The arrogancy of reason against divine revelations, repressed, or, Proud ignorance the cause of infidelity, and of mens quarrelling with the word of God / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed by T.N. for Tho. Underhil,London :1655.)

The arrogancy of reason against divine revelations , repressed . 

Or , proud ignorance the cause of infidelity , and of men's quarrelling with the word of God . 

London : printed by t. n. for tho. Underhil . 1655.  

rom. 11. 33 , 34.  oh the depth of the riches ▪ both of the wisdom and knowledge of God how unsearchable are his judgements , and his ways past finding out ! For who hath known the mind of the Lord , or who hath been his counsellor ? rom. 9 20.  Nay but , oh man , who art thou that repliest against God ? shall the thing form say to him that form it , why hast thou made me thus ? Job 37 : 23.  Touching the almighty , we cannot find him out , he is excellent in power , and in judgement , and in plenty of justice . Job 40. 8 ▪ Wilt thou also disannul my judgements , wilt thou condemn me , that thou Mayst be righteous ? psal. 73. 16 , 17.  When i thought to know this , it was too painful for me ; until i went into the sanctuary of God , than i understood their end . Job 42. 2 , 3.  I know that thou canst do everything , and that no thought can be withheld from thee : who is he that hideth counsel without knowledge ; therefore have i uttered that i understood not , things too wonderful for me which i knew not . 1 cor. 3. 18 , 19  Let no man deceive himself ; if any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world , let him become a fool , that he May be wise . For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God . 1 cor. 1. 25 : The foolishness of God is wiser than men , and the weakness of God is stronger than men . Read isai. 40. 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17.  

The arrogancy of reason against divine relations , repressed . John 3. 9  Nicodemus answered and said unto him ; how can these things be ? In the beginning of this chapter you have a lecture read by the great teacher of the church , to a scholar that was newly entering into his school he is yet but a catechumenus in preparation to be a Christian , rather than one indeed ; having good thoughts of Christ , but not believing in him as the Messiah , nor engaged by baptism to be one of his disciple : and accordingly doth Christ suit his doctrine to his condition , and teach him first the great principle of Christianity . What success it had at first , we find in the text , but not what was the issue at last : though by other texts we May probably conjecture . 

First , the scholar is by name , Nicodemus ; by sect , a Pharisee ; by place , a ruler of the Jews , or one of their great council . For the frame of his mind , the degree of his preparatory knowledge or belief , you May discern it ; 1.  By the season of his coming ; 2.  By the motive that prevailed with him to come ; and 3. by the confession that he makes of his belief . From all which you May see , first , that he believed that there was a God , and that it belonged to God to teach mankind ; and that it was his way to teach by men ; and that it was man's duty to seek after God's teaching from his messengers , and come to them and request it ; and that who ever could give sufficient evidence of his mission from God , should be heard by men ; and that Jesus Christ did truly and undoubtedly work miracles ; and that such miracles as Christ wrought , were an undoubted proof , that God was with him . All these things it is apparent he did believe by these words , vers. 2.  [ rabbi we know that thou art a teacher come from God ; for no man can do th●se miracles that thou dost , except God be with him . ] 

Secondly , from hence also you see , that it was the evidence of Christ's miracles , that had thus far convinced him , and drove him to Christ , as a teacher come from God , and consequently one that was to be credited : but that he was the Messiah , here is yet no confession . 

Thirdly , and as his belief was but preparatory , so this change upon his heart doth appear to be no better : for he hath ●●t yet learned the lesson of self-denial , and preferring the known truth and duty ( Of seeking after the mind of God from his messengers ) before the credit of the world , or his life ; and therefore he comes to Jesus but by night , as being afraid to own him in the face of his enemies . 

Yet doth not Christ cast this cowardice in his teeth to his discouragement , but fitteth his medicine to the strength of the patient , as well as to the disease : for there was more malice and raging zeal against the truth , among the Jews , then among the gentiles ; and so more dangers and sufferings , which a novice Might not be so fit to encounter with . And therefore Paul when he went up to Jerusalem , did preach the gospel privately to them of worldly reputation , which among the gentiles , and inferior Jews , he preacheth publicly ; lest through the prevalency of men's pride or cowardice , his physic should not do its work , but he should run or labour in vain , gal. 2. 2.  

The first and great thing that Christ presently falls upon , is to let this man know , that this much will not serve his turn ( To confess the miracles , and so the divine mission of Christ ; ) but that he must also truly believe the office that he is sent upon , even to be the Messiah , the mediator ; and the redeemer of the world , and must openly be engaged to him as such a one by baptism , and so own him and confess him before the world , and receive his renewing spirit , for the illumination of his understanding , the purifying and quickening of his heart , and th●reforming , and afterguidance of his life . 

This work Christ calleth by the name of the new-birth or regeneration , and tells Nicodemus , [ that except he be born again of water , and of the spirit , he cannot enter into the kingdom of God . ] Not that there is the same necessity of the washing by water , and the purifying by the spirit . For by [ water ] is principally meant that covenant which baptism did sign ; even the confession of Christ , and dedication to him in the relation of redeemed ones , children , disciple , and subjects , on our part ; and his re-engagement and relation to us : yet [ water ] itself is the thing nearly signified in the word , and the use of it is of divine appointment , and not to be neglected where it May be used ; but the necessity to salvation is placed in the relation or thing signified . As its common to say to a soldier of the enemies , [ if thou wilt change thy general , and take the Prince's colours and fight for him , th●● Mayst have pardon for thy rebellion . ] Where [ taking colours ] is a duty ; but the necessity is placed in the change of his relation and practice ; for if there were no colours at hand to give him , yet if he be listed as a soldier ( Or if not listed , yet if by open profession and action , joined to them ) it will be accepted ; or else as Gr●tius expoundeth it , by [ water and the spirit ] is meant , a washing , cleansing spirit ; of which , see him in lo● . 

This change that is here called the [ new birth ] is not the new creation of a substance , or destruction of our former substance , or faculties : for we have still the same natural powers of understanding and willing ; but it is the change of the disposition , habits , and acts of those faculties : and ( With submission to the contrary minded , i conceive that ) it is not only our real qualitative change that is here called the new-birth ; but that the word is more comprehensive ( As i before expressed ) including our new relation to God in Christ , as sons and disciple to Christ , and servants , subjects , or soldiers under him ; with a removal from our former relations which we were in by corruption , and are inconsistent with these : so that it comprehendeth both our new relations to God , to the redeemer , and to his church ; where we have a new father , husband , Lord , and fellow-servants ; new brothers , and sisters , and inheritance ( Though yet we renounce not our natural brethren , parents , and inheritance , as the popish monastical votaries conceive , any further than as they are contrary to the interest of Christ . ) 

The reasons that persuade me to take regeneration in this extent ▪ are , 

First , because it is the entrance into our whole new state that is here so called , without any limiting expression . 

Secondly , because we are said to be born of [ water ] as well as the spirit : and certainly baptism doth as nearly and truly signify our justification , and relative change , and new covenant engagements , and adoption , and church membership , as it doth our qualitative renovation . Nor do i see how any fair exposition can be given of that saying [ except a man be born of water ] which shall not include the change of our relations , as well as of our dispositions . And the like i May say of other texts , which mention regeneration , which i will not now so far digress as to recite . 

Having seen what Christ teacheth Nicodemus first , let us next see the success of his doctrine . Nicodemus fastening too much upon the metaphorical term of being [ born again , ] and withal not understanding the meaning of it , nor the scope of Christ , he presently expresseth his ignorance and unbelief by this question , [ how can a man be born when he is old ? Can he enter the second time into his mother's womb , and be born ? ] Hereupon Christ returning an explicatory answer , telling him not only the nature of the new birth , but also the mysteriousness of its causes in the effecting of it , and showing a plain reason from natural agents , why the mysteriousness of this should not make it seem incredible ; yet doth Nicodemus return a second answer like the first [ how can these things be ? ] Which words do import not an absolute unbelief of the truth of what Christ had said , but a great ignorance of his meaning , and a not discerning of that evidence fully , which should have caused full belief ; but a strong apprehension of the improbability of the thing affirmed , and thereupon a great doubting of the truth of the affirmation . 

And note here the aggravations of Nicodemus his fault , first , they were the words of one that he himself confessed to be a teacher come from God , and that sealed his doctrine by such miracles as none could do , except God were with him . And doth God send any messenger with a lie ? or any teacher that knoweth not what he teacheth ? or will he seal untruths , or senseless absurdities , with such unquestionable miracles ? Sure a man that was once convinced , that God sent the messenger , and sealed the message , should be confident , that the matter of it is divine , and should never once suspect it of untruth ! 

Secondly , though Christ did with frequent asseverations , aver the truth of his doctrine , yet did Nicodemus stagger through unbelief . 

Thirdly , it was the very catechism and rudiments of piety , and Christianity which was so strange to him . 

Fourthly , the term by which Christ expresseth spiritual things , he understandeth all in a carnal sense ; yea , and after that Christ had told him plainly what birth he means , not carnal , producing a fleshly creature , but of water and the spirit , producing a spiritual creature , yet doth not Nicodemus understand him for all this . 

Fifthly , yet was this man a ruler of the Jews , even one of the great Sanedrim , and one reputed skilful in the law ; one that professed himself a guide of the blind , a light of them which are in darkness , an instructor of the foolish , a teacher of babes , which had the form of knowledge , and of the truth in the law ; one of those that boasted of God , and of the law , rom. 2. 17 , 18 , 19 , 20.  Yet he that should teach others , had not learned these rudiments himself . 

Sixthly , and when Christ used a familiar instance , to show him that things are not therefore incredible , because invisible , or because we know not the nature , cause , and end of them . We May know that it is , when we cannot know what is it , or whence , or why it is , or whether it tends , as in the blowing of the wind is evident ; yet doth not Nicodemus cease his doubting , on this account , but asketh , [ how can these things be ? ] the spirituality , and mysteriousness of the thing , made it seem improbable to his uninformed intellect ; and the seeming improbability made him doubt of the verity . Because it was past his apprehension to conceive , how it should be , therefore he doubted , whether it were true , or not : he had not so much rational consciousness of his own ignorance , or so much confidence in a teacher sent from God , and sealing his doctrine by miracles , as to acquiesce as a learner in his teacher's credit , concerning the verity of the thing , while he was seeking to get a clearer discovery of its nature , rise , and ends . 

So that here were all these sins together manifested in this answer , great ignorance , even in a ruler , unbelief , doubting of the conclusion , when he had acknowledged the premises ; an unteachableness ( In part ) when he professed himself to come to learn ; an arrogant conceit of the capaciousness of his understanding , as if Christ's words , or the plain truth should be sooner suspected , than his shallow capacity . 

From this picture we May well conclude what is the ordinary shape of man's corrupted disposition ; and we May all know ourselves by knowing Nicodemus . and from hence i May raise this observation of us all . 

doct. the corrupt nature of man is more pron● to question the truth of God's word , then to se● and confess their own ignorance and incapacity ; and ready to doubt , whether the things that Christ revealeth are true , when they themselves do not know the nature , cause , and reason of them . They will make every thing which they understand not , to seem improbable ; and all such improbabilities will make it seem incredible ; and the incredibility of a part , makes the whole seem incredible : and thus men will be infidels , or seed their infidelity by every thing that themselves are ignorant of ; and make it the chief reason why they will not believe or learn , because they do not already know , and fully understand the things to be learned and believed . And so God must be accused in every thing that moles and worms are ignorant of . 

When the Jews acknowledged the prophets to be of God , and sometime would profess to receive and obey any message that God should send by them ; yet when they heard what it was in particular which he sent , then if it did not suit with their interest and carnal reason , they would not believe it , or obey it , but rather persecute the messenger , and think that , sure such a message could never come from God . So that they must like the particular matter , before they would believe that it was of God . And so God's word shall not be God's word , unless it please the blind and carnal reason of man . 

So you May find they used the prophet Jeremy , jere. 42.  They entreat the prophet to go for them to God , by prayer , and for advice , and bind themselves with seeming resolution to obey , saying , [ the Lord be a true and faithful witness between us , if we do not even according to all things , for the which the Lord thy god shall send thee to us : whether it be good , or whether it be evil , we will obey the voice of the Lord our God , to whom we send thee , that it May be well with us when we obey , &c. ] One would have thought that these men would have believed , and obeyed any thing that God should send to them , after such a vow as this : and yet when they heard that the message was contrary to their own minds and opinions , chap. 43. 1 , 2. its said , that [ all the proud men ] gave this answer [ thou speakest falsely , the Lord our god hath not sent thee to say this . ] 

A full instance you have of the like corrupt disposition , in John 6.  When Christ doth but tell them that he is the bread that came down from heaven , the Jews murmur , vers. 41.  But when he insisted on it , that [ he was the living-bread , and that he would give his flesh for the life of the world , and that he that eateth him , should live for ever . ] These spiritual things they did not understand , but understood him carnally ; and thereupon reject the truth , because they understood it not . So that vers. 52. they fall a-striving among themselves against Christ's words , saying , [ how can this man give us his flesh to eat ? ] Even like Nicodemus [ how can these things be ? ] they will not believe it is true , or that it can be , till they know themselves , how it can be ? and when Christ yet pressed home the same mystery further , even some of his own [ disciple when they heard this , said , this is an hard saying , who can hear it . ] Vers. 60.  And though Christ proceed to open the mystery to them , and speak that more plainly which he had spoken allegorically ; yet it 's said , vers. 66.  That [ from that time many of his disciple went back , and walked no more with him ; ] insomuch , as he asketh the twelve , whether they would go also ? intimating the greatness of the number of revolters , upon this slight occasion ; forsooth , because he spoke that which they understood not , and would have taught them what they had not , humility and patience enough to learn ; and because they did not reach it at the first hearing , therefore they thought it improbable and incredible : many more such instances we Might give you from scripture , but alas , it is a truth that needs no further proof ; there are as many living witnesses of it , as there are men on earth ; the unregenerate being conquered by this corruption , and the regenerate weakened , and hindered much by the remnants of it . 

For the further improvement of this observation , i shall , first , open further the nature and workings of this corruption ; secondly , and then show the reasons of it ; and lastly , make some application of all . 

1.  Sometime the weak intellect of man , is stalled at the quiddity or nature of things ; and then being arrogant , as well as ignorant , it will not believe that there is such a thing , because he cannot reach to know what it is . 

On this account some question , whether man have an immortal soul , because they cannot reach to know ( As they expect ) what that soul is . And some will not believe , that there is such a thing as the spirit of God dwelling in his persons , because they know not what that spirit is : and some think that there is no such thing as inheren● sanctifying grace , or the image of God renewed upon the souls of the regenerate ; but that all talk of these spiritual supernatural changes , are mere fancies and conceits ; and all , because they know not what this sanctity and gracious inclination is . They think there is no such thing as communion with God , because they know not what it is ; nor any such thing as a spirit of prayer , because they know not what it is . 

And indeed , if this were a wise and right reasoning , than there should be nothing in being , but what we know the formal nature of ; which is as gross a conceit , as most in the world . What if you know not what an angel or spirit is ? doth it follow that there is none ? What if you know not what is beyond the visible creatures out of sight ? doth it follow , that there is nothing beyond our sight ? By this rule , you May say , that there is no god ; nay , all the world must needs say so , if this were right reasoning ; for no man hath a true formal knowledge of God's essence ; and therefore must say , there is no god , because they know not what God is : nay , it 's a great question , whether such men must not deny the being of almost all God's creation . For it is but little that we know of the forms of things , in comparison of what we are ignorant of . You know not what the fire is , nor what the light is , nor what the air and wind is ; for all the great pretences of the world , men are ignorant of the formal nature of these . And will you therefore say , that there is no such thing as fire , or light , or air or wind ? You know not the formal nature of the sun or moon ; is there therefore no sun or moon . Alas , there is not a pile of grass , nor the smallest creeping thing , that you thoroughly know , and yet you know that such things there are . A beast knows not what a man is , and yet he apprehendeth that there is such a creature : and no man thoroughly knoweth what he is himself , and yet he knoweth that he is . 

And for the soul itself , it is a most easy and obvious truth , that we have such a soul ; but it is not so easy to give a definition of it . A● the way to know that you have eyes in your head , and eyesight , is not by seeing those eyes or eye sight ; but by seeing other things by them . For the eye was not made to see itself , nor do we see the sight of the eye ; but by that eye and sight we see other things , and thereby know that we have eyes and sight . For he that hath not eyes and eyesight , can see nothing at all ; so the intellective soul was not made directly to understand itself , and it● own intellection ; but to understand other things , and thereby to know that we have an intellectual soul . For he that understandeth , doth understand something , and thereby he understandeth that he doth understand , and so , that he hath an intellectual faculty : for he that hath not an intellectual soul , can understand nothing at all ; ( Yet i will not presume to determine the controversy , whether the intellect do know its own , and the wills elicit acts , by direct intuition of the act itself ? ) it 's as unreasonable a thing then , to doubt whether we have such intellectual souls , because they know not themselves directly o● fully ; as long as they know other things , as it i● to doubt , whether we have eyes , because they s●● not themselves , as long as they see external objects . 

2.  Moreover , this corruption doth often di●cover itself , in that men will not believe the tru●● of the thing revealed , because they cannot rea●● to understand the causes of it ; so many w  question God's decrees of predestination and p  terition , because they cannot reach the cau  and many will deny the very work of creatio  because they cannot know the way of creatio  they will question , whether they have immor  souls , because they cannot tell how they  caused ; whether by seminal traduction and p  ▪ pagation , or by immediate creation ? They 〈◊〉 deny the work of God's differencing effect  grace , because they know not how it is given oh  or wrought in the soul . 

And as well Might they deny , that they have flesh or bones , till they better know how they were caused in the womb : and they May as well deny , that they have any blood in their bodies , any nutrition or augmentation , till they better know the mystery of sanguification , and other n●tri●ive works : and as well May they say , that the sun doth not shine , or warm us , till they know how it is that these are caused by the sun . They know not how the plants are animated , and specified , nor how they suck their nutriment from the earth , and yet they know that such things are : they know not how the silly snail doth form her shell , or nature for her ; nor how the feathers of the peacock are so beautified ; and the several sorts of birds , beasts , plants , fruits , are so diversified and adorned ; and yet they know that such things are : or as Christ telleth Nicodemus here , [ the wind ▪ bloweth where it listeth , and you hear the sound thereof , but know not whence it cometh &c. ] And do we therefore say , that there is no win● , because we know not whence it cometh , or what is the inferior cause of it ? Will you say , that the sea doth not ebb and flow , or there are no earthquake , thunder , and lightning , because men do so little know the causes of them . faelix qui potuit &c. it is not every man's lot to reach such causes ; nor any man's on earth to know the causes of all things which he knoweth to be ; nor fully the causes of any one . 

3.  Moreover , this folly of man's heart doth discover itself thus : in , that men will not believe the truths revealed by God , because they cannot see God's ends and reasons , and the use of the things . Many an evident truth is rejected by the proud wit of foolish man , because God hath not told them why he hath so determined and ordered the business ; or if he have told it , yet they understand it not : so many infidels and Socinians do deny Christ's satisfaction as a ransom , and sacrifice for sin , because they cannot see any reason for it , or necessity of it : they cannot see , but God May pardon sin without satisfaction . And then , what need of all this ado ? or , what likelihood , that God would lay so much on his son , or make so great a business of this work , for our good , and his glory , if all was needless ? And thus many deny the universal extent of his satisfaction , as being for all mankind , because they are not able to see the reason and use of it . They thrust in their dead quorsum as a sufficient answer to the most express words of God : and ask , what good will it do men to be ransomed , and not saved ? They fear not to say , that this is a thing unbeseeming God , and such a weakness , as men would not be guilty of : so that if we can prove that such a thing there is ▪ they will not fear to charge it on God as his unreasonable weakness . The like we Might show in many other points . 

And must God unlock to us the reasons , ends ▪ and uses , of his truths and works , before we will believe that such things are ? We will allo● parents to conceal the reasons and ends of many precepts from their children ; and a Prince to conceal the reasons of many laws , and to kee● to himself the a●cana imperii , the mysteries of state ; and must God open all before he can be believed ? Is not the wisdom , and the will of God , the most satisfying reason in the world ? Must you have proper reasonings and intentions in God ? or will you have a cause of the first cause , or an end of the ultimate end of all ? Al●ss , how little do the wisest men know of the use and ends of many a creature , over their heads , and under their feet , which their eyes behold ? yea , how little know they of the use and ends of many a part of their own bodies ? And yet they know that such things there are . 

What abundance of why's hath an arrogant infidel , upon the reading of scripture , from the beginning of gene●●ss to the end of the revelation ; which must all be satisfied before he will believe ? Of all which , God will one day satisfy them ; but not in the manner as they would have prescribed him . 

4.  Another expression of this arrogant ignorance , is , when men will not believe the several truths of God , because they are not able to reconcile them , and place each one in its own order , and see the method and body of truth in its true locations and proportion : nay , perhaps they will believe none , because they cannot discern the harmony . 

What abundance of seeming contradictions in scripture do rise up in the eyes of an ignorant infidel ? as strange apparitions do to a distracted man ; or as many colours do before the inflamed or distempered eye . These self-conceited ignorant s●ulss , do imagine all to be impossible which exceedeth their knowledge ; and because they cannot s●e the sweet consent of scripture , and how those places do suit , and fortify ●●ch other , which to them seemed to contradict each other , therefore they think that no one ●ls● can see it ; no not ●od himself they are like an ignor●nt fellow in  watch-makers sh●p , that thinks no can  all the loose ●eecess together , and make a wat●h of them , because he cannot . When he hath tried many ways , and c●●●ot hit it , he casts all by , and concludeth , that its impossible . 

And upon this account many cast away particular truths ▪ though they will not c●st aw●y all . Some cannot reconcile the efficiency of the ●p●●i● , with that of the word , in the conversion and confirmation of sinners ; and therefore s●me exclude one , and some the other , or own but the empty names ; some cannot reconc●le the law , and the gospel : and too great a part of the teachers , in the Christian world , have been so troubled to reconcile God's grace , with man's ●reewill , that of old , many did too much exclude grace ; and of late too many exclude the natural liberty of the will , upon a supposition of the inconsistency ; only the names of both were still owned . 

Many cannot reconci●e the sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction , with the necessity of man's endeavours , and inherent righteousness ; and therefore one must be straitened or denied . Many cannot reconcile common love and grace , with that which is special and proper to the elect ; and therefore some deny one , and some another . The like Might be said of many other cases , wherein the arrogancy of man's wit hath cast out God's truth : if both parts be never so express , yet they are upon this unbelieving questioning strain , [ how can these things be ? ] How can these agree together ? How can both be true ? when yet its evident , that God hath owned both . 

It is certain , that the truths of God's word are one perfect well jointed body ; and the perfect symmetry or proportion , is much of its beauty : it is certain , that method is an excellent help in knowing divine things : and that no man can know God's truths perfectly , till he see them all as in one scheme or body , with one view , as it were , and so sees the location of each truth , and the respect that it hath to all the rest ; not only to see that there is no contradiction , but how every truth doth fortify the rest . All this therefore is exceeding desirable , but it is not every man's lot to attain it , nor any man's in this world perfectly , or near to a perfection : it is true , that the sight of all God's frame of the creation , uno intuitu , in all its parts , with all their respects to each other , would acquaint us with abundance more of the glory of it , then by looking on the members peace-meal we can attain : but who can see them thus , but God ? at least , what mortal eye can do it ? And we shall never in this life attain to see the full body of divine revealed-truths , in that method and due proportion , as is necessary to the knowledge of its ful● beauty . It is a most perfectly melodious instrument ; but every man cannot set it in tu●e , so as to pe●ce●ve the delectable harmony . 

What then ? because we cannot know all , shall we know nothing , or deny all ? Because we cannot see the whose frame of the world , in its junctures and proportion , shall we say , that there is no world , or , that the parts are not rightly situated ▪ or ●e●gn one to be inconsistent with the rest ? We must rather receive first ▪ that which is most clear , and labour by degrees to see through the obscurities that beset the rest . And if we first find from God , that both are truths , let us receive them , and learn how to reconcile them after , as we can : and if we cannot reach it , its arrogancy therefore to think that it is not to be done , and to be so highly conceited of our own understandings . 

5.  Another way by which this arrogant i●sidel●ty worketh , is this , when men will not believe any revealed ●ruth of God , unless they can see a possibility of accomplishing the matter by natural means . And therefore , when ever in reading the scripture , they come to a work that passeth the power of the creature , the n●●●dem●teses stagger at it through unbelief , and s●y , [ how can these things be ? ] And the fixed infidels with Julian deride it : when they read of the scripture miracles ; they cannot believe them because they are miracles . Is this a likely matter , say th●● that such and such things should be ? And why is it unlikely ? Because it is too hard for God ? What i doth his creature know his infinite power ? And can you set him his bounds , and say , thus far God can go , and no further ? Thus much God can do , and no more ? Is it ever the more difficult to God , because it is impossible to such as we ? Will you say , that a horse cannot carry you on his back , because a fly cannot ? Creatures May be compared to creatures ; but between the creator ; and the creature , there is no comparison . Have you read how God posed Job in point of power and knowledge ? ( Job 38. 39 , 40 , 41. ) But who is he that hath posed God ? What is that work that should be difficult to him , that by his word or Will did make all the worlds ? Are they greater works than those which he hath certainly done , that you speak of so incredulously ? If you had never seen the sun , or moon , or stars , or earth , or sea , and had merely found it written , that God made such a world , it is like you would as doubtingly have said , [ how can these things be ? ] If you had no more seen the light or sun , than you have seen the angels , or souls of men its like you would have as little believed , that there is such a thing as light or a sun , as you now do , that there are angels and immortal souls . But i hope you are satisfied in the things you see ; and May not they shame your incredulity of the things you do not see ? You see there is a sun , and moon , and firmament , and earth ; you know these had either a maker and cause ▪ or else were eternal ▪ and as an eternal cause to themselves . If they were eternal , or made themselves , than they are the first being and cause , and so are gods . And is it not more reasonable to believe one God , then so many ? And to believe that God is a perfect incomprehensible , superin-tellectual being , then to believe , that the s●nseless earth is a god ? Is it not more ●easonable to conclude , that this one perfect eternal God made all things , then that every stone did make itself ? or , that the sun or moon , or any creature made itself , and the rest ? If you believe , that all things are the works of God , than you see that with your eyes that May shame your foolish dark-incre●ulity . Do you see a greater work , and think it unlikely , that the same power should do a lesser ? Do you see so much of the world that was m●d● by a word , and do you ask , [ how can these things be ? ] when you read of any miracle or unusual work ? If it were yourself , or such as you , that had been the doer of such works , you Might well say , [ how can these things be ? ] But God is not as man in his works , or word . 

6.  Yea , many times when men do but hear , read , or think of some objection against the truth of God's revelations , which they cannot tell how to answer themselves , they presently begin to stagger at the whole truth , and question it on every such slight occasion . If any new difficulty arise in their way , they are in the case of Nicodemus , saying , [ how can these things be ? ] Though they have heard never so many arguments to confirm them , and have been long receiving them , and seen an evidence of truth in them , yet every new cavil or hard objection doth seem to enervate all this evidence . 

If men were as foolish and incredulous in the matters of the world , their folly would easily appear to all men : when a man hath studied physic seven years , or twenty years , he shall meet with many new difficulties , and doubtful c●seses ; and many old difficulties will never be ou●rco●e : and yet he will not therefore throw away all , and forsake his study or profession . W●●l a student in law give over all his study , upon e●ery occurring difficulty , or seeming contradiction in the laws ? If any students in the universities should follow this example , and doubt of all that they have learned , upon every objection which they are unable to answer , they would be but  proficie●●s : or if every apprentice that is learning his trade , will forsake it every time that he is sta●led , and at a loss ▪ he would be long before he set up shop : on this course all men should lose all their time lives , and labour , by doing all in v●i● , and undoing again , by going forward and backward , and so know nothing , nor resolve of any thing . 

It is most certain , that all men are very imperfect in knowledge , and especially in the highest mysteries ; and there is none so high as those in theology , about God , and man's soul , and our redemption , and our everlasting state . And doubtless where men are so defective in knowledge , there must still be difficulties in their way , and many knots which they cannot untie ▪ can you expect till you are perfect in knowledge , to see the whole frame of truth so clearly , as to be able to answer every objection that is made against it ? Why do you not lay together the evidences on both sides , and consider which of the two is the clearer case ? What if you cannot answer all that is brought by the devil and cavillers , against the truth ? Can you answer all that Christ and his servants say for it ? I dare say you cannot , unless you take every impertinent vanity or falsehood for an answer . God needs not you to be the defenders of his truth : he is able to vindicate it himself against all the enemies in the world ? Otherwise , if he had called you chiefly to this work , he would have furnished you for it . But he first calleth you to be scholars to learn that truth , that he May help you over all difficulties in his time and way . 

We are next to show the causes of this unhappy distemper ; why it is , or whence it comes to pa●ss , that men are so prone to doubt of God's truth , upon every difficulty or mystery ▪ that is in their way ? And to question all , when they are stalled in any thing ; and to deny the very things that are certain , when they are puzzled , and at a loss , but about the manner , cause , reason , or ends of them . And among others , the causes of this great sin , are these following . 

1.  Man is naturally desirous of knowledge , and to see things in their own evidence and therefore , he is oft an unmannerly impatient suitor to be presently admitted into the presence chamber of truth ▪ and to see her naked without delay . Nature will hardly be satisfied with believing ; which is a receiving of truth upon trust from another , no , though he give us the most convincing arguments of his veracity ; no , though it be God himself : nothing will satisfy nature , but se●ing . i● the wisest men in the world tell them , that they see it , or know it ; if the workers of miracles , Christ and his apostles , tell them that they see it ; if God himself tells them that he sees it ; yet all this doth not satisfy them , unless they May see it themselves . they think this is but to be kept at a distance , without door , and what May be within , they cannot tell : every man hath an understanding of his own , and therefore would have a sight of the evidence himself ; and so have a nee●er knowledge of the thing , and not only a knowledge of the truth of the thing by the testimony of another , how infallible soever . And therefore we are all prone , when difficulties seem great , to say with Thomas , [ except i see , i will not believe . ] John 20. 25.  Bu● [ blessed are they that have not seen , and yet have believed . ] v. 29.  How far this desire of knowledge is in nature as from . God , and how far it is in nature , as corrupted , i will not stand to debate ; but that it is in us we feel : and this is a preparative reason of our doubting and dissatisfaction , if not a proper cause . 

2.  This nature of man is yet so much more desirous to know , that though it do see things in their own proper evidence , yet is it not satisfied , unless it also see the whole , and comprehend all things with all their reasons , causes , and Modes . Man affecteth a certain infiniteness in knowledge ; he would know all that is knowable ; and so would be as God in knowing . And if he be ignorant of any part , he remaineth unsatisfied , and so is ready to quarrel with all ; and like froward children that throw away their meat or clothes , or what else they have , because they cannot have what more they would have . Every little child will be asking you , not only what is this ? or , what is that ? but also , why is this so or so ? and , to what use is it . and so do men in the matters of God : and if you satisfy them not in all , they will scarce be satisfied in any thing . 

Thirdly , besides this , there is indeed a great dependence of one truth upon another ; and they are ( In morality ) as a well framed building , or as a clock or watch , or the like engine , where no one part can be missing without g●e●t wrong to the whole . Now when these men cannot see all , they do indeed want those helps that are necessary to the perfect seeing of any part ; and then they have not the skill of making use of an imperfect knowledge , but are ready to take it for none , till they conceit it full and perfect ; and thus are still detained in unbelief , and quarrelling with that which they did , or Might know , because of that which they did not , or could not know . 

Fourthly , moreover , it is most certain that when God calls us at first to the knowledge of his truth , he findeth us in darkness ; and though he bring us thence into a marvellous light ( Acts 26. 18. 1 pet. 2. 9  ) yet he doth this by degrees , and not into the fullest light or measure of knowledge at the first ; so that we are at the beginning but babes in knowledge . It cannot be expected , that a man that was born blind , with an indisposition of understanding to spiritual things , and that hath lived in blindness long ▪ should presently know all things , as soon as he is converted : they do not so come to knowledge in earthly things , which they are more disposed to know , and which are nearer to them , much less in heavenly things . The disp●sitive blindness of the best convert , is cured but in part , much less his actual blindness . For ( As i have said before ) if a man have his eyes never so perfectly opened , who before was blind , yet he will not see any more than is near him , within sight : if he will see other countries , places , or persons , he must be at the pains and p●tience of travelling to them . And so in this case , when God hath opened the eyes of the blind , they must yet expect to know , but by degrees : oh what abundance of things are young converts ignorant of , that are fit to be known ? They are but entered into Christ's school to learn ; and can they think to know all the first day or year : but alas , many that are nominally entered , bring not with them the true disposition of disciple , and therefore quarrel with their Master and his teaching , in stead of diligent seeking after knowledge . Men have not the patience to stay at school , and wait on Christ's teaching till they have got so much knowledge , as Might dispel their doubts . They must be taught all at once , though they are uncapable of it , and must know all presently , or in a little time , and with little pains ; or else ; they will not believe that Christ can teach them . And so they run away from him , like foolish , impatient scholars , because he did not bring them to more knowledge , and will not stay the time that their own ignorance doth naturally require , for so great a work . 

Fifthly , and there is also much diligence necessary , as well as time and patience , before men ca● come to so much understanding in the heavenly mysteries , as to be able to resolve the difficulties that occur . If you stay never so long in Christ's school , and yet be truants and loiterers , and will not take pains ; no wonder if you remain ignorant . And yet these men will expect , that they should know all things , and be satisfied in the answer of every objection , or else they will suspect the truths of Christ . Will sitting still in Christ's school , help you to learning ? do you look that he should teach you , when you will not take pains to learn what he teacheth ? You know in law , in physic , in the knowledge of any of the sciences or languages , no man can come to understand them , much less to defend them against all opposers , and to resolve all objections , without so long diligence and pains taking in his studies , as the greatness of the work requires . And shall every young lazy student in theology , or every dull , unlearned professor , think to see through all scripture difficulties so easily ? or else will he suspect the truth which he should learn ? It May be you have been professors of Christianity long ; but have you studied the scriptures day and night , and consulted with men of judgement in such things , and diligently read the writings that should unfold them to you , and held on in this way , till you came to a ripeness of understanding , and ability to defend the truth against gainsayers ? If not , what wonder , if every difficulty do puzzle you , after all your unprofitable duties and profession . 

6.  Moreover , there is a great deal of other knowledge necessary to the through-knowing of the sense of scriptures . Though the unlearned May know so much as is of absolute necessity to salvation , ( And will save , if it be heartily believed and improved ; ) yet there is much learning necessary to the fuller understanding of them , and to the resolving of all doubts and difficulties that May occur . And this is not because Christ hath delighted to speak obscurely ; but because our distance and imperfection , and the nature of the thing , doth make such learning to be necessary . For if Christ speak in the Syriack tongue , and if the scriptures be written in Hebrew and Greek , ( Which were then fittest to divulge it ; ) how can it be expected , that Englishmen , Frenchmen , Germans , or any that understand not those languages , should understand them so fully as those that do ? For no bare translation , though never so exact , can give us the full sense of the original words . Besides this , all countries have their peculiar proverbial speeches , which are familiar with them , but would seem nonsense , or of a ●ontrary sense to others , that were unacquainted with them : and scripture must and doth contain ●uch proverbs , as were usual with those , to whom ●t was wrote , or the matter spoken . They had also many peculiar customs of their countries , which a●e supposed in scriptures which if we understand not , the pl●in text will seem dark to us . The like we May say o● matters o● geography , about the sc●●●uation of plac●ss ; and of chronology , for the due computation o● times ; and of other history , to know the sta●e of church and commonwealth , and many other part● of learning , which the u●ry nature of the matter proclaimeth to be necessary for the res●lving of scripture-difficulties . Now when unle●rned men , or young raw scholars , that want all or most of these necessaries , will yet expect that they must understand all and see through all diffi●ultieses , and be able to answer every cavi● ; what wonder if they be frequently stalled , and temp●●d to unbelief , and say , [ how can these things be ? ] 

If you s●y , that ●hen it seems none but learned men must be able to resolve these doubts , and d●fend the scriptures against opposers ; and we must take all upon their words : 

I answer , you must explicitly know all that is of flat necessity to salvation , and learn as much of the rest as you can : but if it be undeniable , that you do not know more , that is , enough for the resolving of the foresaid doubts ; why should you be offended that we tell you so ? Ei●her you do indeed see through all difficulties , or you do not ; if you do , than you are established , you are none of those that i speak of ; you will not suspect the truth , nor say , [ how can these things be ? ] but you are able to confute all that would seduce you . But if you do not see through these difficulties ; should ●ou not humbly confess it , and not quarrel with those that tell you so ? And for taking it on others words , you must in reason do it , if you have no other way , and if you have reason to think that they know that which you do not know : but if you th●nk that the learnedest men do know no more than yourselves , and are as unable to resolve ●hese doubts , as you are ; you go against the full lig●t of the who●e world's experience . Let their writings bear witness , wherein they do indeed resolve them : and do you call them to a trial , and see whether they are able or not ? and let any that understandeth the matter , and is competent , be the judge . 

7.  Yea , some men are so far from having all the forement●oned qualifica●ionss for knowledge , that they have not a natural strength of understanding , or capacity to conceive of difficult things ; and yet they will expect that all should be made plain to them , who cannot understand a plain case in law , physic , or any other profession , that they are not versed in , no , nor any great difficulties in the thing , that they are more conversant with . 

8.  Besides this , it is most certain , that when the best men have done all that they can , they will here know but in p●rt : perfection of knowledge is reserved for the time of our perfect blessedness ; and he that knows but in part , is not like to see through every difficulty . And this imperfection joined with the corruptions , which we shall anon mention ▪ doth cause these suspectings of the truth that should be entertained . 

9  There are some truths also which are not well understood without exper●e●ce : and it is only sanctification that giveth that experience . And therefore the unsanctified take them but for fancies and suspect the truth of that word which doth assert them . 

10.  But one of the greatest causes of this sin , is the pride of men's heart , which makes them forget their great ignorance , shallowness , and incapacity : men have such arrogant understandings , that be they never so empty , they think themselves immediately capable of receiving any truth that shall be delivered to them . And if they understand not what they read or hear , they never suspect their own wit , but the writer or speaker : because they a●e at age , and are now past childhood , they think they need no more to make them capable . Little know they the nature of that knowl●dge which they want ; and how it must be attained : they know not that there is a certain order ▪ among truths ; and that one presupposeth another ; and all the lower are prerequisite to the higher : they know not how m●ny hundred of the lower preparatory truths , must be known before some of the higher can be well understood : they would go to the top of the stairs , without going up the lower steps : it would make a sober man wonder to see the impudent pride and arrogancy of some ignor●nt men ; that when they have need to sit many a year at the feet of some teacher , and humbly learn that which they know not , they will as confidently pass a present censure on the things that they understand not , as if they were as thoroughly acquainted with them as the best : and if they see not the evidence of a truth , they will as confidently and scornfully call it an error , as if they were indeed most capable of judging of it : when men of true understanding do see that truth as clear as the light . 

If they hear a confident seducer , that hath a glozing tongue , and plausible cavils against a truth , these arrogant w●●ss will presently conclude , that he is in the right , and cannot be answered ; as if no can do it , because they cannot : when , alas , men of understanding May presently discern gross ignorance , and absurdity , in that which sh●llow brains are so confident of . We can scarce meet with the man so grossly ignorant , but he is confident of his own understanding , and wise in his own conceit : so that when we May expect that they should say , [ what ignorant foolish wretchet are we , that cannot understand the word of God : ] they are ready to accuse or suspect the word , and say , [ how can these things be ? ] 

11.  And this arrogancy is much increased by the very nature of ignorance , which is , to be even ignorant of itself . He that never saw the light knows not what light is , not what darkness is as differing from light . A dead man knows not what death is : a bruit knows not what bruitishness is , because he knows not what reason is . 

There is a good measure of knowledge necessary to make some men to know their ignorance . What can show a man his error , but the contrary truth ? This is it therefore that hinders men's conviction , and makes them confident in their most false conceits ; seeing they want both that light , and that humdity which should take down their confidence . We have as much ado to make some men know , that they do not know , as to make them know , that which they know not , when once they will believe that they do not know it : especially , if men have but any plausible , natural wit , or a little taste of lea●ning , or a little illomination in some greater matters , which in gross-ignorance they do not understand , they presently think that all things should be now plain to them . It is the ruin ( Or dangerous ●erverting , at least ) of many young zealous professors , that formerly lived in gre●t ignorance and ungodliness ; that when God hath showed them their error , and brought them to see the excellency of a holy life ; the new light seems so glorious to them , that they think they know all things , and need but little more : and now they are illuminated by the spirit of God , they think they should understand all truths at the first hearing , and see through all difficulties at the first consideration : little knowing how much lamer table ignorance doth yet remain in them ; and how much more glorious a light is yet before them ; and how little they know yet , in comparison of that which they do not know : so that it is the nature of the ignorant , especially half-witted men , that have some little knowledge which May puff them up , to think they have that which indeed they have not ; and so to have this ar●ogancy of understanding , and speak against the darknes● of truth , when they should lament the darkness of their own understandings ; and to think the candle is put out , o● the su● is darkened , because this web is grown over their eyes . 

12.  Moreover , i fid●l●●y is a natural , deep-rooted , obs●●●●ate sin ; and therefore ▪ no wonder if it be har●l● overcome , and will be striving in us to the l●●● . The first sin of m●n , in be●●eving the servant before God , ha●h ●●f ▪ a vicious h●● it in ou● n●tu●e . M●● is now so e●●ranged ●rom God , that ●e  the ●e●s acqua●n●ed with ●is voice , and the more dist●ustful of hi● . We are so m●ch in the dark , that we are t●e more ●iffident . When a man kn●ws not where he is , or w●o is near him , he ●s st●ll fear●ul ; when he knows not what ground he stands on , wh●ther firm , or quick - a●ds , he ●s naturally apt to distrust it : a● unknown God will not be well believe● . Were t● si● to cure infidelity , all other si●s woul● be of much more easy cu●e . He is a conquero● indee● , that thoroughly conquers his unbelief ▪ but the most are captivated by it to their perdition . 

13.  And it somew●at addeth to this disease , that man is conscious of de●e●tfulness in himself , and from thence ●s apt to suspect all others . B●cause he finds himself both fallible and fallacious , he is ready to think that God himself is so too : for corrupt man is prone to question , whe●her there be any higher virtue , than he hath experience of in himself . 

14.  Also it is a great occasion of this sin of infidelity and arrogancy , and questioning all that men do not understand , that they know not the true nature of the Christian state and life , and build not in the order that Christ hath prescribed them . Christ's method is this , that they should first understand and believe those essentials of Christianity , without which there is no salvation ; and then engage themselves to learn of him as his disciple ; and so to set themselves to school to him , and live under his teaching , that they May know by degrees , the rest of his will . And his teaching is jointly by his word , ministers , and spirit . Men must first lay the foundation in an explicit faith , and hold to those fundamentals as of in●allible certainty , and not expect to know the rest in a moment , nor without much diligence and patience , but wait on Christ in the condition of disciple , to learn all the rest . All this is expressed in Christ's commission to his apostles , matth. 28. 19 ●0 . 21.  Where he first bids them disciple the nations ( Which contains the convincing them ( At age ) of the fundamentals , and procuring their consent ▪ and then to baptize them , that they May be solemnly engaged ; and than teach them to observe all things whatsoever ▪ he commanded them ; and this must be the work of all their lives . 

Now here are two gross errors , contrary to this established order of Christ , which professors do oft run into , to their own perdition . The one is , when they do not first lay the fundamentals as ●ertain●ie● , but hold them loosely , and are ready on all occasions to reduce them to doubtful and uncertain points ; or to question them , though their evidence be never so full , because of some defect of evidence in other points . 

A most foolish and perverse course , which will hinder any man that useth it , from the true understanding of any science in the world . For in all sciences there are some undoubted principles which must be first laid , and it must not be expected , that all points else should be of equal necessity or evidence as they : but if we should meet with never so much doubtfulness in any of the superstructure , yet these principles must still be held fast . For he that will be still plu●king up his foundation , upon every error in the building , is never like to perfect his work . 

The second common error , is , that as professors do not lay the foundation as certain , so they do not unseignedly s●t themselves in the true posture of disciple or scholars to learn the ●est , but think themselves past scholars when they have gone to school , and engaged themselves to Christ , their teacher . This is the undoing of the greatest part of the visible church . 

If they come to the congregation , it is not as scholars to school , but as judges to pass sentence of the doctrine of their teachers , before they understand it : and if they read the scripture , it is in the same sort . When they are at a loss , through any occurrent difficulty , they do not go to their teachers as humble scholars , to learn the true sense of the word , and the solution of their doubts : but they go as confident censures , and as boys that will go to school to dispute with their Master , and not to learn ; and therefore , no w●nder if they turn self-conceited h●r●t●ck● or ●nfid●l● : for Christ hath resolved , that the most learned and worldl●-w●se , if they will come to sc●o●l to ●im as his disciple , mu  come ●s little children ▪ cons●ious o● their ignorance , and humble enough to submit to his instructions , and not proudly conceited , that they are wise enough already : and they must wait upon his teaching ▪ year after year , and not think , that they are capable of a present understanding of each revealed truth . 

15.  Lastly , besides all the former causes of this sin , some men are judicially deserted , and left to the power of their arrogancy and infidelity . When God hath showed men the light of fundamental verities , and instead of hearty entertaining and obeying them , they will imprison them in unrighteousness , and receive not the truth in the love of it , that they May be saved : God oft gives them over to believe a lie , and to reject that truth which would have saved them , if they had received it . 

I have noted many professors that have lived in pride , flesh-pleasing , or secret filthiness , or unrighteousness , or worldliness , and would not see , nor forsake their sin , but hold on in their profession , and their lusts together ; that these are most commonly given over to gross heresies , or infidelity : for when they are once captivated to their fleshly lust , and in●erest , and yet read and know the dam●ableness of such a sta●● , they have no way left to quiet the●r conscience , but either to believe that scripture is false ( And then they need not fear its threatenings , ) or else to leave ▪ their sins with confession and contrition ; which their carnal hearts and interest will not permit . 

From what hath been said already in the opening of this point , we May see what a corrupt and froward heart is in man , as to the matters of God , and his own salvation : three notable corruptions are together comprehended in the diste●pe● which we have here described , and ex●●●ss●d in the common incr●dulous questioning , [ how can these things be ? ] 

First , you May hear in this question , the voice of ignorance . Men have lost the true knowledge of God , and of his works especially in spirituals . the natural man discerneth them not ; for they are spiritually discerned , 1 cor. 2. 14.  We are as blind men g●oaping in the dark at a loss upon every difficulty that occurs . Evidence or truth is no evidence to us , because our understandings are unprepared to receive it , and be shut against it . When we should love the ●ruth , we cannot find it ; when we should glorify the god of truth , we know him no● , but in our hearts say as Pilate ▪ what is truth ? and as Pharaoh , who is the Lord ? we are grown strangers to the way that we should go home in ; and strang●r● to the voice that should tell us the way , and to the hand that should guide us in it ; and strangers to the everlasting home that we should go to . So that instead of a cheerful following our guide , we are crying out at every turning , [ how can these things be ? ] 

2.  And here is comprehended and manifested also , the perverseness of man's understanding ▪ that will needs begin at the wrong end of his b●ok , and read backward● : and when he should be first enquiring , [ whether these things be so or not ? ] He will needs be first resolved , [ how they can be so ? ] And he will not believe , that they can be so , till he knows , how they can be so . whereas common reason would teach us in other things to know first , whether it be so o●n● , before we come to the how can it be so we May easily be certain of the being of a thousand things , when we cannot be certain , how they be . 

3.  And lastly , here is manifested also the unreverent arrogancy of man , that will presume to call his maker to account , and to know of him the reasons of his works , and how they can be , before he will believe them ; and so he will needs question the very power of God . For to say , how can it be ? is as much as to say , how can God do it ? as if we were fit judges of his ways ▪ and able to comprehend his infinite power , and the several paths of his unsearchable counsels . he is great in counsel , and mighty in work , jer. 32. 19  he made the heaven , and the earth by his great power , and nothing is too hard for him , vers. 17.  The prophet Isaiah's answer should suffice : to all such incredulous questions , isai. 28. 29.  this cometh from the Lord of hosts , who is wonderful in counsel , and excellent in working . 

Hence also we see what unteachable scholars Christ hath in his school , and consequently , how patient , and gracious a Master he is . When we should be submissively enquiring , we are incredulously disputing ; and we will needs be wiser than our Master , and question , whether he teach us right or wrong . It is a wonder of mercy , that he should pardon so great dulness , and unprofitableness in us ; and shall we after this be so insensible of that sin of ours , and of that grace of his , as to fall a questioning him , and his truth , and lay the ●lame on him from ourselves ? 

object . but we must not believe all things ; and therefore we must inquire , and try the spirits , whether they be of God , or not , even the spirit of Christ himself ? answ. the spirit of Christ fears not a just trial : had not Christ brought sufficient evidence of his truth , he would not have condemned the unbelieving world for not receiving it . I have showed you already how fully he hath sealed ●is testament , and with what attestations he hath delivered his doctrine to the world . But why do you not acquie●ce in these confirmed verities ? when once Christ hath given sufficient proof of his doctrine , must it be questioned again , because it is wonderful ? and because , that the manner of it is beyond your reach ? Inquire first , whether it be a reu●lation from God , or not : and if it had no divine attestation , or evident that it is of God , than you Might reject it without sin or danger , when you find it to contain things so far beyond your reach : but when God hath put his seal to it , and proved it to be h●● own ; if after this you will be questioning it , because of the seeming cont●adictionss or improbabilities , you do but question the wisdom and power of the Lord : as if he had no more wisdom , than you can reach and fathom ; yea , the● you can censure and reprove ? Or , as if he could do no more , than you can see the way and reason of , and are fit to take an account of . 

I do therefore exhort al● that fear the great name of God , and love their own souls , that they take special heed against this da●gerous sin : think not the proved-sealed . Word of God , is ever the more to be suspected , because that the matters in it do seem strange , and unlikely to your reason . And think not that you should comprehend the mysterious counsels and ways of God . Let your understandings meditate on scriptu●e ▪ difficulties , that you May learn to resolve them ; but suffer not the apprehension of those d●fficultieses to make you once question the truth of God ; but abhor such a thought as soon as it ariseth , and cast it with detestation out of your hearts . 

To persuade you the more effectually , i beseech you do but weigh impartially , besides what is said before , these following consideratio●ss 

1.  Consider , who that God is whose ways thou dost so presumptuously pass thy censure of , and whose word thou callest to the b●r o● thy judgement  is infinite wisdom fit to be examined by thee ? or t●e works of infinite power to be tried by thee ? If there were nothing wonderful in his word or works , they would not believe the m●jesty of God ; nor the saviour of the world , whose name is wonderful , counsellor , the mighty g●d isai.   6.  God's name mu●t be written upon his word and works , and all must bear some part of his image ; and therefore have somewhat in them that is incomprehensible . Shall the infinite God have no word or work , but what May be comprehended by such as we ? I seriously profess , that it oft am●●eth me , to think that we should know so muc● of God , his will , and ways , as we do ? When i consider the infinite distance between him and us , i must admire that we are made so much acquainted with his mind , and that he hath told us so much of his mysteries as he hath done , and must say [ what is man that thou art mindful of him , and the son of man that thou so vi test and regardest him . ] Psal. 8 4.  Job 7. 17.  When i consid●r how little a poor worm , or b●rd , or ●east , knows of me th●t an made of the same flesh with him ; and how much man knows of the mind of God , who is infinitely distant from him , it makes me admire at the provi●ence that hath so ordered it . If a beast could so far consider , and discou●se , would it not be f●lly in him to call my writings , words , and ways , to the bar , and to suspect those as false that are beyond his reach ! and to say ▪ [ how can these things be ? ] Why , alas , they are ten thousand thousand times nearer to us , than we are unt● God . Oh then let us thankfully open his books and look upon his words and works , and bless him that hath condescended so far to man , and lifted up man so near to himself in knowledge , in comparison of other inferior creatures ; and make much of that measure of knowledge which we have : but do not think to measure the creation of God , not to comprehend his secrets ; much less himself . Methinks the reading of those four chapters in Job before cited , containing God's expostulation with him , Might do much to humble an arrogant wit , and to make it submit to infinite wisdom . Alas , the very angels cannot comprehend God , and whether a●● creature can immediately see his essence , we cannot now affirm : admirations do better beseem the highest of his creatures , then bold expostulations . The flaming mount Might not be touched . You cannot endure to gaze upon the sun , which is God's creature : should you approach too near it , you would be consumed by its heat . And dare you be so bold with the highest majesty ? It were not greater folly to imagine that you can span the earth in your hand , or that you can reach the sun with your finger , then to imagine that you are meet to expo●●ulate with God ▪ and that all must be unreasonable in his word or works , where your wit is not able to discern the reason . Surely , [ his thoughts are not as our thoughts , nor his ways as our ways ; but as far as the heaven is above the earth , so far are his thoughts and ways above ours , isai. 55. 7 , 8 , 9 ] 

And as you cannot comprehend the thoughts and ways of God , so you are surely unfit to contradict them . The child will submit to the wisdom of his father , and the scholar of his Master , and will believe them when they cannot re●ch the reason of their sayings : they will not set their wits against them , thought they be reasonable creatures , as well as they . It was the humble expression of men of old , when they would contemn themselves , in comparison of their superiors , to call themselves [ a dead dog ] or [ a flea ▪ ] 1 sam 24. 14. and ●0 . 20.  David himself doth so to Saul . what May we then call ourselves , in comparison with the Lord , but even nothing and less than nothing , and lighter than vanity ? and should nothing contend with immensity and eternity ? Should a flea dispute with a learned man and say [ how can these things be ] how much less should we s● dispute with God ? 

If a man do but look up to the height of the visible heaven , or look down into some exceeding depth , it will make him be ready to tremble : with what dread and submissive reverence than should our minds look to the height and depth of the counsels of the Lord ? D●re not therefore any more ●o quarrel with his wisdom ▪ but say as Job when God had non-plus'● him , Job 42. 2 , 3.  [ i know that thou canst do every thing , and that no thought can be withheld from thee , who is he that hideth counsel without knowledge ? Therefore have i uttered that i understood not ; things too wonderful for me , which i know not . 

2.  Consider also what we are ourselves , as well as what that God is with whom we do expostulate . The Lord knows we are silly creatures for such an undertaking ! Can s●ch breathing lumps of earth , such walking dust , such bags of filth , be fit to enter a dispute with God ? And though they are noble souls that are thus meanly housed , yet never endowed or fitted for such a task . A spoon or shell May as well contain the whole ocean , as our narrow understandings comprehend the counsels of God . Are our understandings infinite , that we should think to comprehend the reasons of the words and ways of the Lord , any further than he hath condescended to reveal them ? Our eyes May as well expect an unlimited vision , and think to see beyond the sun ●s our understandings expect such a boundless intellection . it 's a wonder that so much knowledge as we have , should be found in a soul that'● housed in clay : and shall we presume that we have so much more than we have ? It was the sinful arrogancy of our first parents to desire to be as gods in knowledge : and shall we go so far beyond them in our arrogancy , as to presume that we are actually such indeed ? 

And its observable what contradictions there be among s●●ful principles , and how proud infidelity doth condemn itself : these unbelievers have such low thoughts of men's soul , that they think it doth but gradually differ in its rational power from the soul of a bruit ; and therefore think it cannot be immortal : and yet the very same men that think not the soul so noble as to be immortal , do think it so capable of disputing with God , and compre●ending the reasons of his truths and ways , that they are ready to deny the most confirmed truth , if they do not reach the manner and end● and reasons of it , and God shall not be believed , unless their reasons be satisfied in all these , and unless they are able to take so full a view of the whole body of truth , as to answer all gainsayers , and reconcile all seeming contradictions , they will not take God's word to be his word ▪ yea with the wretched atheist God shall not be God , because he cannot comprehended him : he shall not be infinite , in immensity and eternity , because that he cannot comprehend this immensity and eternity . And so with the infidel , Christ shall be no Christ , and the trinity no trinity , because his shallow brain cannot compre●end the mysteries of the incarnation , the hypostatical union and the trinity so that the same m●n will have his soul to be but as the soul of a dog fo● kind , and yet will have it more comprehensive than the very angels in heaven , and think it so competent a judge of God's counsels , that he will presume to condemn them , if he see not the reasons of them . 

3.  Consider , doth not certain experience tell you that you are utterly unable fully to understand the nature and reasons of those works of God , that are daily visible before your eyes ? I will not say , only of the greater and more distant , but even of the least , or of any one of them . I am confident that there is not the least fly or worm or pile of grass ( Much more the sun and other planets ) but that which we know of them , is much less than that which no man knows . And should such poor understandings than be so arrogant as to think to fathom the counsels of God , and reject his plain revealed truths , because they see not , how such things can be . 

4.  Consider , what a stream of experience do you sin against in this arrogancy . Doth not every study that you fall upon , and every days business that you are engaged in , most plainly discover the weakness of your understandings ? Why else do you learn no faster , and know no more ? Why are you not yet absolnte Masters in all sciences and arts ? Yea why are you so defective in all ? And yet will you presume to dispute with God , and reject his truths as unreasonable , after all this experience of your own infirmity , and of your unfitness for works that are so much lower ? 

5.  Consider , whether by this sinful ar●ogancy you do not equal your understandings with gods ? For if you must be able to see the reason of all his truths and ways , and will control them because you see not the reason of them , doth not this imply that you suppose yourself to equal him in understanding ? And what greater madness can you be guilty of , than such a conceit ? So also when you quarrel with the word as if it contained things that are unrighteous , and strengthen your unbelief by such conceits , what do you but say , that you are more righteous than God ? Oh think not that the fool●shness of man is wiser than God , or that our darkness is comparable to his incomprehensible light , or our unrighteousness to his perfect justice ; or that we are fit judges of these his perfections . Hear that voice that Eli●haz heard , from the spirit that passed before him in the visions of the night , Job 4. 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21.  [ shall mortal man be more just than God ? shall a man be more pure than his maker ? Behold he put u● trust in his servants , and his angels he charged with folly : how much less on them that dwell in houses of clay , whose foundation is in the dust , which are crushed before the moth : they are destroyed from morning to evening : they p●rish for ever without any regarding it : doth not their excellency which is in them go away ? they die , even wi●hout wisd●m . ] 

6.  Consider further , that it is the very nature of faith to believe the thing revealed or testified , upon the mere credit of the testifyer or revealer , if therefore you will have no such implicit belief in God , you will have no faith at all . To see a thing in its own evidence , is not to believe . The formal object of faith is the veracity of God : reason assures us first that God cannot lie : and next it discerneth by evidence , that [ this is God's word , or a divine revelation ] : and then we May well build upon this foundation , that each particular of this revelation is true . So that it is no true belief , if the credit of the testifyer be not the reason of your assent . If therefore you must see the reason of God's revealed truths , and the very manner and end of all his works , before you will believe , this is as much as openly to proclaim , that you will be no believers at all . You will assent to the words of the false●t liar , as long as you see the evidence of truth in the things themselves which they report . And will you give no more credit to God then to such a one ? Will you believe God no further than you see a cogent evidence in the thing asserted , which shows that he cannot deceive you therein if he would ? Why , thus far you will believe the worst of men : for indeed this is no beli●ving at all . If you do not first believe that God cannot lie , and so that all that he saith is true , you have no belief in him at all . 

7.  If you are Christians , you are Christ's disciple , and therefore must wait on him in the humble posture of learners . And he that will no w●it credit this teacher is not like to learn . If you will not believe him , but assent only to that which is evident of itself without his word , then how are you his scholars ? 

8.  Will you allow your own children or scholars to do so by you ? If they should dispute with you instead of believing you , and so should reject all that you tell them as false , that is beyond their capacity as to the reasons and manner ; you would not think that they did their duty when a schoolmaster is teaching his scholars their lesson , shall they instead of learning , dispute it with their Master , and in every difficulty or seeming contradiction , unbelievingly say , [ how can these things be ] ? Be not guilty of that towards God , which you would not have a child be guilty of to a man . 

9  Consider aso , if this course be taken , whether ever you be like to come to knowledge . For the knowledge of things whose evidence is all in the revelation , and the credit of the testifyer , can be no other way attained but by believing . All things seem strange and difficult at first , to those that have not learned them . If you understand all things already , what need you to learn any more ? If you do not , than all that you understand will appear to you at first as darkness or contradiction . If now you will be so confident of your own understandings , as to cast away all that you understand not already , because it seems contradictory or unlikely , how are you like to know any more ? If you will conclude that all is false which you understand not already , you are like to make but unprofitable scholars . Well therefore saith Solomon , prov. 6. 12.  [ seest thou a man wise in his own conceit ? there is more hope of a fool then of him ] for certainly it is a double degree of folly , for a man not only to be ignorant of the things of God , but also to be so ignorant of his own ignorance . And we must be at more pains to make such proud men know that they do not know , then to make the humble to know the truths themselves , which they perceive that they yet know not . And therefore Paul doth not only bid us [ be not wise in your own conceits ] rom. 12 16 but also , intimates that ignorance is the cause of such conceits of wisdom , rom. 11. 25.  [ for i would not brethren , that ye should be ignorant of this mystery , lest ye should be wise in your own conceits ] as Solomon saith of the foolish sluggard , that [ he is wiser in his own conceit then seven men that can render a reason ] pro. 26 16.  

10.  Consider , whether in this case you join not impudence and inhuman ingratitude to your arrogancy ? When Christ condescendeth to become your teacher , and you are loiterers and dullards and will not learn , but have lost the most of your time in his school , is it not a great mercy now , that he will yet entertain you and instruct you , and doth not turn you out of his school ? And will you , instead of being thankful for this mercy , fall a-quarrelling with his truth , and take on you to be wiser than he , when you have so provoked him by your ignorance and unprofitableness ! Will you fly in his face , with audacious unbelieving questions , and say [ how can these things be . ] As if it were he that knew not what he said , and not you that did not understand him ? 

11.  Consider , how easily can God evince the verity of those passages which you so confidently reject , and open your eyes to see that as plain as the highway , which now seems to you so contradictory or improbable ? And then what will you have to say for your unbelief and arrogancy , but to confess your folly and sit down in shame ? You know when any difficult case is propounded to you in any other matter , which you can see no probable way to resolve , yet when another hath resolved it to your hands in a few words , it is presently all plain to you , and you wonder that you could not see it before . You are as one that wearyeth himself with studying to unfold a riddle , and when he hath given it over as impossible , another openeth it to him in a word . Or as i have seen boys at play with a ●a●r of tarrying irons , when one hath spent many hours in trying to undo them , and casts them away , as if it could not be done , another presently and easily opens them before his face . So when you have puzzelled your brains in searching out the reasons of God's ways , and seeking to reconcile the seeming contradictions of his word , and say [ how can these things be ] in a moment can God show you how they can be , and make all plain to you , and make you even wonder that you saw it not sooner , and ashamed that you opened your mouth in unbelief . How plain is that to a man of knowledge , which to the ignorant seems impossible ? If the certain event did not convince them , you should never persuade the ignorant vulgar , that learned men know so much of the motions of the planets , and can so long before tell the eclipse of sun or moon , to a minute . But when they see it come to pass , they are convinced . Thus can God convince thee of the verity of his word , either by a merciful illumination , or by a terrible execution for there is not a soul in hell but doth believe the truth of the threatenings of God . And the devils themselves believe , that would draw thee to unbelief . 

12.  Lastly , take heed of the very beginnings of this sin ; for it is the ordinary way to total apostasy ; when men have once so far lost their humility and modesty , and forgot that they are men , or what a man is , as to make their shallow reason the censurer of God's word , because of certain seeming improbabilities ; and when they will not rest satisfied in the bare word of God , that thus it is ; but they must needs know [ why , an● how it can be ] , this opens the floodgate of temptations upon them ; for the envious serpent wil● quickly show them more difficulties than their shallow brains can answer ; and will cull out all those passages of scripture , which are hard to be understood , which the unlearned and unstable d● wrest to their own destruction , 2 pet. 3. 18.  He will show them all the knots , but never show them how to untie them . Such arrogant questioners & censurers of God's word , do oft run on to utter infidelity ; while they are incompetent judges , and do not know it , what can be expected from them but a false judgement ? For though the light shineth in darkness , yet the darkness comprehendeth it no : joh 1. 5. and therefore presumeth to condemn the light . 

Oh therefore let all young , raw students , and unsettled wits take heed in the fear of God , that they exalt not themselves , and that they think not their weak understandings to be capable of comprehending the counsels of God , and passing a censure upon his word , upon the nature of the matter as appearing unto them . Nay let the sharpest wits , and greatest scholars stoop down before the wisdom of God , and be have themselves as humble learners , and enter as little children into his school and kingdom , and submissively put their mouths in the dust , and take heed of setting their wits against heaven , or challenging the infinite wisdom to a disputation . If they love themselves let them take this advice , and remember that God delighteth to scatter the proud in the imagination of their own hearts , Luke 1. 51. and to pull down ●spiring sinners to the dust . As they that would set their power against God , would soon be con●inced of their madness by their ruin ; so they that will set their wisdom against him , are like to escape no better . [ let no man deceive himself : if any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world ; let him become a fool ▪ that he May be wise ; for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God : for it is written , he taketh the wise in their own craftiness : and again . The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise that they are vain ] 1 cor. 3 18 , 19 , 20.  

object . but would you not have men satisfied of the reasonableness of what they believe ? shall men believe that which is unreasonable ? this were to make us mad , and not Christians . answ. you must believe nothing but what you have sufficient reason to believe . But than you must know what is sufficient reason for belief . Prove but the thing to be the testimony of God , and then you have sufficient reason to believe it , whatsoever it be for faith proceedeth by this argumentation [ whatsoever god testifieth is true : but this God testifieth ; therefore it is true . ] You have as good reason to believe the major , as that there is a God : and he that acknowledgeth not a God , is unworthy to be a man : all that you have to look after therefore is to prove the minor , that [ this or that is the word of God ] and as concerning the scripture in general , it carrieth sufficient reason to warrant and oblige any man that readeth or heareth it , to believe it , in the forehead of it . It shineth by it shineth by its own light , and it beareth the certain seal of heaven . So that we have goo● reason to believe the scripture , or doctrine o● Christ to be the word of God : and then we hav● as good reason to believe it , and every part of  to be true . And then what ground is there for any further exceptions or objections ? When yo● have seen the seal of God affixed , and perceive● sufficient evidence of the verity of the whole , what room is left for cavils against any par● of it ? 

object . but it is certain that God never spok● contradictions . Therefore if i find contradictions in the scriptures , May i not rationally argue that they are not the word of God ? answ. yes , if you could certainly and infallibly prove your minor , that scripture hath such contradictions . But that 's not a thing that a sober man can be confident of proving : because all things that men understand not , May seem to them to have contradictions . And you have far more reason to suspect your own shallow understanding , than the word . For those things as i have showed , May be easily reconcilable by others that understand , which seem most unreconcilable to you . Are you sure there can be no way of reconciliation , but you must know it ? it 's easy therefore to see that your minor cannot possibly be proved . 

Yea it May be easily and certainly disproved , even by him that cannot reconcile those seeming contradictions : for [ God attesteth no contradictions : but God attesteth the holy scripture . Therefore the holy scriptures have no contradictions . ] 

The major is most evident to the light of nature , and granted by yourself . The minor ●s proved at large , before and elsewhere : God's attestation is discernible to reason . 

It is therefore a preposterous course to begin ●t the quality of the word , and to argue thence , that God revealed it not , when you should begin at the attestation or seal of God , and argue thence that he did reveal it : ( And indeed the very quality beareth or containeth his image and seal . ) For you are more capable of discerning the seal of God attesting it ( In the spirit of miracles , and holiness , &c. ) than you are of discerning presently the sense of all those passages that seem contradictory to you . You May easily be ignorant of the true interpretation , for want of acquaintance with some one of those many things that are necessary thereto : but i can be certain that God hath astested the scripture to be his word . 

And indeed common reason tells us that we must first have a general proof that scripture is God's word , and argue thence to the verity of the parts , & not begin with a particular proof of each part : it seems you would argue thus : [ this and that text of scripture are true : therefore they are God's word ] but reason telleth you , you should argue thus [ this is God's word : therefore it is true ] if you set a boy at school to learn his grammar , will you allow him to be so foolish , as to stay till he can reconcile every seeming contradiction in it , before he believe it to be a grammar , or submit to learn , and use its rules ? Or will you not ●pect , that he first know it to be a grammar ,  then make it his business to learn to understa●● it , and therein to learn to reconcile all s●em  contradictions ? And should he not in modes● and reason , think that his Master can recon●● that which May seem unreconcilable to him , a● such unlearned novices , as he is ? 

For my part i am fully resolved , that if  reason could reach to none of the matters ●●vealed in scriptures , so as to see them in the eu●dence of the thing , yet if i once see the eviden●● of divine revelation , i May well be assured ▪ th●● it i● wholly true ; how far soever it m●y transcen●● my reason . For i have reason to believe all the God revealeth and assert●th ; and i have re●so● to acknowledge the imbe●illity of my Reaso● and its incompetency to censure the wisdom o● God . 

And thus i abhor both the doctrine of then that say , we have no reason to be Christians ▪ and that the truth of scripture is an indemonstrable principle , that must be believed without reasons , and not proved by them : and also the arrogant infidelity of them that will believe nothing to be a divine revelation , unless their reason can comprehend the thing itself , or at least , if there be any thing in it that seems contradictory to their reason ; and so will begin at the wrong end , and examine the particular matters , by the test of their blind reason , when they should first examine the attestations of the whole , where the evidences are more fitted for the reason , even of the younger Christians to discern . 

I easily confess that no man should ground●esly believe any thing to be a divine testimony , or believe any man that saith , he speaks from God : but when God hath given them sufficient reason to believe , that the testimony and revelation is indeed from himself , if after that men will still be doubting , because their reason is stalled about the manner , and the causes , and ends , and will believe no more than is within the reach of their reason in these respects , nor confess that it is God's word , unless they can vindicate it from all objections , and know why and how it is , as well as that it is ; this is a mere unreasonable unbelief . It is ordinary with Princes and other lawgivers , in wisdom to conceal the reason of their laws : shall subjects therefore presume to censure them as defective in wisdom or justice , because that they know not the reason of them ? I say again , if there were nothing in scripture , but what the reason of man could comprehend , it were not so like to be the product of the infinite wisdom of God . Let reason therefore stoop to the wisdom of our maker , and when he hath , let us know that it is he that speaketh ; let us humbly learn , and not proudly expostulate with him about the rest . 

Though i shall not undertake to set upon the resolution of all the questions of incredulous men , which they commonly raise against the word of God ; ( For that would take up many large volumes of itself ; ) yet as i have dissuaded them from this arrogancy of wit , so i should  make trial of a few of their commonest a  greatest objections , to show them that their i●fidelity is capable of a confutation , as well  of a dehortation . 

object . 1.  you tell us out of scripture , that ther● are devils , most wicked malicious spirits addict  to do evil : who made these devils , or , how can they to be so bad : certainly , God is good , and therefore made nothing but what was good ; and ever● thing must have a first cause : if they made themselves evil , than they were the first cause of thei● own evil : and then you deify the will of the devil in making it to be absolutely a first cause .  you say as some , that sin is but a privation , and therefore hath no efficient cause , but a deficient  then either that deficiency must be first from Go● ( And then he should be the first cause of all sin ) or from the will of the devil ; and then either he wa● before bound non-deficere , or not . If not , it was no sin ; if he were , than first , he could primo deficere , though God did all that belonged to him to prevent it ; secondly , and he could have stood without any more help than he had when he fell , and so quoad determinationem propriae voluntatis , should have been the first determining cause of his own perseverance , or non-deficiency : for if he could not stand , it was no sin to fall , being before innocent . Moreover , their sin was not a mere privation , but materially an act ( Whether velle or nolle ) and formally a relation of disconformity to the law . answ. 1 : the devil himself was the first cause of his own pravity . God made him not evil , but he made himself so . God gave him freewill to be a self-determining principle ; by this he was enabled to stand or fall , and left in the hands of his own counsel . By a sinful act he averted himself from the chiefest good , and became disposed to a further aversion , which Might quickly habituate him to all evil . Nor is it any deifying of the creatures will , to say it is such a self-determining principle , and so far a first cause , while it had the power of self-determination from God , and so absolutely is no first cause . It was the excellency of the creature , as being to be governed , to have freewill , or a self-determining power to good or evil : though it be a higher perfection to be determined or determinable only to good , which in patriâ May be enjoyed , yet in viâ for one under government in the use of means in order to the end , it is most suitable to their condition to have a liberty of self-determination : and therefore this was part of the beauty of the frame of nature , and therefore not derogatory from the workman . As God intended sapientially , or per potentiam sapientiae , to govern the rational creature by laws and objects : so did he sapientially frame him in a capacity for such a sapiential government ; and that was by giving ●im a free , that is , a self-determining will . 

Indeed , the angelical nature , and soul of man , is so exquisite and subtle , and sublime a ●hing , that no man can exactly perceive and com●rehend the manner of its self-determination : ●ut the thing itself is not to be doubted of , though the manner of it be yet past our reach . We May certainly conclu●e , therefore , that God made angels and men g●o● ; but some of those angels , and m●n , by ●heir inducement , made themselves evil : for God made them free agents to determin● themselves to good or evil . And the ignorance of the nature of re  ill , doth cause such infidels to rise up against God with their impious quarrels . 

2.  And see whether these blind wretches do not wilfully put out their own eyes , and reason against most certain sense and experience . For i would ask any of them whether there be indeed any sin , or bad me● in the world , or not ? If they say , no ; then i would wish them not to blame any man as an evil doer , that shall rob them , o● slander them , or beat them . T●e likeliest cure fo● this error , is to beat them black and blue , til● they believe that he that doth it , doth ill . And why should not any man do it daily if there be no ill in it ? Is not he mad with infidel●ty , tha● thinks there is no bad man in all the world , when there are so many , and so desperately wicked , and when he is so bad himself ? Or is ●e fit to be tolerated in any society , that thinks there is no evil ? Sure he will think , that he May ●o any thing , and not do ev●●●● ▪ but if he confess , tha● any man i● evil , or do●h evil , let him ask himself who mad● him evil ? Did God that is good ? or did he himself ? And if he can find out how man came to be evil , he May find a satisfactory answer to his question , how angels came to be evil . Bu● what if we could not tell how this evil did firs● come ? Shall we therefore say , that there is no such thing ? Shall we deny that which we see and hear , and feel , because we know not how or whence it came ? What folly is this ? Then let every murderer , thief , or other ●ff●ndor at the assizes , come off with this argument , and say , that he hath done no evil ; for all things are of God , and God doth no evil . As mad as this reasoning is , yet have i known them that have openly prof●ss●d , that they longed to see the devil ▪ and would ride a hundred mile to see him , in m●er confidence , that there is no devil ; and that upon such vain imaginations as these . 

object . 2 . the scripture saith , that God made all things of nothing ; when of nothing , nothing can be made . How then can these things be ? answ. cannot God do it , unless such worms can tell how he should do it ? Doth the infant know how he is form in the womb ? But why should it seem improbable , that the first infinite being should create a finite being ? He that give all creatures their forms , can as well cause the first matter . What if it were granted . That earth , or water , or air , were from eternity ? Is it not as hard to make the sun and heavens of one of these , as to make one of these of nothing ? 

But methinks these infidels should consider , that either God made all things of nothing , or else , that something of which he made them , must be eternal , and without any cause . If so , than it is God ; and if God , then either the one true God himself , or some other god . If God himself , than all creatures should be his substance , and s● be God ; and so they would make every ●●one to be God . If any other God , than they will in●ur the sa●●●● conu●●ienceses ; besides , the feigning of many gods , ●●cause they will not con●ess the omnipoten●y of one . Is it not more reasonable to ●el●ev● , th●● God made a stone , or earth o● no●●ing , then to believe that it made itself ? But thus will mo●talss ens●are and bewilder themselves ▪ while they will g● about to comprehend and question omnipotency , and ask their maker , how he can so make them . 

object . 3.  Moses saith , that God made the light , and day , and darkness , and night , before the sun : when the light is the effect , and the sun the cause ; and the darkness is but a privation of the light of the sun . How then can these things be ? answ. 1.  Whatsoever God can produce mediately by the sun , or other instruments , that he can produce as easily , immediately himself without an instrument . Is it not as easy to him , to cause light without a sun , as to make the sun itself , with its light ? 

2.  Are not philosophers yet unresolved , whether light be not a substance ? And then why Might it not be first create alone ? 

3.  However , it Might be the effect of the element of fi●e , disposed of by God for differencing day and night , without a sun , till the sun was made . And is it not agreeable to the rest of his works , that he should first make the elements and general matter before he form particular creatures h●●e●f ? As he made the water , before he con●in●d it in its banks , and made it a sea : so Might he make the light or fire , be●ore he contracted so much of it into a sun : and if he can distinguish day and night by the  un afterward , he Might as easily do it by the element o● fire or light before . You ma● see a pr●tence of fu●ther satisfaction to reason in this point , in tho. White his appendix , the●l . ad institut . Peripat . cap.  . & 4. which 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 recite . 

object 4.  M●s●● saith gen. 1 16.  that God made two great lights , the sun and moon ; whereas it is certain ▪ th'  many 〈◊〉 plan●●ss are greater than the mo●● , therefore he speaketh ignoran●ly . answ. but though they a●e greater than the moon , they ●●e n●● g  li●h●s to the earth , than t●e mo●n , w●i●h is the thing that Moses affirmeth . 

object . 5.  M●s●s makes the garden of Eden to have a Riu●● arising i● it , which ●ivideth itself into four parts . But there is no such place now known in the world , where four such rivers as he describeth are so near . answ. Moses saith not , that this river had its rise in Eden , much less in the garden ; nor that the f●ur divisions or branches of it were in the garden , but in Eden . it was not all Eden that was this garden , nor the garden called Eden : but Eden was the name of the country ( At that time when Moses wrote ) in which the garden was . And this land of Eden was in Telassar , that is , in the upper part of Chaldaea , where Babylon is situate ; and there the river Euphrates divideth itself into those four st●e●mss which Moses here d●scribe●h ; which river goeth through and out of Eden ▪ though the bring or head be elsewhere : the four particular branches you May s●e described by Junius on the text at large ; and the most pro●●bl● conjecture of the situation of the garden , is , ●ha● it was in o● ve●y near the place where Babylon now stands , and from whence came the Jews suffering , as well as our first sin . 

object . 6.  is it a likely thing that a serpent should speak to Eve ? or the subtlety of the serpent be a reason of the temptation ? Or , that Eve that was then perfect , should not know that serpents cannot speak of themselves ; and if she knew that it was the devil that spak● by the serpent , it would have affrighted and astonished her , rather than have been such a temptation to her ? answ. 1.  Though Eve was perfect as to her natural powers , and capacity , yet not as to her actual knowledge ? She that was n●wly then create , Might be ignorant of the serpent's nature . 

2.  But suppose that she knew that it was the devil that spoke by the serpent ( Which seems to me most likely ) yet doth it not follow , that she should then dread or abhor him : for ●ow know you that Eve was acquainted with the diabolical pravity or malice ? How know you when the angels fell to be devils ? whether long before ? or whether they were but newly fallen , ( As Zanchy conceiveth by their unbelief ) but most certain it is , that they were then no such hateful or dreadful creatures in the apprehension of man , as now they are : for it was upon man's fall , that God put that enmity between them and us , from which our hatred and dread of them doth proceed . When the devil had showed his malice to us so far ; than d●d God put that fixed enmity in our natures which we all since perceive . This was not in Eve , and therefore it is no wonder if she had no more dread of this evil spirit , than we have of one another , especially when it is most likely that she well knew that there were good angels , but knew not of their fall , and of their malice unto herself . And for the subtlety of the instrumental serpent , it was the likelier to be the instrument of the subtle deceiver : and it is most likely , that God would not suffer Satan to use any other instrument , that so the quality of the instrument Might be fit to exci●e a due cautelousness in the woman , Satan himself being a spirit , is invisible to us ; and therefore ▪ when he will appear , it must be in s●me borrowed shape ; and he usually fitteth that shape to the ends of his apparition : if it be to terrify , it is commonly in a dreadful shape ; and for the most part , God will not suffer him to appear in any other , that man May the better know that it is the enemy that he hath to deal with . And so before our fall , when he would deceive , he speaketh by a subtle creature , and is permitted to do it by no other , that man Might have the more reason to suspect that he came in way of deceit . We are incompetent judges of the full of these things , unless we better knew the a●quaintance that man than had with the angelical nature , and what familia●i●y was between them , or what alteration is since made in the nature of the instrumen●al serpent by the ●●●●e . Why then should we unbelievingly ask , how these things can be ? which God revealeth , when we m●y easily know that we are such incompetent judges . 

Many more of these objections Might be mentioned , and easily co●futed , that are raised by infidels about the creation , and fall ; but because Junius hath confu●ed 22 of them alre●dy , after his prelections on G●● . ●3 p. 9● . against an Antinomian that then urged them from Simplicius the heathen philo●●p●●r i sh●ll ref●r them that need it th●the for 〈◊〉 . 

obj. — . how could a●n f●ye into the land of Nod , or build a city , G●● . 4. 6 , 17. when there was no more m●n ●●●●●th ▪ ans. 1.  At  it  l●d the land of Nod not because it was ●●●alled in Gains time , but in the time when mo●●●●●●●e .  . It is supposed to be between t●e 〈◊〉 &c. ●wo hundr●●h year of ●is age , that ●a●● bu●● this  , and by some the 3 ,  400. for it is not ●●id tha he did it presently after  curs● , though these things are laid close togeth●r in the concise narration . And why Might not  posterity be easily m●le plied , in all that time to such a number as Might build and replenish  city , ●ea many cities . 

o●● . 8.  is it  likely thing that the red-sea should  for the Israelites to pass through ? Or that  should stand still in Joshuah's time : and not  be over tu●ned by it ? Or that Ionas should live without air in the belly of a whale ? Or ●ot be digested in his belly as other food is ? how ●an these things be ? answ and what , must God do none but like●y things ? Is it not as easy with him to do all ●his , as for you to move a finger , and much more ? ●s it not as easy to make the water stand still as ●ove ; or to gather it on heaps in the sea , as to gather it into the sea from the rest of the earth , ●nd to keep its course in ebbing and flowing ? And ●s it not as easy to cause the sun to stand still as to move ? And so to move as it is supposed to do ? ●f the sun had used to stand still , would you not have taken it for as incredible a matter that it should move ? And have said as unbelievingly , how can this be ? and for the disordering of nature , it was sun and moon with all the movable frame that stood still together ; and not the sun alone : and so made no such alteration as is imagined , it must have done . 

And for Ionas , that God that made him and all the wo●ld , and sustaineth it by his power , could easily do this . Perhaps these infidels will next say that an infant cannot live in the mother's womb for want of air or breath . 

2.  Are they not as great works which we every day see , in the being and course of sun , moon and other creatures , as any of these ? 

3.  Is it likely that Moses would have wrote of such a thing as the standing and opening of the red sea ▪ and the Israelites passing through it , to those same Israelites , and that he would so oft have used that as an argument to move them to obedience , and deliver them his law to be kep● upon such an obligation or motive , if no such thing at all had been done : would so many thousand persons have believed such a man that told them they were led through the red sea as on dry land ? and would they have followed him forty years through a wilderness , and so zealously have maintained his law which was backed with such motives , if they had all known these things to be false ? Or was it possible they should be false , and they not know them ? 

But I 'll stand no more in confuting these cavils against the old-testament but speak to 2 , or 3 which they bring against the gospel of Christ . 

obj. 9  is it a lik●ly thing that a virgin should conceive and have a child ? How can this be ? answ. is it not as easy for God to cause conception by the holy ghost immediately , as medidiately by man ? Doth God enable a ( Reature to do that which he cannot do himself , without that creature ? What madness were it to dream that this exceeds the power of God ? 

obj. 10.  is it a likely thing that God should become a man , or that God and man should be one person , which is more condescen●ion than for a Prince to become a fly to save flies ●●om being killed ? answ. it 's one thing to ask whether this be possible ? and another , whether it were done ? It is indeed the greatest wonder of all the works of God , but there is no contradiction in it to prove it impossible . The God head was no whit really abased or changed by this union , but at the utmost ) relatively and reputatively only . God did not become man , by ceasing to be God , ●r commi●ing the human nature with the divine . But one●y assumed a human nature to the divine . It is not therefore as if a Prince should become an inferior creature , but only as if he should assume such a creature into so near a relation to him . 

2.  And that God hath indeed done this , his evident testimonies have proved to the world : is it likely or possible that one should assert such a thing , and seal it in the face of the world with miracles , and rise himself from the dead , and send forth a spirit of miracles and of holiness on his church , to confirm his affirmation , if all this were not true which he affirmeth ? 

3 is this the thanks that God shall have for his wonderful condes●ension , that though he prove it to be true , yet we will not believe the mercy that he shows us , unless it seem likely to us in the way of us accomplishment ? 

obj 11.  is it not a contradiction to say that there are three per●onss , and but one God ? answ no : because to be a person or subsistence in the godhead , and to be a God is not all one . It is no contradiction that the vegetative , sensitive and rational in man , should be three , and distinct one from another , and yet not be three souls but one . And that power , understanding , and will , should be three , and distinct ; and yet not three souls but one : and that power , light , and heat , should be distinct in the sun ; and yet not be three suns , but one . Why then should the divine trinity of subsistences seem a contradiction ? 

object . 12.  there are many contradictions in t● scripture ; and therefore it is incredible . For e●ample ; Mark . 14. 30.  [ before the cock cro● twice ] mat. and Luke say [ before the cock crow● and many the like . answ. 1.  It is mere ignorance of the sense  scripture , that canseth this conceit of contrad●ction . Expositors themselve● are imperfect in the understanding of them ; yet if you will well rea● them , you shall see how easily and clearly they reconcile many things that s●en unreconcilable to the ignorant . Read among others , scharpius hi● symphonia to that end . 

2.  As to the text instanced . The second c●●●● crowing was then specially and eminently c●lle● [ the cocks crowing ] and therefore Matt●●● An●luke do name no more but [ the crowing  the cock ] meaning that second cock , which was specially so called ; ( Of which see Grotius on the text ) whereas mark doth more pr●cisely express the same in fuller words : what a vain mind is it that will pick quarrels with such expressions ? 

I give but a brief touch of these few common exceptions , leaving them to seek the resolution of such doubts , from commentators that have performed it , or from their judicious teachers , who are at hand , and ready to do it . 

The Lord acquaint unbelieving sinners with the greatness of their ignorance , and the shallowness of their capacities that they May know how unfit they are to expostulate with their maker , and what need they have to wait upon him as humble learners . For the meek will he teach his way . psal 25. 9 and unto babes doth he reveal ●●e mysteries of his will . For though the Lord  high , yet hath he respect unto the lowly : but ●e proud he knoweth a far off , psal. 138. 6.  ●nd the mysteries of the gospel which now seem ●credible , he will one day open to the comfort  his saints , and the confusion of unbelievers ; ●●en at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ , ●hich in his times he shall show , who is the blessed ●●d only potentate , the King of Kings , and Lord  Lords : who only hath immortality , dwelling  the light which no man can approach unto , ●hom no man hath seen or can see : to whom be ho●or and power everlasting . 

Amen . Finis . 

use . 