One sheet for the ministry against the malignants of all sorts by Richard Baxter. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed by Robert White for Nevil Simmons ...,London :1657.)

One sheet for the ministry , against the malignants of all sorts . 

by Richard Baxter . 

London , printed by Robert White , for Nevil Simmons , bookseller in Kederminster , anno dom. 1657.  

One sheet for the ministry , against the malignants of all sorts . As man's first felicity was attended with the malice of the serpent , so is the wonderful work of his restauration . The promise of reconciliation by the seed of the woman , is joined with a proclamation of open war with the serpent and his seed . The enmity was hottest in the devil and his seed against Christ himself , who bare and overcame it , and is become the captain of our salvation , that his church May overcome by his cross , and strength , and conduct ; the next degree of malice is against his officers : the most eminent , the general officers had the hottest assault : and his ordinary officers bear the next : that we shall be hated of all men for the name of Christ , ( mat. 10. 22.  ) is still verified to our experience . Not only the openly profane ab●o●●● for our work-sake , but false-hearted professors that turn from the truth , do presently turn malignants against the ministry ; and many weak ones that are better minded , are dangerously seduced into a guilt of the sedition . To all these i here proclaim in the name and word of the Lord , numb 16. 26.  [ depart i pray you from the tents of these wicked men , and touch nothing of theirs , lest ye be consumed in all their sins . ] Which i shall now open to you . 

1.  The office of the ministry is an undoubted ordinance of God , to continue in the church to the end of the world . No man can pretend that they ceased with the apostles ; for it is God's will that ordinary fixed presbyters shall be ordained in every church , Acts 14. 23.  tit. 1. 5. 1 tim. 3. 1. 2 tim. 2. 2.  And pastors and teachers are appointed for the perfecting of the saints , for the work of the ministry , and edifying of the body of Christ ; till we all come to a perfect man , ephes. 4. 11 , 12 , 13.  A ministry authorised to disciple the nations , baptize and teach them , is instituted by Christ as King and saviour , and have his promise to be with them always to the end of the world , matth. 28. 18 , 19 , 20.  The same necessity and work continueth ; still souls are born and bred in darkness ; and how shall they be saved without believing , or believe without hearing , or hear without preaching , or we preach without sending ? rom. 10. 13 , 14 , 15.  There is a clearer word in the gospel for the ministry than the magistracy ; though enough for both . Our own call i shall speak of anon . 

2.  These malignants set themselves against the principal members of the body of Christ , that are in it as the eyes and hands to the natural body , 1. cor. 12. 16 , 19 , 27 , 29.  ephes. 4. 11 , 15.  The ministers of Christ , and stewards of the mysteries of God , 1 cor. 4. 1.  The over seers of the flock that is purchased with Christ's blood , acts 20. 28.  They are the chief members , 1. in office ; 2.  Ordinarily in gifts for edification of the body : 3.  And in grace . Now a wound in the stomach or liver is more mortal to the body , then in the hand : and the loss of an eye or hand is worse than the loss of an ear . 

3.  These malignants are therefore principally enemies to the church itself . They take on them to be only against the ministers , but it will prove most against the persons and whole church . If they sinite the shepherds , the sheep will be scattered . How can they more surely ruin Christ's family , then by casting out the stewards that must rule , and give the children their meat in due season , even milk to the babes , and stronger meat to them of full age , heb. 5. 12 , 13 , 14.  Luke 12. 42.  mat. 24. 45.  What readier way to ruin the schools of Christ , then by casting out the teachers that he hath appointed under him ? Or to ruin his kingdom , then to reject his officers ? Or to wrong the body , then to cut off the hands , and pull out the eyes , or to destroy the principal parts : was it not ministers that planted the churches , and converted the world , and have ever born off the assaults of enemies ? where was there ever church on earth that continue without a minister ? The great kingdom of Nubia fell from Christianity for want of preachers . The nations that have the weakest and fewest ministers , have the least of Christianity : and those that have the most and ablest ministers , have the most flourishing state of religion . All over the world the church doth rise or fall with the ministry : cut down the pillars , and the building falls . He is blind that sees not what would become of the church , were it not for the ministry . Who should teach the ignorant , or rebuke the obstinate , explain the word of truth , and stop the mouths of proud gainsayers ? What work would heresies , and division , and profaneness make , if these banks were cut down ? when all that can be done is still too little . It must needs therefore be meet enmity against the church that makes men malignant against the ministry . 

4.  The design of the maligners of the ministry is plainly against the gospel and Christianity itself . They take the readiest way in the world to bring in heathenism , infidelity and atheism , which Christianity hath so far banished . For it is the ministry that Christ useth to bring in light , and drive and keep out this damnable darkness , acts 26. 17 , 18.  [ i send thee to open their eyes , and turn them from darkness to light , &c. ] Why are so many nations infidels , Mahometans and idolaters , but for want of ministers to preach the gospel to them ? These malignants therefore would take down the sun , and banish Christianity out of the world . 

5.  And they hinder the conversion of particular souls , and so are the cruelest wretches on earth . Though an angel must be sent to Cornelius , it is not to be instead of a preacher , but to send him to a preacher , acts 10.  Though Christ would wonderfully appear to Saul , it is to send him to Ananias for instruction , acts 9  Though the jailor must feel an earthquake , and see miracles , it is but to prepare him for the ministers words , acts 16.  Philip must be carried by an angel to expound to an eunuch the word that must convert him . The ministry is God's instituted settled way , by which he will convert and save the world , as truly as the light is the natural way by which he will corporally enlighten them , acts 2. 18. 1 tim. 4. 16.  matth. 5. 14.  rom 10. 14.  Do you think so many souls would be converted if the ministry were down ? Do you not see that the very contempt of them , that the scorns of the ungodly , and opposition of malignant apostates have occasioned , doth hinder most of the ignorant and profane from receiving the saving benefit of the gospel ? How many million of souls would these wretches sweep away to hell , if they had their will ? while thousands are in damnation for want of the light , they would take it from you , that you Might go there also . Do you not understand the meaning of these words against Christ's ministers ? Why the meaning is this : they make a motion to the persons of the land , to go to hell with one consent , and to hate those that are appointed to keep them out of it . They would take the bread of life from your mouths . They are attempting an hundred times more cruelty on you , than Herod on the Jews when he killed the children , or the Irish that murdered the Protestant's by thousands ; as the soul is of greater worth than the body . 

6.  These malignants against the ministry are the flat enemies of Christ himself , and so he will take them and use them . He that would root out the inferior magistrates , is an enemy to the sovereign ; and he that is against the officers of the army , is an enemy to the general : Christ never intended to stay visibly on earth , and to teach and rule the world immediately in person ; but he that is the King will rule by his officers ; and he that is prophet will teach us by his officers ; and therefore he hath plainly told us [ he that h●areth you , heareth me ; and he that despiseth you , despiseth me ; and he that despiseth me , despiseth him that sent me , Luke 10. 16. ] Oh fearful case of miserable malignants ! Durst thou despise the Lord thy maker and redeemer , if he appeared to thee in his glory ! to whom the sun itself is as darkness , and all the world as dust and nothing . Remember when thou next speakest against his officers , or hearest others speak against them , that their words are spoken against the face of Christ , and of the father . I would not be found in the cafe of one of these malignants , when Christ shall come to judge his enemies , for a thousand worlds . He that hath said , [ touch not mine anointed , and do my prophets no harm ; and hath rebuked Kings for their sakes , psalm 105. 15. will deride all those that would break his bands , and will break them as with a rod of iron , and dash them in pieces as a potter's vessel , psalm 2. 3 , 4 , 9  And as he hath told them plainly , [ who so despiseth the word shall be destroyed , prov. 13. 13. ] And [ he that despiseth , despiseth not man but God , 1 thes. 4. 8. ] So he hath told us that it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgement , then for such , mat. 10. 15.  Many a thousand prouder enemies than you hath Christ broken ; and look to yourselves , for your day is coming . If you had but stumbled on this stone , it would have broken you in pieces ; but seeing you will strive against it , it will fall on you , and grind you to powder , matth. 21. 44.  And then you shall see that he that made them his ambassadors , will bear them out , and say , [ in as much as you did it to these , you did it to me . ] And you shall then say , blessed are they that trust in him . 

7.  It is apparent that these enemies of the ministers , are playing the Papists game . Because the just disgrace of their ministry , was the ruin of their kingdom ; therefore they hope to win of us at the same game . They know that if the persons were brought into a hatred or suspicion of their guides , they Might the easier be won to them . They tell us in their writings , that not one of ten of our persons but taketh his faith on trust from their teachers ; and therefore take them off from them , and they will fall : but they delude themselves in this : for though the ungodly among us have no true faith of their own , and the godly must lean on the hand of their supporters , yet there is in them a living principle ; and we do not as the Papist priests , teach our persons to see with our eyes , and no matter for their own : but we help to clear their own eyesight . Doubt not but the most of the sects in the land that rail against the ministry , are knowingly or ignorantly the agents of the Papists . For the principal work of a Papist is to cry down the ministry , and the scripture , and to set all they can on the same work . 

8.  These sects that are against the ministry do all the same work as the drunkards , whore-mongers , covetous , and all ungodly persons in our parishes do : and therefore it seems they are guided by the same spirit . It is the work of drunkards and all these wicked wretches to hate , and despise , and revile the ministers , and to teach others to say as they . And just so do Quakers , Seekers , Papists and all other malignants reproach the same ministers : and yet the blind wretches will not see that the same spirit moveth them . 

9  It is apparent that it is the devil's game they play , and his interest and kingdom which they promote . Who fights against Christ's officers and army , but the general of the contrary army ? What greater service could all the world do for the devil then to cast out the ministers of Christ ? and what more would the devil himself desire , to set up his kingdom and suppress the church ? Wretches ! you shall shortly see your Master , and he will pay you your wages contrary to your expectation . Read God's word to a malignant , acts 13. 10.  

10.  These enemies do reproach as faithful a ministry as the world enjoyeth , and their malice hath so little footing , as that the result must be their own shame . Among the Papists indeed there are mass-priests that can but read a mass , whose office is to turn a piece of bread into a God ; and yet these the malignants either let alone , or liken us to them . The Greeks , and Ethiopians , and most of the Christian world , have a ministry that seldom or never preach to them , but read commonprayer and homilies . The most of the Protestant churches have a learned ministry that is so taken up with controversies ; that they are much less in the powerful preaching and practice of godliness : above all nations under heaven , the English are set upon practical divinity and holiness ; and yet even they are by malignity chosen out for reproach . Alas , scandals in the ministry , ( As drunkenness , swearing , &c. ) among other nations are but too common : but in England magistrates and ministers combine against them . Ministers are still spurring on the magistrates to cast out the insufficient , negligent and scandalous ; and desire and use more severity with men of their own profession , then with magistrates or any others in the land . In nothing are they more zealous then to sweep out all the remnant of the scandalous . And for themselves , they are devoted to the work of the Lord , and think nothing too much that they are able to perform , but preach in season and out of season , with all long-suffering and doctrine ; and yet malignants make them their reproach . 

11.  It is abundance of pride and impudence , that these malignant enemies are guilty of . They are most of them persons of lamentable ignorance ; and yet they dare revile at the teachers , and think themselves wise enough to rebuke and teach them : many of them are men of wicked lives ; and yet they can tell the world how bad the ministers are . A railer , a drunkard , a covetous worldling , an ignorant sot , is the likest person to fall upon the minister ; and the owl will call the lark a night-bird . Alas , when we come to try them , what dark wretches do we find them ! and should be glad if they were but teachable . And yet they have learned the devils first lesson , to despise their teachers . 

12.  And oh what barbarous ingratitude are these malignant enemies of the ministry guilty of ! For whom do we watch , but for them and others ? Can they be so blind as to think a painful minister doth make it his design to seek himself , or to look after great matters in the world ? Would not the time , and labour , and cost that they are at in the schools and universities have fitted them for a more gainful trade ? Do not lawyers , physicians , &c. live a far easier , and in the world a more honourable plentiful life ? Have not the ministers themselves been the principal instruments of taking down Bishops , Deans and chapters , arch-deacons , prebends , and all means of preferment ? And what have they got by it ? or ever endeavoured ? Speak malice , and spare not . Is it any thing but what they had before ? even the maintenance due to their particular charge . Unthankful wretches ! It is for your sakes and souls that they study , and pray , and watch , and fast , and exhort , and labour , to the consuming of their strength ; and when they have done , are made the drunkard's song , and the scorn of all the wicked of the country ; and when they spend and are spent , the more they love , the less they are beloved . In the times of this greatest prosperity of the church , they live under constant hatred and scorn , from those that they would save , and will not let alone in sin . And what do they endure all this for but God's honour and your salvation ? Would we be ministers for any lower ends ? Let shame from God and man be on the face of such a minister ! I profess , were it not for the belief of the greatness , and necessity , and excellency of the truths that i am to preach , and for the will of God and the good of souls , i would be a ploughman , or the meanest trade , if not a sweep-chimney , rather than a minister . Must we break our health , and lay by all our worldly interest , for you , even for you , and think not our lives and labours too good or too dear to further your salvation , and must we by you , even by you , be reproached after all ? God will be judge between you and us , whether this be not inhuman ingratitude , and whether we deserve it at your hands . 

13.  Yea it is injustice also that you are guilty of . the labourer , saith Christ , is worthy of his hire , Luke 10. 7.  ( Mark that , you that call them hirelings ) the elders that rule well are worthy of double honour , 1 tim. 5. 1. 7.  especially they that labour in the word and doctrine . and will you throw stones at their head for endeavouring to save your souls ? Will you spit in their faces for seeking with all their might to keep you from hell ? Is that their wages that you owe them ? But blessed be the Lord , with whom is our reward ; though you be not gathered , isa. 49. 5.  But as you love yourselves , take heed of that curse , jer. 18. 20.  [ shall evil be recompensed for good ? for they have digged a pit for my soul : remember that i stood before thee to speak good for them , and to turn away thy wrath from them , &c. ] Oh how many a time have we besought the Lord for you ▪ that he would convert you , and forgive you , and turn away the evil that was over you : and when all these our prayers , and groans , and tears shall be remembered against you , oh miserable souls , how dear will you pay for all ? 

14.  And is it not a wonder that these malignants do not see what evident light of scripture they contradict ; and how many great express commands they violate ? They break the fifth commandment , which requireth honour as well to spiritual ecclesiastical parents , as to civil and natural . And he that curseth father and mother , his lamp shall be put out in darkness , prov. 20. 20.  The eye that mocketh at his father , and despiseth to obey his mother , the ravens of the valley shall pick it out , and the young eagles shall eat it : prov. 30. 17.  Did these wretches never read 1 thes. 5. 12.  we beseech you brethren , to know them which labour among you , and are over you in the Lord , and admonish you : and to esteem them very highly in love for their work-sake , and to be at peace among yourselves . ] And heb. 13. 17.  [ obey them that have the rule over you , and submit yourselves ; for they watch for your souls as they that must give account , that they May do it with joy , and not with grief ; for that is unprofitable for you . ] And heb. 13. 7.  remember them which have the rule over you , who have spoken to you the word of God . ] And so ver. 24.  And 1 tim. 5. 17.  the elders that rule well are wor●hy of double honour , &c. ] with abundance more such passages as these ? Do not you feel these fly in your faces when you oppose the ministers of Christ ? Doth a thief or murderer sin against plainer light than you ? 

15.  These malignant's sin against the consent and experience of the universal church of Christ till this day . The whole church hath been for the ministry , and instructed by them : and as the child doth seek the breast , so did new born Christians in all ages seek the word from the ministers , that they May live and grow thereby . And all the nations of the Christian world are for the ministry to this day ! Or else they could not be for Christ , and for the church and gospel . Is it not plain therefore that these malignants are dead branches , cut off from the church , that are so set against the spirit and interest of the church ? 

16.  Moreover they sin against the experience of all , or almost all the true Christians in the world . For they have all experience that ministers are either their fathers or nurses in the Lord . And that by their means they have had their life , and strength , and comforts : their sins killed , their graces quickened , their doubts resolved ; the taste of the good word of God , and of the powers of the world to come . May we not challenge you as Paul oft doth his flock , whether you did not receive the illuminating , sanctifying spirit by the ministry , if ever you received it ? I tell you , it is as much against the new and holy nature of the saints to despise the ministers of Christ , as it is unnatural for a child to spit in the face of his father or mother . And the experience of sound Christians will keep them closer , and help them much against this inhumanity , what ever hypocrites May do . 

17.  And if these malignants had not Pharaoh's heart , they would sure have considered , that the experience of all ages tells them , that still the most wicked have been the enemies of the ministry , and the most godly have most obeyed and honoured them in the Lord ; and that this enmity hath been the common brand of the rebellious , and the forerunner of the heavy wrath of God ; and that it hath gone worst with the enemies , and best with the friends of a godly ministry . Do i need to prove this , which is so much of the substance of the old testament and the new ? Was it the friends or enemies of all the prophets , apostles and ministers of Christ , that scripture and all good writers do commend ? Do not the names of all malignants against the godly ministry stink above ground , as the shame of mankind , except those that are buried out of hearing , or those that were converted ? 

18.  Nay such are noted for the highest sort of the wicked upon earth : worse than drunkards , whore-mongers and such filthy beasts : the persecutors of God's ministers have been ever taken as walking devils . And the hottest of God's wrath hath fallen upon them . Take two instances , 1.  When the Jews went into captivity , this was the very cause , 2 chron. 36. 15 , 16.  [ but they mocked the messengers of God , and despised his words , and misused his prophets , till the wrath of the Lord arose against his persons , till there was no remedy . 2.  And when the Jews were cut quite off from the church , and made vagabonds on the earth , this was the very cause , acts 28. 28.  be it known therefore to you , that the salvation of God is sent to the gentiles , and that they will hear it . ] 1 thes. 2. 15 , 16.  These Jews [ both killed the Lord Jesus , and their own prophets , and have persecuted us : and they please not God , and are contrary to all men , forbidding us to speak to the gentiles , that they Might be saved , to fill up their sin always ; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost . ] 

19  It is the devils own part that these malignant's act : for it is he that is the great enemy of Christ and the saints , and he that is the accuser of the brethren , which accuseth them before God day and night : and is not this the work of Quakers , drunkards , Papists and all malignants ? But the Lord will rebuke them , and be the glory of his servants , zach. 3. 1 , 2.  [ he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the Lord , and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him . And the Lord said unto Satan : the Lord rebuke thee oh Satan , even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem . ] 

20.  These malignants do most of them condemn themselves ; for they honour the ancient ministers of Christ that are dead , even while they oppose and hate the present that are living , who are the nearest imitators of their doctrine and life that are on earth ! The name of Peter , and Paul , and John they honour , and some of them keep holy-days for them . And at the same time hate and reproach those that preach the same doctrine , and that because they tread in their steps . They honour the names of Austin , and Chrysostom , and Hierom , and other ancients : and hate those that preach and live as they did . They speak honourably of the martyrs that were burned to death for the doctrine of Christ ; and at the same time they hate us , for doing as they did . What difference between the calling , doctrine and lives of those martyred ministers , and these that are now alive ? Oh wretched hypocrites , do you not know that these apostles , fathers and other ministers , did suffer in their time from such as you , as we now do and more ? Hear what Christ saith to such as you , matth. 23. 29 , 30 , 31.  [ wo to your scribes , Pharisees , hypocrites : because ye build the tombs of the prophets , and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous , and say , if we had been in the days of our fathers , we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets : ye are witnesses to yourselves that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets , : fill ye up then the measure of your fathers : ye serpents , ye generation of vipers , how can ye escape the damnation of hell ? ] 

21.  Moreover these malignants do harden themselves against the freshest of the judgements of God , which some of their own hands have executed : and justify the persecutors , and succeed them in their fury . Have you forgotten what God hath done here against the papal enemies of the gospel and ministry , in 88 and the powder-plot , and many other times ? Have you already forgotten how the persecutots of a godly ministry have sped within these sixteen years in England and Ireland ? and dare you now stand up in their room and make yourselves the heirs of their sin , and punishment , and justify them in all their malignity ? What do you but justify them , when you rave against , and revile the same sort of ministers , and many of the same persons , whom the former malignants persecuted ? and oppose the same sort of ministers that the Papists burned ? And would not you do the like by them if you had power in your hands ? Can any wise man doubt of it , whether Papists , and Quakers , and drunkards , that now make it their work to make the ministry odious , would not soon dispatch them if they could ? Blessed be the great protector of the church ; for were it not for him , our lives would soon be a prey to your cruelty . 

22.  And indeed if these malignants had their wills , they would undo themselves , and cut down the bough they stand upon , and destroy the little hope and help that is yet left for their miserable souls : it is for the sake of God's servants among them that judgements are so long kept off them . And as long as the gospel and ministry remains , salvation is offered them : the voice of mercy is calling after them , repent and live . they have the light shining in their eyes , which May at last convince them , as Paul was convinced of his persecution : the voice which they despise May possibly awake them . Though they have less hope than others ; yet there is some . But if they had their will , and were rid of the ministry , alas what would the forlorn wretches do ? Then they Might damn themselves without disturbance , and go quietly to hell , and no stop them , and say , [ why do you so ? ] 

23.  And i pray you consider what it is that these men would have . What if the ministers were all cast out ? would they have any to do gods work in their stead , or none ? If none , you May see what they are doing : if any , who and where are they ? Is it not horrible pride if all these silly souls do think that they can do it better themselves ? And what else do Quakers and all these sectst that are the enemies of the ministry ? Do they not go up and down the land , and say to the wisest holiest teachers , as if they took them by the sleeve , [ come down and let me preach that can do it better : come down thou deceiver and ignorant man , and let me come up that am wiser , and better , and know more : out with these proud lordly preachers , and let us be your teachers , that are more holy , and humble , and self-denying than they . ] Is not this the loud language of their actions ? And can you not hear the devil in these words of highest pride and arrogancy ? But really Sirs , do you think that these men would teach you better ? And is there enough that are wiser and better than we to fill up our rooms , if we were out ? Do but prove that , and you shall have my consent to banish all the ministers in England , to some place that hath greater need of their labour , that they May no more trouble you that have no need of them , and keep out better . 

24.  Lastly , consider on what senseless pretences all this enmity against the ministry doth vent itself . You shall hear the worst that they have to say against us , ( Though but briefly ) and then judge . 

1.  The Quakers say , we are idle drones that labour not , and therefore should not eat . Answ . the worst i wish you , is , that you had but my ease instead of your labour . I have reason to take myself for the least of saints , and yet i fear not to tell the accuser , that i take the labour of most tradesmen in the town to be a pleasure to the body in comparison of mine ; ( Though for the ends and the pleasure of my mind , i would not change it with the greatest Prince ) their labour preserveth health , and mine consumeth it : they work in ease , and i in continual pain : they have hours and days of recreation , i have scarce time to eat and drink . No molesteth them for their labour ; but the more i do , the more hatred and trouble i draw upon me . If a Quaker ask me , what all this labour is , let him come and see , or do as i do , and he shall know . 

2.  They accuse us of covetousness and oppression , because we take tithes or hire , ( As they call it ) answ . 1.  Is it not malice or sacrilegious covetousness that frameth this accusation ? whose are the tithes ? are they ours or theirs ? the same law of the land that makes the nine parts theirs , doth make the tenth ours . If we have no title to the tenth , they have none to the rest . We ask none of our persons for a farthing . They give it not to us : it was never theirs . when they buy or take leases of their land , it is only the nine parts that they pay for ; and if the tenths were sold them , they should pay themselves a tenth part more . And would these men make all the persons thieves and covetous , to take or desire that which never was their own ? Nay would they have them rob God , to whom for his service the tithes were devoted ? Read mal. 3. 8 , 9 , 10.  rom. 2. 22.  gen. 14. 20.  heb. 7. 6 , 9  And whether tithe itself be of divine institution still , is more than they are able to disprove . Sure i am , when Christ told them of tithing mint and cumin , he saith , these aught ye to have done , and not to leave the other undone , mat. 23. 23. 2.  But most certain i am that God hath made it our duty to meditate on his word , and give ourselves wholly thereto , 1 tim. 4. 15. and that we May [ forbear working , and not go on warfare at our own charge ; and sowing to men spiritual things , should reap their carnal things ; do ye not know that they which minister about holy things , live of the things of the temple ; and they which wait at the altar , are partakers with the altar ? Even so hath the Lord ordained , that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel . ] 1 cor. 9 6 , 7 , 13 , 14. 3.  And know you not that the primitive Christians gave not only the tenths , but all that they had , and laid it at the apostles feet , to show that the gospel teacheth more clearly than the law , the necessity of dedicating ourselves and all that we have to God . 4.  And yet i must say , that we are content with food and raiment . most ministers in England would be glad to give you all their tithes , if you will but allow them food and raiment for themselves and families , and such education for their children as is fittest to make them serviceable to God . And i hope it is no sin to have mouths that must be fed , or backs that must be clothed . What i must God's ministers above all others be grudged food and raiment , and that of the Lord's portion , which none of you pay for ? I fear not to imitate Paul stopping the mouths of malicious accusers , and to tell you , that the ministers , whose expenses i am acquainted with , do give 500 pence for 50. that they receive by gift from their persons : and that they take all that they have as Christ's ▪ and not their own ; and if they have never so much they devote it wholly to him , and know he 's not beholden to them for it : and some of them lay out in charitable uses , much more than all the tithes that they receive for their ministerial maintenance . And if the Quakers that accuse them of covetousness , would cast up accounts with them , i doubt not but it will be found that they receive more by gift than preachers , and give not the fourth part so much when they have done . 

3.  Another accusation is , that we preach false doctrine , and deceive the persons . Answ . it 's easy to say so of any man in the world : but when they come to prove it , you will see who are the deceivers . 

4.  Another is , that we are persecutors , and like the priests of old , and so all the reproofs of them and the Pharisees belong to us . Answ . this is soon said too : but where 's the proof ? For themselves we have no mind to be troubled with them . Let them let us alone ; as long as we will let them alone . But yet they shall be taught one day to know , that if the magistrate stop the mouths of such railers and abusers of God and men , he doth no more persecute them , than he persecuteth a thief when he hangeth him : or than Paul persecuted Hymenaeus and Philetus when he delivered them up to Satan ; or Elymas , Acts 13. 11. or then Peter persecuted Ananias and Sapphira , Acts 5. or then God would have had the churches be persecutors against the woman Jezebel that was suffered to teach and seduce the persons , or against the doctrine of the Nicolaitans which God hated , rev. 2. 15 , 20.  If hindering sin , be persecuting , the calling of a magistrate is to be a persecutor , rom. 13. 4. and all parents must persecute their own children . 

5.  Another accusation is , that we are against the preaching of any but ourselves . Answ . who doth not desire that all the Lord's persons were prophets ? But yet we know all are not prophets , 1 cor. 12. 29. nor teachers . We would have none of God's gifts in our persons huried , but all improved to the uttermost , for his glory . But we would not have men turn ordinary teachers , that are neither sound , nor able , nor sent ; nor every self-conceited ignorant man have leave to abuse the name and word of God , and the sou●s of men . What would you have more than is granted you ? When any unordained man that is judged competent by the commissioners of approbation , ( Of whom some are soldiers ) May be a constant preacher , and have fullest maintenance , as well as presbyters ? 

6.  Another charge is , that we are some weak , and some scandalous . Answ . we do all that we are able to cast out such ; and i think never more was done . The magistrate sets his guard at the door , and lets in none but whom he please : and sure if he knew where to have better than those that are in , he would put them in , or else he is too blame . If he do not know , will you blame him for using the best that he can get ? But if you will come and help us to cast out any that are vicious and unworthy , we will give you thanks . 

7.  Another accusation is , that we differ among ourselves , and one saith one thing , and another another thing . Answ . 1.  And are all these sects that oppose us , better agreed among themselves ? Inquire and judge . 2.  Do not all preach one gospel , and the same essentials of the Christian faith ? And we expect not perfect unity , till we have perfect knowledge and holiness ; which we dare not boast of , what ever Quakers do . 

8.  Another accusation is , that we are not true ministers . and why so ? Because we have not an uninterrupted succession of lawful ordination . answ. this objection is the Papists , who have little reason to use it , while it is so easy a matter to prove so many interruptions of their papal succession . At large and often have we answered them , and are still ready to deal with any of them herein , and to prove , 1.  That an uninterrupted succession of right ordination , is not of necessity to the being of the ministry . 2.  And if it were , we have more to show for it than they . If others stick on this , let me tell them , that magistracy is as truly from God as the ministry : and let ever a King on earth show me an uninterrupted succession giving him title to his crown , and i will show him a more undoubted succession or title to my ministry . But here 's no room to discuss this question . 

9  Object . but you are parish priests , and no true ministers , because you have not true churches . Answ . all the Christians in our parishes that consent are our flock . And we undertake to prove the truth of such churches , not only against scorn , but against all the arguments that can be brought . 

10.  Object . but you have not the spirit , and therefore are no true ministers . Answ . and how prove you that we have not the spirit ? The approvers admit none but such as they think have the spirit . He that is sanctified hath the spirit : prove us unsanctified , and we will resign our office . Object . you read your sermons out of a paper ; therefore you have not the spirit . Answ . a strong argument ! I pray you take seven years' time to prove the consequence . As wisely do the Quakers argue , that because we use spectacles , or hour-glasses and pulpits , we have not the spirit . It is not want of your abilities that makes ministers use notes : but it 's a regard to the work and good of the hearers . I use notes as much as any man , when i take pains : and as little as any man when i am lazy , or busy , and have not leisure to prepare . it 's easier to us to preach three sermons without notes , than one with them . He is a simple preacher that is not able to preach all day without preparation , if his strength would serve : especially if he preach at your rates . 

11.  object . but the true ministry is persecuted : but so are not you , but are persecutors of others . answ . 1.  For our pesecuring others , be so merciful as to prove it to us , that we May lament it . If punishing wicked men and seducers be persecuting , not only Paul was such , that wished they were cut off that troubled the Galatians : but God himself would be the greatest of all persecutors , that will lay you in hell without repentance , and then you will wish your old persecution again . And if we be not persecuted , what means the reproaches of you and all the drunkards and malignants about us ? But i pray you , envy us not our lives and liberties , and a little breathing time . Do you not read that [ the churches had rest throughout all Judaea and Galilee , and Samaria , and were edified , and walking in the fear of the Lord , and in the comfort of the holy ghost were multiplied ? Act. 9 31. ] Envy not a little prosperity to the church . Doth not Paul pray that the gospel May run and be glorified , and that we May be delivered from unreasonable wicked men ? 2 thes. 3. 1.  Sometimes you can say that more glorious days are promised , and that the saints shall rule the world . Unmerciful men ! It is but a while ago since we had our share of sufferings ! Since that the sword hath hunted after us ! Many of our brethren are yet in America , that were driven thither , at this time in Spain , and Italy , and Germany , and Savoy : alas , what do our brethren suffer in the same cause and calling that we are in ! And do you reproach us with our mercies , if we be out of the furnace but a little while , in one corner of the world ? 

Object . 12.  you work no miracles to confirm your doctrine . Answ . it is true : nor do we need : it is confirmed by miracles long ago . If we brought a new gospel , or as the Papists , gave you not our doctrine on the credit of scripture , but scripture and all on our own credit ; than you Might justly call for miracles to prove it . But not when we have nothing to do but expound and apply a doctrine sealed by miracles already . 

again i say , let any Prince on earth that questions our calling , sh●w his title to his crown , or any judge or magistrate to his office ; and if i show not as good a title to mine , let me be taken for a deceiver , and not a minister . 

Christian reader , as ever thou wouldst be sanctified , confirmed and saved , hold fast to Christ , scripture , ministry , and spirit , and that in the church and communion of saints , and abhor the thoughts of separating them from each other . 

August 15. 1657.  Finis . 

