The judgment of non-conformists of the interest of reason in matters of religion in which it is proved against make-bates, that both conformists, and non-conformists, and all parties of true Protestants are herein really agreed, though unskilful speakers differ in words. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. ([s.n.],London :1676.)

THE JUDGEMENT OF Nonconformists , OF THE INTEREST OF REASON , IN MATTERS OF RELIGION . 

IN WHICH It is proved against Makebates , that both Conformists , and Nonconformists , and all Parties of true protestants are herein really agreed , though unskilful Speakers differ in Words . 

LONDON , Printed in the Year , 1676.  

Among the other Church-troubling Controversies of these times , we find it is one , and not the least , How far Man's Reason hath to do in matters of Religion : And deep accusations we find brought against each other on this account ; some suspecting others of Socinianism , as overmagnifying Reason , and others insimulating such as they seem to differ from , as guilty of making Religion seem unreasonable ; and some ( who go over the Hedge where it is low ) do lay this charge of unreasonableness , in special , on the Nonconformists . 

We , who do verily believe that this scandalous Contention ariseth from men's unskilfulness in the Art of framing , and expressing the notions of that same matter which they commonly hold , and that really not only Conformists , and Nonconformists , but also all Protestant Parties are herein of one mind , though some think otherwise , who neither understand their brethren , nor are understood themselves , do therefore take it , as Peacemakers , to be our duty to give our Reasons of this our Judgement , that if it may be the Preachers of Truth , and Peace may not tempt the People into unchristian disaffection , by persuading them that we so widely differ , when really we are all , or generally agreed . 

Qu. Whether understanding Charity can see any real difference between Conformists , and Nonconformists , or any other Partiss of true protestants , about the interest and use of Reason in Religion ; that is , about God's Doctrine of Faith , and his Laws for men's Desires , and their Practice , Neg.  

For the due handling of this , it is requisite that we first explain our words , and then truly state the Question , and then prove the Negative ; and lastly , add some applicatory Consectaries . 

I By [ understanding Charity ] we mean [ a Person endued with Understanding , and Charity so far as he useth them in this Judgement . 

By [ a Real difference ] we mean not real misunderstanding of one another , or real contending about words ; but a difference in Judgement about the very matter of Doctrine itself , when intelligibly opened , and each Party is understood . 

By [ Religion ] we mean only that which is truly Divine , and not about what Man may superadd , ( though on the by we may speak somewhat of that ; ) and as the Church hath ever summed it up in the Sacramental Covenant , and explained the parts of it according to the three summaries , the Creed , Lords Prayer , and Christian Decalogue , so do we here mean. 1.  The Articles of Faith. 2.  The matter of Holy Love , or Desire . 3.  And of Practice . 

By [ Conformists , and Nonconformists ] we mean qua tales , whether this be any part of the Controversies which denominate them ; And ex abundante even Qui tales , whether they that are Merely Nonconformists , differ from the Conformists herein , the question not extending to Quakers , Seekers , Papists , Antinomians , or any such Sect which are more than Mere Nonconformists . 

By [ Protestant's ] we mean those that make Christianity as delivered in the Scriptures , their Religion , protesting against the Corruptions , and Additions of Popery ; who are now commonly known by that Name , and distinguished unhappily by their By-opinions , into Lutherans , Calvinists , and other Names . 

1.  We deny not that all protestants differ greatly from the Socinians , who reject the Doctrine of the Trinity , though found in Scripture , because they think that it is against Reason , ( though in that they err . ) 

2.  We deny not that protestants herein differ from Enthusiasts , or true Fanatics , who pretend Revelations which Reason cannot prove to be what they pretend them to be , and are contrary to true Reason , and Scripture itself ; and who think that the secret impulses of their diseased Fantasies , and Passions , are such motions of God's Spirit as Reason must give place to . 

3.  We deny not but protestants differ from the great Fanaticisme of Popery ; which both buildeth Faith , and exerciseth Religion upon the most stupendious Fiction of Miracles , against Reason , and Common sense , that ever ( to our knowledge ) was entertained by any Sect , or Heresy in the World , viz. 1.  In their holding that a Pope , and his Council ( called General ) are the Infallible Judges of the Church's Faith , from whose Authority it must be received , though the Pope should be himself an ignorant Lad , or a Heretic , and most of the Bishops in Council should not before understand the matter which they vote for : As if God by Miracles taught the ignorant , and erroneous to vote contrary to their former Opinions , or above their understanding ; and their miraculous Enthusiasm , and Infallibility were the Foundation of the Common Faith. As if God would enable a Pope , and Council that understood not Greek , or Hebrew , Infallibly to Translate the Bible out of Greek , and Hebrew into their Native Tongues . 

2.  And they pretend that all the Priests in their Church ( perhaps many score thousands ) can work Miracles at their pleasure , and do so in every Mass which they celebrate , even to the making Bread to be no Bread , and Wine to be no Wine , nor any sensible Substance ; and all the Senses of the World , that see , taste , touch them to be utterly deceived ; which is far greater Miracle-working than ever Christ , or his Apostles wrought ! And to the Belief of this , and this renunciation of all common Sense , all Christians on pain of damnation must submit ; and Princes must exterminate those that will not , or else their Dominions must be given to another by the Pope . We say not that protestants do either exalt Reason as the Socinians , or renounce it as either of these two Sects of true Fanatics . 

By [ Judging ] we mean , 1.  Discerning ourselves . 2.  Proving to others . 

By [ Reason ] We mean , I Ex parte objecti ; such evidence of Truth which human Reason may discern . 

This is threefold , I Evidence of the Thing itself , which is either , 1.  Sensible Evidence , as the very thing is objected to the Senses , and so as Sensate represented to the Intellect . 2.  Evidence immediately intelligible , by which the thing itself is objected to the Intuition of the Mind ; so some say , with Ockam , that the Intellect knoweth its own Acts , and Spirits , see Spirits . II Evidence of the Medium , from whence , by Reason , we may infer the Verity of the Thing . And this is , 1.  Of an ordinary Natural Medium , ( as a Natural Cause is known by the Effects , and the Effects by the Cause : e. g. There is a Sun , ergo there is Motion , Light , and Heat : ] or [ There is Motion , Light , and Heat ; ergo there is Fire . ] 2.  Or of a Supernatural Medium , such as is Divine Revelation by Vision , Inspiration , miraculous Attestation . III There is Evidence of Consequence , that the Conclusion certainly followeth the Premises . Of Reason , in these Senses we may have occasion to speak . 

II Ex parte subjecti vel Agentis ; And so Reason is taken , 1.  For the reasoning Faculty . 2.  For the mental Exercise , or Act in the actual Reasoning of the Mind . 3.  For a Habit of Facility , and Promptitude in Reasoning . 4.  For expressive Reasoning by argumentation , or discourse , by Word , or Writing . 

The reasoning Faculty is considered in Man , I As in statu informato vel instituto . II In statu def●●mato seu destituto . III As in statu reformato seu restituto . 

In the state of Created Integrity , the state of lapsed Pravity ; and the state of Sanctification , or Recovery . 

I In the state of Nature , or Innocency , Man's Reason was , 1.  Sound in Faculty , before its Acts. 2.  Acted by degrees as Objects were presented to him : And so as Christ himself increased in Wisdom , as to Acts , or Exercise ( for his Infant state was not capable of such Action as his Adult ) so did Adam . 3.  Habitually more prompt to Act upon such Acting . 

II In the state of Sin , Reason was ( and still is in the unregenerate , ) 1.  Privatively blind , or undisposed to the right , and saving discerning of things Spiritual , Holy , and Heavenly ; partly through its own corruption , and partly by the Wills unhappy inclination , which is the exercitij principium : And also disposed ( by both ) to false judging , especially to practical error . 2.  It is actually ignorant , and erroneous , and prejudiced against saving Faith , and spiritual Good , and holy Practice . 

3.  It is by Custom in such sinful Acts , habitually more , and more depraved , in its Privative , and Positive Disposition . 

III Reason repaired is Illuminated by God's Word and Spirit to , 1.  Common . 2.  Special saving . 3.  Special extraordinary Operations . 

1.  The Common are , 1.  That Light , or Common Knowledge and Belief , which is preparatory to saving Light. 2.  That Light of edifying benefits , by which Men are made useful to others . 

2.  The Light of special saving Grace is , 1.  Initial in Vocation for the first saving Faith , and Repentance . 2.  Increased in Sanctification , by such a degree as kindleth in the Soul predominant Love. 3.  more increased in Growth unto the end . 

All this is considered , 1.  In the first Disposition . 2.  In the Exercise . 3.  In the Habit.  

3.  The Extraordinary Illuminations are , by Prophetical Inspiration , Visions , and Gifts of Infallibility proper to some few . 

The perfection of all in Glory we may pretermit . 

These things premised , the Question is not whether Socinians , Papists , Antinomians , Quakers , etc. differ from us ? nor whether any odd Person , or persons , called protestants , have Ignorace enough to entangle them in an error in this Point ? nor whether any hasty Judges , that are not skilled in discussing the ambiguity of words , or for want of well digested Studies , can neither understand others , nor speak distinctly , and intelligibly themselves ; or in uncharitable Factious , passionate humour , are disposed to misunderstand their brethren , or to put a sinister Interpretation on their words ; we say , it is not whether such ignorant contenders do think that Men differ farther than they do ? nor whether any have used unmeet expressions justly unblameable ? nor whether there are any that write against , or accuse each other on this account , and would make the World believe that we are of contrary minds ? nor is it whether our Reasons really differ about the sense of some Texts of Scripture , or Points of Religion ? nor is it whether protestants differ about the extent of Human Authority , and the Obligation of their Wills , or Canons . 

But the sense of the Question is , Whether it be a distance between Conformists and Nonconformists , Lutherans and Calvinists , or any other bynamed Parties of protestants ; whether , and how far we must have , or give Reason for all our Religion , or Exercise Reason in discerning it ; and in propagating , and defending it by Proof . 

And we shall prove the Negative , I By those Confessions of the several Churches , and Parties , which notify their Judgements . In all the Corpus Confessionum there is no Article on this Subject which is not commonly consented to by the rest of the Protestant Churches . And as for the Conformists , and Nonconformists , they consent to Subscribe to all the same Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England , ( though they differ about some other Subscriptions , Declarations , Covenants , or Promises of Conformity ; and some Oaths , and Modes of Discipline , and Worship . ) Besides that , we all Subscribe to the same Creed , and the same Canonical Scriptures . And either the Point about the Interest of Reason in Religion is in the Creed , Bible , or Articles of Religion , or not . If not , it is no part of our Religion , nor necessary . If it be , than we Subscribe our agreement in it . 

There is no Profession , no Writing of either Party , Conformists , or Nonconformists , ( Consented to by the Party ) which signifies any disagreement in this Point , or contradiction of what both sides consent in . Let them that will prove a difference , cite any such Book , or Profession of either Party , if they can . 

We deny not but some Nonconformists , and Conformists did cast out their suspicions of two very Learned rational Men , Mr. Hales , and Mr. Chillingworth , as if they had favoured Socinianism , because they so much used , and Ascribed to Reason , in Judging of matters of Religion ; And Knot the Jesuit would have Chillingworth therefore taken to be a Socinian . But it was but particular Men , and not a Party that was suspected : and it was but particular Men that did suspect them : Dr. Heylins' aspersion of Mr. Hales , was not the Church's Judgement : And in all Parties there will be some suspicious uncharitable Men , and some that will speak evil of what they understand not ; and take it as a near way to get the reputation of being Wise , and Orthodox , by accusing others of Ignorance , and error , than by long , and diligent well ordered Studies . 

Object . 1.  But though they all Subscribe the same Bible , and Articles ; they all understand them not alike . 

Ans . 1.  no , nor any two persons in the World ; It is as probable that any two Men have spoken none but the very same words , as that they have had none but the very same thoughts . 2.  Let any difference be shown , as to the Point in question , And such as is not equally managed by Conformists against Conformists , as by them against any particular Nonconformists . 

Object . 2.  You agree not whether the Reason of the Rulers , or Bishops may make , and impose any Form of Churches , National , Patriarchal , or Provincial , which Christ never made ; or any new Offices , or Ceremonies of Worship . 

Ans . 1.  This is nothing to the Point in question , but of another thing . 2.  We are all agreed that circa sacra there are many undetermined Particulars , and Circumstances , which some call Ceremonies ; for which , Scripture giveth only a general Command , and Rule , ( as , Let all be done decently , in order , to edification , in Unity , etc. ) which human Reason ( in Rulers where it is their part , and in Consenters where it is left to consent ) may , and must determine : And that they that have Power de rebus extrinsecis circa sacra , may make human Offices for such human Works , ( as Doorkeepers , Churchwardens , Magistrates , to keep Church-peace , and Order , etc. ) And if they will call any Lawful Assemblies of Pastors , or orderly Associations , by the Name of ( human ) Churches , so they will but distinguish them from Churches of proper Divine Institution , and take away none of those Rights from such as Christ hath given them in Scripture ; we know no Party of protestants that differ de re against them , though many wish that the Name [ Churches ] were not made common to those of Divine , and of Human Institution , lest it obscure the great difference of the things named ; and lest , as in the Papacy , Societies and Matters of Divine Institution should be thought to stand in a direct Subordination to those of Human Institution ; and the Churches which Christ hath Instituted should be thought to be but as Parishes to a County , Streets , or Houses to a City , Cities to a Kingdom , mere similar parts of the Churches of Man's making ; which conceit is the strength of the whole Roman Kingdom , called a Church . 

Object . 3.  But some say that only the Spirit can assure us that the Scriptures are the Word of God.  

Ans . So we say all ; not excluding , but including the Means and Evidence , and Use of Reason , That is , 1.  The Spirit in Christ , and his Apostles , and Prophets hath Imprinted God's Image of Power , Wisdom , and Love on the Sacred Scriptures ; which is their intrinsic Evidence . 2.  And the same Spirit by that Word doth Powerfully , Wisely , and Graciously Imprint an answerable Image on our Hearts . 3.  And he helpeth us by this effect , and impulse , to discern that it is God's Word that did it ; And giveth us ( as the new born Babe to his Milk ) a discerning of , and Appetite to this holy Word , as Connatural , or suitable to our Souls : The Spirit giveth us such Reasons for our Religion , as else we should not have ; and also helpeth our Reason actually to understand it ; and also maketh us Habitually more Rational herein . And do not all agree in this ? 

Object . 4.  But some say that the Scripture is known propria luce . 

Ans . So say all , but not by that alone : Reason must discern the Divinity of Scripture partly by the evident Impulses of Divinity which are in it , which are its proper Light ; and partly by extrinsic attestations , in the due use of the means which God hath appointed Reason to make use of , 

II Our second Proof of our Common Agreement shall be by an Induction of the particular Points which we are all agreed in , where if the enumeration be sufficient , our Proof will be clear . And if we seem to overdo , in naming more than needs ; it is to avoid the charge of an insufficient enumeration . 

1.  We are all agreed that all true Religion , objectively taken , is the effect of God's Wisdom ; and , subjectively taken , also is the Gift of the Father of Lights . 

2.  We are agreed , that as God's Wisdom is the first efficient , so the Impress of Divine Wisdom , by which it is eminently wise and reasonable , is its very Constitutive Cause ; its Form , and the proper Light , by which it is to be known . 

3.  We are agreed that objective Religion is to be received by Man's Reasonable Intellect , and is , when so received , the light and guide , the advancement and perfecting of our Reason . And the most Religious , are the most truly , and nobly rational . 

4.  We are agreed that it hath Intelligible evidence , which showeth it to be of God , and true . And that Man's Reason must by discerning this evidence , know its Divinity and truth . Seeing nothing is an Object of the Intellect , but by Intelligible evidence ; as nothing is an Object of sight , but Light ; and things by Light , made visible . 

5.  And as our own receiving it , is by receiving the said evidence , and knowing its Divinity , and truth thereby ; so our Teaching it to others , and proving it against Gainsayers by defence , must be by our manifesting the same evidence . 

6.  The Reason , or Intellect of Man in Innocency , was apt to understand both the natural , and supernatural manifestations of Gods governing Will , and so to be Actively Religious , and to increase herein by exercise , and Divine help . 

7.  The Reason of fallen Man before gracious Illumination , is still the same essentially in the Faculty ; but is dispositively depraved ( called Blindness ) disposed to Judge carnally , falsely , and malignantly of things spiritual , and holy ; and undisposed to discern , savingly , the truth , and goodness of Religion . 

8.  There are found in all Mankind , at Age , some Natural notices , which are an advantage to the Reception of Religion , and make Men more capable of it , than otherwise they would be : And Grace giveth Men usually a common sort of external , and internal Light , which is preparatory to that which is specially saving . 

9  The Christian Religion consisting of things partly naturally , and partly supernaturally revealed ; the natural part of it hath its natural evidence ( either Rei ipsius , or Medij naturalis , ) by which , without supernatural Revelation , it may be known ; but is not without Gods illuminating Grace , effectually , and savingly known . 

10.  The natural part of Revelation , or objective Religion is in order of Time before the supernatural part ; and natural evidence and Religion is more common than supernatural : We are Men before we are Christians in order of Nature at least . 

11.  There is no Contradiction between the natural , and supernatural Revelation , or parts of Religion ; for God contradicteth not himself . He therefore that thinketh that he findeth a Contradiction , is deceived ; and must Correct the error of his own understanding , and not accuse the Word of God.  

12.  Things equally true are not equally evident , and revealed , and sure to us : some things in Nature are much clearer than others ; and some parts of Scripture far more intelligible than some others , and so more evident to us . 

13.  Ceteris paribus , things sensible , and the Common Natural notices have greater evidence to us ; and are of easier belief than Prophetical Revelations : But some supernatural Revelations have extrinsecally , and intrinsically , more ascertaining evidence than many Natural Revelations , or Verities ; no small Number of these are very obscure . 

14.  When the Understanding once discerneth a thing to be a Divine Revelation , it hath therein a certain Medium , from which it may infer the thing revealed to be true : All known Divine Revelations are so far ascertaining , as they are known ; For God cannot Lie : Divine Veracity is the formal Object of Divine Belief . 

15.  If we doubt of the evidence of any Revelation , Natural , or Supernatural , whether it be indeed Divine ; we must hold that with the strongest affiance , or belief , which hath the clearest assuring evidence that it is Divine . 

16.  Prophets , and Inspired Seers had such Internal satisfying evidence , ( whether by Intuition , or abstract Species , or internal Sense ) which no Man can formally , and clearly conceive of , but he that hath it ; But the Reason of others may know it by the effects , and concomitant , or consequent Proofs . 

17.  Those that heard the Voice , and saw the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles , had sensible evidence thereof : And those at distance of place , or time that saw them not , may have certain infallible evidences of the Historical truth , or report de facto that such things , indeed , were said , and done . 

18.  There are ( as is aforesaid ) Characters of Divine Authority in Religion , and in the Sacred Scriptures ; which are their Inherent evidence , or propria Lux , even the Impress of God's Power , Wisdom , and Love.  

19  There are evident unimitable effects of the Christian Faith , which prove it to be of God ; even the Spirits sanctifying Work , on Man ; which may , by those that have it not , be partly discerned in the holy Lives of Believers ; especially in the Sanctity of the Church , that it should be holy , in Comparison of the unholy World , ( that is , all sound Believers which are the real spiritual living Church ; ) for , if one Letter might be made without Reason by chance , yet so cannot a Learned Book : And if an individual Christian might by chance be holier than Infidels , yet so could not all true Believers . But he that hath this Sanctification , or Spirit in himself , hath clearer , and more assuring evidence ; and those most that have the greatest degree of holiness : These all have the Witness in themselves . 

20.  The Spirit of Christ thus sent from him , as his Agent , and Advocate in men's Souls , is the Author , both of Common preparatory , and of Special saving Illumination , enlightening the Mind to understand the things of God ; and ( as is aforesaid ) giving the sanctified Will a new Relish to them , as congruous and good : And this Knowledge , and Faith objectively , and subjectively is the gift of God , or a Beam from Christ , the Light of the redeemed World.  

But to some the same Spirit giveth far greater measures of Knowledge and Faith , than to others ; and those are likest to receive most of that Grace , who are most sincere , and diligent in the Study of God's Word , and the use of all other holy means ; and not the idle , negligent presumers . 

21.  Neither corrupted , no , nor sound Reason can discern things without Supernatural evidence , which Natural evidence doth not declare : Therefore those that never hear the Gospel cannot know the Mysteries of Christianity ( without a Miracle ) though they may know much of God as merciful and just , by his Mercies , and Government of the World.  

22.  The Spirit is not given to ordinary Christians ( though it be to Prophets ) to bring them , from God , new Doctrines , or Laws ; nor to make any supplements to the Gospel already revealed , as if it was not sufficient in its kind ; nor yet to reveal the matter of Christ's Gospel , immediately , to the Intellect , or fantasy within , by way of Inspiration , Visions , or Intuitions , without an external Word , or Revelation ; nor yet to cause them to work Miracles themselves , But he is given to enable , dispose , and help us to understand , believe , love , and practise the Doctrine , and Law , already , by the same Spirit given to the Church , by sanctifying our Power , our Reason , and our Wills , by holy Life , and Light , and Love. And as Christ is the Intercessor without us , by whom we must receive all Mercies from God , and send up all our duties to God ; so his Spirit is the Intercessor within us , on Christ's part , as his Advocate , and Witness , pleading his Cause against our unbelief , and other sin , and working all God's Graces in us ; and on our part , teaching , inclining , and quickening us in all the Prayers , and Praises which we send up to God , in the Name of Christ . 

Illuminating , and sanctifying , is not making us Prophets , or Apostles ; nor equal to them , as not being called to their Works . 

23.  We must use our best Reason in diligent Meditation , and Judgement , to search the Works of God in Nature , to know which are the true Canonical Scriptures , to discern true Copies , and Readins where the Copies differ , to expound the Text , to Translate it truly , to discern the Order of sacred Verities that are dispersed through all the Scriptures , to gather them into Catechisms , and Professions of Faith , discerning things more necessary from the lesle needful , and the more clear from the more obscure ; to Compose our Sermons , Prayers , and Praises of God , according to his Word : To gather just , and certain Inferences from Scripture Assertions : To apply general Rules to particular Cases , in matters of Doctrine , Worship , Discipline , and ordinary Practice , prudently to discern those Duties , which are but generally commanded in the Scripture , and left to be discerned by us , in particular , according to determining Accidents , Circumstances , and Occurrences , which must be considered , and compared . And when Parents , Magistrates , Pastors , Tutors , or Masters , shall so determine of such particulars in the Government of their Inferiors , which belong to their several Relations , or Offices to determine of , according to God's general Laws , or Rules , Inferiors must obey them in such determinations ; and in so doing , they do obey God's General Laws , and obey God consequentially , in obeying such Laws of his Officers as he authorizeth them to make . 

For we are all agreed , that there are some parts of Scripture which contain more necessary Doctrine , than other parts ; and some great Duties of Prime necessity , which are the end of many lower Duties ; and consequently , a Rule to them as means , and as subordinate ; and Actions otherwise Good , become Evil when they cross these great final regulating Duties : such a Canon is the Interest of the New Creature , and Unity therein , as to Circumcision , or Uncircumcision , Gal. 5.6 . and 6.15 . And such a Canon is the Love , Peace , and Concord of Christians , in so much as they have attained , while they seek after more , Phil , 3.16 . such a Canon is Edification ( and order ) as to several Modes of Worship , and Ministerial Acts , and Discipline , 1.  Cor. 14.5.12.26 . 2.  Cor. 10.8 . and 12.19 . and 13.10 . Eph. 4.16 . And the right ordering of a Christian Conversation doth much consist in discerning by true Reason when circumstantiated Actions are subservient , or cross to these final regulating ( Canonical ) Duties , that we may know whether pro hic & nunc , they are Duties , or Sins ; Because affirmative Precepts bind not , ad semper ( though no Sin must at any time be done ) lesser Duties when inconsistent with the greater ( at that time ) are no Duties , but Sins : And means are no means , when they loose their tendency to the end , or are against it . So did Christ teach Men to difference between Tything Mint , Anise , and Cumine , and the great things of the Law ; and between the least , and the great Commandments ; and to judge of observing the Sabbath Rest , and Conversing with Publicans , and Sinners , by this Rule , I will have mercy and not Sacrifice , Mat. 9.13 . and 12.7 . And to leave our gift at the Altar , and go first and be reconciled to our Brother , and then come and offer our gift , Mat. 5.  And to cast first the Beam out of our own Eyes , before we take the Mote out of our Brothers , Mat. 6.  Thus to try circumstantiated Actions , by their ends , and greater Canon-duties ; and to try what Accidents do preponderate for the time and place , is the great and hourly Work of Prudent Reason ; and of exceeding great use to our daily innocency , and peace . 

24.  The more the Understanding of a Christian discerneth the Evidences , and true Reasons of all things in Religion , the far greater advantage his Will hath for the Love of it , and fixed Resolution never to forsake it ; and for seriousness , and constancy in a holy selfdenying Life ; and for patience in sufferings , and joyful hopes of Heavenly Glory : for Grace worketh on Man , as Man ; that is , as a Rational free Agent , whose Will must be guided by the light of his Understanding . And he must needs be the lowest and losest Christian , that hath least Knowledge , and Intellectual apprehension ( explicit , or implicit ) why he is a Christian . 

25.  It is a great cause of the slight superficial Religion , and weakness of all Grace which abounds among us , that too many taking the Essentials of their Religion too much on the trust of those that educate them , or with whom they live , do labour only to build upward on such an ill-laid Foundation ; when ( as Trees grow downward in the Roots as well as upward ) they should be all their days still growing downward in the confirmation of their Faith , and in the clearer and more orderly discerning of their Fundamentals , and the Evidences of them ; It being an increased sight of Evidence of Truth , intensively , and extensively ( in depth and clearness of perception , as well as material Evidences ) which is indeed the true increase of Knowledge , and Belief : And the ablest Christians should be ( not questioning , but ) as long as they live , growing clearer , and stronger in the Knowledge of God , the Immortality of the Soul , and reality of the future Life , and Mysteries of Redemption , and Sanctification ; where holy Reason will find the most necessary , great and fruitful Work.  

26.  Objective Religion being the thing which Reason must discern , it is as vain to ask , whether Religion , or Reason should be preferred , as to ask whether we should , in seeing , prefer the Eye , or the Light , or the material Objects ; which must all Concur to make one Act ? And they that ask , Whether Reason , and Religion be contrary ? must know , 1.  That the Faculty of Reason , as such , is no more contrary to Religion , than the visive Faculty to the Light , or Object . 2.  That so far as Reason hath any pravity in Disposition or Act , privative , or positive , ignorance or error in the matters of Religion ; so far it is contrary to Religion . 3.  That so far as Reason is sound in Act , and Habit , it is agreeable to Religion . 4.  Therefore the worse any Man's Understanding is , the more it is against Religion . And not only the Learnedest , and Wisest ▪ but also the Holiest , and best , having but an imperfect Illumination in this Life , hath still some remnants , in him , of that which is contrary to Religion ; and every Man so far as his blindness , and pravity , is yet uncured . 5.  But as to the Objective parts themselves , it is said before , that none of them are contrary : The Common Principles , or Notices of Nature , have nothing contrary to them in the Scripture . There is nothing in the Doctrine of the Trinity , Incarnation , or Resurrection , contrary to any Natural Verity ; nor any thing which true illuminated Reason , by true Divine Revelation , cannot prove . 

27.  The blessed in Glory , whose Intellects are perfected , will see , for ever , such Reasons for all the parts of Religion ; even the Trinity , Incarnation , and Resurrection , as will delight them everlastingly , as seeing the admirable Harmony of all the sacred Truths , and Works of God ; and the transcendent Wisdom of God manifested in all : And Christ , who is now both essentially in himself , and objectively to Believers , the Wisdom of God will , as such , be admired by Believers ; as he is now by Principalities , and Powers in Heavenly places , who know the manifold Wisdom of God by the Church , Eph. 3.9 , 10.  Even that Mysterious Wisdom of God which seemeth Foolishness to the Worldly Wisdom of foolish Men , 1.  Cor. 1 , 2.  And must be spiritually discerned . 

28.  As the Devils believe , and tremble , so it is probable that the Judge of all the World will convince the wicked , and Infidels , at last , that it was a Reasonable Gospel which they rejected , and a Reasonable Faith , and Service which God required of them ; and that they lived against Reason in their unbelief , and sinning against God : For the Spirit doth reprove the World of sin , because they believed not in Christ , John , 16.8 . And he that will come , in flaming Fire , to take vengeance on them that know not God , and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ , and will punish them with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord , and the Glory of his Power ; and will come to be glorified in his Saints , and admired in all them that believe , in that day , even because they believed , 2.  These . 1.9 , 10.  Will sure convince Men , that Faith was a reasonable , and Infidelity an unreasonable thing . 

In all these particulars we have reason to believe that not only Conformists and Nonconformists , but all true protestants are agreed . 

And they agree in the Renunciation of these contrary Opinions , ( though we cannot say that any Man living is so perfect , as to hold nothing that hath some remote Contrariety to the Truths which he doth profess , not discerning the Contrariety . ) 

I They all reject the Infidels Opinions , who think that the Mysteries of Christianity , and the Gospel are not to be believed , at least , as certain ; because Reason without supernatural Revelation cannot know them : or who hold that the Gospel hath no Evidence of certain truth . 

II They all reject their error , who take some part of God's supernatural Revelation to be false ; and will judge what is true , and what is false , by the Conjectures of their Reason , which ought to see the Truth and Concord of all : And that supposing falsely a Contradiction , do set up one part of Gods own Word against the rest . 

III They all reject their error , who will not believe the difficulties of Faith , upon the Reason , or Proof of God's Veracity , and Revelation ; unless the thing revealed be evident in itself , and may be proved by Natural Proof alone . 

iv. They reject the proud conceits of those , who when they find passages in God's Word , which they cannot reconcile , or think not probable , are readier to accuse , or suspect God's Word , than their dark , and erring understandings . 

v. We all reject their impudent error , who feign Miracles where there was none , or put false Constructions on the Text , yea , on the Articles of Faith ; and charge their own errors by misunderstanding on God's Word , even when those errors are contrary to the common Notices of Nature , or the greatest , clearest , and most evident Doctrines ; and then tell Men that they must either deny those great Doctrines , as cross to God's Word , or else that both must be believed , as of God , even the Canon Verities , and these men's inconsistent errors : And we reject their Method that will try many plain , great , certain truths , and Texts , by such as are more rare , and more obscure , and of smaller moment . Much more their scandalous abuses , who persuade Men that we can be no surer of the truth of Christianity itself , than we are of every Lection , Translation , or Exposition , when they are doubtful , various , or contrary ; And who tempt Men to Infidelity by obtruding their own Forgeries , and Contradictions to be believed , as the Word of God , and of equal Verity with the essentials of our Faith.  

VI We all reject their error , who make every Circumstance of Religion unlawful , which hath not a particular Command in Scripture ; as if Reason might not regulate such by the General Command ; As if Reason might not without express particular Precept , choose a Text , Method , Words , and Notes for remembrance in Preaching ; or might not Translate the Scriptures , or turn the Psalms into Metre , and put Tunes on each ; and many such things . 

VII . We all reject the Fanatic , or Enhusiastical Opinion of them that pretend a necessity of immediate inspiration , instead of Scriptures , to teach Men inwardly , Doctrines which they never outwardly heard , or more than is before revealed in the Word ; And who thus equal their Revelations to those of the Apostles , or feign this Immediate Light , or Revelation to be the chief Rule to all Men of their Religion ; As if objectively there whereas many Religions in the World , as there are Men of different degrees of Light within ! that is ▪ as there are Men. And that pretend that none are farther bound to believe the Gospel than they either see Miracles themselves to confirm it , or else have this immediate Inspiration before described , to attest it . 

VIII . We all agree in rejecting the fore-described Papal Fanatiticisme , which maketh the Pope and Council , though never so ignorant , or erroneous , to be secured of the gift of Infallibility , as if it were by Miracle , in judging of that which their Reasons are unmeet for , and they do not understand ; especially their foresaid feigned World of Miracles by the ( sottishest ) Priests in Transubstantiation . And especially their persecuting all that are not as unreasonable renouncers of common Sense and Reason , and deposing Temporal Lords that will not exterminate them . And their requiring all Christians to resolve their Faith into the Authority of this Fanatic Church , as being bound to take that , and only that , for the Articles of their Faith , and Word of God , which they assert to be so ; and as needing no other Proof than the Pope , and his Councils assertion . ( And on whose Authority then doth the Pope , and Council , themselves believe it ? ) 

IX . All protestants disclaim that inhuman , atheistical assertion , that in Religion , Inferiors must believe all that their Superiors assert , and do all that they shall command , and avoid all that they shall forbid them , without using their own Reason to discern judicio privato whether it be agreeable , or contrary to the Laws of God : As if all Subjects must be of the Sovereign's Religion , be it Heathen , Mahometan , Jewish , or Christian , Popish , Socinian , or what ever : Or as if Man were above God , from whom he receives all his power , and might Command Men to blaspheme him , or sin against him ; or forbid all to confess , and worship him ; and God must ask Men leave whether he shall be God , or be obeyed , or worshipped ! And as if it were in the Ruler's power whether any of the Subjects shall be Religious , or be saved ? or as if Subjects were not reasonable Creatures , or could obey without the use of Reason discerning whom ▪ and how far to obey ? If they have not a judicium discretionis how shall they know their King whom they must obey , honour , and protect , from an Usurper , or Traitor , whom they must disown , and oppose . 

X. And we hope all true protestants are agrreed against that impious Opinion , that if an Inferior be uncertain , or doubtful , whether the matter be Lawful , or Sinful , he must do it if his Governor Command it , and forbear it if his Governor forbid it ; because an uncertainty must give place to a certainty : and we are certain that the Ruler is to be obeyed , but not that the thing forbidden is duty , nor that the thing commanded is sin . 1.  For we suppose all agreed that it must go with a caeteris paribus . 2.  And that we are certain that no Ruler can oblige us to sin ; and therefore we are not certain that he is to be obeyed , where we fear , upon good reason , that it is sin which he Commands ; For if I am justly fearful that it is sin that is Commanded , I must be fearful that it is sin to obey by sinning : And to be certain that I should obey , and fearful that I sin in obeying , are contradictory . 3.  And we doubt not but all protestants are agreed , that if all the Subjects ( or any ) can but be ignorant enough as to be uncertain whether there be a God , a Christ , or a Life to come ; or that it is a duty to relieve the Poor , etc. it will not therefore , by any Man's prohibition , cease to be all their duty to love , or obey God , or worship him , or to relieve the Poor ? Or if Men be so sottish as to be uncertain whether Blasphemies , Idolatry , Persecution , Murder , Adultery , Perjury , etc. be sins , we all agree that no Man's Command can make it the duty of those uncertain persons to commit them , nor make them to be no sin ; ( whatever any Man , of violence , may say to the contrary , in passion . ) 

We conclude upon this Induction , that till some omitted instance be produced , this Enumeration of our Agreements will prove that , not only , Conformists , and Nonconformists , but all true protestants are agreed really of the Interest , and use of Reason in matters of Faith , or of Religion . 

Consectaries . I Hence we see then that Divines have great cause to take heed of setting Christians together by the Ears , by feigned differences where there are none ; and so destroying Love and Concord , and tempting the ignorant to hate and falsely accuse their brethren , to the trouble of the Church , and the hazard of their Salvation : And therefore that while Men have not attained a through acquaintance with the matter , and in discussing ambiguities of Speech , and distinguishing Verbal Controversies , from real , if they forbear not their Censures , and public Controversies , till they attain a more ripe distinct understanding , they may greatly serve Satan , while they think that they are serving Christ . And how little the Church is beholden to those Men , that either through factious worldly designs , or ignorant Zeal against error , have made the World believe by Pulpit invectives and voluminous Controversies , that Christians differ really , when it is but verbally , experience might have satisfied us long ere this . 

II Those that have been guilty of such feigning of difficulties , and wronging the Church , should make reparation by open repentance , and all Christians should study the difference between matter and expressive art , and words ; and be desirous and skilful for the narrowing of differences , as others are in widening them . 

We are not in Love with the Spirit and Practice of Incendiaries , Love-killers , or Dividers : We find too many contending in this case , as if they thought the difference real ; but not any Party against another , ( many Conformists , as well as Nonconformists , being jealous of giving too much to human Reason . ) But we suppose we have fully proved a real Concord among us all , though unskilful , word-warriours discern it not . If any will be a dissenter , he must be a straggler from all the Protestant Churches . His Majesty in his Declaration of Ecclesiastical Affairs expressed his displeasure of such as pretended that the Church-doctrine needed reformation , as if in Doctrine we were not agreed . Seeing we all Subscribe the same Scripture , and Articles of Religion , and all agree in the twenty eight Conclusions , and ten Rejections before expressed ; if any yet proceed in their Accusations , we desire them , for our Conviction , to state the Case in which , they suppose , the difference is , and prove their Charge ; and to remember what it is to strive about words , and what have been , and yet are , the effects ; and that the Wisdom from above is first pure , then peaceable , and without partiality and hypocrisy ; and that the Fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace , and that blessed are the peacemakers , for theirs is the Kingdom of God.  

We , whose Names are Subscribed , ( not undertaking that no Individual Person is otherwise minded , ) do , ourselves , believe the real Concord of protestants , as it is here expressed . 

Th. Manton , W. Bates , Tho. Case , Gabriel Sangar , Rich. Baxter , Math. Pemberton , Mat. Silvester , Henry Hurst , Roger Morice , Edw. Laurence , Benjam . Agas , James Bedford , Sam. Fairclough , John Turner , Joseph Read.  

ERRATA . Page , 5. line last , for distance , read difference . P. 5. l. penult . for theirs , r. Men. P. 6. l. penult . for near , r. nearer . P. 6. l. 23. for Impulses , r. Impresses . l. 13. r. Impress . P. 11. l. 26. for to , r. of . P. 12. l. 5. for be , r. was .. 

FINIS . 

