Monthly preparations for the Holy Communion by R.B. ; to which is added suitable meditations before, in, and after receiving ; with divine hymns in common tunes, fitted for publick congregations or private families. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed for Tho. Parkhurst ...,London :1696.)

Monthly Preparations FOR THE Holy Communion , By R. B.  

To which is added Suitable Meditations before , in , and after Receiving . 

WITH Divine Hymns , In Common Tunes ; Fitted for Public Congregations , or Private Families . 

LONDON ; Printed for Tho. Parkhurst , at the Bible & Three Crowns , the lower end of Cheapside . 1696.  

THE PREFACE TO THE READER . Sacramental work is solemn work indeed : And all those helps are valuable and desirable , whereby the furniture of our minds , the temper of our hearts , and the conduct of our lives may be answerable to the solemnity of a Sacramental Table . A mind that is barren or perplexed ; an heart that is false or stupid ; and the conscience of a disordered conversation , are bad Companions to attend us to the Holy Supper of our Lord The Lord's Body is to be discerned , his Death showed forth , his tendered self and benefits received , and his next Coming seriously thought on , and thoroughly prepared for , and joyfully expected by us ; and all this is to be influenced and actuated by this Memorial which Christ hath left with us : Such helps as these , are the more useful by being brief , if brevity do not render them defective and obscure , as here I think they will not . no Directory can be better than the Institution , if well discerned and attended to . 

I The Memorable Person is the Lord Jesus , in his perfections , relations , and designs . Here therefore let him be considered , 

1.  As Man , to render him capable of sufferings , service , and contending with that Enemy of God and Man , who once deceived and enslaved us . 

2.  As the Son of Man , the chief of Human Race , for Trials , Faithfulness and Advancement . 

3.  As the Son of God , as essentially and most intimately one with God ; as Lord of the Universe , Head over all things to his Church , and of the Church itself . The brightness of his Father's Glory , the one Mediator ; and so God's way to Man , and Man's way to God ; and one deputed to undertake and perfect our Conduct , Government , and Salvation . 

II His Sufferings are the things here next to be commemorated . Great were his Trials , from God , from Hell , and from this World. With great composedness and gallantry of spirit did he endure them , and work his passage through them to that exalted state , wherein he had so much to do with God for us : In all these and in his preparations for them , doth he appear most exemplary to us , claiming and urging our Conformity to his obedient , submissive , and resolved self . And in his Meritorious Sufferings and Expiatory Death , must we discern and think severely on , what there and thence was evident ; viz. Gods Wisdom , Majesty , Holiness , and his Governing Justice , and Prerogatives ; the sinfulness of sin , the misery of Revolted Man , the equity and power of God's Violated Law ; and the eminence of the Divine above the Animal Life , Nature , and Concerns . 

III Our Interest in , and Benefit by these his Sufferings , are next to exercise our thoughts . He died to let us see , 

1.  How glorious a God we have to do with . 

2 What wise and righteous Constitutions we had violated . 

3.  What dreadful evils we had brought upon ourselves . 

4.  What spirit , strength and reach there is in Divine threatenings . 

5.  How hard it is to be recovered , when we are fallen from God , and so what an Enemy Satan is to Man ; and how unwilling to let his Captives go . 

6.  To show us the riches of God's Grace in him , and his own Dignity ; in that his Sufferings could , and did , merit and obtain of God our Pardon , Adoption Acceptance , and Eternal Bliss through him . 

7.  To raise and cherish holy endeavours to return to God in hope . 

8.  To make us dread the thoughts of ever falling off from God again . 

9  To justify our claims to all the Benefits of our Gospel-state and day . 

10.  To obtain of God for us the Spirit and Means of Grace , thereby to fit us for our present Work and Trials in this our Probationary state , and to suit and bring us to his Father and himself in Glory , and that with universul Satisfaction , and Advantage , and Applause . 

11.  To put himself into a capacity of interceding for us in Heaven , and blessing us from Heaven as our Highpriest upon his Throne . 

12.  To put us into , and to keep us in a Covenant-state and frame , that thus we may deal and walk with God , as Children , as interested in his Son , as inhabited and actuated by his Spirit , and as united with all the Family of God and Christ , in the same Principles , Practices , Concerns , and Hopes , in order to the exercises of all the sympathies and services of mutually Christian Love , Ephes . four . v. 1-6 . 

iv. Our Commemoration of Christ thus represented to us , as upon the Cross , and as determining to come again , is our next work . 

1.  The Sacramental Elements , and the Observed Institution , is the Memorial . 

2.  The Remembrance contains , 

1.  Head-work , in discerning , remembering and believing the Sacramental Doctrine of this Supper to be true , and of great consequence to us : Christ Crucified , and determining to come again . 

2.  Heart-work , in forming the temper , purposes , hopes and comforts of our hearts unto what this Supper imports , and our acceptance of what is tendered here ; and our obliging our selves to do and be as Christ would have us . 

3.  Life-work ; in keeping up our Christian practice and profession as we are here directed and obliged to ; for a more full account whereof , and greater fitness for it , thou art commended to this helpful Treatise , by thine to his poor power for Christ , 

Matthew Sylvester . 

Feb. 3. 1695  / 6.  A Monthly Preparation for our Holy Communion with Christ and his Church , in the Lord's Supper . THIS is a holy Feast that is purposely provided by the King of Saints , for the Entertainment of his Family ; for the refreshing of the weary , and the making glad the mournful Soul. The night before his bitter Death , he instituted this Sacramental Feast ; He caused his Disciples to sit down with him , and when they had partaked of the Passover , the Sacrament of Promise , and had their taste of the old wine , he giveth them the new , even the Sacrament of the better Covenant , and of the fuller Gospel-grace : He teacheth them that his Death is Life to them : and that which is his bitterest suffering , is their Feast : and his sorrows are their Joys ; as our sinful pleasures were his sorrows . The slain Lamb of God our passover that was Sacrificed for us , that taketh away the sins of the world , was the pleasant food ; which Sacramentally he himself then delivered to them , and substantially the next day offered for them . The bread of God is he which cometh down from Heaven , and giveth life unto the world , John 6. 33.  He is the living bread which came down from Heaven : If any man eat of this Bread he shall live for ever : and the Bread which he giveth is his flesh which he hath given for the life of the world . verse 50 , 51.  Except we eat the flesh of the Son of man , and drink his blood , we have no life in us : Whoso eateth his flesh and drinketh his blood , hath eternal life , and he will raise him up at the last day : For his flesh is meat indeed , and his blood is drink indeed : He that eateth his flesh , and drinketh his blood , dwelleth in Christ , and Christ in him : As the living Father hath sent the Son , and he liveth by the Father , so he that eateth him , shall live by him . This is that bread that came down from Heaven : not as the Fathers did eat Manna and are dead : he that eateth this bread shall live for ever . 

I shall here only give you some brief Directions for your private duty herein . 

Direct . 1.  Understand well the proper ends , to which this Sacrament was instituted by Christ ; and take heed that you use it not to ends , for which it never was appointed . The true ends are these , 1.  To be a solemn Commemoration of the Death and passion of Jesus Christ , Mat. 26. 28.  Mar. 14. 24.  Luke 22. 20. to keep it , as it were , in the eye of the Church , in his bodily absence till he come , 1 Cor. 11. 24 , 25 , 26. 2.  To be a solemn renewing of the Holy Covenant which was first entered in Baptism , between Christ and the Receiver ; and in that Covenant it is on Christ's part , a solemn delivery of himself first , and with himself the benefits of Pardon , Reconciliation , Adoption , and right to Life eternal . Heb. 9 15 , 16 , 17 , 18. 1  Cor. 10. 16 , 24.  And on man's part , it is our solemn acceptance of Christ with his Benefits , upon his terms , and a delivering up ourselves to him , as his Redeemed ones , even to the Father as our reconciled Father , and to the Son as our Lord and Saviour , and to the Holy Spirit as our Sanctifier , with Professed Thankfulness for so great a benefit . 3.  It is appointed to be a lively objective means , by which the Spirit of Christ should work to stir up and exercise , and increase the Repentance , Faith , Desire , Love , Hope , Joy , Thankfulness , and New-obedience of Believers ; by a lively Representation of the evil of sin , the infinite love of God in Christ , the firmness of the Covenant or Promise , the greatness and sureness of the Mercy given , and the Blessedness purchased and promised to us , and the great obligations that are laid upon us . And that herein believers might be solemnly called out to the most serious exercise of all these Graces , 1 Cor. 11. 27 , 28 , 29 , 31. 1  Cor. 10. 16 , 17 , 21. 1  Cor. 11. 25 , 26. 2  Cor. 6. 4. and might be provoked and assisted to stir up themselves to this Communion with God in Christ , & to pray for more as through a sacrificed Christ . 4.  It is appointed to be the solemn Profession of Believers , of their Faith , and Love , and Gratitude , and Obedience to God the Father , Son and Holy Ghost , and of continuing firm in the Christian Religion . And a Badge of the Church before the World. Acts 2. 42 , 46.  & 20. 7. 5.  And it is appointed to be a sign and means of the Unity , Love , and Communion of Saints , and their readiness to Communicate to each other . 

The false mistaken ends , which you must avoid , are these . 1.  You must not with the Papists , think that the end of it is to turn Bread into no Bread , and Wine into no Wine , and to make them really the true Body and Blood of Jesus Christ . For if sense ( which telleth all Men that it is still Bread and Wine ) be not to be believed , than we cannot believe that ever there was a Gospel , or an Apostle , or a Pope , or a Man , or any thing in the World. And the Apostle expressly calleth it Bread three times , in three Verses together , after the Consecration , 1 Cor. 11. 26 , 27 , 28. and he telleth us , that the use of it is ( not to make the Lords Body really present , but ) to show the Lords Death till he come ; that is , As a visible representing and commemorating sign , to be instead of the Bodily presence till he come . 

2.  Nor must you with the Papists use this Sacrament to sacrifice Christ again really unto the Father , to propitiate him for the quick and dead , and ease Souls in Purgatory , and deliver them out of it . For Christ having died once dieth no more , and without kill him , there is no sacrificing him : By once offering up himself , he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified ; and now there remaineth no more sacrifice for sin : Having finished the sacrificing work on Earth , he is now passed into the Heavens , to appear before God for his Redeemed ones . Ro. 6. 9 1  Cor. 15. 3. 2  Cor. 5. 14 , 15.  Heb. 9 26. and 10. 12 , 26. and 9 24.  

3.  Nor is it any better than odious impiety to receive the Sacrament , to confirm some Confederacies or Oaths of Secrecy , for rebellions or other unlawful designs ; as the Powder-plotters in England did . 

4.  Nor is it any other than impious profanation of these sacred Mysteries for the Priest to constrain or suffer notoriously ignorant , and ungodly persons , to receive them , either to make themselves believe that they are indeed the Children of God , or to be a means which ungodly men should use to make them godly ; or , which Infidels or Impenitent persons must use to help them to Repentance and Faith in Christ . For though there is that in it which may become a means of their Conversion , ( as a Thief that stealeth a Bible or Sermon Book , may be converted by it , ) yet is it not to be used by the Receiver to that end . For that were to tell God a lie , as the means of their Conversion ; for whosoever cometh to receive a settled pardon , doth thereby profess repentance , as also by the words adjoined he must do ; And whosoever taketh , and eateth , and drinketh the Bread and Wine , doth actually profess thereby , that he taketh and applieth Christ himself by Faith : And therefore , if he do neither of these , he lieth openly to God ; and lies and false Covenants are not the appointed means of Conversion . Not that the Minister is a liar in his delivery of it : For he doth but conditionally seal and deliver God's Covenant and Benefits to the Receiver , to be his , if he truly Repent and Believe : But the Receiver himself lieth , if he do not actually Repent and Believe , as he there professeth to do . 

5.  Also it is an impious profanation of the Sacrament , if any Priest for the love of filthy lucre , shall give it to those that ought not to receive it , that he may have his Fees or Offerings ; or , that the Priest may have so much money that is bequeathed for the saying a Mass for such or such a Soul.  

6.  And it is odious profanation of the Sacrament , to use it as a League or Bond of Faction , to gather persons in to the party , and tie them fast to it , that they may depend upon the Priest , and his Faction and Inerest may thereby be strengthened , and he may seem to have many followers . 

7.  And it is a dangerous abuse of it , to receive it , that you may be pardoned , or sanctified , or saved , barely by the work done , or by the outward exercise alone . As if God were there obliged to give you Grace , while you strive not with your own hearts , to stir them up to love , or desire , or faith , or obedience , by the means that are before you ; or as if God would pardon and save you for eating so much Bread and drinking so much Wine , when the Canon biddeth you ; or , as if the Sacrament conveyed Grace , like as Charms are supposed to work , by saying over so many words . 

8.  Lastly , It is no appointed end of this Sacrament , that the Receiver thereby profess himself certain of the sincerity of his own Repentance and Faith : ( For it is not managed on the ground of such certainty only by the Receiver ; much lesle by the minister that delivereth it . ) But only he professeth that as far as he can discern by observing his own heart , he is truly willing to have Christ , and his benefits on the terms that they are offered ; and that he doth consent to the Covenant which he is there to renew . Think not therefore , that the Sacrament is instituted for any of these ( mistaken ) ends . 

Direct . 2.  Distinctly understand the parts of the Sacrament , that you may distinctly use them , and not do , you know not what . This Sacrament containeth these three parts . 1.  The Consecration of the Bread and Wine , which maketh it the Representative Body and Blood of Christ . 2.  The Representation and Commemoration of the Sacrifice of Christ . 3.  The Communion : Or , Communication by Christ , and Reception by the people . 

1.  In the Consecration , the Church doth first offer the Creatures of Bread and Wine , to be accepted of God , to this Sacred use : And God accepteth them , and blesseth them to this use ; which he signifieth both by the words of his own Institution , and by the Action of his Ministers , and their Benidiction . They being the Agents of God to the People , in this Accepting and Blessing , as they are the Agents of the People to God , in offering or dedicating the Creatures to this use . 

2.  This Consecration having a special respect to God the Father , in it we acknowledge his three grand Relations . 1.  That he is the Creator , and so the Owner of all the Creatures ; for we offer them to him as his own . 2.  That he is our Righteous Governor , whose Law it was , that Adam and we have broken , and who required satisfaction , and hath received the Sacrifice and atonement , and hath dispensed with the strict and proper execution of that Law ; and will rule us hereafter by the Law of Grace . 3.  That he is our Father or Benefactor who hath freely given us a Redeemer , and the Covenant of Grace , whose Love and Favor we have forfeited by sin , but desire & hope to be reconciled by Christ . 

3.  As Christ himself was Incarnate and true Christ , before he was sacrificed to God , and was sacrificed to God , before that sacrifice be communicated for life and nourishment to Souls : So in the Sacrament , Consecration must first make the Creature to be the Flesh and Blood of Christ representative ; and then the sacrificing of that flesh and blood must be represented and commemorated ; and then the sacrificed flesh and blood communicated to the Receivers for their spiritual life . 

II The Commemoration chiefly ( but not only ) respecteth God the Son : For he hath ordained , that these consecrated Representations should in their manner and measure , supply the room of his bodily presence ; while his body is in Heaven : And that thus as it were in effigy , in representation , he might be still Crucified before the Church's eyes ; and they might be affected , as if they had seen him on the Cross . And that by Faith and Prayer , they might , as it were , offer him up to God , that is , Might show the Father that sacrifice once made for sin , in which they trust ; and for which it is , that they expect all the acceptance of their persons with God , and hope for audience when they beg for mercy , and offer up prayer or praise to him . 

III In the Communication , though the Sacrament have respect to the Father , as the principal Giver ; and to the Son as both the Gift and Giver ; yet hath it a special respect to the Holy Ghost , as being that spirit given in the flesh and Blood , which quickeneth Souls ; without which , the Flesh will profit nothing : And whose operations must convey and apply Christ's saving benefits to us . John 6. 63.  & 7. 39  

These three being the parts of the Sacrament in whole , as comprehending that sacred Action and participation which is essential to it . The Material parts , called the Relate and Correlate , are . 1.  Substantial and Qualitative . 2.  Active and Passive . 1.  The first are the Bread and Wine as signs , and the Body and Blood of Christ , with his Graces and Benefits , as the things signified and given . The second are the Actions of Breaking , Pouring out , and Delivering on the Minister's part , ( after the Conscration ) and the Taking , Eating , and Drinking , by the Receivers , as the sign : And the signified is , the Crucifying or Sacrificing of Christ , and the Delivering himself with his Benefits to the Believer , and the Receivers thankful Accepting , and using the said gift . To these add the Relative Form , and the Ends , and you have the definition of this Sacrament . 

Direct . 3.  Look upon the minister as the Agent or Officer of Christ , who is Commissioned by him to seal and deliver to you the Covenant and its benefits : And take the Bread and Wine , as if you heard Christ himself saying to you , Take my Body and Blood , and the Pardon , and Grace which is thereby purchased . It is a great help in the Application , to have mercy and pardon brought us by the hand of a Commissioned Officer of Christ . 

Direct . 4.  In your preparation beforehand , take heed of these two extremes . 1.  That you come not profanely and carelessly , with common hearts , as to a common work : For God will be sanctified in them that draw near to him , Levit. 10. 3.  And they that eat and drink unworthily , not discerning the Lords Body from common Bread ; but eating as if it were a common meal , do eat death to themselves , instead of life . 2.  Take heed lest your mistakes of the nature of this Sacrament , should possess you with such fears of unworthy receiving , and the following dangers , as may quite discompose , and unfit your Souls for the joyful exercises of Faith , and Love , and Praise , and Thanksgiving , to which you are invited . Many that are scrupulous of receiving it in any , save a feasting gesture , are too little careful and scrupulous of receiving it in any , save a feasting frame of mind . 

The first extreme is caused by profaneness and negligence , or by gross ignorance of the nature of the Sacramental work . The latter extreme is frequently caused as followeth ; 1.  By setting this Sacrament at a greater distance from other parts of God's worship , than there is cause : So that the excess of Reverence doth overwhelm the minds of some with terrors . 2.  By studying more the terrible words of eating and drinking damnation to themselves , if they do it unworthily , than all the expressions of Love and Mercy , which that Blessed Feast is furnished with . So that when the views of infinite Love should ravish them , they are studying wrath and vengeance to terrify them , as if they came to Moses , and not to Christ . 3.  By not understanding what maketh a Receiver worthy or unworthy , but taking their unwilling infirmities for condemning unworthiness . 4.  By receiving it so seldom , as to make it strange to them , and increase their fear , whereas , if it were administered every Lord's day , as it was in the Primitve Churches , it would better acquaint them with it , and cure that fear that cometh from strangeness . 5.  By imagining , that none that want assurance of their own sincerity , can receive in Faith. 6.  By contracting an ill habit of mistaken Religiousness , placing it all in poring on themselves , and mourning for their corruptions , and not in studying the Love of God in Christ , and living in the daily praises of his Name , and joyful thanksgiving for his exceeding Mercies . 7.  And if besides all these the Body contract a weak or timorous melancholy distemper , it will leave the mind capable of almost nothing , but fear and trouble , even in the sweetest works . From many such cause's it cometh to pass , that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is become more terrible , and uncomfortable to abundance of such distempered Christians , than any other Ordinance of God ; & that which should most comfort them doth trouble them most . 

Quest . 1.  But is not this Sacrament more holy and dreadful , and should it not have more preparation , than other parts of worship ? 

Answ . For the degree indeed , it should have very careful preparation : And we cannot well compare it with other parts of worship ; as Praise , Thanksgiving , Covenanting with God , Prayer , etc.  Because that all these other parts are here comprised and performed . But doubtless , God must also be sanctified in all his other worship , and his Name must not be taken in vain . And when this Sacrament was received every Lord's day , and often in the week besides , Christians were supposed to live continually in a state of general preparation , and not to be so far from a due particular preparation , as many poor Christians think they are . 

Quest . 2.  How often should the Sacrament be now administered , that it neither grow into contempt nor strangeness ? 

Answ . Ordinarily in well Displined Churches it should be still every Lord's day . For , 1.  We have no reason to prove , that the Apostles example and appointment in this case , was proper to those times , any more than that praise and thanksgiving daily is proper to them : And we may as well deny the obligation of other Institutions or Apostolical Orders as that . 2.  It is a part of the settled order for the Lord's day's worship : and omitting it , maimeth and altereth the worship for the day ; and occasioneth the omission of the thanksgiving and praise , and lively commemorations of Christ , which should be then most performed : And so Christians by use , grow habited to sadness , and a mourning melancholy Religion , and grow unacquainted with much of the Worship and Spirit of the Gospel . 3.  Hereby the Papists lamentable corruptions of this Ordinance have grown up , even by an excess of reverence and fear , which seldom receiving doth increase ; till they are come to worship Bread as their God. 4.  By seldom communicating , Men are seduced to think all proper Communion of Churches lieth in that Sacrament , and to be more profanely bold in abusing many other parts of worship . 5.  There are better means ( by Teaching and Discipline ) to keep the Sacrament from contempt , than the omitting or displacing of it . 6.  Every Lord's day is no oftener than Christians need it . 7.  The frequency will teach them to live prepared , and not only to make much ado once a Month or Quarter , when the same work is neglected all the year beside ; even as one that liveth in continual expectation of death , will live in continual preparation : When he that expecteth it but in some grievous sickness , will then be frighted into some seeming preparations , which are not the habit of his Soul , but laid by again when the disease is over . 

2.  But yet I must add , that in some indisciplined Churches , and upon some occasions it may be longer omitted , or seldomer used ; no duty is a duty at all ●imess : And therefore extraordinary cases may raise such impediments , as may hinder us a long time from this , and many other Privileges . But the ordinary faultness of our imperfect hearts , that are apt ●o grow customary and dull , is no good reason why it should be seldom ; any more than why other special duties of Worship and Church-communion should be seldom . Read well the Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians , and you will find that the● were then as bad as the true Christians ●re now , and that even in this Sacrament they were very culpable ; and yet Paul seeketh not to cure them by their seldomer communicating . 

Q 3  Are all the Members of the visible Church to be admitted to this Sacrament ? or Communicate ? 

Answ . All are not to seek it , or to take it , because many may know their own unfitness , when the Church or Pastors know it not : But all that come and seek it , are to be admitted by the Pastors , except such Children , Idiots , ignorant persons , or Heriticks , as know not what they are to receive and do ; and such as are notoriously wicked or scandalous , and have not manifested their repentance . But than it is presupposed , that none should be numbered with the adult members of the Church but those that have personally owned their Baptismal Covenant , by a Credible Profession of true Christianity . 

Quest . 4.  May a Man that hath knowledge , and civility , and common gifts , come and take this Sacrament , if he know that he is yet void of true repentance , and other saving Grace ? 

Answ . no ; for he than knoweth himself to be one that is uncapable of it in his present state . 

Quest . 5.  May an ungodly Man receive this Sacrament , who knoweth not himself to be ungodly ? 

Answ . no ; For he ought to know it ; and his sinful ignorance of his own condition , will not make his sin to be his duty ; nor excuse his other faults before God.  

Quest . 6.  Must a sincere Christian receive , that is uncertain of his sincerity , and in continual doubting ? 

Answ . Two preparations are necessary to this Sacrament ; the general preparation , which is a state of Grace , and this the doubting Christian hath ; and the particular preparation , which consisteth in his present actual fitness : And all the question is of this . And to know this , you must further distinguish , between immediate duty and more remote ; and between the degrees of doubtfulness in Christians . 1.  The nearest immediate duty of the doubting Christian is , to use the means to have his doubts resolved , till to know his case ; and then his next duty is , to receive the Sacrament ; and both these still remain his duty , to be performed in this order : And if he say , I cannot be resolved , when I have done my best . Yet certainly it is some sin of his own , that keepeth him in the dark , and hindereth his assurance ; and therefore duty ceaseth not to be duty : The Law of Christ still obliges him , both to get assurance , and to receive ; and the want both of the knowledge of his state , and of Receiving the Sacrament , are his continual sin , if he lie in it never so long through these scruples , though it be an infirmity that God will not condemn him for . ( For he is supposed to be in a state of Grace . ) But you will say , What if still he cannot be resolved whether he have true Faith and Repentance , or not ? What should he do while he is in doubt ? I answer , It is one thing to ask , what is his duty in this case ? and another thing to ask , Which is the smaller or lesle dangerous sin ? Still his duty is both to get the knowledge of his heart , and to communicate : But while he sinneth ( through infirmity ) in the failing of the first , were he better also omit the other , or not ? To be well resolved of that , you must discern , 1.  Whether his judgement of himself , do rather incline to think and hope that he is sincere in his repentance and Faith , or , that he is not ? 2.  And whether the consequents are like to be good or bad to him . If his hopes that he is sincere , be as great or greater than his fears of the contrary , then there is no such ill consequent to be feared as may hinder his communicating ; but it is his best way to do it , and wait on God in the use of his Ordinance . But if the persuasion of his gracelesness be greater than the hopes of his sincerity , than he must observe how he is like to be affected , if he do communicate . If he find that he is like to clear up his mind , aed increase his hopes by the actuating of his Grace , he is yet best to go : But if he find that his heart is like to be over whelmed with horror and sunk into despair , by running into the supposed guilt of unworthy receiving , than it will be worse to do it , than to omit it . Many such fearful Christians I have known , that are fain many years to absent themselves from the Sacrament ; because if they should receive it while they are persuaded of their utter unworthiness , they would be swallowed up of desperation , and think that they had taken their own damnatioa , ( as the Twenty fifth Article of the Church of England saith , the unworthy receivers do . ) So that the chief sin of such a doubting receiver , is not that he receives though he doubt ; for doubting will not excuse us for the sinful omission of a duty ( no more of this than of Prayer or Thanksgiving : ) But only Prudence requireth such a one to forbear that , which through his own distemper would be a means of his despair and ruin : As that Physic or Food ( how good soever ) is not to be taken which would kill the taker : Gods Ordinances are not appointed for our destruction , but for our edification ; and so must be used as tendeth thereunto . Yet to those Christians , who are in this case , and dare not communicate , I must put this Question , How dare you so long refuse it ? He that consenteth to the Covenant , may boldly come and signify his consent , and receive the sealed Covenant of God ; for consent is your preparation , or the necessary condition of your Right : If you consent not , you refuse all the Mercy of the Covenant . And dare you live in such a state ? Suppose a Pardon be offered to a condemned Thief , but so , that if he after cast it in the dirt , or turn Traitor , he shall die a sorer death ; will he rather choose to die than take it , and say , I am afraid I shall abuse it ? To refuse God's Covenant is certain death ; but to consent is your preparation and your life . 

Quest . 7.  Wherein lieth the sin of an Hypocrite , and ungodly person , if he do receive ? 

Answ . His sin is , 1.  In lying and hypocrisy ; in that he professeth to repent unfeignedly of his sin , and to be resolved for a holy life , and to believe in Christ , and to accept him on his Covenant-terms , and to give up himself to God , as his Father , his Saviour , and his Sanctifier , and to forsake the Flesh , the World , and the Devil ; when indeed , he never did any of this , but secretly abhorreth it at his heart , and will not be persuaded to it : And so all this Profession , and his very Covenanting itself , and his Receiving , as it is a Professing-covenanting-sign , is nothing but a very lie . And what it is to lie to the Holy Ghost , the case of Ananias and Sapphira telleth us . 2.  It is usurpation to come and lay claim to those Benefits , which he hath no title to . 3.  It is a profanation of these holy Mysteries , to be thus used ; and it is a taking of God's Name in vain , who is a jealous God , and will be sanctified of all that draw near unto him . 4.  And it is a wrong to the Church of God , & the Communion of Saints , & the honour of the Christian Religion , that such ungodly Hypocrites intrude as Members : As it is to the King's Army , when the Enemy's Spies creep in amongst them ; or to his Marriage-feast to have a guest in rags . Mat. 22. 11 , 12.  

Object . But it is no lie , because they think they say true in their Profession . 

Answ . That is through their sinful negligence and selfdeceit : And he is a liar that speaks a falsehood , which he may and aught to know to be a falsehood , though he do not know it . There is a liar in rashness and negligence , as well as of set purpose . 

Quest . 8 : doth all unworthy receiving make a man liable to damnation ? Or , what unworthiness is it that is so threatened ? 

Answ . There are three sorts of unworthiness ( or unfitness ) and three sorts of Judgement answerably to be feared . 1.  There is the utter unworthiness of an Infidel , or impenitent , ungodly Hypocrite . And damnation to Hell fire , is the punishment that such must expect , if Conversion prevent it not . 2.  There is an unworthiness through some great and scandalous crime , which a regenerate person falleth into ; and this should stop him from the Sacrament for a time , till he have repent and cast away his sin : And if he come before he rise from his fall by a particular repentance , ( as the Corinthians that sinned in the very use of the Sacrament itself ) they may expect some notable temporal judgement at the present ; ( and if Repentance didnot prevent it , they might fear Eternal punishment . ) 3.  There is that measure of unworthiness which consisteth in the ordinary infirmities of a Saint ; and this should not at all deter them from the Sacrament , because it is accompanied with a greater worthiness ; yea , though their weakness appear in the time and manner of their receiving : But yet ordinary corrections may follow these ordinary infirmities . ( The grosser abuse of the Sacrament itself , I join under the second rank . ) 

Quest . 9  What is the particular preparation needful to a fit Communicant ? 

Answ . This bringeth me up to the next Direction . 

5.  Let your preparation to this Sacrament consist of these particulars following , 1.  In your duty with your own consciences and hearts . 2.  In your duty towards God. 3.  And in your duty towards your Neighbour . 

I Your duty with your hearts consisteth in these particulars . 1.  That you do your best in the close examination of your hearts about your States , and the sincerity of your Faith , Repentance , and Obedience : To know whether your hearts are true to God , in the Covenant which you are to renew and seal . Which may be done by these inquiries , and discerned by these Signs . 1.  Whether you truly loathe yourselves for all the sins of your hearts and lives , and are a greater offence and burden to yourselves , because of your imperfections and corruptions , than all the World besides is ? Ez. 6. 9  & 20. 43.  & 36. 31.  Rom. 7. 24. 2.  Whether you have no sin but what you are truly desirous to know ; and no known sin , but what you are truly desirous to be rid of ; and so desirous , as that you had rather be perfectly freed from sin , than from any affliction in the world ? Rom. 7. 22 , 18 , 24.  & 8 18. 3.  Whether you love the searching and reforming Light , even the most searching parts of the Word of God , and the most searching Books , and searching Sermons , that by them you may be brought to know yourselves , in order to your settled peace and reformation ? John 3. 19 , 20 , 21 : 4.  Whether you truly love that degree of holiness in others which you have not yet attained yourselves , and love Christ in his Children , with such an unfeigned love , as will cause you to relieve them according to your abilities , and suffer for their sakes , when it is your duty ? 1 John 3. 14 , 16. 1  Pet. 1. 22.  & 3 8.  Jam. 2 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15.  Mat. 25. 40.  etc. 5.  Whether you can truly say , that there is no degree of holiness so high , but you desire it , and had rather be perfect in the love of God , and the obedience of his will , than have all the riches and pleasures of this World , Rom. 7. 18 , 21 , 24.  Psal . 119. 5.  Mat. 5. 6.  And had rather be one of the holiest Saints , than of the most renowned prosperous Princes upon Earth ? Psal . 15. 4.  & 16. 2.  Psal . 84. 10.  & 65. 4. 6.  Whether you have so far laid up your treasure , and your hopes in Heaven , as that you are resolved to take that only for your portion ; and that the hopes of Heaven , and interest of your Souls , hath the pre-eminence in your hearts against all that stands in competition with it ? Col. 3. 1 , 3 , 4.  Mat. 6. 20 , 21. 7.  Whether the chiefest care of your hearts , and endeavour of your lives , be to serve and please God , and to enjoy him for ever rather than for any worldly thing ? Mat. 6. 23.  Joh. 5. 26. 2  Cor. 5. 1 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 8.  Whether it be your daily desire and endeavour to mortify the flesh , and master its rebellious opposition to the Spirit ; and you so far prevail , as not to live , and walk , and be led by the flesh , but that the course and drift of your life is spiritual ? Rom. 8 , 1 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 13.  Gal. 5. 17 , 21 , 22. 9  Whether the world , and all its honour , wealth , and pleasures appear to you so small and contemptible a thing , as that you esteem it as dung , and nothing in comparison of Christ , and the love of God and Glory ? and are resolved , that you will rather let go all , than your part in Christ ? And , which useth to carry it in the time of trial , in your deliberate choice ? Phil. 3. 7 , 8 , 9 , 13 , 14 , 18 , 19 , 20. 1  John 2. 15.  Luke 14. 26 , 30 , 33.  Matth. 13. 19 , 21. 10.  Whether you are resolved upon a course of holiness and obedience , and to use those means which God doth make known to you , to be the way to please him , and to subdue your corruption ; and yet feeling the frailties of your hearts , and the burden of your sins , do trust in Christ as your Righteousness before God , and in the Holy Ghost , whose Grace alone can illuminate , sanctify , and confirm you ? Acts 11. 23.  Psal . 119. 57 , 63 , 69 , 106. 1  Cor. 1. 30.  Rom. 8. 9  John 15. 5. 2  Cor. 12. 9  By these Signs you may safely try your states . 

2.  When this is done you are also to try the strength and measure of your Grace ; that you may perceive your weakness , and know for what help you should seek to Christ . And to find out what inward corruptions and sinful inclinations are yet strongest in you , that you may know what to lament , and to ask forgiveness of , and help against . My Book called Directions for weak Christians , will give you fuller advice in this . 

3.  You are also to take a strict account of your lives ; and to look over your dealings with God and Men , in secret and public , especially of late , since the last renewal of your Covenant with God , and to hear what God and Conscience have to say about your sins and all their aggravations , Psal . 139. 23. 1  Cor. 11. 28.  

4.  And you must labour to get your hearts affected with your condition , as you do discover it . To be humbled for what is sinful , and to be desirous of help against your weakness , and thankful for the Grace which you discern . 

5.  Lastly , you must consider of all the work that you have to do , & all the mercies which you are going to receive , and what Graces are necessary to all this , and how they must be used ; and accordingly lock up all those Graces , and prepare them for the exercise to which they are to be called out . I shall name you the particulars anon . 

II Your duty towards God in your preparation for this Sacrament , is , 1.  To cast down yourselves before him in humble penitent confession , and lamentation of all the Sins which you discover ; and to beg his pardon in secret , before you come to have it publicly sealed and delivered . 2.  To look up to him with thankfulness , Love , and Joy , as becomes one that is going to receive so great a mercy from him ; and humbly to beg that Grace which may prepare you , and quicken you to , and in the work . 

III Your duty towards others in this your preparation , is , 1.  To forgive those that have done you wrong , and to confess your fault to these whom you have wronged , and ask them forgiveness , and make them amends and restitution so far as is in your power ; and be reconciled to those with whom you are fallen out ; and to see , that you love your neighbours as yourselves , Mat. 5. 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 44.  James 5. 16. 2.  That you seek advice of your Pastors , or some fit persons , in cases that are too hard for yourselves to resolve , and where you need their special help . 3.  That you lovingly admonish them that you know do intend to communicate unworthily , and to come thither in their ungodliness , and gross sin unrepented of : That you show not such hatred of your Brother , as to suffer sin upon him , Leu. 19 17.  But tell him his faults , as Christ hath directed you , Mat. 18. 15 , 16 , 17.  And do your parts to promote Christ's Discipline , and keep pure the Church . See 1 Cor , 5. throughout . 

Direct . 6.  When you come to the holy Communion , let not the over-scrupulous regard of the person of the Minister , or the company , or the imperfections of the ministration , disturb your meditations , nor call away your minds from the high and serious employment of the day . Hypocrites who place their Religion in bodily exercises , have taught many weak Christians to take up unecessary scruples , and to turn their eye and observation too much to things without them . 

Quest . But should we have no regard to the due celebration of these sacred Mysteries , and to the Minister , and communicants , and manner of Administration ? 

Answ . Yes : You should have so much regard to them , 1.  As to see that nothing be amiss through your default , which is in your power to amend . 2.  And that you join not in the committing of any known sin . But , 1.  Take not every sin of another for your sin , and think not that you are guilty of that in others , which you cannot amend ; or , that you must forsake the Church and worship of God , for these corruptions which you are not guilty of ; or deny your own mercies , because others usurp them or abuse them . 2.  If you suspect any thing imposed upon you to be sinful to you , try it before you come thither ; and leave not your minds open to disturbance , when they should be wholly employed with Christ . 

Quest . But what if my conscience be not satisfied , but I am still in doubt , must I not forbear ? Seeing he that doubteth is condemned if he eat , because he eateth not in Faith ; for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin ? 

Answ : The Apostle there speaketh not of eating in the Sacrament , but of eating meats , which he doubteth of whether they are lawful , but is sure , that it is lawful to forbear them . And in case of doubting about things indifferent , the surer side is to forbear them , because there may be sin in doing ; but there can be none on the other side in forbearing . But in case of Duties , your doubting will not disoblige you ; else men might give over praying , and hearing God's Word , and believing , and obeying their Rulers , and maintaining their Families , when they are but blind enough to doubt of it . 2.  Your erring Conscience is not a Lawmaker , and cannot make it your duty to obey it . For God is your King , and the Office of your Conscience is to discern his Law ; and urge you to obedience , and not to make you Laws of its own : So that if it speak falsely , it doth not oblige you , but deceive you . It doth only ligate , or ensnare you , but not obligare , or make a sin a duty . It casteth you into necessity of sinning more or lesle till you relinquish the error : But in case of such duties as these , it is a sin to do them with a doubting Conscience , but ( ordinarily ) it is a greater sin to forbear . 

Object . But some Divines write , that Conscience being God's Officer ; when it erreth , God himself doth bind me by it to follow that error , and the evil which it requireth becometh my duty . 

Answ . A dangerous error tending to subversion of Souls and Kingdoms , and highly dishonourable to God. God hath made it your duty to know his Will , and do it . And if you ignorantly mistake him , will you lay the blame on him , and draw him into participation of your sin , when he forbiddeth you both the error and the sin ? And doth he at once forbid and command the same thing ? At that very moment , God is so far from obliging you to follow your error , that he still obliges you to lay it by , and do the contrary . If you say ; You cannot . I answer , Your impotency , is a sinful impotency ; and you can use the means , in which his Grace can help you : and he will not change his Law , nor make you Kings and Rulers of yourselves instead of him , because you are ignorant or impotent . 

Direct . 7.  In the time of administration go along with the Minister throughout the work , and keep your hearts close to Jesus Christ , in the exercise of all those Graces , which are suited to the several parts of the administration . Think not that all the work must be the Minister's . It should be a busy day with you , and your hearts should be taken up with as much diligence , as your hands be in your common labour ; but not in a toilsome weary diligence , but in such delightful business as becometh the guests of the God of Heaven , at so sweet a feast , and in the receiving of such unvaluable gifts . 

Here I should distinctly show you , I What Graces they be that you must there exercise . II What there is obiectively presented before you in the Sacrament , to exercise all these Graces . III At what seasons in the administration each of these inward works are to be done . 

I The Graces to be exercised are these ( besides that holy fear and reverence common to all worship ) 1.  A humble sense of the odiousness of sin , and of our undone condition as in ourselves , and a displeasure against ourselves , & loathing of ourselves , and melting Repentance for the sins we have committed ; as against our Creator , and as against the Love and Mercy of a Redeemer , and as against the holy Spirit of Grace . 2.  A hungering and thirsting desire after the Lord Jesus , and his Grace , and the favour of God and communion with him , which are there represented and offered to the Soul. 3.  A lively Faith in our Redeemer , his death , resurrection and intercession ; and a trusting our miserable souls upon him , as our sufficient Saviour and help ; And a hearty acceptance of him and his benefits upon his offered terms . 4.  A joy and gladness in the sense of that unspeakable mercy which is here offered us . 5.  A thankful heart towards him , from whom we do receive it . 6.  A fervent Love to him that by such Love doth seek our Love. 7.  A triumphant Hope of life eternal , which is purchased for us , and sealed to us . 8.  A willingness and resolution to deny ourselves , and all this world , and suffer for him that hath suffered for our Redemption . 9  A Love to our brethren , our Neighbours and our Enemies , with a readiness to relieve them , and to forgive them when they do us wrong . 10.  And a firm Resolution for future obedience , to our Creator , and Redeemer , and Sanctifier , according to our Covenant . 

II In the naming of these Graces , I have named their objects : which you should observe as distinctly as you can , that they may be operative . 1.  To help your Humiliation and Repentance , you bring thither a loaden miserable Soul , to receive a pardon and relief : And you see before you the Sacrificed Son of God , who made his soul an offering for sin , and became a Curse for us to save us who were accursed . 2.  To draw out your desires , you have the most excellent gifts and the most needful mercies presented to you that this world is capable of : Even the pardon of sin , the Love of God , the Spirit of Grace , and the hopes of Glory , and Christ himself with whom all this is given . 3.  To exercise your Faith you have Christ here first represented as crucified before your eyes : and then with his benefits , freely given you , and offered to your acceptance , with a Command that you refuse him not . 4.  To exercise your delight and gladness , you have this Saviour and this Salvation tendered to you ; and all that your souls can well desire set before you . 5.  To exercise your Thankfulness , what could do more than so great a Gift , so dearly purchased , so surely sealed , and so freely offered ? 6.  To exercise your Love to God in Christ , you have the fullest manifestation of his attractive Love , even offered to your eyes , and taste , and heart , that a soul on earth can reasonably expect ; in such wonderful condescension , that the greatness and strangeness of it surpasseth a natural man's belief . 7.  To exercise your hopes of life eternal , you have the price of it here set before you ; you have the Gift of it here sealed to you ; and you have that Saviour represented to you in his suffering , who is now there reigning , that you may remember him , as expectants of his Glorious coming to judge the world , and glorify you with himself . 8.  To exercise your self-denial and resolution for suffering , and contempt of the world and fleshly pleasures , you have before you both the greatest example and obligation , that ever could be offered to the world ; when you see and receive a Crucified Christ , that so strangely denied himself for you ; and set so little by the world and flesh . 9  To exercise your love to brethren , yea , and Enemies , you have his example before your eyes , that loved you to the death when you were Enemies : And you have his holy servants before your eyes , who are amiable in him through the workings of his Spirit , and on whom he will have you show your love to himself . 10.  And to excite your Resolution for future odedience , you see his double Title to the Government of you , as Creator and as Redeemer ; and you feel the obligations of Mercy and Gratitude ; and you are to renew a Covenant with him to that end ; even openly where all the Churches are witnesses . So that you see here are powerful object before you to draw out all these Graces , and that they are all but such as the work requireth you then to exercise . 

III But that you may be the readier when it cometh to practice , I shall as it were lead you by the hand through all the parts of the administration , & tell you when and how to exercise every grace , and those that are to be joined together I shall take together , that needless distinctness do not trouble you . 

1.  When you are called up and going to the Table of the Lord , exercise your Humility , Desire and Thankfulness , and say in your hearts , What Lord , dost thou call such a wretch as I ? What! me that have so oft despised thy mercy ? and wilfully offended thee , and preferred the filth of this world and the pleasures of the flesh before thee ? Alas , it is thy wrath in Hell that is my due : But if love will choose such an unworthy guest , and Mercy will be honoured upon such sin and misery , I come Lord at thy call : I gladly come : Let thy will be done ; and let that mercy which inviteth me , make me acceptable , and graciously entertain me ; and let me not come without the wedding Garment , nor unreverently rush on holy things , nor turn thy mercies to my bane ! 

2.  When the Minister is confessing sin , prostrate your very souls in the sense of your unworthiness , and let your particular sins be in your eye , with their heinous aggravations ; The whole need not the Physician , but the sick . But here I need not put words into your mouths or minds , because the Minister goeth before you , and your hearts must concur with his Confessions , and put in also the secret sins which he omitteth . 

3.  When you look on the Bread and Wine which is provided and offered for this holy use , remember that it is the Creator of all things , on whom you live , whose Laws you did offend ; and say in your hearts , OH Lord , how great is my offence ? who have broken the Laws of him that made me , and on whom the whole Creation doth depend ? I had my Being from thee , and my daily Bread ; and should I have requited thee with disobedience ? Father , I have sinned against Heaven and before thee , and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.  

4.  When the words of the Institution are read , and the Bread and Wine are solemnly consecrated , by separating them to that sacred use , and the acceptance and blessing of God is desired , admire the mercy that prepared us a Redeemer , and say , OH God how wonderful is thy wisdom and thy love ? How strangely dost thou glorify thy mercy over sin that gave advantage to glorify thy justice ? Even thou our God whom we have offended , hast out of thy own Treasury satisfied thy own justice , and given us a Saviour by such a Miracle of Wisdom , Love , and Condescension , as men or Angels shall never be able fully to comprehend : so didst thou love the sinful world , as to give thy Son , that whosoever believeth in him , should not perish , but have everlasting life . OH thou that hast prepared us so full a remedy , and so precious a gift , sanctify these Creatures to be the Representative Body and Blood of Christ , and prepare my heart for so great a gift , and so high and holy and honourable a work . 

5.  When you behold the Consecrated Bread and Wine , discern the Lords Body , and reverence it as the Reprsentative Body and Blood of Jesus Christ ; and take heed of Profaning it , by looking on it as common Bread and Wine ; Though it be not Transubstantiate , but still is very Bread and Wine in its Natural being , yet it is Christ's Body and Blood in representation and effect . Look on it as the consecrated Bread of life , which with the quickening Spirit must nourish you to life eternal . 

6.  When you see the Breaking of the Bread , and the Pouring out of the Wine , let Repentance , and Love , and Desire ; and Thankfulness , thus work within you . OH wondrous Love ! OH hateful sin ! How merciful , Lord , hast thou been to sinners ? & how cruel have we been to ourselves & thee ? could Love stoop lower ? could God be merciful at a dearer rate ? could my sin have done a more horrid deed , than put to death the Son of God ? How small a matter hath tempted me to that , which must cost so dear before it was forgiven ? How dear paid my Saviour for that , which I might have avoided at a very cheap rate ? At how low a price have I valued his Blood , when I have sinned and sinned again for nothing ! This is my doing ! My sins were the Thorns , the Nails , the Spear ! Can a Murderer of Christ be a small offender ? OH dreadful justice ! It was I and such other sinners that deserved to bear the punishment who were guilty of the sin ; and to have been fuel for the unquenchable flames for ever . OH precious Sacrifice ! OH hateful sin ! OH gracious Saviour ! how can man's dull and narrow heart , be duly affected with such transcendent things ? or Heaven make its due impression upon an inch of flesh ! Shall I ever again have a dull apprehension of such Love ? Or ever have a favourable thought of sin ? Or ever have a fearless thought of justice ? OH break or melt this hardened heart , that it may be somewhat conformed to my crucified Lord ! The tears of Love and true Repentance are easier than the flames from which I am redeemed . OH hide me in these wounds , and wash me in this precious blood ! This is the Sacrifice in which I trust : This is the Righteousness by which I must be justified , and saved from the Curse of thy violated Law ! As thou hast accepted this , OH Father , for the world , upon the Cross , Behold it ( till on the behalf of sinners ; and hear his Blood that cryeth unto thee for mercy to the miserable , and pardon us , and accept us as thy Reconciled Children , for the sake of this Crucified Christ alone . We can offer thee no other Sacrifice for sin ; and we need no other . 

7.  When the Minister applieth himself to God by prayer , for the efficacy of this Sacrament , that in it he will give us Christ and his benefits , and pardon , and justify us , and accept us as his reconciled Children join heartily and earnestly in these requests , as one that knoweth the need and worth of such a mercy . 

8.  When the Minister delivereth you the consecrated Bread and Wine , look upon him as the messenger of Christ , and hear him as if Christ by him said to you , Take this my broken body and blood , and feed ●● it to everlasting life : and take with it no sealed Covenant , and therein the sealed testimony of my love , and the sealed pardon o● your sins , and a sealed gift of life eternal so be it , you unfeignedly consent unto my Covenant , and give up yourselves to me ●● my redeemed ones . Even as in delivering the possession of House or Lands , the deliverer giveth a Key , and a Twig and a Turf , and saith , I deliver you this house , and I deliver you this Land : So doth the Minister by Christ's Authority deliver you Christ and pardon and title to eternal life . Here is an Image of a sacrificed Christ of Gods own appointing , which you may lawfully use : And more than an Image ; even an investing Instrument , by which these highest mercies are solemnly delivered to you in the name of Christ . Let your hearts therefore say with joy and Thankfulness , with Faith and Love , OH matchless bounty of the eternal God what a gift is this ! and unto what unworthy sinners ! and will God stoop so low to man ? and come so near him ? and thus reconcile his worthless enemies ? Will he freely pardon all that I have done ? and take me into his family and love , and feed me with the flesh and blood of Christ ? I believe ; Lord help mine unbelief . I humbly and thankfully accept thy gifts ! Open thou my heart , that I may yet more joyfully and thankfully accept them : Seeing God will glorify his Love and mercy by such incomprehensible gifts as these , behold , Lord , a wretch that needeth all this mercy ! And seeing it is the offer of thy Grace and Covenant , my Soul doth gladly take thee for my God and Father , for my Saviour and my Sanctifier : And here I give my up self unto thee , as thy Created , Redeemed and ( I hope ) Regenerate one ; as thy Own , thy Subject and thy Child , to be saved and Sanctified by thee , to be beloved by thee and to Love thee to everlasting : OH seal up this Covenant and pardon , by the Spirit , which thou sealest and deliverest to me in thy Sacrament : that , without reserve , I may be entirely and for ever thine ! 

9  When you see the Communicants receiving with you , let your very hearts be united to the Saints in love , and say , How goodly are thy Tents , OH Jacob ! How amiable is the Family of the Lord ! How good and pleasant is the unity of brethren ? How dear to me are the precious numbers of my Lord ! though they have yet all their spots and weaknesses , which he pardoneth , and so must we . My goodness OH Lord extendeth not unto thee ; but unto thy Saints , the excellent ones on earth , in whom is my delight . What portion of my estate thou requirest I willingly give unto the poor , and if I have wronged any man , I am willing to restore it : And seeing thou hast ●●oved me an enemy , and forgiven me so great a debt , I heartily forgive those that have done me wrong , and love my enemies . OH keep me in thy Family all my days , for ● day in thy Court is better than a Thousand , and the doorkeepers in thy house are happier than the most prosperous of the wicked , Numb . 24. 5.  Psal . 133.  & 15. 4.  & 16. 2 , 3.  Luke 19 8.  Psal . 84. 10.  

10.  When the Minister returns Thanks and Praise to God , stir up your Souls to the greatest alacrity ; and suppose you saw the Heavenly Hosts of Saints and Angels praising the same God in the presence of his Glory ; and think with yourselves , that you belong to the same Family and society as they , and are learning their work , and must shortly arrive at their perfection : Strive therefore to imitate them in Love and Joy ; and let your very souls be poured out in Praises and Thanksgiving : And when you have the next ●iesure for your private thoughts ( as when the Minister is exhorting you to your duty ) exercise your love and thanks and Faith and hope and self-denial and Resolution for future obedience , in some such breathe of your Souls as these : OH my gracious God , thou hast surpassed all human comprehension in thy Love ! Is this thy usage of unworthy prodigals ! I feared lest thy wrath as a consuming fire would have devoured such a guilty Soul ; and thou wouldst have charged upon me all my folly : But while I condemned myself , thou hast forgiven & justified me ; and surprised me with the sweetest embracements of thy love . I see now that thy thoughts are above our thoughts , and thy ways above our ways and thy love excelleth the love of man , even more than the Heavens are above the earth . With how dear a price hast thou Redeemed a wretch , that deserved thy everlasting vengeance ! with how precious and sweet a Feast hast thou entertained me , who deserved to be cast out with the workers of iniquity ! shall I ever more slight such Love as this ? shall it not overcome my Rebelliousness ; and melt down my cold and hardened heart ? shall I be saved from Hell and not be thankful ? Angels are admiring these miracles of Love ? and shall not I admire them ? Their love to us doth cause them to rejoice , while they stand by and see our Heavenly feast ? And should it not be sweeter to us that are the guests that feed upon it ? My God how dearly hast thou purchased my Love ? How strangely hast thou deserved and sought it ? Nothing is so much my grief and shame , as that I can answer such Love , with no more fervent fruitful Love. OH what an addition would it be to all this precious mercy , if thou wouldst give me a Heart to answer these thine invitations , That thy Love thus poured out , might draw forth mine , and my Soul might flame by its approaching unto these thy flames ? And that Love draw out by the sense of Love , might be all my life ? OH that I could Love thee as much as I would Love thee ? Yea as much as thou wouldst have me Love thee ? But this is too great a happiness for earth ! But thou hast showed me the place where I may attain it ! My Lord is here , in full possession : who hath left me these pledges , till he come and fetch us to himself , and feast us there in our Master's Joy ; OH blessed place ! OH happy company that see his Glory , and are filled with the streams of those Rivers of consolation ! yea happy we whom thou hast called from our dark and miserable state , and made us Heirs of that felicity , and passengers to it , and expectants of it , under the conduct of so sure a guide ! OH than we shall Love thee without these sinful pauses and defects ! in another measure , and another manner than now we do : when thou shalt reveal and communicate thy attractive Love , in another measure and manner than now ! Till then , my God , I am devoted to thee ; By right and Covenant I am thine ! My soul here beareth witness against myself , that my defects of Love have no excuse ; thou deservest all , if I had the Love of all the Saints in Heaven and Earth to give thee . What hath this world to do with my affections ? And what is this sordid corruptible flesh , that its desires and pleasures should call down my Soul , and tempt it to neglect my God ? What is there in all the sufferings that man can lay upon me , that I should not joyfully accept them for his sake , that hath Redeemed me from Hell , by such unmatched voluntary sufferings ? Lord , seeing thou regardest , and so regardest , so vile a worm , my heart , my tongue , my hand confess , that I am wholly thine . OH let me live to none but thee , and to thy service , and thy Saints on earth ! And OH let me no more return unto iniquity ! nor venture on that sin that killed my Lord ! And now thou hast chosen so low a dwelling , OH be not strange to the Heart that thou hast so freely chosen ! OH make it the daily residence of thy spirit ! Quicken it by thy grace ; adorn it with thy gifts ; employ it in thy Love , delight in its attendance on thee ; refresh it with thy joys and the light of thy countenance ; and destroy this carnality , selfishness and unbelief ; And let the World see that God will make a Palace of the lowest heart , when he chooseth it for the place of his own abode . 

Direct . 8.  When you come home , review the mercy which you have received , and the duty which you have done , and the Covenant you have made : And , 1.  Betake yourselves to God in Praise and Prayer for the perfecting of his work : And , 2 : Take heed to your hearts that they grow not cold , and that worldly things or diverting trifles , do not blot out the sacred impressions , which Christ hath made , and that they cool not quickly into their former dull and sleepy frame . 3.  And see that your Lives be actuated by the grace that you have here received , that even they that you converse with may perceive that you have been with God. Especially when Temptations would draw you again to sin ; and when the injuries of Friends or Enemies would provoke you , and when you are called to testify your Love to Christ , by any costly work or suffering ; remember then what was so lately before your eyes , and upon your heart ; and what you resolved on , and what a Covenant you made with God. Yet judge not of the fruit of your Receiving , so much by feeling , as by faith : for more is promised than you yet possess . 

Here follows the Author's solemn Resignation of himself to Father , Son and Holy Ghost . OH My God , I look to Thee , I come to Thee , to thee alone : no man , no worldly creature made me ; none of them did redeem me ; none of them did renew my soul , none of them will justify me at thy Bar , nor forgive my sin , nor save me from the penal Justice : none of them will be a full or a perpetual felicity or portion for my soul . I am not a stranger to their promises and performances : I have trusted them too far , and followed them too long ! OH that it had been lesle , ( though I must thankfully acknowledge , that Mercy did early show me their deceit , and turn my enquiring thoughts to thee : ) to thee I resign myself , for I am thine own ! to thee I subject all powers of my Soul and body , for thou art my Rightful Sovereign Governor : from thee I thankfully accept of all the benefits and comforts of my life : in thee I expect my true felicity and content : to know thee , and love thee , and delight in thee , must be my blessedness , or I must have none . The little tastes of this sweetness which my thirsty soul hath had , do tell me that there is no other real joy . I feel that thou hast made my mind to know thee , and I feel thou hast made my heart to love thee , my tongue to praise thee , and all that I am and have to serve thee ! And even in the panting languishing desires and motions of my soul , I find that thou , and only thou , art its resting place : and though Love do now but search , and pray , and cry , and weep , and in reaching upward , but cannot reach , the glorious light , the blessed knowledge , the perfect love , for which it longeth ; yet by its eye , its aim , its motions , its moans , its groans , I know its meaning , where it would be , and I know its end . My displaced soul will never be well , till it come near to thee , till it know thee better , till it love thee more . It love's itself , and justifieth that self-love , when it can love thee : it loathes itself , and is weary of itself as a lifeless burden , when it feels no pant after thee . Wert thou to be found in the most solitary desert , it would seek thee ; or in the uttermost parts of the earth , it would make after thee : thy presence makes a crowd , a Church : thy converse maketh a closet , or solitary wood or field , to be kin to the Angelical Chore. The creature were dead , if thou wert not its life ; and ugly , if thou wert not its beauty ; and insignificant , if thou wert not its sense . The soul is deformed , which is without thine Image ; and lifeless , which liveth not in love to thee , if love be not its pulse , and prayer , and praise , its constant breath : the Mind is unlearned which readeth not thy Name on all the World , and seeth not HOLINESS TO THE LORD engraven upon the face of every creature . He dotes that doubteth of thy Being or Perfections , and he dreameth who doth not live to thee . OH let me have no other portion ! no reason , no love , no life , but what is devoted to thee , employed on thee , and for thee here , and shall be perfected in thee , the only perfect final object , for evermore . Upon the holy Altar erected by thy Son , and by his hands , and his mediation , I humbly devote and offer thee THIS HEART : OH that I could say with greater feeling , This flaming , loving , longing-heart ! But the sacred fire which must kindle on my sacrifice , must come from thee ; it will not else ascend unto thee : let it consume this dross , so the nobler part may know its home . All that I can say to commend it to thine acceptance , is , that I hope it 's washed in precious blood , that there is something in it that is thine own ; it still looketh towards thee , & groaneth to thee , & followeth after thee , and will be content with gold , and mirth , and honour , and such inferior fooleries no more : it lieth at thy doors , and will be entertained or perish . Though alas , it love's thee not as it would , I boldly say , it longs to love thee , it love's to love thee ; it seeks , it craves no greater blessedness than perfect endless mutual love : it is vowed to thee , even to thee alone ; and will never take up with shadows more ; but is resolved to lie down in sorrow and despair , if thou wilt not be its REST and JOY . It hates itself for loving thee no more ; accounting no want , deformity , shame or pain so great and grievous a calamity . 

For thee the Glorious blessed GOD , it is that I come to Jesus Christ . If he did not reconcile my guilty soul to thee , and did not teach it the heavenly art and work of Love , by the sweet communications of thy love , he could be no Saviour for me . thou art my only ultimate end ; it is only a guide and way to thee that my anxious soul hath so much studied : and none can teach me rightly to know thee , & to love thee , and to live to thee , but thyself : it must be a Teacher sent from thee , that must conduct me to thee . I have long-looked round about me in the world , to see if there were a more lucid Region , from whence thy will and glory might be better seen , than that in which my lot is fallen : But no Traveller that I can speak with , no Book which I have turned over , no Creature which I can see , doth tell me more than Jesus Christ . I can find no way so suitable to my soul , no medicine so fitted to my misery , no bellowss so fit to kindle love , as faith in Christ , the Glass and Messenger of thy love . I see no doctrine so divine and heavenly , as bearing the image and superscription of God ; nor any so fully confirmed and delivered by the attestation of thy own Omnipotency ; nor any which so purely pleads thy cause , and calls the Soul from self and vanity , and condemns its sin and purifieth it , and leads it directly unto thee ; and though my former ignorance disabled me to look back to the Ages past , and to see the methods of thy providence , and when I look into thy Word , disabled me from seeing the beauteous methods of thy Truth ; thou hast given me a glimpse of clearer light , which hath discovered the reasons and methods of grace , which I then discerned not : and in the midst of my most hideous temptations and perplexed thoughts , thou kepst alive the root of faith , and kepst alive the love to thee and unto holiness which it had kindled . thou hast mercifully given me the witness in myself ; not an unreasonable persuasion in my mind , but that renewed nature , those holy and heavenly desires and delights , which sure can come from none but thee . And OH how much more have I perceived in many of thy servants , than in myself ! thou hast cast my lot among the Souls whom Christ hath healed . I have daily conversed with those whom he hath raised from the dead . I have seen the power of thy Gospel upon sinners : All the love that ever I perceived kindled towards thee , and all the true obedience that ever I saw performed to thee , hath been effected by the word of Jesus Christ : how oft hath his spirit helped me to pray ! and how often hast thou heard those prayers ! what pledges hast thou given to my staggering faith , in the works which prayer hath procured , both for myself and many others ? And if Confidence in Christ be yet deceit , must I not say that thou hast deceived me ? who I know canst neither be deceived , or by any falsehood or seduction deceive . 

On thee therefore , OH my dear Redeemer , do I cast and trust this sinful soul ! with Thee and with thy holy Spirit I renew my Covenant ; I know no other ; I have no other ; I can have no other Saviour but thyself : To thee I deliver up this soul which thou hast redeemed , not to be advanced to the wealth , and honours , and pleasures of this world ; but to be delivered from them , and to be healed of sin , and brought to God ; and to be saved from this present evil world , which is the portion of the ungodly and unbelievers : to be washed in thy Blood , and illuminated , quickened and confirmed by thy SPIRIT ; and conducted in the ways of holiness and love : and at last to be presented justified and spotless to the Father of spirits , and possessed of the glory which thou hast promised . OH thou that hast prepared so dear a medicine for the cleansing of polluted guilty souls , leave not this unworthy soul in its guilt , or in its pollution ! OH thou that knowest the Father , and his Will , and art nearest to him , and most beloved of him , cause me in my degree to know the Father ; acquaint me with so much of his will , as concerneth my duty , or my just encouragement : leave not my soul to grope in darkness , seeing thou art the Sun and Lord of Light. OH heal my estranged thoughts of God is he my light , and life , and all my hope ? and must I dwell with him for ever ? and yet shall I know him no better than thus ? shall I learn no more that have such a Teacher ? and shall I get no nearer him , while I have a Saviour and a Head so near ? OH give my faith a clearer prospect into that better world ! and let me not be so much unacquainted with the place in which I must abide for ever ! And as thou hast prepared a Heaven for holy souls , prepare this too-unprepared soul for Heaven , which hath not long to stay on earth . And when at death I resign it into thy hands , receive it as thine own , and finish the Work which thou hast begun , in placing it among the blessed Spirits , who are filled with the sight and love of God. I trust thee living ; let me trust thee dying , and never be ashamed of my trust . 

And unto Thee , the Eternal Holy Spirit , proceeding from the Father and the Son , the Communicative LOVE , who condescendest to make Perfect the Elect of God , do I deliver up this dark imperfect soul , to be further renewed , confirmed and perfected , according to the holy Covenant . Refuse not to bless it with thine indwelling and operations ; quicken it with thy life ; irradiate it by thy light ; sanctify it by thy love ; actuate it purely , powerfully and constantly by thy holy motions . And though the way of this thy sacred influx be beyond the reach of human apprehension ; yet let me know the reality and saving power of it , by the happy effects . thou art more to souls , than souls to bodies , than light to the eyes . OH leave not my soul as a carrion destitute of thy life ; nor its eyes as useless , destitute of thy light ; nor leave it as a senseless block without thy motion . The remembeance of what I was without thee , doth make me fear lest thou shouldst withhold thy grace . Alas , I feel , I daily feel that I am dead to all good , and all that 's good is dead to me , if thou be not the life of all . Teaching and reproofs , mercies and corrections , yea , the Gospel itself , and all the liveliest Books and Sermons , are dead to me , because I am dead to them : yea , God is as no God to me , and Heaven as no Heaven , and Christ as no Christ , and the clearest evidences of Scripture verity are as no proofs at all , if thou represent them not with light and power to my soul : Even as all the glory of the world is as nothing to me without the light by which it 's seen . OH thou that hast begun , and given me those heavenly intimations and desires , which flesh and blood could never give me , suffer not my folly to quench these sparks , nor this brutish flesh to prevail against thee , nor the powers of hell to stifle and kill such a heavenly seed . OH pardon that folly and wilfulness , which hath too often , too obdurately and too unthankfully striven against thy grace ; and departed not from an unkind and sinful soul ! I remember with grief and shame , how I wilfully bore down thy motions ; punish it not with desertion , and give me not over to myself . Art thou not in Covenant with me , as my Sanctifier , and Confirmer , and Comforter ? I never undertaken to do these things for myself ; but I consent that thou shouldst work them on me . As thou art the Agent and Advocate of Jesus my Lord , OH pled his cause effectually in my soul , against the suggestions of Satan and my unbelief ; and finish his healing saving work ; and let not the flesh or world prevail . Be in me the resident witness of my Lord , the Author of my prayers , the Spirit of Adoption , the Seal of God , and the earnest of mine inheritance . Let not my nights be so long , and my days so short , nor sin eclipse those beams , which have often illuminared my soul . Without thee , Books are senseless scrawls , studies are dreams , learning is a Glow-worm , and wit is but wantonness , impertinency and folly . Transcribe those sacred precepts on my heart , which by thy dictates and inspiration are recorded in thy holy word . I refuse not thy help for tears and groans : but OH shed abroad that love upon my heart , which may keep it in a continual life of love . And teach me the work which I must do in Heaven : refresh my soul with the delights of holiness , & the joys which arise from the believing hopes of the everlasting joys : Exercise my heart and tongue in the holy praises of my Lord Strengthen me in sufferings ; and conquer the terrors of Death and Hell. Make me the more heavenly , by how much the faster I am hastening to Heaven : and let my last thoughts , words and works on earth , be likest to those which shall be my first in the state of glorious immortality ; where the Kingdom is delivered up to the Father , and GOD will for ever be All , and In all : of whom , and through whom , and to whom are all things , To whom be glory for ever . 

Amen . A Pathetical Meditation on the Passion of Christ ; to be read by Communicants before their reception of the Sacrament of the Lords-supper . Quest . What is the Sacrament of the Lords-supper ? 

Answ . It consists of two visible signs , Bread and Wine , which by the Lord's appointment was to represent to the receiver his bloody death , that so his Disciples may keep it fresh in their memories . 

Q. But is it only to remember that there was a Christ , and that he was crucified , and no more ? 

Answ . Experience tells us that such a bare remembrance as that , doth little move upon the heart and upon the affections , and so will do little or no good . It is not the remembrance of any man's death that doth of itself affect me , but as I consider him as a Father , or as a Husband , or as a Friend , with many other expressions of his love to me when living , this will exceedingly work upon the heart , so as to cause sorrow and grief , and the like . 

Quest . What is it then that I must call to mind when I think upon a bleeding and dying Christ , so as to affect my heart ? 

Answ . The cruel and bloody nature of his Death ; here you may consider the whole story of his Arraignment , his being betrayed by his own Apostle , his being spit upon and crowned with thorns , his being mocked and jeered by putting a reed into his hand instead of a sceptre , afterwards his bearing of a Cross , and his being nailed to it in his hands and feet ; after that , his being pierced through with a sp●ar ; this Mat. 27. will fully acquaint you with . Secondly , the causes of his Death ; it was no natural disease , neither was it for any evil done of his own , but for us , He bore our iniquities upon the cross . Thirdly , the effects of his death , which was to obtain power of his Father to conquer the Devil , and pull us out of his hands ; to break our hearts , and to conquer us to himself , to pardon our sins , and to give unto us eternal life with himself in glory , and this upon our faith and sincere repentance . Now from all these things are your Meditations to be raised , before you come to this Sacrament , and when you are receiving of it . 

An Example of Meditation I have here set you down as followeth . 

Away these wanton wandering worldly thoughts , you are clogs to my soul . Away all trifling worldly business , I cannot now attend your call , my heart hath now something else to do . Adieu my Friends , farewell my Husband , Wife and Child , I must go see my bleeding Lord , that 's dearer to me than you all . Come now my soul , thou art alone , thou knowest the way make haste and seed ; look yonder , see how the people flock ; cross but this vale , and climb but up this mount , thou wilt soon arrive at bloody Golgotha , where thou shalt see thy bleeding and dying Siviour to sigh and linger out a dying life on the Cross in love for thee . This , this might , O my Soul , have been thy day , and thou mightst have been the prisoner ; this I say might have been the day in which thou mightst have drunk the bitter cup of the fierce anger of God. But look yonder ! there he goes that must drink up the dregss , and all for thee . Look again ! there he goes that must lay down his life that thou mayst be reprieved . But come , my soul , draw up a little nearer , thou canst not see him well at so great a distance ; stand here and thou wilt see him passing ; look , there he goes with a train of Virgins following . But see how cruelly these barbarous Jews do use him , they make him bear his Cross himself , and press his wearied fainting limbs above his strength ; see how they laugh and scoff , and wag their heads as if he were their May-game . Methinks my heart boils up with rage to see these cruelties revenged : Oh! how could the blessed God forbear to see his blessed Son thus wronged ? Why did he not send twelve Legions of Angels for his rescue ? Why doth he not send down fire from Heaven upon the heads of these his Sons enemies , and so consume them ? But stay my foolish heart , thou knowest not what spirit thou art of ; this debt was owing , and it must be paid ; God requires so much , and it must be given , or thou canst not be saved . Thy Lord did know this well enough , for this he came from Heaven , and committed himself to the rage of men ; he knew he must endure all these revile , and doth it grieve thy soul to see him thus abased ? Stay but a while , and thou shalt see him more ; look up , my soul , come , tell me what thou seest ? O I cannot , sorrow ties my tongue , I cannot speak ; I see and hear those things that I want a power to utter . I see a troop of Virgins following him , their weeping Eyes , their blubbering lips , their sighs and throbbing speak them mourners . I see my Lord looks towards them , and kindly chides their loving sorrow , Why weep ye , O ye Daughters of Jerusalem ? weep not for me . My Lord ! what need was there for that question ? Should not they weep when thou must bleed ? Would not their eyes have been flints if that then they should not drop tears for thee , when as thou wert about to pour out thy life and blood for them ? Ah! could they choose , or do lesle than weep to see thine innocent self among a herd of Tigers ! what should a Lamb do there ? they saw thee in their ravenous jaws about to tear thy heart , to suck out all thy blood , and leave thee dead . Have I not sat and read , and read and wept viewing over the story ; and could they forbear that with their watery eyes saw this scene then acted ? But whither , OH whither , OH ye blinded Jews , are ye dragging this my Lord ? My spirit begins to faint , I now can look no longer , my heart now begins to swell with grief , it must now break , or I must vent it at mine eyes in streams ! Look ! see the Hammer and Nails , the Hammer lift up to strike . Bloody man ! thou durst not sure ; surely thou dost not know whose hands and feet thou art now piercing ; it is the Prince and Saviour of the World Foolish heart ! see how thou art mistaken ; look , see it 's done , the nails are driven to the head ! see how the crimson tears run trickling down his hands and feet , and see how hardened hearts be laughing at it ! O silly foolish blinded men ! what laugh you at ? This very Christ whom now you mock , shall be your Judge ; this very man Jesus whom you have thus abused shall come attended with thousands of Angels , with the sound of Trumpets , and shall sit upon your life and death . Him whom you now have nailed to a Cross , hath God exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour . What then will you do when that great and terrible day of the Lord shall come ? How will you look him in the face whom you have spit on ? How will you dare to speak a word for yourselves to him whom you have nailed to a tree and crucified ? His wounds in hands , side and feet shall all bear witness against you , and his innocent blood that you have spilt shall cry aloud about the throne for vengeance against you ; your flouts shall then be turned into tears , and your taunts into lamentations . And how will you then look and cry when God passeth sentence on you , and thrusts you down to Hell to bear the punishment of your sins ? this is the Lord that came to spare your lives , yet your wickedness spared not his ; and how at length can you think to escape with yours ? 

But once again , look up my soul , and see what is become of thy nailed and crucified Lord : Ah me ! he is not quite dead , look how he gasps and pants for life ! O how his looks are changed ! How pale and wan do I see his cheeks ! the blood and all the spirits are quite drawn from them . Methinks he should be dead , for see how weak his neck is grown , that it is not able to support his head that lies a dying on his bleeding breast . What yet not dead ! see how he shakes and stirs his dying limbs ! what gasps and groans do I hear him fetch , as if his soul were struggling to get out ? Hark , hark , he speaks ! O let me catch the least breath of my dying Saviour . What saith my Lord ? Hark , what dost thou not hear ! What ? My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ? I am amazed to hear these words . How couldst thou suspect thy Father's love ? How could he be far from thee , who was one with thyself ? But Oh! this is but the voice of his Manhood , and not of his Godhead . It was the voice of the dying and bleeding Man Jesus , not the voice of the God Jesus . 

But , O my Lord , what are those pains and gripe's thou feelest , that brings forth these complain ? But why do I ask this question ? hath he not been all this while a drinking up the cup his Father gave him , the bitter , and sour , and poisonous cup of his Father's wrath , which I and all the world had else drunk of ? he just now swallowed down the last mouthful of the dregss , whose bitter noisome taste hath sent forth these doleful lamentations ; for mark , he had no sooner spoke these words , but he gasped his last . 

The causes of his Death . 

And must the Son of God be humbled thus ? must he that was from everlasting , raised and advanced above every man in heaven and earth ; he that lay in the arms and breast of God , loved by the Father , and his only Son ; honoured , adored , admired and beloved of ten thousand times ten thousands of Angels ; But must this God leave all this glory , and change that sweet Heavenly and delightsome Palace for so mean , so low , so dirty a cottage , as to be born a man And must his entertainment at first be no better than a stable or a manger could give him ? no sooner must he begin to live , but must an enemy assault his life ? Must he travel up and down the earth , and spend his time and strength in preaching glad tidings to miserable undone men , and fill the world with signs and wonders , and not deserve so much of men as a house to dwell in , or a hole to put his head in ? and after all this humble , holy , long-suffering life , must he be thought of by this unthankful and unbelieving world as one not worthy to live , and not have a breathing in that air which he both made and gave them to breath in ? but must he at length be laid hold of by a traitorous Judas that he had once taken for one of his Apostles ; & must he suffer all this ? But ah ! alas ! what is this ? must he be also crowned with thorns , and must he sweated and bleed ? O far more than tongue can utter ! O astonishing condescension ! thus did the Son become a servant , and learned obedience by his sufferings , and served three and thirty year's apprenticeship in the pain and travel of his soul here on earth , a longer time than Jacob served for his beloved Rachel , & that because he loved us better , and therefore gave a better dowry for us . But had I lived to have seen this Prince of Glory thus disguised , this Eastern Sun thus benighted in a cloud , this Glorious God thus wraped up in rags of flesh , should I have known him , or not ? my sensual heart , I doubt thee much ; wouldst thou have cleaved to him and loved him better than thy life , and have said , Though all leave thee , I will not ; and with Paul , I am willing and ready not only to be bound , but to die for thee . What thinkest thou , O my soul ! couldst thou have left Husband , Wife , Father and Mother , and all the rest of thy Friends , and have sold all that thou hast , and followed him , what him whom the Prophet foretold ? Isa . 53. 23.  He hath no form or comeliness in him , that you should desire him : he is despised and rejected of men , a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs . Tell me , tell me , couldst thou have divorced thyself from all , and have taken this seemingly uncomely person for thy Lord , and only Husband ? Ah me ! I do not know my heart ; but surely , had I known him as I do now know him , I should not have stuck at any thing for him . For what if his Face did want comeliness , seeing it came so with tears and grief for thee ? and wilt thou love thy friend the worse , because he shares in sorrow with thee ? for thou canst not but know that he came from Heaven to take to himself a Spouse on Earth ; and if I was one that he loved , and grieved for to see my stubborn heart so hard to yield , was this the cause he wanted beauty ? On such a want as this is lovely , and me thinks my heart could have cleaved the closer to him , There was no beauty or comeliness in him , and what of that ? my ugly and deformed soul deserves more loathing ; my righteousness , the comeliest part about me is but rags , or a menstruous cloth ; if there were no more desirableness in him than in me , O had I loved him then , and left all for him , it were no wonder : but that he should love me , I rather stand amazed ! There was no beauty in him , it may be so ; but could it be otherwise expected from him who came to work in fire and smoke , who came to quench the Flames of Hell , and to satisfy God's wrath and justice ? to pull out filthy souls from the jaws of lustful sensual flesh and blood ? it was not beauty but strength that was here needful . A glance of an amorous eye would not have wounded Satan , and made him fall from Heaven like a flash of Lightning . A comely countenance could not have enchanted and unbared Hell gates , and made them fall , and break before him into shatters . What need a fair hand to touch our filthy rotten souls , and 〈◊〉 them up in menstruous blood , and wash 〈◊〉 clean ; or what need such clean hands to 〈◊〉 about the rusty iron gates wherein I 〈…〉 world lay bound in chains , and to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 down , to take our cankered bolts and 〈◊〉 them off ; to take us by the hand to 〈…〉 up , and lead us out ? Alas ! there needs no such eye , face , or hand for such a work . It is powerful , all-conquering strength that is here required . It was a powerful victorious arm that here was needed , and such a one he had . But what should he do with a beauteous body that must be so abased and abused as his was ? an uncomely face will serve where it must be spit on . What must he do with a fair soft delicate hand , which must be pierced ; another kind of hand is good enough to knock a nail into . And what needs his body be of a clear , white , thin , transparent skin ? will not any serve that body that must be bruised and wounded as his was ; nay , as it was necessary his should be ? But why thus necessary ? either he must be thus dealt with , or else my sin cannot be pardoned . Either he must be despised of men , or I must be of God. Oh! he must drink up this bitter cup with all its dregss , or else I must have drunk it up myself . It was I that sinned , and I must have suffered : this cursed , proud and earthly heart of mine rebelled and broke the Laws , and should have suffered and born the punishment ; had not he stepped in and born the stroke off from me , I had been now burning in everlasting flames , and have been linger out this time in torment , which I am now spending in the sweet thoughts of my escape . And is not this all true ? speak out , my Soul ; hath not the Prophet said as much ? Surely ( saith he ) he hath born our griefs , and carried our sorrows : he was wounded for our transgressions , he was bruised for our iniquities , the chastisement of our peace lay upon him , and by his stripes we are healed . All we like sheep are gone astray , we are every one turned to his one way , and the Lord hath laid upon him the iniquities of us all . He was oppressed , he was afflicted , yet he opened not his mouth ; he was brought as a lamb to the slaughter , and as a sheep before the shearers was dumb , so he opened not his mouth . He was taken from prison and judgement , and who shall declare his generation ? for he was cut off from the land of the living . And for the transgression of my people was he smitten . thou feest thy debt , and thy Saviour's payment of it ; these are no fictions ; thou hast just now read a sure word of Prophecy that hath confirmed it . Those wounds , those stripes , those bruises which thou readest of , he bore for thee , and which were due to thee . It was thou that shouldst have been led from prison to judgement , from prison to the Judgment-seat of the great God , who should have sat as Judge ; he should have arraigned thee , sentenced thee , and have sent thee to the slaughter-house of Hell , where thou shouldst have been weeping , and wailing , and gnashing of thy teeth . But O amazing love and grace ! the Son of God that loved me better than his life , stepped off his Throne and took my nature on him , and became a man like to me ( only sin excepted ) he came and bid me comfort my trembling heart , he would put himself in my condition , and become the prisoner ; and if my sin would cost his life , he would freely part with it . Methinks I feel my bowels turn , my spirits melt within me ; was ever love like to his love ? he was a stranger to me : why did he not let me die ? It was his Father I did wrong , why did he not let me suffer ? What if my punishment was as great as Hell ? surely I did deserve it . What if my pains and screeches were eternal ? Ah! I was a creature , a worm , a fly , a nothing to him , and what need he have cared ? but he loved me ; and could he love a prisoner at the Bar ? I was a sinner , a vile polluted one , methinks he should have loathed me ; but he did wash thee , and make thee clean again . Aye , but I was his Father's enemy , and so no friend to him ; or would he love an enemy ? or did he not know so much ? but how could that be when he saw my heart , and the enmity that was in it ? yes , he did , and yet he loved thee ; even while we were enemies he died for us . But why did he love an enemy ? or how could he do it ? I know not why , it is passed my reason to imagine it : O inexpressible love ! O love past thought ! I cannot fathom thee with my reason , thy ways are unaccountable ; he love's because he will love . And though his love displeaseth us , yet it pleaseth him to love us . What ails my heart ? I cannot find it stir ? What , dead under the reviving thoughts of thy dearest Redeemer ! I just now said , he loved thee though an enemy , and when thou lovedst not him ; I see the enmity is not quite removed , thou canst not love him yet : Arise , shake up thyself , and look about thee , thou dost not sure see thy mercy ; surely thou understandest not what thou oughtest to understand . Come away , O come away , lift up thy drowsy head , I will make thee look and love , while I set thee all on burning , and make thee ere I leave thee confess thou lovest him . Think , think , O my soul , that thou hadst just now sinned and broke that law which threatened death , and upon the breach doth find thee guilty . Think that thou sawest a flaming Cherubin , a messenger of the Court of Heaven flirt in at that door and arrest thee for High treason and give thee a summons to rise from the seat thou sittest on , to make a sudden answer for thy life . Look then , my soul , Ah! I looked just now , I see that door wide open : what 's this a spirit ? Ah me , I am undone , for I have sinned ! I think the room shakes under me , or else 't is my heart that 's trembling . what 's this I hear ! I must now answer for my life : OH what shall I say ! I know not what ; I have sinned , my Conscience tells me that I have sinned , the witness within will cast me , I see the Indictment written with blood on my heart ; the pride , sensuality , and the earthliness of which I am charged with , I am not able to deny one tittle . O for a mountain to cover me : O whither shall I go , whither shall I fly ? That Bed , these Curtains , this closet cannot hide me . My Mother , Father , Wife or Child , can not help me : OH who then shall ? I run , whither , I know not ; vengeance will find me out where ever I go . O cursed and subtle Satan ! are all thy fair promises and enticements come to this ! OH my wicked cursed foolish heart ! that ever I should believe him before my Creator , that told me , the day I sinned I should surely die . O that for a little simple transient pleasure I should so madly hazard my eternal life and now I must be cast to Hell to bear the punishment of my folly . Think once again , think that this were the day , and this the very place in which God should come and sit in Judgement on thee . Methinks I see the Heavens bow themselves : O what a crackling do I hear in the Clouds ; look yonder ! see who comes ! it is my Judge ; his countenance is as a flame of fire , he utters his voice like Thunder , the mountains skip , or rather shake , or rather tremble . Now , now , is the time of my utter destruction near at hand . O how shall I look him in the face ! his looks do already affright me ! I shall not say one word , and I have not one Friend that will say one word for me . it 's true , I see a terrible glorious Troop of Angels that do attend him , but they are all his friends , and therefore all my enemies : I dare not speak a word to them ; and alas ! if I should , they are all but his servants , and fellow-creatures with myself ; alas ! they cannot , yea they will not help me . it 's true , there is one , that one that seems as one with God , the beams of whose countenance are far brighter than all the Host of Heaven : Besides , if God have a Son , it may be it is he ; methinks he is a mirror of his Father's Glory ; but this I know not ; be what he will , he cannot pity me a sinner , the doors of hope are all shut up , and now as a miserable wretch I must prepare to hear my sentence ; the Judge is set , and with trembling heart and joints I stand a prisoner at the Bar for my life , and now I must attend his call . 

God speaks , ] Sinner , where art thou ? 



The Sinner answers ] Lord , here am I  



God speaks ] How darest thou thus abuse 〈◊〉 Grace , and kindle up my zeal against 〈◊〉 that now as stubble it will cons 〈…〉 this the thanks that thou 〈…〉 all the love that I have should 〈…〉 Must I make a whole world and 〈◊〉 it to thee , and as if that was to 〈…〉 , I bid thee freely take myself and all , and would not this content thee ? Was I not as a Father to thee , the time thou lovedst me , and didst obey me ? Did I not make thy seat a Paradise , and strewed thy paths with pleasure ? Did I not rejoice over thee as a young man over his bride ? What evil hast thou found in me , that thou shouldst thus rebelliously revolt and break my Laws , and for a trifle sell my favour , and hazard my Eternal pleasures ? Speak sinner , was it not so ? 



The sinner answers ] My God , these weeping eyes and bent knees confess so much . 



God speaks ] Had I not told thee that sin would cost thee thy life , than thou hadst had some excuse : have I said it , and will the great God change ? sinner , thou must die ; I told thee so before , and now I tell thee again , the God of Heaven cannot lie . Get thee gone thou cursed wretch into eternal flames , and keep that Devil company in chains and torments , with whom thou hast rebelled against me , and go see what pleasures thou hast in sinning . 



The Sinner answereth ] thou great God and terrible Judge ; I do confess thy sentence just ; but if there be any powells of mercy in thee , pity me , or I die for ever . Mercy , mercy , Lord ! for I am thy creature , the workmanship of thy hands . If there be any thing in the trembling heart and hands , and knees of this thy sentenced prisoner , that will move compassion , OH pity , pity a condemned sinner . 



God speaks . ] What! stays he longer to trouble my patience ! I say , be gone thou cursed ; though thou art my creature , know that my wrath hath kindled on better creatures than thou art ; get thee to Hell , and the howling Devils will tell thee as much . 



The sinner speaks ] Ah , woe , wo , wo to me , for ever cursed I am , and cursed must I go for ever , My righteous Judge , and ye Glorious Angels adieu for ever : Live , live for ever blessed and happy in his love ; I might have lived , and joyed , and gloried in that God that made both ye and me ; but like a wretch that I am , woe that ever I was born , I sold his favour , and so my eternal life , for a thing of naught , a vain lust , a sinful pleasure that lasted but for a season , and I go , I go into eternal flames . What says my heart to this Methinks the very thoughts of it do make my heart to quiver , and my flesh to shake all round about me ; I feel no strength in all my joints . 



God speaks ] So , so , I am glad something moves thee . 

But think again , that the Devil did take hold of thee , and drag thee from the place thou fittest on , to Hell ; suppose the Father frowning on thee , and all the Angels shouting thee down to Hell , and glorying in thy damnation ; but think again thou sawest when all were joying to see thee sentenced to Hell , that he that sat just by the Judge , whom thou thoughtest even now to be his Son , but knewest it not . Look ! look ! methings I see him rise off his Throne ; see , see , how the Angels fall to adore him , methinks he is a coming near thee . O how my heart doth tremble : O what will he torment me before my time ! Ah me ! my doom is great enough already . 



Sinner speaks ] thou wilt not send me to a worse place than Hell ; my Judge hath passed my sentence , thou canst not send me into worse than flames , or punish me longer than everlastingly . 



Christ answers . ] O how my bowels turn ! this sinner knows not what is in my heart ; he thinks I am his enemy . Sinner , shake off thy tears , and wipe thine eyes , thou shalt not die . 



The sinner speaks again . ] O thou glorious God or Angel , or I know not what to call thee , do not delude or deride a poor Caitiff wretch in the midst of misery : Why wilt thou raise me to such a pinnacle of hope , to cast me down , and make my fall the greater ? My Judge hath passed the sentence , I must die ; and who can reverse the doom ? Ah! I must go ; see my prison-door wide open ; the smoke and flashes come to meet my despairing soul half way . 



Christ speaks ] And now my heart begins to break , my love can keep no longer in ; how causelessly doth this wretch torment his heart ! he knows not who I am : I must reveal myself . Sinner , I love thee ; I say thou shalt not die : Come , feel my heart and pulse how they beaten , and tell how strong my love within doth act them ; Dost thou not fee I have left my Throne , and am come down to the Bar where thou standest condemned ? But why dost thou weep ? Come , let me wipe thine eyes , and bind up thy bleeding and despairing heart : I tell thee thou shalt not die : If Heaven will have blood , it shall have mine , so it will but spare thine . Sinner , if thou knewest who I am , thou wouldst not doubt one tittle : I tell thee I am his Son , his only Son , that but now condemned thee : I know he is just , and justice must be satisfied . But do not thou fear , if one of us must die , it shall be I : I will pour out my blood a sacrifice for sin , and appease his wrath , and make you friends again . ye innumerable company of Angels , ( yet servants at my Father will ) why do ye rejoice to see my prisoner sent to Hell ? this cursed soul over whom in glory you do now triumph , I do resolve to die for , and to buy her to myself a Spouse , and to make her blessed with yourselves , and give her a Princes' place on a Throne that is by myself . 



Sinner speaks ] Is this a dream ! or am I waking ? the goodness , greatness , glory of this sudden unexpected blessed change , tempts me to doubt whether it be true , or whether it be some unruly fancy that doth delude this wretched heart of mine ? What for the Son of God to debase himself so low as to take my nature , & so my cause , and become the prisoner ! What! and though he knows he shall be cast ! Will he hear the sentence , and quietly bear bolts , and shackles , and chains , which should have fettered me ? Yet more than this , Doth he know it is impossible to get a reprieve from his Father and judge ? and that he must most assuredly drink the bitterest dregss of Death , more bitter than Devils or damned Souls in Hell has yet ever tasted of ? For it is impossible the Cup should pass : And can he , will he , dare he venture ? But stay , I must be a Spouse ! to be exalted from this Dunghill to be a Princess to the Son and Heir of Glory ! Hold , hold , here 's enugh , it is a dream , an idle fancy of a distempered brain ; I shall never find a heart to believe one Syllable . But yet , methinks , if it be a dream , 't is a Golden one . Is it possible that such a damned wretch as I , could harbour such silken gilded thoughts of such love , grace , mercy and tenderness of the Son of God ? O my heart ! if they were not true , how came they into my mind , or how came they to stay ? or could they , if but mere fictions , make such a change in my heart ? could they so victoriously conquer all my fear , silence all my doubts , alloy the heats of a scorched and be-helled Conscience ? But why a dream , poor wretched heart ? Didst thou not see him step off his Throne ? Was it a time to dream or sleep in , when thou wert before the judgment-seat , while God was frowning , and the Devils dragging thee to and from to get thee away to Hell ? OH then , just then , he stepped down , drew near and took thee by the hand , and spoke these reviving words to thee : Doubt this , and doubt thy judgement . But why a dream ? I am not now in Hell's torments , whither I was just now sentenced : My heart is now at ease and quiet ; surely something must be the reason why the Devil that but now had hold of me , hath left me . Where is the Conscience that but now was burning in me ; But O , cannot the presence of the Lord put me out of doubt ? Do not his words that were so kind , his tender dealing with me , doth not his stooping to me , taking me by the arm , and the gentle lists that he gives to my drooping soul , speak him present ? Oh! do not my head , eyes , arms , heart , breast , and the case of every joint and limb about me , witness the same ? Away my unbelieving heart , what a stir is here to make thee believe a thing so evident ? Doubt my mind , and freely doubt , I 'll give thee leave , when thou hast any occasion or reason for it . But why should I doubt that which is past all doubt ? May I not believe my senses ? I both saw and heard him speak the words ; or shall I misdoubt his faithfulness ? I know he is the Son of God he cannot lie , but it is true ? yet , my God , I pray thee be not angry with my scrupulous heart ; thou seest in tears I make the doubt , let it be an argument to me of sincerity : I do not ask that question as one that would be fain persuaded its true : Canst thou think , my Lord , that I would not be reconciled , and cheerfully accept of Grace when thou so freely offeredst it ? OH but Lord , speak these words to my heart which thou hast already spoken to my ear , and thou wilt melt it into love and thankfulness , and I shall never doubt it more . 



Object . But yet , but what can Heaven love so much ? 

Answ . thou silly worm ! how idly dost thou question ? must Heaven , and so its love , be bound up to so narrow and contracted thoughts as thine are ? What , can God love no more than thou canst ? Love is a perfection , and God is infinitely perfect , so must be infinitely and incomprehensively loving . thou fool , go sound the Sea , and tell me its greatest depths ; give me the height of yonder Stars , this possibly thou mayst do ; for the Seas are not so deep but they have a bottom , nor the Stars so high , but they may by art be known . But , O the heights , and depths , and breadths , and lengths of the love of our Redeemer ! He is God , and his breasts are so full of love , that they flow and overflow with love ; they have no bottom . Do but try , my soul , cast thyself into this bottomless lovely Ocean , into this endless Bosom ; and when thou hast been sinking million of million of years , tell me whether you come to ground . ye glorious Angels , and ye blessed Spirits of just men made perfect , that live above , you that have been wading downward these five thousands of years , do ye feel a bottom ? or are ye near one ? Away , away , my foolish heart ; if this be all thou hast to pled , he may redeem thee , and take thee for his Spouse , and betrothe thee to himself , notwithstanding all this . 

Object . But O this filthy loathsome fleshly self , this base unthankful earthly heart , that can prefer a dunghill , dross , and dirt , before him that can freely lay out his love to a creature like myself : But O how hard , and stiff , and unrelenting am I to my God. But O he will slight me , because I have often put him off , and slighted him ; he cannot love and die for such a one as I am . 

Answ . Cease , fool , thy reasoning ; he cannot love an enemy , because thou canst not ; he cannot die , because thy cowardly heart will not suffer thee ! Why should he fear the grave , that had power over it ? And what though thou art unworthy of his love , if he will have thee and make thee worthy ? Thy heart is base , and what of that , if he will mend it ? thy filthy rotten and polluted soul he intends to wash and cleanse it till it is without spot and wrinkle , or any such thing . Thy stubborn proud earthly and lustful heart , he can make humble , tender , soft and yielding . And when he hath made thee as he would , why may not he take thee to himself , and lay thee next his heart , and delight over thee everlastingly ? 

Object . But will his Father yield to this ? I am too poor a match for the Son and heir of all things : But will he , can he suffer his Son to die to buy such a beggarly thing to himself as I am ? 

Answ . A way these silly simple childish thoughts ; how like an inhabitant of this earthly sensual world dost thou reason ? thou wilt not under-match , and therefore will not God his Son ? thou fool , thou wilt not because thou canst find another equal . But dost thou not know that God can find none equal to his Son ; he must stoop , or else go without . it 's true , he might have gone without , but what if he would not , why should not Heaven have its will as well as thou ? thou hast no dowry , and he doth need none , and yet thou arguest as if Heaven would make traffic with his Son and his love , as we silly worms do here ; but we are beggars , and so are Angels , and all the glorious Hosts above , they are his Creatures , hang and depend upon him , and cannot subsist one moment happy without suplies and helps of his Grace ; and why may he not bring a beggarly man as near to himself , as a beggarly Angel , if so it pleaseth him ? 

Object . But doth it so please him ? 

Answ . How often have I told thee it doth please him and hast thou not believed ? Come , if thy hearing will will not satisfy , let thy seeing do it . Look , if thou hast eyes . Come tell me , doth not Heaven look as though it was pleased with the offer of his Son ? What cloud or darkness dost thou see about the Throne ? What sign or token of displeasure canst thou at all discover ? Open thine eyes , view the God of Glory . Do his looks bespeak him to be thy Father or thy Judge ? And canst thou not be read both Husband , Father and Lord , and all in his countenance ? What not see it ! surely thou art blind : If he had not told as much from his own mouth , his eyes and looks bespeak his love and favour loud and clear enough to thee . But doth he not tell thee , to put thee out of all doubt , this is my wellbeloved Son , hear him , hear him : what 's that ? believe him whatsoever he says , why , what saith he ? OH dull and stupid heart ! hast thou forgot already ! He said he will pay his life for thine ; and doth not his Father bid thee hear him ? He said he would reconcile thee , love thee , and make thee friends again ; And is it not comfort when the Father bids thee believe him : he said , he will pardon , wash and cleanse thee , and take thee to himself , & betrothe thee to him for ever , and after all will give thee to see his Glory , even the same Glory which he had before the World. And the Father is willing to all this , for he tells thee his Son , is his wellbeloved Son , and bids thee believe him , and misdoubt not one syllable . And canst thou after all this doubt that the Father is not willing ? But do not his Angels likewise , who are ministering spirits , with voice and looks proclaim as much , that Heaven is well-pleased with the Son , and with his Death and Passion , and so with thee in him ? Do not the Angels admire the mystery of Redeeming Grace , that makes them so desirous to peep into it ? Why did they proclaim his coming into the World , and sing for joy that there was good will in Heaven to men on earth ? or why do they so diligently attend thee by night and day ? thou seest them not keep guard about thy Chamber-door , and round about the Curtains of thy bed . Why do they attend thee from room to room , and follow thee down stairs , and out of doors , if it were not but that thou art some great Princess , nearly allied to their Lord and Master ? thou dost not see this , blame then thine eyes , and the infidelity of thy heart ; shall it be lesle true , because thy base infidelity cannot digest it ? thou might doubt God , Heaven , and every thing else on that score ; but hast thou not it from his own mouth , that the Angels are ministering spirits for the heirs of Glory ? Come , tell me , I say , tell me quickly , I must have an answer , Can this , and all this be true , and Heaven yet not be pleased ? If God with his Son and Angels be all content that thou shouldst be restored , and so exalted to such dignities as to be heir unto the Crown of Heaven ; if these be pleased , who is there in Heaven that can else be displeased ? What saith my heart ? what not yet one word ? O how long shall I be troubled and pestered with my unbelief ! O my God , strike , chide , and break this flint , reprove this stubborn and unbelieving heart , I cannot persuade it that thou lovest me , or art willing to love me : I urge thy word , and my best reason to prove it , but I cannot make it yield . O break , I pray thee , this Flint or Adamant upon thy downy breast of love ; strike , and one blow of thine will make it fall in pieces , and confess at length that thou art well pleased with thy Son , and fully satisfied that he should bleed and die for me . But let me try thee once again , if thou hast lost thine ears and eyes ; I 'll see if thou hast lost thy feeling too . thou sayst thou canst not believe that God is willing to accept the Son for thee , or that thou so vile a wretch canst be accepted of by the Father through the merits of his Death and sufferings . Come , tell me , is not this thy language ? I know thou darest not to speak so much in words . But ah ! my Heart , I find thou hast got a Tongue as well as my Mouth , that often mutters and speaks a different language . But tell me if thy unbelief hath any ground for it ? What makes it then that thyself is so free from fears and terrors , when thou shouldst believe the Almighty , of thy Body's Death , Resurrection , and coming to Judgement , if thou thoughtest him not thy friend , and reconciled to thee in his Son ? if not , methinks thy fears should fright thee , and trembling seize on every joint ; and yet thou wilt foolishly mutter against thine own feeling . 

Soul Speaks ] OH blessed God I feel thou hast overcome ; I yield , I yield , I have not left a word to speak against thy love ; thy Son hath offered satisfaction , and thou hast accepted it ; thou hast laid down , OH my Saviour , thy life for mine ; and thy Father and my Father is well pleased with it : Blood is paid , Justice is satisfied , Heavens doors are widened , thine arms opened to receive me ; nothing is wanting but by heart ; make it such as thou wilt have it , and then take it to thyself . Come up , my soul , thou hast an heart , and there is a Christ ; the Father thou seest is willing , and the Son is willing , give but thy consent , and he is thine for ever . Fear not thy hardness , blindness , deadness , loathsomeness , all these cannot hinder , if thou be but willing . He hath been in the world to ask the world's consent already , and also thine ; thou canst not doubt of his goodwill ; speak but the word , and he hath thine too . What stickest thou at ? surely thou art a sluggish spirit ; what dost thou all ? Half of this ado would find a heart for a little mire or dirt , or something else that is worse , and is not Christ better ? But ah ! yet I feel a piece of unbelief still working in thy very bowels , as if that Jesus that died at Jerusalem were not the Son of God , and the Redeemer of the World. And is this all ? OH were I certain thou wouldst never doubt more , how freely should I make satisfaction ? But Oh! I faint and tyre with the trips and stumbling of my unbelief . But mount , my Soul , thou must resolve to tyre and put to silence all thy unbelieving babble , or they will thee ; which , if they do , never expect an hours peace or quiet more ; thou must resolve to conquer thy unbelief , or to be conquered ; thou knowest her tyranny too well to let her go away the victoress . He was not the Christ , thou sayest , but tell me why ? 



Object . His Parentage was too low and mean ; what the Saviour of the world a Carpenter's Son ! how can it be ! 

Answ . My unbelief , in the first place thou liest , his Mother was a Virgin , and her Conception knew no Father but the Almighty power of the overshadowing Holy Ghost ; he was more truly the Son of God than Joseph's Son. And was his birth , thinkst thou , so mean , whose Parentage was so glorious ? 

Object . His birth but mean and beggarly ; no sooner born , but cradled in a manger ; and could Heaven suffer this ? 

Answ . It consists . But yet it was as glorious : for did not a Star proclaim him born ? and did not a whole Host of Angels sing and shout it up for joy ? and did not wise men , yea and Kings , bring Incense , Myrrh , and Frankincense , being but as so much tribute , unto the newborn King and heir of all things , as if by instinct they knew they held their Crowns of him ? a greater honour than ever any new born Prince hath yet received before him , or ever shall or will do after him . 

Methinks , my unbelieving heart , I could dare to tell thee , that room was no stable , it was a Palace ; and did not the cost , presents , and glorious presence of Kings speak as much ? 

Object . But his days were spent in poverty , meanness and disgrace ; and can I , dare I , trust my soul with such a one , and take him to be the Son of God ? 

Answ . And now I wonder at thee ! it's true what thou sayest , if thou lookest upon him one way ; his life was such as thou tellest me of ; but 't is a strong argument against thyself ; for just such a one was the Christ to be , according to the Prophets ; the 53 Chap. of Isa . shows as much . But yet if thou truly understandest what true pump and glory means , even to an eye of sense as well as to that of faith , Solomon's life embroidered with all his glorious acts , was not comparable to this life of his . Was it not filled with miracles and wonders ? was he not proclaimed the Son of God with voices from Heaven ? did he not conquer Devils , and therefore the Kingdom of Hell ? Was ever Prince on Earth honoured with so great a Conquest ? Were not his miraculous Feasts more splendid than those of Princes ? the fare was but poor and mean , but the miracles made it rich and glorious . Had I been present , should I not have wondered and gazed more at the Master of this Feast , and have taken more pleasure to have seen him sit down with these five thousands , than with a Table full of Princes and great men ? Alas , it were a trifling sight to this . Methinks my unbelief that pleads so much for sense , sense itself pleads too strongly against thee , for thou canst not argue one Syllable . 

Object . But would the Son of God be hanged and crucified ? could Heaven have suffered this ? could not the Saviour of the World save himself ? how could he then save me ? 

Answ . Hadst thou not the blindness of the Jews , thou couldst not reason thus like them ; but was it not necessary it should be so ? Did not the Prophets foretell his death , and such a death ? Had he not died , and died as he did , I might then have had some ground to doubt him whether he were the messias or not , for it was needful that the Prophecies should be fulfilled , Dan. 9  But yet as wretched and as contemptible a going out of the world as he had , and his manner of dying on the Cross , how vile soever it seemed to be , yet was there not enough to silence all the doubts that could possibly from thence arise , and much for the confirmation of my faith in the wonderful Eclipse of the Sun , the rending of the veil of the Temple , the opening of the Graves , the raising of the dead , and afterwards his own rising the third day , and ascending up to Heaven in a Cloud ? If my faith might have staggered in seeing him on the Cross dying , it could not when it saw him risen , and in the Clouds ascending . 

Object . But were those wonders true and certain ? 

Answ . But hast thou any ground to doubt them ? are they not written in thy Bible ? and art thou not certain that it is the word of God ? or hast thou not sufficient reason to believe it to be so ? But hast thou not a whole Nation , yea Nations that do believe the same ? and before this age , did not our Fathers , and Grandfathers , and great Grandfathers , and so continued a testimony of ages from the time that they were done , to this day , witness to the truth of them , and that so unanimously & resolutely that ten thousands have rather chosen to lose their lives , than the truth of them . Now put all these together , and tell me , canst thou doubt ? Away , I see thou dost but trifle ; confess the truth , or I am resolved to heed thee no longer . Come , take and embrace that crucified Jesus , accounted all things else but as loss , and dross , and dung in comparison with him ; stick not at his outward meanness , scruple not at his ignominious dying , it is the very Christ the Saviour of the world . O why shouldst thou thus torment me ? Dost thou not see all thy fellow-christians to glory in that Cross , and in that Christ that died on it ? Do they not bear it as a badge of honour , and shall it be to thee as shame ? Do not all the Christian World eat and drink as often as they can the Symbols of this their dying Lord ? And do they not all sing , and joy , and triumph in it ? and wilt thou the while lie vexing thyself over a company of needless fears and scruples ? Farewell all needless doubts and tormenting questions , I see my faith is built on a Rock , blow winds , beaten waves , you cannot now move me . Blessed God I thank thee , for thy Son , thou hast given his life for the spoiler , thou hast bowed his back to the enemies , long furrows have they ploughed upon it , and the day of his calamity they laughed at . Lord : thou hast wounded him for my sins , and bruised him for my iniquities . These speak the depth of thy counsels , and the ways of thy mercy past finding out , and the tenderness of thy bowels . thou hast made him my Rock , and my shield , and my strong tower , and in the day of my sorrow through him thou wilt hear me . To thee , OH God , will I make my vows , and to thee will I pay them ; I will humble myself before thee . I will always lie at the feet of my Redeemer . Lord ! his Gross and his shame shall be no more a stumbling-block to me , I will take it up and follow him , it shall be my Crown , my Song , and the glory of my rejoicing . I will enter into thy Courts with joy , and in the Congregations of thy Saints shall be my delight ; I will remember thy loving-kindnesses of old , and the days in which thou didst afflict thy only Son for the sins of my Soul. I will call to mind the Covenant of thy Grace ; and my heart shall praise thee , when I see it founded on blood . then will I betrothe myself to thy Son ; join thou , Lord , both our hands and hearts , and we will strike up a match for ever . Praise thou the Lord , O my soul , and all you that love and fear him , praise his holy name . 

The SACRAMENT . The Dress . Lord , where am I ! What! all the Children of the Bride-chamber up and dressed , and I slumbering in my bed ! Tell me ye fairest , what make you up so early ? Alas our Lord was up before us all . He called us up by break of day , and wondered that we were not triming our lamps , knowing with whom we were to feast this day . O well then I will rise up too . O what a show do these bright and glittering Saints make in mine eyes ? What a brightness do these pearls and diamonds cast in mine eyes ! they do strike me into amazement . O what a lovely humble look doth crown their brow and what a comely countenance hath joy and Heavenly delight cast on their cheeks surely they did not thus dress themselves it was my Father that made them thus prepared to entertain his Son. But where are my clothes ? Now for the fairest , sweetest robe of thoughts and wishes that can be sound , or that the wardrobe of my Father can afford me . O how naked am I ! But where are my silken golden twists of Faith to hang the jewels of joy and love , and humility upon ? I am never dressed till they be on . O where , where are they ? I saw them by me but just now . I said them by my heart before I went to bed . O what was I so long a reasoning about ? O what long and many threads did my reason spin even now , but to make these twines to tie up my joy , and to raise up my love , and to hang my Heavenly delight upon ? But ah ! I fear this envious world hath with her vanities stolen them away , or hid them from me ; or the envious Devil , or unbelief have been ravelling or snarling of them , that now I am as far to seek as ever . whither , OH whither shall I go to find them out ? Now , will the Bridegroom come , and I am not ready ? I cannot , dare not go to day . Now will my Lord be angry , and ask me why I came not , and I have no answer to make him . And if I go undressed , he will ask me , where is my Weding-garment , and then I shall be speechless . Ah foollsh simple heart ! that thou shouldst take no more care but to let these thoughts of earth so entangle themselves with thy so pure and heavenly contemplations ! Now how to get them lose again , thou knowest not ; this thou mightest by heed and care have prevented ; but now what help ? Lord , I have sinned ; OH holy Father pardon this time , and I will take more heed . O come and untie my thoughts from this earth , and come and dress me up as best pleaseth thee . Come , be not discouraged , O my Soul ! Let but thy attire of Grace be whole , that is , sincere , thy God , and so thy Saviour will accept thee . Though thy garments are not so much perfumed with Heaven , as thy brethren's are , but yet if they are but white and free from the spots of flesh and spirit , thou wilt be looked on and liked of well enough . Thy Lord doth know that all have not Talents alike ; and where he gives but a little , he expects but little . A faith that it richly embroidered over with love and delight , is not given to all ; and is not expected from any but from those to whom it is given . thou hast an honest , willing , serious heart , that thinks it doth despise and trample under feet the nearest , dearest pleasures , profits and glories in the world , in compare with him that gave himself to death for thee ; and hadst rather anger flesh and blood , the dartest friends , and all the world than him , by sinning against him in the least . If this be true , fear not , thou hast thy Weding-garment on , thou art well clad ; as mean so ever as it is , it is such a one as Heaven gave thee , and such a one as thy dear Redeemer can , and will embrace thee in . 

The Presence-chamber . Fear not , OH my soul , I charge thee do not faint . Let not thy weakness , and the poverty of thy grace , discourage thee : ●ee how thy Lord draws nigh . Fear not , I say , he will not ask thee , Friend , how camest thou hither not having on thy Wedding garment ? He sees thy heart , and sees thou hast it on . O he comes ! and it is out to whisper thee a welcome in thine ear ; it is but to fall about thy neck and kiss thy be-teared cheeks , and bid thee a kind welcome to thy bleeding Lord  

Soul.  O did I think to be thus much made of ! I thought he would not have minded me ; but I did no sooner appear and set my feet within the doors , but he ran to meet me ; he took me in his arms , he brought me hither , and set me here . Is this a house , or is it a Palace ? Is this a Court for Princes , or for Angels ? Never did place more ravish me into amazement than this place ! Beautiful are thy gates , OH Zion ! OH how pleasant is the habitation of the most high ! Is it the place or the company that strikes me into astonishment ! Now I can say , most feelingly say with David , My delights are with the Saints of the most high , and the most excellent of the earth . Their poverty , their disgrace , their contempt amongst whom they live , do not puzzle my quick-eyed Faith ; these are the King's Daughters that are all glorious within , their garments are of needle work , embroidered over with pure gold , finespun gold . These ! OH these ! how poor and mean soever they are , or may seem to be , these shall sit with Christ to Judge the World. Oh! how my soul is ravished with delight , to see and look on those with whom I shall live for ever ! If they are so lovely now , what will they be hereafter , when our God shall take them , and scour off their rust , and wash their Garments bright in the Sunshine of his countenance , and change those mortal and corruptible bodies into immortal and glorious ones ; and set them upon Thrones , about himself , and lad their heads with Crowns of massy gold ; and when I shall hear them warbling out the everlasting Praises of the Lamb , whose Body and Blood we shall sit down to feed on ! 



Communion-plate . Never was Gold or Silver graced thus before , 

To bring this Body and this Blood to us , is more 

than to Crown Kings , 

or be made Rings 

For Starlike Diamonds to glitter in . 

The Bread.  Welcome Fairest , take and eat ; 't is the sweetest dainties , dearest morsel Heaven can afford thee . Welcome , my Dear , to the Table of my Lord Welcome a thousand times , I bid thee ; yea , welcomer than thine own heart can wish . Take , eat this morsel , it cost my life ; it 's a portion thy Father sent unto thee by me , and bid me remember thee of his love to thee . He bids thee remember a Father's love , Aye , a Saviour's . He hath a heart to give thee , and so have I Take this in earnest of them both in one . Take freely ; if thou wert not welcome , I would have told thee ; I would have asked thee for thy Weding-garment , knew I not thy heart ; or if I were uncertain of thy love , I would have scorned thee as unworrhy of my presence ; did I know thou lovest any thing above me , I would have hid my face , and never have spoken thee a welcome so feelingly and kindly to thy soul . Tell me , OH tell me ! dost thou not love me ? I know thou dost ; and above Father or Mother , Wife or Child , Lands or Living , or Credit ; I know thou dost . And wilt thou not take the Cross and sollow me ? I know thou wilt , I see and know the labour of thy love ; I remember the pains and travail of thy soul ; I saw thee follow me on thy knees in tears , and begged my life rather than thy life . I know thy heart , I saw it bleeding before my Throne ; I took it in my arms and bound it up , and in that breast I remember I put it up again ; I saw thee when no eye saw thee ; I heard thee , and had compassion on thy groan , whilst thou wert complaining that I had shut out thy prayers ; I will remember since thy heart did first fall sick with love , since the time thy flesh began to die , and since thou laidst thyself in the grave down by me , and wert willing to die to all this vain empty glory of the world , because I died & left it . I know thee well enough , thou art mine , and I am thine . Take it , I charge thee ; eat it as thou lovest me ; and whilst thou feedest , remember the love of thy dearest Redeemer . 

Soul.  O 't is the sweetest meat that ever tongue did taste ; it sends a relish to my very heart ; I find it digest s as it descends ; I feel my nerves and sinews strengthen ; I never knew that bread was the staff of life till now ; O how fit is my soul now for Christ ? How easy do I now find his yoke ; how light his burden ! Methinks I could watch or pray , or read more earnestly , resolvedly , believingly , than ever . Oh! methinks I can take his Cross & bear it strongly , and take the shame and despise it sully . O 't is a feast of fat things ! The richest banquet of love that ever I was at ; it was but a little that I took , and it fills me full , my hungry stomach now cry , 't is enough , I find it now verified to my soul and spirit , that he that eats of this bread shall never hunger more . Well , I need not starve when there is such bread in my Father's house . I need not , I will not , I cannot feed any longer on husks with the swine of the world . I fed on air and smoke before ; I never tasted substantial bread till I tasted of this . This is the staff of my life , and upon this will I support myself to my very grave . 



The Wine . Christ . Come my Dearest , I have drunk , and thou shalt pledge me : I have broached my side , and drew it on purpose for thee . This is a Wine of mine own making , when I trod the Winepress of my Father's wrath . It is my blood ; but take and drink it ; it was the cause of my wounding , but to thy soul it shall prove healing . I died and bled , it was but to make this Banquet for thee . I have brought thee into my Wine-cellar , and my Banner over thee shall be love . Fear not , take and drink , thou hast an ulcer in thy heart , and this shall cure it ; spots and stains of guilt on thy soul , and this shall purge them away ; thy spirits are faint , this shall revive thee , thou art afraid to see thy Father's face , this shall make thee to draw near the Throne of Grace with boldness . Drink , I charge thee ; drink on thy love and loyalty to me . I command thee as thou wilt have thy heart to mend , thy wounds to cure , thy spirits to revive , thy fears to scatter , thy soul to love and obey me , take , OH take this cup into thy hand , taste it , and praise my love . 



Soul.  Lord ! I have taken , I have drunk as thou hast bid me , I neither could , or dare deny thee . Can I refuse thy blood when I have accepted thyself ? Or can I accept my pardon at thy hands , and refuse the Seal thereof ? I know I am vile , I am vile , but thou hast pardoned me . Lord , I have abused thy love , a thousand times refused thy offered self , and withstood the tenders of thy Grace ; but thou hast covered all my sins , thou hast freely justified me by thy Grace , and made a full atonement for me by thy blood ; this is that thou freely biddest me take , and I have freely drunk it . Never was Wine so full as this is . Never was Bowl so full of pleasure as this . I have swallowed down my life and pardon at one draught : I took it from my Saviour's hand , it was a cup of his own preparing . If ever drink was sugared , this was ! I never tasted better relished Wine in all my life ! 

The richest Cordials cannot match this draught Divine , 

Spirits of pearls dissolved would but dead this Wine . 

O when my hopes but kissed the purple dews , they hung and cleaved so , 

As if they were loath to let thee go . 

They striven and struggled to get near my heart , 

As if intending there to take a part . 

I dare not say them nay ; blood from that Bowl 

May the best room command within my soul . 

What a sudden , strange , yet happy alteration do I find within ! my languid spirits are revived ; my winter is over . Methinks I feel my life and joy to spring a main . My Aaron's Rod ( a dry stick but now ) doth bloom and flourish . My newly engrafted soul is full of Infant-clusters . 

Blood at the root of Vines 

They say produce the richest Wines . 

Oh! if my Lord will undertake to dress this Vine , and trickle down his blood into my root , then draw it up into each branch of Grace by the warming beam of his reviving love ; then let my Dears est come , let him come as he hath promised , and bring my Father and his Father with him , and sup both with me and in me . Let them come , and I will bid them a welcome , I shall have a fruit to present them with , which they themselves shall say is pleasant ; I shall not send my Father away now so oft complaining , I came to seek for grapes and fruit , but behold wild ones . 



The Conclusion . Oh! how unwillingly do I rise ! methinks I could sit here and feast my heart and eyes for ever . What running-banquets doth my Lord afford me here ! surely he should not need to fear that I should surfeit on himself . But alas ! I must be gone , what shall I do in yonder hungry soul-starving world again ? I have been feeding on my Paschal Lamb , and now I must go and eat my sour herbs ; but if it be his will , I must obey ; if it be so , I must arise : I know thou hast prepared the endless feast above , where I shall ever sit and enjoy thy love , and glut my hungry eye and heart on the Banquet of thy everlasting self . As yet I am now on earth , my toil and work lies heavy on my hands , I have yet an afternoon to labour out , God knows my work is hard , too hard for me myself to perform . I scarcely should have lasted out so long , but that ometimes at such seasons as this is , he repaired my sinking spirits by pouring in the Cordials of his Blood. Now I must go and perhaps find as sharp conflicts with myself as ever . I know the World and Hell have been laying their snares and 'gins to catch my new-fledged soul ; and all conspire against my welfare . Now it is well if I escape a fall , a bruise , a breaking of my bones , in which sad plight I have so often lain , that my Lord might have taken me for dead , but that my groan told him loudly I lived . Lord ! must I leave this feast ? must I go ? Take me then by the hand , and lead me ; if I must walk , let me see thee by me , that I may know I walk with my God. Led me away , and I will go with thee ; and let me not go till thou bringest me hither again ; I cannot , will not live without thee . And do thou Lord , say , I must not , shall not . 

If both our hearts in love so well agree , 

What then shall separate my Christ from me ? 

A Meditation on the Death of Christ , Preparative to the Scrament : Penned for his private use . BUT is he dead ? O sad ! yet joyful news ! how strangely is my soul amazed , and diversely moved and troubled by these contrary passions ! methinks I could pull up the floodgates of my sorrow , and vent it out in tears ; but something bids me hold . Shall I mourn for him that 's just now past his state of mourning ? he 's dead ! and what of that ? And so are all his griefs , his bloody sweats , his sighs and groans concluded , He hath drunk on the brook in the way ; bitter while they were in his mouth , and he was living ; but sweet now they have sunk into his belly , and he in Heaven . Sweet to him , because it was his work , & he hath finished it ; and sweet to me , because it was the portion of sorrow , death , hell , that I must have taken . And canst thou mourn ! methinks if thou didst love , thine heart should rather sympathise with his : He is singing , and shalt thou be sighing ? He is joying that his work is done , and now is welcomed into Heaven by God his Father , and shouting up by Angels voices , as the great Conqueror of the hearts of men on earth , and that now in triumph he is returned . And will a mournful weed , a wet eye , and a cloudy brow , become thee at these times of Festivals ? Shall the Heavenly Angels be joyful , and thou sad ? How strangely will this be construed ! Will it not be said , thou dost not love him ? or thou dost envy his recovered glory that he had left , and now again hath taken ? Or that thou canst not endure to see him wear his Prince's Crown in Heaven , that for a time he had laid aside to come down to the earth to fetch thee thence to Heaven ? But ah ! my Lord , thou wilt not sure interpret sorrow thus ; thou hast not sure forgot to give a meaning unto tears , to teach a sigh to speak , and then to know its language ! Hath my Lord forgot so suddenly that he was on earth , and that he sweated , and groaned , and wept , and bled , as well as I do now ? What though now all tears , and sorrow , and sighing is done away , and he ceaseth to be any longer subject to our infirmities ? yet sure he knows it is not thus with us . I am not yet in Heaven , nor am I yet quite past the vale of sorrow ; and it cannot then be strange to him , if he sees sometimes our faces look of a sadder hue than those that are in Heaven . But why should thus my tears be checked , and my throbbing heart be chidden ; were it for a thing of naught I might be counted fool or child ; but shall my Saviour die , and vent his Soul in a stream of blood , and all in love to me ? and shall he thus forsake the world , and die and then be laid in the grave , and I be denied the liberty of following him thither as a mourner ? Shall it be said of the Prince of Glory , that he died and had the burial of an Ass ? because there was none to sorrow forth those words of , Ah my Lord ! What! shall it be granted to a Wife to mourn for the death of a beloved Husband ? and to a Child at the burial of a beloved Father ? Shall not such be blamed , but rather pitied ? And shall their friends come in and confess the loss and the ground of their sorrow just , and rather sit them down and bear them company in their grief ? And must I of all be thus censured ? Away with an Husband , Wife , or Child to me : Is he not more to me than ten Husbands ? Might I not have had an hundred that would have never done half so much for me as he hath done ? That first left his glory for my sake , and then laid down his life , and took the stroke upon himself that I myself deserved , and all because he loved me ? Was ever friend like this friend ! and ever love , like this love ! Many waters cannot quench love ; but neither waters , blood , death , nor many deaths could quench his love to me . But shall he love , and die in love , and thus be forced to leave me , because he loved me , and I not mourn the absence of my best Beloved ? How unreasonable may any this deny me ! But ah ! what a bitter-worded check did I even now receive ; as if my sorrow would arise from the envying of his now glorious state , and not from any love I bore him ! Oh! what needle-pointed words are those ! methinks they have pierced mine heart in every part and from each prick hath started forth a drop , that hath set it o'er with a bloody dew ! But how can it once be thought that envy should get a room in an heart that 's full of love , with which it swells , it bubbles up , and runs all over ? it cannot be . Bear witness heavens ! I do not grieve that you contain him , but that I on earth have lost him ! O my God I am not sorry that thy Son hath passed his sufferings , and is arrived to rest , and got again into thy bosom , his ancient nest of love and pleasure . O you blessed Orders of Seraphim & Cherubims , and you innumerable company of the spirits of the just men made perfect ! I do not envy that you have my Lord with you , that you see his face , and live and walk , and joy in the light of his countenance : Alas ! we your poor brethren could not make him so welcome here on earth , as you can there : we loved him as sincerely as you , and believed in him , and took delight too in him ; but yet nothing near so much as you . You know him better than we do ; for you know him as you are known , and therefore know better how to prise him . We know him but in part , and the value , price , & love could but be in the like proportion . He is therefore far much better there than here ; and how shall I then either envy him or you ! And what , my soul ! should I wish him back again ? what if I thought I could prise and love him more , and could promise the like for all his beloved disciples ? I could not alike engage for the wicked , envious , malicious , unbelieving world ; I could not promise he should meet with no other Herod to seek his life , or that the hardhearted Jews would give him better entertainment , whom they dare yet curse with the name of Conjurer , though Moses and their Prophets bore witness to him , and though they received a seal from Heaven in voices , thunders , signs , and an innumerable company of real Miracles . O no! my Lord ! though I could wish to see thy face again on earth , yet not in such a state of misery in the midst of a den of Bears , and Lions , as not long since thou wast . Ah! thou knowest I took no delight to hear that traitorous news of thine own Apostle that had betrayed thee ; & that it filled mine heart with anguish to hear how shamefully and scornfully thou wast abused . thou sawest me blush when I heard thy face was spit on ; my head did ache when thine was crowned with thorns . Anguish and indignation did lose my nerves , and with a palsy shaken mine hands , when thine had a Mock Sceptre put into them , a reed , and a scoff , Hail Jesus King of the Jews . And did not mine heart break and bleed to hear that thine was pierced ! Ah my Lord ! and shall I yet find an heart to wish thee here again ! no , no , I am glad thou hast escaped their bloody hands , and now got quite without their reach . I am glad thou hast got to perfect ease and rest ; and knowest no pains , nor griefs , nor sorrows . Oh! take a full possession of thy Father's breast , and sit thee down upon his Throne , thou art a King for ever . And take delight in these thy soul did travel , die and bleed for on earth . I will repine at nothing that shall advance thy glory . But Oh! thou cruel bloody unbelieving world ! you wicked murderous bloody Jews ! though I rejoice my Lord is safe arrived home , and quietly landed within his Haven ; yet from you I cannot hold mine anger , that made his Sea a Sea of blood , and drained his heart , to make it deep , & filled his sails with sighs and groans , that caused his voyage to be so doleful . What good got you to stand and laugh to see him sorrowful ? to scoff and jeer to hear his lamentations ? what cursed rage was that to make such haste to fetch him vinegar and gall to prolong his life , to lengthen out his dolours ? How could you find such barbarous hearts to triumph over a bleeding dying lamb , that was so innocent ? How could you taunt at him when you heard him praying for you , Father forgive them ! and so tenderly excusing you , for they know not what they do ! Methinks that kindly harmless carriage should have pierced your hearts ; those melting words should have dissolved them ; and instead of piercing him , I should have thought you pierced . And ah ! but that I know an unbelieving heart myself , and understand what hardness means , I should stand and wonder ! Oh! it 's too hard an Adamant for downy words , and doleful sounds , and tender carriages to break and shatter ! How often have I outstood all those myself ! And when I served my flesh , how little did I mind them ! And when they have been presented to me in the Gospel , or in a Sermon told that all these tortures he endured for me , and I in part believed it too , yet , was I not as a man bereft of my senses , and I was no more moved in mine heart , as if I had not heard or understood , and were quite bereaved of sense and reason . But had I thus continued in my senseless unbelieving state , and as I lived so died ; yet how deservedly should I have born the wrath of God , and have been sent to Hell as a recompense of mine unbelief ? And yet , you careless secure Jews , can you think to escape when God comes to make inquisition for blood ? How will you do if this sin shall find you out ? If God requires blood for blood , what will become of yours ? If he had been no more than a common man , the Law would then have required your lives for payment . But how if in the end he prove a Prophet ? nay more than that , the Son of the most high God , the Prince and Saviour whom God had promised to raise , the Messiah whom Moses and the Prophet's bare witness to , and him that you so longed and wished to see ! How will you look ! what will you say ! what answer will you make when all these truths are cleared ? where will you hide yourselves for shame ? and what will you do when confusion shall thus take hold upon you ? What! will you then confess the fact , or will you deny it ? with what face can you do the first ? And if you do the latter , the curse you and your Fathers drew upon yourselves , Let his blood be upon us and our children ! stand still on record against you , and will cry you guilty . Will you excuse it with your unbelieving ignorance ? But how will you be able to rub your brows into so much confidence ? How dare you say you were ignorant of him , when you say you know both Moses and the Prophets , and they bear witness of him ? You asked a sign , and did he not give you both signs and wonders ? How often did he cure your Lame ? How wonderfully did he heal your Lepers , and those sick of the Palsy , yea of all manner of diseases ? How did he open the eyes of the blind ! & give light to them that was born blind ! yea , restore the withered hand , & make the crooked strait , and open the ears of the deaf , and cast out Devils , and raise the dead ! Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly , that God hath made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified , both Lord and Christ . 

A Prayer before the Receiving the Holy Communion . MOST Holy God , I am as stubble before thee , the consuming Fire . How shall I stand before thy Holiness , for I am a sinful Creature , laden with Iniquity , that have gone backward , and provoked the Holy One of Israel ; when I was lost , thy Son did seek and save me ; when I was dead in sin , thou madest me alive . thou sawest me polluted in my blood , and saidst unto me live . In that time of love thou coveredst my nakedness , and enteredst into a Covenant with me , and I became thine own . thou didst deliver me from the power of Darkness , and translate me into the Kingdom of thy dear Son ; and gavest me remission of sin , through his blood . But I am a grievous Revolter , I have forgotten the Covenant of the Lord my God , I was engaged to love thee with all my heart , and to hate iniquity , and serve thee diligently , and thankfully to set forth thy praise . But I have departed from thee , and corrupted myself by self-love , and by loving the world , and the things that are in the world , and have fulfilled the desires of the flesh , which I should have crucified . I have neglected my duty to thee , and to my neighbour , and the necessary care of my own Salvation . I have been an unprofitable Servant , and have hid thy Talents , and have dishonoured thee , whom in all things I should have pleased and glorified . I have been negligent in hearing and reading thy holy Word , and in meditating and conferring of it , in public and private Prayer and Thanksgiving , and in my preparation to this holy Sacrament , in the examining of myself , and repenting of my sins , and stirring up my heart to a believing and thankful receiving of thy grace , and to love and joyfulness , in my Communion with thee , and with one another of thy People . I have not duly discerned the Lord's Body , but have profaned thy holy Name and Ordinance , as if the Table of the Lord had been contemptible . And when thou hast spoken peace to me , I returned again to folly ; I have deserved , OH Lord , to be cast out of thy presence , and to be forsaken , as I have forsaken thee , and to hear to my confusion , Departed from me , I know thee not , thou worker of iniquity . thou mayest justly tell me , thou hast no pleasure in me , nor wilt receive an Offering at my hand . But with thee there is abundant mercy . And my Advocate Jesus Christ the Righteous , is the Propitiation for my sins ; who bore them in his Body on the Cross , and made himself an Offering for them , that he might put them away by the Sacrifice of himself ; have mercy upon me , and wash me in his blood ; cloth me with his Righteousness ; take away my iniquities , and let them not be my ruin ; forgive them , and remember them no more : OH thou that delightest not in the death of sinners , heal my backslidings , love me freely , and say unto my soul , that thou art my salvation . thou wilt in no wise cast out them that come unto thee , receive me graciously to the Feast thou hast prepared for me ; cause me to hunger and thirst after Christ , and his Righteousness , that I may be satisfied : Let his flesh and blood be to me meat and drink indeed , and his Spirit be in me a well of living water , springing up to everlasting life . Give me to know thy Love in Christ , which passeth knowledge . Though I have not seen him , let me love him . And though now I see him not , yet believing let me rejoice with joy unspeakable , and full of glory ; though I am unworthy of the crumbs that fall from thy Table , yet feed me with the Bread of Life , and speak and seal up Peace to my sinful wounded soul . Soften my heart that is hardened by the deceitfulness of sin ; mortify the flesh , and strengthen me with might in the inward man ; that I may live and glorify thy Grace , through Jesus Christ our only Saviour . In whose words I conclude , saying , Our Father , etc.  

A Prayer after the Receiving of the Holy Communion . MOST Glorious God , how wonderful is thy Power and Wisdom , thy Holiness and Justice , thy Love and Mercy in this work of our Redemption , by the Incarnation , Life , Death , Resurrection , Intercession , and Dominion of thy Son ! no power or wisdom in Heaven or Earth , could have delivered me but thine . The Angels desire to pry into this Mystery , the Heavenly Host do celebrate it with praises , saying , Glory be to God in the Highest ; on Earth peace ; good will towards men . The whole Creation shall proclaim thy praises , blessing , honour , glory and power be unto him that sitteth upon the Throne , and unto the Lamb for ever and ever . Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power , and honour , and glory ; for he haeth redeemed us to God by his blood , and made us Kings and Priests unto our God. Where sin abounded , grace hath abounded much more . And hast thou indeed forgiven me so great a debt , by so precious a Ransom ? wilt thou indeed give me to reign with Christ in Glory , and see thy face , and love thee , and be beloved of thee for ever ? Yea Lord , thou hast forgiven me , and thou wilt glorify me , for thou art faithful that hast promised . With the blood of thy Son , with the Sacrament , and with thy Spirit , thou hast sealed up to me these precious promises . And shall I not love thee , that hast thus loved me ? Shall I not love thy Servants , and forgive my Neighbours their little debt ? After all this shall I again forsake thee , and deal falsely in thy Covenant ? God forbid , O! set my affections on the things above , where Christ sitteth at thy right hand . Let me no more mind earthly things , but let my Conversation be in Heaven , from whence I expect my Saviour to come and change me into the likeness of his glory . Teach me to do thy will , OH God and to follow him , who is the Author of Eternal Salvation , to all them that do obey him . Order my stops by thy Word , and let not any iniquity have dominion over me . Let me not henceforth live unto myself , but unto him who died for me and rose again . Let me have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness , but reprove them . And let my light so shine before men , that they may glorify thee . In simplicity and godly sincerity , and not in fleshly wisdom , let me have my Conversation in the world . OH that my ways were so directed , that I might keep thy Statutes ! Though Satan will be desirous again to sister me , and seek as a roaring Lion to devour , strengthen me to stand against his Wiles , and shortly bruise him under my feet . Accept me , OH Lord , who resign myself unto thee , as thine own ; and with my thanks and praise , present myself a living Sacrifice to be acceptable through Christ. Useful for thine honour . Being made free from sin , and become thy Servant , let me have my fruit unto holiness , and the End Everlasting Life . Through Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour . In whose words I farther pray , Our Father , etc.  

A Divine Soliloquy . OH My Soul ! thou hast been feasted with the Son of God , at his Table , upon his Flesh and Blood , in preparation for the Feast of Endless Glory ; thou hast seen there represented , what sin deserveth , what Christ suffered , what wonderful Love , the God of infinite goodness hath expressed to thee . thou hast had Communion with the Saints ; thou hast renewed thy Covenant of Faith , and thankful Obedience , unto Christ . thou hast received his renewed Covenant of Pardon , Grace and Glory to thee ; OH carry hence the lively sense of these great and excellent things upon thy heart . Remember , OH my Soul ! thou camest not ( to that holy Table ) only to enjoy the mercy of an hour , but that which may spring up to endless Joy. thou camest not only to do the duty of an hour , but to promise that which thou must perform while thou livest on Earth . Remember daily , especially when Temptations to unbelief , and sinful heaviness assault thee , what pledges of Love thou hast received . Remember daily , especially when Flesh , and Devil , and World , would draw thy heart again from God ; and temptations to sin are laid before thee , what Bonds God and thy own Consent have laid upon thee . Remember , OH my Soul ! if thou art a Penitent Believer , thou art now forgiven , and washed in the Blood of Christ . O! go your way , and sin no more ; no more through wilfulness , and strive against your sins of weakness . Wallow no more in the Mire , and return not to thy Vomit . Let the exceeding Love of Christ constrain thee , having such Promises , as 2 Cor. 6. 17 , 18.  OH cleanse thyself from all filthiness of flesh and spirit , perfecting holiness in the fear of God.  

Amen . Hymns suited to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper . To be sung in the common Tunes . A Hymn for the Sacrament . HYMN I  A New and well composed Song , 
With raptures filled of Love , 
And ecstasies of Joy , let 's tune 
Unto our Lord above . 
Awake my drowsy sleepy Soul , 
Awake dull heavy heart , 
And all my faculties and powers , 
Join , in and bear a part . 


Let judgement weigh the argument , 
Let fancy it adorn , 
Let memory bring forth its store , 
Thoughts , offer your firstborn . 
God did assume the shape of Man , 
With flesh his glory veiled , 
Himself he humbled unto death . 
He to the Cross was nailed . 


Made sin , us to acquit from sin ; 
Accursed , us to bless , 
Of Righteousness he wrought a Robe 
To hide our nakedness . 
Darling of Heaven he was and is , 
The father 's chief delight : 
Angels wonder , the Saints above 
Are ravished at his sight . 


Arrayed he is with Majesty , 
Angels do him attend ; 
All power is his in Heaven and Earth , 
All to his Sceptre bend . 
A glorious Crown is on his head 
Most lovely is his face , 
Treasures of wisdom are with him , 
For us he 's stored with grace . 


His Love doth pass dimensions , 
His Love exceeds all thought , 
Stronger than death , this Love to us 
Salvation hath brought . 
Hence all the Clouds away , away , 
Darken no more mine eye , 
Feign would I see this lovely one , 
Whose dwelling is on high . 


Open thine Eye , here Jesus stands , 
He looks , he breathes , he moves : 
By Faith thou may'st discern him plain , 
In this sweet Feast of Loves . 
And art thou here indeed , my Lord ! 
Draw nearer yet to me , 
And nearer , nearer , my dear Lord ; 
Too near thou canst not be . 


Come my Beloved , let me view 
Thy beauteous lovely face ; 
Thee I would fold in arms of love , 
fain I would thee embrace . 
I feel , I feel a flame within , 
Dear Lord , I thee admire ; 
Thy sparkling beauty which I see , 
Hath set me all on fire . 


Thy kind looks have me overcome , 
The glances of thine Eye , 
Sweetly my Soul transported have , 
I feel an ecstasy . 
Unutterable Joys I feel , 
How sweet ! how sweet ! how sweet 
Is this taste of thy Love , whilst I 
And my Beloved meet ! 


Sure this the Gate of Heaven is , 
Methinks I'm entering in , 
Where I shall always see thy face , 
And no more grieve or sin . 
Ten thousand praises let us give 
Unto our Lord on high ; 
Let heart , and lip , and life combine 
To make the melody . 


HYMN II  OH Come let us join all like one , 
The Lord to magnify ; 
Let us together lift his name 
In sweet sounds to the Sky . 
Sweet Hymns of Love come let us sing , 
Let Love us act and move ; 
Let Love our voices tune to praise 
Our God , for God is Love.  


God's Love the lofty Heavens' above , 
In height doth far transcend : 
It's depth , the Sea ; its breadth and length 
Is without bound or end . 
God's Love to us is wonderful : 
To us who Rebels were , 
God gave his only Son to die , 
That Rebels he might spare . 


From guilt and reigning power of sin , 
And Satan's slavery ; 
From fire of Hell us to redeem , 
God gave his Son to die . 
Christ suffered in our stead , he was 
more harmless than the Dove : 
That God should lay our sins on him ; 
This , this indeed is Love.  


OH come let us give God our Loves , 
Let every heart take fire ; 
Let flames come forth and join in one , 
And unto Heaven aspire . 
●weet Spirit come , like Southern Gales , 
Within us breathe and move ; 
Blow up our spark into a flame , 
That we may burn with love . 


That we with all our hearts may love , 
Our heart's Lord circumcise : 
Of Love presumed with sweet Incense , 
Accept the Sacrifice . 


Draw near , OH God , unveil thyself , 
Our cloudiness remove ; 
OH shine ! and smile on us , that we 
may see thy face and love . 


Dear Jesus , come and visit us , 
A stranger do not prove ; 
Heal wounds of sin , speak peace that we 
Thy voice may hear and love . 


Ourselves we offer with our hearts , 
Our whole selves we resign 
To thee who art the God of Love , 
We are and will be thine . 


HYMN III  GOD hath us brought into his Courts , 
And Chambers of his Love , 
That he might feed and feast us here , 
With dainties from above . 
Heaven opened is before our Eye , 
The Veil is rend , that we 
May upward look , and his dear Son 
Crowned with Glory see . 


This Jesus crowned was with Thorns , 
Scourged with cruel hands , 
His flesh was torn , when to the Cross 
He tied was with Bands . 
Tears trickled from his mournful eyes , 
Sweated dropped from his face , 
Blood flowed from his hands and feet , 
And side , in streams apace . 


His groans were strong , his cries were loud , 
Pressures of wrath did lie 
Upon his Soul , with sense of which 
In anguish he did die . 
He harmless was , and innocent ; 
no guilt upon him lay , 
But as our Surety he our debts 
Did by his sufferings pay . 


Thus did he Justice satisfy , 
By dying in our room , 
That we might justified be 
By Faith , that to him come . 
The Bread we eat at this great Feast , 
Christ's flesh is , and his blood 
Is represented by the Wine ; 
This , this indeed is food . 


Here is the heavenly Manna , which 
Our God to us doth give : 
Who eateth other bread shall die ; 
In eating this we live . 
A hidden life of Grace we have , 
Breathing desires and love ; 
Christ is our Life , the Author , Spring , 
By whom our Graces move . 


Come let us look unto our Lord ; 
This Glass will show his face , 
Not veiled over with dark Types , 
As heretofore it was . 
God-man , that name is wonderful ; 
So is his beauty ; so 
His love is full of wonders , both 
Beyond our reach to go . 


Yet where we cannot comprehend , 
Looking , let us admire , 
Admiring love , loving rejoice , 
And to enjoy aspire . 
Our Lord is present at this Feast ; 
He looks , let 's meet his Eye 
With ours ; sweet glances , looks of love 
It may be we shall spy . 


Come Lord draw near , we long , we long 
Thy face to see , thy love 
To taste , thy voice to hear , within 
To feel thy Spirit move . 
thou art all fair , thou hast no spot , 
Thy beauty is divine : 
thou art all love , embrace us Lord 
In those sweet Arms of thine . 


We look , we wait , we hope , we trust , 
We long , we love , we burn . 
Ravish thou dost our hearts , whilst thou 
To us thine Eye dost turn . 
With all the powers of our Souls 
Dear Jesus we thee praise , 
In songs of joy and thankfulness 
Our voices we do raise . 


Hosannas we , Hosannas we 
Do sing with one accord 
In Hallelujahs of triumph 
We join to praise the Lord 
ye Angels and triumphant Saints , 
Praise ye our Lord above , 
Whilst we his Servants here below 
Do sing his praise with love . 


HYMN IU.  thousands of thousands stand around 
Thy Throne , OH God , most high ; 
Ten thousand times ten thousand sound 
Thy praise , but who am I ? 
thine arm of might , most mighty King 
Both Rocks and hearts doth break ; 
My God , thou canst do every thing 
But what would show thee weak . 


Most pure and holy are thine Eyes , 
Most holy is thy Name ; 
Thy Saints , and Laws , and Penalties , 
Thy holiness proclaim . 
Mercy is God's Memorial , 
And in all Ages praised ; 
My God , thine only Son did fall , 
That Mercy might be raised . 


Thy bright backparts , OH God of Grace , 
I humbly here adore ; 
Show me thy glory and thy face , 
That I may praise thee more . 
Mysterious depths of endless love 
Our admirations raise . 
My God , thy Name exalted is 
Far above all our praise : 


HYMN v.  TO whom , Lord , should I sing , but thee , 
The maker of my Tongue ? 
Lo , other Lords would seize on me , 
But I to thee belong . 
As thou Lord , an immortal Soul 
Hast breathed into me , 
So let my Soul be breathing forth 
Immortal thanks to thee . 


Sing and triumph in boundless grace , 
Which thus hath set thee free ; 
Extol with shouts my saved Soul 
Thy Saviour's love to thee . 
Sweet Christ , thou hast refreshed our Souls 
With thine abundant grace , 
For which we magnify thy Name , 
Longing to see thy face . 


Down from above the blessed Dove 
Is come into my breast , 
To witness God's Eternal Love , 
This is my heavenly Feast . 
This makes me Abba Father cry , 
With confidence of Soul ! 
It makes me cry , my Lord , my God , 
And that , without control . 


thou art all power , thou art all love , 
And so thou art to me ; 
Blest be my God now and henceforth , 
And to Eternity . 


HYMN VI.  LORD give me a believing heart , 
Advance it more and more ; 
Rebuke those doubts and scruples that 
Are crowding at my door . 
Lord let thy Word and Spirit guide 
Thy Servant in thy way ; 
May I walk closely with my God , 
And run no more astray . 


All they that sit down with thee must 
Be decked with thy Grace ; 
thou smil'st on such Communicants , 
And they behold thy face . 
Come holy Spirit , come and take 
My filthy Garments hence , 
The guilt , the stain , the love of sin , 
Will give my Lord offence . 


Let nothing that is not divine , 
Within thy presence move , 
What ever would cause thee not to shine 
In tokens of thy Love. 
Awake Repentance , Faith and Love , 
Awake OH every Grace ! 
Come , come , attend this glorious King , 
And how before his face . 


Let not my Jesus now be strange , 
And hide himself from me ; 
OH cause thy face to shine upon 
The Soul that longs for thee . 


HYMN VII . WE to our heavenly Father give 
The tribute praise we owe , 
Who by his purifying Grace 
Prepares us here below . 
Lo here 's the most amazing proof 
Of great and matchless Love ! 
Not that our Early love to God 
Did his prevent and move . 


His motives all to pity us 
From his own bowels flow ; 
Thence came the richest gift of Heaven 
To Guilty Men below . 
That to his glorious grace all praise 
Might be entirely paid : 
Who , that he might forgive our sins , 
Christ's Blood our Ransom made ; 


Let then this glorious gift of God 
Yet more our Souls refine , 
That his pure Image may in us 
With greater glory shine . 
Draw us , dear Lord , and towards thee 
We with swift wings will move , 
thou Object of our highest hopes , 
And of our dearest Love.  


Thanksgiving is an heavenly work , 
it 's all in Heaven they do , 
To thank and praise the Lord most high , 
On Earth is sweet work too . 
O! blessed are the Saints above , 
How active is your state ! 
You ever bless the Lord our God , 
Not at our broken rate . 


But , O! how weak are crawling Worms ? 
How short our Sabbath-days ? 
We die more hours by far in sleep , 
Than we do live in praise . 
OH glorious God accept our wills , 
And weaknesses forgive ; 
We wish our Souls were like the Saints , 
Unlike them as we live . 


But , OH my God reach down thy hand , 
And take us up to thee , 
That we about thy Throne may stand , 
And all thy Glory see . 
All glory to the sacred Three , 
One Everlasting Lord , 
As at the first , still may he be 
Beloved , obeyed , adored . 


HYMN VIII . Come let 's adore the King of Love , 
The King of sufferings too , 
For love it was that brought him down , 
And set him here below . 
Love drew him from his Paradise , 
Where Flowers that fade not grow , 
And planted him in our poor dust , 
Among us , Weeds below . 


OH narrow thoughts , and narrow speech ! 
Here your defects confess . 
The life of God , the death of Christ , 
How faintly you express . 
OH thou ! who from a Virgin root 
Made'st this fair Flower to spring , 
Help us to raise both heart and voice , 
And with more spirit sing , 


To Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , 
One undivided Three , 
All highest praise , all humblest thanks 
Now and for ever be . 


HYMN IX . To the Tune of the 100 Psalm . 

Tune now yourselves my heart strings high , 
Let us aloft our voices raise , 
That our loud song may reach the Sky , 
And there present to thee our praise . 
To thee , blessed Jesus , who came'st down 
From those bright Spheres of Joy above , 
To purchase us a dear bought Crown , 
And woe our Souls t'espouse thy Love.  


Long had the World in darkness sat , 
Till thou with thy all-glorious light 
began to dawn from Heavens' fair Gate , 
And with thy beam dispelled their night . 


We too , alas ! still here had stood 
As common slaves in this same shade , 
But Jesus came , and with his Blood 
Our general Ransom freely paid . 


And now , my Lord , my God , my All , 
What shall I most in thee admire , 
That power which made the world , & shall 
The world again dissolve with Fire ! 


O no! thy strange humility , 
Thy wounds , thy pains , thy Cross , thy death 
These shall alone my wonder be , 
My health , my joy , my staff , my breath . 


To thee , great God , to thee alone , 
Three persons in One Deity , 
As former Ages still have done , 
All Glory now and ever be . 


HYMN X.  THE Mighty Jesus , filled with love 
Did these dark Regions leave : 
The heavenly Hosts all wand'ring stood 
King Jesus to receive . 
The great Jehovah sets a Throne , 
Installs our glorious King ; 
Both Heaven and Earth must him adore ; 
And loud Hosannah's sing . 


There sits the King of Peace and Love , 
A Saviour is his name , 
Mercy his Nature and delight , 
And ever so the same . 
Come all that fear , come all that want , 
And speedy succour find ; 
He ne'er denies a praying Soul , 
He is so good and kind . 


Behold and wonder at his Love , 
We are his daily care , 
His ear , his heart , is always fixed 
To hear and answer prayer . 
Be not afraid to bring your Suit , 
Come with a cheerful heart . 
Weak cries , mixed prayers cannot bar 
A grant to his own part . 


Satan , it 's true , presents his Plea , 
And Justice brings its claim ; 
But all are silent when he pleads , 
His Blood , his Love , his Name ! 
Let holy Souls then daily go 
To Jesus on his Throne , 
And love that all-prevailing Friend 
Who says we are his own . 


HYMN XI . As the 67th Psalm . OH This ungrateful World ! 
To kill so kind a Friend , 
That made the Lord of Glory die , 
What might this act portend ? 
But wonder , holy Souls , 
God's thoughts all thoughts transcend : 
Christ murdered by a Rebel World , 
And yet he is our Friend . 


it 's true , Christ left the Earth , 
But is enthroned above , 
Not to revenge this cruel act , 
But lives and reigns in love , 


Sweet is his work on high , 
Peace is the charming voice ; 
Let but a Soul embrace his Call , 
The heavenly Host rejoice . 
Behold he stands and calls , 
Come Sinners , come to me , 
My Love , my Kingdom shall be yours 
To all Eternity . 


Believe my faithful Word , 
All my designs are Grace , 
Take now the Earnest of my Love 
Before you see my face . 
Never be strange to me , 
I wait to hear your cry , 
Let me but know your pressing wants , 
And you shall have supply . 


Never distrust my Love , 
I am , this is my Name ; 
Sin makes me hide my face a while , 
When yet my love 's the same . 
Never regard your Foes , 
They are no match for me ; 
Pled still my Conquests with your God , 
And you shall Victors be . 


HYMN XII . Filled with the sense of sin and wrath , 
And black despair drew nigh , 
To Christ I fled for succouring Grace , 
He heard my mournful cry : 
Under his pleasant shade I sat , 
Sweet notes of Love I heard ; 
My welcome was above my thought , 
How was I loved and cheered ! 


He came to me , but not alone , 
Divine fruits were my fair ; 
I waited what he first would say , 
Your sins now pardoned are : 
Peace with Jehovah is my gift , 
no frowns appear above ; 
Go boldly to my Father's Throne , 
Love waits your Soul to love . 


The Book of Life , your Name is there , 
And ever there shall be , 
Love wrote it there , Love keeps it there 
To all Eternity . 
Ask what you will , I have God's Ear , 
He never me denied : 
Come with your fears , come with your wants , 
And you shall be supplied . 


I give my Angels for your Guard , 
You are their daily care , 
Let Satan tempt and shoot his Darts , 
They can prevent the snare . 
OH Lord ! what can I now reply , 
What , love at such a rate ! 
But this I 'll pray , OH let my Love 
Bear an Eternal Date . 


Another . The time is passed when human Race 
became God's Enemy : 
The World never saw so black a Night , 
When Adam eat the Tree , 
Vast gulf of Woes became his due , 
Which had no bounds nor end ; 
What ever he did , what ever he thought , 
Still guilt did him attend . 


God saw this sad tremendous Fall , 
His Truth said , might thy Word 
Justice required , the Sinner's Blood 
no pity him afford ; 
But Love , that charming Attribute 
Prepared a kind Reply , 
The Pleas of Justice I 'll adjust , 
My only Son shall die . 


Blessed was the day when Adam heard 
That cheering word of Grace , 
I 'll send the Lord of Glory here , 
And hide my angry face . 
Hear what he says , he knows my heart , 
My Mercy shall rejoice , 
Peace he 'll proclaim , the War will cease , 
If you obey his voice . 


Go trembling Sinner , go to him , 
Fear not your former guilt , 
His Death has answered my demands , 
And I will you acquit . 
Come take the Pledge , believe my Son , 
I am your own , your All , 
I have a Father's hand and heart , 
To hear you when you call . 


My Christ did lovingly invite 
Me to his charming Feast ; 
He added to his wondrous Love , 
Made me a wiliing Guest . 
I came and found a Banquet rare , 
He brought me Angel's food , 
He bid me take and eat my fill , 
For my Eternal good . 


He spoke such cheering words of Grace , 
What do you want , my Friend ? 
What , can you doubt my kind design ? 
Consider and attend . 
Sin cannot now defeat my Love , 
Since pardons I will give . 
Sin seems an unresisted Foe , 
It shall not always live . 


You feel a dreadful War within , 
Lusts claim a rightless Throne , 
But this united force I 'll break , 
Since now you are my own . 
Satan with all his Darts and Snares 
Shall prove a fruitless Foe ; 
You are designed for Heaven's Bliss , 
He to Eternal Woe . 


Never distrust my wondrous Love , 
The best is yet behind , 
no Tongue nor Thought can represent 
How good I 'll be , and kind ; 
Refresh your Souls with what I give , 
Wait till you come on high : 
I long till all my Members see 
what 's in Eternity . 


Another . What made the Lord of Glory die ? 
Shall God the answer make ? 
Our guilty Souls may trembling stand 
To hear Hehovah speak : 
But God has spoken , he sent his Son , 
But stay dejected heart , 
Not to condemn a Rebel World , 
But to regain his part . 


The Death of Christ no vengeance cries , 
It is a sign of Peace ; 
It pardon's sins , and pays our debts , 
And gives our Souls release ; 
Let Law & Conscience bring their charge , 
Let Justice pled our guilt : 
The Death of Christ can silence all , 
And God will us acquit . 


O Soul ! shall banished fears return , 
When you can pardon pled . 
Hold fast this charming Pledge of Love , 
For you it is decreed ; 
Let Angels sing their highest Note , 
Let Earth triumph below , 
Let the Redeemed of the Lord 
Their Saviour's Glory show . 


Books sold by Thomas Parkhurst , at the Bible and Three Crowns , the lower End of Cheapside . A Body of Practical Divinity , consisting of above one hundred seventy six Sermons on the lesser Catechism composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster : With a Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of Scripture . By Tho. Watson , formerly Minister at St. Stephen's Walbrook , London . 

A Paraphrase on the New Testament , with Notes , doctrinal and practical . By plainness and brevity fitted to the Use of Religious Families , in their daily Reading of the Scriptures ; and of the younger and poorer sort of Scholars and Ministers , who want fuller helps . With an Advertisement of Difficulties in the Revelations . By the Late Reverend Mr. Rich. Baxter . 

Six hundred of select Hymns and Spiritual Songs collected out of the Holy Bible . Together with a Catechism , the Canticles , and a Catalogue of Virtuous Women . The Three last hundred of select Hymns collected out of the Psalms of David . By William Barton , A. M. late Minister of St. Martin's in Leicester . 

Spiritual Songs : Or Songs of Praise to Almighty God upon several occasions . Together with the Song of Songs , which is Solomon's : First turned , than paraphrased in English Verse . By John Mason . 

Penitential Cries , in Thirty two Hymns . Begun by the Author of the Songs of Praise and Midnight Cry ; and carried on by another hand . 

Sacramental Hymns collected ( chiefly ) out of such passages of the N. Testament as contain the most suitable matter of Divine Praises in the Celebration of the Lord's Supper . To which is added one Hymn relating to Baptism , and another to the Ministry . By J. Boyse . With some by other hands . 

A Collection of Divine Hymns upon several occasions ; suited to our common Tunes , for the use of Devout Christians , in singing forth the Praises of God.  

The Psalms of David in Metre : Newly translated and diligently compared with the Original Text and former Translations : more plain , smooth , and agreeable to the Text than any heretofore . 

Of ●●ee Justification by Christ . Written first in Latin by John Fox , Author of the Book of Martyrs , against Osorius , etc.  And now Translated into English , for the benefit of those who love their own Souls , and would not be mistaken in so great a Point . 

An Earnest Call to Family-religion : Or a Discourse concerning Family-worship . Being the substance of Eighteen Sermons . Preached by Samuel Slater , A. M. Minister of the Gospel . 

The Preaching of Christ ; and the Prison of God , as the certain Portion of them that reject Christ's Word . Opened in several Sermons on 1 Pet. 3. 19  By Samuel Tomlyns , M. A. and Minister of the Gospel of Christ in Marleborough . 

Ornaments for the Daughters of Zion : Or the character and happiness of a Virtuous Woman ; in a Discourse which directs the Female Sex how to expess the Fear of God in every Age and State of their Life ; and obtain both Temporal and Eternal Blessedness . Written by Cotton Mather . 

The Confirming Work of Religion , and its great things made plain by their primary Evidences and Demonstrations ; whereby the meanest in the Church may soon be made able to render a rational account of their Faith.  

The present Aspect of our Times , and of the Extraordinary Conjunction of things therein ; in a Rational View and Prospect of the same , as it respects the public hazard and safety of Britain in this day . These two last by Robert Fleming , Author of the Fulfilling of the Scriptures , and Minister at Rotterdam . 

England's Alarm : Being an account of God's most considerable Dispensations of Judgement and Mercy towards these Kingdoms , for 14 year's last passed ; and also of the several sorts of Sins and Sinners therein ; especially the Murmurers against this Present Government . With an Earnest Call to speedy Humiliation and Reformation , and Supplication , as the chief means of prospering their Majesty's Counsels and Preparations . Dedicated to the King and Queen . 

A Family-altar Erected to the honour of the Eternal God : Or , a so emn Essay to promote the Worship of God in Private Houses : Being some Meditations on Gen 3. 5 , 2. 3.  With the Best Entail , or Dying Parents Living Hopes for their Surviving Children , grounded upon the Covenant of God's Grace with Believers and their Seed . Being a short Discourse on 2 Sam. 23. 5.  By Oliver Heywood Minister of the Gospel . 

The Gospel Mystery of Sanctification opened in sundry practical Directions , suited especially to the case of those who labour under the guilt and power of Indwelling sin . To which is added a Sermon of Justification . By Walter Marshal Minister of the Gospel , etc.  

Death improved , and immoderate Sorrow for Deceased Friends & Relations reproved . Wherein you have many Arguments against Immoderate Sorrow , and many profitable Lessons which we may learn from such Providences . Bianca E Bury , formerly Minister of Great Bolas in Shropshire , Author of the Help to Holy Walking , and the Husbandman's Companion , etc.  

The Poor Man's Help , and Young Man's Guide : Containing , 1.  Doctrinal Instructions for the right informing of his Judgement . 2.  Practical Directions for the general course of his Life . 3.  Particular Advices for the well managing of every day with reference to his Natural Actions ; Civil Employments , Necessary Recreations , Religious Duties , particular Prayer , Public in the Congregation , Private in the Family , Secret in the Closet , Reading the holy Scriptures , Hearing the Word Preached , and Receiving the Lord's Supper . By William Burkitt , M. A. of Pembrook-hall in Cambridge , and now Vicar of Dedham in Essex , and Author of the practical Discourse of Infant-baptism . 

A plain Discourse about rash and sinful Anger ; as a help for such as are willing to be relieved against so sad and too generally prevailing Distemper even amongst Professors of Religion ; being the substance of some Sermons Preached at Manchester . By Henry Newcome , M. A. and Minister of the Gospel there , and Author of the Improvement of Sickness . 

The Rod or the Sword , the present Dilemma of the Nations of England , Scotland and Ireland , considered , argued and improved on Ezek. 21. 14.  By a true Friend to the Protestant Interest , and the Protestant Government . 

A Present for such as have been Sick and are recovered : Or , a Discourse concerning the Good that comes out of the Evil of Affliction : Being several Sermons Preached after his being raised from a Bed of Languishing . By Nathaniel Vincent , M. A. and Author of the Conversion of the Soul. The true Touchstove of Grace and Nature . Discourse of Conscience . Treatise of Prayer and Love , etc.  

Some passages in the Holy Life and Death of the Late Reverend Mr. Edmund Trench , most of them drawn out of his own Diary . Published by Joseph Boyse Minister in Dublin . 

Advice to an Only Child , or Excellent Counsel to all Young persons , containing the sum and substance of Experimental and Practical Divinity . Written by an Eminent and Judicious Divine , for the private use of an Only Child . Now made public for the benefit of all . 

An account of the Blessed Trinity , argued from the Nature and Perfection of the Supreme Spirit , coincident with the Scripture Doctrine , in all the Articles of the Catholic Creeds ; together with its Mystical , Foederal , and Practical Uses in the Christian Religion . By William Burrough Rector of Cheyns in Bucks . 

A Discourse of Justification , being the sum of Twenty Sermons . By Walter Cross , M. A.  

Practical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery . 

A Discourse concerning Trouble of mind ; in three parts . By Timothy Rogers , M. A. Also a Treatise of Consolation , by the same Author . 

A plain and Familiar Discourse on the Sacrament . By Bishop Kidder . 

Robert's on the Sacrament . 

Vines on the Sacrament . 

Day 's Sacramental Catechism . 

Doolittle's Second Part of the Discourse on the Sacrament , concerning Christ's Sufferings . 

FINIS 

