A sermon of repentance preached before the honourable House of Commons, assembled in Parliament at Westminster, at their late solemn fast for the setling of these nations, April 30, 1660 / by Richard Baxter. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed by R.W. and A.M. for Francis Tyton and Jane Underhil ...,London :1660.)

Tuesday May the first , 1660.  

ordered , 

That the thanks of this house be given to Mr. Baxter for his great pains in carrying on the work of preaching and prayer , before the house at saint Margaret's Westminster yesterday , being set apart by this house for a day of fasting and humiliation . And that he be desired to print his sermon , and is to have the same privilege in printing the same , that others have had in the like kind . 

And that Mr. Swinfin do give him notice thereof . 

w. Jessop cler. of the Commons house of parliament . 

A sermon of repentance . Preached before the honourable house of Commons , assembled in parliament at Westminster , at their late solemn fast for the settling of these nations , April 30. 1660.  By Richard Baxter . 

London , printed by r. w. and a. m. for Francis Titan and Jane Underhil , and are to be sold at the sign of the three daggers in Fleetstreet , and at the bible and anchor in Paul's churchyard , 1660.  

To the honourable the house of Commons assembled in parliament . As your order for my preaching , persuaded me you meant attentively to hear ; so your order for my publishing this sermon , persuaded me that you will vouchsafe considerately to read it . ( For you would not command me to publish only for others , that which was prepared for , and suited to yourselves . ) Which second favour if i May obtain , especially of those that need most to hear the doctrine of repentance , i shall hope that the authority of the heavenly majesty , the great concernment of the subject , and the evidence of reason , and piercing beams of sacred verity , May yet make a deeper impression on your souls , and promote that necessary work of holiness , the fruits whereof would be effectual remedies to these diseased nations , and would conduce to your own everlasting joy . Shall i think it were presumption for me to hope for so high a reward for so short a labour ? Or shall i think it were uncharitableness not to hope for it ? That here is nothing but plain English , without any of those ornaments , that are by many thought necessary , to make such discourses grateful to ingenuous curious auditors , proceeded not only from my present want of advantages for study ( Having and using no book but a bible and a concordance , ) but also from the humbling and serious nature of the work of the day ; and from my own inclination , less affecting such ornaments in sacred discourses , then formerly i have done . It is a very great honour that God and you have put upon me , to conclude so solemn a day of prayer , which was answered the next morning , by your speedy , and cheerful , and unanimous acknowledgement of his majesty's authority . May i but have the second part , to promote your salvation , and the happiness of this land , by your considering and obeying these necessary truths , what greater honour could i expect on earth ? Or how could you more oblige me to remain 

A daily petitioner to heaven for these mercies , on your own and the nations behalf , rich. Baxter . 

A sermon of repentance . ezek. 36. 31.  then shall ye remember your own evil ways , and your doings that were not good , and shall loath yourselves in your own sight , for your iniquities , and for your abominations . The words are a part of God's prognostics of the Jews restoration , whose dejecton he had before described . Their disease begun within , and there God promiseth to work the cure . their captivity was but the fruit of their voluntary captivity to sin ; and their grief of heart , was but the fruit of their hardness of heart ; and their sharpest sufferings , of their foul pollutions ; and therefore God promiseth a methodical cure ; even to take away their old and stony heart , and cleanse them from their filthiness , and so to ease them by the removing of the cause . how far , and when this promise was to be made good to the Jews , as nationally considered , is a matter that requires a longer disquisition than my limited hour will allow : and the decision of that case is needless , as to my present end and work . That this is part of the gospel-covenant , and applicable to us believers now , the holy-ghost in the epistle to the Hebrews hath assured us . 

The text is the description of the repentance of the persons , in which the beginning of their recovery doth consist , and by which the rest must be attained . The evil which they repent of is , in general , all their iniquities , but especially their idolatry , called their abominations . their repentance is foretold , as it is in the understanding and thoughts , and as in the will and affections . in the former it 's called [ remembering their own evil ways ] in the latter it 's called [ loathing themselves in their own sight , for their iniquities and abominations . Montanus translates it [ reprobabitis in vos ] : but in c. 20. v. 43. [ fastidietis vos ] the same sense is intended by the other versions : when the Septuagint translates it by [ displeasure ] and the Chaldee by [ groaning ] and the Syriack by [ the wrinkling of the face ] and the sept. in c. 20. 43. by [ smiting on the face : ] the Arabic here perverts the sense , by turning all to negatives [ ye shall not , &c. ] yet in c. 20. 43. he turns it by [ the tearing of the face . ] i have purposely chosen a text , that needs no long explication , that in obedience to the foreseen straits of time , i May be excused from that part , and be more on the more necessary . This observation contains the meaning of the text , which by God's assistance , i shall now insist on : viz.  

the remembering of their own iniquities , and loathing themselves for them , is the sign of a repenting persons , and the prognostic of their restoration . ( So far as deliverance May be here expected . ) 

For the opening of which , observe these things following . 

1.  It is not all kind of [ remembering ] that will prove you penitent . the impenitent remember their sin that they May commit it : they remember it with love , desire and delight : the heart of the worldling goeth after his airy or earthen idol : the heart of the ambitious feedeth on his vainglory , and the people's breath : and the filthy fornicator is delighted in the thoughts of the object and exercise of his lust . But it is a remembering , 1o from a deep conviction of the evil and odiousness of sin ; 2o and with abhorrence and self-loathing ; 3o that leadeth to a resolved and vigilant forsaking , that is the proof of true repentance , and the prognostic of a people's restoration . 

2.  And it is not all self-loathing that will signify true repentance . for there is a self-loathing of the desperate and the damned soul , that abhorreth itself , and teareth and tormenteth itself , and cannot be restrained from self-revenge , when it finds that it hath wilfully , foolishly and obstinately been its own destroyer : but the self-loathing of the truly penitent , hath these following properties . 

1.  It proceedeth from the predominant love of God , whom we have abused and offended : the more we love him , the more we loath what is contrary to him . 

2.  It is much excited by the observation and sense of his exceeding mercies , and is conjunct with gratitude . 

3.  It continueth and increaseth under the greatest assurance of forgiveness , and sense of love ; and dyeth not when we think we are out of danger . 

4.  It containeth a loathing of sin as sin ( And a love of holiness as such ) and not only a love of ease and peace , and a loathing of sin as the cause of suffering . 

5.  It resolveth the soul against returning to its former course , and resolveth it for an entire devotedness to God for the time to come . 

6.  It deeply engageth the penitent in a conflict against the flesh , and maketh him victorious ; and setteth him to work in a life of holiness as his trade and principal business in the world . 

7.  It bringeth him to a delight in God and holiness ; and a delight in himself , so far as he findeth God , and heaven , and holiness within him : he can with some comfort and content own himself and his conversation , so far as God ( Victorious against his carnal self ) appeareth in him . For as he loveth Christ in the rest of his members , so must he in himself . and this is it that self-loathing doth prepare for . 

this must be the self-loathing that must afford you comfort , as a penitent persons in the way to restoration . 

Where you see it is employed , that materially it containeth these common acts . 1.  accusing and condemning thoughts against ourselves . It is a judging of ourselves , and makes us call ourselves with Paul , foolish , disobedient , deceived , yea mad ( As Acts 26. 11.  ) and with David to say , i have done foolishly , 2 sam. 24. 10. 2.  It containeth a deep distaste , and displeasure with ourselves ; and a heart-rising against ourselves . 3.  As also an holy indignation against ourselves ; as apprehending that we have played the enemies to ourselves and God . 4.  And it possesseth us with grief and trouble at our miscarriages . So that a soul in this condition is sick of itself , and vexed with its self-procured woe . 

2.  Note also , that when self-loathing proceedeth from mere conviction , and is without the love of God and holiness , it is but the tormentor of the soul , and runs it deeper into sin ; provoking men here to destroy their lives ; and in hell it is the never dying worm . 

3.  Note also , that it is [ themselves ] that they are said to loath : because it is ourselves that conscience hath to do with , as witness and as judge : it is ourselves that are naturally nearest to ourselves ; and our own affairs that we are most concerned in . it is ourselves that must have the joy or torment : and therefore it is our own actions and estate that we have first to mind . Though yet as magistrates , ministers , and neighbours , we must next mind others , and must loath iniquity wherever we meet it ; and a vile person must be contemned in our eyes , while we honour them that fear the Lord , psal. 15. 4.  

And as by nature , so in the commandment , God hath given to every man the first and principal care and charge of himself , and his own salvation , and consequently of his own ways . so that we May with less suspicion loath ourselves , than others ; and are more obliged to do it . 

4.  Note also , that it is not for our troubles , or our disgrace , or our bodily deformities or infirmities , or for our poverty and want , that penitents are said to loath themselves : but for their iniquities and abominations . for 1o this loathing is a kind of justice done upon ourselves ; and therefore is exercised not for mere infelicities , but for crimes . Conscience keepeth in its own court , and meddleth but with moral evils , which we are conscious of . 2o and also it is sin that is loathed by God , and makes the creature loathsome in his eyes : and repentance conformeth the soul to God , and therefore causeth us to loath as he doth , and on his grounds . And 3o there is no evil but sin , and that which sin procureth . And therefore it is for sin that the penitent loathes himself . 

5.  Note also , that it is here employed , that till repentance , there was none of this remembering of sin , and loathing of themselves . they begin with our conversion , and ( As fore-described ) are proper to the truly penitent . For ( To consider them distinctly ) 1o the deluded soul that is bewitched by its own concupiscence , is so taken up with remembering of his fleshly pleasures , and his alluring objects , and his honours , and his earthly businesses and store , that he hath no mind or room for the remembering of his foolish odious sin , and the wrong that he is doing to God and to himself . death is oblivious : and sleep hath but a distracted uneffectual memory , that stirreth not the busy dreamer from his pillow , nor dispatcheth any of the work he dreams of . And the unconverted are asleep and dead in sin . The crowd of cares and worldly businesses ; and the tumultuous noise of foolish sports , and other sensual passions and delights , do take up the minds of the unconverted , and turn them from the observation of the things of greatest everlasting consequence . They have a memory for sin and the flesh , to which they are alive ; but not for things spiritual and eternal , to which they are dead . they remember not God himself as God , with any effectual remembrance : God is not in all their thoughts , psalm 10. 4.  They live as without him in the world , eph. 2. 12.  And if they remember not God , they cannot remember sin as sin , whose malignity lieth in its opposition to the will and holiness of God . They forget themselves , and therefore must needs forget their sinfulness : alas , they remember not ( Effectually and savingly ) what they are , and why they were made , and what they are daily nourished and preserved for , and what business they have to do here in the world . They forget that they have souls to save or lose ; that must live in endless joy or torment : you May see by their careless and ungodly lives , that they forget it . You May hear by their carnal frothy speech , that they forget it . And he that remembreth not himself , remembreth not his own concernments . they forget the end to which they tend : the life which they must live for ever . the matters everlasting ( Whose greatness and duration , one would think should so command the mind of man , and take up all his thoughts and cares , in despite of all the little trifling matters that would avert them , that we should think almost of nothing else ; yet ) these , even these , that nothing but deadness or madness should make a reasonable creature to forget , are daily forgotten by the unconverted soul , or uneffectually remembered . Many a time have i admired , that men of reason that are here to day , and in endless joy or misery to morrow , should be able to forget such unexpressible concernments ! Me thinks they should easier forget to rise , or dress themselves , or to eat or drink , or any thing , then to forget an endless life , which is so undoubtedly certain , and so near . a man that hath a cause to be heard to morrow , in which his life or honour is concerned , cannot forget it : a wretch that is condemned to die to morrow , cannot forget it . And yet poor sinners , that are continually uncertain to live an hour , and certain speedily to see the majesty of the Lord , to their unconceivable joy or terror , as sure as now they live on earth , can forget these things for which they have their memory ; and which one would think should drown the matters of this world , as the report of a canon doth a whisper , or as the sun obscureth the poorest glow-worm . Oh wonderful stupidity of an unrenewed soul ! Oh wonderful folly and distractedness of the ungodly ! That ever men can forget , i say again , that they can forget , eternal joy , eternal woe , and the eternal God , and the place of their eternal unchangeable abode , when they stand even at the door , and are passing in , and there is but the thin vail of flesh between them and that amazing sight , that eternal gulf ; and they are daily dying , and even stepping in . Oh could you keep your honours here for ever ; could you ever wear that gay attire , and gratify your flesh with meats , and drinks , and sports , and lusts ; could you ever keep your rule and dignity , or your earthly life in any state , you had some little poor excuse for not remembering the eternal things , ( As a man hath , that preferreth his candle before the sun : ) but when death is near and inexorable , and you are sure to die as you are sure you live ; when every man of you that sitteth in these seats to day can say , [ i must shortly be in another world , where all the pomp and pleasure of this world will be forgotten , or remembered but as my sin and folly ] one would think it were impossible for any of you to be ungodly ; and to remember the trifles and nothings of the world , while you forget that everlasting all , whose reality , necessity , magnitude , excellency , concernment and duration , are such , as should take up all the powers of your souls , and continually command the service and attendance of your thoughts , against all seekers , and contemptible competitors whatsoever . But , alas , though you have the greatest helps ( In subserviency to these commanding objects ) yet will you not remember the matters which alone deserve remembrance . sometimes the preachers of the gospel do call on you to remember ; to remember your God , your souls , your saviour , your ends and everlasting state , and to remember your misdoings , that you May loath yourselves , and in returning May find life : but some either scorn them , or quarrel with them , or sleep under their most serious and importunate solicitations , or carelessly and stupidly give them the hearing , as if they spoke but words of course , or treated about uncertain things , and spoke not to them from the god of heaven , and about the things that every man of you shall very shortly see or feel . Sometime you are called on by the voice of conscience within , to remember the unreasonableness and evil of your ways : but conscience is silenced , because it will not be conformable to your lusts . But little do you think what a part your too-late-awakened conscience hath yet to play , if you give it not a more sober hearing in time . Sometime the voice of common calamities , and national or local judgements do call on you to remember the evil of your ways : but that which is spoken to all , or many , doth seem to most of them as spoken unto none . sometime the voice of particular judgements , seizing upon your families , persons or estates , doth call on you to remember the evil of your ways : and one would think the rod should make you hear . And yet you most disregardfully go on , or are only frightened into a few good purposes and promises , that die when health and prosperity revive . Sometime God joineth all these together , and pleadeth both by word and rod , and addeth also the inward pleadings of his spirit : he sets your sins in order before you , psal. 50. 21. and expostulateth with you the cause of his abused love , despised sovereignty and provoked justice ; and asketh the poor sinner , hast thou done well to waste thy life in vanity ? to serve thy flesh ? to forget thy god , thy soul , thy happiness ? and to thrust his service into corners , and give him but the odious leavings of the flesh ? ] But these pleas of God cannot be heard . Oh horrible impiety ! by his own creatures ! by reasonable creatures ( That would scorn to be called fools or mad men ) the god of heaven cannot be heard . the brutish , passionate , furious sinners , will not remember . they will not remember , what they have done , and with whom it is that they have to do , and what God thinks and saith of men in their condition ; and whither it is that the flesh will lead them ? and what will be the fruit and end of all their lusts and vanities ? and how they will look back on all at last ? and whether an holy or a sensual life will be sweetest to a dying man ? and what judgement it is that they will all be of , in the controversy between the flesh and spirit , at the later end ? Though they have life , and time , and reason for these uses , we cannot entreat them , to consider of these things in time . If our lives lay on it , as their salvation , which is more , lieth on it , we cannot entreat them . If we should kneel to them , and with tears beseech them , but once a day , or once a week , to bestow one hour in serious consideration of their latter end , and the everlasting state of saints and sinners , and of the equity of the holy ways of God , and the iniquity of their own , we cannot prevail with them . Till the God of heaven doth overrule them , we cannot prevail . the witness that we are forced to bear , is sad : it is sad to us : but it will be sadder to these rebels , that shall one day know , that God will not be outfaced ; and that they May sooner shake the stable earth , and darken the sun by their reproaches , then outbrave the judge of all the world , or by all their cavils , wranglings or scorns , escape the hands of his revenging justice . 

But if ever the Lord will save these souls , he will bring their misdoings to their remembrance . He will make them think of that , which they were so loathe to think on . You cannot now abide these troubling , and severe meditations : the thoughts of God , and heaven , and hell , the thoughts of your sins , and of your duties , are melancholy unwelcome thoughts to you : but oh that you could foreknow the thoughts that you shall have of all these things ! Even the proudest , scornful ; hardened sinner that heareth me this day , shall shortly have such a remembrance , as will make him wonder at his present blockishness . Oh when the unresistible power of heaven shall open all your sins before you , and command you to remember them , and to remember the time , and place , and persons , and all the circumstances of them , what a change will it make upon the most stout or stubborn of the sons of men ? What a difference will there then be between that trembling self-tormenting soul , and the same that now in his gallantry can make light of all these things , and call the messenger of Christ that warneth him , a Puritan or a doting fool ! Your memories now are somewhat subject to your wills ; and if you will not think of your own , your chief , your everlasting concernments , you May choose . if you will choose rather to employ your noble souls on beastly lusts , and waste your thoughts on things of naught , you May take your course , and chase a feather with the childish world , till overtaking it , you see you have lost your labour . But when justice takes the work in hand , your thoughts shall be no more subject to your wills : you shall then remember that which you are full loathe to remember ; and would give a world that you could forget . oh than one cup of the waters of oblivion , would be of unestimable value to the damned ! Oh what would they not give that they could but forget the time they lost , the mercy they abused , the grace which they refused , the holy servants of Christ whom they despised , the wilful sins which they committed , and the many duties which they wilfully omitted ! I have oft thought of their case , when i have dealt with melancholy or despairing persons . If i advise them to cast away such thoughts , and turn their minds to other things , they tell me they cannot ; it is not in their power ; and i have long found , that i May almost as well persuade a broken head to give over aching . But when the holy God shall purposely pour out the vials of his wrath on the consciences of the ungodly , and open the books , and show them all that ever they have done , with all the aggravations , how then shall these worms be able to resist ? 

And now i beseech you all consider ; is it not better to remember your sins on earth , then in hell ? before your physician , then before your judge ? for your cure , then for your torment ? give me leave then , before i go any further , to address myself to you as the messenger of the Lord , with this importunate request , both as you stand here in your private , and in your public capacities . In the name of the god of heaven i charge you [ remember the lives that you have led : remember what you have been doing in the world ! Remember how you have spent your time : and whether indeed it is God that you have been serving , and heaven that you have been seeking , and holiness and righteousness that you have been practising in the world till now ? Are your sins so small , so venial , so few , that you can find no employment on them for your memories ? Or is the offending of the eternal God , so slight and safe a thing , as not to need your consideration ? God forbid you should have such atheistical conceits ! Surely God made not his laws for naught ; nor doth he make such a stir by his word , and messengers , and providences against an harmless thing ? Nor doth he threaten hell to men for small indifferent matters : nor did Christ need to have died , and done all that he hath done to cure a small and safe disease . Surely that which the god of heaven is pleased to threaten with everlasting punishment , the greatest of you all should vouchsafe to think on , and with greatest fear and soberness to remember . 

It is a pitiful thing , that with men , with gentlemen , with professed Christians , God's matters , and their own matters , their greatest matters , should seem unworthy to be thought on ; when they have thoughts for their honours , and their lands , and friends ; and thoughts for their children , their servants , and provision ; and thoughts for their horses , and their dogs , and sports ! Is God and heaven less worth than these ? Are death and judgement matters of less moment ? Gentlemen , you would take it ill to have your wisdom undervalved , and your reason questioned : for your honour sake do not make it contemptible yourselves , in the eyes of all that are truly wise . It is the nobleness of objects that must ennoble your faculties ; and the baseness of objects doth debase them . If brutish objects be your employment and delight , do i need to tell you what you make yourselves ? If you would be noble indeed , let God and everlasting glory be the object of your faculties : if you would be great , then dwell on greatest things : if you would be high , then seek the things that are above , and not the sordid things of earth , col. 3. 1 , 2 , 3.  And if you would be safe , look after the enemies of your peace : and as you had thoughts of sin that led you to commit it , entertain the thoughts that would lead you to abhor it . Oh that i Might have now but the grant of this reasonable request from you , that among all your thoughts , you would bestow now and then an hour in the serious thoughts of your misdoings , and soberly in your retirement between God and your souls , remember the paths that you have trod ; and whether you have lived for the work for which you were create ? One sober hour of such employment Might be the happiest hour that ever you spent , and give you more comfort at your final hour , than all the former hours of your life : and Might lead you into that new and holy life , which you May review with everlasting comfort . 

Truly , gentlemen , i have long observed that Satan's advantage lieth so much on the brutish side , and that the work of man's conversion , and holy conversation , is so much carried on by God's exciting of our reason ; and that the misery of the ungodly is , that they have reason in faculty , and not in use , in the greatest things , that i persuade you to this duty with the greater hopes : if the Lord will now persuade you but to retire from vanity , and soberly exercise your reason , and consider your ways , and say , what have we done ? and what is it that God would have us do ? and what shall we wish we had done at last ? i say , could you now but be prevailed with , to bestow as many hours on this work , as you have cast away in idleness , or worse , i should not doubt , but i should shortly see the faces of many of you in heaven , that have been recovered by the use of this advice . It is a thousand pities , that men that are thought wise enough to be entrusted with the public safety , and to be the physicians of a broken state , should have any among them that are untrusty to their God , and have not the reason to remember their misdoings , and prevent the danger of their immortal souls . Will you sit all day here , to find out the remedy of a diseased land ; and will you not be entreated by God or man , to sit down one hour , and find out the disease of , and remedy for your own souls ? Are those men likely to take care of the happiness of so many thousands , that will still be so careless of themselves ? Once more therefore i entreat you , remember your misdoings , lest God remember them : and bless the Lord that called you this day , by the voice of mercy , to remember them upon terms of faith and hope . remembered they must be first or last : and believe it , this is far unlike the sad remembrance at judgement , and in the place of woe and desperation . 

And i beseech you observe here , that it is your own misdoings that you must remember . had it been only the sins of other men , especially those that differ from you , or have wronged you , or stand against your interest , how easily would the duty have been performed ? How little need should i have had to press it with all this importunity ? How confident should i be , that i could convert the most , if this were the conversion ? It grieves my soul to hear how quick and constant high and low , learned and unlearned are at this uncharitable contumelious remembering of the faults of others : how cunningly they can bring in their insinuated accusations : how odiously they can aggravate the smallest faults , where difference causeth them to distaste the person : how ordinarily they judge of actions by the persons , as if any thing were a crime that is done by such as they dislike , and all were virtue that is done by those that fit their humours : how commonly brethren have made it a part of their service of God , to speak or write uncharitably of his servants ; labouring to destroy the hearers charity , which had more need in this unhappy time , of the bellows than the water ! how usual it is with the ignorant that cannot reach the truth , and the impious that cannot bear it , to call such heretics that know more than themselves ; and to call such precisians , Puritans , ( Or some such name which hell invents , as there is occasion ) who dare not be so bad as they ! How odious , men pretending to much gravity , learning and moderation , do labour to make those that are dear to God ; and what an art they have to widen differences , and make a sea of every lake , and that perhaps under pretence of blaming the uncharitableness of others ! How far the very sermons and discourses of some learned men are from the common rule of doing as we would be done by : and how loudly they proclaim that such men love not their neighbours as themselves ; the most uncharitable words seeming moderate which they give ; and all called intemperate that savoureth not of flattery , which they receive ! were i calling the several exasperated factions now in England , to remember the misdoings of their supposed adversaries , what full-mouthed and debasing confessions would they make ? What monsters of heresy , and schism , of impiety , treason and rebellion , of perjury and perfidiousness , would too many make of the faults of others , while they extenuate their own to almost nothing ! It is a wonder to observe , how the case doth alter with the most , when that which was their adversary's case , becomes their own . the very prayers of the godly , and their care of their salvation , and their fear of sinning , doth seem their crime in the eyes of some that easily bear the guilt of swearing , drunkenness , sensuality , filthiness , and neglect of duty , in themselves , as a tolerable burden . 

But if ever God indeed convert you , ( Though you will pity others , yet ) he will teach you to begin at home , and take the beam out of your own eyes , and to cry out , [ i am the miserable sinner . ] 

And lest these generals seem insufficient for us to confess on such a day as this , and lest yet your memories should need more help , is it not my duty to mind you of some particulars ? which yet i shall not do by way of accusation , but of enquiry : far be it from me to judge so hardly of you , that when you come hither to lament your sins , you cannot with patience endure to be told of them . 

1.  Inquire then , whether there be none among you that live a sensual careless life ; clothed with the best , and faring deliciously every day ? in gluttony or drunkenness , chambering and wantonness , strife or envying , not putting on Christ , nor walking in the spirit , but making provision for the flesh , to satisfy the lusts thereof , rom. 13. 13 , 14.  Is there none among you that spend your precious time in vanities , that is allowed you to prepare for life eternal ? that have time to waste in compliments and fruitless talk and visits ; in gaming and unnecessary recreations , in excessive feasting and entertainments , while God is neglected , and your souls forgotten , and you can never find an hour in a day , to make ready for the life which you must live for ever . Is there none among you that would take that man for a Puritan or fanatic , that should employ but half so much time for his soul , and in the service of the Lord , as you do in unnecessary sports and pleasures , and pampering your flesh ? Gentlemen , if there be any such among you , as you love your souls , remember your misdoings , and bewail these abominations before the Lord , in this day of your professed humiliation . 

2.  Inquire whether there be none among you , that being strangers to the new birth , and to the inward workings of the spirit of Christ upon the soul , do also distaste an holy life , and make it the matter of your reproach , and pacify your accusing consciences with a religion made up of mere words , and heartless outside , and so much obedience as your fleshly pleasures will admit ; accounting those that go beyond you , especially if they differ from you in your modes and circumstances , to be but a company of proud , pharisaical , self-conceited hypocrites , and those whom you desire to suppress . If there should be one such person here , i would entreat him to remember , that it is the solemn asseveration of our judge , that except a man be converted , and be born again , of water and the spirit , he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven . joh. 3. 3 , 5.  Mat. 18. 3.  That if any man have not the spirit of Christ , he is none of his , rom. 8. 9  That if any man be in Christ , he is a new creature ; old things are past away , and all things are become new , 2 cor. 5. 17.  That without holiness none shall see God , heb. 12. 14.  That the wisdom that is from above , is first pure and then peaceable , jam. 3. 17.  That God is a spirit , and they that worship him , must worship him in spirit and in truth , John 4. 23 , 24.  That they worship in vain , that teach for doctrines the commandments of men , mat. 15. 8 , 9  And that except your righteousness exceed that of the scribes and Pharisees , you shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven , matth. 5. 20.  And i desire you to remember that its hard to kick against the pricks ; and to prosper in rage against the Lord : and that its better for that man that offendeth one of his little ones , to have had a millstone fastened to his neck , and to have been cast into the bottom of the sea , matth. 18. 6.  It is a sure and grievous condemnation , that waiteth for all that are themselves unholy : but to the haters or despisers of the holy laws and servants of the Lord , how much more grievous a punishment is reserved ? 

3.  Inquire also , whether there be none among you , that let loose your passions on your inferiors , and oppress your poor tenants , and make them groan under the task , or at least do little to relieve the needy , nor study not to serve the Lord with your estates , but sacrifice all to the pleasing of your flesh , unless it be some inconsiderable pittance , or fruitless drops , that are unproportionable to your receivings . If there be any such , let them remember their iniquities , and cry for mercy , before the cry of the poor to heaven , do bring down vengeance from him that hath promised , to hear their cry , and speedily to avenge them , luk. 18. 7 , 8.  

4.  Inquire , whether there be none that live the life of Sodom , in pride , fullness of bread and idleness , ezek. 16. 49. and that are not pust up with their estates and dignities , and are strangers to the humility , meekness , patience , and self-denial of the saints : that ruffle in bravery , and contend more zealously for their honour and pre-eminence , then for the honour and interest of the Lord . For pride of apparel , it was wont to be taken for a childish or a womanish kind of vice , below a man ; but it 's now observed among the gallants , that ( Except in spots ) the notes of vanity are more legibly written on the hair and dress of a multitude of effeminate males , then on the females ; proclaiming to the world that pride , which one would think even pride itself should have concealed ; and calling by these signs to the beholders to observe the emptyness of their minds , and how void they are of that inward worth , which is the honour of a Christian , and of a man : it being a marvel to see a man of learning , gravity , wisdom , and the fear of God , appear in such an antic dress . 

I have done with the first part [ the remembering of your own evil ways and doings . ] i beseech you practically go along with me to the next , [ the loathing of yourselves in your own eyes , for all your iniquities and abominations . 

every true convert doth thus loath himself for his iniquities ; and when God will restore a punished persons upon their repentance , he bringeth them to this loathing of themselves . 

1.  A converted soul hath a new and heavenly light to help him , to see those matters of humbling use , which others see not . 

2.  More particularly , he hath the knowledge of sin , and of himself . he seeth the odious face of sin , and seeth how much his heart and life , in his sinful days abounded with it , and how great a measure yet remains . 

3.  He hath seen by faith the Lord himself : the majesty , the holiness , the jealousy , the goodness of the eternal God whom he hath offended ; and therefore must needs abhor himself , John 42. 6.  

4.  He hath tasted of God's displeasure against him for his sin already . God himself hath set it home , and awakened his conscience , and held it on , till he hath made him understand that the consuming fire is not to be jested with . 

5.  He hath seen Christ crucified , and mourned over him . This is the glass that doth most clearly show the ugliness of sin : and here he hath learned to abhor himself . 

6.  He hath foreseen by faith the end of sin , and the doleful recompense of the ungodly : his faith beholdeth the misery of damned souls , and the glory which sinners cast away . He heareth them beforehand repenting and lamenting , and crying out of their former folly , and wishing in vain that all this were to do again , and that they Might once more be tried with another life , and resolving then how holily , how self-denyingly they would live ! He knows if sin had had its way , he had been plunged into this hellish misery himself , and therefore he must needs loath himself for his iniquities . 

7.  Moreover the true convert hath had the liveliest taste of mercy ; of the blood of Christ ; of the offers and covenant of grace ; of reprieving mercy ; of pardoning mercy ; of healing and preserving mercy ; and of the unspeakable mercy contained in the promise of everlasting life : and to find that he hath sinned against all this mercy , doth constrain him to abhor himself . 

8.  And it is only the true convert that hath a new and holy nature , contrary to sin ; and therefore as a man that hath the leprosy doth loath himself because his nature is contrary to his disease , so is it ( Though operating in a freer way ) with a converted soul as to the leprosy of sin . Oh how he loathes the remnants of his pride and passion ; his excessive cares , desires , and fears ; the backwardness of his soul to God and heaven ! Sin is to the new nature of every true believer , as the food of a swine to the stomach of a man ; if he have eaten it , he hath no rest till he hath vomited it up ; and then when he looketh on his vomit , he loatheth himself to think how long he kept such filth within him ; and that yet in the bottom there is some remains . 

9  The true covert is one that is much at home ; his heart is the vineyard which he is daily dressing ; his work is ordinarily about it ; and therefore he is acquainted with those secret sins , and daily failings , which ungodly men that are strangers to themselves , do not observe , though they have them in dominion . 

10.  Lastly , a serious Christian is a workman of the Lords , and daily busy at the exercise of his graces ; and therefore hath occasion to observe his weaknesses , and failings , and from sad experience is forced to abhor himself . 

But with careless unrenewed souls it is not so ; some of them May have a mild ingenuous disposition ; and the knowledge of their unworthiness ; and customarily they will confess such sins , as are small disgrace to them , or cannot be hide ; or under the terrible gripes of conscience , in the hour of distress and at the approach of death , they will do more ; and abhor themselves perhaps as Judas did ; or make a constrained confession through the power of fear . But so far are they from this loathing of themselves for all their iniquities , that sin is to them as their element , their food , their nature , and their friend . 

And now , honourable , worthy and beloved auditors , it is my duty to inquire , and to provoke you to inquire , whether the representative body of the Commons of England , and each man of you in particular , be thus affected to yourselves or not . It concerns you to inquire of it , as you love your souls , and love not to see the death-marks of impenitency on them . It concerneth us to inquire of it , as we love you and the nation , and would fain see the marks of God's return in mercy to us , in your self-loathing and return to God . Let conscience speak as before the Lord that sees your hearts and will shortly judge you : have you had such a sight of your natural and actual sin and misery , of your neglect of God , your contempt of heaven , your loss of precious hasty time , your worldly , fleshly , sensual lives , and your omission of the great and holy works which you were made for ; have you had such a sight and sense of these , as hath filled your souls with shame and sorrow ? and caused you in tears or hearty grief to lament your sinful careless lives , before the Lord . Do you loath yourselves for all this , as being vile in your own eyes , and each man say , what a wretch was i ? what an unreasonable self-hating wretch , to do all this against myself ? what an unnatural wretch ! what a monster of rebellion and ingratitude , to do all this against the Lord of love and mercy ? what a deceived foolish wretch ! to prefer the pleasing of my lust and senses , a pleasure that perisheth in the fruition , and is past as soon as it 's received , before the manly pleasures of the saints , and before the souls delight in God , and before the unspeakable everlasting pleasures ? was there any comparison between the brutish pleasures of the flesh , and the spiritual delights of a believing soul , in looking to the endless pleasure which we shall have with all the saints and angels in the glorious presence of the Lord . Was God and glory worth no more , then to be cast aside for satiating of an unsatisfiable flesh and fancy ! and to be sold for a harlot , for a forbidden cup ; for a little air of popular applause , or for a burdensome load of wealth and power , for so short a time ? where 's now the gain and pleasure of all my former sins ! what have they left but a sting behind them ? How near is the time when my departing soul must look back on all the pleasures and profits that ever i enjoyed , as a dream when one awaketh ; as delusory vanities , that have done all for me that ever they will do , and all is but to bring my flesh unto corruption ( Gal. 6. 8.  ) and my soul to this distressing grief and fear ! Add than i must sing and laugh no more ! I must brave it out in pride no more ! I must know the pleasures of the flesh no more ! but be leveled with the poorest , and my body laid in loathsome darkness , and my soul appear before that God whom i so wilfully refused to obey and honour . Oh wretch that i am ! where was my understanding , when i played so boldly with the flames of hell , the wrath of God , the poison of sin ! when God stood by and yet i sinned ! when conscience did rebuke me , and yet i sinned ! when heaven or hell were hard at hand , and yet i sinned ! when to please my god and save my soul i would not forbear a filthy lust , or a forbidden vanity of no worth ! when i would not be persuaded to a holy , heavenly , watchful life , though all my hopes of heaven lay on it . I am ashamed of myself : i am confounded in the remembrance of my wilfall self-destroying folly ! I loath myself for all these abominations : oh that i had lived in beggary and rags , when i lived in sin : and oh that i had lived with God in a prison or in a wilderness , when i refused a holy heavenly life , for the love of a deceitful world ! Will the Lord but pardon what is past , i am resolved through his grace to do so no more , but to loath that filth that i took for pleasure , and to abhor the sin that i made my sport ; and to die to the glory and riches of the world , which i made my idol ; and to live entirely to that God that i did so long and so unworthily neglect ; and to seek that treasure , that kingdom , that delight , that will fully satisfy my expectation , and answer all my care and labour , with such infinite advantage . Holiness or nothing shall be my work and life ; and heaven or nothing shall be my portion and felicity . 

These are the thoughts , the affections the breathing of every regenerate gracious soul . For your soul's sake inquire now , is it thus with you ? or have you thus returned with self-loathing to the Lord , and firmly engaged your souls to him at your entrance into a holy life ? I must be plain with you gentlemen , or i shall be unfaithful ; and i must deal closely with you , or i cannot deal honestly and truly with you . As sure as you live , yea as sure as the word of God is true , you must all be such converted men , and loath yourselves for your iniquities , or be condemned as impenitent to everlasting fire . To hide this from you , is but to deceive you , and that in a matter of a thousand times greater moment than your lives . Perhaps i could have made shift , instead of such serious admonitions , to have wasted this hour in flashy oratory , and neat expressions , and ornaments of reading , and other things that are the too common matter of ostentation , with men that preach God's word in jest , and believe not what they are persuading others to believe . Or if you think i could not , i am indifferent , as not much affecting the honour of being able , to offend the Lord , and wrong your souls , by dallying with holy things . Flattery in these things of soul concernment , is a selfish villainy , that hath but a very short reward ; and those that are pleased with it to day , May curse the flatterer for ever . Again therefore let me tell you , ( That which i think you will confess , ) that it is not your greatness , nor your high looks , nor the gallantry of your spirits that scorns to be thus humbled , that will serve your turn when God shall deal with you , or save your carcases from rottenness and dust , or your guilty souls from the wrath of the almighty . Nor is it your contempt of the threatenings of the Lord , and your stupid neglect , or scorning at the message , that will endure , when the sudden unresistible light shall come in upon you and convince you , or you shall see and feel what now you refused to believe ! Nor is it your outside hypocritical religion , made up of mere words or ceremonies , and giving your souls but the leavings of the flesh , and making God an underling to the world , that will do any more to save your souls , than the picture of a feast to feed your bodies . Nor is it the stiffest conceits that you shall be saved in an unconverted state , or that you are sanctified when you are not , that will do any more to keep you from damnation , than a conceit that you shall never die , will do to keep you here for ever . Gentlemen , though you are all here in health , and dignity , and honour to day , how little a while is it , alas how little , till you shall be every man in heaven or hell ! ( Unless you are infidels you dare not deny it . ) And it is only Christ and a holy life that is your way to heaven , and only sin , and the neglect of Christ and holiness that can undo you . Look therefore upon sin as you should look on that which would cast you into hell , and is daily undermining all your hopes . Oh that that this honourable assembly could know it in some measure , as it shall be shortly known ? and judge of it as men do , when time is past , and delusions vanished , and all men are awakened from their fleshly dreams , and their naked souls have seen the Lord ? Oh than what laws would you make against sin ? How speedily would you join your strength against it , as against the only enemy of our peace , and as against a fire in your houses , or a plague that were broken out upon the city , where you are ? Oh then how zealously would you all concur to promote the interest of holiness in the land , and studiously encourage the servants of the Lord ! How severely would you deal with those , that by making a mock of godliness , do hinder the salvation of the people's souls ? How carefully would you help the labourers that are sent to guide men in the holy path ? and yourselves would go before the nation , as an example of penitent self-loathing for your sins , and hearty conversion to the Lord . Is this your duty now , or is it not ? If you cannot deny it , i warn you from the Lord , do not neglect it ; and do not by your disobedience to a convinced conscience , prepare for a tormenting conscience . If you know your Master's will and do it not , you shall be beaten with many stripes . 

And your public capacity and work , doth make your repentance and holiness needful to others as well as to yourselves . had we none to govern us , but such as entirely subject themselves to the government of Christ ; and none to make us laws , but such as have his law transcribed upon their hearts , oh what a happy persons should we be . Men are unlikely to make strckt laws , against the vices which they love and live in : or if they make them , they are more unlikely to execute them . We can expect no great help against drunkenness , swearing , gaming , filthiness , and profaneness , from men that love these abominations so well , as that they will rather part with God and their salvation , than they will let them go . All men are born with a serpentine malice and enmity against the seed of Christ , which is rooted in their very natures . Custom in sin increaseth this to more malignity ; and it is only renewing grace that doth overcome it . If therefore there should be any among our rulers , that are not cured of this mortal malady , what friendship can be expected from them to the cause and servants of the Lord ? If you are all the children of God yourselves , and heaven be your end , and holiness your delight and business , it will then be your principal care to encourage it , and help the persons to the happiness that you have found yourselves . But if in any the original ( Increased ) enmity to God and godliness prevail , we can expect no better ( Ordinarily ) from such , then that they oppose the holiness which they hate , and do their worst to make us miserable . But woe to him that striveth against his maker . Shall the thorns and briers be set in battle against the consuming fire and prevail ? isa. 27. 4 , 5.  Oh therefore for the nations sake , begin at home , and cast away the sins which you would have the nation cast away ! All men can say , that ministers must teach by their lives , as well as by their doctrines ; ( And woe to them that do not . ) And must not magistrates as well govern by their lives , as by their laws ? will you make laws which you would not have men obey ? Or would you have the persons to be better than your selves ? or can you expect to be obeyed by others , when you will not obey the god of heaven and earth yourselves ? We beseech you therefore for the sake of a poor distressed land , let our recovery begin with you . God looks so much at the rulers of a nation in his dealings with them , that ordinarily it goes with the persons as their rulers are . Till David had numbered the persons , God would not let out his wrath upon them , though it was they that were the great offenders . If we see our representative body begin in loathing themselves for all their iniquities , and turning to the Lord with all their hearts , we should yet believe that he is returning to us , and will do us good after all our provocations , truly gentlemen , it is much from you that we must fetch our comfortable or sad prognostics , of the life or death of this diseased land . Whatever you do , i know that it shall go well with the righteous ; but for the happiness or misery of the nation in general , it 's you that are our best prognostication . If you repent yourselves , and become a holy persons to the Lord , it promiseth us deliverance : but if you harden your hearts , and prove despisers of God and holiness , it 's like to be our temporal , and sure to be your eternal undoing , if saving grace do not prevent it . 

And i must needs tell you , that if you be not brought to loath yourselves , it is not because there is no loathsome matter in you . Did you see your inside , you could not forbear it . As i think it would somewhat abate the pride of the most curious gallants , if they did but see what a heap of phlegm , and filth , and dung , ( And perhaps crawling worms ) there is within them . Much more should it make you loath yourselves , if you saw those sins that are a thousand times more odious . And to instigate you hereunto , let me further reason with you . 

1.  You can easily loath an enemy ; and who hath been a greater enemy to any of you , than yourselves ? Another May injure you ; but no man can everlastingly undo you , but yourselves . 

2.  You abhor him that kills your dearest friends ; and it is you by your sins that have put to death the Lord of life . 

3.  Who is it but yourselves that hath robbed you of so much precious time , and so much precious fruit of ordinances , and of all the mercies of the Lord ? 

4.  Who is it but yourselves that hath brought you under God's displeasure ? Poverty could not have made him loath you , nor any thing besides your sins . 

5.  Who wounded conscience , and hath raised all your doubts and fears ? was it not your sinful selves ? 

6.  Who is it but yourselves that hath brought you so near the gulf of misery ? and endangered your eternal peace ? 

7.  Consider the loathsome nature of your sins , and how then can you choose but loath yourselves ? 

1.  It is the creatures rebellion or disobedience against the absolute universal sovereign . 

2.  It is the deformity of God's noblest creature here on earth ; and the abusing of the most noble faculties . 

3.  It is a stain so deep that nothing can wash out but the blood of Christ . The flood that drowned a world of sinners , did not wash away their sins . The fire that consumed the sodomites , did not consume their sins . Hell itself can never end it , and therefore shall have no end itself . It dieth not with you when you die : though churchyards are the guiltiest spots of ground , they do not bury and hide our sin . 

4.  The church must loath it , and must cast out the sinner as loathsome if he remain impenitent : and none of the servants of the Lord must have any friendship with the unfruitful works of darkness . 

5.  God himself doth loath the creature for sin , and for nothing else but sin , zech. 11. 8.  my soul loathed them . deut. 32. 19  when the Lord saw it he abhorred them , because of the provoking of his sons and daughters . ] lev. 26. 30.  my soul shall abhor you . ] psal. 78. 59  when God heard this he was wroth , and greatly abhorred Israel . lam. 2. 7.  he abhorred his very sanctuary . ] For he is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity , hab. 1. 13.  In a word , it is the sentence of God himself , that a wicked man is loathsome and cometh to shame , prov. 13. 5.  ] so that you see what abundant cause of self-abhorrence is among us . 

But we are much afraid of God's departure , when we see how common self-love is in the world , and how rare this penitent self-loathing is . 

1.  Do they loath themselves that on every occasion are contending for their honour , and exalting themselves , and venturing their very souls , to be highest in the world for a little while ? 

2.  Do they loath themselves that are readier to justify all their sins , or at least extenuate them , then humbly confess them ? 

3.  Do they loath themselves for all their sins , that cannot endure to be reproved , but loath their friends , and the ministers of Christ that tell them of their loathsomeness ? 

4.  Do they loath themselves that take their pride itself for manhood , and Christian humility for baseness , and brokenness of heart for whining hypocrisy or folly , and call them a company of priestridden fools , that lament their sin , and ease their souls by free confession ? Is the ruffling bravery of this city , and the strange attire , the haughty carriage , the feasting , idleness and pomp , the marks of such as loath themselves for all their abominations ? why then was fasting , and sack cloth and ashes , the badge of such in ancient times ? 

5.  Do they loath themselves for all their sins , who loath those that will not do as they ? and speak reproachfully of such as run not with them to the same excess of riot , 1 pet. 4. 4. and Count them precisians that dare not spit in the face of Christ , by wilful sinning as venturously and madly as themselves . 

6.  Or do they loath themselves for all their sins , that love their sins , even better than their god , and will not by all the obtestations , and commands , and entreaties of the Lord , be persuaded to forsake them ? How far all these are from this self-loathing , and how far that nation is from happiness where the rulers or inhabitants are such , is easy to conjecture . 

I should have minded you what sins of the land must be remembered , and loathed if we would have peace and healing . But as the glass forbids me , so , alas , as the sins of Sodom they declare themselves . Though through the great mercy of the Lord the body of this nation , and the sober part , have not been guilty of that covenant-breaking perfidiousness , treason , sedition , disobedience , self-exalting , and turbulency as some have been , and as ignorant foreigners through the calumnies of malicious adversaries May possibly believe , yet must it be for a lamentation through all generations , that any of those that went out from us , have contracted the guilt of such abominations , and occasioned the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme ; and that any in the pride or simplicity of their hearts , have followed the conduct of Jesuitical seducers , they knew not whither , nor to what . 

That profaneness aboundeth on the other side , and drunkenness , swearing , fornication , lasciviousness , idleness , pride and covetousness , do still survive the ministers that have wasted themselves against them , and the labours of faithful magistrates to this day ! And that the two extremes of heresy and profaneness , do increase each other ; and while they talk against each other , they harden one another , and both afflict the church of Christ . But especially woe to England for that crying sin , the scorning of a holy life , if a wonder of mercy do not save us . That persons professing the Christian religion , should scorn the diligent practice of that religion which themselves profess ! that obedience to the god of heaven , that imitation of the example of our saviour who came from heaven to teach us holiness , should not only be neglected , unreasonably and impiously neglected , but also by a transcendent impious madness , should be made a matter of reproach ! That the holy ghost into whose name as the sanctifier these men were themselves baptised , should not only be resisted , but his sanctifying work be made a scorn ! That it should be made a matter of derision , for a man to prefer his soul before his body , and heaven before earth , and God before a transitory world , and to use his reason in that for which it was principally given him , and not to be wilfully mad in a case where madness will undo him unto all eternity ! judge as you are men , whether hell itself is like much to exceed such horrid wickedness ! and whether it be not an astonishing wonder , that ever a reasonable soul should be brought to such a height of abomination . That they that profess to believe the holy Catholic church , and the communion of saints , should deride the holiness of the church , and the saints and their communion ! that they that pray for the hallowing of God's name , the coming of his kingdom , and the doing of his will even as it 's done in heaven , should make a mock at all this that they pray for ! How much further think you is it possible , for wicked souls to go in sinning ? Is it not the God of heaven himself that they make a scorn of ? Is not holiness his image ? did not he make the law that doth command it ; professing that none shall see his face without it ? heb. 12. 14.  Oh sinful nation ! Oh persons laden with iniquity , repent , repent , speedily and with self-loathing repent of this inhuman crime , lest God should take away your glory , and enter himself into judgement with you , and plead against you the scorn that you have cast upon the creator , the saviour , the sanctifier to whom you were engaged in your baptismal vows ! Lest when he plagueth and condemneth you he say , why persecuted you me ? ( Acts 9 4. ) inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of these my brethren , ye did it unto me . ] read . prov. 1. 20. to the end . When Israel mocked the messengers of the Lord , and despised his words , and misused his prophets , his wrath arose against his persons till there was no remedy , 2 chron. 26. 16.  And oh that you that are the physicians of this diseased land , would specially call them to repentance for this , and help them against it for the time to come . 

Having called you first to remember your misdoings , and secondly to loath yourselves in your own eyes for them ; i must add a third , that you stop not here , but proceed to reformation , or else all the rest is but hypocrisy . And here it is that i most earnestly entreat this honourable assembly for their best assistance . Oh make not the forementioned sins your own ; lest you hear from God , quod minus crimine , quam absolutione peccatum est . though England hath been used to cry loud for liberty , let them not have liberty to abuse their maker , and to damn their souls , if you can hinder it . optimus est reipublicae status , ubi nulla libertas deest , nisi licentia pereundi , as Nero once was told by his unsuccessful tutor . Use not men to a liberty of scorning the laws of God , lest you teach them to scorn yours : for can you expect to be better used than God . And cui plus licet quam par est , plus vult quam licet ( Gell. l. 17. c. 14. ) We have all seen the evils of liberty to be wanton in religion : is it not worse to have liberty , to deride religion ? if men shall have leave to go quietly to hell themselves , let them not have leave to mock poor souls from heaven . The suffering to the sound in faith is as nothing : for what is the foaming rage of mad men to be regarded ? But that in England God should be so provoked , and souls so hindered from the paths of life , that whoever will be converted and saved , must be made a laughing stock ( Which carnal minds cannot endure , ) this is the mischief which we deprecate . 

The eyes of the nation , and of the Christian world , are much upon you , some high in hopes , some deep in fears , some waiting in dubious expectations for the issue of your counsels . Great expectations , in deep necessities , should awake you to the greatest care and diligence . Though i would not by omitting any necessary directions or admonitions to you , invite the world to think that i speak to such as cannot endure to hear , and that so honourable an assembly doth call the ministers of Christ to do those works of their proper office , which yet they will be offended if they do ; yet had i rather err in the defective part , then by excess , and therefore shall not presume to be too particular . Only in general , in the name of Christ , and on the behalf of a trembling yet hoping nation , i most earnestly beseech and warn you , that you own and promote the power and practise of godliness in the land , and that as God whose ministers you are ( rom. 13. 4.  ) is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him , heb. 11. 6. and hath made this a principal article of our faith ; so you would imitate your absolute Lord , and honour them that fear the Lord , and encourage them that diligently seek him . and May i not freely tell you , that God should have the precedency ? and that you must first seek his kingdom and the righteousness thereof , and he will facilitate all the rest of your work . Surely no powers on earth should be offended , that the god from whom , and for whom , and through whom they have what they have , is preferred before them ; when they should own no interest but his , and what is subservient to it . I have long thought that pretences of a necessity of beginning with our own affairs , hath frustrated our hopes from many parliaments already : and i am sure that by delays the enemies of our peace have got advantage to cross our ends and attain their own . Our calamities begun in differences about religion , and still that 's the wound that most needs closing : and if that were done , how easily ( I dare confidently speak it ) would the generality of sober godly persons , be agreed in things civil , and become the strength and glory of the sovereign ( Under God ? ) And though with grief and shame we see this work so long undone ( May we hope that God hath reserved it to this season . ) Yet i have the confidence to profess , that ( as the exalting of one party by the ejection and persecuting of the rest , is the sinful way to your dishonour and our ruin , so the terms on which the differing parties most considerable among us , May safely , easily and suddenly unite , are very obvious ; and our concord a very easy thing , if the prudent and moderate Might be the guides , and selfish interests and passion did not set us at a further distance than our principles have done . and to show you the facility of such an agreement , were it not that such personal matters are much liable to misinterpretations , i should tell you , that the late reverend primate of Ireland consented ( In less than half an hoursdebate ) to five or six propositions which i offered him , as sufficient for the concord of the moderate episcopal and Presbyterians , without forsaking the principles of their parties . Oh that the Lord would yet show so much mercy to a sinful nation , as to put it into your hearts to promote but the practice of those Christian principles which we are all agreed in : i hope there is no controversy among us whether God should be obeyed and hell avoided , and heaven first sought , and scripture be the rule and test of our religion , and sin abhorred and cast out . oh that you would but further the practice of this with all your might : we crave not of you any lordship or dominion , nor riches , nor interest in your temporal affairs : we had rather see a law to exclude all ecclesiastics from all power of force : the god of heaven that will judge you and us , will be a righteous judge betwixt us , whether we crave any thing unreasonable at your hands . These are the sum of our requests : 1.  That holiness May be encouraged , and the overspreading profaneness of this nation effectually kept down . 2.  That an able diligent ministry May be encouraged , and not corrupted by temporal power . 3.  That discipline May be seriously promoted , and ministers no more hindered by magistrates in the exercise of their office , than physicians and schoolmasters are in theirs ; seeing it is but a government like theirs , consisting in the liberty of conscionable managing the works of our own office that we expect : give us but leave to labour in Christ's vineyard with such encouragement as the necessity of obstinate souls requireth , and we will ask no more . You have less cause to restrain us from discipline then from preaching : for it is a more flesh-displeasing work that we are hardlier brought to . I foretell you , that you shut out me and all that are of my mind , if you would force us to administer sacraments without discipline , and without the conduct of our own discretion , to whom the magistrate appoints it ; as if a physician must give no physic but by your prescript . the antidisciplinarian magistrate i could as resolutely suffer under as the superstitious ; it being worse to cast out discipline , then to err in the circumstances of it . The question is not , whether Bishops or no ? but whether discipline or none ? and whether enough to use it ? 4.  We earnestly request that scripture sufficiency as the test of our religion , and only universal law of Christ May be maintained : and that nothing unnecessary May be imposed as necessary , nor the church's unity laid on that which will not bear it , nor ever did . oh that we Might but have leave to serve God only as Christ hath commanded us , and to go to heaven in the same way as the apostles did ! These are our desires ; and whether they are reasonable God will judge . 

give first to God the things that are God's , and then give Caesar the things that are Caesar's . let your wisdom be first pure , and then peaceable . not but that we are resolved to be loyal to sovereignty , though you deny us all these : whatever malicious men pretend , that is not nor shall not be our difference . I have proved more publicly when it was more dangerous to publish it , that the generality of the orthodox sober ministers , and godly persons of this nation , did never consent to king-killing , and resisting sovereign power , nor to the change of the ancient government of this land ; but abhorred the pride and ambition that attempted it . I again repeat it : the blood of some , the imprisonment and displacing of others , the banishment or flight of others , and the detestations and public protestations of more ; the oft declared sense of England , and the wars and sad estate of Scotland , have all declared before the world , to the shame of calumniators , that the generality of the orthodox sober Protestant's of these nations , have been true to their allegiance , and detesters of unfaithfulness and ambition in subjects , and resisters of heresy and schism in the church , and of anarchy and democratical confusions in the commonwealth . And though the land hath ringed with complaints and threatenings against myself , for publishing a little of the mixture of Jesuitical and familisticall contrivances , for taking down together our government and religion , and setting up new ones for the introduction of popery , infidelity and heresy ; yet i am assured that there is much more of this confederacy , for the all-seeing God to discover in time , to the shame of Papists , that cannot be content to write themselves for the killing of Kings when the Pope hath once excommunicated them , and by the decrees of a general council at the Lateran , to depose Princes that will extirpate such as the Pope calls heretics , and absolve all their subjects from their fidelity and allegiance , but they must also creep into the councils and armies of Protestant's , and taking the advantage of successes and ambition , withdraw men at once from their religion and allegiance , that they May cheat the world into a belief , that treasons are the fruits of the Protestant profession , when these masked jugglers have come by night and sown and cherished these Romish tares . As a Papist must cease to be a Papist if he will be truly and fully loyal to his sovereign ( As i am ready to prove against any adversary ; ) so a Protestant must so far cease to be a Protestant before he can be disloyal . For rom. 13. is part of the rule of his religion . Unhappily there hath been a difference among us , which is the higher power , when those that have their shares in the sovereignty are divided : but whether we should be subject to the higher power is no question with us . 

Gentlemen , i have nothing to ask of you for myself nor any of my brethren as for themselves : but that you will be friends to serious preaching and holy living , and will not ensnare our consciences with any unscripturall inventions of men , this i would beg of you as on my knees : 1.  As for the sake of Christ , whose cause and persons it is that i am pleading for . 2.  For the sake of thousands of poor souls in this land , whose salvation or damnation will be much promoted by you . 3.  For the sake of thousands of the dear servants of the Lord , whose eyes are waiting to see what God will do by your hands . 4.  For your own sakes , who are undone if you dash yourselves on the rock you should build on , and set against the holy God , and turn the cries of his servants to heaven for deliverance from you , luk. 18. 8.  If you slumble on Christ he will break you in pieces ; but if he fall upon you he will grind you to powder . 5.  For the sake of your posterity , that they May not be bred up in ignorance or ungodliness . 6.  For the honour of the nation and yourselves ; that you turn by all the suspicions and fears that are raised in the land . 7.  For the honour of sound doctrine and church government , that you May not bring schism into greater credit than now you have brought it to deserved shame . for if you frown on godliness under pretence of uniformity in unnecessary things , and make times worse than when libertinism and schism so prevailed , the persons will look back with groans and say , what happy times did we once see ? and so will honour schism , and libertinism , and usurpation , through your oppression . 8.  Lastly , i beg this of you , for the honour of soveragnty and the nations peace . a Prince of a holy persons is most honourable . The interest of holiness is Christ's own : happy is that Prince that espouseth this , and subjecteth all his own unto it . See psal. 1. 1 , 2.  & 101.  & 15. 4.  It is the conscionable , prudent , godly persons of the land that must be the glory and strength of their lawful sovereign . their prayers will serve him better than the hideous oaths and curses of the profane . Woe to the rulers that set themselves against the interest of Christ and holiness . Read psal. 2. or that make snares for their consciences , that they May persecute them as disobedients , who are desirous to obey their rulers in subordination to the Lord . See dan. 3.  & 6. 5 , 10 , 13.  I have dealt plainly with you , and told you the very truth . If God have now a blessing for you and us , you will obey it : but if you refuse , then look to yourselves and answer it if you can . I am sure in spite of earth and hell , it shall go well with them that live by faith . 

Finis . 

