The humble petition of many thousands, gentlemen, free-holders, and others, of the county of Worcester to the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England, in behalf of the able, faithful, godly ministry of this nation / delivered by Colonel Jeff Bridges, and M. Thomas Foly, December 22, 1652 ; with the Parliaments answers thereunto. / England and Wales. Parliament. (Printed by Robert White, for Francis Tyton, and Thomas Underhill and are to be sold at their shops ...,London :1652.)

The humble petition of many thousands , gentlemen , freeholders , and others , of the county of Worcester , to the parliament of the commonwealth of England . in behalf of the able , faithful , godly ministry of this nation . Delivered by colonel John Bridges , and Mr. Thomas folly , December 22. 1652.  With the parliaments answer thereunto . 

London , printed by Robert White , for Francis Titan , and Thomas Underhill , and are to be sold at their shops , the three daggers in fleet street , and the bible  

To the honourable the parliament of the commonwealth of England . The humble petition of us gentlemen , freeholders , and others inhabiting the county of Worcester . Showeth , 

That your petitioners having with grief observed both the language of many pamphlets and persons of late times , against the ministers of Christ among us , and petitions preferred to you against their present maintenance , without any regard to the substitution of a fit : and these pretending to the relief of the impoverished nation , as if they were the very sense and language of the body of this commonwealth : we cannot but suspect , yea discern that there is a party that desire and endeavour the subversion of the ministry ; yet have we hitherto remained silent , partly in hopes that they were so few and inconsiderable , as not to deserve to be publicly taken notice of , and mentioned , to the dishonour of our nation : partly that we Might not interrupt your weighty consultations , but chiefly lest we should be misinterpreted to suspect your fidelity to the ministry , and consequently to Christianity and Christ himself : which we know you must needs resent as an uncharitable censoriousness , considering how evident you have seen , and how often acknowledged with greatest solemnity , the Lord Jesus in your preservations ; and how deeply you are engaged to him above most men on earth , and how sensibly you vindicated a persecuted ministry in the very beginning of this parliament , and how strongly you have obliged yourselves , not only to preserve the reform religion in doctrine , worship , discipline , and government ; but also to promote in all these a further reformation where it is wanting ; as also considering what a tender respect to a faithful ministry you have all along to this day professed , and are still consulting for the propagation of the gospel , and have done justice on some opposers so near you ; besides the augmentations you have allowed to many places where means was wanting . We disclaim therefore all such ungrateful censoriousness , and thankfully acknowledge all your favors to the ministry and gospel of the Lord Jesus , who is easily able to reward you , and see that you be no losers by him and his cause . But yet least our continue silence should seem to signify our consent to those that would undo us , under pretence of relieving us ; and lest they be thought to speak our sense , lest their audaciousness increase while none contradict them : and lest we dishonour our nation in the eyes of the Christian world , whilst they think that the voice of these few is the common voice : and lest your own hearts should be overwhelmed with grief , not only to see such a degenerated persons living under your government ; but also that so few gain ▪ say them , as if the nation had lost their love to the gospel : and that after such light , profession and engagements ; and consequently you May think they will prove an ungrateful persons to you , who prove so ungrateful to the Lord their saviour ; we have therefore adventured on this bold interpellation , and crave your patience , while we do with more than ordinary importunity bespeak you , seeing it is in the zeal of the Lord , for his glory , his church , his gospel , and the souls of ourselves and posterity . We know it was by ministers of the gospel , that the Lord Jesus did set up his kingdom on earth , and hath subdued so much of the world to himself , destroying the kingdom of darkness , paganism , idolatry , and wickedness : we know he granted their commission upon the reception of his plenipotency , and upon his ascending he gave them for the perfecting of the saints , and the edifying of his body , till they come to his fullness , and that as a means to preserve them from seducers , and being tossed and carried about as children with every wind of doctrine , eph. 4 9 to 15. and hath promised to be with them to the end of the world : which promise he hath hitherto eminently accomplished . It is the ministry by which Christ hath continue his church to this day : nor do we know , or have heard of that place on earth where Christianity was ever maintained in splendour and vigor ( If at all continue ) without a ministry . It was the ministers by whom Christ did waken the superstitious world , and discover to them the Romish delusions ; and by whom he begun and carried on the work of reformation , by them exciting a zealous magistracy ; and after all their labours , multitudes of them did sacrifice their lives in the flames . It is the writings of a learned able ministry which yet stand up in the face of heathenish , Mahometan , and Romish adversaries , to their vexation and confusion , which they May sooner reproach or burn , than answer : by which after-ages are , and still May be established in the truth , against all the subtle endeavours of seducers . It is a learned , able , faithful ministry , which yet is the daunting and discouragement of the Jesuits and other deceivers , who well know , if these were but taken out of their way , how boldly they Might dare us , how insultingly they Might challenge us to dispute for our religion , and how easily they Might silence and shame us , and thereby carry away the multitude after them . For who should strengthen the people's hearts , and defend the cause of the Lord against them , if such a ministry were down ? It was a faithful ministry who revealed God's mercy , and the precious truths of the gospel to our own souls , and whom God by the cooperation of his spirit hath blessed to be the means of converting , or confirming , or both , the souls of all those of us who have attained to any saving knowledge of himself . When we remember how often , and how happily our souls have been revived and refreshed by their ministry , we are ashamed of the remissness of our zeal in this cause ; when we think that they are our fathers , and confirmers in Christ , and how they must present us to him at his appearing as their joy and crown , phil. 2. 19 , 20. and that when we have escaped the flames of hell , and meet them in glory , we must acknowledge them instruments of so unvaluable a blessing ; we had rather there were no tongues in our mouths , then that ever we should join with their reproachers , and had rather suffer greater wants than ever we yet suffered , then ungratefully deny them their necessary maintenance , seeing our Lord himself said , when he set them upon his work , the labourer is worthy of his hire ; and the holy ghost saith , who goeth to warfare at his own charge ? They that minister about holy things , live of the things of the temple ; even so hath the Lord ordained , that they which preach the gospel , should live of the gospel , 1 cor. 9 7. to 15.  Considering also that they are not foreigners , but Englishmen , our own brethren , and sons that receive it from us , even that which by law is not ours but theirs ; and considering also how much more liberal Papists are to their mass-priests and seducing Jesuits than we are to a faithful ministry of Christ . And when we consider , that if England do excel other nations in the light of knowledge , and power of godliness , it is the ministry that are herein our glory , and the means of what the persons do enjoy , we cannot be so ungrateful to them as to starve them and cast them off ; nor yet such enemies to England's happiness and honour● yea ▪ when we consider how the dreadful , omnipotent King of saints doth call them his coworkers , and hath sent them in subserviency to his own bloodshed , and spirit , and said , he that despiseth you , despiseth me ; we had rather endure any corporal calamities , then stand charged with such a sin at the bar of our Lord : yea ▪ and when we consider how he hath owned and stood by them , and rebuked Kings for their sakes and his churches , charging them to do his prophets no harm ; and how well those rulers have sped , that have most obeyed , and encouraged them in the work of the Lord ; and how God hath broken those powers that have disobeyed and abused them , 2 chron. 36. 15 , 16 , 17. and how severely he hath dealt in England before our eyes with that generation of men that silenced , reproached , and persecuted them ; we tremble at God's judgements , and dare not venture into the same consuming fire , whose flames are yet so fresh in our memory . 

Your petitioners having as in the presence of the Lord made this necessary and solemn profession of their judgements , affections , and resolutions , to acquaint you how far they are from approving or consenting to any opposers or underminers of the ministry and gospel of the Lord Jesus , do humbly address themselves , with these earnest requests , to this honourable assembly . 

First , that you will be pleased , not only to continue your owning of , and tenderest care for the upholding or an able , godly , faithful ministry ( Of which we dare not doubt ) but also that you will so far countenance and encourage them in the Lord's work , and discountenance all that oppose them , directly or indirectly that all the world , and especially the persons of this commonwealth , May still see , and acknowledge your open and resolved adhering to the reform Christian religion , and interest of the Lord Jesus : and seeing all the ungodly ( Besides misguided distempered Christians ) are ever discouragers of them , God having sent them on a work so unpleasing to flesh and blood , you will the more sedulously encourage them , as nursing fathers of the church . 

Secondly , that you will be pleased to this end , to take special care of their competent maintenance , that we May not have an ignorant ministry , while they are forced to be labouring for food and raiment , while they should be in their studies , or watching over their flocks ; and that through disability or unpreparedness , they disgrace not the work of Christ , nor make it and their office contemptible , thereby rejoicing the enemy , and hindering the saving of souls ; specially seeing it is expected that they credit their doctrine with works of charity : and seeing that a dependent and beggarly ministry will lose so much of their authority with the souls that most need them , and themselves will be laid open to the sore temptation of man-pleasing ; besides the probability of the suffering of their children , when they are dead : and if the ministers of this age be never so resolved to continue their work through all necessities , yet in the next age the church is like to be destitute and desolate , because men will set their sons to other studies and employments : we therefore humbly crave , that this honourable assembly will not take down the present maintenance by tithes ( Though we have ●s much reason to be sensible of those inconveniences that it is charged with , as others ) or at least , not till they , instead of it , establish as sure , and full , and fit a maintenance . 

Thirdly , that you will be pleased to take into your compassionate thoughts , both the dark places in England and Wales which want able godly teachers ; and the state of great cities , and populous towns , where through the exceeding number of souls , one minister hath more work than can possibly be done by many : whereby while they are confined to the public work alone , all private ministerial instruction , admonition , and other oversight , must needs be neglected : that therefore to such very numerous congregations , you would allow a maintenance , if not to ministers proportionable to the number of souls , and greatness of the work ; yet at least more than in smaller places : we offer but the same request to you , in your places , which Christ hath commanded us to offer to God himself . That where the harvest is great , and the labourers are few , more labourers May be sent into the harvest . 

Fourthly , that you will be pleased to continue your care of the universities , and schools of learning , and tenderly preserve their maintenance and necessary privileges , that there May be a meet supply of labourers for the continuation of the gospel , and the glory of England to our posterity . 

Fifthly , and because our sad divisions in matter of religion , especially about church-government , have been such a hindrance to the propagation of the gospel , that you will be pleased speedily to employ your utmost wisdom and power for the healing of them : and to that end would call together some of the most godly , prudent , peaceable divines of each party , that differs in points of church-government , and lay upon them your commands and adjuration , that they cease not amicable consulting and seeking God , till they have found out a meet way for accommodation and unity , and acquainted you therewith : and if through God's heavy displeasure against us , he shall suffer the spirit of division and prejudice so far to prevail , as to frustrate their consultations ( The contrary whereto we should strongly hope ) that you would be pleased to advise with those divines that are most judicious and peaceable , and least addicted to parties ; and thereupon to recommend at least to the persons , so much of church-order and government , as you find to be clearly required by Jesus Christ , and vouchsafe it your public countenance and encouragement , though you scruple an enforcement . 

these things we humbly and earnestly request of this honourable assembly , in the behalf of Jesus Christ ( to whom we doubt not but you are daily petitioners ) and of this commonwealth , and the souls of men : beseeching you to let the interest of the gospel have the most speedy and resolute dispatch in your consultations , and at least to equal it with our most necessary defence , whereby you will the more engage Christ to defend both you and us , whom you have so often found to be the surest defence : so shall you be called the repairers of our breaches ; and shall oblige us to pray , &c.  

[ subscribed by above six thousand . ] 

Col : John Bridges , and Mr. Thomas folly being called in to the house , Master speaker told them , the house had read and considered the petition brought up out of the county of Worcester , and the house had commanded him to give them thanks on the behalf of those of the county of Worcester that sent it , for their good affections expressed therein : and accordingly he did give them the thanks of the house , and that they would take their petition into serious consideration in due time . 

Finis . 

