Dwelling with God, the interest and duty of believers in opposition to the complemental, heartless, and reserved religion of the hypocrite / opened in eight sermons by John Bryan ... / Bryan, John, d. 1676. (Printed by T.M. for James Allestry ...,London :1670.)

DWELLING WITH GOD , THE INTEREST and DUTY OF BELIEVERS . In Opposition To the Complimental , Heartless , and Reserved Religion of the Hypocrite . Opened in Eight Sermons . By JOHN BRYAN D. D. late Pastor in Coventry . 

LONDON , Printed by T. M. for James Allestry , at the Sign of the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard , 1670.  

To the Right Honourable ARTHUR Lord CHICHESTER Viscount CARRICKFERGUS , AND Governor ; Earl of Donegal : One of his Majesty's most honourable Privy Council in the Kingdom of Ireland . And to the Right Honourable , and truly Religious LAETITIA Countess of Donegal . Right Honourable , and my good Lord and Lady . 

Many and great are the obligations that lie upon me to your Honours , as upon many other , so upon the account of my youngest Son Noah , many Years since Minister in Stafford ; since , for the space of more than Seven Years your Chaplain ; whom , while he lived in your Noble and Religious Family , you loved dearly and prized highly , and whose Death you take heavily . So that all that myself and my two surviving Sons can do in way of thankfulness , should we live Methusalem's Days , will come short of what You have deserved of us . And therefore we must and shall make it our Daily Prayer , while we are in the Land of the living , to Him who is All-sufficient , to give to your Honours a full reward . Mean time these poor low Meditations of mine upon the richest and highest subject I most humbly present to your Honours , as a token of my gratitude , beseeching your acceptance of it , ( as that great Prince did of the poor Man's handful of Water , who had no better thing at hand to offer ) beseeching God to bless it to You , and to all into whose Hands it shall come for the furtherance of your and their spiritual and eternal good ; and that he will grant you according to the riches of his Glory , that as you have been , and still are very great Props and Encouragements to the profession and practice of Piety , Loyalty , and Charity in that Kingdom where you now live , and were so in this , while you lived here , so you may live long and long to promote both in both , till you be translated into his everlasting rest . 

Your Honours : most humble bounden Servant . John Bryan . 

TO THE READER . Courteous Reader , 

IT is GOD Himself who is the substantial Object of Science and Religion . Though we would not err with them , who too much dishonour and vilify Creatures , lest we reflect dishonour on the Creator , and tempt Men to think basely of the Author , as we do of the Work ; yet we must say that compared with Him , they are a very little thing , yea as nothing , yea lesle than nothing , and vanity , Isa . 40. 15 , 17.  And what they are , they are in that dependence on him and relation to him , without which they would be strictly nothing : Though the old Philosophers did many of them think that so fair a Structure deserved to be esteemed , as Corpus Deitatis ; yet Christians are more wise and reverend than to approve the more modest assertion of them , who call it Vestimentum numinis , or Accidentia Divina : yet the notion of an Accident is thus far apt , to tell us that all the creature 's being , is in its dependence on the Creator ; and that it is nothing but what it is in him : For of him , and through him , and to him are all things , Rome ? 11. 36.  And in him we live , and move , and be , Act. 17. 28.  To think therefore or treat of any Creatures , abstractedly , leaving out the knowledge of the Creator , is not properly to know , but to dote or err : He that does annihilate them , or deny their very being , doth not know it , nor cannot teach it . Such fooleries are all the busiest and most learned inquiries of those Formalists , who separate Philosophy from Theology , and think they have done fairly when they have once confessed that God gave the World a being and first motion : as if he had then left it to its self , or made it a separate self-subsisting thing ; or as if they might then proceed to treat of it , without any further thoughts , or mention of that God who is more to it than a Soul ; and without whom it cannot be truly defined , no more than the beams without mentioning the Sun , or the Accidents without the Substance . 

And as the true Natural Philosopher doth see GOD as all in all , in Physics ; so doth the true Moralist in Ethics . Well may our Religious Science be called Divinity , because GOD is in it , the beginning , the middle , and the end ; the life , the substance of it , and all in all . And as this is true of the Theory , it is as true of the Practice : ( For it is one and the same Religion or Theology , which is essentially in the three constitutive faculties of Man , and must be defined , as Scientia affectiva practica ) It is a very apt and instructing expression which is used . Heb. 4. 13.  All things are naked , and opened to the Eyes of him with whom we have to do . It is most intimately pertinent to our Religion , to know GOD , as Him with whom we have to do , and to know how much we have to do with him ! to know that we have more to do with him , than with all the Creatures in the World : Yea , that we have nothing to do with any Creature , but as in him , and with him , and for him ; and as that which is lesle than an Accident of GOD ; That we have nothing to do with Men or Angels , high or low , rich or poor , animate or inanimate , no not ourselves , as separate from God , or from his presence , interest , and will ; nor as coordinate ( in subsistence or intention ) with him ; but only as absolutely dependant on him , and subordinate , and subservient to him : And that we have nothing to do in the World , but his service , and the fulfilling of his will : And to know how Great , and of what unspeakable importance , our Daily and Hourly business is , in which we have to do with God. This will first fix us in the Positive part of our Religion , which is properly called GODLINESS ; And than it will most effectually accomplish the Negative part ; in calling off our minds from every Idol , and kill our brutish and unchaste affections . While our hearts are seriously taken up with GOD , the Creature will seem lesle to us comparatively , than a Fly compared to a City , or an Atom to a Kingdom , or a Candle to the Sun. Overvaluing , and overloving , and overdoing for the World , is a certain Sign of our undervaluing , and underloving , and neglect of GOD. For if GOD have his due , he will have all : And if he had all , the World , and all things in it would have none ; unless as it is sent to GOD by them . 

And so excellent is this converse with GOD , that the nature of it may much convince us , that GRACE. and GLORY are but as the Seed and the Plant , as infancy and manhood ; and that Life Eternal is begun on Earth , Joh. 17. 3.  One being but the work of seeking love , and the other of fullenjoying-love ; and both being the Dwelling of the Soul in GOD , in several manners and degrees . 

Do not wonder therefore , if the Reverend Author of this Treatise ( my deservedly-much valued and honoured Friend , and long a laborious Servant of Christ , ) have chosen this Subject for his own delight , and for his Readers benefit . For however perhaps the burning of the City , and the removal of many Ministers from their settled habitations , might be some occasion of his choice ; yet the great reason , no doubt , was the Greatness and Necessity of this truth , as suited to the greatest edification of men's souls . 

I foresee , that there are some that will say , that this running of Allegories so far , doth carry away the mind from the just conceptions of the thing , and hinder , and delude the understanding , by drawing it into the by-paths of improper notions ; and is the way of injudicious superficial Teachers . And I confess it is so in several Cases : As 1.  When metaphors are chosen needlessly , instead of more plain significant terms . 2.  And when they are chosen unaptly , and are not fitted to the matter signified . 3.  When they are insisted on too far , to the exclusion of the proper notions , and tend indeed to seduce and carry away the mind . 4.  When they are run up so high , as to infer any false conclusions , or to introduce any groundless confectaries or applications . But if you consider of the Allegory insisted on in this Treatise , you will have better thoughts and censures of it , upon these reasons following . 

1.  It is not about a created subject , where we have store of proper notions ; but about the Creator , and our communion with Him , where we must have improper thoughts , and borrowed notions , or none at all : It is a controversy between the Thomists and the Scotists , whether one syllable Ens be spoken Univocally of GOD and of the Creatures ? But that no other word is spoken Univocally of them , they are agreed . And the Scotists do not without reason maintain , that Analogical Attribution is not a third member , betwixt Univocal and Equivocal , but is truly Equivocal , as Metaphors are . Talk not then against all Allegorical expressions about God , till you would forbid Mortals to talk of God at all . 

2.  Note , that it is not so much the matter of our communion with GOD , as the manner of it , which the Allegory is used to express . For the matter on our part , I here tell you once for all , that it is not any Friar - like , fanatical , notion , of deification by an indwelling in GOD , nor Andr. Os●anders' conceit of Essential Righteousness ; nor the Platonists fancy of the Union of the Intellect with the thing understood , which the Reverend Author doth assert : But it is only the communion of the Three Essential faculties of the Soul with GOD , the Vital and Executive Power , the Intellect , and Will , partly receptively and partly operatively , which is meant : And the Allegory of Dwelling signifieth the Permanency , Fixedness , Constancy , Familiarness , etc.  Of these . 

3.  And consider how apt and significant it is : How fitly it expresseth the Habits of Grace , the Souls fidelity , the course of duty , the contents and comforts of a Believer in his GOD , etc. as is here fully opened to you : And how fitly it differenceth a Christian indeed , ( who dwelleth habitually , and devotedly in GOD ) from all sorts of Hypocrites , who do but compliment with him as a stranger , or step aside out of their ordinary way , to speak now and then with him , either in formality , or in their extremity ; and cast an Eye towards him sometimes on the by . And that it is not a barren notion , but most practical , directing the thoughts of a Christian to a constant , spiritual , holy life ; yea , that it is a very Consolatory notion , speaking the beginning of Heaven on Earth , and suited both to Grace and Glory , and apt to lead up our Desires to the everlasting Mansions ; which we have scarce a more familiar conception of , than by Dwelling with GOD ! And who would not be at Home , that hath such a Home prepared for him , when once He is prepared for it ? 

4.  And lastly consider , that it is a Scripture metaphor ; yea , frequently there used : And what words of Scripture can seem more important to us , than 1 John 4. 16 ? GOD is Love ; and he that dwelleth in Love , dwelleth in GOD , and GOD in Him. And v. 15.  Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of GOD , God dwelleth in Him , and He in GOD. And v. 12.  If we love one another , God dwelleth in Us , and his Love is perfected in Us. 1 Joh. 3. 24.  He that keepeth his Commandments dwelleth in Him , and He in Him. 2 Cor. 6. 16.  For ye are the Temple of the living GOD ; As GOD hath said , I will dwell in them , and walk in them , and I will be their GOD , and they shall be my People . 

And there is another sort that I foresee will be offended , because the Author hath said so much against separation from the public Assemblies and Worship , as now managed , seeing he is silenced for Nonconformity Himself . 

To these I shall only say : 1.  Why do they not wonder as much at the old Nonconformists , Hildersham , Paget , Brightman , Bradshaw , Ball , with many more ; who said much more against separation long ago ? 

2.  Consider that the Author is an ancient experienced Divine , who hath lived to see the fruits of all extremes ; and in particular , what the Love-killing and separating Spirit hath done in these Kingdoms these Thirty Years ; He hath been the Tutor and Father of more faithful Teachers in the Church , than many other worthy Pastors , have been of converted serious Christians : And if the young unexperienced censures , will but stay till they come to his age and experience , and to half his Learning , Wisdom , and Grace , and till they have done God's Church but the twentieth part of the service , that he hath done , it 's like they will be themselves of the same mind that he is . But I could wish for their own sakes , they would not do by him , as they do by Mr. Tombs , who having written a Book against Separation , which none of them can confute with truth and reason , they commonly and confidently affirm that he conformeth , and then cast by his Book through prejudice ; and few that I hear of , who most need it , do read it : Though he is so far from Ministerial Conformity , that in the Epistle to that Book he still declareth his old opinion against Infant Baptism . Partiality is a forfeiture of truth , and contemptuously shuts the Door against it . It will suffer Men to receive no instruction ▪ from those that differ from them : And those that differ not can scarce instruct them , because their Opinions are but the same , which they hold already . Alas , then what will become of the understandings of this Generation ? wherein there are so few , that are not in one Faction or other , possessed with partiality and unreasonable prejudice against the rest ! 

Reader , the way to escape this Soul-perverting Sin and misery , is , that which this Treatise doth instruct thee in ; even to dwell continually with GOD , who is the Original Life , and Light , and Love ; and in whom all wise and holy Souls , are united , and employed in delightful Harmony ; And are no further divided , discordant , contentious , uncharitable , than they departed from GOD ! And to retire more in mind , from this dark , perverse , confused World ; which to the best is a Wilderness , though the way to Rest ; and to the Worldlings is a place of snares and sin , a Babel , and a Bedlam Habitation , where the Prince of the Powers of the Air , who ruleth in the Children of disobedience , is busily and successfully fitting Souls , for a sadder state . Watch and pray , that thou mayst be saved from this present evil World ; but especially , and above all thine Enemies , from thy Self ! Happy is the Man whose Selfishness , Pride , and Lust , do not subvert his Soul ! and whose own Opinion , Will , and Way is not his Ruin ! 

I Rest , An unworthy Servant of Christ for his Church . Rich. Baxter . 

Acton . June 4. 1669.  THE CONTENTS . The Contents of the first Sermon . The Doctrine is proved by the properties of this Habitation , and the conveniences and privileges belonging to it : and the proof in the Text explained . The Contents of the second Sermon . Two Questions are Answered . 1.  What it is to make the Lord our Habitation ? Viz. To make choice of him , to close with him , and to cleave unto him , as our resting place . 2.  How we may know that we dwell in God ? Viz. By 4.  Characters of such Inhabitants . Entrance upon Application in reference to 3. sorts of Men. 1.  Such as are , or may be sure they have not yet made the Lord their Habitation . 7. sorts of these . Advice to them , and instruction how to make the Lord their Habitation . 7. means , in order to this end . The Contents of the third Sermon . Addition of another means . viz. to dwell in God , to this end get an honest and good heart : what such a heart is . What power there is in natural Men , with Exhortation to exert it . 2.  Such whose Habitation the Lord is sure enough , but they have no sensible comfortable assurance that he is so ; what the Reasons are of their doubts , and fears , and how to repel them . The Contents of the fourth Sermon . 3.  Such as have sensible comfortable assurance , that the Lord is their Habitation . Exhortation to prise this blessing ; to hold fast , and increase their assurance , and how . 1.  Generally to walk worthy of the Lord 2.  Particular Duties , in reference to things and persons . 1.  To things , Viz. Earthly Habitations . 1.  What their duty is that have no Habitation of their own . 2.  What there 's that have Houses of their own , but may not live in them . 3.  What there 's that have convenient Dwellings , and competent means to live upon . 4.  What there 's that have stately Houses , and abundance of all Earthly things . 5.  What there 's that have had their Houses burned , and are rebuilding , or finished : a Word of Caution to all these . The Contents of the fifth Sermon . Second sort of spiritual Duties . viz. In reference to persons . 1.  The principal efficient causes of their happiness . The Three Sacred persons of the Deity , and the Instrumental Causes . 2.  In reference to such persons as are yet without God in the World , and how to draw them in . The Contents of the sixth Sermon . Duties in reference . 1.  To visible Chuches ( God's Habitations ) false ( Popish ) to separate from them ; but ( Protestant ) not to separate . 2.  To Fellow-members of the same Family . Live in unity with them , though differing in judgement . The Contents of the seventh Sermon . Other Duties upon the account of the properties of this House . Some of the Laws , and Ordinances of this House . The General Laws partly natural , partly supernatural . 

The Law of Faith : How to manage Faith so , as to maintain Life . 

The Contents of the eighth Sermon . How faith maintains life against all Instruments of death . Nine acts of faith to free the Heart from all discouragement and disquiet : some other Laws of the House concerning watching , rejoicing , praying , thanksgiving , readiness to remove out of lower into higher rooms . By reason of the Author's absence , these Errors have escaped the Press , with several false pointings , which the courteous Reader is desired to amend . Page 4.  Line 8. after hereafter add to make use . p. 5. l. 20 r. heights , or high places ▪ p. 8. l. 24. r. penned . p. 11. l. 16. r. theirs . p. 13. l. 11. your r. their . l. 14. such r. which . p. 16. l. 10. r. goods . p 25. l. 7. r. effected . l. 22. rejoice r. noise . p. 35. l. 18. r. felt . l. 23. r. persisted . p 42. l. 5. twines . r. turns . p. 44. l. 19 for will , r. glory . p. 50. l. 21. r. sensualists . p. 52. l. 9 r. this . p. 61. l. 12. r. both th●se themselves . p. 78. l. 9 r. was . p 79. pomell 7. r. against them . p 82. pomell 24. each , r. which . p 83. 18 ▪ leave out that to him p 86. pomell 15. a place , r. a feast . p 87. pomell 12. his , r. this . p 96. acquisition , r this of . p 97. pomell 23. r. whence . p 101. pomell 4. r. any real rest . p 102. pomell 7. r sought . p 103. pomell 12. r. nor in the latter . p 105 pomell 6. first r. true . p 106. pomell 4. her r ▪ his . p 107. pomell 21 r. prelation . p 108. pomell 14. natural r. mutual . p 110. pomell 16. this r. that : p 116. pomell 5 ▪ leave our once . p 117. pomell 21. is , r. as . p 118. pomell 14. belike , r. because life . p 120 pomell ▪ 11. fixed , r. first . p 125 pomell 26. persons , r. profess . p 129. pomell 6 after Religion add , with piety and reason . p 132 pomell 21. r. Against whom . p 141. pomell 7. r. do you likewise . p 142. pomell 3. your , r. their . l 7. have , r know . p 145. pomell 4 ▪ these , r. yourselves . l 8. these , r. yourselves . p 148. pomell 12 ▪ turns to , r. works for . p 165 , pomell 3. r. pace . l 4 , r. when there is solid and true Grace in it . l 16 , r. generally ▪ p 170 , pomell 26. esteemed , r ▪ showed . p 175 , l 6 , so , r. to . p 178 , pomell 17 , the , r your . p 180 , l 8 , alone , r. a one . p 207 , pomell 19 , exquisite , r. extinct . p 208 , l 3 , r. handsel . p 210 , pomell 18 , r. premises ▪ p 218 , l 3 , r. to praise God. p 256 , l 4 , leave out Only ▪ p 265 , pomell 18.  Even ▪ r. Ezekiel . p 287. pomell 6 , after Church , r. is of the former sort for as . l 8 , after Invention add , So 2dly , in it is wanting truth of Doctrine ; Fundamental Errors , Doctrines of Devils in very great number are obstinately maintained there . l 23 , after so , r ▪ it being without true preaching but a Seal . p 297 , pomell 18 , r. the Church of England . p ●80 , l 12 , truth , r. touch . p 386 , l 8 , r. prove . p 388 , l 15 , r. emptying : p 391 , l 7 , a desiring , r , an adhering : p 393 , l 8 , which , r ▪ such : p 397 , l 3 , scarce , r , secure . p 412 , l 10 , r. a dedication . 

THE FIRST SERMON . Psal . 91. 9 , 10.  Because thou hast made the Lord which is my refuge , even the most High , thy Habitation , there shall no evil befall thee , neither shall any Plague come nigh thy dwelling . IT is as natural for all Men to desire happiness , as it is For the sparks to fly upwards : To make them happy , there is required an absence of all oppressing evils , and a concurrence of all things necessary , convenient , and decent : Among and above many other things an habitation or resting place for their bodies is needful to their outward happiness , without which they cannot but be miserable , whatever other good things they may enjoy . Herein our blessed Saviour seems to prefer the felicity of Foxes and Fowls before his own . The Foxes have Holes , and the Birds of the Air have Nests , but the Son of Man hath not where to lay his head . The better House any Man hath , the more happy he is ( in that : ) He that hath the best is happiest . Now that House is best that is higher , stronger , larger , more lightsome , warm , and better furnished with provisions , and all desirable accommodations , than any other ; That is not subject to any casualties , and which secures its Inhabitants from all manner of evil present and future : And withal , is a resting place for their Souls . They that have such an habitation cannot but be acknowledged by all the World , to be the only happy People in the World. If the Question be , where such an habitation can be found ? Where such a People ? And by what means they become thus superlatively happy ? This Text resolveth it . The habitation is the Lord , who was David's refuge , even the most High ; find him , and this habitation is found . The People are such , as he to whom David directs his Speech , whom the Lord himself describes and owns a little after . He hath set his love upon me , he hath known my Name . The means whereby this People come to be possessed of this happiness , it is by their own making . Because thou hast made the Lord , etc.  

Who the Lord is , it is well known , even Israel's God , the same whom we Christians own and worship : One in Essence ; Three in Subsistence , the Father , the Son , the Holy Ghost . What , and what a One he is , his Name Jehovah in part imports , an Absolute , Simple , Infinite , Independent and Immutable Being . That he is a real habitation , appears by all those places of Scripture , where Men are said to Devil in God , ( whereof we shall have occasion hereafter ) He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High , shall lodge under the shadow of the Almighty . He that keepeth his Commandments dwelleth in him . Hereby we know that we dwell in him , because he hath given us of his Spirit . Whoso shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God , he dwelleth in God. He that dwelleth in Love , dwelleth in God. That he is such an Habitation , as hath been formerly mentioned , and consequently the best , as far surpassing all others , even the choicest under Heaven , as the stateliest Palace in the World , doth the poorest Cottage , or Heaven Earth , and infinitely more , is now to be proved . And hereby the Conclusion asserted will be evinced to be a truth . That all , and only they are the most , yea the only , happy People upon Earth , whose Habitation the Lord Jehovah is . 

1.  Begin we with the Properties of this House . The first whereof is Height , ( expressed in the Text. ) The Situation of it is exceeding high . The Babel-builders designed to erect a Tower , whose top might reach unto Heaven . This is far above it . They that are in it are out of danger , of any deluge , beyond the reach of Men , or Devils . David calleth God his high Tower. And he that can , as David could , prove God to be his Habitation , is said to dwell in height . 

2.  It is also a non-such for strength . Hear that holy Man of God thankfully acknowledging what God had been for him in times past . thou hast been a shelter for me , and a strong Tower from the Enemy . And what he was at present . thou art my strong refuge . And he not only prayeth , that God would still be his strong habitation , whereunto he might continually resort , his strong Rock for an house of defence to save him ; But frequently declares his confidence , that as God was , so he would ever be as he wished ; and how oft doth he call him his strength ? His Son tells us , he is the same to every one that is as he was . The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower , the Righteous runneth to it , and is safe . And the Prophet esay praiseth God for this . thou hast been a strength to the Poor , a strength to the needy , in his distress , a refuge from the storm , a shadow from the heat , when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the Wall. The greatest Canon-bullets shot against the Walls of this House , make no more Impression , do no more execution than Paper-pellets shot against a Wall of Brass or Marble . 

3.  It is a House exceeding large ; this is accounted a great commodity , of a House to have Rooms enough , and Room enough . Solomon intimates as much , when he saith , it is better to dwell in a Corner of the House top , than with a brawling Woman in a wide House . To have any thing we use too narrow , or too straight , is very troublesome . The Bed is shorter than that a Man can stretch himself on it , and the Covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in it . In God there is Room more than enough , both for the understanding and affections of Man to expatiate themselves in . Canst thou by searching find out God ? Canst thou by searching find out the Almighty to perfection ? 't is as high as Heaven , What canst thou do ? deeper than Hell , What canst thou know ? the measure thereof is longer than the Earth , and broader than the Sea. His Commandments are exceeding broad . How much more are his Attributes , Absolute , and Relative , proper and figurative . God bid Abraham to walk through the Land of Canaan , ( which is called a good Land , and a large , ( good , because large ) in the length of it , and in the breadth of it . And he bids every Child of Abraham ( to whom he gives himself for a possession ) as he gave that Land to Abraham ) to walk within , and pass through all his Divine Properties , going out ▪ of one Room into another , as also his great and precious promises : Nor shall they have cause to complain of straitness , as the Church's Children do in their Mother's ears . — The place is too straight for me , give place to me that I may dwell . To whom we may conceive her giving them this Answer ; Children , though your bodies may be present in your Earthly dwellings , the faculties of your souls have space enough , abundantly more than your faculties can conceive in God , who saith to every Saint of his dwelling in him , apt to make the like complaint , as Paul to the Corinthians , ye are not straitened in us , but you are straitened in your own Bowels . 

4.  It is a House no lesle lightsome than large . God is light , and in him is no darkness at all , in this light we shall see Light. The Lord will be unto thee an everlasting Light. When there was a thick darkness in all the Land of Egypt , The Israelites had Light in their dwellings . All that are Israelites indeed , have light in God their dwelling place . When all others in the World sit in darkness , and the shadow of Death . And they do contemplate the light of his Mercy , Truth , and Power . With open Face beholding his Glory by which they are transformed more and more into his Image . Sometimes indeed they are compelled to sit in darkness of dangers and distresses , inward and outward . Who is among you that feareth the Lord , that obeyeth the voice of his Servant , that walketh in darkness , and hath no light ? He hath led me , and brought me into darkness , but not into light . But even in this darkness they are not altogether without light , they have the light of God's Word . They Word is a Lamp unto my Feet , and a light unto my Path. And in his Word they have the light of his promises , that he will bring them out of that darkness whereinto he brought them , and turn their grief and afflictions into joy . For thou wilt light my Candle , the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness . Yea , even when , and all the while , I sit in darkness , the Lord shall be a Light unto me . God is a Sun , ten thousand times more full of Light than this material Sun ; and it is impossible that he that dwells in the Sun should want Light.  

5.  It is a warm House , Light hath heat in it emiently ( as the Peripatetics say ) yea , it is both warm and cool : A Summer and a Winter House both , ( great Men were wont to have several Mansions for these two several Seasons of the Year . ) This House is as some choice Rooms in some great Houses , are warm in Winter , and cool in Summer . Many there are that dwell in God , who have more Winters than one , every Year ▪ scarce one Summer's day in many Years . I am afflicted , and ready to die from my Youth up . Yet in the sharpest weather this House of yours keep their hearts warm . So that the Spouse said , I sleep , but my Heart waketh . They can say with Paul , As sorrowful , yet always rejoicing . I am filled with comfort , I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulations : Being justified by faith , we have peace with God , and rejoice in hope of the glory of God ; and not only so , but we glory in tribulations also , — Because the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts , by the Holy Ghost , which is given unto us . Although the Figtree shall not blossom , neither shall fruit be in the Vines , the labour of the Olive shall fail , and the Fields shall yield no increase , the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold , and there shall be no Herd in the Stalls , yet I will rejoice in the Lord , I will joy in the God of my Salvation . If it be objected , that this is not always true , that they who dwell in God are always thus joyful ; nay , many times their hearts have not the least sense of comfort ; yet in such a case , they have a warmth and heat that is far better , and includes abundance of comfort in it , and in due season will flame forth , namely that of love , and that both of desire and complacency . Set me as a Seal upon thine arm , for love is strong as death ; The Coals thereof are coals of fire , which hath a most vehement flame ; many Waters cannot quench love , neither can the floods drown it . This warmth their hearts never want , though sometimes the sense of the second motion of it , may seem to them as dull , as that of their joy : Nor is there any time wherein they cannot say with David , My Heart was hot within me . Yea , discouragements from the World are so far from cooling your love to God , that they make it hotter as Water cast upon Lime ; so Michol's scoffs were to David's Zeal ; such is a flame issuing from the fire of Love. If this be to be vile , I will yet be more vile than thus . 

Others of God's People have many Summer Days ; yea , almost all their Days all the Year long , for many Years together , are such . Job had such a long Summer , all which time , God's Candle shined upon his head : The secret of God was upon his Tabernacle . His most wise Conduct governed his House , provided plentifully for it . He washed his steps with Butter , and the Rock poured him out Rivers of Oil . Hyperbolical terms . As if he had said , I enjoyed all my goods and pleasures , according to mine own desire . When the Ear heard him , than it blessed him ; and when the Eye saw him , it gave witness unto him . He sat chief , and dwelled as a King in the Army . Was both beloved and feared , yet in all these hot Sunshine Days of prosperity , this House of his kept his heart cool towards the things of the World : He lived in continual fear of losing them . I feared ( saith he ) a fear , and it came upon me . I never all this while gave myself over to carnal security , I always affrighted my heart with the apprehension of the Accidents of this life , and contained myself in fear and humility towards God : and within the bounds of modesty towards men . Hear him making a solemn protestation how cool his heart was kept from evil concupiscence , and cursed love to Women . I set a watch ( saith he ) at the entrance of my senses , made a Covenant with mine Eyes . That my Soul might not by them receive any vicious enticements to uncleanness . Or if my senses had been at any time , alured by any object of sin , yet my heart , which is the seat of God's Spirit , hath opposed them : It never walked after mine Eyes . And as for temporal good : Though I had exceeding great store of them , and all justly gotten , yet was I free from rejoicing carnally , or setting my whole delight in them ; nor did I put any confidence at all in them . Thus loose was this holy Man's Soul kept , from the things of the World. The lusts of the flesh , the lusts of the eye , and the pride of life . And so was the Soul of Moses , who living by faith in God , had his affections so cooled to the pleasures of Egypt , that with ease he forsaken them all , and with joy joined himself to the Ignominious condition of his brethren . 

6.  no House is so full of goods as this is , none so stored with all things , both for necessity and delight . Houses that are high , and strong , and large , and lightsome , and warm , if they want provision of good , and furniture , are far from being accounted good Houses . These only , where there is a fullness of Household stuff , plenty of meat , and drink , and clotheses , and Silver , and Gold , and Armour for defence and offence , have the denomination given them , by the generality of People , and are only cried up : empty ones have no bodies good word . Take notice of some passages of Scripture to this purpose , from the mouths both of Profane and Divine Penmen ; yea , of Divinity itself . How many hired Servants in my Father's House have Bread enough , and to spare . We shall find all precious substance , we shall fill our Houses with spoil . If Balak would give me his House full of Silver and Gold. Through wisdom is a House builded , and by knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all precious , and pleasant riches . thou shalt save Goat's milk enough for thy food , for the food of thy ▪ Household , and for the food of thy Maidens . Thy Barns shall be filled with plenty , and thy Presses shall burst out with new Wine : Wealth and riches shall be in his House . They possessed Houses full of all good , the Floors shall be full of Wheat , and the fat 's shall overflow with Corn and Oil . 

Some very good People , who had Houseroom enough , have had therein next to nothing . The Widow of Zarephath going into her House , to fetch the Prophet Elijah a little Water , in a Vessel which he begged of her to drink , makes this answer to him , craving that she would also bring him a morsel of Bread in her Hand . As the Lord thy God liveth , I have not a Cake , but a handful of Meal in a Barrel , and a little Oil in a Cruse ; this was all her store . Such an answer gave a certain Woman , of the Wives of the Sons of the Prophets , unto Elisha . Tell me ( said he ) What hast thou in the House ? Thy Handmaid ( said she ) hath not any thing in the House , save a Pot of Oil . 

In this House which we have in hand , there is not only no want of any thing which is on the Earth ( the good report given of Laish by the five Searchers . ) But here is also all the good things that Heaven itself is able to afford : Witness him that was caught up thither , and saw what was in those Mansions ; Blessing God for blessing him , and all his fellow-members of this blessed Family , withal spiritual blessings in Heavenly places in Christ . 

Begin we with Provisions of food . They to whom it is given to dwell in God , shall be sure not to want either Corporal or Spiritual sustenance , but enjoy both in abundance . 1.  For their bodies , this is one of the encouragements given to the Saints of God , to fear and seek him . OH fear the Lord , OH ye his Saints , for there is no want to them that fear him . The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger , but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing , in the Day of Famine they shall be satisfied . The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his Soul ; but the belly of the wicked shall want . They shall always have Bread and Water enough : As those hundred Prophets had in that time of great dearth , ( whom Obediah fed by fifty in a Cave ) Bread shall be given them , their Waters shall be sure . Likened unto Men that dwell in an unpregnable Fort : well provided with Victuals to hold out a Siege . And there Bread and Water is sure , as is not elsewhere to be found . For there is a blessing in both , which are also of the choicest , and God himself feeds them therewith . I should have fed them ( saith the Lord to his professing People , had they harkened unto me , to come and live in him , but they would not ) with the finest of the Wheat , and with Honey out of the Rock should I have satisfied them . no courser Bread than wheaten doth every hind , or Servant of this House eat . That which is materially pulse , beans , pease , ( which some of them are fain sometimes to feed upon ) is virtually the fat of wheat . So it was to Daniel , and his three Companions , whose countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh , than all the Children which did eat the portion of the King's meat . Nor can they be scanted . He who 's the Earth is , and the fullness thereof , having said , thou shalt eat thy Bread without scarceness . I will abundantly bless her Provision , I will satisfy her Poor with Bread. In case they have but an handful of Meal : He can make it suffice them and theirs many Days ; yea , enable them to go in the strength of one Cake baken on the Coals forty Days ; yea , to make five Loaves feed no fewer than five thousand Men , besides Women and Children ; nor shall there want a concurence of his will with his power , if need be . Though Miracles are said to be ceased , every one of the House shall have their Daily bread , according as they are taught to pray . And as Agar prayed in faith , nothing doubting : nor were ever any of them in David's observation , put to the Trade of begging their bread . Though some of them have in all Ages been constrained to live of Alms for exercise and trial , which is a noble way of living . And so the Waters given them to drink , they are not like these of Marah and Jericho , bitter and naught , but sweet and wholesome . If they be otherwise naturally , they are by a Tree or Salt cast in presently sweetened , and healed , with which , as with Honey distilled out of the Rock , their thirst is wonderfully quenched . 

2.  As for their Souls , there is in this House abundantly more and better Provision of all manner of Food , for all sorts of persons that are of the Family . Nehemiah tells us of what a great Table he kept , and what was provided for him daily . Viz. one Ox and six choice Sheep , also Fowls , and once in ten Day's store of all sorts of Wine . Solomon's Provisions for one Day was thirty Measures of fine flower and threescore Measures of Meal , ten fat Oxen out of the Pasture , and an hundred Sheep , beside Hearts and Roe-bucks , and fallow Deer , and fatted Fowl ; But all his great store is but as a drop to the Ocean , in comparison of the spiritual Provision prepared every day for the Saints , to feed upon in this House . The Word of God , and God the Word are a million of times more in quantity and virtue to nourish and cheer . How sweet are thy Words unto my Taste ? Sweeter than honey unto my mouth . Thy words were found , and I did eat them , and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my Heart . 

OH Book , insinite sweetness ! Let my heart 
Suck every Letter , and a honey gain 
Precious for every Grief in any part 
To cheer the breast , to mollify all pain , 
thou aut all health , health thriving till it make 
A full Eternity . thou art a Mass 
Of strange delights , where we may wish and take . 


Here is milk for Babes , the first Principles of the Oracles of God , and strong meat for those that are of full age , profounder and more mysterious Doctrines . The Stewards of the House appointed to dispense both to both , as they are able to bear them . As the head of the House taught them to do by his practice , every part and particle of the Holy Scriptures , Histories , Precepts , Prohibitions , Promises , threatenings are all of them choice Viands wherewith holy Souls are satisfied , as with marrow and fatness , Nor are they only meat but Medicinal also , and therefore called wholesome words that have a healing property in them . The Spirit of God accompanying his word is called by our Saviour the Water of Life . Hadst thou asked of me ( said he to the Woman of Samaria , that denied to give him of her Water ) I would have given thee a better and far more excellent kind of Water , than this is that I have desired of thee . Whosoever drinketh of this Water shall thirst again , but whoever shall drink of the Water that I shall give him , shall never thirst . Of this living Water they that dwell in God do drink continually ; whereby the thirst of their Souls after earthly things , the lust of the flesh , the lust of the eye , and the pride of life is quenched . And their consciences are satisfied and quieted , against the sense and apprehension of God's wrath due for their fins . And the sense of his love affected by this Water , is better than Wine ; whose property is to comfort the heart , beget new Spirits , purge , warm , refine , and waken them . Yea , this House is a House of Wine . And the graces and fruits of the Spirit , are delightful to them as Wine , with which they being spiritually drunk , have inward spiritual joy bred in them , testified in the private and public praises of God , by Psalms , Hymns , and spiritual Songs ; Their hearts being merry , and cheerful , They make a rejoice , as if they were set on fire with Wine . 

But here is another food , which every one of this House have for commons every Day . The Body and Blood of Jesus Christ . His flesh is meat indeed , and his blood is drink indeed . Note well that spiritual things have their truth and reality as much , and beyond comparison in their kind , as corporal ones have theirs . 

This meat and drink surpasseth all other upon a manifold account . 1.  Of the place from whence it comes , This is the Bread which cometh down from Heaven ; Not out of the middle Region of the Air , as Manna did , but from the highest Heaven . 2.  The Variety of Viands in it , for all things are in Christ , who of God is made unto us , Wisdom , Righteousness , and Sanctification , and Redemption . Let our wants be what they will , let our wills be what they can to feed on this or that dish : Nothing can be imagined nourishing or cheering , which is not to be found in Christ . Manna , which was but a type of this true bread , is said to have had all sorts of good tastes in it . 

3.  Of the sufficiency of it , for it pleased the Father , that in him should all fullness dwell , in him dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead bodily . The whole Mass and gathering together of all Divine and everlasting goods . Whereof the parcels and streams do issue out upon the Church : They are in him not in shadows , and figures , as in the Old Testament , but in reality and substance . And of his fullness have we all received grace for grace ; Not a fullness of abundance only , but a fullness of redundance also : out of which a sufficient portion is distributed to every of his Members . There can be no want in him , where riches are unsearchable . As he is able to save them unto the uttermost , that come unto God by him , and so to satisfy them that feed upon him , as it is said of those four thousand Men , beside Women and Children . They did all eat , and were filled . 

4.  Of the powerful efficacy that is in it , I am the Bread of Life . That is there remains in me , received and applied by a lively faith , power to quicken the Soul that is dead in sin , separated from God the true Spring of Life , and to preserve it alive by a communicative and continual influence of Divine grace , and to give it also the life of joy and comfort ; yea , and to cure not only all the Maladies that molest the Life of Grace , but of Nature also . 

5.  Of the permanency of it , this is not like other Food and Physic , that perishes itself , and is not able to keep the body , into which it is received from perishing ; Upon which account we are forbidden to labour for it . Labour not for the Meat which perishes , but for that Meat which endureth to everlasting life , which the Son of Man shall give unto you . What is that ? The Bread that I will give is my Flesh . If any Man eat of this Flesh , he shall live for ever . 

This Meat and Drink is every Day received by this whole Household , not after a corporal and carnal manner , ( as those Capernaites conceived Christ's meaning . How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat ? ) But by believing that it was given for them , and is the Price of their sins to God. He that cometh to me shall never hunger , and he that believeth on me shall never thirst . As Meat is received into the stomach by eating : so is Christ into the Soul by believing . He that eateth my Flesh , and drinketh my Blood , dwelleth in me , and I in him : that is to say , is inseparably united to me , and I to him , even as food is with him that eats it . This and no other way is this meat and drink received in the Holy Supper , ( wherein here is or aught to be a frequent communicating ) where and when every Communicant by eating and drinking the consecrated Bread and Wine , being Sacramentally Christ's body and blood , Signs to represent it , Seals to confirm , and Instruments really to exhibit them , doth acknowledge , and preach the benefits of the Lord's Death , and protesteth to take part thereof by a lively faith ; which is as the Eye and Hand to the Mouth and Stomach of the Soul , taking Christ into , and uniting him to them ; even as corporal Food is by eating and digesting united to the Body . 

6.  This is that Feast of fat things of Wine on the lees , of fat things full of Marrow of Wines on the lees , well refined ; which the Lord of Hosts promised to all Nations , gathered together in his Church , ( to some of all ) veiling Heavenly things under Earthly , condescending so low , as to enter into the inward Man by the outward , our apprehensions being so weak and narrow , that we cannot otherwise be acquainted with them while our Souls are in our Bodies . They are much guided by our fancy , and then spiritual things are conveyed to them this way ; only we must remember , that there is a far greater excellency in the things themselves , than in their representations : For what is all fullness with marrow , What is Wines on the lees ? what are all earthly royal dainties , to these rich graces and Divine special favours and blessings , offered and bestowed , and participated of in the Sacraments ? At which sumptuous and delicious banquet every worthy receiver , that has made due preparation by self examination , is or should be much affected and ravished . As the Divine Poet , was , who thus expresseth himself . First as to the manner of Importation , and submission . 

Herb. H. Com.  Not in rich Ornament or fine Array , 
Nor in a Wedge of Gold , 
thou , who for me waste sold , 
To me dost now thyself convey ; 
For so thou shouldst without me still have been , 
Leaving within me Sin.  


But by the way of nourishment & strength , 
thou creepest into my Breast ; 
Making thy Way my Rest , 
And thy small quantities my length ; 
Which spread their Forces into every part , 
Meeting Sins force and art . 


Yet can these not get over to my Soul , 
Leaping the Wall that parts 
Our Souls and fleshly Hearts ; 
But as the outworks they may control 
My Rebel-flesh , and carrying thy Name , 
Affright both sin and shame . 


Only thy grace , which with these Elements comes , 
Knoweth the ready way , 
And hath the Privy Key , 
Opening the Souls most subtle Rooms , 
While those to Spirits refined at Door attend 
Dispatches from their Friend . 


Give me my Captive Soul , or take 
My Body also thither . 
Another life like this will make 
Them both to be together . 


Before that Sin turned Flesh to stone , 
And all our Lump to leaven : 
A fervent sigh might well have blown 
Our innocent Earth to Heaven . 


For sure when Adam did not know 
To sin , or sin to smother ; 
He might to Heaven from Paradise go , 
As from one Room to another . 


thou hast restored us to this ease 
By this thy Heavenly blood , 
Which I can go to when I please 
And leave the Earth to their food . 


When he was pleased to go to this Heavenly Banquet , ( and he was so pleased , as oft as might be , and so should every godly Christian ) hear him warbling this Divine Rapture . 

Idem the Banquet . Welcome sweet and sacred cheer , 
Welcome dear ; 
With me , in me , live and dwell : 
For thy neatness passeth sight ; 
Thy delight 
passeth Tongue to taste or tell . 


OH what sweetness from the Bowl 
Fills my Soul , 
Such as is and makes Divine ! 
Is some Star ( fled from the Sphere ) 
Melted there , 
As we Sugar melt in Wine ? 


Or hath sweetness in the Bread 
Made a head 
To subdue the smell of Sin ; 
Flowers and gums and powders giving ▪ 
All their living , 
lest the Enemy should win ? 


Doubtless neither Star nor Flower 
Hath the Power 
Such a sweetness to impart : 
Only God , who gives perfumes , 
Flesh assumes , 
And with it perfumes my heart . 


But as Pomanders and sweet Wood 
Still are good , 
Yet being bruised are better scented , 
God , to show how far his love 
could improve , 
Here as broken is presented . 
etc.  


Let the wonder of this pity 
Be my ditty , 
And take up my lines and life : 
Harken under pain of Death , 
Hands and breath , 
Strive in this , and love the strife . 


Nor found he this food beyond all degrees of comparison , nourishing and strengthening , but he feeleth it also most effectually healing Physic , as appears by what he speaks to his prattling Conscience , which called every fair look soul , every sweet Dish sour . 

If thou persist , I will tell thee 
That I have Physic to expel thee . 
And the Receipt shall be 
My Saviour's Blood : when ever at his board 
I do but taste it , strait it cleanseth me , 
And leaves thee not a Word , 
no , not a Tooth , or Nail to scratch , 
And at my actions carp or catch . 


Here is therefore no such provision of food , no such sumptuous fair in any House as this . Solomon's , so much admired , was as Husks ; yea , and stark hunger compared to this : and each of the Household fares alike . And they have both Dinner and Supper every Day of the same delicates . ( that which Matthew calls a Dinner , Luke calls a Supper . ) And they are called upon to feed heartrly . Eat OH Friends ; Drink , yea , drink abnndantly , OH wellbeloved . 

Nor are there any such fellow-commoners , to Dine and Sup with any where as here ; These are all Noble Honourable persons . The choicest , and most excellent Kings and Priests . A chosen Generation , a Royal Priesthood , a Holy Nation , a peculiar People . Yea , the King of Kings , and Lord of Lords Dines and Sups with them . Mephibosheth thought it no small honour , that David set him among them that did eat at his own Table . How great honour must it then be to sit at Christ's Table , who is David's Lord ? And to increase their comfort , they have assurance of the same Session with him in the Kingdom of Glory . I appoint you ( saith he ) a Kingdom , as my Father hath appointed me ; that ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom . 

Nor are there any such servitures in any House , as in this , to wit , the Holy Angels . Are they not all Ministering Spirits sent forth to Minister for them , who shall he Heirs of Salvation ? There are that make them both Cooks and Butlers , that dress and dish up , and bring in the provision of this continual Feast , attend at Table and Minister Cups of Consolation . And moreover wait upon every Member of this Family , when they go abroad about the works of their Callings : and in all the changes of their life ; who have care of them , besides this common attendance , a peculiar Guardian of Angels , from their new birth at least , as some probably gather from sundry Scriptures . 

Nor are there any such Vessels in any House to serve up the Meat and Drink in , as are in this . The Dishes , Spoons , Covers , and Bowls belonging to the Sanctuary were all of pure Gold , so were all the Vessels of the pure Table . All the drinking Vessels of King Solomon were of Gold ; and all the Vessels of the House of the forest of Lebanon were of pure Gold. At that Royal Feast which Ahasuerus made to all his Princes and Servants , That lasted an hundred and fourscore Days , They gave them Drink in Vessels of Gold. The Vessels of this House , wherein the Saints dwell , and wherein they have their Meat and Drink served up , are much more precious , than the Gold that perishes , ( which is corruptible how pure soever ) even great and precious promises , in which are contained all the choicest Viands , that Earth and Heaven can yield , both for the nourishment of Soul and Body . For Godliness is profitable for all things , having the promise of the Life that now is , and that which is to come . 

Nor are there any such Seats , to rest both Souls and Bodies on , in taking repast in any House , as in this ? King's have had their Seats for themselves , and by them for their Children , and Favourites , on which they sat down to eat meat ; they were terrestrial , these celestial places . We read of the great King sitting at his Table with his Spouse sitting with him , presented Him with the exercise of her Virtues . And of his sitting down with his Twelve Disciples to eat the Passover , and before this , with many Publicans and Sinners . All penitent Sinners , whose habitation the Lord is , ever had , still have , and ever shall have this Privilege , to sit with Christ in Heavenly places , which are no other , than the Loves of God in Christ : from which Seats neither Death , nor Life , nor Angels , nor Principalities , nor Powers , nor things present , nor things to come , nor height , nor depth , nor any other Creature shall be able to separate them . 

Nor any such Beds to take rest in , which the now named Love's make . 

My God thou art all Love , 
Not one poor Minute escapes thy Breast , 
But brings a favour from above ; 
And in this Love more than in Bed I rest . 


The softest down Beds , compared to these are harder than stones , on which as little true rest can be taken , as Ahasuerus took the Day before Mordecai was to be hanged : on that Night could not the King sleep : or as Job had , when he wanted the sense of these Divine Loves . When I say my Bed shall ease me , my Couch shall ease my Complaints , than thou scarest me with Dreams , and terrifiest me with Visions . In this Bed of assurance of Divine Love Jacob slept sweetly , comforted by a Vision , made by a Sign , namely a Ladder set upon the Earth , the top whereof reached unto Heaven , etc. and in words , promising the Land whereon he slept , a numerous posterity and protection in his going out , and coming home , when his Body lay on the cold Ground , and his Head on a Stone . And in the same Bed David slept securely , when surrounded with Enemies . I laid me down and slept , and I will not be afraid of ten thousand of People , that have set themselves against me , round about . Yea , when their Bodies are upon Sick-beds , God himself twines them , makes them soft , stirring up Feathers of Consolation under them . The Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of languishing , thou wilt make all his Bed in his Sickness . 

Nor is there in any House such Linen for Bed and Board , which is spread and used as oft as rest or repast is taken , and hath an influence into both , making them comfortable ; yea , into the very Dishes and Vessels , wherein the Meat and Drink is served up , making them precious and permanent , and into the Couches or places of repose corporal , as well as spiritual , without which those would have no grateful relish : nor these any refreshing sweetness . ( Such as Jeremy found wrapped therein , upon this I awaked and beheld , and my sleep was sweet unto me . ) 

But especially this Linen serves for the clothing this Household ( imparting not only warmth ( to which , sufficient hath been spoken , but also Ornament beyond compare : To her ( speaking of the Church , the Lamb's Wife ) was granted , that she should be arrayed in fine Linen , clean and white , for the fine Linen is the Righteousness of Saints . Of old , great and honourable persons , were clothed with fine Linen . Pharaoh arrayed Joseph in Vestures of fine Linen . Mordecai went out from the presence of the King , in Royal Apparel , and with a Garment of fine Linen . Dives was clothed in Purple and fine Linen . The High Priests Garments were made of Gold , and of Blue , and of Purple , Scarlet , and of fine Linen ; The Ephod , and the curious Girdle , the Coat and the Mitre ; and so were the Vestures of his Sons , which are said to be for Glory and for Beauty ; that is , to make them Venerable and Majestic in the executing ▪ of their Office.  

Every faithful Christian , Man , or Woman , is a sacred King , a Royal Priest , hath Royal blood running in his Veins : Was born not of blood , ( is not such by natural Generation ) nor of the will of the flesh : But of God , by the power of his Spirit , unto his own Image , and so is higher than the Kings of the Earth , hath Power as a King to subdue , and keep under , the rebellious motions and lusts of his own corrupt reason , and will ; and is by faith partaker of Christ's royal Dignity , and Will , being with him annexed Heir of an Heavenly Kingdom . He is also made partaker of the Dignity of Christ's Priesthood , ( better than the Levitical Priesthood , which was not after the Order of Melchisedeck ) having God propitious to him , by his Death , having access to God by Prayer , through his intercession : and to offer spiritual sacrifices to him , the Sacrifice of Prayer , that is the fruit of the Lips , giving thanks to his Name . To do good also , and to communicate for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased . The Linen wherewith these spiritual Kings and Priests are apparelled , being the Righteousness of Christ's human Nature , called the Righteousness of God ; Because he is the Supreme Author of it , and appointed his Son who was true God , for to fulfil and to acquire it out of his mere grace , and imputes it to the Elect , and accepts it for their absolution ; as far surpasseth in fineness , purity , and whiteness , that wherewith Earthly Princes and Priests were arrayed , as the finest Flax doth the coursest Sack or Haircloath . For it is Angelical , yea more pure and bright and transcendently glorious , and makes them appear so . The King's Daughter is all glorious within . Yea Glory itself in the abstract , yea they do appear so , not only in the Eyes of God , but even in the Eyes of the Nations of the World , as appears by these words of admiration , uttered by them . Who is she that looketh forth as the Morning , fair as the Moon , clear as the Sun , and terrible as an Army with Banners ? And this by reason of those gorgeous outward Garments , and Jewels that cast a shining lustre wherewith they are invested , and adorned Cap ▪ a pe , ( like Herod in his Cloth of Silver , which being beaten by the Sunbeams , dazzled the People's Eyes . ) The exercise and exerting of those glorious Virtues mentioned by the Apostle , Bowels of Mercies , kindness , meekness of mind , long-suffering and charity , which is the Bond of Perfection , make them to shine as lights in the World. He that will look into the Wardroab of this House , shall find , besides these , very many changes of rich Raiment , fitted for all Sexes and Ages , which being put on and worn abroad , must needs make them glorious in the Eyes of all beholders . 

And as there is no such Vestry in any House as this , so neither is there any such Armony . In the Tower of David , which was builded for an Armoury , there hang a Thousand Bucklers , all Shields of Mighty Men. There is in this one Shield , of more worth , to all intents and purposes , than all those a thousand times told over . The Shield of Faith , a spiritual Shield serving to beaten back and bear off all the fierce Temptations of Satan , To quench all his Fiery Darts , to hinder their pernicious working . By this the Fathers of old time , Of whom the World was not worthy , quenched the violence of Fire , and turned to Flight the Armies of the Aliens . Faith is of that force , that it is able to hold Argument , even against the wrath of God , to quench the fierceness of his Arrows . Though he slay me , yet will I trust in him . it 's termed a Shield , every faculty of the Soul is defended by it , against all manner of temptations . A Shield serves for defence of the whole Body , and every part of it . Other pieces of spiritual Armour , the Girdle of Truth , the Breastplate of Righteousness , the shows of Patience , the Helmet of Hope , are for particular parts , and serve against particular sins and temptations ; but faith puts by , and blunts all blows , and , as if this grace were all in all , a Christians whole warfare , is called the Fight of Faith. This , with the other now named , are defensive only or mainly , like to which none can be found in any other Armoury . And for offence here is a Sword , of which it may be said , as David did of Goliah's , There is none like that , the Sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God. So called because the Holy Ghost hath framed it , and put it into Believers hands , and is of a Divine strength and temper to pierce and overthrew the spiritual Enemies . With this Word , which is sharper than any two edged Sword , Christ himself defended himself against the Devil , and with the invincible force thereof foiled him , fulfilling in part that Prophecy . In that Day the Lord with his sore , and great , and strong Word , shall punish Leviathan , the piercing Serpent , even Leviathan the crooked Serpent , and in that Day he shall slay the Dragon that is in the Sea.  

Moreover , Princes , and great men's Houses are stored with goods for Ornament , as well as for necessity and conveniency , serving to delight and please the outward Senses of Seeing , Hearing , Smelling , and Feeling . ( that of Tasting hath been spoken to ) Rich hangings , Curtains , Carpets , Images , and pleasant Pictures Portrayed upon the Walls , Instruments of Music , Ointments , Perfumes , Treasures of Gold and Silver , and precious Stone . Hezekiah showed the King of Babylon's Ambassadors his House of precious things , the Silver , and the Gold , and the Spices , and the precious Ornaments , and all that was found in his Treasures . 

In Solomon's House were hangings of Purple , a rich and a beautiful Stuff , of a red and bloody hue , a dye of great esteem . And in Ahasuerus' Palace , where he feasted his Princes and Servants , There were white , green , and violet hangings fastened with Cords of fine Linen and Purple to Silver Rings and Pillars of Marble . The Beds were of Gold and of Silver , upon a Pavement of red and blue , and white and black Marble . In the Houses of those unnatural sensuality , we find Women that wore hangings , to make them more delightful . no lesle is employed in that passage . Let them stretch forth the Curtains of thine Habitation ; What Lamentation is made when these are harmed ? Suddenly are my Tents spoilt , and my Curtains in a moment . Or when they are not handsomely set up . There is none to set up my Curtains . The Tabernacle had great store of costly hangings and Curtains , to make it beautiful and glorious , of cunning work woven , but wrought to the Life with a Needle , in manner of Pictures like Arras work , or other Tapestry . Solomon carved all the Walls of the Temple round about with Figures of Cherubims and Palm-trees , and open Flowers within and without : Nor was hardly any goodly House without its pleasant Pictures , Images of Men portrayed upon the Walls with Vermilion . 

Nor without Musical Instruments . The Viol , the Tabret and Pipe are in their Feasts . As the Prodigals Elder Brother drew nigh to the House , he heard Music and Dancing . 

But money answereth all things . By this Men furnish their Houses with all the foresaid Ornament , and their Feasts with variety of all delights . Thrice happy is that habitation thought to be , where there is no want of this ; and blessed are those Children thought whose Parents go to the Devil to procure and leave them bags of theirs in abundance . 

What shall we say to these things ? If God be ours , how shall not all these things be ours ? They whose House the Lord is , have all these , and infinitely more to please and delight their inward Senses , yea their outward also . That one sight of Jesus Christ hanging upon the Cross , with his hands stretched abroad to embrace them , and his Head bowed down to kiss them , and his pierced Side streaming forth blood to wash them , from the guilt and filth of their sins , evidently set forth , lively and naturally represented unto them , with his Death and Passion , and the Virtue and use thereof is a Picture most pleasant to their Eyes . So are the Portraitures of his holy Apostles and Martyrs , with the description and history of their acts and passions seen and read of them . 

And to please your Sense of Smelling , the House is filled with the savour of Christ's good Ointments ( as that House was with the Odour of that Ointment of Spiknard , wherewith Mary anointed his Feet . ) Those gifts of the holy Ghost , wherewith the Father hath anointed him , and which he poureth upon them by the preaching of the Gospel , whereof take a taste only of two words , and hereby judge of the rest . 

How sweetly doth my Master sound ! my Master ? 
As Ambergrease leaves a rich sent 
Unto the Taster : 
So doth these words a sweet content , 
An Oriental fragrancy , My Master . 
With these all Day I do perfume my mind , 
My mind even thrust into them both ; 
That I might find 
What Cordials make this curious broth 
This broth of smells , that feeds & fat's my mind . 


And farther for the Sense of Hearing , if the Music made by Organs , in the Church , so sounded in the Ears of that Divine Poet , that drew a Song of Thanksgiving to it from his Tongue and Pen.  

Id. Ch. Must . Sweetest of sweets , I thank you when displeasure 
Did through my Body wound my mind , 
You took me thence , & in your house of pleasure 
A dainty Lodging me assigned . 


Now I in you without a Body move , 
Rising and falling with your Wings ; 
We both together sweetly live and love , 
Yet say sometimes , God help poor Kings . 


Comfort I 'll die , for if you post from me , 
Sure I shall do so , and much more ; 
But if I travail in your Company , 
You know the way to Heaven's Door . 


How infinitely sweeter must that Music be to the Ears of this Household , which the Organ of the Holy Scripture , the Keys whereof are stricken with the hand of the holy spirit , makes with such strains as these : Fear thou not , for I am with thee ; be not dismayed , for I am thy God , I will strengthen thee ; yea I will help thee with the right hand of my Righteousness . When thou passest through the Waters , I will be with thee ; and through the Waters , they shall not overflow thee ; and through the fire it shall not burn thee , neither shall the flame kindle upon thee , for I am the Lord thy God , I will never leave thee nor forsake thee . Be of good cheer thy sins are forgiven thee . If we confess our sins , he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins . Blessed be the Poor , for theirs is the Kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now , for you shall be filled . Blessed are ye that weep now , for ye shall laugh . All things shall work together for good to them that love God. If there be a willing mind , it is accepted , according to what a Man hath with a thousand more . This is the Music that David desired to hear , which he calls joy and gladness . Such Music and Dancing there is to it , in this House every moment , and frequently an expression of spiritual joy , and jollity , in Psalms , and Hymns , and spiritual Songs , making melody in the Heart unto the Lord  

And as for Treasures of Gold and Silver , there is not one of this House which hath not always plenty of both ; Though many of them , many a time may say as Peter did , Silver and Gold have I none : First they have that which is a thousand times better ; The Word of God , which they justly claim as their Heritage for ever . Thy Testimonies have I taken as an Heritage for ever : as my true Sovereign and peculiar good , which I hold from thee as a Child of thy grace . The Law of thy Mouth is better unto me than thousands of Gold and Silver . more to be desired than Gold , yea than much fine Gold. And in that word they have bonds ( which made by solvent Men are esteemed every whit as good as the sums therein specified ) Divine Promises . One shall suffice for all . thou shalt lay up Gold as Dust , and the Gold of Ophir , as the Stones of the Brook ; yea , the Almighty shall be thy Gold , and thou shalt have plenty of Silver . There are a World of goods more wherewith this House is stored , the worth whereof is unvaluable , the smallest quantity whereof being a thousand times more worth , than a thousand such Worlds as this Visible one is . The Lord , the Lord God , gracious , merciful , long-suffering , abundant in goodness and truth ; The Earth is full of the goodness of the Lord , thy right Hand is full of Righteousness . Touching the Almighty , he is excellent in Power , and in Judgement , and in plenty of Justice . Holy , holy , holy , is the Lord of Hosts , the whole Earth is full of his glory . thou Lord art good and ready to forgive , and plenteous in Mercy unto all them that call upon thee ; the Voice of the Lord is full of Majesty . 

And OH the fullness of God manifested in the Flesh ! We beheld his Glory , the Glory of the only begotten of the Father , full of grace and truth . Of his fullness have we all received . With him is plenteous Redemption . 

7.  This is a living House , other Houses are made of dead Materials , Wood and Stone , most of them of Clay , whose Foundation is in the Dust , which are crushed before the Moth. God the Father hath life in himself , and he hath given to the Son to have life in himself , and to be the cause and giver of life , of the life of nature to all Men ; and of grace and godliness to sinful Men , and of comfort to sorrowful Men , and of Resurrection to dead Men , and of Glory to godly Men. It is God in whom we live , and move , and have our Being , and he it is that maintains our life . OH bless our God ye People , and make the voice of his praise to be heard , which holdeth our Soul in Life . Watching continually to prevent them that seek after it , and lay snares for it . Men that are Princes Life-guards , are fain sometimes to sleep , cannot watch always , and Men that dwell in costly Houses are fain to watch their Houses . Know this saith our Saviour , that if the good Man of the House had known in what Watch the Thief would come , he would have watched , and not have suffered his House to be broken up : But this House watcheth over all that dwell in it , that no hurt be at any time done them . He that keepeth thee will not slumber , saith the Psalmist speaking to himself ; ( who dwelled in the secret place of the most High ) in the spirit ) Behold , he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep . 

This is a new House , always new , and so needs no repair ; it is not subject , as all other Houses are , to age and decay . Though some old things are better than new , no Man having drunk old Wine , straightway desireth new : for he saith the old is better . They sacrificed to new Gods that came newly up . Yet generally new things are best , and so accounted , both things of Gods making . Behold , I make all things new . I create new Heavens , and a new Earth . I will make a new Covenant . A new Heart will I give you , and a new spirit will I give you ; thou shalt be called by a new Name , which the Mouth of the Lord shall Name . 

And so of men's Garments , and all manner of Utensils , when and while new , are most set by : Especially Houses , both themselves live and lodge in , and also Outhouses when they are over old , they pull them down , and build new ones . This House is never old , but as new at this day , as it was when the first holy Man had his habitation in it , as full of lustre and glory , ten thousand times more glorious than that Palace of the Sun , which the Poet describes ; and it must needs be so , because every Inhabitant is not only glorious , made so by it , but glory itself . Upon all the Glory shall be a defence . By Glory are meant the Saints of God , the abstract put for the concrete , to note their eminent shining surpassing transcendent excellency ; though in this life they are compassed about with many infirmities , which makes their glory lesle conspicuous , They are all glorious within . Now do but note what kind of defence ▪ what manner of covering this House is promised to be , to all those glorious ones that dwell in it , namely like that of the Israelites , when they went out of Egypt . The Lord went before them by Day , to lead them in a Pillar of a Cloud in the way : and by Night in a Pillar of Fire to give them light . It shall be ( though not so visibly ) conspicuous , yet as illustrious and miraculous , and that against all manner of evils , heat and rain , and for all times Day and Night . There shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the Daytime , from the heat , and for a place of refuge from storm , and from Rain . God hath been ever such a house of defence to all his holy ones , is now and ever shall be , World without end . I am the Lord , I change not . Jesus Christ yesterday , to Day , and the same for ever . 

His works indeed of the first Creation are changeable to the worse and weaker , but so is not he ; of old hast thou laid the foundation of the Earth , and the Heavens are the Works of thy Hands , they shall perish , but thou shalt endure , they all of them shall wax old , like a Garment , but thou art the same . And so are all his works of the second Creation . The renewing graces of his holy Spirit , the older they are , the newer and fresher , and more flourishing they grow . They that are partakers of them , can say , as Caleb did to Joshua , Forty Years old was I when Moses sent me to espy the Land , I am this Day fourscore and five Years old , as yet I am as strong , this Day , as I was the Day when Moses sent me , as my strength was then , even so is my strength now , for War both to go out , and to come in . So it is said of Moses , who was an hundred and twenty Years old when he died , yet his Eye was not dim , nor his natural force abated . How much more may it be said of the everlasting Lord God , that his Eyes are as sharp sighted as ever , nor is his Divine force abated ? The Eyes of the Lord run too and from , throughout the whole Earth , to show himself strong in the behalf of those whose heart is perfect towards him . Is his hand shortened , that it cannot redeem ? Or have I no power to deliver ? Behold the Lords hand is not shortened , that it cannot save , neither his Ear heavy that it cannot hear . And as his Power is , so is his Mercy and Truth . The Mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting : upon them that fear him , and his righteousness , unto children's Children . Thy faithfulness is unto all Generations . 

This House therefore with all its Furniture is always new and fresh , which can be said of no other ▪ nor is it new formally only , but also effectively . 

Hast thou not known ? hast thou not heard that the everlasting God , the Lord the Creator , of the ends of the Earth fainteth not , neither is weary ? His strength never decayeth , nor doth his will ever alter towards his , who by a never failing Power of the Holy Spirit are carried as it were upon eagle Wings , to Heaven , to the mark of their supernal Calling . Yea , their Wings grow like unto Eagles , that is , they grow young , and renew in spiritual Vigour . 

9  It is a dwelling house , dwelling in , as well as dwelled in , an habitation , inhabiting in each of its Inhabitants ; which no other house is . 

God is oft said to dwell in Heaven . Unto thee will I lift up mine Eyes , OH thou that dwellest in the Heavens . Look down from Heaven and behold from the Habitation of thy Holiness , and of thy Glory . I dwell in the High and Holy Place . The Heaven is my Throne . We must not understand this , placing God in Heaven , as if he were totally circumscribed there , for this is contrary to his infinite greatness . Behold the Heaven , and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee . Do not I fill Heaven and Earth ? saith the Lord Nor must we think he is so in Heaven , as if his sight of things below were hindered by Heaven , as a Curtain drawn before him , as those great Fools thought : for this is contrary to his Omnisciency . But he is said to be in Heaven , because he doth there most immediately and visibly manifest his Majesty , and exhibit the fullness of his Glory , and because from thence he doth most manifest his powerful providence , wisdom , justice and mercy : we are commanded , when we pray to him , to conceive of him , as being in Heaven , to teach us to raise our Souls , as high in praise , as possibly we can above the Earth ( beyond Heaven our thoughts cannot soar : ) As also how to make Prayers pleasing to God , both for matter and manner . 

God is as oft said to dwell on Earth , to have his Residence among his ancient People , in the Land wherein they dwelled . Defile not the Land which ye shall inhabit , wherein I dwell , for I the Lord dwell among the Children of Israel . The Lord hath chosen Zion , he hath desired it for his Habitation ; This is my rest for ever , here will I dwell , for I have desired it . Blessed be the Lord out of Zion , which dwelleth at Jerusalem . I have surely built thee an House to dwell in . A settled place for thee to abide in for ever . In that place , as in the flitting Tabernacle which Moses made , he caused his Name to dwell : that is , he made manifest and known in those places , the sacred Signs of his Presence , as it were by his own proper name : His Majesty and Glory in singular and wonderful effects of Grace and Power . 

Every regenerate and faithful Man and Woman hath ever been , is , and will be owned and acknowledged the Temple of the Holy , Blessed , and Glorious Trinity . ye are the Temple of the Living God , as God hath said , I will dwell in them , and walk in them . That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith . ye are not in the Flesh , but in the Spirit : if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you . Know you not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost , which is in you , which ye have of God ? These things are signified by this dwelling of the Spirit in Believers . 1.  That his Spirit is effectual , and mighty to possess and govern them , enlightening their minds to know , and powerfully guiding them , to do the known will of God. 2.  That his Presence is continual , not as of a Guest , who lodgeth for a Night at an Inn ▪ and is gone next Day , nor as a Sojourner , but as an owner , and Possessor to abide for ever . I will pray the Father , and he shall give you another Comforter , that he may ab●de with you for ever : even the Spirit of Truth , he dwelleth in you , and shall be in you . 3.  The manner ▪ of his Presence , not by Infiniteness of Power , as he is present to all Creatures to sustain them , but by his grace and healthful effects . If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead , dwell in you , he shall quicken your immortal Souls , and mortal Bodies , by his Spirit that dwelleth in you . 

10.  It is a movable Habitation , according to the motion of those that dwell in it , accompanying them whithersoever they go , covering them where-soever they are . Some Creatures carry their Houses about with them : So doth every new Creature , They are never out of this their own House . 

The Israelites , during their abode in the Wilderness , dwelled in Tents Forty Years : The Arabians and other People do so constantly , having no firm Habitations . In time of War , and in travelling , these movable Houses were , and still are in use . ( Places to dwell in , so made , as they might be removed and carried too and from : ) God himself sends word to David , since the Day he brought up Israel , unto that Day , he had not dwelled in a fixed settled House , But had been from Tent to Tent , from one Tabernacle to another . But I have been with thee ( saith he ) whither soever thou hast walked . Yea , though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death , saith David unto God. I will fear no evil , for thou art with me . While I sleep , and when I awake , I am still with thee . 

Jacob had this assurance given him , that God would accompany him , and go too and from with him , when he fled from the face of his Brother . Behold I am with thee , and I will keep thee in all places whither thou goest , and will come back again with thee . I will not leave thee . And so when he went to see his Son Joseph , I will go down with thee into Egypt . 

As the Wheels accompanied closely the living Creatures exactly following their motion and their rest , resting with them : When the living Creatures went , the Wheels went : when the living Creatures were lift up , the Wheels were lift up : when those went , these went , and when those stood , these stood . This living House as closely accompanies the living Creatures in it , and as punctually attends their motions up and down , and rests with them in their resting place every where . 

11.  Nor is this House capable of , or subject to any such casualties , as other houses are . The houses of some poor Creatures , which they bear about with them , are so brittle , that a foot that treadeth on them , or a Cartwheel going over them , may crush and destroy them . The best built houses may be burned with Fire , or blown down with Tempests , or rend with Meteors , or broken up with Thiefs ; Job's Sons and Daughters were eating , and drinking Wine in their elder Brothers House , and behold there came a Wind from the Wilderness , and it fell upon the young Men , and killed them . The Hold whereinto a thousand Men and Women of the Tower of Shechem entered , was set on Fire , and consumed with all the persons in it . Nebuzaradan burned in one Day the House of the Lord , and the King's Houses , and all the Houses of Jerusalem , and every great Man's House burned he with Fire . I will gather all Nations against Jerusalem , and the City shall be taken , and the Houses rifled . The Earth opened her Mouth , and swallowed up Korah , Dathan and Abiram , and their Houses , and all their goods . 

But there is no fear of any such accident to this House , what Plots or conspiracies soever are made to harm it or them , that live in it , there shall not a hair of their heads perish , nor their Treasures be touched . 

True it is , this House is itself a Consuming Fire , Infinitely hotter than that in Nebuchadnezar's Furnace , the Flame whereof consumed those Men that took up , Shedrach , Meshach and Abednigo : but it is only so to them that are without , and dare to come nigh to pillage it , or hurt any in it , who walk as comfortably in this Fire , as those three Children did in the burning Furnace , upon whose Bodies the Fire had no Power , nor was an Hair of their Heads singed , neither were their Coats changed , nor had the smell of Fire passed on them . 

12.  It is a holding House : as it holds the Souls of the Inhabitants in Life , so it suffers not their feet to be moved out of it , but it keepeth them constantly and perseveringly in . Nor is it in the Power of Men or Devils to eject them , no , nor of the old Man that hath still a Being in them , and persuades them to depart , and make a change : for though they may do both if they will , yet they cannot will to do either ; for God hath promised that all whom he receives within himself , shall not have a heart to leave him , But to abide for ever in him . I will put my fear in their hearts , and they shall not depart from me . And he hath power to perform what he has promised , he is able to keep you from falling , and to preserve you blameless , before the presence of his glory is exceeding joy . We are kept by the Guard of God's Power , his strongest ( if degrees be in ) Omnipotency through faith unto salvation . There were never any that went into this House by the Door . ( Such as Jesus Christ is . I am the Door . By him an abundant entrance is made into the Church , and consequently unto God. no Man cometh unto the Father , but by me : by him we have access with confidence . ) that ever apostatised finally or totally . 

Some that have seemed unto themselves , and others to be real Members of this Family ( Demas for example ) that went out , but they were never truly in , as appears by their going out . Hear the testimony of one of the household , the truth of whom is without question . They went out from us , because they were not of us , for if they had been of us , they would no doubt have continued with us ; but they went out , that they might be manifest , that they were not all of us , the servant abideth not in the House for ever , but the Son abideth ever . The righteous is an everlasting Foundation . True it is , he may set one Foot out of Doors . David did so when he committed Adultery ; and practised the Death of Uriah , and Peter did so when he forswear his Master , and with such direful curses denied that he knew him . But this was through the violence of temptation : The purpose and resolution of both their hearts , was not to take a step out , but to keep close within Door . 

I have sworn and will perform it , that I will keep thy righteous Judgements . Though all Men should be offended because of thee , yet I will not be offended . Though I should die with thee , yet will I not deny thee . How fell they then into so foul sins ? Surely they were suddenly overtaken : the one with a passion of lust , the other with a passion of fear , and so they fell . But even then both of them had one Foot still within the House , which stayed while the other stepped . They had sanctifying grace still in their hearts , whose essential property is constancy , called therefore immortal Seed . And it appeared ( like sparks of Fire , when the ashes covering them , are blown away ) as soon as they came to themselves : David yielded to the reproof of Nathan presently . And Peter , when the Lord turned and looked upon him , went out and wept bitterly . Each drew his Foot back into the House again , and kept close in unto the end of their lives . 

13.  It is a House held by the best tenure , none like it ; 't is held in such a head as is non-such , Jesus Christ , whom God hath made head of the Church , in a singular and eminent manner , far above the domination which he hath over all other Creatures . 

He dearly bought and purchased this Habitation for all the Elect , which they had forfeited by their first offence , and hereupon were outed of it : He gave himself a Ransom for them all , a Price fully answerable to their Souls , and to this Inheritance . In him they may have been said to have received at the Lords hand double for all their sins . 

And for them it were , and not for himself only , that He fulfilled all Righteousness , and thereby paid the whole debt of obedience to the Law : which they did own to God. All spiritual blessings whereby they are made meet to be made partakers of this blessed Mansion , Faith , Repentance , and Holiness , though they be Gospel . Gifts of God , and obtained merely through his Mercy , yet is this mercy obtained from God only through Jesus Christ . Blessed be God , who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ , in him we have Redemption through his Blood. Which also purgeth our Consciences from dead Works to serve the living God , and thereby we have boldness to enter into the holiest , and through his Intercession , it is that we have our abiding there . Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect ? Or bring a Writ of Ejection to them ? Who is he that condemneth ? Or who is he that passeth Sentence , that they must avoid their House ? It is Christ that died , yea rather that is risen again , who is even at the right hand of God , who also maketh Intercession for us . He died for , and in their name and stead , whereby they are absolved from all their forfeits . He is risen again for their Justification , to acquit them , as it were by manner of solemn Judgement . His Resurrection was a certain argument , that God was reconciled , and that this habitation was regained for them ; which could not have been , if he had remained dead . For the continuation of the Payment , would always have showed the Imperfection of it . And as he is at the right hand of God in the Heavenly Glory , fully manifested , so they are at his right hand . Upon thy right hand did stand the Queen . And there he maketh Intercession for them , by continually representing himself , his Righteousness , Merit , and Love before the face of his Father , and so preserves them in his favour and love , from which nothing shall be ever able to separate them , by him they have and hold possession . 

14.  It is a habitation best accommodated of any other . The conveniences belonging to it are numberless and matchless . The excellency of the meanest of them cannot be worthily uttered , nor sufficiently magnified by the tongue of Men and Angels . 

no such passage into any House as this . When the Queen of Sheba had seen the House that King Solomon had built . — And his ascent by which he went up to the House of the Lord : ( that most stately Bridge , and great terrace born up with exceeding strong Walls , which he set upon that hollow place , and deep precipice , which divided Mount Zion from Mount Moriah , by which they went from the royal Palace to the Temple , ) There was no more Spirit in her : she was ravished beyond herself . How insinitely more ravished would she have been , had she seen by the eye of faith , ( as probably she did and so was ) the ascent and passage into this house , which is the Lord The Apostle tells us that he by his blood hath made a new and living way of entrance , into the holiest for all believers : who by a lively faith represent unto themselves his human nature , with all that he hath done in it for them : and hereby get into the innermost fruition of God's grace and glory . He in his own Person is the way and passage into this supper celestial Palace . I am the way , no Man cometh unto the Father , but by me . 

Nor is there any house that hath such Air. Kings have had a care of this especially , that the edifice when erected , might have fresh Air , and cooling Gales of Wind continually . Jehoiakim whose pride in building is blamed , is brought in thus , expressing his purpose . I will build me a high house Chambers through Aired , ( the Hebrew hath it so , and so the Septuagint . ) exposed to blasts on every side . no house hath such continual refreshing Gales as this . Christ breathes upon his proper household , for an external sign of the Internal operation of his spirit . He still doth so upon his whole household of faith : shedding the love of God abroad in their hearts by his holy spirit , to whom their common Mother makes this Prayer , each is heard and granted . Awake OH North Wind , and come OH South , and blow upon my Garden . 

By these two Winds of contrary qualities is signified the same spirit , working either coolness and refreshing of Comfort , or heat and fervency of Zeal . And Moreover that every Wind shall blow profit to every one that loveth God , as every one doth that to him that dwelleth in him . 

Nor hath any House such Gardens , and Orchards , with Variety of Flowers , and Fruits , and fresh Springs therein , nor such Walks and Arbours belonging and adjoining to it , as this hath . The loss of this parcel of Ground , which was stored with such excellent Plants and Trees , and enriched with more fruitfulness , and beauty than any other part of the Earth , ( called Paradise , and the Garden of the Lord ) made for Man's use and delight , and out of which he was excluded , and to which he might no more come near , because of his sin , is abundantly made up to all that dwell in God. Who have liberty to eat of the fruit of every Tree that is pleasant to the sight , and good for food . Yea , Of the Tree of Life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God , and to drink of the Water of Life freely , and to walk at liberty . Yea themselves are the Gardens and Orchards of this House , wherein he walks and delights to feed . Nor have any Gardens and Orchards , and Spring's such Fences and Guards about them as these . A Garden enclosed is my Sister , my Spouse , a Spring shut up , a Fountain sealed : in that Day sing ye unto her a Vineyard of red Wine . I the Lord do keep it , I will Water it every moment ; lest any hurt it , I will keep it Night and Day . I ( saith the Lord ) will be unto her a Wall of Fire round about . 

Nor is there any House that hath such Lands and Revenues , such a stock belonging to it . The Earth is the Lords , and the fullness thereof . Every Beast of the Forest is mine , and the Cattles upon a thousand Hills . I know all the Fowls upon the Mountains . ( They are all before me , ready at my service ) The World is mine , and the fullness thereof : of the upper as well as lower World. Every one that dwells in this house may say truly , all these are mine . The Apostle says so . All things are yours . Entirely , refinedly , really , safely , serviceably , satisfyingly . He must needs have all , that hath the haver of all . He is by faith in Christ , Heir of the World. Yea , they are in actual possession of all things , when they are in want of all things . Having nothing , and yet possessing all things . 

15.  It is a House of the easiest rent , the chiefage to be paid is not so much as a Pepper Corn , all that 's required , is thankful acknowledgement , and invocation , which are pointed out by terms of the Law. Sacrifices , Prayers , and Vows . Offer unto God thanksgiving , and pay thy vows unto the most High , and call upon me in the Day of trouble . thou that teachest another , teachest thou not thyself ? Yes , that I do , and that practically and continually . Hear it and know it for your good . What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards me ! I will take the Cup of Salvation . I will solemnly and thankfully acknowledge him , ( a phrase taken from the custom observed in thanksgiving , after which they made a place wherein the Father of the Family took a Cup in his hand , and used a certain form of blessing , and having drank , and caused the Cup to go round to all the rest . ) And I will call upon the Name of the Lord , I will pay my Vows unto the Lord I will offer the Sacrifice of thanks giving , every Day will I bless thee , and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever . God is willing we should have the comfort of his blessings , but he will have the glory of them . My glory will I not give to another . We must give him the glory , which we do , when we give him the praise and thanks . Whoso offereth praise , glorifyeth me . The Shepwards returned , praising and glorifying God. Theophilus Samaritan that was healed , turned back , and with a loud Voice glorified God , giving thanks . For his healing , now his thanks must not only be vocal , but vital and cordial . Bless the Lord OH my Soul , and all that is within me , bless his holy Name . I will praise thee OH Lord with my whole heart , the Life and Conversation also must be rightly ordered . The best livers are the best thanks-givers . To him that disposeth his way aright , will I show the salvation of God. He hath showed thee , OH Man , what is good , and what doth the Lord require of thee , but to do justly , and to love mercy , and to walk humbly with thy God ? And lest any should think it difficult and grievous to do all this , let these Scriptures be consulted . 1 John 5. 3.  Pro. 21. 15.  Phil. 1. 29. 2. 13.  Math. 11. 30.  Ezek. 36. 26 , 27.  

16.  Who ever dwells in this House , shall be sure not to want an Earthly House to dwell in , with all provision , and furniture convenient . He that gives the greater , will not deny the lesle . Thus our blessed Saviour reasoneth . Is not the Life more than Meat , and the Body than Raiment . God out of his Power and Goodness having granted unto Man his Being , which is the greater , will not deny him the lesser , which is the preservation thereof . And the Apostle . He that spared not his own Son , but delivered him up for us all ; How shall he not with him also freely give us all things . 

Object . The Son of God himself , when on Earth , had not where to lay his head . Those Worthies mentioned in that little Book of Martyrs wanted houses . Wandering about in Sheepskins , and Goatskins , in Deserts , and in Mountains , and in Dens , and Caves of the Earth . Saint Paul , describing the condition of himself , and his fellows , saith . Even unto this present Hour , we both hunger and thirst , and are naked , and are buffeted , and have no certain dwelling place . Now the Disciple is not above his Master , nor the Servant above his Lord And who will be so arrogant as to think himself better , or better privileged , than those of whom the World was not worthy , or that Holy Apostle ? 

Answ . Touching our Saviour , as he was Voluntary poor to enrich us . ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , that though he was rich , yet for your sakes he became poor , that ye through his poverty might be rich . He sorrowed that we might rejoice , died that we might live . So he would be houseless , that none of his might want a House . 1.  As for those other Worthies , God did indeed exercise their faith , and patience . Yet 2. their Dens and Caves were better to them , than any Earthly Palaces , having God's gracious presence with them , which was better to them than ten Houses : ( as Elkanah to Hannah , am not I better to thee than Ten Sons ? ) Though Paul had no House of his own , yet those that had , willingly received him into theirs . Lydia did so . If ye have judged me faithful unto the Lord , come into my house , and abide there , and she constrained us . So did Publius the Chief Man of the Island receive him , and his Company , and lodged them Three Days courteously . And Paul dwelled two whole Years in his own hired House . Thus God provided for Elijah and Elisha , and thus he provided for his Gospel-ministers , who have not been suffered to live in their own Houses . 

17.  They that dwell in this House here , are sure of an Heavenly House hereafter . We know that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved , we have a building of God , an House not made with hands , Eternal in the Heavens . 

18.  While they are here , they are , or may be sure no evil shall befall them , Because thou hast made the Lord , even the most High , thy Habitation , there shall no evil befall thee . See parallel promises , Psal . 121. 7.  Pro. 12. 21. 19 23.  Eccl. 85.  By evil , is not meant moral evil , sin and iniquity . Evil of fault or crime , for the holiest are not free from this , while on this side Heaven . There is not a just Man on Earth that doth good and sinneth not . Who can say I have made my Heart clean , I am free from my sin . If we say that we have no sin , we deceive ourselves , and the truth is not in us ; if we say we have not sinned , we make God a liar ; and his word is not in us : in many things we offend all . Nor are injuries and wrongs from Men intended , in which sense evil is sometimes taken , for none are more subject to these , than the Household of God , nor the matter of any other penal evil sent by God , ( as indeed all such evils are ) for these befall as well the Righteous , as the wicked . All things come alike to all , there is one event to the Righteous , and to the wicked , to the good , and to the clean , and to the unclean , to him that sacrificeth , and to him that sacrificeth not . As is the good , so is the sinner ; as he that sweareth , so he that feareth an Oath . As the evil partake of common blessings with good Men ; so the good of common judgements with evil ones : yea it is observed , that when God brings any common judgements , he usually begins with his own , the dearly beloved of his Soul. Yea , that his strokes are sorer upon them than upon any others . Yea , and when wicked Men ( whose habitation the Devil is , as they are his , for he dwells in them ; yea , they are incarnate Devils ) when these I say are free from all manner of outward evils , pious Men who have made God their habitation , have immunity from none . And that they are moreover obnoxious to inward afflictions , terror of Conscience , and wounds of Spirit , which is an intolerable pressure ; and therefore the promise must be understood of their freedom from the form of penal evils , which is the revenging wrath of God , and the power such evils have to separate the Soul from the Love of God. And the meaning is , they never have any dram of God's revenging justice on them . A little of his chastising wrath some afflictions may have , for a little moment ; nor shall any of them singly , or all of them jointly be able to separate them from his Love in Christ . Nay , they shall all cooperate for the furtherance of their spiritual and eternal good . They believe as they are taught to pray that God would deliver them from all evil ; That is , that he will either keep away evil imminent , that it come not at all , or that he will so assist in suffering , as that they shall not sink under the burden , or that he will take away the force and strength of the Instrument , that it shall not be able to act according to its Nature , or that he will remove the evil clean away ; or finally that he will take them away from the evil to come , or that he will alter the nature of the evil , and turn it to good . One of these ways God will deliver them whose habitation he is , and any of these ways is this promise made good to them . 

no more need to be said to prove the Lord the best Habitation , and them to be the most , yea the only happy ones , who have made him their habitation . 

THE SECOND SERMON . The Question will be , what it is to make God our Habitation ? And how may we know that we dwell in him ? To the first part of the Question , I answer , it is to make choice of him , to close with him , and to cleave unto him . 

1.  To make choice of God , as the sole Seat of our Souls rest , and the only object of the Worship and Service of our whole Man The chief end and use of a House is well known to be rest . Where is the House that ye build unto me , and where is the place of my rest . Every Man's House is the place of his rest ? My People shall dwell in a peaceable Habitation , and in sure dwellings , and in quiet resting places . I Nebucadnezar was at rest in my House . 

Rest is both the Privation , and a perfection of motion . That in respect of the acquisition of the end of motion . For therefore things move that they may rest . Rest is deservedly esteemed a choice and chief good . We may say of it , what the Preacher doth of Light. ( Truly Light is sweet ) Truly rest is sweet . It was no deception of sight in Issachar , when he saw that rest was good : The truth is , it is the good of goods . It may be said of it , as David did of Goliah's sword . There is none like that , give it me . no good like this of rest , all other good things without it avail nothing . All Creatures desire rest , the wild Beasts of the Desert , and of the Island , the Satyr , and the screetch-owle seek and find for themselves a place of Rest . it 's noted as a comfortable privilege , which Foxes , and the Birds of the Air had above our Saviour , that they had Holes and Nests to rest in . The Dove sent out of the Ark sought , but found no rest for the sole of her foot , therefore returned again to that place of her rest . Special Order is taken for the Ox and the Ass , that they should have One Day of Rest in Seven ; It kills the heart of the Earth to be always tilled , and therefore the Countryman let's it lie sometimes fallow , that by taking rest it may get heart . The very Devils affect a House upon this account . The unclean Spirit gone out of a Man , walked through dry places , seeking rest and finding none , I will , he says , return unto my House where I came out , where I had rest . Yea , God himself seems to be joyed , when a House of rest was builded for him to dwell in . Arise OH Lord unto thy rest , the Lord hath chosen Zion , he hath desired it for his Habitation . This is my rest , for ever here will I dwell , for I have desired it for a Habitation , and he blessed the seventh Day , because that he rested thereon from all his Work. The best thing one friend can wish to another , or procure for another , is rest . The Lord grant that you may find rest , my Daughter ; Shall I not seek rest for thee ? that it may be well with thee . And the worst mischief one can do his Neighbour , is to spoil his rest . Lay not wait , OH wicked Man , against the dwelling place of the righteous , spoil not his resting place . The goodness and badness of every Man's condition is measured by rest . This hath more rest than the other . Yea for rest Death itself is desirable . Why died I not from the Womb ? Why did I not give up the Ghost , when I came out of the Belly ? then had I been at rest . There the weary be at rest . There the Prisoners rest together . 

Though bodily rest be a great good , and promised as a blessing . thou shalt take thy rest in safety , Israel shall be in rest and quiet , yet it is not to be compared to the rest of the Soul , which indeed is the Soul of rest . And without which , the best resting places with the greatest conveniencies that the whole World can yield , can give no content , witness Haman . And the transcendent excellency of this rest is evidenced by its contrary , a restless unquiet mind is a burden importable . 

Let the Question be put concerning this rest , which Job propounds . But where shall wisdom be found , and where is the place of Understanding ? Where may we find the Souls Rest , and what is the place of its repose ? The Answer is given negatively , that it is not to be found in any Creatures . They will each of them give the same answer , which the depth of the Sea doth ; It is not in me , the Depth saith , and the Sea saith , it is not in me . 

Herb. Ch. Peace . Sweet peace , where dost thou dwell , I humbly crave , 
Let me once know . 
I sought thee in a secret Cave , 
And asked if peace were there ? 
A hollow Wind did seem to answer no. 
Go seek else where . 


I did , and going , did a Rainbow note , 
Surely thought I , 
This is the Lace of Peace's Coat ; 
I will search out the matter . 
But while I looked , the Clouds immediately 
Did break and scatter . 


then I went to a Garden , and did spy 
A gallant Flower . 
The Crown Imperial sure , said I 
Peace at the root must dwell . 
But when I digged , I saw a Worm devour 
What showed so well . 


Pleasures , riches , Honours , under which all the good things of the World are comprehended , are utterly impotent , altogether insufficient to give the Soul of Man any Rest . 

False glozing pleasures Casks of Happiness , 
Foolish Night fire's Woman's and children's wishes , 
Chases in Arras , guilded emptiness , 
Shadows well mounted , dreams in a Career , 
Embroidered lies nothing between two dishes ; 
These are the Pleasures here . 


riches seem to be something able to do something in order to this end , but in truth they are nothing , can do nothing . Labour not to be rich — ▪ wilt thou set thine Eyes upon that which is not ? wherefore do you lay out your labour for that which satisfyeth not ? 

Take Earthly Honours in , and take his testimony , who had all these in abundance , made trial of them , to find what good was in them , and was more able to improve them , than was ever any mere Man , since the fall , and hear him after his utmost experimental disquisition , that not only , he found not what he taught , namely rest for his Soul. Vanity of Vanities ( saith the Preacher ) Vanity of Vanities , all is Vanity . But that he found the clean contrary trouble , sorrow , anguish , bitterness , Vexation of Spirit . 

The rich Man is brought in singing a Requiem to his Soul. Soul thou hast much goods laid up for many Years , take thine ease , eat , drink and be merry . But wisdom upbraids his folly for placing his joy and peace in his possessions and promising to give his Soul ease and rest in his abundance . 

2.  Nor is it to be found in knowledge , Human or Divine , not in the former , For in much wisdom is much grief , and he that increaseth knowledge , increaseth sorrow . Learning cannot be attained without great pains of mind and body , and he that hath attained the highest degree and greatest measure , hath his mind more unsatisfied , than when he began to study . And herein Children and fools have the advantage who as they want wit , so they want wo. Not to know much , but to know nothing in the sweetest life of all . Nor in this neither , for experience shows , that such that give themselves most to the study of Scripture , and get greatest ability to discourse of Divine matters : are as far from rest , as others which appears by the falling off , of many of them from one Sect to another , till they have made trial of every dispensation ( as they call it ) and then they are as far from satisfaction as ever , and farther . 

3.  Nor in a form of Godliness , 't is not the outward profession of the true Religion , nor frequent use of holy Ordinances , or religious exercises , public , private , secret , that hath any more power , to bring rest and quiet to the soul , than Elishah's staff laid upon the dead Child's face , had to bring heat or life into it . The frequent complaints of many Christians that are much in both confirm this . 

4.  Much lesle in Doctrines and Inventions of Men. These are Husks that Swine's do eat , they that fill their Bellies with them , are like unto Pharaoh's lean kine . And as they nourish not , so they quiet not ; miserable Comforters are they all . All that would take up their rest in any of these , may hear the Prophet speaking thus unto them , Arise ye and depart , for this is not your Rest . 

Positively , the Souls true rest is to be had only in God , who is a fit Harbour and Heaven for the heart to cast Anchor in ; because he is a Spirit . 2.  Being infinite , he is able to fill the boundless and endless desires of it . Moreover he made the Soul for himself . And gave it at the first a Being in himself , a local Being in the Body , and a Spiritual Being in himself . This being in God is Man's first being , when Man fell by sin , God in Justice cast him out of himself , Forsaken him ; and so the Union and the Communion that he had with God was broken off . Hence it is that the Soul being out of God , its proper Habitation , can have no true rest , till it return thither : Return unto thy Rest , OH my Soul.  

The first step the Soul takes in this return to its rest , is a free and well-advised choice of God to dwell in him , and serve there , observing and conforming to the Laws and Orders of the House . 

Joshua put the Children of Israel to their choice . Choose you this Day whom you will serve , whether the God your Fathers served on the other side of the Flood , or the Gods of the Amorites in whose Land ye dwell , if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord Professeth her resolution ; that whatsoever they did , what choice soever they made , He and his House would serve the Lord They make the same profession , express the same resolution . God forbid that we should do otherwise , we are witnesses against ourselves , that we have chosen us the Lord to serve , even the Lord our God , him will we serve , and his Voice will we obey . Such a choice David made . I have voluntarily Decreed to give up myself to be guided by thy Word . I have chosen thy Precepts , above other things for my sovereign good and treasure : with which I am resolved to be satisfied and contented , and precisely to order my words , and thoughts , and actions according to them . Having inclined my Heart to perform thy Statutes always , even unto the end . And being fully purposed that my Mouth shall not transgress , and that my Feet shall run the ways of thy Commandments . Yea , were I put to my choice , I would choose rather to sit at the Threshold of the House of my God , to be a Doorkeeper in it , than to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness . The like choice did the three Children make , and so did Daniel , and Moses , and Mary , and those ancient Martyrs , who would not accept deliverance , which was offered them conditionally , that they would deny the true God , and not serve him : this is the first way whereby Men make God their habitation , namely by choosing him , giving him their judgements , wills , and affections , the probation before all other persons , or things , or service . Whom have I in Heaven but thee , and there is none upon Earth that I desire in comparison of thee . A Day in thy Courts is better than a thousand . Thy loving kindness is better than Life . How much better is thy Love than Wine , and the smell of thine Ointments than all Spices ? The Law of thy Mouth is better to me than thousands of Gold and Silver . It is better to trust in the Lord , than to put confidence in Princes . 

The second follows , which is by closing with him . Many Nations shall be joined unto the Lord , and shall be my People , and I will dwell in the midst of them . This joining makes this natural dwelling . Neither let the Son of the Stranger that hath tied himself to the Lord , speak , saying , the Lord hath utterly separated me from his People . Also the Sons of the Stranger that join themselves to the Lord to serve him , and love the Name of the Lord , to be his servants , even them will I bring to my holy Mountain , and their Sacrifices shall be accepted . He that is joined to the Lord , is one Spirit . United with Christ , and so to God the Father , in Body and Soul , as by a Bond of spiritual Matrimony in the Communion of the Spirit of Holiness . 

This actual closing with God is , especially by faith , which is a trusting in his mercy , through the mediation of his Son , with an obediential affiance . I have trusted in thy mercy , and by this means made thee my Habitation , and Salvation , wherein I take no small Consolation . Let him trust in the Name of the Lord , and stay upon his God. Rely with hearty confidence upon his faithful promises , and most powerful , wise , and good providence , for preventing and removing of evils ; and obtaining all good , spiritual , temporal , and eternal . The want of this is noted in that wicked mighty Man Lo this is the Man that made not God his strength , but trusted in the abundance of his riches , and strengthened himself in his ▪ wickedness . By repenting whereof , and closing with God , by a religious trust , he might have made him his dwelling place ; for not doing so , he is threatened to be plucked out of his own dwelling place . 

3.  God is made our Habitation by cleaving to him , thus closed with persevering in faith and holiness , adhering constantly , and abiding faithfully to God. Seeking and expecting all our safety from his sole protection , and accordingly qualifying ourselves for a capacity thereof , keeping in the way , to which he hath promised his safeguard . This is the meaning of the subject of this proposition in the first Verse of this Psalm . He that dwelleth in the secret Place of the most High. The same with making the Lord , even the most High , our Habitation . Sticking fast also to him with the affections of the heart , especially that of Love , which hath the Nature of Glue . The Soul of Jonathan was knit with the Soul of David , and Jonathan loved him as his own Soul. Ruth clavae to Naoimi ; entreat me not says she to hear thee , or to return from following after thee : For whither thou goest , I will go ; and where thou lodgest , I will lodge ; where thou diest , will I die ; and there will I be buried . Hezekiah cleave unto the Lord , and departed not from him , but kept his Commandments ; him shalt thou serve , and to him shalt thou cleave ; thus thou shalt make him thy habitation . 

To the later Branch of the Question , I answer in the words of the Apostle John , in his first Epistle , where he gives among others these four Characters of persons dwelling in God. 1.  He that keepeth his Commandments , dwelleth in him , and he in him . The Commandments of the moral Law are meant , which whosoever keepeth , approves himself to God and Men , and to his own Conscience , that he hath his dwelling in God. He that life's in the breach of them , evidenceth ▪ that he hath not his abiding in God. Nor will obedience to some of these Commandments be any comfort to a Man's conscience that God is his habitation . That young Man in the Gospel could say to Christ , who bade him , if he would enter into life , keep the Commandments , and mentions sundry of them ; All these things have I kept from my Youth up . The proud Pharisee thanked God he was not as other Men were , Extortioners , Unjust , Adulterers , that he fasted twice a Week , and gave Tithes of all that he possessed . Herod did many things . 

Obedience must be Universal ; Whosoever shall keep the whole Law , and yet is guilty in one point , offendeth in all . David did according to all that God commanded him . Zacharias and Elizabeth walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord ; then shall I not be ashamed , when I have respect unto all thy Commandments . Conscience must be made of every sin , great and small . They only are blessed that do no iniquity . I have refrained my Feet from every evil way . I hate every false way . Darling sins must be abandoned and abominated , sins of constitution , calling , company . I kept my self from mine iniquity . So must every secret sin , even of thought . Why should I think upon a Maid ? Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments , shall be excluded out of Heaven ; yea , all appearance of evil must be abstained from . And conscience must be made of every duty , how costly , dangerous , or difficult soever . 2 Cor. 8. 7.  Phil. 4. 8 , 9  Dan. 6. 10.  Rom. 12. 19 , 20.  True it is , we must be most careful of such duties , that God hath laid a charge upon us , especially to perform , namely substantial duties of Piety and Charity , and the duties of our particular Callings and Relations . Mat. 22. 38 , 39 ▪ 23. 23 , 24. 1  Sam. 15. 22.  Hos . 6. 6.  Luk. 3. 13 , 14. 1  Tim. 6. 1 , 2.  Tit. 2. 15.  Eph. 5. 22.  

Not that it is expected that we should legally keep all these Commandments , for this is impossible , while we are in these earthly Tabernacles . Evangelical obedience will be accepted which stands in five things . 1.  That we approve of all the Commandments of God. I esteem all thy Commandments to be right , the Law is holy , the Commandment is holy , just and good . 2.  That we unfeignedly will , and earnestly endeavour to keep the whole Law. We trust we have a good conscience in all things willing to live honestly . OH that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes . Let now thine Ear be attentive to the Prayer of thy Servants , who desire to fear thy Name . 3.  That there be in us as earnest an endeavour . Herein do I exercise myself to have always a Conscience void of offence both towards God and Man 4.  That we unfeignedly repent , as oft as we fall or fail : Grieving that we have done amiss and resolve to do so no more . If thy Brother Sin against Thee seven times in a Day , and seven times in a Day turn again to thee , saying ▪ I repent : thou shalt forgive him . Repent and be converted , that your sins may be blotted out . I gave her space to repent of her Fornication , and she repented not . They repented not to give him glory , neither repented they of their murders , or of their Sorceries , nor of their thefts , no Man repent him of his wickedness , saying , what have I done ? There was under the Law a Sacrifice , even for Perjury , whereby a Man seals himself to the Devil . 

5.  That we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ , apprehending and applying the promises of pardon made in his blood . Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ , and thou shalt be saved . 

2.  Hereby know we that we dwell in him , and he in us , because he hath given us of his Spirit . By spirit are meant the gifts or workings of the Holy Ghost , which are twofold : one inferior , once slightly enlightening men's minds , this is common to the Elect , with many reprobates , who are said to be made partakers of the Holy Ghost . All that before God are rightfully baptised , receive the Holy Ghost according to the promise . no Man being able to say that Jesus is the Lord , but by the Holy Ghost . The other is a supreme gift , peculiar to the Elect only , a new quality of Holiness infused into the Soul , transforming the whole Man , effecting a real change and alteration of the whole Man from evil to good , enabling him to make a good confession , and to walk in Love , which are the two next Characters . 

3.  Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God , God dwelleth in him , and he in God. This confession includes and comprehends in it four things . 1.  A distinct and cordial knowledge of this , and all other fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith , which are inseparable in their own Nature , ( For if Jesus Christ be the Son of God , all his Doctrine must be a Divine and everlasting truth ) Especially of that which the Gospel reveals , concerning Christ , namely that he is an alsufficient Saviour ; and offered indefinitely to every reasonable Creature , that will receive him in a Matrimonial Covenant , as a Wife receives her Husband to be governed by him , and to cleave unto him in every condition . 2.  A lively assent of the mind to all this is an undoubted truth , with a free and full consent of the will , to this blessed offer for the incomparable goodness of it , rolling and relying upon his Person and merits for the obtaining of remission of sins , and everlasting life after Death . According to that of the Apostle . This is a faithful saying , and worthy of all acceptation that Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners . 3.  A Verbal acknowledgement of these , and all other known and believed Gospel Verities , with an open profession of them , before the face of the World. That this is necessary to be found in every one that would approve himself to have Interest in God , and possession of him , as his Habitation , appears belike ( in God's grace by Christ , is ) by faith in the heart , as in a lively Spring , and in confession , as a continual respiration , both which are promised in the Gospel . For what saith Moses , The Word is nigh thee , even in thy mouth , and in thy heart , that is , the Word of Faith , which we Preach , that if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus , and shalt believe in thy heart , that God raised him from the dead , thou shalt be saved , for with the heart Man believeth unto Righteousness , and with the Mouth confession is made unto Salvation . Nor can the one be without the other . For when God hath once said unto any Man's heart , I have called thee by thy Name , thou art mine . That Man's heart cannot but answer and say , Lord I am thine . OH Lord , truly I am thy Servant , I am thy Servant . And what he hath heard in the Ear , he cannot but declare in the hearing of others . One shall say , I am the Lords , and another shall call himself by the Name of Jacob , and another shall subscribe with his hand , and surname himself by the Name of Israel . All manner of persons that shall join themselves to me with my Church : shall make open profession of my faith and service , and therefore he that is ashamed of Christ , and his Words , in an adulterous and sinful Generation , that would hate , and reproach , and persecute him for a strict profession thereof ; or is affrighted hereby from making such a profession ; God will never own , nor Christ acknowledge such a one . Their hidden faith shall not hide them from the wrath of God , who will take Eternal Vengeance on them for their Cowardice . They who through carnal fear shall not dare to make profession of my truth , ( saith Christ ) shall have their part fixed in the Lake , that burneth with Fire and Brimstone . These lead the Van in the rout of Reprobates marching thitherward . Among the Chief Rulers , many believed on Christ , but did not make public profession of believing in him , for fear of excommunication : this faith of theirs was properly no faith . For a true and lively faith confesseth that with the Mouth , which is believed in the Heart . This duty of confessing God was figured under the Law , by the shaking of things offered , waving them to and from before the Lord , which signified the shaking of our Lips , as in uttering and speaking forth his praise . By him let us offer the Sacrifice to God continually , that is , the fruit of our lips , giving thanks to his Name . So the telling forth frankly and boldly what we hold in matter of Religion . 4.  A Vital confession joined to a Verbal . There are some whose lives give their Mouths the lie . They profess that they know God , but in works they deny him , being abominable disobedient , and unto every good work Reprobate . Unto the wicked God saith , what hast thou to do to declare my statutes , seeing thou hatest instruction , and castest my words behind thee ? 

God is love , and he that dwelleth in Love , dwelleth in God , and God in him . This is a sure note and character of our dwelling in God , when we find that we love God for himself , and our Neighbour for his sake , In obedience to his Command . thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thyself . And because of his Image , which is more or lesle visible in every Man ; by this we may try the truth of the first note , for the love of God is the root of all true obedience to his Commandments . Nothing we do is good in his sight , unless we do it out of love to him . When our Saviour gives the sum of the precepts of the first Table , he does it in these words . thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart . Giving us thereby to understand what makes all the service there required to be acceptable unto God. The same makes the duties of the second Table so . Let all your things be done in love . follow the truth in love . Above all these things put on Love. This makes them all lovely . Love is the fulfilling of the Law.  

Qu. How may we know we have this love to God and Men ? 

Answ . Where there is true love to God , the heart is softened : The sight and sense of sin will fill it with sorrow , for offending God thereby . Zech. 12. 10.  Psal . 51. 3.  Luk. 7. 38 , 47. and there will be a Daily increase of hatred of sin , a greater desire after , and delight in the Word of God , and all other means of grace , and in the Saints of God , and a more fervent zeal against sin in ourselves and others , and for advancement of God's glory . For zeal is nothing else but a flame , issuing from the Fire of Love : And because there is a zeal which is not according to knowledge , the five requisites in the exerting of our zeal , aught to be examined , namely whether we have a good cause and calling , and a good Conscience , and use only good means , and aim at a good end . Where there is true love to Men , it will be extensive to all , and manifest itself by unfeigned desire of their salvation , and an earnest desire to procure them all the goods their necessities require according to our ability : and even to our greatest Enemies , compassionate affection towards them , pitying and grieving for any evil that befalls them , with a gentle usage of them in speech and action . Thus are we commanded to deal with our Enemy's Ox or Ass . Moreover we are bound to pray for the pardon of their sins , and conversion of their minds and manners , and readily to relieve them . But especially we prove our dwelling in God by Love to the brethren . Christ's whole spiritual Kindred that are knit to him by the bond of faith , and among themselves by that of love ; Those on whom we discern the new Man put on , which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness , though different from us in judgement , in points of faith that are not fundamental ; Our love to these must not only be unfeigned ▪ So it must be to all others , and with a pure heart free from Lust , and evil surmising , but with extraordinary heat of affection . 

Having thus proved the Doctrine , and resolved the Question , we proceed to Application : And there are three sorts of persons to be dealt with . 

1.  Such as are , or may be sure they have not yet made God their Habitation . 

2.  Such whose Habitation the Lord is sure enough , but they have no comfortable assurance that he is so . 

3.  Such as have this assurance . 

The first of these are the greatest part of the Visible Church , ( as for the rest of the World , which are 28. or 31. by computation they are without doubt without God in the World ) wherein there are no lesle than one and thirty sorts of Hypocrites , of whom eleven come not up so high as the profession of the true Religion . The other 20.  persons the true Religion , without being truly Religious , Affecting the Name Religion , but dis-affecting the thing , The description of each of these are legible in Crook's Characters . Now an Hypocrite shall not come before God , cannot subsist in his presence , much lesle have his abode in him . Many of them have confidence in God's mercies . But the Hypocrites hopes shall perish , whose hope shall be cut off , and whose trust shall be a Spider's Web : their hopes shall be as the giving up of the Ghost . For what is the hope of the Hypocrite , though he hath gained when God taketh away his Soul. Will God hear his cries when trouble cometh upon him ? There is no hope of mercy for them : no , though the fittest objects of mercy . The Lord shall have no joy in their young Men. Neither shall have mercy on their Fatherless and Widows , for every one is an Hypocrite . Nothing but woe is their Portion , as appears by those 8. woes pronounced against them by our Saviour in one Chapter . And he makes them ( as it were ) the Freeholders' of Hell. All others but as Inmates , holding under them . And he hath given 14.  Notes together , whereby they may be known , any one of which reigning in any Man , proves him to have nothing to do in God , that God is not his Habitation , but that he is a Simon Magus , was in the gall of bitterness . It is too manifest , alas , that most among us are out of God , by what hath been spoken in answer to the Question . 1.  There are none in comparison that will be persuaded to make choice of God : Not only the whole World out of the Church lieth in wickedness , as in a deep puddle have chosen to live under the power and command of the wicked one , and with the Swine to wallow in the mire and filth of Sin , but also the whole Multitude that is within the Body and Kingdom of Christ : Yea , they have chosen their own ways , and their Soul delighteth in their Abominations . When I called none did answer , when I spoke none did hear , but they did evil before mine Eyes , and choose that wherein I delighted not . They hated knowledge , and did not choose the fear of the Lord , they would have none of my counsel . My People would not harken unto my Voice , and Israel would have none of me . no , for I have loved strangers , and after them will I go . Strange Nations and Gods , their Idolatries , Superstitions and Customs . They choose new Gods that came newly up , whom their Fathers feared not . From the least of them even to the greatest , every one is given to Covetousness ; from the Prophet , even to the Priest , every one deals deceitfully . They have chosen the Tongue of the Crafty . 

Such a choice most of the sacred stock , and Members of the Church of old made . The Sons of God saw that the Daughters of Men were fair , and they took them Wives , of all which they choose . Without making any distinction for spiritual matters , or Religion , did intimate was to be done : and such a perverse choice the Jews long after made , who were the only Visible Church , For Salvation is of the Jews . They cried all , not this Man but Barrabas . They denied the holy One , and the just , and desired a Murderer to be granted unto them . And no other choice do the generality of the World among us at this day make . The World hath three Daughters . The lust of the Flesh , the lust of the Eye , and the Pride of Life . One of which every one chooseth before God ; the Voluptuous the first , the Covetous the second , the Ambitious the third . And who , or where is he or she , that is not one of these ? Many walk , of whom I have told you often , and now tell you even weeping , that they are Enemies of the Cross of Christ . Whose God is their Belly , whose Glory is their shame , who mind Earthly things . 

2.  There are as few that lay hold on God , join themselves to him , close with him . There is none that calleth upon thy Name , that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee ; Where are there any that do as those Children returning to Judea did ? the Children of Israel , and the Children of Judah together , of whom it is said , They shall go and seek the Lord their God , they shall ask the way to Zion , with their Faces thither-ward . Saying , come let us join ourselves unto the Lord in a perpetual Covenant , that shall not be forgotten . Going and weeping , for repentance for their former sins , for grief to behold their miserable Estate . Where have we any that have any such mind to join themselves unto the Lord ? To become one spirit with him . We have too many that join themselves to Harlots , making one Body with them : Like the Israelites that committed Whoredom with the Daughters of Moab ; and then joined themselves with Baal Peor , and that join together with Thiefs , and Drunkards , and Enemies to God and goodness . Saying , Come with us , let us lay wait for blood , let us lurk privily , for the Innocent without cause : though they have done us no wrong . Come let us device devices against Jeremiah , let us smite him with the Tongue , lay accusations and calumnies against him . 

3.  There are fewer that cleave unto the Lord How many visible Members of the Church joined a Covenant with God by Baptism , and in fellowship with his People , have fearfully apostatised ? yea , some that have been eminent for knowledge , profession , and practice of piety , are fallen from their holy principles and practices . Some to scandalous and foul sins ; some to Popery , and other Heresies ; some to Profaneness , and some to Worldliness , like Demas , who forsaken Paul , Having loved this present World : The eases , commodities , and carnal securities thereof . How many are there in whom we may see , as in him that fulfilled which our Saviour speaketh ? Many that were the first , the forwardest in their love to the Word , in the work of God , in public , domestical , and secret duties , are now become the last , the backwardest of all others : After they had escaped the pollutions of the World , through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ , They are again entangled therein , and overcome by the Devil . Again , in some manner , and for some time they fought , whereby he hath for ever possessed himself of them . To whom it is happened , according to the true Proverb . The Dog is turned to his own Vomit again , and the Sow that was washed , to her wallowing in the Mire . 

4.  How few have any care to keep the Commandments of God ? How many give that answer to his Prophets , pressing obedience , which those Jews did to Jeremy ? As for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord , We will not harken unto thee . But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth out of our own Mouth , willingly walking after the Commandments of Men.  

5.  Where almost shall we find such a one as Joshua ? a Man in whom is the Spirit , to whom God hath given his good Spirit , upon whom the Spirit of the Lord rests ( as it did upon Christ ) the spirit of wisdom and understanding , the spirit of counsel , and might , the spirit of knowledge , and of fear of the Lord , the spirit of grace and of supplication , the spirit of sanctification , of meekness , of faith , of love , and of a sound mind . Such a Spirit as Caleb had , fulfilling to follow God. no such spirit appears in many in our Days . In most there is the evil spirit , the spirit that worketh in the Children of disobedience . A perverse spirit , The Lord hath mingled a spirit of perverseness in the land He hath taken away the understanding , and troubled them , as if they had drunk some stupifying Drink . A Spirit of deep sleep . The Lord hath punished their voluntary blindness with a greater astonishment , depriving them quite of the light of his spirit , against whom they rebelled , giving themselves over to the spirit of darkness . The spirit of the World , such a spirit as hath no proportion nor correspondency , but only with worldly things , which it only values and affects . If Men had th● holy spirit of God given them , they would be led by him : follow his directions and good motions for the guide and Governor of their life ; they would live in the spirit , and walk in the spirit , and strive in the newness of the spirit : and give and offer unto God a spiritual worship according to his nature . Bring forth the fruit of the spirit , which is love , joy , peace , long-suffering , gentleness , faith , meekness , temperance : but the clean contrary . But none of all this they do , and therefore God hath not given them his spirit , and consequently they do not dwell in God.  

6.  Very few confess truly that Jesus Christ is the Son of God , They know nothing of him , and his Gospel , as they ought to know , distinctly , humbly , ●avourly , practically . They give not their unfeigned assent and consent unto his Holy Liturgy , that all in it is truth and goodness , nor do they own and acknowledge him with their Lips and Lives . 

7.  Most Men are so far from dwelling in Love , that the hatred both of God and Men dwells in them . They are haters of God could wish there were no God. Though with their Tongue , some show much love , yet with their hearts they hate him , and his Laws , and ways . And so they do his People , as Cain did Abel , and Ahab Micaiah , wishing evil to them , out of a rooted and settled malice , and that for their Holiness , though they pretend it is for their hypocrisy ; and if any wrong them , they bear implacable spirits towards them : by this it appears they dwell not in God.  

Now my business with all these , is to advice them to give all diligence , to give themselves no rest , till they have gained the Lord , even the most High , to be their habitation , and to instruct them in the means conducing to this end . 

Motives , many might be given , but sufficient hath been spoken in the beginning of this Discourse , concerning the desirableness and excellency of Rest in general , and of the Souls rest , which is to be found only in this House . To which I shall add , that in no other a Man that takes his rest can be secure and safe , but in this he may . I will both lay me down and sleep , for thou Lord makest me dwell in safety . If thou preparest thy heart , makest thyself fit to lodge under the shadow of the Almighty , thou shalt take thy rest in safety . Also thou shalt lie down , and none shall make thee afraid . Whoso harkneth to me , useth means to have his abiding in me , shall dwell safely , and be quiet from the fear of evil . God says to every one , whom he sends his Ministers unto , to come and take their Rest in him ; As David to Abiathan , Abide thou with me , fear not , for thou shalt be in safeguard . Those Egyptians that feared the Word of the Lord , threatening a direful hail which should come on the morrow , and should destroy all Men and Beasts , which were out of Houses . Made their Servants , and their Cattles flee into Houses . He that regarded not the word of the Lord , left his Servants and his Cattles in the Field , to their destruction . It will be the destruction of you and yours to Eternity , if you get not yourselves and them timely into this House , where and no where else there is safety . 

The general means is employed in the word making , which speaks stirring and action . As God the Father hath made his Son Jesus Christ unto believers , wisdom , righteousness , and sanctification , and redemption . So he that by faith in Christ , which works by Love , makes God unto himself all that to him , which in all estates may give him comfort , and satisfaction , his King , Lord , Husband , Father , Shepherd , Son , Shield , Comfortress , Hiding-place , Habitation and Portion : You that have as yet no such portion in God , arise and be doing . The Soul of the Sluggard desireth and hath nothing , because his hands refuse to labour ; but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat . Such shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of God's House : and he shall make them drink of the Rivers of his pleasures . wherefore do they spend Money for that which is not Bread , and their labour for that which satisfieth not ? Heathens were wont to say , the Gods sell good things to Men for Labours . 

True it is , all Men are always making . We read of many that have made , and do make woeful work . They made a Calf in Horeb. Ephraim hath made many Altars to Sin. They have made goodly Imamages , Molton Images of their Silver and Idols , according to your own understanding . Their Feet run to evil , and they make haste to shed innocent blood . They have made their hearts as an Adamant Stone . Woe to thee that puttest thy Bottle to thy Neighbour , and makest him drunken . We have made Lies our refuge . ye have made the Commandment of God of none effect . By the Tradition ye have made my House a Den of Thiefs . Some having put away Faith and a good Conscience , concerning faith have made shipwreck . Fools make a mock of sin . Such kind of making makes Men meet to be made partakers of the Inheritance of the Devil , and his Angels in blackness of darkness for ever . 

Another manner of making is required of them that would have God to become their Habitation . Cast away from you all your transgressions , whereby ye have transgressed ; and make ye a new heart , and a new spirit : return ye now every one from his evil way , and make your ways and your doings good ; Prepare ye the way of the Lord , make his Path straight . Make strait Paths for your Feet . Make the way of the Gospel easy for you . By the diligent Obedience , give diligence to make your Calling and your Election sure . 

more particularly consider , what they that want a House , and hear of a good one to be had , do , and do likewise . 

1.  They are sensible of , and lay sadly to heart their misery thereby . What comfort can that Man have , that hath Meat , Drink , and Clotheses , and Silver , and Gold , and Jewels ; if with these he hath not a House to live in ? And such a House as can keep him , and what he hath , dry ? A Housless Man is exposed to unsufferable evils , to all the injuries of Heaven and Earth ; in the Day the draught consumes him , and the frost by Night , and all his Sleep departeth from his Eyes . 

2.  They consider how happy they are that have a House , and such an one as hath been described for properties , furniture , conveniences ; and how happy themselves should be , if they had the same . 

3.  The desire of your Soul is carried earnestly after this Happiness , and they express their desires both by enquiring of them that have , how the House they have heard of may be had , and requesting them that have interest in the owner and disposer of it to befriend them in speaking a good word for them , and also making and putting up their supplication themselves to him , to vouchsafe this favour to them . 

4.  They are contented to purchase , or take it at any rate within their power , are willing to come up to the full price or rend demanded . 

5.  They put themselves into the way , that leads to this House , with the Price in their hands , ( as those Lords are said to go to Delilah . ) 

6.  They are careful to qualify themselves , so as to be made meet to enter into the House , and dwell there . We read of a prohibition to suffer any that are blind and lame to come into the House of David . Nor might any enter into Ahasuerus Gate clothed in Sackcloth . 

7.  They are ready to enter into Covenants and Bonds , and an Oath too if need be , to perform Conditions that are required by him that owns the House , and must give them possession of it . 

1.  All this must be done by you that are out of God , that he may become your Habitation . See and know that it is an evil and a bitter thing to be without God in the World. You have no Union nor Communion with Christ , the Spring of all spiritual and everlasting blessings . You are separate from his body , in which only he communicates his grace . You have no Interest nor Portion in the goods promised by the Covenant of grace ; are without all hope of salvation while in that condition . You are subject to the wrath and curse of God , your very blessings are curses , your Table is a snare , and that which should be for your welfare , is a trap : Not only the corporal but spiritual food , even the consecrated Elements which you receive . Every Creature is your enemy , and seeks your ruin ; yea , all things work together to effect it . You are every moment in danger of dropping into Hell ; out of which there is no Redemption . And what will ye do in the Day of Visitation , to whom will ye flee for help ? There is no help for you out of me . They shall be bound up and tied together as bundles , and cast into the Furnace of Fire ; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth . You may seem to yourselves , and others to be in a good condition , because you have the World at will , and are perhaps civil and honest ; yea , and formally religious like the Laodicean Angel. thou sayest I am rich , and increased with goods , and have need of nothing ; and knowest not that thou art poor , and blind , and naked . 

apprehend these , as the Officers of the Children of Israel did , when Pharaoh denied them Straw , To be in evil case , be afflicted , make these miserable , so the word signifies . Go too now ye rich Men , weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon you . Though a sinner do evil an Hundred times , and prolong his Days , yet surely I know that it shall go well with them that fear the Lord , which dwell in him . But it shall not be well with the wicked , whose Habitation the Devil is , whom they serve , and with whom they shall shortly dwell in his infernal House to all Eternity . Mean time their judgement lingereth not , and their damnation slumbereth not , but is coming Post-haste to meet them . Evil shall hunt the Violent Man to overthrew him . The punishment which he hath deserved for his persecution , shall persecute him , until such time , as like unto a Beast forced to some City , he fall and perish . Be sure your sin will find you out . The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness , and Unrighteousness of Men , who hold the truth in unrighteousness ; indignation ▪ and wrath , tribulation and anguish upon every Soul that doth evil . The wicked shall be turned into Hell , and all the People that forget God. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares , Fire and Brimstone , and an horrible Tempest ; this shall be the Portion of their Cup. Say to thy self , Is this my portion ? OH wretched Man that I am , who shall deliver me out of this dark and damned estate ? If Paul cried out so lamentably , because of the remnant of natural corruption , which was as grievous to him , as if a deadbody had been tied to him , and he compelled continually to carry it about with him , What cause have I to lament , that am in the state of corrupt nature , and gall of bitterness ? Till Men have this knowledge , and sense of their misery , in being out of God , they are not so much as called to come into him . 

2.  See and apprehend how happy you should be , transcendently happy , had you a God to dwell in , David's Refuge , the most high . The Psalmist having signified the happiness of those People that were to enjoy health of Body , abundance of Fruit , Herds and Flocks of strong Cattles , and public Peace , Corrects himself , concluding his enumeration with this gratulatory Epiphonema , or pleasant ending ; Yea , happy is that People , whose God is the Lord And so Moses , after celebration of God's great goodness to Israel , in being a most glorious and powerful protection unto them . In dispossessing their Enemies , and bringing them into their Land , He elevates their happiness , and celebrates their exaltation above all other People , in having the Lord for their God and Habitation . If God be for us , ( he is so far for all them that are in him his household of faith , the Lord taketh my part with them that help me ) Who can be against us ? None to hurt us , all things cooperate for our good , Afflictions , Sin , Satan , All. If it sounds harsh to say sin turns to our good , certainly it turns to our good , if the Christian riseth with greater shame and hatred of it , after his fall . Put not your trust in Princes , nor in the Son of Man , in whom there is no Salvation ; happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help , whose hope is in the Lord his God , who hath him for his Habitation . Blessed is the Man whom thou choosest , and causest to approach unto Thee , that he may dwell in thy Courts ; We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy House . Let your judgements be thoroughly convinced , that the happiness of Man lies in the enjoyment of God , and that it can never be well with you ▪ till you have possession of this resting place , and that than your happiness will be superlative . 

3.  Let your desires be carried after God , vehemently and constantly , like the desires of a hungry thirsty Man after Meat and moisture , whom nothing of any other kind will satisfy ; And like the desire of an Infant , after the Milk of its Nurse's Breasts , who will cry itself to Death , if it be kept from it . Many promises are made to such desires . Such an affection we find to have been in the People . The desire of our Soul is to thy Name , or to the remembrance of Thee ; with my Soul have I desired Thee in the Night . As the Hart panteth after the Water brooks , so panteth my Soul for thee OH God My Soul thirsteth for the living God. When shall I come and appear before God ? Whom have I in Heaven but thee ? And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee . Let the same inward , earnest , constant affection be in you , and express your desires , ask the way to this House , as those returning Captives did , with their Faces thitherward : And as those punctually pierced sinners did , Men and brethren , etc.  And as the terrified Jailor : Sirs , what must I do to be saved ? Yea , do as Simon Magus did , pray them that have interest in the Lord to pray for you . Yea yourselves take with you words , and turn unto the Lord , saying , take away all iniquity , and receive us graciously . 

4.  Because this House cannot be had but by buying , nor any of the goods of it . Take our Saviour's advice . I counsel thee to buy of me Gold , tried in the Fire , that thou mayest be rich , and white Raiment that thou mayest be clothed : Come ye , buy and eat ; yea , come , buy Wine and Milk : to buy , is properly to get a Commodity , by giving the due price of it : thus this House cannot be bought , nor any spiritual gift . Thy Money perish with thee , because that thou hast thought , that the gift of God may be purchased with Silver . But to obtain a thing by other means , as to part with something for it , or by pains and labour , is in Scripture phrase , buying . Thus Paul was contented to part with any thing , how dear soever , and to be at any pains to gain Jesus Christ : and so must you , if you would gain the most High for your Habitation . Many there are that think this House not worth the cheaping , bid nothing for it : God is not in all their thoughts . They will part with nothing , no not with the beastliest lusts , be at no pains at all for God. If he and Heaven will be had for nothing , without any labour , perhaps they would accept thereof ; but upon any harder term● , you may hear them bidding God depart from them . 

Others there are that bid seeming fair , but will not come up to the price . This did that young Ruler , he yielded obedience to the Commandments of the second Table , and his Obedience was Universal and constant ; and more than this , he proffereth his desire to know , and do more . The five foolish Virgins did more than he , they kept themselves undefiled from the World , made open profession of Christ , had faith and convictions to keep their profession alive ; nor was their profession idle , they performed Christian duties , frequented Gospel-ordinances ; their Companions were Christ's , whom as they owned , so sought after : and finally expressed their earnest desire of saving grace . Those Hypocrites of old seem to bid more than these . They sought God diligently , and constantly delighted to know his ways ; practised good , were steadfast to their Principles , faithful to their profession , desired to be guided and counselled by God ; took delight in approaching to him ; afflicted their Souls with fasting . Judas left all to follow Christ , continued long with him in his temptation , preached the Gospel zealously , and so demeaned himself , that none of his followers had any suspicion of his Hypocrisy . 

Qu. What was wanting in these Chapmen , that bid thus fairly for this House , and went without it ? 

Answ . Three things , which you must bring to make up the Price of this Purchase , or fare as they did ; Namely , 1.  Poverty of Spirit , they came with Money : You must come without , or go without . Come , buy without Money , and without Price . He that hath no Money , Come ; apprehend yourselves in the prodigals condition , in extreme want of grace , and in debt to divine Justice ten thousand Talents , and utterly unable to pay one Unite . To such a Chapman will the Lord look and harken . For thus saith the high and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity , whose Name is Holy ; I dwell in the High and Holy Place with him , also that is of an humble spirit . And to be sure he dwelleth in God , in whom God dwelleth . Blessed are the Poor in Spirit , for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven . 2.  Self-denial . If any Man will come after me , let him deny himself . Christ was going unto his Father's Bosom , ( he was there always ; ) they that go after him , must needs go in thither : this only self-denyers do , who forsake the motions of their own corrupt reason and will , loathe whatsoever is lovely to Nature , that will hinder them in the course of godliness , mortify the old Man , crucify the flesh , with the affections and lusts ; yea , dispose themselves to hate , even their nearest kindred ; in case the love of them be incompatible with the love that is due ●o Jesus Christ . Nor is their life ●ear to them , nor dare they do that which they do , but suspect is displeasing to God. Many have written divinely upon this subject . Mr. Baxter incomparably . 

4.  An entire resignation of the whole heart to Jesus Christ . Take my Yoke upon you , and learn of me , and you shall find rest for your Souls . Yield and submit ourselves we must , both actively and passively . 

5.  Get into the way that leads unto this House . I am the way ( saith Christ ) no Man cometh unto the Father , but by me . The way to get into Christ , is , by a lively faith , denying our own righteousness , and rolling our persons , Souls and Bodies upon the Person of Christ , God and Man , and upon his merits and righteousness , and upon the promises made in him , for remission of sins and salvation ; receiving him not only , as a Saviour , but also as a Lord ; as willing to be ruled by him , as well as to be saved . If you find it difficult to do this , do as that poor Man did , Who cried out , and said with tears , I believe , Lord help my unbelief . 

6.  You that are yet in a state of nature , blind and lame , and worse clothed than with Sack - cloth , and so unmeet to be admitted into this House ; Anoint your Eyes with Eyesalve , that you may see . You know of whom you may have it , and have faith to be healed of your lameness ; as that Cripple from his Mother's Womb had , in whom the Spirit of God had infused some seeds of Faith : which Paul conceived by Revelation . And cast away those filthy Garments that are upon you , as menstruous clothes ; saying , get you hence , and put on other Apparel ; The new Man , which after God is Created in Righteousness , and Holiness of Truth . 

7.  Nor do you stick at any engagements , or obligations , or oaths required of you ; but freely enter into any that shall be put upon you , by him who cannot impose any thing , but what is holy , just , and good ; And resolve to keep them . I have sworn , and I will perform it , that I will keep thy righteous Judgements . 

Thus do , and you shall not fail to find the Lord to be , what a House , and all desirable Furniture and Conveniencies , can be unto you . 

THE THIRD SERMON . There is yet one thing more required of you , that would make God your habitation , viz. That you make yourselves his habitation . He will not suffer any to dwell in him , who freely do not suffer him to dwell in them , in all the Scriptures we quoted out of the Apostle John's first Epistle , Characterizing them that dwell in God. We find the dwelling to be mutual . If therefore you desire to dwell in God , serve his desire , which is , that he may enter and dwell in you , in your whole Man , in all the faculties of your souls , mind , will , affections , memory and conscience , and in all the senses and members of your Bodies , Eyes , Ears , Mouths , Hands , Feet . But especially he craves the heart , My Son give me thy Heart , and let thine Eyes observe my Ways . The heart first , and then the Eyes . Lift up your Heads OH ye Gates , and be ye lift up OH ye everlasting Doors , that the King of Glory may come in . men's hearts are compared to Trapdoors , the lifting them up is the opening of them . They must be lift off from things of the World , from the things below , and be lift up to things above . Set your affections on things above , not on things on the Earth . See how earnest the Lord Jesus is with you to give him entrance . Behold , I stand at the Door and knock , if any Man hear my Voice , and open the Door , I will come in to him , and sup with him , and he with me . Read Cant. 5. 2 — 7. and observe the several degrees , by which this Door comes to be opened unto him . Now because it is not every heart , that is fit to entertain God. The heart of the Wicked is little worth . The Query will be , what manner of heart it is , that God is willing and desirous to dwell in . Our Saviour resolves the Query , It is an honest and good heart . For only such a heart is good soil , fit for the good Seed of the Word to fall into , and God comes into the heart with his Word . 

Qu. What is an honest heart , and what makes it so ? 

Answ . That is an honest heart , That provides for things comely before God and Men. It was honestly said of those Israelites to Moses : Go thou near , and hear all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee , and we will hear it , and do it . They have well said , ( saith God ) all that they have spoken , but OH that there were such an heart in them , that they would fear me . The fear of God is the principal grace that makes the heart honest . And then a Man fears God when , distrustful of his own insufficiency to do any thing that God requires , he is studious and willing to give up himself to Christ , to be taught of him , and enabled by him to do all the will of God.  

A good heart is described , and set forth in Scripture , by sundry Names and Epithets ; namely , new , broken , single , whole , pure , perfect . And although it be true , that he that hath one of these , in truth , hath all , they are all one ; Yet because each of them requires a several notion to open it , and because some can better discern of one , than of another , it will be needful to speak a word or two to each of them . 

That is a New heart which is furnished with a new spirit ; that is to say , new dispositions , inclinations , and habits ; it 's called new , because it 's opposed to the old spirit , that of the World , and of the Devil , who by breathing on Men makes them go an end into old courses ; And because it 's ever fresh and green , and comfortable to them that have it . 

That is a Broken heart , which is smitten and pierced with remorse for sin , broken down and brought low , all high thoughts laid flat and levelly , Broken off from the ways of sin and stubborness in pursuit of those ways , Broken up as fallow ground , made soft , and tender , as Josiahs was . 

that 's an open heart , which is enlightened to see our estate by nature , and bewail it ; And to see comfort in Christ , and rejoice in it ; To have it also enlarged towards God's faithful Ministers , as Lydia's was towards Paul , and his fellow-labourers , who constrained them to come into her House , and abide there ; as also to run the way of God's Commandments . 

A Single heart is opposed to eye-service , and to carnal wisdom , and to double mindedness , and to guile . 

A Whole heart is a willing heart ; when we are willing to a thing , ( we use to say with all our hearts ; ) it 's opposed to a heart withdrawing itself , and to a heart divided , willing to lay hold on God , and the World too , and that fulfilleth not to walk after God.  

That heart is pure , that suffers no sin to abide in it , without disallowance . It being both against the judgement and will , and when after falling into sin , there is a speedy rising again with self-abhorring . 

1.  A Perfect heart includes integrity , and uprightness . The heart is then entire , when it is sanctified throughout , and when there is a study and desire to attain perfection of degrees , and a readiness to do all whatsoever God calls for , and a constant holding unto God , Following hard after him , Keeping race with him . And it is then upright , when it is solid and true , great , just ; and when it is led by a right rule , and aims at a right end . 

Such a heart as this God love's and dwells in , and if you provide such a dwelling place for God , he will be your dwelling place . 

Qu. But is all this , or any of this , in the power of mere natural Men ; Such as you have been all this while persuading and advising to do ? Is it not severally taught and held , that no Man can do any thing to help forward , or further his own conversion ? Is it not a truth that no natural Man hath any desire of grace , or of the means of grace , never thinks of it , because he is dead in trespasses and sins , and how can a dead Man desire Life ? or use any means to attain it ? Nor when God by his Word makes offer of his grace , can he perceive it ? Nor when he doth by God's Word and Spirit , beginning to enlighten him in some measure to perceive it , is he able to embrace it ? Because wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God , and because he is under the power of Satan ? And is not the Religion of the Papists convinced of gross error for teaching that the natural man , is able both by his freewill to prepare himself for grace , and to accept of grace when it is offered : Yea to desire it , like the Man that lay in the way to Jericho half dead ; yea , and to do some good works . 

If all this were true , yet it hinders not ; but that God's Ministers may and aught to call upon natural Men , to do what they can to reach forth their utmost towards grace , for the obtaining of it . Hear ye deaf , and look ye blind , that ye may see . Some power they had , which they are commanded to exaert and act , and they are reproved for not doing what they could . ye Hypocrites , ye can discern the face of the Sky , and how is it that ye cannot discern this time ? Yea , and why even of yourselves ( That is , your own Conscience dictates to you so many proofs of God's truth , and God's Kingdom being set forth so clearly unto you , by so many marks and tokens : ) Judge ye not what is right ? that is to say , that I am the messias you have so long looked for . They had therefore power to judge of the Visitation of Grace , and God's Kingdom , and in the Verses following , they are told they neglected the time of God's patience . It would befall them as a Debtor , who suffers himself to be imprisoned , after wearying out his Creditor , namely , that they should find no more grace or pardon at his hands . Seek ye the Lord while he may be found , call upon him while he is near . 

Nor ought Nature to be laid over-low , Grace is Nature's perction : what does it but repair the decays of Nature ? Nature is the matter , and Grace the Form of God's Kingdom , both in Earth and Heaven . It Figures and Formeth Nature to the Image of God. Moreover , this is the way of God's exhibiting grace , there is a necessity of Nature's concurrence . First , this must precede , as we are taught to pray for our daily bread , before forgiveness of sins . God cannot save an unwilling Man , the will being uncapable of force and violence , and all possibilities divine are carried on in an ordinary way of Man's industry ; who must therefore carry on himself as far as he can : which whoso doth not , hath no ground to expect common grace . He that doth , may expect to receive supernaturals common ; And he that abides with God in these , may probably expect supernaturals special . 

Qu. What are the abilities which Nature may , and must reach forth in the pursuit of saving grace ? 

Answ . She may and must approve the good ways of God : more purity of Principles being left in Man's mind and conscience , than in his will and affections . That devilish Sorceress could say , I see and allow , and like that which is good and honest , though I pursue and practise the contrary . That sentence and principle pressed by our Saviour . All things whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you , do ye unto them : was the Posy of an Heathen Emperor . 2.  She may and must assay and make after , Lift at the Commandments of God , as a blind Horse having heard a noise , hath been seen to lift up his head , and turn that way where the noise came . And a Child being commanded by his Father to reach a thing which he cannot , will put to the little strength it hath , and tug at it , to remove , bear , and bring it . 3.  Matter of duty and obedience may be done by a natural Man They did well that took heed to the Word , as to a light , shining in a dark place , though the Daystar was not yet risen in their hearts . There is no outward exercise of Religion , but we find graceless hypocrites have been conversant in them , even afflicting their souls , and fasting frequently , and praying on such Days very servently . And this is that which God's Ministers are bound to press upon Men , that are in a natural condition , to do matter of duty , to set themselves as objects of the spirit of God , attending upon Divine Ordinances . As a neglected Courtier sets himself in the King's sight , standing and waiting where he usually passeth ; and there humbly faces him . It is observed that the Spirits outgoing are only upon such as face him . He goes right on , and turns not as he goes . They must do as Esther did , who esteemed herself as lovely as she could in the King's sight , set herself in the best dress she had , as an object of the Kings call : and see what good success she had by so doing . 

Qu. How far doth nature qualify herself for grace when she reaches forth her abilities as far as she can ? 

Answ . 1.  Morally God took occasion from Ahab's humiliation to spare his life , when upon hearing of Elijahs words he rend his clotheses , put Sackcloth upon his flesh and fasted , and lay in Sackcloth and went softly , seest thou ( saith God ) unto the Prophet , how Ahab humbleth himself before me ? because he humbleth himself before me , I will not bring the evil in his Days . So he took occasion from what those noble Bereans did , in bringing their Bodies to public Assembly , takeing the heads of Paul's Sermons ; and examining the Notes they had taken by the Scriptures , to work effectual faith in them . 2. Passively a Man makes himself an object of the grace Life : a handle for the Spirit to lay hold upon , when he harps upon the string of his misery : Cries out of his sin , implores mercy , and waits for grace in the use of means . And it is not only possible that he may be translated out of the state of nature into the state of grace , but probable he shall be so . The Gospel being the market of grace , he that goes to buy there without Money , it 's probably he may be furnished to his mind . As they that lay at the Pool of Bethesda , waiting for the moving of the Water , were in fair probability to be healed of their Diseases . The Scribe that answered discreetly , was not far from the Kingdom of God. If there be no certainty of obtaining saving grace , yet this should not discourage any natural Man , from doing their utmost , for the obtaining of it , no more than the Husbandman is discouraged from Ploughing & Sowing , because he is not certain he shall have his seed again . no more is the Merchant sure he shall have his Ship come home laden with goods : yet he ventures , and so do all that trade for earthly commodities . The Argument , or motive to painstaking , from a peradventure , or may be , hath a force in it . 2 ▪ Tim. 2. 25 , 26.  Dan. 4. 27.  Joel 2. 14.  Zeph. 2. 3.  

They that neglect to use the means are sure to perish , and such are most Men in these last Days , who embezzel Nature's abilities , make her poorer than she is , strip her naked , even of common Principles . Sensual livers , that drown all in Belial manners , and having stifled Conscience , give themselves over to work all uncleanness , with greediness ; live as if they had no God to serve , no soul to save , or as if their souls served only , as the souls of Swine , to keep their Bodies from putrifying . 

They that are lesle licentious , and lead a civil life , are generally prodigiously slothful , work not at all , or not with half their might : as if grace and glory were not worth the while to labour for . Now them that are such , we command , and exhort to be impatient of a natural condition , to look upon grace , as lovely , and the Mother of delights . 

Herb. Ch. the Foil . If we could see below 
The Spheer of Virtue , and each shining grace 
As plainly as that above doth show ; 
This were the better Sky , the brighter place . 


God hath made Stars the foil 
To set off Virtues ; Griefs to set off sinning : 
Yet in this wretched World we toil 
As if Grief were not foul , nor Virtue winning . 


Thus saith the Lord God , OH ye House of Israel , let it suffice you of all your abominations . It is now even time to turn over a new leaf . 

Let possibility and probability put you upon straining yourselves with all your strength for the improving of Nature in her abilities , and prove me now herewith saith the Lord If so , the common grace I have given you to actuate nature , I will not also add sanctifying saving Grace . 

Yea , let me assure you , that if you find in yourselves , a valuing of an estate of Grace in yourselves , above all earthly things , and a vehement and constant desire to have admission into God's Grace and savour ; and that not only for the benefit and comfort it brings with it , but for the beauty and excellency it brings with it also , at least you would , and wish heartily that it were the ground of your desire , and if withal your purpose and resolution be to persevere in the use of all the means appointed , to bring you to this estate . 

God hath begun a work of Grace in your Souls , which he will perfect and you are in the number of those thrice happy People , whose habitation the Lord Jehovah is . With whom we are next to deal . 

And first with those whose habitation , God , is sure enough , but they have no comfortable assurance that he is so , Cannot say , as David here in my Text , He is my refuge . I say , they are not comfortably assured , for there are none whose habitation the Lord is , are utterly without all assurance . Certainly the Lord is theirs , that he dwells in them , and they in him : but many of them know not that they have this knowledge , and some of them deny it ; yea , conceive and conclude that they are out of God , and as far from him as Hell from Heaven . That it 's possible for Men to know a thing , and not to know they know it , yea to deny that they know it , appears by these words of Thomas in the name of all his fellow Disciples to our Saviour , who had assured him , that whither he went , they knew , and knew the way , Lord we know not whither thou goest , and how can we know the way ? They knew both , but they knew not that they knew either . And that Men in the state of Grace , and abiding in God , may be so far from any sensible and comfortable assurance of their interest in God , of his love and favour towards them , that they may seem to be assured of the contrary , apprehend him as their mortal Enemy , appears by those words of Job . He teareth me in his wrath , who hates me , Mine Enemy sharpeneth his Eyes upon me . wherefore hidest thou thy face , and holdest me for thine Enemy ? 

Now the Grounds and Reasons why many precious Souls have such doubts and fears , and are apt to pass such a sad conclusion against themselves , that they are without God , are many . Two of them , we will mention and answer : in which the rest are included and comprehended . 

Obj. 1  They never entered in by the Door , this they make out , and put it on thus . no Man can dwell in God , in whose heart Christ dwells not by faith , coming to Christ and believing in him are all one . He that cometh unto me , shall never hunger , and he that believeth on me shall never thirst . no Man is called to come to Christ , that is not thoroughly and truly humbled for sin . The Universal is restrained , Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden . 

You that labour in the Souls and Consciences , by a lively feeling of your sins , and terror of God's Judgements due unto you for them . Such are intended , who being deeply sensible of their sins , and Satan's Yoke , by panting and groaning under it . Now they never had any such deep humiliation , and therefore have reason to question Christ's dwelling in them , and consequently theirs in God , they never had this preparatory work . 

To these Objections against themselves , and the work of God's Grace in them , I have these things to say . 1.  By way of Concession , that sound humiliation arising from the sight and sense of sin , and apprehension of Divine wrath is necessary , to qualify Men for coming to Christ . They that be whole , need not the Physician , but they that be sick . I came not to call the Righteous , but Sinners to Repentance ( sensible Heart-smitten , affrighted , Soul afflicted-sinners . ) The Son of Man is come to seek , and save that which was lost . Them who see and feel themselves quite undone and lost , by reason of their sins . The Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek . He hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted , to Proclaim liberty to the Captives ; The opening of the Prison to them that are bound , to comfort them that mourn . Till Men be thus humbled , they will not care to come to Christ , nor have desire of him , nor prise him , and be willing to part with any thing for him . Paul professed he was willing to part with all to win him , counted all loss and dung for him . What alone , was this Paul ? one that had so deep a sense of his sins , that he counted himself the chiefest sinner in the World. no Man can believe the Gospel , till the Law hath wrought Repentance in him , the foundation whereof is a deep sense and sorrow for sin ; Nor will Men hold Christ with any retentiveness , if this were not first wrought in them . 

If Men be not weary of Satan's Yoke , they will soon be weary of Christ's . Want of humiliation is the cause of all Apostasy . And therefore there is great need that Ministers preach and press the Law to bring Men to a sight and sense of their sins . Which is so far forth a blessing , as it is necessary to drive us to Christ . To show us how wretched we are without him , to make us pant and groan , and mourn after him . They err , that hold that Men are fit enough without any such legal terrors preceding , that never felt their hearts broken , to come to Christ to dwell in God. As there is no natural birth without some precedent pains of travail in the Mother : So neither is there any spiritual birth , without some such in the Child . God hath ever used to take this course to cast down sinners , to lay them as low as Hell , convincing them of their dark and damned condition , giving them the spirit of bondage to fear the Vengeance of Eternal Fire due to them , and then to erect and comfort them ; And so by the Suburbs of Hell , to bring them to Heaven . Thus he dealt with our first Parents , and all along downward to this Day . As the great and strong Wind renting the Mountains , breaking in pieces the Rocks , and the Earthquake , and Fire went before the still small Voice ; And the noise and shaking before the Resurrection of the dry bones ; and a Voice from Heaven , as the Voice of many Waters , and as the Voice of a great Thunder , more terrifying and distinct , before the Voice of Harpers , harping with their Harps ; and as ploughing precedes sowing , and the Needle the Thread , and melting the Mettle before the casting of it into a new form : So must humiliation precede regeneration . Woe to them that being laden with many sins , feel them light as a Grass-hopper , that have sworn a thousand Oaths in their ordinary discourse , have told a thousand lies in their ordinary jesting , officious , pernicious , committed prodigious filthiness frequently with themselves and others : Have made the Lord's days the devil 's , by going their own ways , Finding their own pleasure , speaking their own words , and can carry all these , with a thousand more Omissions , as well as Commissions , with as much ease as Samson did the Gates of Gaza . When light outward crosses are heavy to them , and make them howl ; yea , they can make a sport of sin , delight to act it : Make themselves and others merry , by boasting of it , glorying in their shame . These Men shall find one Day every of their sins , which they feel so light , to be heavier than a Mountain of Lead ; when they shall call to the Mountains to fall on them , and the Hills to cover them , and the more pleasure they have felt in any sin , the more sorrow and torment shall be given them . Woe unto you that laugh now , for ye shall mourn and weep . Son , remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things , but now thou art tormented . Every idle , and much more , every evil word shall be an unsufferable load upon their Consciences to all Eternity . Unless voluntary humiliation , before they come into that place of torments , prevent it . As for you that feel your sins pressing you as low as Hell , take comfort in this , that you are in the way to conversion . And I may say unto you , as the People to the blind Man , be of good comfort , Christ calleth thee . There is a fountain opened for sin , and for uncleanness , for them that can mourn over him , whom they have pierced . 

2.  By way of Correction , though all before Conversion are humbled , yet all are not so in a like degree . They that have been notorious wicked livers . Such as Manasseh was , must be humbled greatly , as he was . So they that killed the Lord of Life were punctually pierced . So the Jailor , and Mary Magdalen , and those whom God means to bestow more than ordinary gifts upon , or to employ in great business for him , he humbleth deeply . Others that have been civilly educated , never guilty of any heinous , hideous crimes , but always lived unblameable moral lives ; These have the grace of Regeneration dropped insensibly into them , never feel such pangs , and terrors , and heart-breaks ; nor know the time when God began to work upon them . These fearful doubting Christians , that I am dealing with , may , and aught to take comfort in this , that they cannot deny , but that they have been truly humbled though in a lower degree . It being the truth , and not the measure that warrants sinners to come to Christ , and qualify them for faith in him . He saith not , come unto me all ye that labour , and are heavy laden in such a degree . But all that labour , and are heavy laden in a true degree . 

Qu. What is the lowest degree of true Humiliation ? 

Answ . It is that which brings him into the Beggar's case , Blessed are the poor in Spirit , for theirs is the , etc.  When is a Man so ? Answ . When out of a sense of his own emptiness , and apprehension of Divine Justice , to which they are indebted , he is wrought upon by God's gracious promises , to seek supply from Christ's fullness . As when a Man is extreme poor , and knows himself to be so , having never a Penny in all the World , and owes a very great Sum , and that to such a one as will not abate one farthing of the Debt , but exact the whole ; and for default of payment will cast him into Prison , there to lie and rot ; nor has he a friend in all the World to help him , only he hears of a rich Man that is able to pay all he owes , who hath discharged the Debts of many in his case , but alas he dares not adventure for a good while , to go and speak with him , because he hath no interest in him . In this case he is exceedingly cast down , not knowing what to do , yet at last necessity forcing , he is resolved to go to him , and seek supply from him , relying wholly upon his goodness , having heard how mercifully he hath dealt with all that have so done . 

Is not this thy case , poor despondent Christian ? Hast thou not seen thy Soul totally empty of Grace , yet indebted to God Ten Thousand Talents , whose Justice thou knowest will exact the utmost Mite ? dost not thou see fullness in Christ , and all-sufficiency , that he is able to save them to the uttermost , that come unto God by him , to discharge their debt , were it ten thousand times greater ? Though thou didst not dare to go to him for a while , yet at last didst adventure , being encouraged by what others in as bad a condition have found , and by sundry gracious invitations and promises , excluding none that have an heart to come . Upon which promises thou dost in great humility roll thy Soul , and resolvest therein to rest . 

Thus the Prodigal saw , an emptiness in himself knew there was fullness in his Father's House , was moved to go to him , trusting in his gracious disposition . So the Syrians , Behold now we have heard that the Kings of the House of Israel are merciful Kings . Let us put Sackcloth upon our Loins , and Ropes upon our Heads , and go to the King of Israel , peradventure he will save thy Life . So they put Sackcloth upon their Loins , and Ropes upon their heads , and begged their Master's Life . 

Qu. How shall I know I have this poverty of Spirit ? 

Answ . By the signs of a poor Beggar . He is full of complaints to such as can relieve him , full of requests . no need to teach him rhetoric , Industrious to get maintenance ; out he will , though the Law be against it . The Belly hath no Ears . If he be blind , he will get some to lead him ; if lame , he will get a Crutch to uphold him . He is moreover meek , patiently bearing checks and reproaches , content to stay his leisure of whom he begs , and expects an Alms , full of observance also towards him , ready to obey his commands , trembling at his frowns , and greatly thankful , if he give him but a Crumb . And if he hath offended , is at no rest till his anger against him be appeased , and his favour and good will regained . thou canst not but find all these signs in thyself , in reference unto God , and therefore mayest take comfort in thy poverty . Add unto this another sure evidence of true humiliation ; namely , thou esteemest sin the greatest evil , and Jesus Christ the greatest good : put naked Christ in one Scale , and all the pomp and glory of the World in the other , and whether of these would weigh the most , in thy judgement and valuation ? 

Obj. But thou knowest not the time , when thy heart was broken and humbled . Ans . Suppose thou sawest a good Crop of Corn upon a piece of Ground , wouldst thou not think it had tillage good enough , though thou sawest not when it was broken up ? Nor how deep the Blow went ? The fruits thou bringest forth of holiness , righteousness , sobriety and charity , argue the fallow ground of thy heart to have had sufficient ploughing . Though thou know not the time when , nor the means whereby this was done . thou walkest not in the counsel of the ungodly ; much lesle standest in the way of sinners , lest of all sittest in the seat of the scornful : But thy delight is in the Law of the Lord , and in his Law thou meditatest Day and Night . As thy affections are , such are thy words seasoned with salt , such as discover Grace in the Speaker , Minister Grace to the hearers , and thy conversation accordingly , and actions , such as become the Gospel . Herein thou exercisest thyself to have a Conscience void of offence towards God , and toward Men. thou dost good to all , especially to the household of faith . Art ready to distribute , willing to communicate . ye shall know others by their fruits , do Men gather Grapes of Thorns , or Figs of Thistles ? even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit . thou mayest and oughtest to pass judgement upon thyself , that certainly the Root of the matter is in thee . That thou art a Tree of righteousness , the planting of the Lord , wherein he is glorified . Herein is my Father glorified , that ye bear much Fruit , so shall ye be my Disciples . ye shall show yourselves to be truly such , doing acts worthy of such a Title . And if you be indeed Christ's Disciples , you need not question your dwelling in God.  

Obj. 2.  These Godly doubting Christians are so far from acknowledging any such fruits , or taking comfort in them , that they deny there is any good in them , any good fruit brought forth by them ; They believe themselves , & would have you believe so too . That their Vine is of the Vine of Sodom , and of the Fields of Gomorrah . Their Grapes are Grapes of Gall. Their Clusters are bitter , their Wine of the poison of Dragons , and the cruel Venom of Asps , instead of good fruits . They will tell you your hearts , and tongues , and lives are full of evil fruits . Vain and vile thoughts , and idle , and ungracious words , unprofitable , impious , and unrighteous actions . Fruits not tending to Life , but Death . That they are Trees not for fruit , but for the Fire . Corrupt Trees at best , whose fruit withereth , which have neither life , nor sap to bring forth any fruit unto God. Even like Trees after Autome . Yea , quite plucked up by the Roots , quite cut off from the spiritual communion with Christ , the true foundation of life and grace . Or if they have brought forth any fruit at any time materially good , the root , and manner , and end have been all naught , stark naught , worse than naught . They never did any thing for God , in obedience , and out of love to him , or with an intent to honour and please him thereby . Take them at the best , and it may be said of them , what was said of Israel . Israel is an empty Vine , he bringeth forth fruit unto himself : They have been self-seekers , and selfdependers , and self-ascribers in all that ever they have seemed to do for God.  

Answ . To this Objection I have these two things to say , 1.  That it is possible for a Man to be in God , and yet to see no goodness at all in himself ; nothing but evil , nothing at all to commend him to God ▪ nothing but what may make him odious in his sight . The Centurion saw nothing of worth in himself ; why Christ should come to him , or he to Christ . Though others thought him to be a worthy Man , and so reported him to be to Christ . And Christ himself gives testimony , not only he had true faith , but a great measure of it . I have not found so great faith , no not in Israel . 

no more did the Woman of Canaan see any goodness in herself , she confesseth herself to be an unclean Person ; but Christ both graceth and gratifieth her , gives a very high commendation of her Heroical Faith. And what goodness saw Paul in himself , when he said , I am a carnal Man sold under sin ? Hear the Confession of our Holy Mother , and all her Genuine Children . We are all an unclean thing , all our righteousness is as filthy rags . We acknowledge that our persons , and all our actions , even the most praise ▪ worthy of them ; namely , those wherewith we did thy service , are all contaminated with abominable filth . 

2.  That it is an Argument of true goodness , to see little goodness , much evil in thyself ; If thou canst and dost bewail the absence of that , the presence of this , findest a disallowance and deep detestation of it in thy heart , and makest continual resistance against it : Mourning for the want and absence of a friend , argues truth of affection , and love to him . thou wouldst not , couldst not grieve , because thou art not good , if there were not in thee a love of goodness . And the sight of so much sin in thy Soul , proves thee to have light in it . For whatsoever doth make manifest is Light. And thy sensibleness of the burden of thy sins tells thee , that thou livest much more , thy stirring and struggling to be rid of them , and the War thou makest against them . A dead man can neither feel , nor stir , nor strive : there is therefore spirit in thee , as well as flesh . For the Flesh lusteth against the Spirit , and the Spirit against the Flesh , and these are contrary the one to the other , so that ye cannot do the things that ye would . Every new Man is two Men. The two Armies in the Shulamite maintain civil broils within her , as the two Babes did in Rebecca's Womb. This Combat with Corruption may comfort thee . Though still I must grant , that as there is natural life and conscience in the wicked , so common Grace may strive uneffectually in them . And the Spirit in the Godly does conquer their reigning sin , as well as strive : but not all their infirmities . Saint Paul doth comfort himself with this raising up his Soul , even to an holy insultation and triumphing . For after he had described the two contrary principles , the Combatants within him : the unregenerate and regenerate part , and the combat or conflict itself between them . That hindering from the evil which he would do , and putting him upon the evil he would not do . This disapproving , and hating the evil which he did , and approving the good which he did not : he comforts himself in this , that he consented to the Law of God , delighted in it , that to will , to keep it perfectly , was present with him ; and although he found a foil given to the new man , captivated , which makes him make a miserable outcry . Wretched man that I am , who shall deliver me from this Body of Death ! that is , tied to me , and which I am compelled to carry about with me , tired with the luggage , and poisoned with the stench . Yet through the Grace of God in Jesus Christ , I am filled with comfort , rejoice , and triumph , as more than a Conqueror . I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord So then with the mind , I myself serve the Law of God , but with my Flesh the Law of Sin. I bless God for his Grace in Christ , who doth not impute this corruption unto me to condemnation . ( But still that it is only sins of infirmity , and not such as are inconsistent with spiritual life , which were in Paul , and are in all the Godly . ) So though thou seest nothing but Flesh in thyself , if a Man may believe thee , yet thou walkest not after it , for though thou walkest in the Flesh , yet thou dost not fulfil the lusts of the flesh , followest not with consent the motions of thy own natural corruption . thou sowest not to the Flesh : taking no other care , but to please thy carnal appetite ; but on the contrary , thou sowest to thy Spirit , employing thy care and labour in obedience to the motions of the Holy Spirit , that thy will is to do , so thou canst say in sincerity , and this may be thy rejoicing , as it was Paul's . 

Obj. But I am full of hypocrisy , which Paul was free from ; all the signs of hypocrisy , that I find in the Bible , I find in myself not one sign of sincerity . 

Answ . What the Apostle saith of Sin in general , If we say that we have no sin , we deceive ourselves ; may be said of this sin of hypocrisy , if we say we have no hypocrisy , the truth of Grace is not in us . 

Obj. But it 's said of Israelites indeed , that there is no guile in them . And they only are blessed , in whose Spirit there is no guile ; therefore I have cause to conclude myself cursed . 

Answ . These places must be understood , as those where it is said . Whosoever abideth in him , sinneth not ; whosoever is born of God , doth not commit sin , and his seed remaineth in him , and he cannot sin , because he is born of God. They also do no iniquity . The meaning is , they give not themselves over to sin ; they sin not with full consent , they fall not into the purpose , though sometimes into the act of Sin. Sin reigns not in their mortal Bodies ; that they should obey it in the lusts thereof . It hath not Dominion over them . 

Obj. But this Sin of Hypocrisy Reigns in me . 

Answ . But that , it doth not , is evident by this , because thou discernest it , and art so troubled with it , complainest to God and Men of it , and judgest thyself for it , and hatest it , longest to be freed from it . it 's Grace certainly that makes thee able to discern so hidden and close a Corruption , and to hate it . And as sense and feeling is a certain sign of a living Man , ( as was now said ) So thy sense of hypocrisy , with a hatred of it , is a sure note and token of thy sincerity . So that thou art not in the Flesh , but in the Spirit . Nor matters it so much what evil motions thou findest in thyself , as how thou standest affected to them . There are and will be filthy scums rising up in thy heart continually , while thou livest here . But while thou castest it off , as it riseth by confession and self-condemnation , it shall never hurt thee , God will not condemn , but absolve and acquit thee of it . thou mayest and oughtest to take comfort , in the allowance of the Law of God in thy judgement , and in thy will consenting to do it , having an unfeigned desire , purpose , and endeavour to please God , and to do his will , this being the work of God's sanctifying Spirit , and a special fruit of Christ's purchase ; as real comfort therefore herein as if thou wast perfect in obedience . For if there be first a willing mind it is accepted according to that a Man hath , nor shall he be rejected for that he hath not . In this God's choicest Servants have comforted themselves against all their imperfections and falls and failing . 

Obj. But I question the truth of my desires . 

Answ . That thou needest not do as long as thou esteemest God's grace and favour above all things . Seeking by prayer and other means every Day to grow lesle sinful , and more holy , and mournest for thy Daily miscarriages , lamenting after the Lord  

Obj. But my Conscience condemns me for an Hypocrite . 

Ans . OH spiteful bitter thought , bitterly spiteful thought ! — thou hast reason to discredit thy Conscience , if it be opposite to the Word of God , and not to regard it against the Word of God. If our heart condemn us , God is greater than our heart , and knoweth all things . He knows the way thou takest , that it is right . And his word which is the Judge of Conscience , hath given Sentence on the right side . And therefore thou art bound in this case to check and condemn thy Conscience , for troubling thee causelessly . So did David and Job : Let me give thee one caution , take heed of making inherent Grace the only and chief ground of thy comfort . Though it is indeed the only evidence of thy title to comfort . For in so doing thou shalt commit two great evils , one against thyself , in leaning upon a bruised Reed ; for thine own Spirit may fail thee , and be overwhelmed , and thy heart may reproach thee ; another against the Lord , making an Idol of that gift of his , which cannot be so trusted in without sin . Rely more upon God's Grace without thee , than that which is within thee : Yet cherish also inherent Holiness , as thy only evidence of Life Eternal , and the beginning of it . 

Finally , give not credit to thy misgiving heart , that would persuade thee thou hast no assurance that God is thy Habitation : For thou hast that degree of assurance which is necessary to the being of Grace ; the lowest degree of certainty , which is in every true believer , consisting in an application of adherence . Whereby the Soul of a penitent sinner casts itself upon Jesus Christ , with a resolved humble recumbency , cleaving to him , as the Ivy doth to the Oak , Eagle to the Carcase , goes out of itself , renouncing its own Merits , and relying upon the Person and Merits of Christ , his active and passive obedience for forgiveness of sins , and for Life and Salvation . This is the act of Faith , and every one that thus receives him with an Obediential affiance knows that , and that through him dwelling in his heart , he hath his dwelling in God.  

You therefore , as yet that have not any comfortable assurance , cease henceforth to doubt and fear , and assay to join yourselves with them that have ; with whom we are next to deal , as Saul assayed to join himself to the Disciples at Jerusalem . Who will not at all , as they were awhile of him , be afraid of you : but receive you joyfully into their blessed Society . And when thou hast told despair Divine Herbert's strange story . Say to it as he doth . Hark Despair away . 

THE FOURTH SERMON . Having dealt with those of this Divine Household , that have as yet no comfortable assurance , that the Lord is their Habitation , we proceed to deal with them that have higher degrees of assurance , which carry sensible comfort with them , one is the Application of Experience ; when a Christian discerns in himself Divine impressions , effects of regenerating Grace , two or three whereof we will mention . The prime and most general , is , a real change of the whole Man from evil to good . This is a sure evidence of our being in Christ . If any Man be in Christ , he is a new Creature , old things are passed away , all things are become new . Whoever is changed in all his senses motions and affections , speeches and actions , is certainly engrafted into the Body of Christ by his spirit . The substance of the Soul and Body is the same , the qualities and operations altered . Another is walking in the light , as God is the light . Living and conversing , following that light of God which is conferred upon us by Grace , evidenceth us to be partakers of the Divine Nature ; Purifying ourselves , as he is pure . Hereby we know we have fellowship one with another : God with us , and we with him ; that he dwells in us , and we in him . Love to the brethren , Christ's whole spiritual kindred , who are knit to him , to the bond of Faith , and among themselves by that of love , another infallible note . We know that we have passed from Death to Life , because we love the brethren . When a Christian's faith in lively exercise reflects upon its own acts receptive of Christ , and operative by him , having withal a sanctified Conscience , witnessing sincerity in the acts , he gathers by discourse and reasoning his own spiritual estate , as Paul did . Our rejoicing is this , the testimony of our Conscience , that in simplicity and godly sincerity , not with fleshly wisdom , but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the World , and now abundantly to you-ward . Such an application of experience had Thomas upon his Faith , not quite exquisite before , but very weak , was raised and renewed , by beholding , touching and feeling . The other application is that of evidence , when the testimony of God's spirit comes , and concurs with ours , when we find the Holy Ghost in us , not only as a seal imprinting the graces of Christ upon our Souls : nor only as an earnest giving us the first Fruits , and as it were handle of Heaven . 

Those holy and Heavenly Gift ▪ conferred in this life , being a pledge of the perfection which shall be in the next , but also as a joyful witness , both clearing our evidences , and opening our minds to discern them . The Spirit itself beareth witness with our Spirit , that we are the Sons of God. Hereby we come to have boldness , confidence , and a perspicuous manifestation of Divine love shed abroad in our heart ▪ and certain knowledge , and full assurance of knowledge , and hope , of Faith , Let us draw near with all full assurance of Faith ▪ The word imports a carrying on with full Sail , like a Ship that hath Wind and Tide , and all the Sails spread to the Wind. Those three parts of God's Kingdom ▪ Righteousness , Peace , and Joy in the Holy Ghost , are consequents and effects of these three Applications . The first , namely that of adherence hath Wind and Tide against it . The second hath Wind carrying it on , but without Tide . The third hath both Wind and Tide , and all the affections like spread Sails filled with the Gales of the Spirit causing joy unspeakable , and full of Glory . 

In the Church of Rome this Doctrine of full assurance is cried down , and an impossibility of attaining it by any ordinary Christians , asserted , and the main reason they tender for the Confirmation of this Doctrine , especially as to the subjective certainty of perseverance , whereof Paul speaks , when he saith , I am sure that nothing shall be able to separate us from the Love of God in Jesus Christ . Is the mutability of Man's will ? but the assurance of Christians depends not upon Man's mutable , but upon the immutable will of God , and upon his infallible truth , who hath promised to keep them , whom he receives in him by his strongest power ( if there can be conceived any degree in Omnipotency ) we are kept ▪ by the Guard of God's Power , through Faith unto Salvation . They asked what ground hath any ordinary Christian for special faith , when there is no special promise , nor any Divine testimony by audible Voice , such as some choice persons have had , as Gen. 15. 1.  Mat. 9 2.  Luk. 5. 20. 47. 48. 23. 42. 43.  They are answered , we will not contend about bare words , whether it be better called special faith or assurance , gathered from two promises , the one in Scripture , the other in our hearts , so participating of Faith ; for that is our sense of special Faith , but as to the matter . 1.  There are general promises with a command to apply them . 2.  Special Faith is gathered by argumentation , thus whoever hath God's Spirit confesseth that Jesus is the Son of God , that Man dwelleth in God. But so have I : so do I therefore , I dwell in God. 3.  Sacraments give ground for special Faith , wherein is made special application to the receivers . 4.  The Spirit is given for this end to believers , as a seal , and earnest , and witness to assure them that God is their Habitation and Salvation . And that it 's possible for a Christian in ordinary course to attain this grace , if he do what in him lieth . We have God's express promise to this purpose . thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and Redeemer : and a charge is laid upon every Christian to make his calling sure , and not to come without full assurance , when they draw nigh to him in Prayer , and other duties of his Worship . Let us draw near him in full assurance of Faith. And we have the experience of God's People in all ages for it . And though they that profess they had it , as Job , David , Paul were rare persons : Yet the Faith of the meanest Christian is of the same Nature with theirs , though not in the same degree . This is the Doctrine of the reform Churches , who yet deny not the difficulty of attaining the highest degree , and that very few there are that attain it , and fewer that have it at all times alike , nor any in that perfection , but that there is some mixture of doubting . And this is one sign of the truth and goodness of it , when it is attained with difficulty , and assaulted with infidelity . For there are many , whom Satan and their own heart have deluded in this point , who are strongly persuaded that God is theirs , never doubted of their interest in him , make no question , but the Lord is their Habitation , who entered not in by the Door , never received the spirit of bondage to fear , have no fear of offending God , no care to please him , but live in known sin against the light of knowledge , and checks of Conscience , which evinceth them to be in the gall of bitterness . Now these who in their own conceits have taken up their dwelling in God , like those buyers and sellers that took up their seats in the Temple , without the Warrant , against the consent of the Owner of that House , must be dealt with by the Ministers of Christ , as those Intruders by Christ were driven out with a scourge ; And as Nehemiah dealt with Tobiah , who had got a Chamber in the Court of the House of God , who cast both him and his stuff out of it . Avoid profaneness , come not here ; nothing but holy , pure and clear , or that which groaneth to be so , may enter , or abide one Moment at his peril . 

To you who can prove your assurance that you are in God , to be of God by the qualification of your persons , as having formerly been humbled for your living without God in the World , and at present humble yourselves to walk with your God , and resolve so to do to the end of your life : Unto you I am sent with a manifold Word of Exhortation . 1.  To prise this as the greatest blessing , and rejoice in it more than in all other blessings , and accordingly to praise God for it , that he hath given you to know , that he is your Habitation ▪ Lifting up the Light of his Countenance upon you , and giving you Eyes to see that Light. There be many that say , who will show us any good . Lord , lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us . thou hast put gladness in my heart more than in the time when their Corn and Wine increased : because thy loving kindness is better than life , my Lips shall praise thee . Thus will I bless thee while I live ; Because thou hast caused me to feel the effects of thy Grace at full , even as the Sun shooteth out his Beams at Midday : And because I find this to be the life of my life ; without which , every Day would be more bitter to me than Death . Therefore for this above all Mercies will I bless thee every Day , and I will praise thy Name for ever . 

2.  To hold fast what you have , and be always adding to it , as worldly Men do by their Earthly substance . How oft are Christians exhorted to hold fast every good spiritual thing that they have gotten ? Hold fast ( as with Tooth and Nail ) the faithful Word . The pure and sincere Doctrine of the Gospel , against those Gainsayers that would snatch it from you ; and not only the matter , but the form of sound words . Let us hold fast our profession of Christian Faith and Religion in words and deeds . That which ye have already , hold fast till I come . Especially this grace and gift of assurance , which is a Jewel of the greatest worth in the World. For as the happiness of having it , so the misery of wanting it is unspeakable . We cannot love God heartily , when we doubt whether he love's us . We can have little heart to pray , our spiritual fight will be uncomfortable , our peace unsettled , our patience heartless ; all heat to holy duties will be utterly dampt in us . This is made an effect of lively Faith , and an assured mark of those who are living Members of Christ , namely to hold fast , that degree of assurance : Christ was faithful as a Son over his own House , whose House are we . If we hold fast the confidence , and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end . See an example of this fast holding and keeping this Pearl of Price in the Spouse of Christ , how servant her desires were , how forcible her endeavours to make his singular presence with her familiar with her always . It was but a little that I passed from the Watchmen , ( great worldly wise Men ) but I found him whom my Soul loveth , I held him , and would not let him go . 

We are as oft exhorted to add unto those good things which we have and hold , to increase our spiritual store , to grow in all Graces . Besides this , giving all diligence , add to your Faith Virtue , to Virtue Knowledge , to Knowledge Temperance , and to Temperance Patience , to Patience Godliness , and to Godliness brotherly Kindness , and to brotherly Kindness Charity . Grow in Grace . We beseech you brethren , and exhort you by the Lord Jesus , that as ye have received of us , how ye ought to walk , and to please God : So ye would abound more and more . That ye would increase more and more , with the increase of God. Grow up into him in all things , which is the Head , even Christ . This will be both for our comfort and credit , profit ; Lord , thy Pound hath gained other Five Pounds , be thou over Five Cities . Especially we should desire and add degrees to our Faith , as of adherence , so of experience and evidence , make it our Prayer , Lord increase our Faith ; and this will bind others praises of God on our behalf . We are bound to thank God always for you brethren , as it is meet , because that your Faith groweth exceedingly . 

The great benefit and necessity of this knowledge of assurance , may be motive sufficient , to persuade you to give all diligence , in the use of all means , to preserve , and increase it . You will be sure to meet with temptations , to doubt of your interest in God , of your being in him , to question whether you are Children of this Family . Christ himself was thus assaulted , though dwelling in the bosom of his Father . If thou be the Son of God. You must all die shortly , you may presently . For what is your life , it is even a Vapour , which appeareth for a little Moment , and vanisheth away . Now , if you be without assurance , that you dwell in this heavenly House , when Death drives you out of your Earthly ; How full of Horror and Torment must your Hearts needs be ! not knowing whether Heaven or Hell must be your dwelling place to all Eternity : Whereas , if you knew you were in the same House with Christ , this would quiet your heart from all fear . As soon as Christ was come into the Ship , wherein the Disciples were tossed , the Wind presently ceased . God through Christ being your Habitation , your Light and Salvation , whom or what should you fear , while you live , and when you die ? God is our refuge , therefore we will not fear . And this , and this only is able to make and keep your hearts lightsome in every condition . Yea , knowledge of your abiding in God , will give a sweet relish , as to every comfort : So to every cross . I have lost a dear Husband , Wife , Child , Friend , a comfortable dwelling , but not my dear God. And the more assurance , the lesle fearful , and more cheerful . Now the means to preserve and increase assurance , are the same whereby you gained it . The outward are those Ordinances of God , and exercises of his holy Religion , which he hath sanctified to this end , to bring us unto , and into himself , and to work in us a comfortable assurance thereof , especially the Word , Sacrament , and Prayer . The more inward and spiritual , are care to keep a good Conscience : Diligent observation of your own ways : Consideration of the experiments you have had of God's favour towards you , renouncing yourselves : Resting only upon the free Grace of God , in performance of the conditions required on our part ; looking oft over your evidences , and holding the Conclusion . To learn by heart , and put in practice all those duties that are incumbent upon all those , to whom the Lord , even the most High , vouchsafeth this high Prerogative of admission to , and possession of his blessed Self to be your proper Habitation . 

The general duty is to walk worthy of the Lord , who hath effectually called you out of the World , and out of yourselves , into himself , and hath justified you , and partly glorified you with glorious privileges , graces , and comforts . For whom he called , them he also justified ; and whom he justified , them he also glorified . This the Apostle Paul frequently presseth . I beseech you that you walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called . You know how we exhorted , and charged every one of you , that ye would walk worthy of God , who hath called you into his Kingdom of Glory : Of God , whose Livery you wear , whose Image you bear , of whose Household you are . To walk worthy of your Vocation is to walk holily : for the general Vocation of all Christians is to be holy , as God is holy : unto whom they are called in Jesus Christ . As he which hath called you is holy , so be ye holy in all manner of conversation . And as he presseth them to this worthy walking : So he presseth God by Prayer for them , that they might by his grace be enabled to walk ; declaring withal sundry Ingredients , and Concurrents , that make these paces and steps , they take , regular , and graceful , and the end of the course joyful . We cease not to pray for you , and to desire that ye may be filled with the knowledge of his will , in all wisdom , and spiritual understanding , that ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all wellpleasing , being fruitful in every good work : and increasing in the knowledge of God , strengthened with all might , according to his glorious power , unto all patience and long-suffering , with joyfulness . 

Let knowledge show you the ways you should walk , and sanctification carry you on an end therein , and patience uphold you , till you come to the end of your Journey , when you shall receive the end of your Faith , even the salvation of your Souls . 

The particular duties are many ; in sundry references both to things and persons . The first of the former sort we will dwell awhile upon , are Earthly Houses and Habitations . Some whose dwelling Place the Lord is , have no House on Earth , which they can call their own . Of those that have , some are not suffered to live in them ; and of them that have this liberty , some have very poor Houses , with as poor Furniture , or other Conveniences . Others have convenient Dwellings , with an indifferent outward estate , and some few have gentile and stately Edifices , with riches and honour in abundance . 

1.  To those that have no earthly Houses of their own , but are in a state of beggary , or next to it , of whom some there are , who never had any , others had comfortable ones , but have lost them by Fire , or other casualty , and so are for the present Housless ; to these I have this word of Exhortation . Let not your hearts be troubled . 

1.  Because you are not without Fellows and Companions , better than yourselves , that are in the same Housless condition : you have heard of some , Of whom the World was not worthy . Who wandered in Deserts , and in Mountains , and in Dens and Caves of the Earth . And of the blessed Apostle St. Paul , Who both hungered , thirsted , and was naked , and had no certain dwelling place . And of our blessed Saviour , Who had not where to lay his head . And you know how little it troubled these holy ones , that they were thus destitute , how well pleased with their want , it being their Heavenly Father's good pleasure , that it should be with them as it was . And how joyfully those believing Hebrews took the spoiling of their Goods , knowing that they had in Heaven a better Mansion , and a better and an enduring substance . 

2.  You are not without a House , which likes you best , and which you would not change for the best House in the World : You hear God ask you , as Elkenah did Hannah , am not I better to thee than Ten Sons ? Had you not rather enjoy me , and do you not find more comfort in me , than in Ten Houses ? And your Heart answereth , truth Lord And can it then be troubled ? It may be said of all Houses , compared with this of yours , as it 's said of all Nations , they are as nothing , lesle than nothing , and vanity . And in truth , all Houses and riches , which others inherit , are not , though they seem to be : You only , and your fellow Inhabitants inherit that which is . Esther had good reason to be content , when she was preferred to the best place of the House . And so have you , who are preferred to live in the best House , and in the best place , the very heart of it . You are not only graved upon the Palms of God's hands , but you are in his heart , set as a seal there ; Yea , I will rejoice over them , to do them good with my whole heart , and with my whole Soul. How then can ye choose , but rejoice exceedingly in the want of all Creature comforts ; yea , though you have to boot the present feeling of the greatest outward evils ? And say with the holy Prophet . Although the Figtree shall not blossom , neither shall fruit be in the Vines , the labour of the Olive shall fail : and the Field shall yield no Meat , the Flocks shall be cut off , from the Fold . And there shall be no Herd in the Stalls . Yet I will rejoice in the Lord I will joy in the God of my Salvation : The Lord is the portion of mine Inheritance . The Lines are fallen to me in pleasant places ; Yea , I have a goodly Heritage . Having nothing , I possess all things ; having the Haver of all things . 

3.  You may and aught to take comfort in the promises which God hath made to his People in this case of Poverty , which for the present pincheth you : He is pleased to bring you to this want of house and maintenance , that he might humble and prove you , to do you good in the latter end . And he is able , and no lesle willing to help you , either by inclining the hearts of the rich , to show compassion upon you , to receive you into their Houses , and feed you at their Tables ; or if you have but Pulse to eat , he can make that nourish you , better than Kingly fare : yea , he can make you go in the strength of one Meal made of a Cake baken on the Coals Forty Days . 

Qu. But may we expect God will work Miracles now adays ? Yes , that we may rather than his promise should fail , Is my hand shortened at all ? This resolve upon , that the Eyes of the Lord run too and from , throughout the whole Earth , to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect towards him : And of this also , that all things are possible to him that believeth . And therefore with Job , resolve to trust in him , though he slay you : and to die , rather than to help yourselves by any unlawful means , and cast off all solicitous carking thoughtfulness for your Bodies , where to dwell , and what to eat , and wherewith ye shall be clothed . Ponder those Seven Disswasives from distrustful cutting , dividing , distracting cares . And having Food and Raiment , how little , how course soever , be content therewith . Considering that a little that the righteous Man hath , is better than the riches of many wicked . Nor do you doubt all , but if God see that a House with wealth and riches may serve to further your spiritual and eternal good , you shall not fail to have them before you die . He hath raised the Poor out of the Dust , and lifted the needy out of the Dunghill , and set him with Princes . And so he will you . Hear his express primise , Wealth and riches shall be in his House , or if you live and die poor and mean , your Children shall be blessed with abundance . His Seed shall be mighty upon Earth . And you that were some Years since wealth , but by the rage of the Fire , or malice and fraud of Men , or other mishaps are become as poor as Job ; do not despair of recovering your loss : but remember what the Man of God said to Amaziah , who demanded of him , What he should do for the Hundred Talents . The Lord is able to give thee much more than this : and how he gave Job twice as much as before . Wait upon God , and keep his way , and he shall exalt thee to inherit the land Ye have heard of the patience of Job ; and have seen the end of the Lord , that the Lord is pitiful , and of tender Mercy . 

2.  To you that have Houses of your own , but may not live in them , at lest cannot with any safety . 1.  See , and acknowledge the hand of God in your expulsion , as in every other Cross , so in this you should a Divine Providence . It is God that , and not Man only that hath thrust you out . 

2.  Examine the cause of your Ejection ; if it be so , Why am I thus ? That you may be sure your cause is good , and your heart sincere , in that which you suffer for . 

3.  If you had a doubting Conscience indeed , against which it is unlawful and damnable to act , and not a mere scruple against which Men may act ; yet you may find cause enough , why God should cast you out of his House , and out of your own . For you honoured God in neither as you might have done . And therefore aught to acknowledge with David , Righteous art thou OH God , and just in thy Judgements . I know , OH Lord , that thy Judgements are right , and that thou in faithfulness hast afflicted me . 

4.  When you have humbled your Souls , and made your peace with God , by repenting of your neglect to husband time and talon , while a price was in your hand . Resolve to bear with humility and patience the Indignation of the Lord , because you have sinned against him , until he pled your cause , and execute Judgement for you , and believe that he will bring you forth again to the Light , and you shall behold his righteousness . i e. his deliverance , the effect of his faithfulness and love towards you : and of his just severity against your and his enemies ; who intended not to execute his judgements for your sins , whatever their pretence was : and bless God that you are still permitted to live in the Land of your Nativity : And that there are any who are willing to receive you into their Houses , as Laban did Jacob , when he was compelled to leave his Father's House , and Jethro , Moses , and the Shulamite Elisha , and Lydia , Paul : And that none can drive you out of your divine habitation , nor shall be ever able to separate you from his love in Jesus Christ , wherein you lodge . 

3.  To you that have convenient Houses , and a competency of means to live upon . Be persuaded to think your condition better , than if you had fairer buildings , and more abundant income and revenues . Agar thought a mean estate best , as appears by his Prayer against riches , as well as poverty . Give me neither poverty nor riches , feed me with food convenient for me ; As much as I shall need from Day to Day . So we are taught to pray by our Saviour : Give us this Day our Daily Bread. The word signifies such a kind or quality , as is fitting for our sustenance or being . So much as is needful to be added thereto , and no more . Such a measure of goods , of body and fortune ( so Men use to speak ) as is necessary , comprehended by the Apostle under Food and Raiment . This was all that Jacob desired of God. If God will give me Bread to eat , and Raiment to put on . If the Query be , What may be counted needful ? Answ . 1.  That which Nature requireth enough only to hold Life and Soul together , from Hand to Mouth . ( as they say ) 2.  That which is meet for the state wherein God hath set us . 3.  That which is requisite for the charge committed to us . 4.  That which is apparently needful for the time to come . If any provide not for his own , especially those of his own House , he hath denied the faith , and is worse than an Infidel . no Man's desire must go beyond this . Labour not to be rich . Superfluity coveted is very dangerous . They that will be Rich fall into Temptation , and a Snare , and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts , which drown Men in destruction and perdition . A moderate estate hath little danger and trouble , much ease and comfort , a plentiful one little or nothing of these , much of those , and therefore thank God that it is with you as it is ; nor do you , or can you want plenty , abiding in God , for in him there is all fullness , and enjoying him , you possess all things ; yea , you would do so , if you had nothing ( as was said ) . 

4.  To you who dwell in earthly Houses , and have all earthly good things in abundance , I have this word of exhortation . Let your hearts be lift up with thankful acknowledgement of God's goodness in giving besides himself , these outward blessings richly to enjoy . When others , nothing inferior to you in grace and goodness , are glad to dwell in poor Cottages , and to feed on scraps ; yea , to beg their Bread. Who am I , OH Lord God , and what is my House , that thou hast brought me hitherto ? thou preparest a Table before me , thou anointest my Head with Oil , my Cup runneth over . I am not worthy of all the Mercies , and of all the truth which thou hast showed unto thy Servant , for with my Staff I passed over this Jordan , and now I am become two Bands . 

But let not your hearts be lifted up with pride , because of your abundance . Charge them that are rich in this World , that they be not highminded . Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God. lest when thou hast eaten , and art full , and hast built goodly Houses , and dwelled therein , and when thy Herds and thy Flocks multiply , and thy Silver and thy Gold is multiplied , and all that thou hast is multiplied then thy Heart be lifted up . See God in your fair edifices , and sumptuous Furniture , and large Revenues , esteeming them as a beam of the bright Sunshine of his favour , you being enabled by his Grace to make them instrumental for his glory in the refreshing the bowels of his Saints ; and so to enjoy the good of them , as to avoid the snare . To use them not as hindrances , but helps to a better life . Consider withal , how easy and quickly all you have may be brought to nothing , ( Job this Morning , the greatest Man for wealth of all the Men of the East , and by Night was brought to poverty to a Proverb ) and therefore look upon all as transitory , keeping your affections lose , and all off from them . And if they make themselves Wings , and fly away , as an Eagle towards Heaven : let it trouble you as little , as the sight of a Flock of Foul out of your Ground , flying thitherward would do ; and rejoice , that with Mary , You have chosen that good part , that shall not be taken from you . 

5.  To you , who , having dwelled in fair and goodly Houses , which the Fire consumed , are in your thought and purpose , if not actually building , as , or more fair and goodly to dwell in , in the same places where the former stood , or elsewhere be exhorted . 1.  To bless the Lord , your everlasting Habitation , which preserved yours and all the persons of your Families , and so much of the movable Goods in your Houses and Shops , from that raging Element ; That you have still wherewith to subsist comfortably , and are in a condition of Rebuilding : Acknowledge it to be of the Lord's Mercies that yourselves , and all yours , persons and things were not consumed ; That so many lives , and so much substance is given to you for a Prey . 

2.  To take heed to yourselves , that none of these evils , no degree of them , which are noted , and taxed , and threatened in many new builders of old , and which it is to be feared , will be found in too many of your fellow builders , whose Houses will be contiguous with your selves , what those crimes are , may be gathered from such Scriptures as these . Woe unto him that buildeth his House by unrighteousness , and his Chambers by wrong : that saith , I will build me a wide House and large Chambers , and cutteth him out Windows ; and it is ceited with Cedar , and painted with Vermilion . Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his House that he may set his Nest on High. thou hast consulted shame to thy House , for the Stone shall cry out of the Wall , and the Beam out of the Timber shall answer it . That shall say , I was laid here by biting Usury , and this shall answer , I lie here by cheating and violence , extortion and oppression . All the people shall know , that say in the pride and stoutness of Heart , the Bricks are fallen down , but we will build with hewn Stone . The Sycomores are cut down , but we will change them into Cedars . We will raise up our Houses in greater splendour and Glory than ever they were . Their Goods shall become a booty , and their Houses a desolation , they shall build Houses , but not inhabit them . Whereas Edom saith , we are impoverished , but we will return and build the desolated places . Thus saith the Lord of Hosts , they shall build , but I will throw down . For as much as their treading is upon the Poor , and ye take from him burdens of Wheat , ye shall build Houses of Hewn Stone , but ye shall not dwell in them . ye planted pleasant Vineyards , but ye shall not drink Wine of them . For I know your manifold transgressions , and your mighty sins . They afflict the just , they take a bribe , and turn aside the Poor in the Gate from their sight . They build up Zion with blood , and Jerusalem with iniquity ; the Heads thereof judge for a reward , and the Priests teach for hire ; and the Prophets thereof Divine for money . Yet will they lean upon the Lord , and say , is not the Lord among us ? no evil shall befall us . Therefore shall Zion for their sakes be ploughed as a Field , and Jerusalem shall become heaps . I will smite the Winter Houses with the Summer House , and the House of Ivory shall perish , and the great Houses shall have an end , saith the Lord For behold , the Lord commands , and he will smite the great Houses with breaches , and the little House with clefts . Woe unto them that join House to House . He will destroy the House of evil doers . Whoso rewardeth evil for good , evil shall not depart from his House . Though you , with whom I am dealing , are not of the number of these wicked Men , that are building with you ; yet it is your part and duty , to take good notice of the lord 's just punishments , which he hath threatened to inflict upon them , and take warning thereby , not to follow their footsteps , nor to tread in one of them . The righteous Man wisely considereth the House of the wicked , which being wholly built , and filled with Goods , gotten by evil means , shall bring them to fall into ruin ; so far shall it be from being any stay unto them . Take heed of partaking of their sins , that ye receive not of their Plagues . See that terrible and flaming place . I will bring the curse forth , and it shall enter into the House of the Thief , legal , as well as illegal , and into the House of him that sweareth falsely by my Name : and of him that sweareth vainly , as well as falsely ; that sweareth by the inch as well as by the Ell , by his faith and troth , as well as by his Maker . Petty as well as bloody Oaths : ) and it shall remain in the midst of his House , and shall consume it , with the timber thereof , and the Stones thereof . 

3.  If you have not yet begun to build , take the wise Man's advice ( 't is the loving advice of your living House ) Prepare thy work without , and make it fit for thyself in the Field , and afterwards build thine House . Regulate yourself , and your Building according to thy Purse . Cast the cost beforehand . Which of you intending to build a Tower , sitteth not down first , and counteth the cost , whether he have sufficient to finish it , lest happily after he hath laid the Foundation , and is not able to finish it , all that behold it begin to mock him ? They will do as much and worse , if you finish with other men's Money , which you owing , are unable to repay . By no means run in debt , take thine own measure . owe no Man any thing , but love . 

4.  In carrying on this work , as in all others of your particular calling , approve yourselves to God and Men , to be good Men , by doing all things according to the rule and guidance of well instructed natural reason : A good Man will guide his affairs with judgement . Through wisdom is an House builded , and by knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all precious pleasant riches . I need not tell you what is the prime means in order to this end , namely prayer , For the Lord giveth wisdom , out of his Mouth cometh knowledge and understanding . He is the Author of reason in Men , and in the guiding of their actions , even in all manual matters . If any of you lack wisdom , let him ask it of God. Your God will direct you to order your Buildings , that there may be a prevention of deadly mishaps , as he directed his People of old in theirs . When thou buildest a new House , thou shalt make a Battlement for thy Roof , that thou bring not Blood upon thine House , if any Man fall from thence . In all other points of prudence and foresight , you shall find him your Instructor . 

5.  When then the work is done , and your Houses fit for Habitation , remember and imitate God's people in ancient times , in dedication of their new-built Houses , solemnly blessing the first enjoying of them , by Prayers and holy Hymns , consecrating them to God , to be Houses of Prayer and little Churches , wherein Duties of Religion should be performed every Day , and all things done therein , even natural actions , to the glory of God , by Governors , and governed : according to that of the Apostle . Whether ye eat or drink , or whatsoever ye do , do all to the glory of God. This was Josuas' religious resolution . I and my House , we will serve the Lord  

Now because all these Five Divine Domestics are apt to have their minds too much upon the things of the World ; they that are Housless and Landless , to be solicitous how to get a House and livelihood ; they that have Houses of their own , but are prohibited to live in them , to have a hankering desire after Liberty ; they that have their Houses free to live in , and sufficiency , how they may add house to house , & increase their substance ; they that have goodly Houses with superfluity , how they may yet have more wealth and honour : The mind of Man being like the Horseleech , which hath two Daughters , crying , give , give ; the two Forks in the Tongue of that bloodsucker , setting forth the two passions in the mind of Man ; the one a burning desire of getting beyond measure , the other an unquietness through sense of want , when more than enough is gotten : and like those four things that are never satisfied , the Grave , a barren Womb , the Earth that is not filled with Water , and the Fire : and they that are building , are apt to be in earnest expectation , that they shall be well and warm in those new Nests . I think this one consideration needful to be suggested to them all , namely what power God's grace useth to have in all them that dwell in him , to take off their hearts from minding earthly things , in that manner they used to do before they were in God ; namely , though not to forsake the World quite , and give over worldly business , and spend their whole time in private Devotions , nor having found this House and Treasure , to cast away their worldly Goods . For Religion bindeth Men and Women to be good Husbands , to seek to preserve and increase their estates that God hath given them ; yet to make them willing to part with Houses and Lands , and whatsoever is dearest to them in the World , if they cannot hold them with God's favour . To lose all things , and count them but dung in comparison of it . This made God's people in the Ten Tribes to leave their dwellings and possessions , and to come to Jerusalem , where God was purely worshipped . This made Moses to leave Pharaoh's Court , and to join himself to God's afflicted , despised Church , and to moderate their affections , to use them with more sobriety and indifferency ; It being all one to them whether they had little or much . I have learned in whatsoever state I am , therewith to be content , I know both how to be abased , and how to abound : every where , and in all things , I am instructed both to be full , and to be hungry , both to abound , and suffer need : Yea , so to take up their hearts , as to be more careless and forgetful of these things , than they were formerly . For they having found a better House , and a better Treasure , There their hearts must needs be most , if not altogether . Nor can the heart be divided between the love of God , and the World : But one of them will and must have all . no Man can serve two Masters , for either he will hate the one , and love the other , or else he will hold to the one , and despise the other . ye cannot serve God and Mammon . Love not the World , neither the things that are in the World : If any Man love the World , the love of the Father is not in him . 

THE FIFTH SERMON . The second Sort of Spiritual duties incumbent upon you , who have assurance that the Lord is your Habitation , is in reference to persons . 1.  Those who were the efficient cause of this your superlative Happiness , both principle and instrumental . The principle are the three sacred persons of the glorious Deity , the Father , the Son , and the Holy Ghost . 

1.  Admire the goodness of God in electing you to this happiness . Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , who hath chosen us in Him , before the Foundation of the World : and in conferring upon you , by the grace of Adoption , the right of inheriting his Light here and hereafter . Giving thanks unto the Father , who hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light . Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us , that we should be called the Sons of God.  

2.  The love of God the Son , which passeth knowledge ; who purchased for us this dwelling place with the price of his blood . ( The blood of God ) ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , that though he was rich , yet for your sakes he became poor , that ye through his poverty might be rich . When he was in the possession of a perfect Happiness and Glory in his Divine Nature , that he might bring you into the same possession . He took upon him your Nature , with all its miseries , wants and obligements to gain you the Treasures of God's Grace , Righteousness , and Eternal Life in Him here , and with Him hereafter . He would be without a House , where to lay his head , and without any civil propriety of Earthly Goods , and without any peace , or rest in the World , that you might have a resting place in God , and a spiritual right to all this , and actual enjoyment of as much as needs , and is good for you . 

3.  The powerful Operation of the Holy Ghost in imprinting upon your Souls those Divine Graces , which are certain signs and tokens of your real interest in , and present possession of this supercoelestial Mansion , and witnessing with your spirits , that you are truly Gods Children , and being such , shall abide in the House for ever , for so Sons do . 

To provoke and quicken you the more to thanksgiving for this inestimiable happiness . Consider how infinitely you are bound to these Three persons , above innumerable others ; whom God the Father did not choose to have their dwelling in him , and whom the Holy Ghost never wrought upon , to accept this , as he hath upon you . There are who would persuade you otherwise , that is , that God the Father hath in his decree of Election done no more for you , than he hath for other Men , whom he from Eternity choose to be partakers of his happiness conditionally , that is , if they would , as you have done , accept it offered to them , as it was to you : because he foresaw that you would receive Christ into your hearts by faith , he therefore determined to receive you into himself , to make you eternally happy ; because he foresaw others would not , he therefore passed them by , and rejected them , and decreed to damn them ; for he love's all Men equally , desires and will's the Conversion and Salvation of every Man alike , unfeignedly and earnestly ; that God the Son manifested in the World , who came in the World to save sinners , died for all without difference , intended to give himself a ransom for all , and every one equally ; that the efficacy of the Holy Ghost , and his Cooperation accompanying the Word , calling Men out of the state of nature , into the state of Grace , is only by moral persuasion : and that it is in the power of every Man's freewill , to accept or reject this grace ; These are plausible , but pernicious Errors , against which I shall bring a few Scriptures , to antidote and fortify your judgements , and establish them in the contrary truths . 

1.  Touching the Decrees of God the Father's predestination , the Scripture makes it absolute , definite , and irrevocable : So as the number of the Elect can neither be increased or diminished . The Foundation of the Lord standeth sure , having this Seal , the Lord knoweth them that are his , that the purpose according to Election might stand . Even so at this present also , there is a remnant , according to the election of grace . All that the Father giveth me shall come to me ; I know my Sheep , and I give unto them Eternal Life , and they shall never perish . ye are come to the Church of the first born , which are enrolled in Heaven , rejoice that your Names are written in Heaven , Whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life , was cast into the Lake of Fire . Insomuch if it were possible , they should deceive the very Elect. So that howsoever Salvation in the execution of it depends upon the conditional use of the means , yet the will of God is not conditional , incomplete or mutable , because God hath absolutely purposed to give his Elect both will and power to perform those very conditions required , namely Repentance , Faith , and Perseverance : For the Decree of God predestinating , must not be considered after this form : I will choose Peter to Eternal Life , if it shall so happen that he doth believe ; but rather thus , I do choose Peter to Eternal Life , which that he may infallibly obtain , I will give him faith . As many as were ordained to eternal life , believed according to the faith of God's Elect. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father , who are kept by the power of God , through Faith unto Salvation . All gifts of grace leading into the habitation of holiness , and whom to salvation are the fruits and effects of Eternal Election . Neither is it true , that we are Elected for faith and holiness , for we are Elected unto both , according as he hath chosen us in him that we should be holy . Election therefore is before the spiritual blessings both in order and time . ye have not chosen me , but I haven chosen you , and ordained you , that you should go : and bring forth fruit , and that your fruit should remain . For by grace are ye saved through faith , and that not of yourselves , it is the gift of God. As for this only General Election of all , and every Man to salvation upon condition of faith , it is indeed ( alone ) no Election , because it predestinates no Man actually , severs no one from another , writes no Name in the Book of Life , ordains no individual to have his habitation in God , but only prescribes the manner of coming to salvation , promiscuously to all : neither by it is it decreed , who shall be saved , but what manner of Men. Moreover , who holds this Universal Election alone , must also grant an Universal reprobation . For if God will only have all to be saved indefinitely , if they will believe , he willeth likewise that all shall be damned that do not believe ; and so God neither chooseth or refuseth any antecedently . Finally , this opinion makes Man's will to overrule God's counsel . Nor can you believe God's equal love to all Men , when you hear him professing that he did not equally love two , who were equal by Nature , nor that he desire's the salvation of all alike , because all are not converted and saved , it being as easy for him to effect as desire , and by his effectual Grace to make Men of unwilling willing without destroying their voluntary liberty . 

3.  Touching the efficacy of God the Holy Ghost working Conversion , that it is not to be restrained to moral persuasion only , which man 's will may embrace or reject , and finally resist , is abundantly evinced by that one Text , where the Apostle heaps up so many emphatical and significant words , on purpose to declare the power of the spirit of God , put forth in the conversion of a sinner . That they may know what is the hyberbolical greatness of his power to us-ward , who believe according to the working of his mighty power , which he wrought in Christ , when he raised him from the dead . To which many more may be added , and that it depends not upon Man's freewill , which can neither convert itself , nor overcome divine grace , to put forth for his conversion . The Scripture every where plainly and expressly teacheth , I mean , that grace which is given with an absolute purpose to convert . See 2 Cor. 10. 4 , 5.  Col. 2. 12. 2  These . 1. 11.  Luk. 11. 22. 2  Pet. 1. 3  

Next to the principal efficient causes of their happiness , the instrumental are to be owned and thanked . Those from whom you had your natural being , without which you had not been capable of this , or any other good . Honour is due to natural Parents , how poor , how bad soever , nor must they be despised for any default of body or mind : and it is a point of piety to relieve them , if they be in want . Nor can you ever sufficiently requite them , though it must be your study so to do . Let them learn first to show piety at home , and requite their Parents , for this is acceptable before God. Your spiritual Parents are much more to be honoured , and much lesle to be contemned ; for as much as they have been instruments of your better being , your being in Christ in God , without which you had better to have been Dogs or Toads ; Yea , good had it been for you , if you had never been born . In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel . Think nothing too dear for these . I bear you record , that if it had been possible , ye would have plucked out your own Eyes , and have given them unto me . Time was , when you held yourselves happy in me , and blessed the time that ever you saw and heard me . Howbeit , I do not say unto thee , how thou owest me even thine own self . Bless also all those who have been fellow-helpers with these , by informing , convincing , reproving , instructing , advising , comforting you against despair . All these call for thankful acknowledgement . Blessed be the Lord God of Israel , which sent thee this Day to meet me , and blessed be thy advice , and blessed be thou which hast kept me from avenging myself . Let the Righteous smite me , reprove , and chide me . It shall be a kindness . I will thank him for it , and God for him for it , and God for him . 

The next sort of persons , to whom you owe duty , to the performance whereof , I shall earnestly exhort you , are they , who as yet are without God in the World , to whom it may be said . They have neither part nor lot in this matter , but are in the gall of bitterness , and bond of iniquity : And that not only without the Pale of the Church , Twenty-six parts of the World divided into Thirty-one , having not so much as the Name of Christians ; and of those Five that are Christians in Name . What a World of Papists are there , besides Heretics that cut off themselves from the true Church ? But even in the reform Churches , and even in this Land of light , and Valley of Vision , there are six sorts and a great number of them , who dwell not in the Light , but sit in Darkness , and in the shadow of Death . Namely , 1.  Grossly ignorant ones , that are utterly unacquainted with the first Principles of the Oracles of God. These are in Satan's Power , under his Government , who is the Ruler of the Darkness of this World ; against these is the wrath of God revealed from Heaven , in temporal , and spiritual , and Eternal Judgements . Knowledgè being the Foundation , and Seed of all saving Grace , they must needs be graceless that want it . 2.  Wickedly erroneous ones , those who hold in their judgement's Doctrines overthrowing the Christian Faith , these are not many Doors from Death . For every fundamental Error hath a damnable defilement , being a Leprosy in the Head , the worst of that kind of Plague . 3.  Openly profane ones that live in the omission of known duties , and in the practice of known gross sins . Who for the pleasures of the Flesh , renounce the Heavenly blessings , as Esau did , who for a Morsel of Meat sold his birthright . Fornicators , Thiefs , Drunkards , Revilers , Swearers , Sabbath-breakers , etc. This ye know , that no such have any abiding in God , but dwell in the Devil , whose they are , and whom they serve , and with whom they shall abide eternally , without Repentance . 4 Mere civil ones , who live not in any open offence against the Second Table , but are utterly regardless of the First : which are of absolute necessity , to prove Man's being in God. The Gospel teaching us to live godly , as well as righteously and soberly . Nor without holiness shall any Man ever see God. 5.  Hypocrites , who though they seem to have a prime respect , to the First Table ( which Christ calls the First and great Commandment ) yet they make little or no Conscience of the Second Table duties ; love not their Wives , are cruel to their Children and Servants , will lie , and cheat , and cozen , tipple , etc.  The damnable estate of these hath been sufficiently discovered , and that the lowest place of Torments in the burning Lake , is assigned for them . 6tly . Haters and Blasphemers , and Persecutors of the ways of Godliness , and of them that walk in those ways by word or deed . This is an evident token of Perdition , and the wrath of God shall come upon such to the utter-most , if they perish in their malice . 

The duty we owe to all these , is to mourn for their undone condition , and to desire , and strive earnestly to convert them , That they may be in capacity to live , and lodge with you under the same Roof , and partake of the same glorious Privileges , and Graces , and Comforts . So you ought to do by these , when you have occasion to converse with any of them , as Lydia by Paul and Silas , constrained them to come into her House , and abide there , at least by earnest invitation , and persuasion , as Jael did Sisera , with another manner of mind , Turn in my Lord , turn into me , fear not . You are bound to have the same tender and cordial affection towards all these , that are out of God's grace , that Saint Paul had towards the Galatians , that were fallen from grace . My little Children , of whom I travel in birth again , till Christ be form in you . 

1.  Be in pain for them , as a Woman in travail is . Grieve , and groan , and sigh , and weep bitterly for them , as Let did for the Sodomites , With whose filthy conversation he was vexed , for that righteous man dwelling among them , in seeing & hearing vexed his righteous soul , from Day to Day with their unlawful deeds . I beheld the Transgressor's , and was grieved , Rivers of Waters run down mine Eyes , because they keep not thy Law. OH that my Head were Waters , and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears , that I might weep Day and Night , as well for the sins , as the slain of the Daughters of my People : For they be all Adulterers , an Assembly of treacherous Men , and bend their Tongue like their Bow for Lies : They proceed from evil to worse . Samuel mourned for Soul. Even mourned , because of the transgression of them that had been carried away . Jesus grieved for the hardness of the Heart of the Jews , Beheld their City , and wept over it . Out of much affliction , and languish of heart , I wrote unto you with many tears . Many walk , of whom I have told you often , and now tell you weeping , that they are Enemies of the Cross of Christ , whose end is destruction , whose God is their Belly , whose Glory is their shame , who mind Earthly things . For love's sake , love to God who is dishonoured , and your Country , which is endangered , and to these poor Creatures that are destroying their poor Souls , and your own Souls , which you will preserve from infection by this means , lay sadly to heart , and grieve affectionately , for the sad , dark , doleful , damnable condition , so many thousands in this Land are in . Should you come into Houses full of dead Men , that had slain themselves , would not your Eyes affect your Hearts , could you forbear tears ? You can scarce come into any House where some are not spiritually dead , and destroying their own Souls , which is a thousand times worse . 

2.  Pray for them , brethren , my Heart's desire and prayer for Israel is , that they may be saved . OH that I shmael might live before thee . If any Man see his Brother sin a sin , which is not unto Death , he shall ask , and he shall give him life . God shall pardon him , and by that means free him from everlasting Death . Father , forgive them , for they know not what they do . Lord lay not this sin to their charge . There are none you know or meet with worse than these , for whom Stephen thus prayed , they were stiff necked ; so hard , that they were not to be made pliable , uncircumcised in Heart , and Ears , as profane inwardly , and wicked as the Heathen themselves , though they outwardly in their Bodies carried the Seal of God's Covenant : They always resisted the Holy Ghost by whom God's truth was not only propounded , but the truth of it likewise so powerfully demonstrated , that they could not contradict it , but only by obstinate malice . They gnashed upon that Holy-man , with their Teeth , from madness and malice , which they bear to the Evangelical Doctrine , which he preached , and they stoned him with Stones to Death . Pray also that God would work a change in their minds and manners , draw them by a merciful Violence out of Satan into Christ . 

3.  To your mourning and prayers add utmost endeavours , using every one according as his Nature and Condition shall require . Of some have compassion , making a difference , and others save with fear , pulling them out of the Fire . The simple , weak , and seduced deal gently with . Those that are hardened , and perverse , and corrupters of others , be as much as in you lieth Instruments of their Salvation , by more severity . Save them with fear , namely by a lively denunciation of God's Judgements darted into your Consciences , pulling them out of the Fire ; that is , doing what you can to draw them from Perdition , without any vain respects or considerations , as Men draw things out of the Fire in any fashion , or what way they can . First , 

Them that you find grossly ignorant , instruct in Fundamental Truths , without the distinct knowledge whereof , no Man can have any entrance into this House . Especially you that have Children , and Servants , take pains in Catechising them , till they be as able and ready to render a reason of their Faith , as to answer to their Names . These words which I command thee this Day , shall be in thy heart , and thou shalt teach them diligently to thy Children , and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thy House , and when thou walkest by the way , and when thou liest down , and when thou risest up : and ye Fathers bring up your Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord  

But you must not neglect to instruct strangers , also even Beggars that come to your Doors , they have precious immortal Souls , which you should be as willing to relieve , as your Bodies . You that are godly Women , as well as Men , must perform this duty . We find Women not only teaching their Husbands ▪ Manoah's Wife said unto her husband , concluding the Death of himself and her . If the Lord were pleased to kill us , he would not have received a burnt-offering , and a meat-offering at our hands , neither would he have showed us all these things , nor would at this time have told us such things as these : and their Children and Servants . What my Son , and what , the Son of my Womb ! and what , the Son of my vow ! give not thy strength unto Women , nor thy ways unto that which destroyeth Kings — She openeth her Mouth in wisdom among her Maidens , and in her Tongue is the Law of Kindness , sweet and gracious speeches sounding to edification in knowledge and holiness , but expounding the way of God to others also . Aquila and Priscilla took Apollo's to them , and expounded to him the way of God more perfectly . Seeing godly Women may and should be private patterns , and may have a gift of expounding Scripture , and much more private Men , and use that gift in the presence of Ministers , for the edification of others , yea of Ministers themselves . 

2.  Those you find led away with the Error of the wicked , holding any points in Religion , contrary to sound Doctrine , denying directly , or by consequence any Fundamental Verity . Such was that of Hymoeneus and Philetus , and that false Doctrine which the Galatians held , namely that to be justified before God , it was necessary together with faith in Christ strictly to observe the Mosaical Ceremonies , as a part of Man's righteousness and holiness , appointed by the Law : and that of the Nicolaitans , who permitted the community of Women , held it a thing indifferent to commit Adultery , and eating Meats sacrificed to Idols ; and Popish , and Pelagian Errors : when ever you have occasion to converse with any such as these , or that hold any point not consonant to Scripture , though having lesle filth and danger , do your endeavour to recover them , by soft words and hard Arguments . So you are taught by the Apostle James' Practice , who calls a damnable blasphemy by the gentle name of error , and useth a loving compellation , ( Do not err my beloved brethren ) But observe what powerful Arguments he useth both before and after his dehortation : and by the Apostle Paul's precept ; In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves , if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth , that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil . Two things especially should move you to endeavour to convert souls from error , especially if Fundamental . The one from the nature of such an error , it is like a Canker or Gangreen , a Malady so contagious that it presently spreads itself into the next Members , and so by degrees destroys the whole Body ; being once admitted into the soul , it will glide into it , to the total extinguishing of the spiritual life thereof : And having possessed it self in one of the Members of the Church , will spread over all the Body of it , if it be not withstood in time . Another is the great reward promised to this endeavour , if it prove successful ; if not the will , as it is accepted , so it shall be equally rewarded . 

3.  Such as are profane persons , the show of whose Countenance doth witness against them , and declare their sin , as Sodom , and hide it not ; that draw iniquity with Cords of Vanity , and sin as it were with a Cart-rope , and that live in the neglect and contempt of divine Ordinances , and religious exercises , public , domestic , or secret , professing by their practice , that they are the Children of Belial , and rank Atheists . If you find that any of these have not as yet commenced Dogs and Swine , but are as yet Undergraduates , and in the Devil's Academy , and that you shall not provoke them to Blasphemy , nor aggravate their rage against you thereby , allure them to go with you into Divine ▪ Herbert's Church Porch , and then sprinkle them with his Holy Water-stick . 

Beware of Lust , it doth pollute and fowl . 
Whom God in Baptism washed with his own blood . 
Drink not the third Glass , which thou canst not tame , 
When once it is within thee . 
Take not his name , who made thy mouth , in vain , 
It gets thee nothing , and hath no excuse . 
Lie not , but let thy heart be true to God , 
Thy Mouth to it , thy actions to them both . 
Fly idleness , which yet thou canst not fly ▪ 
By dressing , Mistrissing and Compliment . 
Look at thy Mouth , Diseases enter there . 
'Slight those who say among thy sickly health , 
thou livest by rule , — 
Be thrifty , but not covetous , — 
Play not for gain , but sport : — — 
Be sweet to all , — 
Catch not at Quarrels . — 
Laugh not too much — Pick out of mirth , 
Profaneness , filthiness , abusiveness . 
Be useful where thou livest — 
Restore to God his due , in tith and time . 
Resort to Sermons — 
Sum up at Night what thou hast done by Day , 
And in the Morning what thou hast to do . 


Take heed , lest through fear , or too much respect towards any , whom you hear speaking , or see acting profanely , you become by your connivance or silence , guilty of want of Zeal towards God's glory , and of Charity towards your Neighbour's Souls and Salvation . thou shalt not hate thy Brother in thy heart , thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy Neighbour , and not suffer sin upon him . Not , but regard must be had to Person , time , and place , and the manner of reproving , which sometimes may be by discountenancing , as well as by discourse , and always , so that the party reproved , may see it proceeds from love . 

4.  Them that are civil , have a care to keep their good word , deal justly with all that are meek merciful , ready to help such as stand in need of them ; when you meet and converse with such , commend these and all other good things in them , as being such as God love's , and will reward : but labour to convince them , that all their Moral parts and actions , till they be members of Christ , will yield them no true comfort , by being in him they are brought to dwell in God. This you may easily prove unto them by the example of sundry persons , who though endowed with many civil Virtues , yet are branded by the Holy Ghost , for most unhappy Men. Esau was a dutiful Child to his Father , careful to please him , fearful to offend him , of a bountiful disposition , and free from covetousness . Ahab a kindhearted Man , pitiful towards an insolent inveterate Enemy . The Pharisee that went up into the Temple to pray , could thank God that he was not as other Men were , Extortioners , Unjust , Adulterers , that he paid his Tithes duly . And what Man in the World could live a more unblameable life , than that young Ruler did ? And so Paul before his Conversion . If any Man think he hath whereof , he might trust in the Flesh . I more touching the righteousness which is in the Law blameless . Yet without Faith in Christ , and a real change wrought in the heart , all this , and much more is nothing : he being the Fountain of all true goodness . The civil Devil carries Men to Hell , as well as the profane Devil , though somewhat more about . 

5.  Those whom you discern to be Hypocrites , by living and allowing themselves in some one known sin of Omission or Commission : ( Thus Jehu discovered himself to be an Hypocrite . He took no heed to walk in the way of the Lord God of Israel , with all his heart , for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam , which made Israel to sin . ) When you have occasion to confer with these , acknowledge the good that is in them , much more than in Moral Men , as having a prime respect to the first Table , affecting the Ministry of the Word , giving themselves to Prayer and Fasting , abstaining from petty , as well as bloody Oaths , strictly observing the Lord's Day , loving the pure worship of God , and hating will-worship ; commend them for these things , but labour to fright and Fire them out of their Hypocrisy , by pressing that of St. James upon them . Whosoever shall keep the whole Law , and yet offend in one point , he is guilty of all , that breaketh one Commandment . Habitual sincere obedience is Universal , extending to the compass of the whole Law evangelically . And as one Leak in a Ship let alone will sink it as well as many , and one Mortal Wound destroy the Body . So any one sin wilfully continued in , will drown and destroy the Soul : and finally how more intolerable their torment shall be in Hell , than any other sinners . 

6.  In like manner deal with them , who are haters and Persecutors of the People of God , pretending that it is for their Hypocrisy , that they cannot away with them , persuade them that their pretence is false ; for if they hated them as : Hypocrites , they would hate them as sinners , and so they would hate all sinners , and the greatest sinners most : as he that hate's a Toad , because of his poison , the greater the Toad is , the more he would hate it . But these Men know themselves , and are known to love well enough Drunkards , Whoremasters , Swearers , and practical Atheists ; and therefore the true reason why they hate strict Professors , is for their godliness , which condemns their irreligious and loose living : ( as Noah by building the Ark , condemned the World ) So Cain slew his Brother because his own works were evil , and his Brothers righteous . Saul , Saul , why persecutest thou me ? His Conversion presently followed his Conviction . They that dwell in God , dwell in love . Your love to poor Souls , that are out of God , expressed thus , by making essays to draw them unto God , will both evidence to yourselves and others that he is your habitation . Make this therefore your work every day , do as Lot did by the two Angels . Turn in I pray you into your Servant's House , no , but we will abide in the Street , and he pressed them greatly , and they turned in unto him , and they entered into his house . What know you , but you may prevail , as he did ? and if so , you will make Men Angels ; for this is their highest happiness . Always to behold the Face of God. Let love constrain you , not only that which I have now pressed ; you owe love to every Man , are bound to love them as yourselves , and to seek their welfare as your own : and there is no love in any Man to his Neighbour , that loveth not his Soul. But the love of Christ should more constrain you to put the whole strain of your strength to this work . God having declared his desire to have his House filled , and his Son's Kingdom enlarged ; and there being joy in Heaven at the Conversion of every sinner : Yea , love to yourselves should force this . It being the best means to increase your graces and comforts : the more you draw to knowledge , and faith , and holiness , the more will these grace's increase in you , and the comfort of them . As a Man casting forth of his Seed , brings it him back again with great increase . Nor will any work you can do have the like recompense ( which was hinted before ) They that turn many to righteousness , shall shine as the Stars , for ever and ever . Nor can you be ignorant , that this is the end , why God hath bestowed his graces upon you , whereby you were made meet to be partakers of this Inheritance , not that you should keep them to yourselves , but that you should benefit others by them . The manifestation of the Spirit , ( that is , those gifts of grace , whereby it is manifested , that they dwell in God ) is given to every Man to profit withal . 

Finally , The Lord hath strictly commanded , that no Man should content himself to know and believe aright himself , to repent of his own profaneness , and to be religious and righteous , but that he should seek also to cause others to be , and do so , that they may be as well housed as he , as happy as himself . 'Cause others to return that you and they may live together under the same Roof : and the more the merrier , and better cheer to . 

Obj. There is no hope of doing good upon many , that we meet with , scarce upon any . 

Answ . If with all your pains taken all the Days of your Life , you can win but one Soul , it 's as much as the gaining of the whole World. Yea , one Soul is more worth than the whole World.  

2.  Despair of none , how wicked so ever : as bad as bad can be , have been reduced and brought in , Manasseh for example , and three thousand at once . 

3.  If assaying three , or four , or five , or six times prevail not , the 7th . may : Go up now , look towards the Sea. Master , there is nothing , go again seven times , and it came to pass at the seventh time , that he said , behold , there ariseth a little Cloud out of the Sea , like a Man's hand . 

4.  Suppose when you have done all you can all your life long , no good be done , yet you may take that Comfort your Master did . Though Israel be not gathered , yet shall I be glorious in the Eyes of the Lord And in the Verse before , I have laboured in vain , I have spent my strength in naught , in vain . Yet surely my Judgement is with the Lord , and my work with my God. God knoweth with what uprightness I have done his work , and therefore I know he will Crown me with Glory , though my labour hath been lost , as to the most part of the People . 

THE SIXTH SERMON . The next sort of persons , in reference to whom Duty lies upon you , are Christian Societies . Assemblies that profess the Christian Religion , and join together in the worship of the true God. These are called Churches , and of these there are two sorts , false and true , and your duty is to separate from those , and hold fellowship with these . Three things are required to the constituting of true Churches . 

1.  That the Word of God , and Doctrine of Salvation be truly taught in them , ye are of the household of God , and are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets : upon this Rock ( this truth confessed by thee ) I will build my Church , the Church is God's Register , that keeps his Records faithfully , the Pillar and ground of Truth , where the Doctrine of the Law and Gospel is truly taught , God dwells with that People , and Salvation may be there had . 

2.  That there be Pastors and Ministers lawfully called , How shall they preach except they be sent ? pray the Lord of the Harvest , that he will send forth Labourers into his Harvest , Christ hath given his Ministry to his own Church . 

3.  That the People receive and embrace the Doctrine and Religion of Christ , and submit to , and join together in the Worship of God. then they that gladly received the Word were Baptised , and they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship , in breaking of Bread and Prayers . 

Hereby may be discerned , which are false Churches , and which true : The Roman Political Church , as the Constitution of it is false , and of Man's Invention . 

Obj. They have the Apostles Creed , the Books of Canonical Scripture and Baptism . 

Answ . They acknowledge the Creed in profession and word , but overthrow much of the sense , by their superadded Articles , and false expositions . They retain the words of Scripture , though in much , not the sense of the Holy Ghost : nor can Baptism , though for substance , according to the first Institution , prove them a true Church , more than Circumcision could Samaria to be so , or a Seal pulled from the Writing , and set to the bare paper . A Thief may show a true Man's Purse , but that proves him not to be a true Man : and they overthrew inward Baptism , the life of that Sacrament , imputed righteousness and holiness , which in God's Church must go together with the outward Element . 

2dly . As Papists , they have no true Ministers : the Romish Priest , as such , is no Minister of Christ , not only because of the Antichristian Doctrines , which he teacheth , overthrowing the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles , but also in that he offereth Christ a real Sacrifice for quick and dead , wherein chiefly stands his Office ; and because as a Papist-priest he receives his very Power from the Pope , whose Office is not of Christ . 

Qu. Why then should not one Baptised by a Mass Priest , be Rebaptised ? 

Answ . Because the action of a lawful Calling , done by one that is not lawfully called , is not a nullity ; the Ministry is lawful , though as corrupted by them is bad . 

3dly . Their People oppose God's true Worship , and live in palpable Idolatry , and profess themselves the Members of a usurping traitorous head the Pope . 

Obj. Antichrist sitteth in the Temple of God , therefore the Church of Rome is God's Church . 

Answ . In the Popish Church , there is the hidden Church of God mingled , as a little Wheat with much Chaff , as a little Gold with much Dross . So that though the Church of God be where Antichrist sitteth , yet the Church whereof he is Head , is no Church of God ; for there are no means there to beget , or preserve spiritual life , whether we regard Doctrine or Worship . 

To speak plainly , it is a part of the Universal Visible Church of Christians , so far as they profess Christianity , & acknowledge Christ their Head ; but it is the Visible Society of Traitorous Usurpers , so far as they profess the Pope to be their Head : just as if a Traitor should make himself Deputy of Ireland against the King's will , and all the People believe he is so ; and so profess themselves Subjects to the King as their Sovereign , and to him as his Deputy : Here it is a true Kingdom , as it is still under the King , and yet a Kingdom of Traitors , or Rebels , Secundum quid , or so far as they adhere to the Usurping Deputy , against the King's command . From this Church therefore , which is spiritual Babylon , the Mother of Harlots and abominations of the Earth , no Spouse of Christ , but a Strumpet , no House of God , but an Habitation of Devils , once indeed a famous Church , but now dead and buried ( and as is the Mother , so is the Daughters ) God's People are bound to separate . Come out of her my people , and yet not from such therein who mean well in the general , and secretly descent from her damnable Corruptions , is this Obligation of Separation upon you . Rom. 18. 4.  Much lesle ought you to separate from Churches which have made separation from Rome , as the reform Protestant Churches in France , Germany , and other Countries , and these of Great Britain , and Ireland have done ; in whose Congregations is found truth of Doctrine , a lawful Ministry , and a People professing the true Religion , submitting to , and joining together in the true Worship of God.  

I am not ignorant that many of you , whose Habitation I question not but the Lord is , who have your Habitations in all the several Countries of this Kingdom , have drunkin a deep prejudice against all the Parochical Congregations , whereof you are legal Members , and where all you were baptised , and thereby were made the Members of Christ , the Children of God , and Heirs of his Kingdom . I fear some of you will startle at these expressions , found in the Common-prayer-book . But if ▪ you consult the Holy Scripture , you will find them warranted in a Sacramental sense ; and your prejudice hath so far wrought upon you , that you have forsaken the assembling of yourselves together with your Neighbours in the public Meeting Places . 

I know with whom I am dealing , persons that have a comfortable assurance that they dwell in God , and therefore are willing to hear any thing that may tend to the increase of their comfort , and unwilling to retain any error in their judgements or practice , that may defile and dishonour their dwelling place , or cause it to be evil spoken of by them that are without ; whose mouths you know your absenting yourselves from all the Solemn Assemblies , open wide to cast a scandal upon your persons , as profane , and upon that strict profession of walking precisely , according to the Rule of the written Word , which they think gives you no Warrant for your separation from their Society in the service of God : and my humble and earnest request to you is to lay aside your prejudice , and examine by that good Word , whether your separation be not sinful . 

I shall presume you will freely grant both , that it 's necessary to Salvation , that a Man be a member of the true Visible Church , because in the Word you find the profession of the true Religion ; yea , the very hope of Salvation , and joining to the true Church , going together : and that so long as God continueth the Doctrine of Salvation to a People , and his Solemn Worship ; so long he dwells among that People , and Salvation may be had there , and that no utter separation may be made from those Assemblies , where God dwelleth , and where Men may be assured to find Salvation , though there may be many great corruptions both in Doctrine and Worship , in those Assemblies . There were so in the Church of the Jews in Christ's time , the Priests and Teachers were ignorant and wicked , and had a corrupt and unlawful entrance into their Calling ; and the People were like to the Priest generally , notoriously and obstinately ungodly ; and the Worship used in that Church was woefully corrupt , many superstitious Ceremonies , the Observation whereof were more strictly urged , than the Commandments and Ordinances of God ; the Temples made a Den of Thiefs , the Discipline and censures shamefully abused , the Doctrine was corrupt in many points , and the great Sacrament of the Passover ill timed : yet the Word tells you , Christ ( whose example it binds you to follow ) and you profess yourselves followers of him in all imitable things ) made no separation from this Church , professed himself a Member of it , was by Circumcision incorporated a Member of it , received Baptism in a Congregation of that People , was a hearer of their common-service , and their Teachers , allowing and commanding his Disciples to hear them , communicated in the Pass-over with the People and the Priest ; no more did his Apostles make separation from this Church , after his Ascension , till their Day had its period . Peter and John went to their public Prayer in their Temple . So Paul and Barnabas in their Synagogue . By their example it appears , that till God hath forsaken the Church , no Man may forsake it ; and that it is no sufficient warrant to separate from a Church , because it is guilty of such sins and corruptions , as deserves God should forsake it , and for which he hath threatened in his Word , that he will forsake it : till it appear that God hath put in Execution that which he justly threatened , we ought to acknowledge and receive it , as his House , and not to refuse to dwell with him in it . For shall Man be holier than God , and hate corruption more than he ? And yet we may not communicate with it , by consenting to any corruptions that are , or shall be detected , or proved to be in it , wherein we have our Saviour's example to guide us . All this I take for granted , that you will surely grant , because many Books largely asserting all this , have been many Years in the hands of those , who have led away many to separation , a syllable whereof they have not gain - said : and they are in yours ; nor have I heard a word of your dissenting . But this I hear you say , that you question the constitution of the Church of England , and that you cannot join with their Congregations in Divine Worship , because they stand under an Antichristian Government , and the worship in them is a devised worship . Touching the constitution of the Church of England , I have no more but this to commend to your consideration ; namely the answer , that was long since given to the Brownists , to which I never saw reply given . Their Objection was this , that the People of England were never rightly called ; for in the beginning of the Queen's Reign , they were by her command , and Proclamation , compelled to embrace the Protestant Religion , and to conform to God's worship : whereas in the New Testament , we have no Example of People compelled to the Service of God , christ commanding Fishermen to convert souls by preaching , not Princes to make Disciples by compulsion : Therefore the church of Christ had no right constitution . The Answer , to the separation of old , is this , that if we speak of a Church first planted , the people of such a Nation are first called by the word , before they come to be a Church ; but it is not so of a Country , where for a long time , true Religion hath been professed , which is our case . And as to that part of the Object , that there is no such example in the New Testament . 

1.  The Magistrates were then Enemies to the Christian Religion . 

2.  It sufficeth that we have examples in the Old Testament . 2 Kings 23. 21. 2  Chr. 15. 13.  & 33. 16.  & 34. 33.  Nor have Christian Princes lesle power in their Dominion , to abolish Idolatry , and by Law , and penalties , to compel their Subjects , where there is a parity of reason . 

3.  We find that private Governors , in the New-testament , have required , and brought in their Families , to embrace , and profess the Christian Faith. Joh. 4. 53.  Acts 10. 21.  & 16. 34.  & 18. 8. 1  Cor. 1. 16.  But that these did any more than teach , and command them to learn , consent , and profess , some question , if they did so much . And so much they did , may , and aught to do , Gen. 8. 9  And whether a Christian Magistrate may do more . For though it 's out of all doubt , that not only all external duties of the Second Table , but also all such of the First Table of the Moral Law , are directly and properly of political cognizance ; yet they doubt much , whether any Evangelical Ceremonies , or Forms of Worship , which relate to Christ be so ; because they are supernatural , and Conscience is the only Rule , whereby the Merit of those Duties is to be Judged , which must be satisfied before any Papal Injunction can be imposed , or obedience can be safely yielded : and therefore they would have the ranged not among the essential , but among the contingentials of Political Government . But they earnestly deny that any internal duties and matters of Faith , and Evangelical Doctrine fall within the spheer of that cognizance , either directly or indirectly ; because no human power extends to acts of the Soul , and it is the duty of the Minister , and not of the Magistrate , to reform even in such matters : and yet the Magistrate may , and aught to exercise his power , for restraining and punishing the fruits and effects of such Errors , when the peace of the Commonwealth comes to be disturbed thereby ; but he has no warrant to punish the misbelief , or incredulity concerning Articles of Chirstian Faith , no nor Idolatrous Forms of Worship , unless they proceed from the error or obliquity of their Subjects wills , the reformation whereof is the absolute and adequate end of all punishments , and of the exercise of all Political Power : but punishments were never ordained for the information of the understanding . To return to satisfy the Objection , It is not necessarily nor generally true of all Members of the Visible Church , that they be called by the word : if this be granted which cannot be denied , that as among the Jews Men were incorporated into the Church by Circumcision ; so they are under the Gospel by Baptism , Col. 2. 11 , 12. and that as in those times , many for by-ends , and through fear joined themselves to the Church , Est . 8. 17. so it may be , and hath been under the Gospel . 

Obj. But the greatest part of our people are ignorant , and unsanctified ; yea , profane persons . 

Answ . Ignorant and profane persons have always been in the Church : It was so in the Church's Infancy , and so in her perpetual growth , and so shall be to the end of the World , at least till Christ come the second time ; but these are not of the Church , which hath its denomination of the better part . 

Obj. But open and profane persons are not cast out . 

Answ . The Law takes Order they shall be . The fault is in the Governors . We are not no Church , or a false one , because such are suffered . 1 Cor. 5.  rev. 2.  

Obj. But we want the Form of a true Church . Viz. a Covenant . 

Answ . It appears not in the Apostles times , any thing more was required to make Church-members of the Church-universal , than assenting to Evangelical truths , embracing and professing Christian Religion , and receiving Baptism ; wherein all in our Church enter into a Solemn Covenant , and confirm it when they come to years of understanding . And moreover to settle them in particular Church-order , the Apostle made Bishops or Elders over them in every Church , Acts 14. 23. and required the People to obey them , hear and honour them . 1 These . 5. 12 , 13.  Heb. 13. 7. 17. 24. 1  Tim. 5. 17.  And those that consented to this , and did so , were Members of that particular Church : so that we confess , as a Man cannot be a Member of the Universal Church , ( if at age ) without his own consent ; so neither can he be of a particular Church : ( however he may be antecedently obliged to consent . ) But that this consent was wont to be signified by any express Covenant , between the Pastors , and the Flocks , no Scripture mentioneth . It is consent signified only which God requireth : But whether this consent be signified , 1.  By the People's Election of the Pastors . 2.  Or by a Covenant . 3.  Or by lifting up the hands , or any such sign . 4.  Or only by constant attendance with the Church on all God's Ordinances there , God hath no where determined ; save only as circumstances may make one of these more fit than another , and so oblige us to it in prudence . And he which maketh Duties , which God hath not made , is a maker of superstition , and a false Teacher , or Speaker of God and his Laws , and addeth to them . 

As to that , you say you cannot join with our Congregations , because they stand under a Devilish Anti-christian Government , and the Worship in them ( by a number of Common-prayers ) is a devised Worship . All that I desire of you is only this , that laying aside passion , you will but pause and ponder what is alleged to give satisfaction to this Objection ; which may cool at least the fierceness of your Spirits , and abate that desperate prejudice you have conceived against the Government and Worship established in these Churches . Touching the exercise of Ecclesiastical Government in general , you know it is not of absolute necessity to the Constitution of a Church ; and as to the Government of the Churches by Bishops ( speaking of it only as they are Superior to Presbyters , without meddling with the extent of their Dioceses , etc. ) when you find so much written with so much confidence , that Episcopacy is the true ancient Apostolical Government of the Christian Church : That it was received in profession and practice in all Ages , and is so far Divine , that Bishops were in the very time of the Apostles , that they were ordained and appointed by the Apostles themselves : That there was an approved succession of them in the Apostolical Churches : That in all the following Ages , all the Churches in the World were governed by them , for more than Fifteen Hundred Years , without any opposition , save by the Arrian Aerius , who was therefore cried down as an Heretic by the ancient Fathers . That the first reform Protestant Churches cast not off Episcopacy with any averseness to the Order , as appears by the History of the Augustane confession , to which Calvin himself signed : That some of those Churches are governed by Superintendents , the same with Bishops . That there was long since a challenge made to them , that have averseness to the degree or order , in these words . We require you to find out , but one Church upon the Face of the Earth , that hath not been ordered by Episcopal Regiment : which to this Day ( as they say ) is not answered . These allegations may ( methinks ) so far allay your heat , as to restrain your thoughts and Tongues from passing so sore a censure upon the Government , that it is Devilish and Antichristian , till you can solidly absolve all these Arguments ; though notwithstanding all that hath been said , you are persuaded that another Church Government may be better . And that there is no cause why you should refuse communion with these Churches upon this account , because Bishops are chief Rulers there . Touching the devised Worship objected , do but ruminate upon what you have frequently heard and read , and you will see little reason to condemn stinted Prayers , because invented and devised by Men. For how many inventions of Men are there of the same nature in God's worship , which you approve of : namely , setformes of Catechising , studied Sermons , Interpretations of Scripture , division of it into Chapters and Verses , Contents of Chapters , Marginal references , putting Psalms into Meeter , with a multitude more . True it is , invented or devised worship is unlawful , yet it is lawful to serve God in a Form of words devised : For the Form is not worship , but the Prayer tendered in that Form. And therefore they do not well , that say , a stinted Form of Prayer is a means of Divine Worship , not ordained of God , and that there is no warrant for it in the Word of God. For God's Word warrants things , not only by special Institution ( as all substantial means of Worship : and by necessary consequence , so the Translation of the Scripture is warranted , because it must be read to edification , and edify it cannot , unless it be understood ) but also by the Light of Nature and Reason , according to the general Rules of Scripture . And thus accidental means of God's Worship , which are only circumstances of the Celebration , as time , places , order , method , phrase , and sorme of words in the administration of holy things of God ; yea , Pulpit to preach in , and Bells to call People together are warranted . If all such means of worship must be ordered by special Institution , or they shall be unlawful , God must ( upon the matter ) have no Worship at all from us in the means , which he himself hath ordained , because it is impossible to use these means , and not to do many things which he hath not instituted . To return to Prayer , that a true Prayer may be made to God in a Set form , cannot be denied , because things agreeable to God's will may be disposed therein , as in the Lord's Prayer ; and it 's possible for the heart and affections to go along with it , and faith , and other graces to be exercised in it . But you question whether Ministers may read in the Congregation prescribed Forms of Prayer imposed ? Admit it were unlawful for them to do it , yet it is warrantable for you to be present at such Prayers ; because all Prayers wherein you join are stinted to you , and you are tied to the form of words uttered by him that prays : nor is a holy good prayer made evil to him that hears it , for the possibility aforesaid . 

Obj. But the Prayers in the English Liturgy are Forms , neither holy , nor good ; for the Book itself is an Idolatrous Book , the Mass in English . 

Answ . This is as true , that light is darkness ; and white , black : Consider what is the matter of the Popish Mass prayers in an unknown Tongue , to Saints departed , and to feigned Saints ; receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in one kind , an unbloody sacrifice offered up for quick and dead , the real Presence , satisfaction for Venial sins , temporal penance for mortal sins , blotting out the Second Commandment , or confounding it with the First , etc.  Blackness and Darkness : and what is the matter of our English Liturgy , reading the Holy Scriptures in a known Tongue ; the calling upon God in the mediation of Christ , and not upon Angels and Saints , for the living , and not for the dead ; the administration of the Holy Supper in both kinds , singing of David's Psalms , etc. all White and Light.  

Obj. But sundry of the Prayers are found word for word in the Mass-book . 

Ans . So may a true Man's goods be found in a Thiefs Den ; and the goods of the Church may be in the possession of Antichrist an Usurper , which goods she may lawfully require , and take back again , not as borrowed from him , but as due to herself , being the rich Legacies which Christ bequeathed to his Church , which Anti-christ had seized upon : the Good therefore in the Mass - Book belonged not to Anti-christ , but the foul gross Errors which are purged out of ours . 

Obj. But there are foul errors and gross corruptions in our Liturgy , which are not purged out . 

Ans . Admit there be , or were , yet there are no Fundamental Errors , nor any that bordereth thereupon objected . The corruptions objected , are misapplications of Scriptures , frequent repetition of the same things , disordered Prayers and Responsories , breaking Petitions asunder , etc.  no errors that concern the main grounds or chief heads of Christianity ; but faults that may be tolerated , and for which a Christian hath no cause to separate : Suppose a Teacher misalledge a Text of Scripture , or that something be amiss in his Prayer , when he exerciseth his own gifts ; is this a ground sufficient to separate from the Ordinance of God , or reject the good for that which is amiss ? Nor is there any doctrinal passage in any of the Prayers , that may not bear a good construction , and so Amen may be said to it . Charity binds us to take every thing in the best sense : nor can you think it pleasing to God , for some evil that may be fastened upon some passages , to withdraw communion , especially when communion may be had without approving of any of the errors or corruptions ; though we do not for their sakes with draw from the communion of the Churches , while they are exercised . 

Obj. But most of the Ministers that officiate in these Congregations , are either blind or superstitious , or profane , or idle , or Drunkards , or Whoremasters ; and they that are not of this last Tribe , are most of them Apostates from their Principles , and therefore we cannot bring our hearts to hear any of them pray , read , or preach . 

Answ . You may find as bad as any of these in the Church of Israel , and as many for the space of Ground , before our Saviour's time , and in his Days , and in the Apostolical Churches ; and yet you do not find any of the People to have forsaken the public Ordinances of God. How far the charge is true or false , I shall not now meddle ; In some Country's , I am sure that there are many sober godly Orthodox able Preachers , yet in possession of the public places . And if you know any Country where it is worse , consider if Christ himself did not join with worse . 

OH that I could persuade with you , to lay sadly to heart the greatness of the sin of Divisions , and the grievousness of the punishment threatened against it , and that hath been executed for it ; and that the Leaders and Encouragers of private Christians to make this sinful separation , would read oft , and meditate much upon St. Judes' Epistle , to v. 20.  And that the multitudes that are willing to be led by them would follow the prescription of the means here to preserve or recover themselves from this seduction . v. 20 , 21.  And that both would leave off their reviling the Government Ecclesiastical , and the Ministers that conform , and peaceably , and submissively behave themselves , by the example of Michael , who though an Archangel , and contending in a just cause , and disputing in an Argument , wherein he was very knowing , did not , durst not bring a railing accusation , though his adversary was the Devil ; But committed the cause to God , saying , The Lord rebuke Thee . Though Quakers , who pretend to follow no other Rule save the Light within them , use ordinarily such railing and reviling Language ; yet let no such word ever be heard to Proceed out of your Mouths , who profess to follow and walk exactly , according to the written Word of God.  

The last sort of persons , are those of your own House , Fellow-members of the same Family , and your Fellow-commoners : your duty in reference to these is manifold . I shall earnestly commend this one ; namely , to live in Unity with them : to move you effectually hereunto , behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell in unity together . It is like the precious Ointment upon the Head that ran down upon the Beard , even Aaron's Beard , that went down to the Skirts of his Garments ; as the Dew of Hermon , and as the Dew that descended upon the Mountain of Zion . For the Lord commanded the blessing for evermore . Psal . 133. a Song of Degrees purposely penned for the knitting together the Hearts of God's People in the blessed band of Unity , Emphatically propounding both the profit and pleasure redounding therefrom . Behold ( a matter worth the marking ) how good in regard of profit ) and how pleasant in regard of delight ) it is for brethren both by nature and grace to dwell together in Unity , both of judgement and affection . Next , he expounds , and so proves the pleasure , and the profit of this twofold Unity . First , by parable and similitude , which is double , to show the pleasure he compares it to , that odoriferous anointing Oil , which God commanded to be made and compounded after the Art of the Apothecary , which when it was poured upon Aaron's head , ran down upon his Beard , and thence went to his Skirts : So this sweet communion of spiritual grace , cunningly composed of united minds and affections , passeth down from Christ our Head , not only upon the stronger Professors , which are as great an Ornament to the Church , as a Beard is on the Face of a Man , but also to the meanest and weakest Christian Members . To set forth the pleasure of it , he compares it to Dew , which is a special blessing sent upon the Earth , for the refreshing thereof , which falls freely ( and therefore is said to be begotten of God ) and finely distilled down in so small drops , that it cannot be perceived till it be laid , and fully ( it falls into lowest Valleys , as well as highest Hills ) and fitly ( in Spring for growth in Harvest for ripening ) and fruitfully ( making the Ground bring forth abundantly ) So it is in all these respects with spiritual graces , especially with this . And then he proves it by plain , strong , and binding demonstration : where this Unity is , God commands the blessing , and life for evermore ; that is , promises and fully performs it in this life , spiritually , and corporally , and hereafter Eternally . 

I hinted this Unity to be twofold , and will speak a little to both . First , of mind and judgement , it is a thing greatly to be wished and sought after , that all God's Children and Servants dwelling together , in the same House , might be of one mind , and judgement in all points . The Apostle oft earnestly presseth this , frequently striketh upon this String . Now I beseech you brethren , by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ , that ye all speak the same thing , and that there be no Divisions among you ; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind , and in the same judgement : be of one mind for matter of Opinion . If there be therefore any consolation in Christ , if any comfort and love , if any fellowship of the Spirit , if any bowels of mercy , fulfil ye my joy , that ye may be likeminded , being of one accord , and of one mind . A most passionate obtestation , importing a most vehement desire of their good agreement : whereunto he conjures them by all the bonds of love , between him and them . Persuasion itself could not speak more perswasively . Here are so many words , so many Weapons able to pierce , and work upon any heart that had not an Iron sinew . How many Arguments doth he take from one , to enforce his Exhortation with all possible carefulness , To keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace ? One Body , one Spirit , one Hope , one Lord , one Faith , one Baptism , one God and Father of all . The Apostle well knew , the nearer they were agreed in Judgement , the faster their affections would be knit one to another : and beside the great advantage that all wicked Men take at the disagreement of God's People , should make them desirous to be all of one mind , and to compose all the differences that are between them . Let there be I pray thee no strife , between thee & me ; & between , etc. for we are brethren : not only upon this account , but because the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwell in the Land ; and because of our dissension , we shall give them occasion to speak evil of our holy Religion , and alienate their hearts more from it . How oft have you had this cast in your Dish by enemies , both to the form & power of godliness when you have persuaded them to embrace both ? agree first among yourselves . There is no such stumbling Block at this Day , in this Land , laid in the way of ungodly Men , through God's just Judgement indeed : and it is necessary there should be such offences ; but woe unto you , if you become occasions of such offences , if you repent not that you are so , and labour not to take away the stumbling Block out of your way by endeavouring to be all of one mind . 

But because perfect Unity is not to be expected , till the Church be come to her perfection . There must be Heresies among you , Sects , and Dissensions , concerning Tenets and Grounds of Doctrine , and ways of Worship : It is a thing unavoidable , by reason of the Devil's malice , Man's wickedness , and God's most wise counsel , and according to the frequent predictions of the Holy Ghost . 

God indeed hath promised to give his People , One Heart , and one Way . But the meaning is , that they shall all agree in all Fundamental points of Doctrine , and in all substantial ways of Worship , in which they should jointly and conformably serve him ; but in points of Religion and Circumstances of divine Worship , that are of inferior moment , there will be brethren different in Opinion and practice from you , towards whom you are bound to bear brotherly love , which is of a bearing and forbearing nature , and not suffer difference in judgement to work in you the least alienation of affection towards them . What a deal of pains does the Apostle take to work Christians , to a charitable Toleration each of other ? 

1.  Dissuading them from censuring one another , for , or in the use of things indifferent : the parties that dissented were weak and strong Christians ; the things wherein , were ▪ Meats and Days ; the strong thought all difference of Meats prohibited by the Law to be abolished by Christ , and therefore did not forbear to feed on any , and they conceived all Jewish Festivals to be abrogated by God , and so observed them not . The weak not seeing their own liberty in the case of Meats , choose rather to eat Herbs , than with a doubting Conscience to feed upon Meats forbidden , and conceiving the Festivals not to be abrogated , still observed them . In both these cases , the Apostle gives negative directions , and exhortations to both sorts of Christians . Viz. That in the case of Meats , the strong should not contemn the weak , as superstitious for abstaining ; Nor the weak censure the strong , as profane , for neglecting the observation of distinction of them ; And in the case of Days , that neither of them should do any thing with a gainsaying , or doubting Conscience : pressing these directions with sundry Arguments , and that by no means , the strong should give the least offence to their weak brethren , by abuse of their liberty . 

2.  And he persuades every one to study not to please himself , but his Neighbour , to edification for his good , by the example of Christ , who did not only not please himself , but sought the good of others : and so , saith he , must we , bearing one with another , receiving one another , as he received us to be partakers of his glory . It is the guise and property of too many of you that think you are assured you are the Lords , to question whether others be so , that dissent from you ; Yea , to pass sentence against some of them , as out of God , for no other reason , but because they are not of your mind and way , and to say of them , that its love of the World , or fear of trouble , or some other by-respect and base end , that keeps them from embracing these Gospel-truths which you hold , and whereof they have had sufficient conviction ; or if indeed they see them not to be such , that it is , because the God of this World hath blinded their Eyes . Nor lest of all can you bring your hearts to look upon , or love as brethren , these who have been of the same mind and way with you , and are apostatised from their principles and practices : Turn-coat-rogues . Have patience and ponder with yourselves , what rashness you discover in censuring any Man to be Godless , because he sees not those truths which you think you do , and they may clearly see to be revealed and commanded by God. Barnabas was a good Man , and full of the Holy Ghost and Faith : and yet he could not see that , that Paul saw . Viz. That it was lawful and fit for them to converse with the Gentiles , even in the presence of the Jews . God bestows his gifts on his Servants , in different measures and degrees . None that sees the truth in all things , but in some points he is ignorant and erreth : Setting aside the Prophets and Apostles , who were infallibly guided in penning the Scripture . Who almost of all the ancient Fathers , but held some gross Error ? Justin Martyr , besides that he was a millinery , held that it was the Angels that begat those Giants . Athenagoras , that the Souls of those Giants were Devils . Ireneus that man was not created perfect . Clemens Alexandrinus , that none were saved by Christ before his Incarnation . Tertullian , that God was corporeal , that Montanus was the Paraclete , that a Christian falling twice after Baptism was damned ▪ Origen understood much of the Scripture allegorically . Hierom that Angels were many Ages before the World : that there is no sin in Infants , or not deserving punishment . Ambrose , that the Gospel was preached to Devils . Chrysostom , that the Fathers were in Hell before Christ , that we are justified by works . Augustine's Book of retractations witnesseth his manifold Errors , for a long time . Luther the great Reformer held consubstantiation . Not only particular persons , but whole Counsels and Churches have erred . The reasons of this proneness in Men to err , are . 1.  Truth is but one , Error manifold ; there is but one right , many by-paths . 2.  The Seeds of all Errors are naturally in all men's hearts . 3.  Error hath usually on it the Vizard of truth . 4.  The understandings of the strongest Christians are so weak , that it is easy for them to mistake . 5.  Satan and his Instruments are full of subtlety , and cunning craftiness . 6.  God suffers Errors to spring up in his Church , to punish the wicked , and for trial of his own , and for clearing of truth . Contraries opposed mutually argue each other . 

This consideration should teach you not to be insolent in censuring , and not to be stiff in your own Opinions or persuasions . Others may be in the right , and you in the wrong : And if you be in the truth , Love them not ye lesle , that err from it in infirmity , but pity them more , and pray for them ; and though you know it to be passion or prejudice that hath blinded their judgements ( a greater infirmity than simple ignorance ) yet believe they may be godly Men for all that ; and if they be so , you are bound to love and reverence them , how much soever they differ in Judgement from you . 

And if Men that are as practically godly as yourselves , hold those to be truths , which you hold to be errors , seek not to draw them over to you , but let them quietly enjoy themselves ; take the blessed Apostles advice . I press toward the mark . Let us therefore as many as be thus perfect , be thus minded , and if any thing be otherwise minded , God shall reveal this unto you . Nevertheless whereto we have already attained . Let us walk by the same Rule . Let us mind the same thing ; So far as you freely can join with your dissenting brethren in Duties of Divine Worship . And let not them that are without have occasion to say you are of several Religions , or to call you by several Names any longer : But rather to wonder at your mutual love , and peaceable and quiet spirits , free from any appearance of raising contention either in Church or State ; They that do so , having the Brand of graceless Men set upon them by the Holy Ghost . Now I beseech you brethren , mark them that cause Divisions and Offences , contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned , and avoid them , for they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ , but their own Belly , and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple . Every Man that dwells in God , is of a peaceable disposition , quiet in the land As for them that you call Apostates , consider that their Apostasy is not from any fundamental point in Religion , or substantial worship of God. And that love of their callings , and the works thereof , and of their People's Souls , and Conscience of obeying the Magistrate in all things , not expressly forbidden in the Scripture , might move them to do what they have done , and charity binds you to make the best construction . 

Finally , In reference to those that are of your own mind and way . Let brotherly love continue . And abound yet more and more in knowledge , and in all judgement ; rejoicing and weeping together ; and laying out yourselves in a special manner , in a faithful employment of God's gifts , for the good one of another in things temporal . Gal. 6. 10.  Heb. 13. 16. 2  Cor. 8. 9  Psal . 112. 5. and in spirituals by example . Rom. 15. 1 , 2. 1  Cor. 10. 33. by admonition , 1 These . 5. 14.  Heb. 3. 13.  prov. 10. 21. by consolation , 2 Cor. 1. 4.  esay 54.  prov. 25. 25.  Rom. 1. 12. and by prayer , Eph. 6. 16.  Jam. 5. 15 , 16.  John 16. 24.  By thus doing , you shall improve that branch of the Communion of Saints , which you have among yourselves , and be the fitter to improve that which you have together with Christ by the Spirit , in respect both of substance and Offices , and Virtues . 

THE SEVENTH SERMON . There remaineth yet very much of Duty to be performed by , and to be pressed upon you , whose habitation the Lord is , and who know him to be so . And first upon the account of the properties of this House wherein you dwell . The first whereof is height . And the first duty upon this account , is to lift up your hearts and voices as high as may be in praises and prayers . 

1.  In praises , acknowledge yourselves bound to acknowledge . 1.  As all other excellencies and transcendent perfections of God ; So this , especially of sublimity , that he is most high . This did David , I will praise thee OH Lord with my whole heart — I will sing praise to thy Name , OH thou most high . I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness , and will sing praises to the most high . As he did himself , so he stirreth up all others to do so . OH clap your hands all People , shout unto God with the voice of Triumph ; for the Lord most high is terrible , he is a great King over the Earth . Let the Saints sing aloud upon their Beds . Let the high praises of God be in their Mouth . And this he tells us is a good thing at all times , especially on the Sabbath Days . It is a good thing to sing praises unto thy holy Name , OH most High. His Universal Regiment is to be acknowledged . This matter is by the Decree of the Watchers , and the demand , by the Word of the holy One , to the intent that the living may know , that the most High ruleth in the Kingdom of Men , and giveth it to whomsoever he will , and setteth up over it the basest of Men.  

2.  His wonderful humility and condescension . The Lord is high above all Nations , and his glory above the Heavens . Who is like the Lord our God , who is most High , who humbleth himself to behold the things that are done in the Heaven and in the Earth ? He doth not disdain , from his High Seat of Glory , to provide for all Creatures , both Terrestrial and Celestial . He hath a gracious and loving care of vile Worms , and grievous sinners ; yea , vouchsafes to make their hearts , if humbled , and contrite for their sins , his dwelling place : For thus saith the High and lofty One , that inhabiteth Eternity , whose Name is high and holy . I dwell in the high and holy Places , with him also , that is of an humble and contrite Spirit . The humility of the Son of the most high God being the same in substance with him , and equal in power and glory , condescended to match with a Maid of our Family , that had neither beauty nor dowry . A greater condescension , than if the greatest Emperor on Earth should marry the poorest and most deformed Virgin upon Earth , assuming a human Nature with his Divine Person ; In all things like unto Man excepting sin , and in that nature to suffer poverty , hunger , thirst , weariness , and other humiliations , even unto Death . Who being in the form of God , thought it not robbery to be equal with God , made himself of no reputation ; Annihilated himself , and brought himself as it were to nothing ; took upon him the form of a Servant , and was made in the habit of Men ; And being found in fashion , as a Man , he humbled himself , and became obedient unto Death , even the Death of the Cross . 

3.  Consider the exceeding high honour he hath done you , to be Servants in such a House , to himself , whom you have made your House , by choosing him and cleaving to him . Nebucadnezar could not desire a higher honour for the Three Worthies , whom he saw walking in the midst of the Fire , than to call them Servants of the most high God. Nor the Angel that appeared to Daniel in the Vision of the Four Beasts , and interpreted it to him , for the Subjects of God's Kingdom , than to call them Saints of the most high . Yea , the Angels themselves glory in this title . I am thy fellow-servant , and of thy brethren . And James styles himself not the Lords Brother , but the Servant of the Lord And God himself , Moses , not King in Jesuran , but my Servant . My Servant Moses . 

2.  In Prayers , I will cry unto God most high . Every good and perfect gift is from above , and cometh down from the Father of lights . We are commanded to pray to God , as being above in Heaven , to teach us , among many other things , that our Prayers should be sent forth with such fervencies , that they may reach and pierce Heaven , where God is ; to cry as David did . OH my God , I cry in the Day time , in the day time , and in the Night season . He heard my cry : My most earnest desires in Prayer , arising from feeling and fear of misery . And so did Moses , wherefore criest thou unto me ? God seeming to chide him for so doing ; but it was not for his fervent praying , but for his fearing and fainting , his Faith beginning to fail , and to let him know that he was more ready to hear than he to pray . 2.  Learn humility of the most high God. Be ye followers of God , as dear Children . Beloved , if God so loved us , we ought also to love one another . So if God have condescended unto us , we ought to do the like to our Inferiors , there being infinitely more distance and disproportion between God and us , than there is between us , were we the highest Princes on Earth , and they poorest Beggars . For they are all our brethren . Have we not all one Father , hath not one God created us ? Be not therefore highminded , but condescend to Men of low Estate . And learn of me ( saith the Son of the most High ) for I am meek and lowly in heart . Lowliness of mind will make you high with God , and meekness of word shall make you sink into the hearts of Men. Let this mind be in you , which was also in Christ Jesus . You that are higher than others in gifts , wealth or dignity , disdain them not , but demean yourselves humbly toward , them , and honour shall uphold you . 

3.  Take heed of provoking the most High , or of contemning his Counsels , lest you provoke yourselves to the confusion of your own Faces : as the Israelites did ; of whom it is said , That they sinned yet more against him , by provoking the most High in the Wilderness . Yea , they tempted and provoked the most high God , & kept not his testimonies . They contemned the Counsel of the most High. Therefore he brought down their heart with labour , they fell down , and there was none to help . 

4.  If you have provoked him to anger against you , as David did , when Satan provoked him to number the People , inquire and desire to know the true means to appease him , and to be reconciled unto him . Wherewith shall I come before the Lord , and bow myself before the High God ? And turn ye to him with all your heart , to him I say and not as Ephraim , of whom it is said , They returned , but not to the most High. Renew your purposes , and resolutions , and vows of more wary walking , for the future ; and when upon your humiliation and reformation , he is returned unto you with mercies , offer unto him thanks giving , and pay your vows unto the most High.  

5.  Comfort yourselves against all the injustice and disorders of the World ; and against all the Plots and Conspiracies of wicked Men , against the Church and People of God. Marvel not at it , but look higher , and expect seasonable relief , and redress , how high soever their rage doth rise , and how low soever , they lay the Saints of the most High. If thou seest the oppression of the poor , and violent perverting of Judgement in a Province , marvel not at the matter ; for he that is higher than the highest regardeth , and there be higher than they . Shall any teach God knowledge , seeing he judgeth those that are high . He is the Sovereign Lord and Judge of the World , above all Power and Greatness . Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right . He worketh all things after the Counsel of his own william And his will is the absolute Rule of all Righteousness . Thy righteousness also OH God is very high , Who hast done great things : ●ear not OH Land , be glad , and rejoice , for the Lord will do great things . Though the Lord be high , yet hath he respect unto the lowly ; them that are of a poor and abject condition , and trodden upon by the Foot of imperious contempt . But the proud he knoweth afar off , and they shall know , when they have spent all their strength , spit out all their malice , and done their worst , That thou , whose Name alone is Jehovah , are the most high over all the Earth . 

From the Second property of this your Habitation . Viz. Strength , learn in your Prayers , which you Daily make to God for yourselves and fellow-servants in the House , who are all weakness , to say , Stir up thy strength , and come for Salvation to us . Show it , make use of it , stand in the front of thy feeble Army as a Leader , to defend them from their Potent Enemies . And let it appear that thy Prayer is not idle . Give thy strength unto thy Servants . Awake , awake , put on strength , OH Arm of the Lord , awake as in the ancient Days , in the Generations of old . Art thou it that hath cut off Rahab , and wounded the Dragon ? Art not thou it which hath dried the Sea , the Waters of the great Deep , which hath made the depth of the Seas , and way for the ransomed to pass over ? Display thy Sovereign Power for the deliverance of thy Children , as thou formerly didst in Egypt , and at the Red-sea . Look down from Heaven , and behold from the Habitation of thy Holiness , and of thy Glory : Where is thy zeal and thy strength , the sounding of thy bowels ? When you have thus prayed , cast off all slavish fear , of what the might or malice of Men , or Devils can do . Who art thou , OH my poor , weak , faint-hearted Church , that thou shouldst be afraid of a Man , that shall die , and be made as Grass . Take now good courage , setting before thee thine Enemies approaching and certain destruction . Fear thou not , for I am with thee , be not dismayed , for I am thy God , I will strengthen thee with the right hand of my righteousness . That is , with mine Omnipotence , I have and will put forth in righting thee of thine Enemies . The Lord is my Light and my Salvation , Whom shall I fear ? The Lord is the strength of my life , and of whom shall I be afraid ? He it is that will dissolve all my inward darkness of trouble and confusion , and external ones of dangers and calamities . In this will I be confident , namely in this , that the Lord is my Light , Salvation , and Strength . My God shall be my strength , thou hast girded me with strength . The Lord will give strength unto his People : He delivered me from my strong Enemy ; And from them that hated me , for they were too strong for me . thou hast guided thy People in thy strength to thy holy Habitation . thou wilt do so still , and not forsake them , when their strength faileth . My Flesh and my Heart faileth , but God is the strength of my Heart , and my portion for ever . Be not discouraged at all for the weakness or absence of outward means . Not by might nor by power , but by my Spirit , saith the Lord of Hosts . When Men and means , and hopes and helps , and Hearts and all fail . Trust ye in the Lord for ever , for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength . He giveth power to the faint , and to them that have no might he increaseth strength . They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength . They go from strength to strength . The righteous shall hold on his way , and be stronger and stronger . I will go in the strength of the Lord God. I shall never faint , but always , even every step I take , gather new strength and courage . Wait on the Lord , be of good courage , and he shall strengthen thine Heart . Despair not like her that said , My strength and hope is perished . If thou chance to do so , recover quickly as she did , This I recall to my mind , and therefore have I hope . Be fully persuaded that what God hath promised , he is able also to perform . Acknowledge as your Father Abraham did , as his Sovereign truth , so his infinite power , above all inferior order , or contrary difficulty . Yea , he is able to do exceeding abundantly above all we can ask or think . Neither do you despair of any Man's Salvation , for whom you pray : no not of the Jews ( whom you are bound every Day to remember in your Prayers . ) For God is able to graft them in again . When you are tempted to any sin , think thus with yourselves . Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy , are we stronger than he , that we should not fear to provoke him ? Can thine Heart endure , or can thine Hands be strong in the Days that I shall deal with Thee ? wilt thou have courage or strength enough to endure or withstand my Judgements ? I say unto you my Friends , be not afraid of them that can kill the Body , and after that have no more that they can do . But I will fore-warm you , whom you shall fear : Fear him , which after he hath killed , hath power to cast into Hell.  

If Men should be in danger of present Death , by any men's unjust Decrees , in case they refuse actively to obey them : They must say , if it be so , Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us ; but if not , we will not serve any false Gods : Nor the true otherwise than he hath appointed in his Word . And in the midst of the most desperate dangers serve the Lord with sweet security ; knowing that your good Shepherd Jesus Christ , is always doing his Office , standing still on Foot , and watching for the safeguard of his , employing for their safety his Father's Divine Power , whereby they shall rest secure , having the King of the Universe for their Protection . He shall stand and feed in the strength of the Lord , in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God , and they shall abide . When you shall be cast upon your sick Beds , doubt not but he will both turn , and stir , and make them easy , but strengthen you upon them . His everlasting Arms shall be underneath you , and you shall be able both to do and suffer all things , through him that strengtheneth you . Upon all these and many more accounts , Ascribe the strength unto God , his excellency is over Israel , and his strength is in the Heavens . The God of Israel is he that giveth strength and power unto his People . Blessed be God.  

From the third property of your Habitation , Viz. Largeness , Learn rightly to conceive of this property , holding forth the infiniteness immenseness , and omnipresence of God , being without quantity and measure , every where both within and without the World , filling all places with his essence : as the whole Soul is said to be in the whole Body , and in every part of it ; so is God whole and wholly in every part of the World. Behold the Heaven and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee . His greatness is unsearchable , infinite , and incomprehensible . The Heaven is my Throne , and the Earth is my Footstool . am I a God at hand , saith the Lord , and not a God afar off ? Can any hide himself in secret Places , that I shall not see him , saith the Lord , Do not I fill Heaven and Earth ? Yea , and Hell too . If I make my Bed in Hell , behold thou art there . This must teach us to banish all gross conceits of God out of our mind , and to detest the making any Picture of him , by which he is denied to be incomprehensible , and to see him , though invisible , to be present with you , where ever you are , his Eye beholding whatsoever you are doing . This Consideration filled David's heart with shame and sorrow for his sin , and made it to lie so heavy upon his Conscience . I have done this evil in thy sight . All my care was to be secret , to hide my sin from the Eyes of Men , but all this while thine Eye was upon me . There is no Man but would be restrained from many sins , if they knew of any body that was by them , to see what they did . The Murderer & Adulterer are brought in by Job , imboldening themselves , no Eye shall see me . As if he had said , if they knew there was any Eye to see them , they durst not do it . Moreover in all their Meditations & Contemplations of God , take as full a view of him as you can ; Hear him saying , behold me , behold me . Especially take notice of the largeness and greatness of his goodness and bounty . All the dimensions of its breadth , length , depth and height with admiration . OH how great is thy goodness which thou hast for them that fear thee ? As high as the Heaven is above the Earth , as the space is between the East and West . I will mention the loving kindness of the Lord , his great goodness , the multitude of his mercies . And labour for largeness of heart , in some sort answerable . From the rest of the properties of this your habitation , and from all the furniture in it , and from each of the conveniencies belonging to it , I shall leave you to gather comforts and duties in abundance , having this one thing only more to do ; Namely , to acquaint you with some of the Statutes , Laws , and Ordinances of the House , and earnestly to press upon you the Observation of them , by promises and penalties annexed . The general Laws of this House binding all that live in it , are partly natural , and partly supernatural . The natural are Ten in Number , called in Scripture Ten Words , and some where One Word . The Divine Law teaching and commanding Moral good , and forbidding evil , known by the Name of Moses Law ; Uttered and promulgate with God's own Mouth , by his immediate Voice , delivered in Fire , and therefore termed a Fiery Law , in the hearing of all Israel ; Afterwards written with his own Finger , ( by a mere and miraculous divine Operation ) in Two Tables of Stone , to signify the perpetual use and continuance of it , to the end of the World , and so published and committed to the Church for all Ages , as the Moral Law for Obedience to God our Sovereign Lord and King.  

This self same Law did God engrave in Man's heart , even when he created him ; For that before the written Law of Moses there was an unwritten Law of Nature , must needs be granted ; because needs must they be bound to God who had their Being from him ; Nor could they have sinned against him , if they had had no Law from him . For where no Law is , there is no transgression . Whosoever committeth sin , transgresseth also the Law. But sin Men did all this space of time , and were punished with a witness . Witness Cain , the old World , Sodom , Onan , and innumerable of others , and they were punished for the sins forbidden in Moses Law ; and the Apostle expressly teacheth , that the Gentiles who never had the written Law of Moses , had their Natural Law , even this Law ( though lesle perfect ) imprinted in their Souls ; by which they were instructed and bound to do well , and debarred from doing evil , which are the two properties of all Laws . And these two properties called The work of the Law written in their Hearts they showed , their Conscience bearing witness , their Hearts accusing or excusing one another . The Conscience being but a correspondency and relation of a Man's Spirit unto the Law , to bind or unbind , condemn or absolve him . Moreover the good Laws the Heathen made to punish the evils forbidden , and to draw People to practise the good commanded in the Law of Moses , and the endeavour of many of them to act accordingly , argues the Unity of both Laws . The reason of which unity is the unchangeableness of God , who is always the same . 

Qu. What need was there of the repetition and renovation of this Law ? Or if there was need , Why was it not sooner ? 

Answ . To the former Branch , though Nature brought the same things , yet it did it very weakly , and many conclusions were obliterated , and others much obscured ; and all men's hearts were weakly drawn to obey this Law , very strong to obey the Law of sin . And although the Law of Nature could scarce never have been extinguished , in Principles and Grounds , yet it might , and was , and would have been more in Applications . Men took evil for good , and good for evil , and grew more and more vain in their imaginations . 

To the latter Branch , Man's heart was not after his Fall thoroughly humbled , but thought his own reason sufficient for his Guide ; therefore God would leave the World a while to try them , and let them see their own weakness . Besides , sin was not come quickly to such a pitch and height , as afterwards it did , and yet we find that God did by piecemeal , and occasionally teach them this Law presently and almost equipollently before its solemn Proclamation . The Unity of these two Laws let's you see , as the constancy and Immutability of your God , who is not as other Lawgivers , who build , and pull down , and whom a Man knows , as well how to please , as shape a Coat for the Moon ; So also the necessity of the obedience of Mankind to the Moral Law. 't is as inseparable , as it 's very being , it being impossible to receive a being , and not with it a bond of obligation . Men when they sin spurn not only against Moses , but against very Nature . He that owns the ground owns the Fruit also . We are not our own in any of our actions . And how easy a way Men have to choke temptations to Atheism ! Let them take leave to deny Moses , and trample him underfoot , yet in their Souls they find written in very legible Letters , every Commandment of this Law : 't was born with them , and sucked from Natures own instruction . Why then should they suspect the Law of Moses , and think it a trick foisted upon them , to deprive them of their pleasures , Nature bearing witness that Moses is no Deceiver ? Finally , How inexcusable Men are , that live in such an Age , wherein they have both these Laws ; One to confirm the other ? Two witnesses , if both accuse us at the last Day , how shall we escape condemnation ? Manifold are the uses this written Law of God doth serve unto : Some common to the Elect and Reprobate , Viz. to show the excellency of Man's Nature before the Fall , when he had power perfectly to keep it , and the excellency of that supernatural condition in the life to come , when there shall be the same , yea , a more glorious power : and the corruption of our present condition , how short we come of due perfection : and the lord 's right , notwithstanding to require perfect obedience of us , and to punish us for default in the least point . It serves also to illustrate the Law of Nature obtenebrated by the Fall , the Law of incorrupted Nature being the same in substance with the Decalogue ; also to discover and convince all Men of sin , and their obnoxiousness to eternal Death , to be a Bridle to restrain them from gross sins ; and finally , Men are taught thereby what a one God is , and how he ought to be worshipped , either proper and peculiar to the Elect , it serves as a guide to point thèm to Christ the Mediator , and to kindle a desire in them to seek eternal righteousness and salvation by him ; and when they are in Christ , to be a Rule of Thankfulness , for the Redemption purchased by him . Every Man should be thankful in the best manner he can for a benefit received . What better Rule can a Christian have , than that which God hath made ▪ He hath showed thee , OH Man , what is good : and what doth the Lord require of thee , but to do justly , to love mercy , and to walk humbly with the Lord thy God ? Micah 6. 8.  Tit. 2. 11 , 12.  

Qu. Why have you dwelled so long upon this point ? 

Answ . To work in you , whose dwelling the Lord is , a detestation of the Antinomian Errors . Many have cut off some uses of the moral Law , or falsely glossed upon it ; but few would ever wholly abrogate it , but this unhappy Sect. Like Nero , who wished Rome had but one Neck , that he might cut it off at one blow : So these would deal with this Law of Moses . It follows not , the Gospel is come in , therefore the Law must go out . Hagar so long as she is obedient , may dwell in Abraham's House . To make it clear to you , that the decalogue pertains to Christians , consider , 1.  That it is confirmed by Christ . 2.  Commanded to Christians by the Apostle . 3.  Established by the Gospel , how it teacheth Christ to be the end of the Law , and that Justification cannot be had without that perfect righteousness which the Law requires , or satisfaction for unrighteousness , and that Men ought to study and endeavour it , and that the observation of it is a testimony of our communion with God , that he dwelleth in us , and we in him , as you heard in a former discourse . 

Obj. Christians are not justified by the Law , neither do they receive the promise by it , therefore it pertains not at all to them . 

Ans . The consequence is false , unless they could prove there were no other necessary uses of the Law , but we have showed many , and there 's a number more . 

Obj. 2d . If believers are not under the Law , but under Grace , to them the Law doth not pertain ; but the former is true , Ergo , the latter . 

Ans . 't is a fallacy termed from ambiguous , or that which may be taken more ways than one . Not to be under the Law , is , not to be freed from it , as a rule of life , for we are inclined and disposed by God's free Spirit to the willing obedience of it ; but to be delivered from the burden of the Law , exacting in our own persons perfect obedience , as necessary to life , and from the malediction of it due to disobedience : these we are freed from by Christ . To be under grace , is to be justified and regenerate . 

Obj. Christians are mortified and dead to the Law.  

Ans . The same fallacy , and the same solution . Believers are moreover freed from that irratation to sin , which is effected in unregenerate Men by the Law.  

Obj. 4th . But now we are delivered from the Law , that being dead wherein we were held . 

Ans . The same again , and the Apostle opens his meaning in the words that follow , declaring our manumission from the servitude of the Law , from its rigorous exaction and curse , and that we have a spirit of ingenuity to obey willingly . 

Obj. 5.  Gospel-ministers are Ministers of the Spirit , not of the Letter . 

Ans . The meaning is no more but this , that their Ministry is more efficacious than the Ministry of the Old Testament . 

Obj. 6.  If the Law pertain to Christians , than they are under the curse of it ; but the latter is false , Ergo , the former . 

Answ . The meaning of those words of the Apostle , upon which the consequence of the Connexion is grounded , is plainly this , that they that think Righteousness to come by the works of the Law , and promise themselves Eternal life thereby , are under the curse of it . 

Obj. Christians are no longer under a Schoolmaster . 

Ans . 1.  The place is impertinent , for it speaks of the Ceremonial Law mainly , if not only . 2.  If at all of the moral , the consequence is denied , for though they be not under a Schoolmaster , as the faithful under the Old Testament were , yet it follows not that obligation to obedience is taken away . 

Obj. 8.  Christians are redeemed from the Laws subjection . 

Ans . Not simply , as if they owed no more obedience ; but so far forth , that they are not bound to a perfect fulfilling of it , but that unfeigned assent and consent shall be accepted . 

Obj. 9  Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free . 

Ans . From the Ceremonial Law.  

Obj. 10.  Against Spiritual Men there is no Law.  

Ans . To hold their Consciences under guilt , yet they must be taught their duty by this holy , and just , and good Law.  

Obj. 11.  The Law is not made for a righteous Man  

Ans . The meaning is , believers , and those that are regenerate by God's spirit , apply themselves to the obedience of the Law , without constraint or terrifying ; having the habit of righteousness and holiness in themselves , as an inward and living Law. They have no need of the horror and constraint of it ; and also being justified by Christ , they are freed from the condemnation of it , seeing that a Sovereign pardon stayeth and endeth all Actions and Condemnations grounded upon the Law.  

Great Houses , with the Gardens , Orchards , Parks and Grounds belonging to them , have their bounds and limits made by Walls , Pales and Hedges . That great glorious House which Ezekiah saw in a Vision had its limit . This is the Law of the House , upon the top of the Mountain , the whole limit thereof round about shall be most Holy : God is said to have determined the bounds of all men's Habitations upon Earth . 

The Ten Commandments of the Moral Law , are the Bounds , Walls , Pales , and Hedges set round about the House , wherein you , that are Saints on Earth , inhabit , beyond which you may not pass , but must keep within this compass . As the Waters dwelling within the great Channel have their bounds , which they are commanded to keep , and forbidden to transgress , pass , or go over . I establish ( saith God to Job ) my Decree upon it , ( speaking of the Sea ) break up for it my Decreed place , set Bars and Doors to it , ( Figurative terms to express the concavities wherein the Sea is enclosed ) and said , hitherto shalt thou come and no further , and here shall thy proud Waves be stayed . You are commanded in like manner , to keep within the bounds of your Decreed place , and you are bound to keep within them under a greater penalty , than that which was laid upon Shimei , when he was confined to his House by Solomon , and to the City of Jerusalem , the Walls whereof were his utmost limits . The King sent and called for Shimei , and said unto him , build thee an House in Jerusalem , and dwell there , and go not forth thence any whether : For it shall be that on the Day thou goest out , and passest over the Brook Kidron , that thou shalt surely die . Abide within : So long as you do so , you abide with God. Cursed be the Man , whose Heart departeth from the Lord As a Bird that wandereth from her Nest , so is a Man that wandereth from his place . thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed , who do err from thy Commandments . thou hast trodden down all them that err from thy Statutes . Take heed brethren lest there be in any of you an evil Heart of unbelief , in departing from the living God. Every Sin small and great , is a transgression of the Law , Exceeds the bounds which God by his Law hath appointed unto Men , for the moderating & regulating of their thoughts words and actions . And every transgression and disobedience , every commission and omission received a just recompense of reward . 

If at any time through frailty , or violence of temptation , you pass these bounds . If at any time said I ? Alas , who doth not every Day both in thought , word and deed ? There is not a just Man upon Earth that doth good , and sinneth not . In many things we offend all . David , a Man after God's own heart , passed these bounds , oft through infirmity , once most abominably . Well , consider what is to be done after such excursions . Consider your ways in your hearts . bend your minds very diligently , weigh , ponder , think seriously with yourselves what you have done . Most Men are guilty of this neglect . no Man repenteth of his wickedness , saying , What have I done ? Remember this , and show yourselves Men , bring it again to mind OH ye Transgressor's . Know therefore that it is an evil , and bitter thing , that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God. Be ashamed and confounded to have been found out of the bounds of your House . then shalt thou remember thy ways and be ashamed . What fruit had ye then in those things , whereof ye are now ashamed ? Let it not be said of you , as of the generality of the Jews in Jeremyah's time . Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination ? Nay , they were not at all ashamed , neither Let the review , remembrance and thought of every ordinary sinful digression , by rash anger , or any bitter expression against Wife , Husband , Child , Servant , Neighbour , by vain , empty , idle , unprofitable conference at any time , by intemperance in Eating or Drinking , though never so little beyond necessity , or honest delight , making you unfit for divine service in either of your Callings , by immoderate sleeping , or not being up as early for God , as for yourselves , or spending more time in dressing your Bodies than your Souls , by wanton glances of your Eyes , or lusting after strange Flesh , or abusing the lawful duty of Marriage , by envying and grieving at the outward welfare of others , or discontentment with your own health , wealth , credit ; or carking distrustful caring for to morrow , or hasting to be rich , by passing rash censure upon the spiritual estate of others , or speaking of their faults and follies with mirth ; by silence at the unsavoury speeches of any , or conniving at their miscarriages , not reproving them at least by discountenance , for fear of giving them offence , by having too great a hankering of heart after things not evil in themselves ; Tobacco , Hunting , Hawking , Angling , Gaming , though not for gain , but sport ; by suffering , buying and selling , thoughts , and vile distractions to have incursions , and lodging within you in holy Duties : Let the thoughts I say of these and numberless other sinful digressions , fill your Souls with shame and blushing king and sinful abhorrence . Much more if you call to mind grosser crimes . then shall ye remember your own evil ways and doings , that were not good , and shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for your iniquities , and for your ▪ abominations . 

Nor let your shame for taking so many steps out of your Heavenly Father's House , or sense of selfloathsomeness , hinder your return thither ; but say as that unclean spirit ( for it is lawful and stands with godliness , honesty , and reason , to learn of an enemy ) I will return unto my House from whence I came out . And as that penitent Wife that had stepped aside from her Husband , I will go and return unto my first Husband , for than was it better with me than now . So did the Prodigal resolve to do , I will arise , and go to my Father , and say unto him , Father , I have sinned against Heaven , and before thee . OH Israel return unto the Lord thy God , for thou hast fallen by thy iniquity . Go and knock at the Door of Divine Mercy , confess your folly , accusing and judging yourselves . Surely it is meet to be said unto God , ( who hath revealed himself not only in his Law by commanding and threatening , but also in his promises of grace to comfort and encourage by the remission of sins ; so the Italian reads the word following : I pardon ) I have born chastisement , I will not offend any more , that which I see not , teach thou me : If I have done iniquity , I will do no more . Confess thy sins with such an honest , as well as broken heart , and thou needest not fear , but God will open the Door to thee , and let thee see himself again . He that keepeth his sins upon his conscience disguiseth and dissembleth them , and doth not confess them to God , and to Men also , if need require it , shall not prospero ; but who so confesseth and forsaketh them , shall find mercy . Let your sins be of what sort they will , of ignorance , infirmity , presumption , those three Parables of the lost Sheep , and the lost Goat , and of the Prodigal , may give you ground of assured hope , after such confession and supplication for a pardon , that thou shalt not fail to receive it , and the sense of it . Come now , and let us reason together , saith the Lord , though your sins be as Scarlet , they shall be as white as Snow , though they be red like Crimson , they shall be as Wool. If convinced in your own Consciences , you give glory to God by a free confession , and fly to his mercy by faith , and a lively conversion . He will quickly cause you to feel by effect the forgiveness of your sins , let them be never so grievous . 

This is the Voice of the second of those general Laws , I mentioned , called the Law of Faith , the Doctrine which offereth and promises remission of sins and salvation , requiring only in order hereunto repentance and faith . Repent ye , and believe the Gospel . The two great Gospel commands which you , with whom I am dealing , have been enabled by grace to yield obedience unto , whereby you have made the Lord your Habitation : Nevertheless they are duties which all the Days of your life you are bound to be doing : To act both these graces every Day as there is occasion , and there will be occasion for acting both while you have a Day to live , to renew your repentance , and to live by your faith , as it is written , The just shall live by his Faith : The meaning is , he shall live healthfully , happily , blessedly , in which sense living is taken . John 4. 51. 1  Sam. 10. 24. psal . 38. 19 1  These . 3. 8.  

And that this is the Prophet's meaning , appears from the scope and occasion of the words in the 1st . Chap. he complains , and expostulates , in the beginning of the second the Lord answers , the just shall have deliverance , but it shall not be yet . The Vision is yet for an appointed time , but at the end it shall speak and not lie , though it tarry : wait for it , because it will surely come , it will not tarry . The Prophet might have objected , and asked , but how shall the afflicted Jews be able to live in the mean season , for Seventy Years together ? The Lord answers by a distinction : the unjust puffs up himself with vain confidence , But the just shall live by his Faith. Whence it is evident , that true Faith , if well managed , is able to keep a life , yea to make him live healthfully and happily , even in the worst and saddest times , and to this conclusion , these Scriptures give suffrage : 2 Chr. 20. 20.  Psal . 27. 13.  Dan. 6. 23.  Esa . 50 10. 26. 3.  Heb. 10. 39 2  Cor. 1. 24.  And reasons grounded upon Scripture , come in as Auxiliaries . 1.  From the Object of Faith , namely the promises which are meet matter to maintain life . Phil. 2. 16.  John 6. 63.  Jer. 15. 16. 1  Pet. 2. 2.  esay 55. 1. 12. 3. 66. 11.  Cant. 2. 5.  Job 15. 11. 2.  From the Nature and Office of Faith , which is to rest upon God's faithfulness , for the performance of these promises , it certifies and assures the Soul , that all shall certainly be made good . Psal . 89. 34.  Numb . 23. 19  By this means saith gives a Christian actual present possession of all good things , even in their absence ; Faith is the substance hoped for : that is , it gives substance to things that have no Being , The evidence of things not seen ; that is , that it both convinceth the judgement , that such things must come to pass , and it makes the mind conceive them really present . Joh. 8. 56. 1  Cor. 10. 3. 3.  From the fruits , or if you will , the Children and Daughters of Faith , which are attendant on her , and helpful to her , in maintaining life , namely hope , which keeps the heart alive , by expecting better , when things are at the worst , banisheth despair , is compared to an Helmet and Anchor . 2.  Joy , this is the juice of Faith , the Souls strength , banisheth sorrow , eats up all Earthly griefs 3.  Courage and boldness , which expels fear . 4.  Love , this makes bitter things sweet , causing a cheerful willingness to suffer the hardest things for the sake of the party beloved . 5.  From a singular property and power that is in Faith , to break through all difficulties , leap over all carnal objections , and remove all impediments , Rom. 4. 18 — 22.  

Qu. How may we manage our Faith , so as to maintain this life of joy and comforts ? 

Ans . Your care must be to make this sure , not only that you are within the compass of God's special Covenant ( to them that are out of this belong no promises , nothing but threatenings and curses ) but also that these special qualifications are in you , which are annexed to particular promises , the fruition whereof depends upon the practice of some choice part of obedience , which if you neglect , you do but presume and tempt God in making title , and laying claim to them . Compare Psal . 91. 11 , 12. with Mat. 4. 6 , 7.  

2.  This done , learn Four things concerning the promises : 1.  The matter , which is supply of all good , and deliverance from all evil : 2.  The kind or quality of them ; the principle promise indeed , is absolute , but all the rest are conditional , these shall all be literally fulfilled for you , so far forth as they may be subservient to that . 

3.  The manner of propounding them ; some promises are expressly declared , both general and special ones , others are by consequence employed in the examples or prayers of the faithful . 

4.  The several ways of God's performing his promises . Sometimes he gives his People the very thing he promises : Sometimes he denyeth that , and gives them some thing equipollent proportionable instead of it , or else that which he knows is far better for them . 

5.  You must in every state of life , when you find need , set your Faith on work , both to fetch in provision out of the Word , and to prepare it , and to apply it . 

1.  The way to bring in provision ( for the maintenance of life ) is by the memory : whatsoever faith doth in the Soul , it doth it by the help of this faculty , Heb. 12 , 5 , 6.  Forgetfulness is the cause of fainting in all time , therefore of need : whenever you are brought to any straight , that you can see no way of escape , or means of relief , but begin to faint and sink under distress and vexation of mind , call to mind such promises , as are fitted to your condition . For there can be no condition imagined , but there are promises suited to it , and a Christian wisdom must be to accommodate the remedy to the sore and malady of his heart . Inquire what word there is in God's Book to still the tempests and distempers of your spirits , and then make application of it : Promises faithfully remembered and well digested , will arm and fortify your Souls , that they shall be able to put any case of trouble inward or outward , and come off victoriously and triumphantly . Put case you be as poor as Job , Lazarus , the Prophet's Widow : Call to mind the promises of temporal blessings in abundance . Put case you be persecuted by the tongues or hands of wicked Men , call to mind the promises , that you shall be delivered , & your enemies confounded . Put case your hearts be heavy for some great losses of Goods or Friends : Call to mind the promises , that you shall be gainers by your losses . Put case your spirits be wounded with the sense of Divine wrath : Call to mind the promises of pardon , peace , and rest . Put case your Graces be weak , and corruptions strong : Call to mind the promises of sanctification and quickening . Put case some great eminent danger threaten you : Call to mind the promises , that nothing shall hurt you ; that every thing that befalls you , shall work together for your spiritual and eternal good . 

2.  Provision thus brought in by the Memory , the next work of Faith , is to prepare and make it fit nourishment . This is done by searching for , and finding out that Grace , or part of obedience , upon which , the fruition of the promise depends ; to which sufficient hath been spoken already : nor will it be disheartened for weakness , if there be truth , yea , if no more than a true desire . Mat. 5. 3 — 6.  Neh. 1. 11.  

The third and last chief work of Faith , is application of the promises to yourselves in particular , this is feeding upon the provisions brought in and dressed . Faith first does its utmost , to assure the soul , that what God hath promised , is already done . Mark 11. 24. 15. 28.  Job 13. 15.  Yea , and it makes it good thus . 1.  It hath Christ , and he is all . 2.  It hath , if not the thing promised , as good , or better . 3.  When it finds much ado ; It goes to God , and seeks help of him . Mark 9 24. 2  Chr. 20. 12.  Psal . 73. 23. 24. 27. and concludes with the Psalmist 60. 12. 73. 1.  

You will be sure to find , while you live here on Earth , the Devil ever anon throwing his Fiery darts into your Souls . You must take the Apostles advice , to stand always Armed with the whole Armour of God. Above all , taking the Shield of Faith , whereby ye shall be able to quench all his Fiery Darts . 

THE EIGHTH SERMON . You have heard what the Daily Duty is , of all who live and dwell in God , viz. To live by Faith. How faith maintains the Soul in life , and the Apostle bidding you to take the Shield of Faith , and to use , and move , and manage it , according to the place , Satan casting his Darts at you , aims at , and according to the kinds of his temptations . I shall give you a truth , and taste how faith may be managed , and what the several acts of Faith are , by which the fierceness of these Darts of Satan may be quenched : 

There are six Fiery Darts ( besides many others ) which Satan throws at the Souls of those that dwell in God , whereby he works them much disquiet and trouble . The first and worst , is concerning the forgiveness of sins . He would and often doth persuade them , that their sins are unpardoned , and that God will damn them for their manifold transgressions , and mighty sins . The apprehension of this fills their Souls with horror , nor can the greatness and grievousness of this affliction be expressed . 

A second is , Concerning their spiritual Estate , he would make them believe , they are yet in a state of Unregeneracy ; and that the Root of the matter is not in them , but that they are but painted Hypocrites . 

A third is , Concerning Mortification of Lusts , and Sanctification of Life , neither of which they have attained , and they are afraid they never shall . 

A fourth is , Fear of Poverty , and temporal Misery ; what will become of them in sickness and old Age , they cannot tell , want coming on them like an Armed Man , this Dart sets on Fire many Lusts . 

A fifth is , Concerning the right use of prosperity and adversity : Satan persuades them they neither do , nor ever shall use either rightly . 

A sixth is , Fear of falling away . 

Faith rightly managed , will blunt the piercing points of all these Darts , and take away all the burning Poison in them ; and so repel them , that the Soul shall not be hurt at all by them : though until Faith have done , it suffer much affliction by each of them . 

I shall not now undertake to show what be the several acts of Faith , that have force to overcome these several temptations , but will declare very briefly , what those acts are , whereby Faith supports , and settles the Soul , and makes it victorious in any trouble or affliction whatsoever , inward or outward , which may be applied to any of the cases forementioned . 

Qu. What use will this Doctrine be to those that are not under any trouble , that have no manner of affliction upon them . 

Ans . There is no Christian that is at any time of his life free from all affections : no Day comes so fair over any godly Man's head , wherein he meets not with some matter of grief , yea so much , that he finds enough ado to sustain and master it . Luk. 9 23.  

2.  Those that are now free from affliction ( may , they know not how soon ) be hemmed in , compassed about , and overwhelmed with variety of afflictions , as Job was , and therefore aught to live in continual expectation of crosses and distresses , public , domestical , personal ; and although there are great hopes of peaceable times , yet hopes may be frustrate : our sins are many and mighty , which gives us just cause to fear God's judgements ; we have also Enemies many , and politic , and malicious , and the Devil , and his Instruments are busy : but howsoever , how calm soever the public state may be , yet afflictions and miseries may and will sure enough befall those that fear God ; If not outward , yet inward . Many are the afflictions of the righteous . And manifold are their infirmities in their afflictions , and therefore they are called by that name . Evils will not come the sooner , because expected , but they will fall the lighter . And faith is necessary that they may so do , it cannot therefore but be necessary and profitable to acquaint you with the acts of Faith , in general at least ; whereby a Christian Soul may be upheld in evil times , against all afflictions and miseries whatsoever . This grace well acted , will bring you under the wing and protection of your God , and so free your Hearts from all fear and discouragement and disquiet . 

The acts of Faith , effectual to this end , are Nine in Number , and in this Order . 

The first , is an act of Information . Faith informs the Soul of these things . Namely , concerning the nature , Author , ends , measure , and continuance of the affliction . 

1.  Concerning the nature or matter of it , that it is human . There hath no temptation overtaken you , but such as is common to Man Let it be what it will , other Men as good , yea better than you , have suffered in the same kind , drank of the same Cup , yea deeper than any of you have yet done . Poverty , sickness , reproach , loss of dear relations , trouble of mind ; Job , and David , and Paul for example , and the Macabee Confessors and Martyrs . 

2.  Concerning the Author , that who or whatsoever is the Instrument , God is the Principle Agent . His Decree ordained it , and his actual providence hath inflicted it . 

3.  Touching the ends God aims at in your afflictions . Among others , they are these . To bring you to a sight of your sins long since , or lately committed . To humble and reprove you , to purge and refine you , to work self-denial in you , to reduce you into the right way , to quicken your devotion : To wean you from the love of the World , and make you long for Heaven . To cause you to relish mercies and comforts better . To save you from Damnation , and to make your Crown of Glory weightier . 

4.  Touching the measure that it shall be no more than needs , and no more than you shall have strength well to bear . 1 Pet. 1. 6. 1  Cor. 10. 13.  All your Enemies shall not be able to add one scruple more . Job 1. 12. 2. 6.  

Wife and loving Parents correct their Children in measure , there is no fear that they will break their Bones . Learned and loving Physicians have due respect , when they administer Doses to the strength of their Patients . Such a Father and Physician is God , and a thousand times more tender . 

5.  Touching the continuance of the affliction incumbent . Faith informs the Soul , that the Diet-drink prescribed , shall be no longer required to be taken , than till health be recovered . That the Plaster shall lie no longer on the sore , than till the Cure be wrought ; that the Gold be no longer in the Fire , than till the Dross be consumed : at longest it shall be but until Death , and all the space until then , let it be never so long , is but a little moment , in respect of Eternity ; a little Cloud quickly passing . 

The second , is a quickening exciting act : Faith excites the Soul , first , to make search and scrutiny into this affliction . 2.  To cast itself down , in humble acknowledgement of its own desert , and God's Justice accusing and judging itself , and justifying God in his sharp Dispensation . 3.  To pour out its complaint to God , and cry for mercy , and pardon of the sin procuring the Cross , and for sanctification and removal of it . 4.  To cast off all purposes of falling into sin again ; of giving God any more cause to punish . 5.  To use all lawful means to get the Cross removed or mitigated . Jos . 7. 11. 13 — 16.  

The third , is an employing act : hear faith speaking thus , We have no might , neither know we what to do . It causeth the Soul to renounce its own wisdom , strength , and all confidence in the Creature , draws the heart from carnal repose in means or friends . 

The fourth , is an act of discovery , it discovers to the Soul that sees no help any where else , all-sufficiency of help in God. All-sufficiency of wisdom , power , grace , mercy , truth , and love ; and it discovers also the manner of God's dealing , which usually is to grant deliverance , and send help then , when to sense and reason it is furthest off . Deut. 32. 36.  Jer. 30. 12 — 18.  Psal . 142. 6.  It looks also back upon former favours , which are as Bills obligatory of future good things , even all that God sees necessary . That which God hath once done , for any of his in sustaining , relieving , and delivering them ; He will do over and over again for them , if they enforce themselves towards him . 

The fifth , is a meekening act : Faith makes the heart willing to submit itself to the good pleasure of God , and patiently , and gently to bear his corrections . And the considerations , whereby Faith moves and prevails with the soul to carry itself meekly under God's hand , are such as these , first , from the desert of sin : you have merited all this , and much more , and are punished beneath your iniquities . 2.  From the hand that lays this Rod upon the back : It is a Fatherly one that gives you this bitter Cup. 3.  From his predestinating you to be conformable to the Image of his Son , who was a Man of sorrows , acquainted with griefs . 4.  From the recompense of reward , which is infinitely heavier than your sufferings . 

The sixth , is an act of remembrance . It causeth the soul to call to mind those sweet and gracious promises God hath made in his Word , to his People in their afflictions . 1.  That he will look down from Heaven in mercy , and cast a gracious aspect upon them . 2.  That he will be with them , to support and comfort them in their troubles . 3.  That he will deliver them out of trouble . 4.  After they have suffered a while , establish , strengthen them , and then receive them to Glory , where they shall never suffer more , but in his presence have fullness of joy , and at his right hand , pleasures that shall please for ever more . 

A seventh , is an act of recumbency , a resting , rolling , relying act , casting the Soul upon God , and staying there , clasping , a desiring , depending , committing itself to divine providence , with assured trust and confidence , that all shall be well , because all shall end well , though sense and reason say never so much to the contrary ; this confidence doth as it were oblige , and bind the Lord to do his People good . Psal . 37. 40. 57 1.  & 147. 8 , 9  Es . 26. 3.  Jer. 39 18.  

The eighth , is an act of expectation , waiting for comfort and deliverance , referring both time , and means , and manner unto God.  

The nineth and last , is an act of rejoicing and triumphing : the former it doth , because it feels the Physic to work kindly , and the latter in assurance of a blessed issue . 

There are besides these many several Laws , which you that dwell in God are bound to observe continually . A few of them I shall commend unto your practice , you must be always watching , always working , always rejoicing , and always praying , and always giving thanks , and always ready to remove out of the lower Rooms , wherein you live into higher , whither you shall hear a voice saying , come up hither . 

Every one in this House must be evermore working , watching . They ought not to sleep at any time : ye brethren are all the Children of the Light , and the Children of the Day ; we are not of the Night , nor of Darkness , therefore let us not sleep as do others . There is a twofold waking , literal and metaphorical ; the former is sometimes a punishment . thou holdest mine Eyes waking . It is always a duty to withhold your Eyes from immoderate and unseasonable sleep . How long will thou sleep , OH sluggard , when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep ! yet a little sleep , a little slumber , a little folding of the hands to sleep . Too many Christians willingly suffer this Thief to steal away the best , and feed upon the very fat of their time ; which are a shame to the House they live in . It was thought in Augustine's time to be an undecent thing , for a Christian at any time of the Year to have the Sun beams find him in Bed. How early every Morning was David up at his Devotions ! My Voice shalt thou hear in the Morning , OH Lord In the Morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee . Awake up my Glory , awake Psaltery and Harp. I myself will awake early ; yea , mine Eyes prevent the Night Watch's , that I might meditate on thy Word . I have awaked of myself in the Night , before I have been called upon by the Watchmen , who give warning of the seasons of the Night . Yea , at Midnight will I arise to give thanks unto thee . This was ordinary for the Servants of this House to do their Master service , as well by Night as Day . Behold , bless ye the Lord , all ye Servants of the Lord , which by Night stand in the House of the Lord Nothing was more ordinary in Primitive times , in the House of godly great Men , than to have Vigils . Paul says of himself , that he was oft in voluntary fasting , which he undertaken , to fit himself the better for Supplications and Prayer . So oft in such watchings . it 's said of our blessed Saviour , that He continued all Night in Prayer to God. Come lie all Night in Sackcloth ye Ministers of my God. David fasted and went in , and lay all Night upon the Earth . This was extraordinary literal watching for spiritual ends , and for our imitation upon like occasions ; time allowed to spend in sleep , must sometimes be set apart for religious Duties . And every Night of of our life when we are awake , we must take care to spend piously ; ●is the Character of a godly Man His delight is in the Law of the Lord , and in that Law doth he meditate , Day and Night . When I remember Thee upon my Bed , and meditate on Thee in the Night Watch's . With my Soul have I desired Thee in the Night . Stand in awe and sin not , common with your own Heart upon your Bed. But it is the latter waking and watching , which the Apostle chiefly intends , when he saith , let us not sleep as do others , that is , through carelessness , slacking , giving over acts of faith and piety , or doing them listlesly , or perfunctorily , sluggishly , or by being lulled asleep , and overburdened by worldly desires , cares , or pleasures ; 't is an heedful observation of ourselves in all things , and a serious , careful , and diligent circumspection , over all our thoughts , words and ways , that we may please God by doing his will , and neither commit any sin , nor omit any duty . This Christian heedfulness is very frequently and earnestly urged upon God's People , no duty more . Take heed to thyself , and keep thy Soul diligently , take heed unto yourselves lest ye forget the Covenant , take diligent heed to do the Commandment and the Law , take heed then that ye walk circumspectly , not as fools , but as wise . Watch ye therefore , for ye know not when the Master of the House cometh , at Evening , or at Midnight , or at the Cock crowing , or in the Morning , lest coming suddenly , he find you sleeping : and what I say unto you , I say unto all , Watch. This watchfulness must be in all things , what Saint Paul saith unto Timothy ( who was as all Gospel-ministers should be , religious , faithful Watchmen , warning their People of spiritual dangers and enemies , as God's Prophets of old were ; somewere then as too many are now , careless Guides , Watchmen in Name , but not in truth , wretched or rather wretchless , and scarce Watchmen ) he saith to every private Christian . Watch thou in all things , Evil , civil , good . Take heed how ye hear , read , pray , give Alms ; How you do the works of your particular Calling , and even natural actions , eat , drink , play : and watch over all the powers and parts both of your Souls and Bodies , your outward Senses , Eyes , and Ears , and taste , and touch , Job 31. 1.  Mat. 5. 28.  Psal . 119. 37.  esay 33. 15.  Pro. 23. 1 , 2 , 3.  Your Tongues especially . Psal . 39 1. 37. 30.  Pro. 15. 4. 7. 23. 18. 20. 25. 11. 1  Cor. 15. 31.  Jam. 3. 2.  Mat. 12.  34-38 . Psal . 45. 1.  Eph. 4. 29.  Col. 4. 6.  But above all , your hearts must be watched over . Pro. 4. 23.  Heb. 3. 12.  And you must watch especially against those sins that are most dangerous , and whereto you are naturally most inclined , Luk. 3. 12 , 13 , 14. 12. 15.  The Paths of your Feet must also be pondered , Pro. 4. 26.  And this must be in all places , and at all times , all the days of your lives . Deut. 4. 9  Nor must you only watch over yourselves , but over your brethren also . Heb. 10. 24. 3. 13.  Gen. 4. 9  Leu. 19 17.  A great many reasons may quicken you to this duty , besides the many Precepts that press it , in reference to yourselves . 1.  The estate and condition wherein you stand . 1.  You are weak at best , full of infirmities . Mat. 26. 41.  As they that have weak sickly Bodies observe a strict Diet , so should you much more be careful and fearful , whose Souls are so . 1 Cor. 10. 12.  Phil. 2. 12.  Pro. 28. 14. 2.  You are naturally drowsy , and therefore had need to do as the Nightingale , that is said to set her Breast against a Thorn , to keep herself from sleeping . Mat. 25. 5.  Cant. 5. 2.  Eph. 5. 14.  The wise as well as foolish Virgins slept : your hearts are naturally wicked , and deceitful , and desperately wicked . Jer. 17. 10.  Psal . 18. 57  Deut. 11. 16.  Heb. 3. 12. 1.  You are extremely apt to relapse into your former condition . rev. 2. 5.  Mat. 12. 45. 2  Pet. 2. 21 , 22. 2.  You have many mighty , and subtle , and malicious , and dangerous enemies . Eph. 16. 12. 1  Pet. 5. 8. 3.  Great are the benefits of this continual watchfulness . You will hereby tame your Flesh . The wildest Beasts are tamed by watching . This will be a great furtherance to your Prayers , and hereby you will be kept from being foiled by temptations . Mat. 26. 41. 4.  Great is the danger of neglecting this one Moment . There is no sin but may be sown in you , while you sleep . Mat. 13. 24. witness David , 2 Sam. 11. and so you hazard your salvation . Means enabling you to the performance of this duty , are , 1.  Sobriety in the use of lawful things . 1 Pet. 1. 7 , 8. 1  These . 5. 5 , 6.  Luke 21. 34. 2.  Filial fear of God , Pro. 14. 16.  Rom. 14. 16. 16. 6.  Psal . 4. 4. 130. 4.  Gen. 20. 11.  Psal . 36. 1.  Jer. 32. 42. 3.  Remembrance of God's Judgements . Mat. 24. 37 , 38 — 42.  Es . 47. 8 , 9  rev. 3. 3.  Luke . 21. 34 , 35 , etc. 1 Cor. 10. 15. 12. especially of the last Judgement . 2.  Cor. 5. 10.  There are other notable helps . Viz. Growing in knowledge : a blind Man is unfit to make a Watchman . A spirit of mistrust-fulness : a Master that mistrusts a Servant will watch to catch him . Living under a powerful Ministry : a Trumpet continually sounding is a good means to keep a Man from sleeping . Desiring Friends to admonish you when ever you nod : They that are inclined to sleep mortally , are desirous that others should pinch them , to keep them waking . Sobriety and temperance in eating and drinking . A Drunkard will make an ill Watchman . If you will know what are the signs of a truly watchful Christian , they are such as these . He discovers the secret windings and turnings of his own heart , the least stirring there , and much more if the Fire of any Lust begin to kindle there . If there be any Fray there , he presently stifles it . And if need be , he calls for help . If any good news comes he takes present notice of it , and makes it known . Psal . 66. 16.  no blessing of God towards himself , or the Church , that he does not take thankful notice of . If there be Lightning , or Thunder , or any dreadful Apparition of God's judgement , he trembles at it , loves and delights in the Morning light . And for that reason fears not Death , the immediate antecedent of it . 

Qu. Are all of God's holy household always thus waking and watching . 

Ans . The Holy Spouse of Christ acknowledgeth , that there was a time when she slept , having eaten and drank largely of her heavenly Husband's blessings . She began to remit her Zeal , and neglect the works of Faith and Love. Wanting the pretence of her Husband , and being pressed with the remnants of the Flesh , she gave Ear to carnal ease and security ; occasioned further hereunto by the time of the Night , and by the weather which was Rainy ; that is , by ignorance and error prevailing , and by the opposition and persecution of Enemies . Her sleep was neither that dead sleep , that all Men are in by nature , nor that judicial sleep , the spirit of slumber ; a farther degree of that natural sleep , to which God gives up some as a Seal of their desperate condition , but it was a sleep arising from the relics of natural corruption unsubdued , prevailing over the regenerate part : yet was her heart all this while awake , I sleep , but my heart waketh . Though she had a little laid aside her divine thoughts , and meditations , yet she still kept the eye of Faith open , and the ear of her Heart attentive , When the Lord had returned . Thus the wise Virgins slumbered and slept , but they had their Lamps burning by them which the foolish had not . Their hearts waked , Mat. 25. 5.  They were provided in them with instructions , in faith and piety , and with the gift of the spirit , which is the Oil that always burneth in all good hearts ; howsoever not always in actual exercise . But O! the dreadful danger that good Christians are in , when it is not so through the letting down of their spiritual watch , and giving way to sluggishness , there being no sin , no temptation , no judgement , but a secure drowsy Christian is open for : Which is the reason of so often enforcing watchfulness by the spirit of God in the Scriptures . And therefore I beseech you suffer a word of exhortation , to the next special duty incumbent upon all , whose habitation the Lord is ; Namely , to be always working . God will not have one idle or slothful Person in his House . Every one must have a particular honest Calling : The Light of Nature taught the Heathens this , as appears by Pharaoh's question to Joseph's brethren , What is your occupation : Gen. 47. 3.  And the Mariners to Ionas , What is thy occupation ? Forty Years was Moses a Courtier , and Forty Years more a Shepherd ; that great Men may not be ashamed of honest Vocations : the greatest that ever , have been content to take up with mean Trades . The contempt of honest Callings in those that are well born , argues pride without wit. How constantly did Moses stick to his Shepherd's Hook , and yet a Man of great learning , excellent spirit , good education ? I presume all you that dwell in God are in lawful Callings , wherein you may be serviceable to the Church , or Commonwealth , or private Families . In these the Apostle forbids you to be slothful , Not slothful in business . To be slothful , is to be loath to work , willing and desirous to shifted it off . Pro. 21. 25. 24. 23.  To be negligent in working , taking up more time than needs , or not to endeavour to do it well . Not to be slothful , is to be ready and forward to be employed , esay 6. 8. and to be diligent , and expeditious , and industrious , to do business in the best manner , Gen. 31. 6.  That every Christian Man and Woman's duty , is to be thus employed continually , appears , because God prohibits sloathfulness , and commands diligence , Heb. 6. 12.  Pro. 6. 9  Gen. 3. 19  Mark 13. 34. 1  These . 4. 11.  Curseth sloathfulness , and blessed diligence , Pro. 10. 47. 23. 21. 24. 30. to the end . Jer. 48. 10.  Pro. 13. 11. 28. 19  Eccl. 5. 12.  Mat. 25. 16 , 17 , 21 , 23.  OH that every one would look upon idleness and sloth as a great sin , as theft . 2 These . 3. 10 , 11 , 12.  Prodigality . Pro. 18. 9  Sodomy , a sin that disposeth a Man to all manner of sin ; and which shall be punished with the vengeance of Eternal Fire , Mat. 25. 26 , 30.  And Heathens and Bruits shall rise up in Judgement against idle slothful Christians . You therefore that are sure you dwell in God , take heed of damping your assurance , and blurring your evidence , by giving the least way to idleness , or sloathfulness in your Callings . Are you Magistrates ? be continually employing , and applying your power and authority to the uttermost , for the ends for which God hath given it to you . Rom. 13. 4. 1  Tim. 2. 2. 2  Chr. 19 6. to the end . Consider God's wrath declared against you , if you be slothful to execute Judgement , even upon your dearest Relations that deserve it . In the example of Eli , 1 Sam. 3. 13 , 14.  On the other side , the pleasure he will take in you , and delight to do you good , if you be faithful , and severe : Jer. 22. 15 , 16.  Numb . 25. 11 , 12 , 13. 2  King. 10. 30.  If you be Ministers , let the weightiness of the work , and glorious reward promised to laboriousness therein , and the Plagues threatened against loiterers , move you . 1 Cor. 4. 2. 2  Tim. 2. 15. 4. 1 , 2. 1  Pet. 5. 2.  Es . 58. 1. 2  Cor. 2. 16.  Dan. 12. 3.  Jer. 1. 1. CITIZEN  Cor. 9 16.  If you be Governors of Families , set before you the example of the virtuous Woman , Pro. 31. 13 — 28.  If Servants , Eleazar and Jacob , Gen. 24. 31. 6 , 40.  Col. 3. 22. to the end . Remember the promise of protection of Angels , while you are diligent in your Callings , Psal . 91. 11 , 12. and how God hath graciously , and gloriously appeared unto them he found therein , Exod. 31. 2.  Judg. 6. 11. 2  Sam. 7 , 8.  Amos 7. 14 , 15.  And how he will welcome you with a well done , good and faithful Servant , Mat. 25.  Only be sure to follow these Rules in your particular Callings : 1.  Labour principally for spiritual and heavenly things , Mat. 6. 33.  esay 55. 2.  Joh. 6. 27. 2.  Let your end be right . 1 Cor. 10. 31.  Acts 20. 35.  Eph. 4. 28.  And 3.  For the manner , do your work without all carking care . And without discontent of any providences , and with a heavenly mind . Phil. 3. 20.  

3.  Be always rejoicing ; God hath declared abundantly his will and pleasure , that you who dwell in him should be continually cheerful and comfortable in your Spirits ; and he hath in his Word , as oft charged you to be so : and he hath charged you to fear him , and live a godly life . Psal . 119.  Psal . 2. 117. 32. 11. 33. 1. 48. 11. 5. 11. 68 4.  Mat. 5. 12.  Phil. 3. 1. CITIZEN  These . 5. 16.  

And he is delighted to see you cheerful , and offended much , when you are disconsolate and uncheerful . Deut. 28. 47 , 48.  You are the only People that have right and title to joy and comfort . Psal . 116. 15. 47. 11. 64. 10. 106. 4 , 5.  Rom. 5. 1. 14. 17. 15. 13.  The objects of your joy are such , as have in every one of them force and power , if seriously pondered to keep up your hearts in frame of comfort , and so fill them with joy at all times . 

Quest. What are these objects ? 

Answ . 1.  The Lord himself , he is the prime main ultimate adequate object of your joy , Phil. 4. 4.  Psal . 4. 6 , 7.  Hab. 3. 17 , 18.  Jesus Christ , John 16. 33.  Phil. 3. 3. 4. 13.  The word of God , Psal . 119. 92. 94. 19  Rom. 15. 4.  All the Ordinances of God , especially Prayer , Phil. 4. 6 , 7.  The works of God , these are also a great object of his People's joy , both the internal eminent ones , that werewrought within himself , especially Election : Luk. 10. 20.  And the outward , viz. Creation and providence , Psal . 107. 22.  Especially the work of Redemption . Psal . 53. 6. 71. 23. 126. 1 , 2.  All the gifts of God , Faith : Hab. 2. 4. 1  Pet. 1. 8.  Hope , Rom. 5. 2.  The testimony of your sanctified Conscience , 2 Cor. 1. 12.  Experiences of the love of God. Psal . 63. 3.  Remission of sins , Mat. 9  ● . Co-operation of all things for their good ▪ Rom. 8. 28.  The Attendants of the holy Angels , the immensity of their wages for their works , which is from free grace , 2 Tim. 4. 8.  Heb. 11. 26.  Rom. 8. 18.  Afflictions themselves of all sorts , both natural , being prepared for them , corrected with Lenitives , one whereof is commonness : 1 Cor. 10. 13.  Another , that they are love-tokens , like the Rainbow . And another the effects they produce , whereof you have heard much ; and much more accidental for Religion , and Christianity sake : Mat. 5. 11 , 12.  Col. 1. 24. 1  Pet. 4. 13. 2  Cor. 12. 15.  Acts. 5. 41.  Jam. 1. 2.  

4.  Be always praying , opening your desires to God , with reverence and confidence in the name of Christ , for things agreeable to his will : viz. That he will glorify his own great name immediately , by himself , and by all his providential Dispensations : That his paternal Kingdom may be brought to perfection , both by means and gifts of grace : That his will may be done by yourselves , and others , as the Angels in Heaven do it cheerfully without murmuring , speedily without delaying , totally without mincing or reservation , sincerely without self-seeking , constantly without fainting : That you & your fellows may enjoy all necessary temporal blessings , personal , domestical , Political , National , have title to them , leave to use them , and comfort in the use of them : That he will free you from the guilt of sin , grant you remission free and full : And that he will sanctify you and them throughout , giving you conquest over all temptations , and perseverance to the end . Neglect not to keep a constant course of praying twice a Day at least , Morning and Evening , and occasionally Day and Night , sending up servant short Ejaculations . continue in Prayer , and watch in the same with thanksgiving : which is the next duty to be performed , and the next which every Day must be paid duly . 

5.  Be always giving thanks , 1 These . 5. 18.  In thanksgiving there is both the Memory , Meditation , and serious acknowledgement of God's blessings . And in token of the truth thereof , and dedication , and consecration of our Bodies and Souls , with all we have , to divine use , that is , to the honour and service of God. This was figured in the Sacrifices of the old Law , which were first set before the Altar , and so presented to God , and then afterwards were offered unto him . This dedication is made , when the intention of our minds , and purpose of our hearts , and in all our affections we give up , and set ourselves apart . This was first done in our Baptism , and is continually renewed in the Lord's Supper . Thankfulness is all the Rent God requires of us for the House we dwell in , and all the accommodations thereunto annexed , Psal . 5● . 15.  We would not forfeit any thing we hold for nonpayment of rent . Take we heed lest for want of thankfulness , we give God occasion to dispossess us of himself , and of all the good things we enjoy in him . 

6.  Be always willing to remove from these lowest , into higher Rooms in this House . By Death we do no more , but change our Lodging , from lower to higher Rooms in the same House . Be willing to die at any time : So Simeon was , Lord now lettest thou thy Servant depart in peace . So was Paul , Having a desire to depart , and to be with Christ , which is far better . Be always prepared to die , by dying to sin , and to the World continually . And by making every Day your dying Day , by breaking off sins ; and avoiding all occasions of sinning , and embracing all occasions of doing good : and doing all in such a manner , as you would , if you knew you should die presently . Making also to your selves , Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness , and setting your House in Order , and praying to God continually , To teach you to number your Days , that you may apply your hearts unto Wisdom . 

FINIS . 

IMPRIMATUR . 

Rob. Grove R. P. D. Humph. Episc . Lond. a Sac. Dom.  

Mart. 9 1668  / 9  Mat. 8. 20.  P. 14.  Psal . 91. 1.  1 Joh. 3. 24.  4. 13. 15 , 16.  Gen. 11. 4.  Psal . 144. 2.  Esa . 33. 15 , 16.  Psal . 61. 3. 71. 7.  prov. 15. 10.  Esa . 25. 4.  Jer. 22. 14.  prov. 21. 9  Esa . 28. 20 , Job 11. 7 , 8 , 9  Psal . 119. 69.  Gen. 13. 17.  Exod. 3. 8.  2 Pet. 1. 4.  Esa . 49. 20.  2 Cor. 6. 12.  1 Joh. 1. 5.  Psal . 36. 9  esay 60. 19  Exod. 10. 22 , 23.  2 Cor. 3. 18.  Esa . 50. 10.  Lam. 3. 2.  Psal . 119. 105.  Psal . 18. 28.  Mic. 7. 8.  Psal . 84. 11.  Psal . 88 15.  Cant. 5. 2.  2 Cor. 6. 10.  7. 14.  Rom. 5. 1 , 6.  Psal . 39 9  2 Sam. 6. 22.  Job 29. 3.  4● ▪  6.  Job 3. 25 , 26.  Job 31 1.  7.  25.  24.  Heb 11. 25 , 26 , 27.  Luke 15. 17.  Pro. 1. 13.  Numb . 22. 18.  Pro. 24. 3 , 4.  27. 27.  3. 10.  Psal . 112. 3.  9 25.  Joel 2. 24.  1 King 17. 13.  2 King. 4. 1 , 2.  Judg. 18. 10.  2 Cor. 12. 2.  1 Eph. 1. 3.  Psal . 34. 9 , 10.  37. 19  1 King. 18. 4.  Esa . 33. 16.  Psal . 81. 16.  Dan. 1. 8  ▪ 17.  Deut. 8. 9  1 King. 17. 15. 19 8.  Mat 14. 15 22.  Mat. 6. 1.  Pro. 30. 8.  Psal . 37. 25.  Exod. 25. 29.  2 King. 2. 19 , 21.  ●●● . 5. 18.  Psal . 119. 103.  Jer. 15. 16.  Herb. Ser.  1 Cor. 3. 2.  Heb. 5. 12 , 13 , 14.  Joh. 16.  1● . Mark 4. 33.  Psal . 63. 6.  2 Tim. 3. 16.  Esa . 59 21.  Joh. 4. 20.  Esa . 44. 3.  Joh. 7. 38 , 39  Cant. 1. 2.  2. 4.  Es . 55. 1.  Eph. 5. 19  Zach. 9 15.  Joh. 6. 50.  1 Cor. 3. 30.  Col. 1. 19  2. 9  Joh. 1. 16.  Eph. 3 8.  Math. 15. 37.  Joh. 6. 35.  Joh. 6. 27.  6. 51.  John 6. 52.  6. 39  esay 25. 6.  Mat. 22. 4.  Luke 14. 16.  Cant. 5. 1.  Acts 17. 11.  Esa . 43. 4.  Pro. 12. 26.  rev. 1. 6.  1 Pet. 2. 9  rev. 3. 20. 2  Sam. 19 28.  Psal . 110. 1.  Luk 22 29 , 30.  Heb. 1. 14.  Pro. 15 15.  Luk. 22. 43.  Dan. 10. 19  Psal . 91.  Acts 12. 15.  Mat. 18. 10.  Exod. 21. 29.  ● 37. 16.  2 Chr. 9 20.  Est . 1. 7.  1 Pet. 1. 7 , 18.  2 Pet. 1. 4.  1 Tim. 4. 8.  1 Sam. 20. 24 , 25.  Eph 2. 6.  Cant. 1. 12.  Mat. 26. 20. 9 10.  Cant. 1. 2.  Rom. 8. 38. 39  Est . 6. 1.  Job 7. 13 , 14.  Gen. 28. 11  ▪ 16.  Psal . 3. 5  ▪ 6.  Psal . 41. 3.  2 Cor. 1. 20.  Jer. 31. 26.  rev. 19 8.  Gen. 41. 42.  Est . 8. 15.  Exod. 28. 5.  6 , 8 , 30.  6. 40.  Joh. 1. 12 , 13.  1 Pet. 2. 5.  Heb. 13. 14 , 16.  Rom. 1. 17.  Psal . 45. 17.  Esa . 4. 5.  Cant. 6. 10.  Acts 12. 21.  Col. 3. 12 , 14.  Col. 2. 15.  Cant. 4. 4.  Eph 6. 16.  Heb. 11. 34.  Job 13. 15.  1 Tim. 6. 12.  1 Sam. 21. 9  Eph. 6. 17.  Heb. 4. 12.  Math. 4. 7. 10.  Es 27. 1.  Esa . 39 2.  Cant. 3. 10.  Est . 1. 6.  2 King. 23. 7.  Esa . 54. 2.  Jer. 4. 20. 10. 20.  Exod. 26. 1.  1 King. 6. 29.  Esa . 3. 16.  Ezek. 23. 14.  Esa . 5. 12.  Luke 25. 29.  Eccls 10. 19  Gal. 3. 1.  Cant. 1 3.  John 12. 3.  2 Cor. 2. 14 , 15 , 16.  Esa . 41. 10.  Esa . 43. 2.  Heb. 13. 5.  Mat. 9 2.  1 Joh. 1. 9  Luk. 6. 20 , 21.  Rom. 8. 28.  2 Cor. 8. 12.  Psal . 51. 8.  Eph 5. 19  Acts 3. 6.  Psal . 119. 111.  72.  Psal . 19 10.  Job 22. 24 , 25.  Exod. 34. 6.  Psal . 48. 10.  Job 37. 23.  Psal . 86. 5. 102. 8. 29. 4.  Joh. 1. 14 , 16.  Job 4. 19  John 5. 26.  Acts 17. 28.  Psal . 66. 8 , 9  Mat. 24 43.  Psal . 121. 3 , 4.  Luke 5. 39  rev. 21. 5.  Esa . 65. 17.  Jer. 31. 31.  Ez. 36 26.  Es . 4. 5.  Psal . 45. 13.  Exod. 13. 21.  Esa . 4. 6.  Mal. 3. 6.  Heb. 13. 8.  Psal . 102. 25. 26 , 27.  Jos . 14. 7. 10. 11.  Deut. 34. 7 , 2 Chron. 16. 9  Esa . 50. 2.  59 1.  Psal . 103. 17.  119. 90.  esay 4. 29.  Psal . 103 ▪ 5.  Psal . 123 ▪ ● . Is . 63. 15.  57 15.  1 Kings 8. 27.  Jer. 23. 24.  Job ▪ 22.  12-15 . 1 Cor. 13. 12.  1 Joh. 3. 2.  Psal 19 1. 76. 8.  Rom. 1. 18.  Mat. 6. 9  Numb . 35 34.  Ps . 132. 13 , 14.  135. 21.  1 Kings 8. 13.  Deut. 12. 11 ▪  2 Cor. 6. 16.  Eph. 3. 17.  Rom. 8. 9  1 Cor. 6. 19  Joh. 14. 16 , 17.  Rom. 8 ▪ 11.  1 ▪ Chron. 17. 5.  8.  Psal . 23. 4.  3. 5.  139. 18.  Gen. 28. 15 ▪  46. 4.  Ezek. 1. 19 21.  Job 1. 19  Judg. 9 46 , 50.  2 Kings 2● . 8 , 9  each . 14. 2.  Numb . 16. 32.  Psal . 90. 1.  & 91. 1.  Esa . 8. 9 , 10.  54. 16 , 17.  Psal . 62. 3.  Heb. 12. 29.  Dan. 3. 20.  Dan. 25. 27.  Psal . 66. 9  Jer. 32. 40.  Judas 24.  1 Pet. 1. 5.  Joh. 10. 9  14. 6.  Eph. 3. 12.  Col. 4. 14.  Philem. 2.  2 Tim. 4. 10.  1 Joh. 2. 19  prov. 10. 25.  2 Sam. 11.  Mark 14. 71.  Psal . 119. 106.  Mat. 26. 34 , 35.  Gal. 6. 1.  1 Pet. 1. 23.  2 Sam. 12 , 13.  Luk. 22. 61 , 62.  Eph. 1. 20 , 21 , 22.  Col. 2. 10.  1 Tim. 2. 6.  Esa . 40. 2.  Mat. 3. 15.  Eph. 1. 3.  Heb. 9 14. 10. 19  Rom. 8. 33 , 34.  4. 25.  Psal . 45. 9  Rom. 8. 38 , 39  1 Kings 10. 9  Heb. 10 19 , 20.  John 14 6.  Jer. 22. 14.  Joh. 20. 20.  Rom. 5. 5.  Cant. 4. 16.  Rom. 8. 28.  Psal . 87. 7.  26. 3.  Gen 2 8 , 9  3. 23 , 24.  rev. 2. 7.  22. 14.  17.  Psal . 119. 45.  Cant. 4 16.  Cant. 4. 12.  esay 27. 23.  Zec. 2. 5.  Psal . 24. 50.  10. 11.  1 Cor. 3. 21.  Rom. 4. 13.  2 Cor. 6. 10.  Psal 50. 14 , 15.  Psal . 116. 12 , 13.  14. 17.  Psal . 145. 2.  esay 42 8.  Psal . 50 23.  Luk. 2. 22.  17. 14 — 19  Psal . 103 1.  9 1.  Psal . 50. 22.  Mat. 6. 25.  Rom. 8. 32.  Mat. 8. 20.  Heb. 11. 37. 38.  1 Cor. 4. 11.  Mat. 10. 24.  2 Cor. 8. 9  1 Sam. 1. 8.  Acts 28. 7. 30.  1 King. 17. 9 2  King. 4. 8.  2 Cor. 5. 1.  Eccl. 7. 20.  Pro. 20. 9  1 Joh. 1. 8 , 10.  Jam. 3. 2.  Pro. 17. 13.  20. 22.  Psal . 35. 12.  esay 45. 7.  Amos 3. 6.  Eze. 21. 3 , 4.  Eccl. 9 2.  Joh. 6. 60.  Rom. 8. 38 , 39  Mat. 6. 13.  Exod. 14. 13.  Psal . 69. 14 , 15.  Dan. 3. 27. 6. 22.  2 Sam. 24. 25.  esay 57 1.  1 Kings 14. 13.  2 King. 22. 20.  Gen. 50. 20.  Esa . 66. 1.  32. 18.  Dan. 1. 3  Eccl. 11. 7.  Gen. 49. 15.  1 Sam. 21. 9  Est . 5. 13.  Esa . 34. 14.  Mat. 8. 20.  Gen. 8. 9  Exod. 23. 12.  Mat. 12. 43 , 44.  Psal . 132. 8.  13 , 14.  Gen. 2. 2 , 3.  Pro. 24. 25.  Eccl. 6. 5.  Job 3 11 , 13. 17. 18.  Job 11. 18.  Jer. 30. 10.  Est . 5. 10. 14.  Pro. 18. 14.  Job 28. 12.  Id. 14.  Pro. 23. 4 , 5.  Esa . 55. 2.  Eccl. 1. 2.  Luk. 12. 16. 20.  Id. 20. 21.  2 Kings 4. 29. 31.  Zech. 10. 2.  Mal. 2. 10.  Psal . 116. 7.  Jos . 24. 25  ▪ 26.  Psal ▪ 119. 173  Psal . 119. 112.  17. 3.  Psal . 119. 32.  Psal . 73 25.  63. 3.  118 ▪ 8 , 9  Zech. 2. 11.  esay 56. 3.  6. 7.  1 Cor. 6. 17.  Psal . 13. 5.  esay ▪ 50. 10.  Psal . 52. 7.  5.  1 Sam. 18. 1.  Ruth . 1. 14. 16.  2 Kings 18. 6.  Char. 1st . 1 John 3. 24.  Mat. 19 16. 23.  Luk. 8. 11 , 12.  Mat ▪ 6. 20.  Jam. 2. 10.  1 Kings 9 4.  Luke . 1. 6.  Psal . 119 3.  101 104.  18. 23.  Mat. 5. 19  1 These . 5 22.  Psal . 119. 128  Rom. 7. 12.  Heb. 13. 8.  Psal . 119. 5.  Neh. 1. 11.  Act. 24. 16.  Luk. 17. 4.  Acts 3. 19  rev. 2. 21. 16. 9  & 21.  Acts 16. 31.  Char. 2.  1 Joh. 4. 13  Heb. 6 4.  Mat. 3. 11.  Acts 2. 38.  1 Cor. 12. 3.  Char. 3.  Joh. 4. 15.  1 Tim. 1. 15.  Rom. 10. 8 , 9 , 10.  Psal . 116. 6.  esay 44. 5.  Mark 8. 38.  rev. 21. 8.  Joh. 12 42 , 43  Heb. 13 15.  Tit. 1. 15.  Psal . 50. 16 , 17.  Char. 4. 1  Joh. 4. 16.  Mat. 22. 37.  Rom. 16. 14.  Eph. 3. 15.  Col. 3. 14.  Rom. 13. 10.  Psal . 16. 3.  Cant. 8. 6 , 7.  Rom. 10. 2.  Rom. 10. 1.  Job 31. 29.  1 Sam. 24. 26.  2 King. 6. 14  ▪ 24.  Exod. 23. 4 , 5.  Mat. 5. 44.  prov. 25. 21.  Rom. 12. 9 1  Joh. 3. 18.  1 Pet. 2. 22.  Job 13. 16.  18. 13 , 14.  11. 20.  27. 8 , 9  Mat. 23.  24. 51.  Acts 8. 23.  1 Joh. 5.  ● . 2 Pet. 2. 22.  Esa . 66. 3 , 4.  Psal . 29. 30.  & 81. 13.  Jer. 2. 25.  Judas 5. 8.  Deut. 32. 17.  Jer. 6. 13.  Job 15. 5.  Gen. 6. 2.  John 4. 22.  18. 40.  John 3. 16.  Phillip 3. 18 , 19  esay 64. 7.  Jer. 50. 4 , 5.  Acts 11. 24.  2 Cor. 6. 16.  Pro. 1 ▪ 11.  Jer. 18. 18 ▪  2 Tim. 4. 10.  Mat. 19 30.  2 Pet 2. 20.  Mat. 12. 43.  2 Pet. 2. 22.  Jer. 44. 15 , 16.  Hos . 5. 11.  Numb . 27. 18.  Nehe. 9 20.  esay 11. 2.  Zech. 12. 10.  Rom. 1. 4.  1 Cor. 4. 21.  2 Cor 4 13.  2 Tim. 1. 7.  Numb . 14. 24.  Eph. 2. 2.  esay 19 14.  20. 10.  Rom. 11. 8.  2 Cor. 2. 12.  Rom. 8. 14.  Gal. 5. 25.  Rom. 7. 6.  John 4. 24.  Gal. 5 22. 23.  1 Cor. 8. 2.  Rome 1. 30.  Ezek. 33. 31.  1 John 3. 12.  1 Kings 22. 8.  Psal . 4. 8. 91. 1.  Job 11. 13. 18 , 19  Pro. 1. 33.  1 Sa. 22. 23.  Exod. 9 18  ▪ 22  1 Cor. 1. 30.  Pro. 13. 4.  21. 25.  Psal . 36. 8.  Psal . 106 19  Hos . 8. 11. 10. 1. 13. 2.  esay 59 7.  zech . 7. 12.  Heb. 2. 15.  Mat. 15. 6.  1 Tim. 1. 19  Pro. 14. 9  Acts 23. 13.  rev. 22. 15.  Ezek. 18. 31.  Jer. 18. 11.  Luk. 3. 4.  Heb. 12. 13.  2 Pet. 1. 10.  Judges 16. 18.  2 Sam. 5. 8.  Es . 4. 2.  Jer. 2. 19  Eph. 2. 12.  Mal 2. 2.  Psal . 69. 22.  Esa . 10. 3 , 4.  Mat. 13. 30 , 42.  rev. 3. 17.  Exod. 5. 19  Jam. 4. 9  51.  Eccl. 8. 12 , 13.  2 Pet. 2 3.  Psal . 140. 11.  Numb . 32 23  Rom. 1. 18.  & 2. 8 , 9  Psal . 9 17.  11. 6.  Rom. 7. 24.  Mat. 11. 28.  Psal . 144. 2. to the end . Deut. 33 26. to the end . Pro. 8. 31. to the end . Psal . 118. 7.  Rom. 8. 28.  Psal . 146. 3 , 5.  65. 4.  Luk. 1. 53.  Mat. 5. 6.  esay 44. 3.  55. 1.  rev. 22. 17.  esay 26. 9  Psal 42. 1 , 2 ▪  73 2●  ●● 45.  Hos . 14. 2.  rev. 3. 18.  ●say 85. 1.  Gen. 23. 9  Phil. 3. 7 , 10.  Psal . 10. 4.  Job . 21. 14.  Mat. 19  esay 58.  esay 55. 1.  Luk. 15. 14 , 16.  esay 66. 2.  & 57 15.  Luk. 9 23.  John 1. 18.  Gal. 5. 24.  Luk. 14. 26.  Acts 20. 24.  Mat. 11. 29.  Joh. 14. 6.  Mark 9 24.  rev. 3. 18.  Acts 14. 18.  Esa . 30. 22.  Zech. 3. 3 , 4.  Eph. 4. 24.  Psal . 119. 106.  1 John 3 24.  4. 13.  15. 16.  prov. 23. 26.  Psal . 24. 7 , 9  1 Joh. 2. 16.  Col. 3. 1 , 2.  rev. 3. 20.  prov. 10. 10.  Luk. 8. 19  2 Cor. 8. 21.  Deut. 5. 27.  Acts 10. 33.  2 Cor. 8. 8.  Ezek. 36. 26.  Acts 2. 37.  2 Cor. 10 4 , 5.  Hos . 14. 3 , 8.  Jer. 4. 3.  Acts 16. 14.  Psal 119 3● . Col. 3. 22. 2  Cor. 1. 12.  & 2. 17.  Psal . 12. 2.  John 1. 47.  Psal . 110. 3.  Jer. 17. 5.  Hos . 10. 2.  Jer. 5. 23.  1 John 3. 3.  2 Cor. 3. 5.  Phil. 2. 13.  john 15. 5.  Esa● 42. 18.  Luk. 12. 56 , 57  esay 55. 6.  Mat. 7. 12.  2 Pet. 1. 19  Esa . 58. 3.  Ezek. 1. 12.  Acts 17. 11 , 12.  Esa . 51. 1.  John 5.  Luk. 12. 34.  James 5. 7.  Ezek. 44. 6.  1 Pet. 4. 3.  Phil. 1. 6.  2d . Sort.  John 14. 4 , ● . Job 16. 9 , & 13. 24.  Eph. 3. 17.  John 6. 35.  Mat. 11. 28.  Mat. 9 12 , 13.  Luk. 19 10.  esay 61. 1 , 2 , 3.  Numb . 21. 9  Phil. 3. 7 , 8.  Rom. 3. 20. 7. 9  Gal. 3. 10 , 24.  Gen. 3. 8 , 10.  Acts 2. 37. 9 6. 16. 29.  Rom. 8. 15.  1 King. 19 11 , 12.  Ezek. 37. 4 — 7.  rev. 14. 3.  Jer. 4. 3.  Hos . 12. 10.  1 King. 21. 4.  Hos . 7. 14.  prov. 1. 22. 2. 14. 10. 23.  Psal . 62. 4.  Phil. 3. 19  rev. 6. 16.  rev. 18. 7.  Luk. 16. 25. 6. 25.  Mark 10. 49.  Zech. 12. 10.  With 13. 1.  2 Chr. 33. 12.  Mat. 5. 3.  Esa . 66. 2.  Luk. 15. 14 , 22.  1 Kings 20. 31 , 32.  Mat. 7. 16 , 17.  Job 19 28.  esay 61. 3.  John 15. 8.  Deut. 32. 32 , 33.  Judas 12.  Hos . 10. 1.  Luk. 7. 6 , 7 , 9  Mat. 15. 26 , 27.  Rom. 7. 14.  esay 64 6.  Eph. 5. 13.  Gal. 5. 17.  Rom. 7. 14. to the end . Rom. 8. 1.  2 Cor. 10. 3.  Gal. 6. 8.  2 Cor. 1. 12.  John 1. 47.  Psal . 32. 2.  1 Joh. 3 6.  Psal . 119. 3.  Rom. 6. 12 , 14.  Rom. 8. 9  1 John 1. 9  1 Cor. 11. 31.  Phil. 2. 17.  1 Pet. 2. 2 , 5.  2 Cor. 8. 12.  Psal . 119. 4 , 5 , 6  Neh. 1. 11.  Heb. 13 : 18.  Psal . 4. 6 , 7. 27. 4.  1 Sam. 7. 2.  Mat. 5. 4.  1 John 3. 20.  Job 23. 10.  Psal . 4. 2 , 5.  Job 27. 6.  John 1. 12.  Herb. Bag. in the end . Third Sort.  2 Cor. 5. 17.  33.  14.  2 Cor 1. 12.  Joh. 20. 27 , 28.  Eph. 1. 13.  4. 30.  2 Cor. 5. 5.  1 Cor. 2. 9 , 15.  John 2. 27.  Rom. 8. 16.  Eph. 3. 12.  Joh. 14. 21.  1 Joh. 3. 2.  Eccl. 2. 2.  Heb. 6. 11. 10. 22.  Rom. 14. 7.  1 Pet. 1. 8.  Rom. 8 38 , 39  1 Pet. 1. 5.  esay 60.  1● . 2 Pet. 1. 10.  Heb. 10. 22.  Joh. 2. 12 , 18.  Neh. 13. 7 , 8.  〈◊〉 . 4. 6 , 7.  ●3 . 3.  Tit. 1. 9  2 Tim. 1. 13.  Heb. 4. 14.  rev. 2. 25.  Heb. 3. 5 , 6.  Cant. 3. 4.  2 Pet. 1. 5 , 6 , 7.  & 3. 18.  1 These . 4. 1 , 10.  Col. 2. 19  Eph. 4. 15.  Luk. 19 18 , 19  & 17. 15.  2 These . 1. 3.  Mat. 4. 4.  James 4 14.  Psal . 27. 1.  46. 1 , 2.  Neh. 9 25.  Rom. 8. 30.  Eph. 4. 1.  1 These . 2. 12.  1 Pet. 1. 15.  Col. 1. 9 , 10 , 11.  Heb. 11. 38.  1 Cor. 4. 11.  Mat. 8. 20.  Heb. 10. 34. 2  Cor. 5. 1.  Esa . 40. 17.  Pro. 23. 5.  8. 21.  Est . 2. 9  esay 49. 16.  Cant. 8. 6.  Hab. 3. 17 , 18.  Psal . 16. 5 , 6.  2 Cor. 6. 10.  Psal . 33. 18 , 19  & 34. 10.  37. 19  & 132. 15.  Heb. 13. 5 , 6.  Deut. 8. 2 , 16.  1 King. 19 6 , 8.  2 Chron. 16. 9  Mark 9 23.  Job 13. 15.  Dan. 1. 8. 3. 17 , 18.  Mat 6. 25. to the end . 1 Tim. 6. 8.  Psal . 37. 16.  Psal . 113. 7 , 8.  Psal . 112. 3.  2.  2 Chro. 25 9  Job 42. 10.  Psal . 37. 34.  James 5. 11.  Psal . 119. 137. 75.  prov. 17. 16.  Mich. 7. 9  This is for London especially . esay 10. 7.  66. 5.  Rome 8. 37. 38. 39  Pro. 30. 8.  1 Tim. 6. 8.  Gen. 28. 20.  1 Tim. 6. 9  2 Sam. 7. 18.  Psal . 23. 5.  Gen. 32. 10.  1 Tim. 6. 17.  Deut. 8. 11 , 12 , 13 , 14.  Luk. 10. 42.  Lam. 3. 22.  Jer. 22. 13 , 14.  Hab. 2. 9 , 10 , 11  Esa . 4. 9 , 10.  Zeph 1. 13.  Mal. 1. 4.  Amos 5. 10 , 11.  Micah 3. 10 , 11  Amos 5. 15.  6. 11.  esay 5. 8.  31. 2.  Pro. 15. 25.  Pro. 〈…〉  Eph. 〈…〉  rev. 18. 4  Zech. 5. 4.  Exod. 2. 7.  prov. 24. 27.  2 Tim. 3. 16.  Luk. 14 28 , 29.  Herb. Ch. Porch . Rom. 13. 8  Psal . 112. 5.  Pro. 24. 3 , 4.  Pro. 2. 6.  James 1. 5.  Deut. 22. 8.  Deut. 20 5.  1 Cor. 10. 31.  Josua 24. 15.  Pro. 30. 15.  Phil. 3. 8.  2 Chro. 11. 16.  Heb. 11. 24 , 25.  Phillip 4. 11 , 12.  Mat. 6. 21.  24.  1 John 2. 15.  Ephes . 1. 3 , 4.  Col. 1. 12.  1 Joh. 3. 1.  Eph. 3 19  Acts 20. 28.  2 Cor. 8 , 9  Mat. 8. 20.  Joh. 8. 35.  2 Tim. 2. 19  Rom. 9 11.  11. 5.  John 6. 37.  10. 28.  Heb. 12. 23.  Luk. 10. 20.  rev. 20. 15.  Mat. 24. 24.  Acts 13. 48.  Tit. 1. 1.  1 Pet. 1.  ● , 5.  Eph. 1. 4.  Joh. 15. 16.  Eph. 2. 8.  Rom. 9  1● . 12. 13.  Ezek. 36. 26.  Eph. 1. 18.  19 , 20.  1 Tim. 5  1 Cor. 4. 15.  Gal. 4. 15.  Phil. 19  1 Sa. 25. 32 , 33.  Psal . 141. 5.  Acts 8. 21 , 23.  Heb. 12. 24.  Phil. 1. 28.  1 These . 2. 15 , 16  〈◊〉 1● . 15.  Judg. 4. 18.  Gal. 5. 4.  4. 19  2 Pet. 2. 7 , 8.  Psal . 119. 158.  136.  Jer. 9 1 , 2 , 3.  Sam. 15. 35.  Ezek. 10. 6.  Luk. 19 41.  2 Pet. 2. 4.  Phil. 18. 19  Rom. 10. 1.  Gen. 17. 18.  1 Joh. 5. 16.  Luk. 23 34.  Acts 7. 60. 17.  Judas 22. 23.  Deut. 6. 6.  7. 11.  18 , 19 , 20.  Eph. 6. 4.  Judg. 13. 22 , 23.  2 Tim. 2. 24 , 25 , 26.  Jam. 5. 19 , 20.  2 Cor. 8. 12.  Esa . 3. 9  5. 8.  Leu. 19 17.  Mark 10. 10.  Gen. 20. 6.  Gen. 25. 27.  28. 33.  1 King. 20. 31 , 34.  Luk. 18. 11.  Mat. 19 20.  John 15. 4 , 5.  2 King. 10. 31.  Heb. 11. 7.  1 John 3. 12.  Acts 9 4.  Gen. 19 23.  Mat. 18.  1● . Luk. 15. 7 , 10.  Jam. 5. 19  Dan. 12. 3.  1 Cor. 12. 7.  1 John 4. 13.  Ezek. 18. 32.  Mat. 16. 26.  Acts 2.  1 King. 18. 43. 44.  esay 49. 5. 4.  Jo● . 2. 41 , 42.  Gen 9 27.  esay 33. 24.  44. 5.  Leu. 26. 12.  Psal . 76. 2.  Rom. 1. 16.  1 Cor. 1. 21.  James 1. 21.  John 6. 67 , 68  Gen. 27. 28 , 39  Job 38. 28.  Esa . 55. 10 ▪  1 Cor. 1. 10.  2 Cor. 13. 11.  Phil. 2. 1 , 2.  Eph. 4. 3  ▪ 7.  Gen. 13. 8 ▪  Mat. 8. 7.  Eph. 4. 13.  1 Cor. 11. 19  Jer. 32. 39  Rom. 14. 19 ▪  Acts 11. 24. 15. 38 , 39  Gen. 6. 4.  Acts 14. 15.  Psal . 15. 4.  Eph. 4. 2 , 3.  Phillip 3. 14  ▪ 17.  Ro ▪ 16. 17 , 18.  Judas 8. 11 , 12.  Psal . 35. 20.  Heb. 13. 1.  Phil. 1. 9  Rom. 12. 15.  Psal . 9 1 , 2.  7. 17.  47. 1 , 2.  149. 5 , 6.  Dan. 4. 27.  Psal . 113. 4 , 5 , 6  Esa . 57 15.  Phil. 2 , 6 - ▪ 9  Dan. 3. 26.  7 , 18. 22. 25.  rev. 19 10. 22. 9  Josua 1. 2.  Psal . 57 2.  Jam. 1. 17.  Psal . 22. 2.  Exod. 14. 15.  Eph. 5. 1.  1 John 4. 11.  Mal. 2. 10.  Rom. 12. 16.  Mat. 11. 29.  Phil. 2. 5.  Pro. 29. 23.  Psal . 78. 17. 56.  107. 11.  1 Chr. 21. 1.  Mich. 6. 6.  Hosea 7. 16.  Zech. 1. 16.  Eccl. 5. 8.  Job 21. 22.  Gen. 18. 25.  Eph. 1. 11.  Psal . 71. 19  Joel . 2. 21.  Psal . 138. 6.  Psal . 83. from the beginning to the end . 21. 17. to the end . Psal . 80 ● . 86. 16.  esay 51. 9 , 10.  63. 15.  esay 51. 12.  esay 41. 10.  Psal . 27. 1.  3.  esay 49. 5.  2 Sam. 22. 40.  Psal . 29. 11.  2 Sam. 22. 18.  Exod. 15. 13.  Psal . 71. 9  73. 26.  Zech. 4. 6.  Esa . 26. 4.  40. 29.  31.  84. 7.  Job 17. 9  Psal . 71. 16.  27. 14.  Lam. 3. 18. 21.  Rom. 4. 21.  Eph. 3. 20.  Rom. 11. 23.  1 Cor. 10. 22.  Ezek. 22. 14.  Luk. 12. 4 , 5.  Dan. 3. 17 , 18.  Micah ▪ 5. 4.  Psal . 41. 3.  Deut. 33. 27.  Phil. 4. 13.  Psal 68 34 , 35.  1 King. 8. 27.  Psal . 148. 3.  esay 66. 1.  Jer. 23. 23 , 24.  Psal . 139.  7-11 . Pro. 15. 3.  Psal . 51. 3.  Job 24. 5.  esay 65. 1.  Eph. 3. 18.  Psal . 31. 19  103. 11 , 12.  esay 63. 7.  2 Chr. 32. 25.  Deut. 10. 4.  Galliard ▪ 5. 14.  Psal . 119. 101.  Heb. 10. 28.  Deut. 33. 2.  Exod. 20. 1.  31. 18 , 32. 16.  Jam. 2. 8.  Rom. 4. 15.  1 Joh. 3. 4.  Rom. 4. 14.  Rom. 2. 15.  Mat. 5. 27.  22. 37.  Rom. 6. 7.  12. 13.  3. 31. ●  Ezek. 43. 12.  Acts. 17. 26.  Job . 38. 8 — 12.  26. 10.  Psal . 104. 9  Jer. 5. 22.  1 Kin. 2. 36 , 37.  1 Cor. 7. 24.  Jer. 17. 5.  Pro. 27. 8.  Psal . 119. 21.  118.  Heb. 3. 12.  1 Joh. 3. 4.  Heb. 2. 2.  Eccl. 7. 20.  Jam. 3. 2.  Hag. 1. 5.  ● . Jer. 8. 6.  esay 46. 8.  Jer. 2. 19  Ezek. 16. 61.  Rom. 6. 21.  Jer. 6. 15.  Ezek. 36. 31.  Mat. 12. 44.  Hos . 2. 7.  Luk. 15. 18.  Hos . 14. 1.  Pro. 28. 13.  Luk. 15.  esay 1. 18.  55. 7 , 8.  Jer. 3. 1.  Rome 3. 27.  Mark 1. 15.  Rom. 1. 17.  Heb. 10 37.  Hab. 3. 4.  Hab. 1. 13.  2. 3.  4.  Heb. 11. 1.  Jer. 15. 16.  Psal . 37. 1.  Joh. 6. 56 , 57  Eph. 6.  13-19 . Mat. 6. 34.  Gen. 47. 9  Psal . 73. 14.  Gen. 19 23.  1 Sam. 12. 17.  Psal . 30. 6 , 7.  Psal . 27. 1.  Eccl. 11. 8.  Amos 6. 3.  esay 59 9  2 King. 9 22.  Gen. 13. 3.  15. 16.  ● ▪ Chr. 21. 1.  Psal . 38. 19  73. 14.  34. 19  ● Cor. 12. 10.  ●●am . 27. 1.  Psal . 31. 22.  17. 13.  〈◊〉 . 11. 35 , 36.  Psal . 71. 3.  56. 3.  23. 4. 27. 1. 125. 1. 24. 5. 11.  1 Cor. 10. 13.  1 Cor. 4. 8 — 14.  2 Cor. 11. 23. to the end . Heb 11. 30. 39  1 These . 3. 3  Job 1. 21.  Amos 3. 6. 2  Sam. 16. 12.  Psal . 39 9 1  Sam. 3. 18.  Gen. 42. 21.  Luke 15. 17.  Deut 8. 2.  Psal . 66. 10.  esay 1. 25. 27. 9  Zech. 13. 9 2  Cor. 1. 9  Psal . 119. 67.  Heb. 12. 10 , 11.  Hos . 5 15.  Psal . 78. 34. 1  Cor. 15. 29.  Pro. 7. 7. 1  Cor. 11 , 32. 2  Cor. 4. 17.  esay 27. 78.  Jer. 46. 28.  Psal . 103 9 125 3.  Jer. 3. 12.  2 Cor. 4. 17.  Hos . 6. 1 , 2.  Psal . 3. 5.  Es . 54. 78. 10 25. 57 16.  Mich. 7. 18.  Lam 3 39 , ●0 . Ez. 9 6.  Psal . 38. 18.  Lam. 3. 42.  Job 42. 6  Psal . 62. 8. 142. 1 , 2. 57 1 , 2. 2  These . 14. 11. 2  Cor 12. 8.  Psal . 40. 13.  Lam. 3. 55.  Job 34. 31 , 32.  2 Chr. ●0 . 12.  Jer. 3. 23.  Psal 33 16 , 17. 127. 1 , 2 esay 30 7. 31. 3.  Hos 14. 3. 2  Pet. 2. 9  Eph 3. 26. 2  Chr. 14. 11.  Rome 4. 21.  Mark. 1. 40. 2  Cor. 12 9  Psal . 33 18 , 19  Rev 3 19  Psal . 94 12. 122. 9  71. 17. 2  Tim. 4. 14. 2  Cor. 1. 10.  Pro. 3. 11.  Psal . 62. 1 , 5.  Mich. 7. 9 2  Sam. 15. 26.  Psal . 131. 2. 38. 14 , 15.  Ezr. 9 13.  Job 11. 6.  Mich. 7. 9  Joh. 18. 11.  Rom. 8. 29.  Es 53. 3.  Heb. 11. 25. 26.  Rom. 8. 18. 2  Cor. 4. 17.  Es . 63 15.  Exo. 2. 25.  Gen 31. 12.  rev. 2. 9  Psal . 31. 7.  Psal . 119. 50. 46. 1. 91. 15. 99 37 , 39  Es . 41. 10 , 14. 43. 2. 49. 13 , 14.  Psal . 34. 19  Job 5. 18. 19 , 20.  Psal . 94. 12 , 13. 33. 18 , 19 91. 14 , 15.  Jer. 29. 11.  Jam 1. 12  Psal . 73. 24.  Es . 30 15. 50. 10.  Psal . 31. 5. 112. 7.  Cant. 2. 14. 8. 5.  Psal . 71. 20.  job 13. 15.  Heb. 11 11.  Psal . 85. 9  Esa . 8. 17. 30. 8.  & 28. 16.  & 40. 31.  Jam. 1. 2.  Heb. 12. 11.  Rom. 8. 28. 37 , 38 , 39  1 These . 5. 5 , 6.  Psal . 77 4.  Pro. 6. 9 , 10.  Psal . 5. 3.  57 8.  119. 148.  62.  134. 1.  2 Cor. 11. 27.  Luke 6. 12.  Joel CITIZEN : 13.  2 Sam. 12. 16.  Psal . 1. 2.  63. 6.  Esa . 26. 9  Psal . 4. 4.  Deut. 4. 9  23.  Jos . 22. 5.  Eph. 5. 15.  Mark 13. 35.  36. 37.  Ezech. 3. 17.  esay 52. 8. 56. 10.  2 Tim. 4. 5.  Mat. 6. 1. CITIZEN  Cor. 10. 31.  Cant. 5. 2.  Ionas 1. 8.  Rom. 12. 11  Acts 20. 20 , 31.  Luk. 2. 29.  Phil. 1. 2  ▪ 3.  esay 38. 1.  Luk. 16. 9  Psal . 9 12.  