The middle way of predetermination asserted. Between the Dominicans and Jesuites, Calvinists and Arminians, or, A scriptural enquiry into the influence and causation of God in and unto humane actions; expecially such as are sinfull. / Humfrey, John, 1621-1719. (Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside.,London, :1679.)

To the Reverend and Learned Author . SIR , 

Since I had the honour and satisfaction of seeing your Papers , I have blamed your delay in the publication of them ; especially being designed to recall a Romish Proselyte that was gone from the Communion of our Church , they might ( in this unhappy and distracted Juncture ) have seasonably helped towards the recovery of others , whose temporal as well as eternal Interests make them as eager and desirous of satisfaction . I know that Modesty is a virtue , and Caution a very commendable thing : but Charity and Love to the Souls of men is much more so . You have lived to see the Church forlorn and desolate , persecuted and seemingly forsaken ; and after a little respite and the hopes of settlement , to be again threatened and menaced with a final overthrow . Down with it , down with it even to the ground , cry our Modern Edomites . And when the Church did need the Aids of those who loved her , we know she found your Zeal , and Resolution and Courage in her service : And that now you should flag when you are so well armed and prepared for Combat , or be backward when her Adversaries are pecking at the very foundations with Axes and Hammers , and striving to undermine her by Artifice or Violence ; And you a Champion so tried and experienced , and furnished to defend her ; I cannot imagine , unless you are more tender than formerly , and fear taking of harm by being exposed to the open Air. I think I have heard that the time has been , when , like Nehemiah's Builders , you wrought with one hand in the Church's service , and with the other you h●ld a weapon for her defence and succour . You know the Arguments that moved you then ; and what hinders but they should now prevail ? I am , you see , warm in the Church's cause , nor do I believe that you are lesle concerned . But if I seem to reproach or lament your remissness in these seasonable Circumstances to send abroad your useful preparations , let me not be thought rude or unmannerly , because I hereby not only vindicate you from the common fault of being forward to print , but likewise show the high value I have for your Person and Papers , and that I believe them to he very useful for the Public benefit . 

As to the Gentleman you design to reduce , I only know him upon this occasion , and therefore can say little of his Learning or Ingenuity , or the Motives that made him depart from us : But if after all your endeavours to convict him he still remains hard and untractable , and refuseth to hear the voice of the charmer , charm he never so wisely , he must be let alone in the obstinacy of the deaf Adder , and to our Prayers to soften him , when your Arguments cannot alter him ; but when the World have seen your Papers , and know that he has done so ; they 'll strain their Charity to suspect , that something else besides the pretended advantage of Infallibility persuaded him to revolt ; and till he can answer your Arguments , they 'll be apt to think , that the exchange of Opinion was not for Faith but Fancy , and that while he dreamt that he left uncertainty , it was to be secure of nothing . 

But if you should have that Friendly influence upon him by your pains and endeavours to call him back , he 'll ( by that Charity that is more Catholic than the Religion he leaves ) be glad , that by his fall so great an advantage has been offered to the world , and that others may be reduced thereby to the sober enquiry upon what bottom they trust their Salvation , and see upon what slender and fickle grounds their Faith has been fixed ; And what those Grounds are , all men will see when they peruse your Tractate . Besides , we have reason to thank such men as you for asserting the Church's cause in these Controversies ; For who now that is most freakish in folly and Enthusiasm , has a front to say , That the Sons of our Church are warped from what is Primitive and truly Orthodox ; or Factors for the Romish Interest ; or wish well to the promoting that Cause amongst us , etc.  Let us hear no more such outcries against the Church of England , nor against those who are exact and punctual in the decent performance of God's public Worship , and the circumstances of Order and Discipline . For the gaudy Superstitions of Rome and Italy are more contemned by such men , than the loser and more careless dress of Amsterdam and Geneva . And you amongst many others have freed our Church from this whining & unjust imputation , in that you have not only shaken , but everted that fundamental Principle , upon the fall of which all the superstructure tumbles . 

As to your Quotations , they are so proper and peculiarly adapted to every period , that you had very great luck to happen on the choice of them . And for the Translations which your Charity suffered to be made of them , for the use of your meaner and more unlearned Reader ; they , I perceive , were done by one whose skill in Grammar did exceed his sense in Theologie and Divine Controversies , which may excuse them to the Critics and men of brisker fancy . However , Translating is a very tedious task , and so long as they are true and l●teral , they are justifiable enough against the keenest and most snarling Censurers . 

I am loath the Messenger should stay , and therefore only wish your Reader may be impartial and considerative , unprejudiced and serious , and that your Papers may convince and confirm him , that they may have their design on the Gentleman you 'd recall , and advance the interest of Truth and Goodness amongst all men ; that they may help to allay that bitterness , and heal those Animosities and w●ld Conceits that trouble the Christian World , and that all that see them may endeavour after the things that make for Peace . Which is the Prayer of , 

Sir , Your faithful Servant . 

Dec. 2. 1678.  THE MIDDLE WAY OF Predetermination ASSERTED . 

Between the DOMINICANS And JESUITS , CALVINISTS And ARMINIANS . 

OR , A Scriptural Enquiry into the Influence and Causation of God , in and unto Human Actions ; Especially such as are SINFUL . 

Hos . 13.9 . OH Israel , thou hast Destroyed thyself , but in me is thy Help . 

LONDON , Printed for Thomas Parkhurst , at the Bible and three Crowns at the lower End of Cheapside . 1679.  

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER . Reader , When I had finished an Answer to the Author of the Court of the Gentiles about Predetermination , this shorter Treatise came to my Hand ; On the same Subject , Plain and Easie ; not Fettering or Vexing the Reader with School Disputes ; Sound and Judiciously done if I may Judge : And I hope none will like it the worse , because the Author is a Nonconformist , or because he hath gone for an Independent . Think not that we have communicated Notions , because he saith the same that I do , for I am a Stranger to him , and never saw his Face : But I thank God that the Church hath any such , and OH that they were more . Blessed are the Peacemakers , for they shall be Called the Children of God. Seeing it hath pleased God to permit Satan , and some otherwise Honest men , to sow Tares while we slept , and to Hazard the Church and the Souls of Men , by very dangerous writings of Late , I think you should with Thankfulness receive this Antidote from this Worthy Servant of Christ . I add this Notice , that he hath a Treatise of Justification new Licenced , Written with the same Healing Spirit and Judgement , Neglect it not because there is so much Written on that Subject ; for it tells you more than is ordinarily told you , and there are few things written thereon with equal Judgement and plainly fitted to the Edifying of the meanest Capacity , if he understand the matter aright , who is 

An earnest Desirer of Truth , Love and Concord , Rich. Baxter . 

Septemb. 19 , 1678.  THE MIDDLE WAY OF PREDETERMINATION ASSERTED . it 's not unknown to persons soberly Inquisitive into Truth , of what Importance , and Concernment in Religion it is , so far forth as in us lieth , to have a right Understanding , and due Conception in our Mind , touching the Notive Power of Man , in or unto the specifying and determining , of his own Acts or Actions : as also of the Influence and Causality of God , in and unto the determination of the same : What is God's Interest , and what is man's , in the Existence [ especially ] of those sinful motions and actions of man , which God dehorteth from , and so severely doth prohibit and punish him for . A Misconception therein on the one hand , or the other , may expose us unto the Charging of God foolishly , even whilst we take ourselves to be pleading of his Cause ; and may occasion in us unbecoming thoughts of ourselves , and hard thoughts of him , unworthy the Revelation that he hath made of himself to us , tending to Expunge out of our Souls all due sense of Sin , and acknowledgement of the Holiness , and of the Equity of God's Law , and of his Righteousness in his procedure thereupon with us . 

The Thesis or Position which I maintain , in short is this , namely , That God doth not Premove , or by his Transient Influence as the first cause , Predetermine men unto all and every of their Acts or Actions whatsoever ; not in particular to those which are sinful ; such as Blasphemy , Incest , Murder , etc. in specie . 

it 's not my Design to enter the Lists with any one in the way of Disputation's ; nor shall I at all interest myself in the contests of other men Learned and Pious , engaged in that Controversy about Predetermination . I shall only speak the sense of my own Soul nakedly therein , and what hath been the result of my thoughts upon my most Sedulous enquiry for some years passed into the Question ; which bordereth much upon Practice , although controversial , no man but at one time or other will have his Thoughts exercised more or lesle about it . it 's a question wherein , as well the wisest of the Heathen , as of the Christian World have been engaged : as well Papists , as Protestant's ; and that , ●qually among themselves , as well as each against other . 

And it were earnestly to be wished that Controversies in Religion were managed with more Candour and Moderation , without Animosities , and Personal Reflections , that it might appear that it is the Cause of God singly , not our own that we pled ; and that it is the discovery and promotion of Truth alone that we design ; which the venting of Human Passion may hinder , but can never further the entertainment of . 

Nor shall I trace the Schools at all in their Notions and various Exp●icationss of the matter under consideration . it 's every Soul's concernment to understand it in some measure ; and they who cannot Philosophise , may for aught I know , have as due a Conception and found Judgement therein , as to the main , plainly deduced from the word of God , as the most Learned . Yea I do apprehend , that Philosophical Disputes , in conjunction with an undue Veneration of some men whom they affect , is that which hath rendered the Truth veiled unto many . For my part , I have chosen rather to study Catechisms , next to the Bible , for my direction herein , than the Dictates of Philosophical men ; rather consulted the Conviction of Conscience , and sense of Mankind , than their Scholastical determinations . 

But to come to the Matter itself . Some things Preliminary , for the due Stating of the Question , and ●or Explication sake , must be insisted on in our way . Let it be noted then , 

( 1 ) The question is not touching God's Science , Prescience , or Foreknowledge of all futurities , his foresight of all the freest actions of man , one as well as the o●her . For supposing that God will create man , and make him a free agent , yet mutable , and put him under a Law , and sustain him in his operations . it 's granted , that by his own infinite perfection , he might do , and did foresee in Eternity , what he would issue in , as future , Isa . 41 , 22 , 23. all his actions good and evil , even the sin of them , In concreto & abstracto . Ye● the formale of it , its anomy , or irregularity ( which some term a non ens ) he foreknew , but the modus or the way and manner how God forseeth all future contingencies , especially the Fall of man , and of Angels , is to us unknown ; at least I sh●ll not for my part enterprise to determine it ; no principle of the Christian Religion rendering it necessary for us to understand . The prescience of God nil ponit in objecto , puts nothing into the creature ; it infers no more than a logical necessity of existence in ordine dicendi , a necessity of consequence only , Joh. 12.39 . It shall be ; not of consequent , or in ordine causandi , nothing of causality , ( nor is it concerned at all in the manner of the Subjects determination of it ●elf , or of its operation , ( which is the object of his foreknowledge ) whether it be a principio dissito , from a from a Principle extrinsical to it ; as when a stone moves upwards : or impetu naturali ; as when it moves downward : or sponte ; as brutes act void of coaction : or voluntariè & liberè , according to a judgement of Reason , as man , freely , still God forseeth the even● ; but his foresight causeth it not . ) God's foresight , or knowledge , what I shall or will do to morrow , ( if I live ) hath no influence at all into the determining me thereunto ; it leaveth me equally free and indetermined , as if he foreknew it not at all . nor 's it more difficult to me to conceive or fathom , how God should in Eternity foresee the fr●est action of his creature , which yet he predetermineth not to , but leaveth still in i●ss own nature evitable , and contingent , than it is to me to form any conception of his Eternity , or how he came to be God : wherein I am lost . Ex nihilo nihil fit , that of nothing , nothing is made , is as cogent an argument to me , to prove that the world must needs be Eternal , as any that ever I met with to prove that God cannot foresee , what he doth not decree to effect , or that which he determineth not the creature to . God foresaw that Ananias would not , not that he could not , dispose of the price of his estate as he pretended to do ; that he would not , not that he could not forbear to lie , Act. 5.3 , 4.  He could not ind●ed make God ignorant ; yet he co●ld have done otherwise than he did , for all Go●'s' knowledge that he would not so do . Nay , possibly it may prove no lesle difficult to make out what some do so Peremptorily fix upon as the way in which , or manner how God in Eternity forseeth all things that shall ever come to pass ; namely in his own Decree , giving them a futurition in the first place , and thence taking the Idea of them , in his own will : since that in Eternity there is no prius and posterius one thing before an other , it consists in a Point : beside , that the free Act of God will have no necessary connexion with his Being , nor do they by way of emanation result therefrom , Eph. 1.11 . Who can make out these things ? Can any one define or resolve how God himself should foresee , and fore-appoint things to come , and yet notwithstanding their Futurition , or Shallbe , still we are to conceive of him ( wherein he hath not bound himself by express law , or promise to the contrary , ) as retaining a liberty pro arbitrio , whether this or the other thing shall come to pass or not ; unless we will take away and destroy the reason and foundation of Prayer , according to that of the Poet , Desine fata Deûm flecti sperare precando , let us never think by prayer to move God to reverse his determinations , or to alter that which he foresees , and therefore will , and must be . We ought not to pray , only , for that it is our duty , and as that which fell also within God's predetermination ; but we are in our addresses to him , suppose under a national calamity , or a particular distress , to conceive of him , as yet free at his pleasure to prospero , or blast us , in the very instant wherein we pray to him , and accordingly as we shall demean ourselves , we may expect from him , though we have no certainty of the event . Jer. 18.7 , 9  Jonah 2.9 . Zeph. 2.3 . Exod. 32.31 , 32. 2  Cor. 12.8 . And not think that once he could help us , antecedently to his determination , or before the contrary was future ; but that now he is not at liberty as before to proceed either way , or to be moved by any Address to him , etc. and yet to form any adequate conception of the consistency of these things , may be to us impossible . 

( 2 ) Nor is the question touching God's preordination , or free decree of all actions , or events , [ either efficiendo or permittendo ] whether they be good or evil : though I deny that the decree of God did enter into them after the same way and manner . God did from Eternity predestinate , or decree some of fallen man , ( fallen I mean , ut in esse cognito , such in the foreknowledge of God ) unto salvation , and unto faith and holiness in order thereunto , Rom. 8.29 , 30.  Eph. 1.4 , 5.2 These . 2.13 . He did decree to cause it so to be ; And the same doth and sh●ll come to pass as the Effect of it . But I deny that God did so decree the fall of man ( though he did to permit it , ) or that he did so predestinate any man unto unbelief , impenitency , and rebellion , the Material of it . Thus the learned Bishop Davenant in his Animadversions against Hoard , mihi p. 105.  Predestination is a cause effectual in the producing of all salutiferous actions ; But reprobation ( or preterition ) is no effectual cause in the producing of any wicked actions . And , we hold not that God hath determined to produce any bad actions in men , as impenitency , or the like , so p. 258.  Predetermination in this sense taken , as an immanent act in God , and the same with his decree , precisely in its self ; It puts no more into his Subject than his bare Prescience . How the event , or things decreed shall be brought about falls within the decree too ; But that belongs to the execution , and is de modo ; which may be , as well by permitting , or ordering things ( so as to ascertain the existence of what is decreed ; ) as by affective production , or causative determination , and specifying the operation of the creature , in persuance of his decree , and such a difference there is : Gods will giveth Being and Existence to the Object of his love ; Not so of his hatred : but presupposeth it only there ; and yet both the one and the other , are births lying in the womb of his Eternal decree , whether they shall have a true Existence or not . Even touching the evil , projections , and actions of men , God hath predefined , which of their contrivances shall take effect , and which not ; what Weapon shall be improsperous , and what shall prospero , Dan. 8.25 . and 11.25 , 27.  Isa . 54.15 , 17.  Jer. 47.7 . Isa . 44.7 . his determinate counsel and purpose is concerned therein , Isa . 46.10 . Act. 4.28 . Of which more hereafter . 

( 3 ) Neither is the question touching the providence of God , either in the sustentation or conservation of the Being of man , or of his concourse to the enabling him unto the production of his Acts and operations in general ; nor of his influence and causation as to good actions ; ( nor yet touching his order and government of the world , ) but it is , of his precurse , or transient influence , unto the determination of the Subject , in the exercise and specification of his Acts , antecedently ( at least in order of nature ) to his own determination , and that in relation to evil actions especially , whereof we are enquiring . Here i●'s granted . 

1.  That the creature , as to all its actions in general , hath its dependence upon God the first cause , on his manutenency and supportation both in esse & operari , as to his Being and Motion , Psal . 104.30 . Neh. 9.6 . and consequently that to all actions incommon , whether good , or evil , ( so in like manner to all operation of every creature , ) such a sustentation and concourse of God there is necessary thereunto , as whereby he preserveth the order of nature , and enableth every cause to produce its effect : and , that by his continual energetical operation and influx ( which is the same ) he doth concur with the reason and free will of man , at lest concomitanter , in its own election and free determination , as that whereupon the Will in acting , the Acts of the will , and its Actions willed , do depend , and without which the Agent could not subsist nor move of himself at all , Act. 17.28 . Rom. 13.36 . But it hence followeth not but that man hath a self determining power , ( that presupposed ) as to some acts , or actions , which he hath not lost his capacity unto , 1 Cor. 7.37 . 

The Providence of God , whereby he upholdeth all things , Heb. 1.3 . and by his general influence doth preserve , and keep alive the power , and operation of the creature , doth differ from Creation : that is the production of something out of nothing simply , or out of the power of Nature , or of any second cause , this is the sustentation of something already in Being , supplying it with strength for the reduction of its Power into Act. it 's of the ordinary , and mediate providence of God that I am speaking , in the execution whereof , he cooperateth with the creature , yet so as that the creature hath its immediate influence into the specifying the effect , by virtue of its proper Form , and God acteth , but mediantibus suppositis , ac virtutibus causarum secundarum , as Ames expresseth it , mediately according to the law of the Being , or the power and peculiar nature , or virtue of the second cause , already stamped upon it , ( specifying the Act or operation of the first cause here , in a sense , unless he will change or turn the course of nature , Jer. 31.35 , 36. ) God's influence by his presence and virtue reaches unto all and every operation of the creature , yet it is according to their nature ; he causeth not fire to cool , or the water to burn ; It were a miracle if it should . Let but the general influence of the Heavens , reach the Trees , and herbs , and every one will bring forth its own kind ; the Effect is already in the Cause ; it 's no creation . 

So for man , of whose essence it is to have dominion over his own actions , or a liberty of specification of his own acts within his sphere , by the Law of his Creation : the Principle is preexistent in the Subject , which we call a power , ( ad actum to the act , else it 's no power ) supposing the common providence and assistance of God , Act. 17.28 . ( in whose hands our life and breath is , Gen. 2.7 . James 4.14 , 15. ) he can determine himself this way , or the other , according to his judgement of reason and discretion , such as it is ; else he is no man , but a mere machine , inferior to all the rest of the creation of God ; to be sure not capable of being the Subject of moral government . In such sense as every species of creatures are said to have their different nature , tendency , or law of operation connate to them , suited to their Being , ( which providence works , ) of their own : so is the actuation thereof consonantly thereunto , their own , and essential to them , as well ●s the Principle ; no creative Act , but the Law of their creation . What meaneth the plastic virtue given to the earth , and plants , Gen. 1.11 . or the prolific power of other living creatures , p. 22. or the rational faculties or active Powers wherewith God furnished man , p. 26. if they be not a Power unto act so long as their nature abides entire , and is sustained , and no impediment be in the way ? take away action , and you take away Life and Soul. The Nature of a stone abiding , it will fall downward , without any premotion extrinsical to its self ; and so will the Fire burn , if its quality which is essential to it be conserved ; and the Beast will follow its instinct , so long as its nature remaineth , and determine its self to , or turn to the right hand or the left at the call of its Owner , according as it is Disciplined ; It is within i●s power , if no natural Impediment hinders ; and surely the same is not wanting to man suitably unto his Nature , through the aforesaid comm●n Providence of God , ( without his b●ing Physically Predetermined therein by him : ) a power to specify his acts according to his own Inclination , in reference to his natural actions , unto which by the Apostasy he is not disabled ; and sinful actions , to which by it he is viciously preponderated and disposed . This the Sense of all Mankind doth give in its suffrage to ▪ God ordinary Supportation and Concourse is sufficient , to the flux of an effect , within the limits of the cause , or its power à naturâ inditâ or insitâ , by God given it unto such effect . 

2.  As to good Actions , savingly such ; it 's granted , that besides the first Change wrought by God in the Soul rendering Potent , Hab●le , and disposed to such Acts , new-biassing , or invincibly turning , and inclining it towards God and Holiness , unto which it was before Impotent and wickedly averse , Eph. 2.1 , 10. and 4.22 , 23. there is still necessary a continued Influx of more than ordinary Divine Assistance , to keep alive , and to influence and determine the Soul unto those Acts of true Piety or Holiness which it hath the next power of , or is in an immediate capacity unto ; and that , on the account of the remaining darkness of the m●nd , and the prevalent Counteractings of the Law of Sin , the Relics whereof are yet ab●ding , Rom. 7.  Gal. 5. and the weakness and imperfection of Grace , rev. 3.2 . This is the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the Will and the Deed whereof the Apostle speaks , Phil. 3.13 . and Christ Jesus is to that end Constituted to be a Head of vital Influx to them , Col. 2.19 . Joh. 15.4 . and Supplies are promised of God to them , in waiting upon him for the same , Isa . 40.31 . Eph. 3.16 . and accordingly , so far forth as the Inclinations and Actions of God's People are regular and gracious , so far its granted to be owing to the Grace of Christ , and the Operation of his Spirit , 2 Cor. 9.15 . but so is not the imperfection thereof , not owing to God at all ; no more than any other neglect . 

A Godly man through the Divine help , 2 Pet. 1.3 . may or can act , or he may suspend his Acts in an ordinary way ; there is no Saint living that doth all the good which he might or could do ; or that hath not cause as well to be Humbled before God , for his Will-no●s , as his Cannots ; for his Neglects in what he had grace sufficient for , awaiting him , 2 Pet. 5.8 , 9 and he could have helped . And , supposing him Predetermined at any time ( after the manner of his first Conversion ) in his Gracious operations , in pursuance of God's Election ; when negligent or relapsing , prevented or recovered , Luk. 22.32 . It followeth not that God is the Determiner of him to what is imperfect or sinful , accompanying the Act to the which he is so Premoved , or Determined ; not to the materiale of it . Suppose a man , for Instance , to be efficaciously excited by God to give an Alms to a Disciple , ( which is good ) and withal that he hath an admixture of Ostentation in his mind accompanying it , ( which is sin , Mat. 6.1 . ) such Thought is of himself , or of the Devil's injection , not of God's : and if his Charity were disposed to a Disciple , and not by him designed to be bestowed on him in the name of a Disciple , Mat. 10.42 . that Omission was his own , nothing of God's ; all that God caused or effected was good ; and what was irregular or sinful was the suo of his own , in concreto , both the Act , and Omission ; as well the Substrate matter of which the sin is denominated , as the sin its self in its abstract nature adhering thereunto . 

As to the Manner of God's Operation on the Soul in its first Change , I take it to be unto us very far unknown ; nor do I think any Article of Religion to depend on the stating of the same . Some affirm a Physical predetermination of God , of all and every the Acts and Operations of man ; such Physical precurse , and efficient pre-exciting and determining influence they assert to accompany , and to be necessary also to the specification of any Act whatsoever , whether good or evil , as that without which the Creature could never act or determine its self at all . To me it seems hard to make out , whether there be any such way of God's determination of man , as that termed Physical in Contradistinction to Moral , though here , as to good I would mo●t readily admit it ; ( for to evil I do peremptorily deny it ) I mean to good actions ; for its nonsense to speak of Predetermination Physical or Moral either , to aught but the act or action , which is good or evil , upon an account Adventitious , and Extrinsical to its self , as related to Law. What it is I say that God doth in the Conversion of a sinner , as to the way of working that first Turn to himself , seems to me difficult to find out , Joh. 3.8 . If such a Physical operation there be , terminating on the entity of the Soul , ( it must as well reach the body too , the Ministerial and Organical parts ; which are also said to be sanctified , 2 These . 5.23 . ) it may consist in the suscitation or elevation of its natural faculties , rendering them capable of taking in a new Impression , or irradiation , from the Word and Spirit , to which the soul was disabled before ; which some understand by Vivification or Quickening , 1 Cor. 15.45 . Eph. 2.1 . and opening the Heart , Act. 16.14 . and Understanding , Luk. 24.45 . Bending also , and applying the Faculty to the Object , in order to its receiving of the Impress and stamp thereof upon it , Job . 33.16 . the Signature of Truth upon the Mind and Heart , all which I deny not ; but still , evident it is That God worketh not any Moral Change on the Understanding otherwise than objectively , also by offering Reason to it , or proposing that before it which invincibly bindeth it to an admittance thereof , Hos . 11.4 . and the Gospel is the deepest Reason , and Faith the most solid Understanding , Mat. 13.44 , 45.  Isa . 1.18 . the Word of God is the Seed of the New Birth out of all question , Jam. 1.18 . 1 Pet. 1.23 . and that as proposed to the mind , 1 Cor. 4.15 . and entertained there , Jam. 1.21 . Nor doth God work on the Will or Affections , or Executive power in Conversion , otherwise than Mediante ratione by the intervention , of Reason , 1 Cor. 2.4 . not by any Physical attingency immediately , but by Moral Suasion , and Objective Proposal , by the Mind , the eye of the Soul. God shall persuade Japhet , Gen 9.27 . By objective Proposal , and moral Suasion , I do not intend only , that of God Externally , in his Word Commanding , Persuading , Counselling , etc. or in and by the Ministry of Man ; but moreover his Internal application to the Soul in the Ministry of the Word , or otherwise ; where yet the Word is the Instrument in the hand of the Spirit , working in a Moral way ; efficiently too in a Sense ; yet not modo Physico after the manner of a real Impulse , or proper Physical Action or Causation . God knoweth how to reach the Reason , and Elective Faculty , the main Springs of the Soul , and how to fasten a Nail there , Eccl. 12.11 . a fit Word , spoken on his Wheels , prov. 25.11 . how to catch the Soul ever it is aware , Luk. 5.10 . to allure and draw , Cant. 1.4 . ( not motu physico by proper physical determination I take it , but ) by convincing Reason and Teaching , Instructing with a strong hand , Isa . 8.11 . Every man that hath heard and learned of the Father , cometh unto me , Joh. 6.44 , 45. is made Willing , Psal . 110.3 . the Stony Heart , all Prepossession and Aversation against God and Godliness , is removed , Ezek. 36.26 . and its sense of things is changed , Rom. 8.5 . and the new man is put on , viz. in a Moral sense , Eph. 4.24 . the propension and inclination of the Subject altered and changed , and become a radicated Principle in the Soul , disposing it unto Holiness . 

If the Devil can so far overmatch the Understanding of man , when by God left to his delusions , that an 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 an effectual working is ascribed to him , 2 These . 2 9  ( Whom yet all acknowledge to work only morally and objectively , 1 King. 22.21 . ) Who can say but that God , who is more intimate to man than he is to himself , can so accommodate his Word , and follow it by Internal suggestion , so fit it as a key to the he●●t of the sinner fast lo●ked against him , as to shoot aside the bolt , the dissenting power , and to overperswade and invincibly determine him to ●●●●o●●osse repudiaere , an mpossi●ility of withstanding any longer the Call of C●rist , or to a free , yet certain entertainment of it , without such a physical influx as some insist so much upon , flecting the will , and predetermining 〈◊〉 in its operation , and specification of its Acts , in a way contradistinct to that we are speaking of , and wherein it is not concerned . The Natural faculties of the soul , its powers of understanding , reasoning assenting , willing ; and its affections of loving , hating , etc. are out of doubt à primà causâ , from God as the first cause , who giveth Being to all things ; and the exertion of those powers into act in line â physicâ , is from him ; they are dependant Being's , and cannot reduce themselves into act or exercise without his influence or assistance ; And that in the way of physical concourse and cooperation , before and after conversion the same Act. 26.22 . and moreover , it 's with me out of question , that the Lord doth anticipate and prevent the soul in a more than ordinary way , in its first Turn to him , Jer. 31.18 . 2 Tim. 2.25 . rectifying all the powers of the soul , the mind , will , affections etc.  Turning them to their right Object , and disposing them to their right Use , and End ; that he specifieth and determineth the souls Acts and operations in conversion , which is their modification , as well as concurreth to their Entity , or enableth to their existence in the general as acts or actions . The question only is , whether this determination of the natural powers of the soul ( to a believing in God , a liking , loving , willing , choosing of the things of God , or of the Spirit , directly opposite to the channel wherein the soul in the egress or exercise of those powers or acts ran before that , whilst it believed the Devil rather than God , liked and preferred the world and the pleasing of the flesh above the pleasing of God , loved sin , and hated strict piety ) whether I say God doth change the course of the soul , and determine its operations as before , I mean give to will and to do , yea effectually cause so to do by any physical Precurse , or Predetermination , distinct or different from the power which he dareth to enable the creature to all and every its natural motions and operations , or which himself evermore exorteth therein ; or by a moral agency only : whether he draweth and turneth the soul , as the Fisher doth the Fish when he hath it upon his hook and line , by a physical impulse : or as the Fisher doth the Fish when he hooketh it , or in order to it , by laying the bait before it , where the pleasure of the bait or hopes of ●ood presented in the fancy , doth allure and draw it , this way or that , till it hath takn it in , or swallowed it ; which is an objective drawing , and like to that which is moral in men ? ( I mean it not in the Arminian sense , so as to leave the soul indifferent , or the Will in suspense , that what ever God doth on the contrary , it still may eventually will , or nill , choose , or refuse , cast balance this way , or the other ; but ) whether God's actual efficacious and powerful determination of the Will of the sinner indeclinably to Good , many not be effected , and brought about by the way of moral operation , or causation ( as well as physical ) where the soul specifieth its own Act , in a way more congruous to its nature , and yet can go no other way in its elections without offering an affront to the dictate of its own Reason and Understanding , Psal . 119.36 , 8.  Luk. 15.17 . First rectified by the special Grace and help of God , Col. 3.10 . Job . 33.16 . Jer. 31.11 . Joh. 4.10 . ( after the same manner ) by a divine Inculcation of Truth , and fixation thereof upon it , to a saving illumination , Mat. 5.22 . Joh. 14.26 . and 16.8 . But that God doth not either the one way or the other , predetermine men to actions wicked and sinful , I take here for grant , and shall hereafter prove : I mean , neither by external legal Commanding , counselling , or persuading ; nor by internal moral suasion , or Suggestion , ( which is yet more powerful ) tempting , or soliciting effectually thereunto ; much lesle by any physical Thrust , or premotion of the Will that he should influence it inevitably and insuperably in its election of two objects lying evenly before it ; one good the other evil , to choose and determine itself to that which is most nefariously wicked ; which at the same time he dehorteth from , and declareth h●s abhorrency of , and threateneth to punish , Dut. 29.20 . 

Here by the way , let me take occasion to note the disadvantage , which ( to my best understanding ) I conceive the truth of God to have received , in the management thereof in the Point now mentioned , by those who go the way of physical Predetermination , whil'●● sober and worthy men of that persuasion , in their popular Sermons , undertaking ( as one doth in print ) to vindicate the Sovereignty of the Grace of God in the beginning and carrying on of man's conversion , and salvation , and for the maintenance of the necessity of effectual grace therein , sh●ll pitch upon such mediums as these , namely ( CITIZEN ) That the denial thereof , disparageth God's providence ; For that ●t breaks the essential subordination between the second cause and the first . ( 2 ) It destroys prescience ; for how then c●n God infallibly foresee the Motions of the Will , and the Effects depending on it , the event being uncertain ? ( 3 ) It deifies the Will , making it supreme and independent upon God himself , etc. which do as well prove , and are the main arguments brought for the maintaining of God's efficacious predetermination of men in and unto their Unbelief , Rebellion and all the most impious actions whereof the most profligate sinner is guilty ; and cuts the throat of the fourth argument ; that it abolishes all prayer and thanksgiving : for that , on the former Hypotheses , the meaning of such prayer to God mu●t be only , that he would change his operation , and cease to premove and determine the Will to that , which he had all along before guided and overruled it to ; that he would counterwork his own prior determination , and now turn it , and determine the Will to good , as before to evil ; which is a strange notion of prayer . Nor can the soul in good earnest thank him for it , when done , if it be indeed really convinced that it might not thank itself that it was done no sooner : or that it may thank God that it so long resisted his Spirit , and walked in the pathway of destruction , in every instance whereof , it was effectually predetermined by a superior agent , on whom it had its dependence , who foresaw all its motions , who had an absolute supremacy over its Will , and unto whose efficient energetical Operation it could not but be obsequious . If we had no other medium to oppose Arminianism by , in the Point of effectual Grace , I should take our case for desperate ; and the remedy to be no lesle dangerous than the disease . But to proceed , 

3.  As to the Providence of God in the Government of the World ; it 's granted , that God doth not carry it as a mere Spectator , but that his Providence is positively active in the disposal of all Events under the Sun ; even to a sparrow falling to the ground , Mat. 10.29 . or to the Lot that is cast into the Lap , prov. 16.33 . All the Issues of Health and Sickness , Poverty and riches , War and Peace , Life and Death , they are in God's h●nd , Eccl. 9.11 . Job 14.14 . 2 King. 8.11 . Jer. 10.23 . prov. 16.9 . Eccl. 11.5 , 6. nor are sinful men out of the limits of his Supremacy in the order and disposal of their actions ; which of their Projections shall take Effect , or see the light , and in what Circumstances , and which not ; Psal . 29.10 . he hath all wicked men upon his hook , Ezek. 38.4 . the Heart of the most Absolute on the Earth , at his Pleasure and Dispose . prov. 21.1 . Isa . 10.5 . and 44.28 . and 45.7 , 9  Psal . 33.15 , 16 , 17. the Overruling Providence we acknowledge in the order of all Events , whatever betideth us . Yet hath not every Providence the same aspect with it , though God's hand be in it all . Suppose for instance , a man walking in the Streets , the Tiles of a house , he not perceiving any danger , may slip , and fall on him : or he seeing them ready to fall , may yet to save the wetting of h●s' foot , choose to adventure the going under them , rather than to cross the way , and they happen to hit him : Or , one from the Roof of the house wittingly throwing them down upon him ; and wounding him either way , in them all , he must acknowledge , and eye Providence : but in the first instance , though there was a natural cause and reason of their Falling , yet he wholly resolves his Misfortune into the Divine Providence , which could have diverted him from coming at that instant there , but did not ; or which ordered things in such a concurrence of Circumstances , as that it should so fall out that he should not avoid the Stroke of them . In the second , he Notes the Providence , and withal reputes him , and befools himself for his rashness and oversight that he prevented it not , when it was in his power ; God could have turned his thoughts too , and did not ; and so might he , had he considered the Danger as he should and could have done . In the third , he acknowledges Providence also , but he blames the Person that did it , and seeks his remedy against him , for his Illegal act . If yet the Person that wounded him should confidently argue with him , that he should rest satisfied in the Dominion of Providence , and not look at him ; that he was invincibly or effectually premoved and determined to it ; his Re●son and Freewill was in it indeed , but he could not help it : that the Entity of the Action was good , and for the anomy or irregularity , it was a Privation , a non ens , had no efficient cause at all , he had no hand in that , nor yet can tell until it be pleaded , whether any Law will take cognizance of it or not . I doubt that the party aggrieved would hardly stand to dispute his distinctions ; but he would t●ach him better . 

God's Providence in the Government of sinful Actions is not in dispute ; but the Question is de modo , how God serves himself on sinful men , or determineth them in their sinful actions to serve his Providence ? whether by his transient influence upon their Minds and Wills , he pre-exciteth , premoveth , and predetermin●th them unto such Acts or Actions : or some other way he ascertaineth the Event only ? the latter is it which I affirm ; and the former , by many asserted , is it which I oppose . 

Touching the fir●t Apostasy of Men or Angels , the Scriptures give us no account directly relating either to the Decree of God thereof , or his Agency therein at all . The Angels that fell had a possibility of attaining Happiness , and a sufficiency of Divine Grace given them to have preserved them from their Rebellion , had they not by a Voluntary Act of their own abused it ; so had Adam ; no decree of God did hinder him from creating him with a sufficiency of Grace , or with a possibility of Standing , saith Davenant , Animad . p. 282.  Yet that God foreknew their defection , is out of doubt ; yea , and that his Governing Providence was highly concerned therein , and served thereby . 

For the Providence of God , or its concernment in all the future Acts of Sin , whether of wicked Men or Devils , since the first Apostasy , therein the Scripture doth lend us more Light ; in which , there is not one instance upon Record , where God is said to Decree , Order , or Determine the Being or existence of such or such evil actions , yea , or to do them , the which ( if I be not much mistaken ) may not be made out , were it necessary , to be with●n the reach of Human Re●son to fathom , and to assign how he might bring it about most certainly ; and that by no other medium but that only of Permission and Impedition , and objective proposal or Premotion , exciting to Cogitations and Actions good , and Materially agreeing to his Law. Which two former , ordinarily insisted on at every turn by Divines , to solve the equity of God's Justice in his procedure with men , notwithstanding his Providence over ruling their sinful actions : the former notion of Physical Predetermination doth wholly deny , a●d overturn : For , if the motus primo primi , the first sigments or thoughts of the Heart , or machin●tionss of the M●nd , Isa . 59.4 , 5. and Conceptions of the Will , Psal . 11.2 . Job . 15.35 . be forged by God ; if the Will cannot elicit any Act , nor imperate the execution thereof , nor the executive power follow , otherwise than as the obediential capacity of the Subject , or possibility of action contained in the powers , in an indifferency or indetermination , must be first reduced into Act , and also determined by God h●mself as the first cause , then is Permission , and Impedition or hindering , a mere Chimaera ; what should he permit , or prevent in others , or what need of that , when he determineth all , and doth a●l himself ; or efficiently determineth the second cause to it , as is supposed ? But that such a thing there is , and that predicated or affirmed of God in Scripture , innumerable Texts do plainly speak ; and also accommodate to our present Enquiry . God is said to Suffer the Nations to wa●k in their own ways , Act. 14.16 . So Luk 8.32 . to Suffer the Devil to enter into the Herd of Swine ; and to permit , or to give men up to the Swing , of their own Heart's Lust , Rom. 1 , 24. till he s●e what their end shall be , Deut. 32.20 . And frequently again to obstruct or h●nder what else would certainly be Effected , Gen. 12.6 , 7.  God withheld , and suffered not Abimelech to touch Abraham's Wife , chap. 20.6 . he suffered no man to do them wrong , Psal . 105.14 . none shall desire their Land , Exod. 34.24 . He maketh Diviners mad , and turneth Wise m●n backward , in order to the performing of the Counsel of his Messengers , and all his Pleasure , Isa . 44.25 , 28.  Disappointing the devices of the Crafty , so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise , Job 5.12 . the remainder of wrath shall he restrain , Psal . 76.10 . & 106.46 . How many ways c●n God render abortive the Conceptions of men , prevent them , or cause them to miscarry ! hence is that Memento of the Apostle James , changed . 4.15 . ye ought to say , if the Lord will we shall live , and do this or that . So Job . 19.11 . Psal . 64.5 , 7. in like manner by exciting to Good , may God cause , that an other evil rather than that projected shall be effected , as Gen. 37.20 , compared with v. 26. and that in persuance of sme farther Design , ch . 45.8 . Mat. 26.63 , 65. or by giving a Diversion only , etc.  Wherein God's providential disposal of the Event or order of this , rather than the other to take effect , neither di●poileth the Creature of the liberty of specifying his own Act ( in a matter wherein he must be accountable to his Judge , ) nor doth make God the cause or determiner of it , any more than David● sl●●ghter of the Am●l●k●●eses , 1 Sam. 30.17 . lay at the door of the Philistines , ch . 29 7. who would not let him abide any longer wi●h them : or than my coming by on the Road , when a Robber is about to set upon a Person , and so preventing him thereby , would infer me to be the cause of his next robbery or murder that he commits immediately i● another place ; although I foresaw that it would so prove . 

Yet such is the order and Direction of God's Providence , such his dominion therein , in every in●●ance of that kind , that his determinate counsel may be affirmed to reach the most wicked actions , in a sense , Act. 4.28 . Isa . 46.10 . when he hath any Design to serve by them , Gen. 50.20 . Yea , he is said to bid , and to do them . The Lord hath said unto h●m , curse David , 2 Sam. 16.10 . I w●ll do this thing openly , and before the Sun , 2 Sam. 12.12 . he moved David against them , to s●y , go number the people , ch . 24.1 . even when the Devil does it , 1 Chr. 21.1 . 1 Thess . 2.11 . T●e Lord hath taken , saith Job . ch . 1.21 . when the Sabeans had spoilt him ; and , God had smitten him he said , or he received that Evil of his Boils , from him , changed . 2.10 . when it was the Devil that had done it , by God's permission , v. 1. and would have reached his life too , would he have suffered him , v. 4. without any premotion of God's therein , or Predetermination , otherwise , as to the manner , than by a non-impedition of his own motion and Inclination . The Eve●t is indeed in the Dispose of God , and the Executioner , as the Axe , Rod , or Stuff , in his hand , Isa . 10.5 . Yet so , as that he retaineth a dominion over his own Act therein , ( God's sustentation , concourse , and permission presupposed , ) he is not a mere machine , or dead engine ; nor yet his Reason and free Will carried along after the way and manner of a vital engine , or spontaneous instrument , yet necessarily : but is so termed , from his subserviency a● that time to God's special Providence , and instrumentality in performing his Design ; ( though in such a way , as he he may justly and equitably afterwards be called to an account for the same ; as well for the fact , Isa . 10.12 , as for the circumstances of it , v. 7.13 . ) otherwise than in every other Omission of his , or every Act of Unbelief , Impenitency , Hatred of God , and the like : men are not ordinarily styled God's instruments therein , or compared to the Axe or staff in his hand , or to be conceived of by us as such , with reference thereunto , Herein I subscribe to the worthy Bishop Davenant ; As for the procuring and working the impenitency or infidelity of Reprobates , God doth not ( saith he ) at all work any vicious dispositions , or defective and sinful actions in such men ; wicked habits or dispositions are diseases bred within men's own souls , ( and yet they have an entity ) not infused into them by the Physician of our souls : wicked and sinful actions are the productions of the●r own corrupted freewill , and not produced by any divine operation working in them : for it 's only in holy and good actions that God giveth us both the Will and the deed , Animad . p. 120. neither doth God draw any man unto sin , by an unconquerable power , but he permiteth some men , by the Devil and their own lusts to be drawn from sin to sin , till at last they perish in them ; of whom perditio tua ex●te , thy destruction is of thyself , notwithstanding , is most truly verified p. 121. although the Will of God hath the determining Stroke amongst all possible evil actions or events , which shall infallibly be , and which not : And God may be said to be the prime cause of the substrate matter or act , in every motion , whether of the soul or body , as in whom we live , and move , and have our Being , as the same learned Author asserteth ; Yet doth it not follow , but that man still retaineth his self-determining power quoad speciem actûs , a liberty of specifying his own act ; as the same Author maintaineth with St. Augustine , deus it à ordinat omnia ut proprios motus exercere sinat . p. 154.  ( From whence the formal nature of good or evil resulteth , as the same is conform , or inconform to the Law of God ; I mean from its specification , not its Entity in the general . ) The Saebeans and Chaldeans for instance , had their power and their actual Exercise thereof from God enabling them to take goods and drive cattles , and to destroy the life of man , or beast ; but the specification of that power , in the actual Exercise thereof , or its modification , ( which hath nothing more of Entity , which way soever it 's determined ) unto the Robbing of men , or slaying of the innocent , was not of God , but of themselves : that they spoilt Job , not another man , and slew his Servants in individuo , and not another man's , was of themselves ; as and of God too , though in a different sense : of themselves , as the immediate cause of the action ; of God , as the prime cause , or fountain of Being and Operation : of themselves , as the specifyers of the act , according to their own free election : of God , in that he permitted it , for the trial of his servant , ( when possibly he had hindered them from hundred of such like exploits before , and besides that , overruled its circumstances so , as that it should infallibly light upon him , and no other man at that time . Which I cannot better express than in the words of the aforesaid learned man ; Those that derive the evil Actions of men from their own Freewill as the proper efficient cause , and the exsisting or coming of such actions in eventum à decreto dei permittente & ordinante , into event , from the permitting , and disposing decree and appointment of God , are in no error at all . p. 57  The providence of God reaches to all Events , and actions ; but forwicked actions which according to God's eternal determined Decree come into act at the time appointed , as the Betraying of Christ , the murdering of him , and such like , the Devil and men's Freewill are the only moving and determining causes unto them . p. 115 God cannot be an Author or Producer , much lesle an Inforcer , in regard of any sinful action , yet he may be a determiner in permitting it . p. 118 Gods decree in malis , is only , as he termeth it , antecessio ordinis , not causalitatis . ( 4 ) Nor is the question yet farther , about Determination in general , or Predetermination simply considered , or of the compossibility , or consistency thereof with human freedom . For it 's granted , 

1.  That an Aequilibrium or Indetermination is not man's best state . Such a pendulous Suspense or Even poise , and inclination of mind and W●ll , in the Exerci●e and specification of its acts , ( consequenter , aft●r the object is united with the faculty , and reason ha●h weighed the good and evil , the conveniency and inconveniency of things in its balance , and deliberated about it , ) is the soul's sickness or disaster ; arising from an insufficient application of the Object , or defect in the Understanding , an inability to judge of the Good or Evil of what lieth before it , which should ponderate it , and cast the Scale in its election , that it hangs in a Suspense . ( which is the freedom which Arminians seem to pled for . ) True Freedom consisteth not in a power or liberty , after the due exercise of ratiocination , be the evidence what it will , to write black for white , or white for black , to judge Evil Good , or Good Evil ; or still to be undetermined about it , for fear of forestall the will : or in a power or liberty , in the will , not to follow the liberum arbitrium the free award of Reason , or for the soul in willing not to be confined to its own reason in what it chooseth or avoideth : or pro libitu arbitrarily or at his pleasure to elicit and imperate what it listeth , though against the sentiment of the mind ; or at least , that after reason hath issued in a judgement , the Will should still be indetermined to one . Such a dominion over its reason , or liberty and freedom of will , cannot but be abhorrent to the nature of man All that can be desired is , that the soul hath such a freedom of Will , and dominion ou●r its ●wn acts , as that , in what ever it willeth , it acteth as a vital and rational agent , in respect of its proper nature , and internal principle of operation , with such a natural indifferency , in sensu diviso , before it acteth , ( for quicquid est , quando est necessariò est ) as whereby Reason proposing to the Elective Faculty divers Objects , that have no natural Connexion with the Will , in determining its self to either , it followeth the dictate of its own judgement of Discretion , void of all natural Necess●●y , such as when the Fire burneth ; or of Coaction , as when a man is haled or carried without or against his own choice ; neither is led by a blind instinct , as the Beast ; nor acted like a mere Machine or Engine , that ordere●h not its own motion , nor knows its use , or tendency . 

it 's generally acknowledged , that if the Understanding hath but one Object alone proposed before it , or but one way or means to such an end ; or that if the Object be presented in all respects good , as , circa finem , that happiness in General is to be desired ; or if any particular Object be presented as undequáque bonum , having no appearance of Evil in one respect , as well as of Good and Eligibleness in another respect , the Will quoad speciem actûs , if it acts at all , must close with it , and cannot refuse the same ; and so , if there be in it omnimoda ratio mal● an appearance of nothing but Evil in all and every respect , it must neccessarily repudiate , or nill it , and cannot otherwise determine its self . Yea and it is affirmed of God himself in Scripture , that he is not at liberty in some things to determine himself , or to will , or act otherwise than he doth ; its impossible for him to lie , Heb. 6.18 . or not to do that which is just and right , Gen. 18. 25. the Saints also in Heaven are determined to good , ( as was our Saviour Christ even on earth , they are invincibly inclined to it ; and it is their Perfection , that its ( as well Naturally as Morally ) impossible for them to will the contrary , and th●t for reasons unalterably preponderating them that way , keeping the Will Habitually fixed , and indeclinably pointed towards God , and Holiness , wherein all future instances of Worship and acknowledgement , ( being included , as the effect in its cause ) are Virtually in Act , the faculty being so far forth determined ; and it 's our unhappiness that it is otherwise with us now . it 's no defect , or want of any desirable Freedom of Will , that a man cannot obtain of himself to cut his own throat , or feel not himself indifferent about it . 

To be determined to evil only , or to be in such state and condition as that , to do good , formally such , every way pleasing and acceptable in the sight of God , is impossible , to be sure is a most Deplorable estate ; though it be ab intrinseco , from an innate Principle . Neither is it denied , but that such an indetermination as some state the Freedom of man's Will to consist in , were better , and to be preferred before determinate Fixation , in , and insuperable propension of Will unto Sin , Jer. 13.23 . 2 Pet. 2.14 . But still , though lapsed man ( till restored by Grace ) doth not estimate aright of the things of God , though he nauseateth the things of the Spirit , and declineth God and Holiness : it 's not from the Enjoyment , or want of any such Freedom as is essential to Human nature , ( nor can he pled an equitable dismission from his obligation to Obedience ; since he is disabled by his own fault : ) but from a privation in his mind , laesa facultas , a peccancy or disease therein , as to his discerning and relish of Divine and Spiritual Objects , Eph. 4.18 . Rom. 8.5 , 7. and a vicious disinclination in his Will and Affections balancing him another way , Gen. 6.5 . Eph. 2.3 . Joh. 3.19 . Free Will is still retained . What though a m●n cannot turn the course of the Sun in the Firmament ? yea , what though many attainments , as well Natural , as Moral , be now impossible to man , which were possible to Adam , and of his concreated perfection , Gen. 2.19 ? what if he be a lover of pleasures , more than a lover of God , 2 Tim. 3.4 . and cannot obtain of himself to do otherwise ? Yet is he a man still , a rational and voluntary Agent in all that he doth ; and retaineth a Dominion over his own Acts , and a Liberty in their Specification too , of all within his Sphere and Compass . 

The Saints in Heaven , notwithstanding that their state is no other than of a determinate perfection , ( not of Indifferency to Good or Evil , ) yet they retain a liberty of Competition , Contrariety , or contradiction in their Acts , with reference to this or that particular Object , within the bounds and limits of God's Will and Law , indelibly engraven on their heart . The Natural or Unregenerate man in like manner , notwithstanding his impotency to Good , and invincible Propension determining him to Evil in General ; yet reraineth the like Liberty and Freedom , to Will or Nill , to Choose or Refuse , and consequently to Do or not Do this or that , ( in the ordinary way of God's Providence ) save in what , by the Apostasy , or by a radicated Habit or Custom in Sinning , he hath Disabled himself , or is left of God. In his Natural and Civil Acts , or in his Sinful Acts , he hath a Self-determining power , ( if God permit ) he can Specify his own acts , he can of two Objects before him , choose one , and refuse the other , as the Cogency of his Reason shall sway him : A wicked man can choose whether he will go to this Alehouse , or that , or to neither of them : he can pay a Sum of Money that he hath given Bond for , at the day , if he have it ; or he can let it alone : he can Hear , and Read , and Pray , ( though not every way as he ought to do ) yea were he not deficient to himself , might overcome his Will to it , ( possibly he may be wagered , or by penalties be driven to it ) as well as the contrary . Every disaffection is not Invincible , Luk. 11.7 , 8.  Jeroboam , Baasha , and other the Kings of Israel , upon the denunciation of Wrath against them , might and could , for aught we know , ( we are sure graceless persons may ) have Humbled themselves , and caused their People to Fast , as well as Ahab , or the King of Nineveh did , upon the like Message sent of God to them ; but they did not . Jer. 5. 21 , 23.  Mat. 11.23 . & 12.41 . Yea and the best Saints , may and can do more Good , and forbear more Evil than they do , as hath been hinted . David might and could have forborn to make Vriah Drunk , or Murder him , and he could have done Mephibosheth Right , against that Traitor Ziba , 2.  Sam. 19.27 , but he did it not . Whose Heart is it that reproacheth him not for preventable Miscarriages ? In such things it is , ( which are within man's power either way ) that God is said to Try or Prove men sometimes , Deut. 8.2 , 16.  Gen. 22.11 , 12.2 Sam. 24.12 . 

The Saints in Glory are Immutably determined to to Good ; or cannot sin . 

The Sinn●● , or Unrenewed man or men , they are Invincibly determined to Evil , or bend on it in the General ; or cannot do Good.  

Man in Innocency , he had perfect Good , or spotless Obedience ; and also Sin , and Evil , within his power both ; being made Mutable . 

Man Restored , and Manumitted by Grace , hath imperfect Good , ( compared to the Original Law ) or Sincere Obedience , within his power ; and also Sin and Disobedience ; being on Earth defectible , or not yet Confirmed ; though the Decree and Efficiency of God shall prevent , that he sinneth not to Death . 

Yet may Freewill be denominated or affirmed of them all . The one act as freely as the other ; the worst in sinning , as the best in obeying . He acts freely that can act , or not act , what , when , and how he presseth , in things which m●y be said to be 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , i e. in our power ; so doth the s●rvant , at his Master's Beck , Col. 3.23 . where note by the way , that to act voluntarily or freely , and yet necessarily are consistent , and may well stand together . The Angels in Heaven they love God , and serve him , Voluntarily and Freely ; so shall the S●intss in Glory ( and so doth man in his present state , even in what hath a kind of natural Connexion with the Will , determine himself Freely according to the Dictate of his Reason and Judgement . ) A Rational , a Voluntary , and a Free Choice , are Convertible Terms . The Will acteth Freely ; not Necessarily , as opposed to Voluntary , either contrariè , by Coaction or Violence , against its Elicit Inclination ; or negatiuè , from a mere natural Necessity , without Reason : B●t still it acteth Necessarily in some sense , ( as the Will evermore doth , when Reason hath once cast the Scale , ) with necessity of Immutability in respect of the Event , which , opponitur possibili non esse , is opposed to a Possibility not to be , ( God's Supportation and Concourse presupposed ) or eventus contrarii , of the contrary Issue or Event , it can do no otherwise , and t●at from the Potency or perfection of the Rational Faculty , and Cognation that it hath with the Object . And the contrary is as true , of Wicked and Unregenerate men ; they Act freely , following the Dictate of their Reason and Judgement , such as it is , though Brutish , Jer. 10.8 , 21.  & 55.17 . though Carnal , ●ensual , and Devilish , Jam. 3.15 . Jer. 4.22 . vo●d of all natural Necessity or Coaction , in their choice of Sin , and Fl●sh-pleasing , Eph. 2.3 . Yet do they Act Necessarily also , so as that they cannot possibly Will or Do the Contrary , ( without renewing grace ) Job . 5.44.45 . Rom. 2.5 . and that ab intriseco , from a Privation in their Mind , Rom. 3.11 . Eph. 4.18 . and an Impotency , or contraty Propension in their Will and Affections , preponderating them to Evil , ( though not sub ratione mali ) and to a Disrelish of true Holiness , Rom. 8.5 , 7. which is languor & aegritudo animi the Souls sickness , and depravation of its Faculties , the fruit of man's first Apostasy from God , Job . 14.4 . though he be still habile subjectum , a Subject capable of the Retrivement of God's Image into his Soul , Col. 3.10 . i e. Man still , with his natural faculties of Reason and Will ; and so , Good is yet possible to him in some sense , if God please to adapt him for it , Eph. 2.10 . 

In and about particular Acts agible , within man's power , and unto which he is not actually or virtually , by a previous invincible Habit , or Propension of Mind and Will predetermined , lieth the Contingency and Evitability of Human actions . In such actions hath man a liberty of Contrariety , or Contradiction , in the Exercise and Specification of his Acts , or of Indifferency , accordingly as his Reason doth sway him . He may and can Act , or suspend his Act ; his Will containeth within its dominion a power and possibility unto contrary acts and effects ; what is future , is yet evitable ; and that possible , that is not future . Man ( saith the Learned Davenant ) hath not only potentiam in se liberam , a faculty in its self free , or capable of freedom ; but liberum usum potentiae , the free Use or Exercise of it . A wicked Man for instance , can upon other Deliberation , resolve to do otherwise than he doth , which freedom is evident in Adulterers , Thiefs , and all manner of Sinners , who being resolved to Commit this or that Sin , when they perceive some great Danger , presently choose to abstain from it till fitter opportunity . Cain , Absalon , Judas , and others , were not under a Necessity of committing those Sins , whereof they are noted to be Guilty ; it was out of their free Election , having a power whereby they might have abstained from them . The Angels that fell , notwithstanding the Decree of the Divine Will , had a Possibility of Not-rebelling against God , and a Sufficiency of Divine Grace given them to have preserved them , so had Adam , had they not abused it . God's absolute prescience doth not take away the possibility of the contrary Action or Event ; no more doth his absolute decree , to think that the decree of absolute Reprobation must leave men under a necessity of committing their several sins , is a false Imagination , as every man's Conscienee is able to witness , so the aforesaid Author , p. 116.199.328.344 . whom I have the rather consulted , for that he is instanced in by some , and produced for a maintainer of God's Predetermination of man's will , in the sense by them pleaded for ; Which himself termeth , a controversy between the Dominicans and Jesuits ; with whose Metaphysical speculations our Protestant Divines love not to torture their brains . 

Nor yet do I take all Extrinsic Predetermination to be Inconsistent with human Freedom in Acting . For it hath been before granted , that such Predetermination of God is necessary unto the Conversion of any Sinner unto him , ( though the Sinner is capable of doing something that in the Order of God's appointment hath a tendency to it , prov. 2.3 , 5.  Isa . 64 , 7. and it lieth at the Door of any under the call of the Gospel , that they are not converted and healed by God , it 's their own fault , Jer. 13.27 . Mat. 25.29 . and their heart will one day Reproach them for it , Luk. 16.28 . ) neither do we , when we speak of an Irreversible , Insuperable , Irresistible Determination , ( whether to good or evil Actions , ) mean any more than such as cannot , or rather shall not be resisted ; such as is efficaciously prevalent , and never fruastrate . Yet is the Liberty and Freedom of Co-operation in the Subject in such case , no more than that of a Rational Spontaneity ; it containeth in its own nature nothing of contingency , or possibility of the contrary Event . In Effectual calling , the New Creation , ( wherein God worketh something above and besides the Order and Course of second Causes , in order to the new Biassing and Pointing the soul towards himself , Heaven , and Holiness ; ) whatever the Influence or Efficiency of God be on the soul , or its faculties of Reason and Will , or his manner of Operation ; ( whether it be by way of objective Proposal , and Fixation on the mind Demonstrating the Object , and Effectually setting home Truth , to an immutation therein , and turn of the Will , 1 Cor. 2.4 . Or by way of Physical Precurse and Premotion besides , exciting the natural Powers into Act , and inclining and bowing them in their Operation as the Fountain of Being , and motion , unto a Change or Turn into a new Course , Eph. 2.2.4 , 10. of which before , ) still , he so intimately by his Presence and Virtue reaches , and applieth himself to the Active Principle of the second cause , he so congruously accommodateth himself to the nature of the subjecy to be wrought upon , as that all the vital Wheels of the soul , the Reason , Elective power , Will and Affections go along with choice and delight in their determination , without the least Rape or Violence offered to the Innate freedom of the soul , though God and Christ be carried into the heart , with a greater weight of Love than any other Object can balance , to turn the scale of its Predominant Eletion an other way , and yet it 's Invincibly or Irresistibly wrought upon , and a necessity Induced upon it in a sense . It can will no otherwise , Christ drawing , yet the Will remaineth still free ; for voluntary and violent , willing and forced , do implicare ; The Will cannot be forced , and for the Will to be determined necessarily or indeclinably to Good , and what may render the soul happy , no man that prayeth to God for grace , or that acknowledgeth God therein , will ever recoil at it , or accounted himself injured thereby , or concerned to rise up against it : nor is it at all repugnant to the Commands , Counsels , Promises , or Threats laid before men to induce them to a Returnal unto God , Heb. 4.1 , 11.  For that , the dispensation of this grace is , as to us , contingent , and in the use of means ; And the second cause hath its immediate , formal , and proper Efficiency therein . It is man that believeth and repenteth , ( not God ; yet the Effect of God's power overshadowing the soul , Psal . 110.3 . ) whose Action is not only the first cause in the presence of such a Creature , ( as in the gifts of miracles : ) but is specified by the second cause , in the virtue of its proper form suitably to its nature , as a reasonable Creature , 2 Cor. 6.1 . God's Efficiency changes not the natures of things ; though he rectifieth , and heals the Mind and Will morally , yet he altereth not its proper motion or manner of operation naturally . It inclineth its self as freely to the Act , and that upon the cogency of reason and judgement , as if there were no such Hyperphysical determination thereof by God at all . Dut. 30.19 . 

3.  But as to evil or sinful actions , whereof our question is , such Predetermination is destructive to the Creature , and inconfident with God's moral Government over him : albeit that God's decrees are infrustrable , yet doth not God premove their Wills Insuperably in and unto the Conception and Production at such Act : more were it for the honour of God , ( if sin dishonoureth him , ) and the good of man his Creature , that such Acts are Operations of his should for ever abide in their bare Potentiality , or that his Will should remain in an Everlasting Indetermination , ( which it 's said that it must , if God determine it not , ) than that its p●ssibility , should be educed into an Actual invasion of the Government of God , and affronted of his holy Majesty ; and then the creature be damned for the same , ( though he could , but sees it not meet to prevent it . ) here it 's necessary , not only that the Subject hath no Violence offered to it , but that it be not made free nor willing , which is far the worse . If any man should violently snatch me out of ha●mes' way , when I was not aware of it , or rescue me from the Pit ; I should have no cause to complain of him : but in case any one could reach my Elective power , and infatuate and befool my Reason , ( suppose it by fascination , ) and should determine me to the Contrivance and Execution of some horrid Treason , to my destruction ; He should do me more Mischief and Injury than if he had violently or by force assassinated me , and taken away my Life with h●ss own hands ; as is obvious to every Understanding ; more of Evil would cleave to me ; and if he were my Judge in such Instance , I know what I could not but say . God himself ●ath declared it a thing to him condecent and just , that in the matter of Offence and Punishment , his Act should be ( if I may so speak ) at the Beck and determination of the Creature . Legisl●tion belongs to God alone ; and Deliverance after forfeiture belongs to his Prerogative : but that any one becomes an Object of his rectoral Justice and Wrath , God is not the first cause of th●t ; or the Predeterminer to those Action's which involve men under Gild . The Judge or King is and must be at the Dispose of the Subject in a sense , in the Execution of the penalty of the Law ; not to hang whom he please ; nor yet to make them culpable . Such a Supremacy over all persons , and in all Cases , God abhorreth from , Isa . 50.1 . The Position directly contrary hereunto , is that which by some is maintained ; namely , That God in Eternity did Predefine or decree all the sinful Actions of Angels and Men. That by his Efficiency , which is but the Execution of his Decree and adequate to it , foregoing the Operation of the second cause , he doth in time , by his transient physical Influence , predetermine the Creature to all such Actions ; th●t the necessary dependence of the second cause , or the first , and its Essential subordination to it , doth so require , that the Habit or fir●t Act , and the Operation or second Act , is the Product and Effect of such Influence of God the first cause , as secundary and subordinate to it , and is ascertained by it ; or that otherwise the Decree might suffer disappointment . more particularly ; that the Fall of our first Parents was fore-dec●eed of God ; and that in Execution thereof , substrahendo , by withdrawing , or suspending that Light and Assistance , without which it was imp●ssible for th●m eventually to stand : or efficiendo , by his Physical precurse , he determined them thereunto . They affirm not only the concourse of God enabling them to and in the Acts of Appetition , of Mastication , Manducation etc. in eating of the fruit ; but that the disorderly Modification of the Act was primarily from God ; that by his Influence and Causation , himself did cast the Scale of their Will , to desire , and to eat of that Tree prohibited ( in which , was ye disorder ) rather than any other , ( before free and indifferent , till determined thereunto , by that Energy of his , wh●ch cou●d not but produce the Effect ▪ ) yet so , as that no straining or compassion can be dreamt of therein ; though in sensu composito considered , as in subordination to the Immutable Decree and Efficiency of God , they co●ld do no otherwise than they did . So for all other the wickedest Actions of men ; that all the ine●cationss of the flesh , the motus primo primi , all the first machinations of the Mind or Thoughts , and conceptions of the Will , are forged by him , ( as to the suberate matter , ) that unto all the hatred of himself , all the Lying , Cursing , Rap●ne , Blood , Cruelty and Confusion in the World , he is the first ●over , the reducer of it out of its bare potentiality into Act , its Specifier , and Predeterminer , as to its Existence , and mode of Being ; not only the Assyrians spoiling and taking the Prey , Isa . 10.6 . but all his evil meaning , 20.7 . and his saying , that by his Strength and Wisdom he had done it , v. 13. both Habit and Act : all that had any thing of Entity in it , that n●t only the Power of Herod , and the exercise thereof unto the taking of a Wife was from God ; But in specie and individuo , that he took his Brother Philip's Wife , rather than an other Woman he was indeclinably premoved of God , and Efficiently Predetermined by him ; and so in all instances of natural Action . This is it which I oppose , and the which now cometh more directly to be Considered and Argued . 

1.  The First Argument which I shall insist on , for the confutation of the Doctrine aforesaid , and in maintenance of the Position by me before laid down , which is diametrically opposite to it , is this . It maketh God to be the Efficient cause , or the Author of sin ; ( not a sinner ; for that he is above Law , say some , but ) of all that is so in man The consequence I know is denied by them whom I oppose , yea and the thing disowned ; they will not affirm , nor grant God to be the Author of sin , nor do think , that from what they assert , it will avoidable follow ; whatever odious Consequences we fasten upon an opinion in the way of Argumentation , we take for grant the contrary . Namely , that they who do hold that Opinion , do not hold that which we connect with it , or , that which we tell them will follow thereupon . When I endeavour to convince a man of his error , by reducing him ad incommodum or absurdum , to an inconveniency , or absurdity : I take it for Grant that himself accounteth it an absurdity which I would fasten upon him ; Or my Argument is to him lost . If he agreeth not with me in that which I make Use of a● my medium to convince him , ( and there is no man so perfect , but he holdeth contradictions , though he seeth it not ; ) or if he doth not with me more firmly adhere to the Tru●h which I take to be contradictory to his Error , my Argument , ( which proceedeth ex concessis ) will not pinch him at all . 

Here therefore they distinguish of the Physical Action , and the Morality of it ; the Action they say is of God , and its Existence ; He it is that premoveth , and by his transient Physical influence causeth , and efficiently predetermineth men in and unto all their sinful Actions ; ( and is the first cause , and determiner in all their Omissions ) that he specifieth , and giveth its particular Individuation to every such numerical Action : but for the anomy or ataxy of it , it 's Irregularity ( wherein the formal nature of Sin consisteth , its inconformity to Law ) that is a privation , it 's a non ens , or nihil , it h●th no Author or Efficient cause at all , ( only a deficient cause , or subject rather , ) nor is caused . The Action they say , the substrate matter of Sin , God causeth or effecteth ; not the Obliquity of it ; the Act , not the sinfulness ; the former , i e. the Act , they say is ens , it hath an Entity or Being , and ens & bonum convertuntur , it must necessarily therefore be good , and have God for its Author , who is so of all that is good , etc.  But surely ens , & bonum morale , are not convertible terms : every thing that is , is not morally good ; and of Metaphysics we are not disputing . 

Laying aside therefore all Philosophical and Scholastical subtleties , let us attend to the Scriptures , and see whether we can find out what is Sin ; and whether it may be said to have any Author of it , or no ; and if so , what it is that denominateth any one such in the Language of the Holy-ghost . 

Sin is either Orginal , or Actual . Original , is either that of Adam , or of all mankind in him , Rom. 5.12 . which was Origo , the first beginning , and Springhead of all sin : Or the immediate Product thereof , that which though it be not the first S●n or Transgression , yet is ab origine congenite , or of the same Original with us ; and that is either private , The loss or Want of something in debito subjecto , that the jure aught to be in the Subject , termed the Image of God , Gen. 1.26 . Ecc. 7.29 . Col. 3.10 . Or positive , an Alienation , or Dis-inclination to what the Law of God requireth ; and a bias and propension to what it prohibiteth , Job . 14.4 . Psal . 51.5 . and 58.3 . Gen. 6 5.  Rom. 3.10 . ( which is heightened by continued Acts , Jer. 13.23 . ) and this is the Source and Fountain of all other Sin.  

Actual Sin , is either of Omission or Commission . The former , is the subjects not exerting , or not coming up to some particular Act , which by the Law he stood obliged to . The latter , the Perpetration of some Act , or the Doing of some thing , which the Law of God forbids to be committed or done , Luk. 11.42 . The formal nature of Sin in abstracto , is a Repugnancy to Law or Rule ; so the Apostle defines it , a Transgression of the Law , 1 Joh. 3.4 . All Sin , however Distinguished , is such , and for the same reason is Sin ; because Inconform to the Law of God , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , an Illegality ; it 's not the Object , or Circumstance of an Act , or Intention of the Agent in Acting , that is the Rule or Measure of its Morality ; but the Act or Action so modified , is Good or Evil , as Conform or Inconform to Rule , Rom. 4.15 . 

Sin in concreto , is a Peccant Habit , Act , or Omission , against Law or Rule . In it there is nothing more nor lesle to be considered , but the Habit or Privation , Act or Omission of the Law ; and the Habitude of the former to it . The Law , that is Good and Holy , Rom. 7.12 . it 's also index recti & obliqui , the Rule and Standard of what is Right , and what Not. God is the Author of That , Man of the Habit or Act Deviant from it ; the Habitude or Relation of Sinfulness , stante lege , results from the former Act. The Formality God is the Author of , in some Sense , he Constituteth the Law ; what Action shall be Good , what Evil , his Nature and Will giveth it so to be , it 's of Him ; but the Existence of the Act or Action discrepant to Law , is of Man ; God is not the Author or Predeterminer of That ; he might not do it , or was not Necessitated so to have done it . 

Sin is sometimes in Scripture predicated of the Soul now depraved ; sometimes of its Faculties ; of the Understanding , Will , and Affections ; and sometimes of the Body its Instrument , as the Subject and Efficient of it ; so it is of the Habit or Propension to Evil ; and Privation of Light , and of the contrary Inclination to Good , ( whereof the Soul itself , and its natural Faculties , is the substratum , the prime Subject of such Depravation , and vicious Inclination , and in like manner of all sinful Omissions or Non-agencies ) and of actual sinful Commissions , ( the substratum or materiale , the matter whereof is the act itself ) yea , it 's denominated of th●m all in the Abstract , Eph. 5.8 . Rom. 8.7 . ch . 1.29 . Let now this irregular warping of the Faculties , this crookedness of the habitual Frame and Inclinations of the Soul , and disconformity of its actions , Isa . 59.8 . let it , I say , be what it will be , in its precise nature , ens real rationis , modus entis or modus modi entis ; still it cleaveth to , and is affirmed of the Faculty , Habit , or Act whereof it is the Mode , the Scriptures throughout ; and he that determineth , or is determined to an Act forbidden , doth , or is so also , to the Sin or Evil of it , in the Judgement of God ; or to the evil Action in concreto ; as well to its irregularity , as to the Entity of the action : which whilst the Law abides , it can never really ( only by a ment●l Precision or Abstraction , ) be separated from . Put but the Fundamentum and terminus , and the relation results . If a Man begets a Child , the relation of Paternity cannot but ●ollow . If the Soldiers do not keep their R●nkss , or observe not their due and proper Motions ; the disorder of the Army re●●l●s , and no●e can help it . The Winding up or losing of a string , or Physical undue Touch or motion of it , will cause an Irregularity or Discord in Music● ; and that by Resultancy from it . So , let the Habits and Propensi●nss ●f the Soul be wrong pointed , and its natural Actions determined , as to the Entity of them , and manner of Being , cross to the Law of God , ( whencesoever it be ) and its Harmony is destroyed ; Sin results , ne●ther can the Gild of it come any o●her way . He that so acteth , doth 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , make S●n , Joh. 8.34 . 

Sin , it 's 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 a Transgression , besides or against the Law , 2 Pet. 2.16 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Impiety , 2 Tim. 2.16 . and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a Deflection from a straight Line , Rom. 5.14 . and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 an Aberration , or Lapse , v. 15. and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Disobedience , v. 19 and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Pravity , Act. 3.26 . and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ●●edity or Impurity , Mat. 23.27 . and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Wickedness , Act. 8.22 . and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , all Injustice , or Deviation from the Rule of Righteousness , is Sin , 1 J●h . 5.17 . The Question is , of what all this is Denominated ? what it is , that whoever can justly be charged therewith , the G●ilt of all that cleaveth to him ? Surely it 's something Re●l , not Imaginary only that it 's spoken of ; it 's as well of Habits , as Privations ; of Act● , as Omissions ; and hath an Efficient Cause , and Real Foundation , with the Entity whereof ; those Relative Respects are Identified , and he that Causeth one , Causeth both . 

That 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 unbridled Concupiscence , Rom. 7.8 . or the Habitual Inclination of the Whole Man to what is Prohibited , and D●sclination to what is Commanded . it 's termed in Scripture , Sin ; the Body of Sin , and Law of it , Rom. 7.23 . something Present , Dwelling , and Moving in the Subject , v. 5.17 . ch . 8.3 . Sometimes it 's said to War , sometimes 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to Reign , or to Lord it ; ( this Nonens , as some will have it , ) Let not Sin Reign in your Mortal Body , that ye should obey it in the Lusts thereof , Rom. 6.12 . This our Catechizes teach to be a Corrupt Nature Inhering or Dwelling in us , pondus a weight , and an Operative , Effective Principle ; an anomalous thing ; yet the foams peccati , the Source and Fountain of all Actual Transgression . The Natural Habit or Inclination , is quid real , something Real and Existent an Active Quality . it 's the Soul , the Form , that Acteth ; but by the Habit it 's disposed to Act ; its Faculties , and Habits or Dispositions , are its Instruments of Action , and concur subordinately thereunto . 

If it Inclineth , stands Bend , or Determined towards what the Law forbids , or be pointed repugnantly to Rule , it 's 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 an Evil Complexion , Habit or Constitution of Soul ; a Leprosy , Isa . 1.6 . a Running sore upon it , Ps . 38.5 . it 's more than a Privation , it 's a contrary Habit to Good , a Plag●e on ●he Heart , Hos . 11.7 . Inclinatio ad malum & prohibitum reciprocanter , to incline to any Act or Object that God Prohibits , is to Incline to Moral Eull , or Wickedness ; and such Inclination ( of Mind , Will or Afflections , ) or so modified , and determined , is Wicked and Sinful ; the Entity of it is so mo●ally , ( not Physically , ) so is the Mi●d its self so Affected , Act. 14.2 . the Will , Eph. 2.3 . and Aff●ctions , Rom. 1.26 . as well as that which proceedeth or cometh our of them : For , from within , out of the Heart of Men , proceed Evil Thoughts , Adulteries , etc. saith our Saviour : all these Evil things ; and defile the Man , Mark. 7.21 , 23. having Eyes full of Adultery , 2 Pet. 2.14 . 

So for Omissions and Commissions . Omissions ; There is none that calleth upon thy Name , that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee , Isa . 64.7 . There is none that understandeth , none that seeketh after God , none that doth Good , Rom. 3.11 , 12.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ingrateful , 2 Tim. 3.2 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 without Natural Affection , v. 3.  I was an Hungered , and ye gave me no Meat ; In Prison , and ye visited me not , Mat. 25.42 . All this is Impiety , Sin , or Unrighteousness . By what th●n doth a Man Contract the Gild of all , but by a non agency nor non-exertion of some Physical Act , which the Law of God , some affirmative Precept requireth ? it results from it . 

In like manner for Commissions ; They are all gone out of the way , Rom. 3.12 . Their Throat is an open Sepulchre ; With their Tongues they have used deceit , etc. v. 13. this is Sin and Wickedness . The Question is whether Sin hath an● Efficient , or Author , or not ? Or if so , what it is to be the Author of it ? Sin is the Transgression of the Law , saith the Apostle ▪ 1 Joh. 3.4 . But he that lieth carnally with another man's Wife , or that takes away the Life of an Innocent Person , or uncondemned , etc.  Transgresseth the Law , Jam. 2.11 . Ergò , So to do is Sin. The very natural Act is such : Put but the Law , and the Act , and it results ; If ye have respect of persons , ye commit Sin , and are convinced of the Law as Transgressor's , v. 9  You are the Authors of it . Hence such Actions receive a new denomination , when Illegal . The Natural Use of Woman is lawful , but that is not called Adultery ; So , to take away the Life of man in some case ; but that is not termed Murder as before . Jam. 2.11 . All Eating and Drinking , is not Surfeiting and Drunkenness ; nor every taking of a Purse , Theft ; nor saying Yea or Nay , Lying ; but as the question is put , Act. 5.8 . the modification then of these natural Acts , ( the Power whereof is from God , Act. 17.28 . ) the Specifying and Determining them this or the other way , with their Relation to God's Law , is that which giveth them both Name and Thing . If a man ●ayeth Yea , when by the Law of God he ought to say Nay , it 's Lying , and the physical Act Sin , or Transgression . To pour water , and to Baptise in the Name of the Father , Son , and Holy-ghost , is no Sin , ( yea may be Righteousness ; ) but so to do , and say , over a Beast , can never be but Sin : To Name the Word Devil , is is not always Sin ; But to Baptise a Christian in●o his Name , hath a moral Malignity in it , that can never by the Wit of Man be separated from it ; but that he that determineth to the Act , doth also to the Obliquity of it . 

Hence it is that Men are said to hatch and contrive Mischief , Isa . 59.4 . to do Wickedness , Gen. 39.9 . or Unrighteousness , Leu. 19.15 . Rom. 1.29 . and to commit Sin , Ja. 2.9 . ( the Abstract for the Concrete , ) this , though it may not be Good Metaphysics , is found Divinity I am sure it 's meant of Acts oblique , and thwarting God's Law ; Termed a Working of Wickedness , 2 King. 21.6 . it 's the Act or Substratum only that is meant , or that Man doth , when he is said to be the Author or Worker of Sin ; and that he pleaseth himself in , when he is said to take Pleasure in Unrighteousness , 2 These . 2.12 . or that his Members are Serviceable to , when he is said to yield them as Instruments of Unrighteousness , Rom. 6.13 . or that he reputes him of , when he is said to repent him of his Wickedness , Act. 8.22 . and beg pardon for it , Psal . 32.2 , 5. or that Men are Damned for , when they are said to Receive the Wages of Unrighteousness ; And yet surely that is Sin , Rom. 6.20 , 23. these things hast thou done , Psal . 50.21 . And divers Affection : Sin hath predicated of it ; ( whereas non entis nulla est affectio ) it 's said to be Intended , and Remitted ; some to be greater , some less●r Sins , and Sinners , Gen. 15.16 . a Wonderful and Horrible thing is Committed . Jer. 5.30 . and 23.14 . it 's said also to leaven , 1 Cor. 5.6 . and its self to be purged out , 2 Pet. 1.9 . some to be overcome of it , 2 Pet. 2.19 . and others to overcome it , Rom. 12.21 . being aware of its deceit , Heb. 3.13 . What can all this and the like be affirmed of : but of somewhat that hath Entity ? it 's the Material , the Substrate matter , or Subject , the Illegal Habits , or Operations of the Soul , that is called Sin , and the Body of it , Rom. 6.6 . 

Yet farther , If sin be a nonens , Nothing , Or hath no Efficient ; neither is Grace any thing , nor hath it God for its Author , nor yet man : This appeareth from the Rule of Contraries ; contrariorum eadem est ratio . Sin and Grace , Righteousness and Unrighteousness are opposed contrarily , ( not privatively in Morals ) Sub habitu , vel actione morali . They are two Contraries meeting sometimes in the same Subject , and combating there , Gal. 5.17 . As Grace , or Holiness is an Elective habit of the Mind and Will , or an Act Imperated of it , commensurate to the Law of God : So is Vice or Sin , in the Mind or Will , a Habit or Act deflecting from the same Rule ; And in the Abstract the deflection ( opposed to commensuration ) is its Vitiocity or Sinfulness ; and the Will of man is the Efficient cause of it , of Evil equally as of Good. Error hath its Radication in the Mind , as well as Truth ; and to be Wise to do Eull , h●th as much of Entity in it , as to do Good , Jer. 4.22 . Blindness , Darkness , or Ignorance is indeed nothing Positive . If it be of what the Nature of man is Incapable of , or was never Endowed with ; it 's but Simple Nescience , a Negation only : If of Natural things only , the loss of an Endowment of Mind in the discerning of , and Knowledge in and about things not Relating to Religion , wherein yet Manonce had Understanding , and was capable of ; it 's a Privation ; but no Sin , or Moral Evil. If a Man becometh Ignorant or Nescient in or unto the compass of what is by the Law of God forbidden ; it 's Metaphysical Evil , ( if I may so term it , ) a Privation of something that hath an Entity , and with which transcendental Good ( the common Affection of Entity ) is Convertible ; but it 's Moral good , Jam. 3.15 . let not my Soul come into their Secret , Gen. 49.6 . Ignorance or Darkness in and abo●t the things of God , and of the Spirit , be it juris or facti , of the Law , or of the Adequation of the Act to it , 1 Tim. 6.5 . Isa , 5.20 . if of that which is due and was connate to man to know and Understand , it 's a Privation ( viz. ) of that , the Habit or Power whereof was once an Human Endowment : ( and the which he is a Subject capable of having again retrived , by a Supernatural and Divine power ) and Perfective of man : and its Moral Evil. The Soul or Mind of Man is the Substratum or Subject of it , or that that is so deprived : and being destitute of Light and Truth , it 's ens moraliter Malum , a Being ethically Evil , a depraved Faculty , Eph , 4.18 . and he that extinguisheth the Habit , causeth the Privation , and all the Evil that ensueth , Rom. 1.28 . 2 Pet. 3.5 . The Pravity or Sinfulness of the Soul , or its Faculties , by reason of that Privation , is from the Law requiring the contrary Habit. The Formal Nature thereof , is its discrepancy and repugnancy to Law or Rule ; and hath as much of Entity in it , as when the fundamentum , the Foundation of that relative Respect , is quid positivum something positive , as a Habit. And the reason of Sin is the same , in Omissions , and Commissions ; the Will is culpable in both alike , either Efficiently or Deficiently ; and the Obliquity or Illegality of the one , hath as much of positivity in it , as of the other . 

Neither hath Righteousness or Holiness , the contrary Mode of Being , any thing more of Entity , ( as hath been said ) than Sin or Unrighteousness ; or is there any more of Efficiency to the one than the other . Neither Sin , nor Grace , Piety , or Impiety can subsist out of any Subject , or hang in the Air ; inconcreto , & abstracto in that agree . Harmony nam Discord , Order and Disorder , Conformity and Disconformity , Rectitude and Obiquity , Righteousness and Unrighteousness , have an Efficient Cause ; and Men are said as well to do one , as the other , if we may Credit the Scriptures , 1 Joh. 3. 7 , 10.  Leu. 19.15 . Rom. 6.23 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Uncorruptness , or 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Sincerity , Tit. 2.7 . which is as Salt , that rendereth every Instance or Obedience Savoury ; hath no more of Positivity in it , than the Contrary Deceit , Corruptness , Prevarication , or Hypocrisy , of which the former is the Negation ; without Hypocrisy , Isa . 3.17 . 1 Pet. 3.4 . that is , Upright , in the Affirmative . Yea , one and the same Act or Action , every way alike Circumstantiated , may and have received either Denomination ; sometimes , that of Good or Righteous , and then again of Sinful or Unrighteous ; upon the Alteration of the Law , the Standard of Righteousness , Josh . 7. 20 , 21. and chap. 8.2 . So it was with reference to the Ceremonial and Judicial Law , after the Coming of Christ . If in lineâ Physicâ the Jews kept their course , Acted and did , what before that they practised ; those same Actions were now Impious and Sinful , that before were Pious and Good. Shall we then think that the Goodness and Rectitude of the same natural Habits and Acts , was ens , and had an Efficient Cause , ( when the Law was in force ) but yet that the Malignity and Obliquity of them was nihil , ( after its Repeal , ) and had no Cause at all ? what did they more in the One , than in the Other ? its too Subtle for me to understand . The Truth is , he that is the Author or Efficient of the Act , is the Author or Efficient of both . Righteousness , or Unrighteousness ( straight , or oblique , ) is but the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; or Habitude of the Act , and all its Circumstances to Law ; and he that Doth or Causeth the Act , Doth or Causeth Righteousness or Unrighteousness , ( accordingly as the same Act is Conform or Inconform and Cross to the Law of God ) and that in a proper Sense ; or the Scriptures do never treat-of the one or the other properly at all . Did not Sol●mon King ' of ▪ Israel sin by these things ? Neb. 13.26 . 

What hath been said may suffice for the Explication of the Scriptural Notion of Sin. To reassume then our former Argument , and reduce what hath been before insisted on to the Case in hand . 

( 1 ) As to Original Sin , originans I mean , that of Adam , and ours in Him. If our first Parent's Inadvertency , or Omission of a due Exercise of Reason and Understanding ; if their Eating of the Forbidden Fruit ; if their Los● and Depravation of the Image of God in Knowledge and Light necessary to Conduct them unto God and Holiness ; or their Declining from God , and Inclination and Propension to the Flesh-pleasing , contrary to the Law of God , was Sin ; then accordingly it followeth from our Adversaries hyyothesis , that God must be the Author of Sin : But the Antecedent is true : Ergò the Consequent . 

The Antecedent is proved , Gen. 3.6 . what is this that thou hast done ? saith God , v. 13 , 17. 1  Tim. 2.14 Rom. 5.12 . Col. 3.10 . Nor can it be denied to be Sin.  

The Consequent is evident , in that they make God to be the first Cause , and Predeterminer of Man unto all , in every Branch thereof . That Adam did not Advert , Weigh , and better Consider the Evil and Danger of Complying with the Temptation , was they say from Gods withdrawing his Influence , and Causation from him , as often as man doth not Will or Act ; he therefore doth it not , say they , because God doth not determine him to it ; and that None-determination , or Suspensation of God , merely of its self , without any positive action inureth to the preventing of all Operation of the Creature . They affirm , that God did subtract or take away from Adam before his Fall , that spotless Light , and Primogenial Perfection of his Understanding , wherein he was at first Created , and and left him so denuded or stripped to shifted for himself : that moreover God did Predefine his Lapse or Fall , and that in Execution of his Decree , he did Premove , and Efficiently , by his Physical Influx , Predetermine his Will to the Eating of the Tree , whereof he Commanded him not to Eat ; to choose that rather than the other , and that Indeclinably , so as that it was Inevitable to him , considered as he stood in Subordination to the aforesaid Decree , and Efficiency of God , and his necessary Dependence on him : ( though in sensu diviso , considering him , or his furure Act , without the Consideration of the Decree and Efficiency of God , or his Dependence upon him in esse & operari , or secluding the Foreknowledge of God of all future Contingencies , etc. which is impossible : they deny not but that he might possibly have stood , and not have been so Predetermined by him , or Caused to Fall ; ) either I say all that was not Sin , nor Culpable ; or according to them God was the Author of his Sin or Transgression . 

So in like manner , ( 2 ) For our Personal Original Sin , ortum I mean , or originatum , that which ab origine we bring into the World with us , Job 14.4 . if God be the Author and Efficient of our Habits or Inclinations in the General , and their Specifier and Determiner , giving them their Bias that way they propend or go , namely , contrary to his Law , then is he the Author of Sin : But according to them who go the way of Physical Predetermination he , doth the former ; Ergò according to them he doth the latter also . 

The Minor is their own assertion , they say that not only the power of Willing , and the radical affections of Love and Hatred ; but their alienation from the Life of God , the Habitual Pointing and Determining them oblique and Cross to his Law , to the Love of the Word and Flesh-pleasing , and to the Hatred of Himself , and Enmity to his Law , both their Entity and Modification , God is the prime Cause and Efficient of . He from Eternity foresaw it , and that in his Decree , with which his Efficiency runs Parallel and Even , in all and every Creature-effect ; all that hath Entity . 

The Connexion or Consequence of the Mayor Proposition , will not I suppose be Denied , namely , that the Habitual Dis-inclination of the Soul to Holiness , or Propension and Inclination to Acts Discrepant to the Law of God , ( such as the Hatred of God , and aversation unto his Commands ) is indeed Sin , or the Law of Sin , Rom. 8.3.5 . I● than God be the Author and Determiner of , or unto that , he is so of Sin.  

The Case is still the s●me , as to Actual Sin , whether of Omission , or Commission . If God be the Cause of men's not Hearing the Word , Reading , Praying , Omitting , or not Exercising of this and the other act which his Law Commands and Obliges them unto , causa prohibens , by his Suspending or Denying that Influence of his , without which the Creature cannot move or act at all , but is Determined to a Non-agency ; then is the Author , or is wholly in Cause of all S●n against the affirmative Commands of his Law : but according to our Adversaries in this point , he is so : Ergo.  

That the Omission of many Physical acts is Sin cannot be denied , Mat. 5.42 . But that God by his Non-operation doth Predetermine the Creature Universally to a Not-acting , is their constant Doctrine , as ●o all Natural Acts , ( nor only as to Gracious or truly Pious acts , the which we grant in a Sense , since Man hath disabled himself ) then by undeniable Consequence is God the Cause , yea the Sole Cause of such Sins ; for Man doth nothing at all therein , neither ( according to them ) can do , nor ever could : and that Common assertion of Divines , wherewith they have been wont to stop the Mouths of Objectors against the Equity of Gods procedure with Man , for that he cannot do this and that ; namely that Man once had Power ; is by them Exploded as Heterodox , and of no Use , if this be true . Again , If God Premoveth and Efficaciously by his Influence and Causation Predetermineth men unto the Perpetration of Acts Repugnant to the Negative Precepts of his Law , such as Gluttony , and Drunkenness ( not bare Eating and Drinking ) Fornication , Adultery , Incest , and the like ; then is he the Author or Predeterminer of Sin ; or else those Acts are no Sins : But God causeth those Acts , according to them . Man they would have to be the Deficient Cause , and God the prime Efficient . All such Acts say they were from Eternity future : and that could not be without a Cause ; If Gods Will then , were not it , there must be an Effect without a Cause ; This they term an Insoluble demonstration , that such Effects have God for their Cause . Thence they proceed to Argue , that the Operation of the second Cause , is the Effect of the Precurse of the first Cause , as l●ss Worthy , Dependant , and Subordinate to it , etc.  Now let any one show me , how God for Instance should Premove or Excite Achan to covet the Babylonish Garment , the Silver and the Gold , Josh . 7.21 . How he should Predetermine him by his Physical Influence , to Will and to Do , to take them , and to hide them in the Earth , ( which himself acknowledgeth to be Sin , v. 20. add for the which doing , or for the passing of which Act out of its potentiality into Existence , and determination , he died , ) and yet not be the Author or Cause of that Sin of his : how God should Effectually cause that Numerical Act , but not the Obliquity of it , the Law abiding ; Or what Achan the Secondary Instrument did more ; If it be Granted but that he was the Subordinate Author of that Wickedness , ( though Inevitable to him . ) But enough of that . 

Arg. 2.  The aforesaid Hypothesis of Gods Predetermining all sinful Actions , reflecteth on the Attributes of God ; and therefore is not to be admitted . 

( 1 ) It asperseth the Essential Holiness of God , 1 Pet. 1.15 , 16. whilst he is made to predetermine to , and by his energetical Operation to give a Shallbe , or determinate Existence to all the Impious Actions Conceived , and Committed in the World ; Yea to Actions intrinsically Evil ; not only contrary to the Light of our Nature , the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , to the Fundamental Principle of Reason relating to Morals ; But Repugnant to its own Nature , ( which is regula regulans , ) such as are not so , from the bare Will or Pleasure of God prohibiting them ; But by Resultancy from his Nature , and from the Eternal Reason of the thing , in Conjunction with the Habitude or Relation that we stand in to him ) and which himself cannot alter not change : As , to hate his Blessed self , and to Lie and Blaspheme his Holy Name , to say in the Heart that there is no God , or to Curse him . As to such Acts or Actions , God himself cannot alter the Standard which they run cross to , nor can separate their Entity from their Obliquity , or make them not to be Wickedness . And yet this he is said , by those whom I Oppose , to Predetermine men to , even to those very Acts , ( but not to the Sinfulness they say . ) more tolerable is the Opinion of the Manichees , who feigned two Gods , one to be the Author of Evil , and the other of Good ; than so to affirm , or to Father such Actions on the true God.  

( 2 ) It Impeacheth the Legislative Righteousness of God , and the Equity of his Law. It hath been Generally taken for Granted , that God not only made Man with the Faculties of Reason and free Will , without which he had not been a Being of such a species or kind as had been capable of any Law ; But that also he was furnished with whatever might adapt him to the keeping of that Law he should be put under : and that the same was due to him from God's Justice or Righteousness of Condecency , ( as due to his Soul , in Case he Expected Obedience from him , ) and that he should be no ways necessitated to transgress , or Obedience be rendered impossible to him , from any Cause Extrinsical to himself . Now all this the former Hypothesis overturneth . Where then is the Equity of ●he Law ? or by what shall the Righteousness of God be vindicated ? If it be true , which is by them maintained , that God never gave to a Man a self-determining Power : ( through his Assistance , ) that he never made , nor could make such a Creature as might or could possibly specify his own Acts ; that could Choose or Refuse , but as himself first determineth him : That it were a Contradiction to suppose it ; For that he must be a God , ( not made after his Image ) that doth it : Nor could God foresee if it were so , what he would Issue in ; Nor his Supremacy he Retained over such a Subject ▪ what Reason then that man should be Obliged by any Law , when he can neither Will nor Choose in any Instance of Action , whether this or that shall be or not be ? which is Essential to the Idea of a Subject capable of Moral Government , and Obnoxious to an Enquiry about it . Yet farther , If Man cannot but Omit what God Efficaciously determineth him not to , but must abide in an Everlasting Indetermination , why should he by Law be Obliged to a Natural Impossibility ? And if God Invincibly determineth him unto every Action that he doth , by what Righteous Law should he be Obliged to be above God , or to be Stronger than he ? Thus to resolve all Man's Wickedness into Necessity , is to justify him , and to Condemn God. Nemo tenetur ad impossibile . 

( 3 ) It reflecteth on the Wisdom and Counsel of God in the Constitution of his Law. The Law must be rather for himself , than for them , if Man cannot nor never could ever put in Act the least Thought or Motion conform , nor inconform to it , but as he Predetermineth him . A Man might as Rationally make a Law for his Axe , Hammer or Saw ; for , though his Elective Power goes along they say with God's Precurse or Premotion : Yet in no Instance can he turn this way or the other , but as he is first Inclined by the Lawgiver , and Predetermined anteceden●er therein . Let the Law Speak what it will for it , or against it , still the Instrument can neither Move , nor Act otherwise than it doth ; what then meaneth the solemnity of a Law ? or to what End should it be designed ? 

( 4 ) It Impeacheth the Fidelity and Sincerity of God in his Expostulations with Men , if nothing be within the Verge of their Power . Why will you die saith he ? Ezek. 28 . signifying his being aggrieved at their Sin , and Ruin thereby . What shall we think of his Upbraiding Men for it , and protesting he willed the contrary ? OH that my People would Consider , etc. Deut. 5.29 . and 32.29 . Isa . 48.18 . Jer. 44.4 . Psal . 18.13 . Mat. 11.20 . and 12.41 . If he himself Indeclinably Predetermineth them to the very thing which he dehorteth them from , and worketh in them both to will and to do , so as that they can do no otherwise ; no Man can form a Conception of God , more repugnant to the Notions that the Scripture hath given us of his Nature and Properties , If I mistake not ; Amos 2 , 11 , 12 , 13.  

Arg. 3.  The former Hypothesis of Physical Predetermination , It over-turneth the Doctrine of Original Sin ; And of its Traduction . If on the one Hand God did subtract his Gift from Adam before he Sinned , and deprive him of that Light and Ability which he once had , and without which he could no longer stand , before any fault or forfeiture of his , ( and so determined him to fall in Execution of his Decree , as is sometimes said : ) by what Rule should his Posterity be Obliged still to have that , ( which though the Nature of Man was capable of it , yet was never due to it , and ) which God h●mself took away ? or why should it be termed Sin to want it ? when it 's by no fault of his that it 's wanting , nor was it ever by God intended to be continued ? It must be a mere Negation , no Privation ; Since there could not be debitum inessendi , any due Obligation of having it , if their Supposition be true : no more than is on a Beast to Reason ; Shall the Lord and Master of the Family take the Candle out of the Room , ( not the Servants Extinguish it , ) and then make it an Offence that they are in the dark , and challenge them for their not working ? or will it solve the matter to tell them that it 's a Privation , Darkness , a nonentity , and therefore he could not cause it ? So on the other Hand , If that which is termed the Corrupt Nature dwelling in Man , be ens as it is a Quality or Habit , and all that hath Entity be the Workmanship of God , ( as they say it is ; or else Man must have a Creative Power , and also good : why then do we call it sin , and Original sin ? or if it be nihil , a nonentity , how then doth it descend ? How is it Traduced , Joh. 3.6 . and said to be ours by real Inhesion and Contagion , as the whole Church consesseth ? saith Davenant . 

Arg. 4.  It staineth the Glory of free Grace in the Pardon of Sin , and casteth a Blemish upon the Whole of the Meditation of Christ . Wha● Conviction can possibly possess the Mind of Man of the riches of God's Grace in the Pardoning of sin , whilst it 's maintained that the abounding of sinful Actions ( not to say sin ) is as well from God , ( the Efficient and Predeterminer unto them , ) as the Superabounding of Grace in the Remission of them ? Rom. 3.7 . and 5.20 ? What sense can abide upon the Soul , of the Grace of Christ , in his being made Flesh , and bearing the Wrath of God for those Transgressions , whereof himself as God was the Prime Efficient , and the which , man by his own Influence and Causation was Indeclinably Predetermined unto ? He that shall Cause or Determine another , ( supposing him a Rational Agent , and capable of such an Impress , ) freely and willingly to do that wh●ch in the Issue will prove Rottenness in his Bones , ( as Prohibited , or Illegal Actions will do , Job . 20.11 . Psal . 38.5 . ) will Receive little thanks for his Cure , whatever Cost he may be at ; When himself caused the Disease , and the which , had he not done it , there had been no need of a Remedy for it . 

Arg. 5.  If the Doctrine of our Adversaries be true ; What meaneth then the Combating of the Spirit of God against sin , or men's being said to grieve , and to Quench the Spirit ? 1 These . 5.19 . it must according to th●●r Hypothesis be God on both parts ; His own Counteraction in the Subject . And if all the first motions of the Imagination , all Distraction in Religious Duties , all the vain Thoughts emerging out the Heart of Man in their Numberless Operations be from God , as the first Mover and Determiner , why then should Man be required at his Peril to dislodge them ? Jer. 4.14 . What is it that he can do ? Or should he Enterprise the Eviction and Expulsion of the ataxy or Obliquity of them , whilst that God himself keepeth the Entity of them in possession , and in actual Operation ? Deut. 15.9 . 

Arg. 6.  It layeth the Axe to the Root of all Repentance for what is done and passed : It raseth the Foundation thereof , and Excludeth the very Idea of it . A Man may bewail Impreventable disaster ; but cannot prevent him , of that which he could never have helped , 2 Cor. 7.11 . I appeal to the sense of any man living , whether his Heart be wont to reproach him , for the doing of that wherein he was no way wanting to himself , or for that , the which were it to do again , must be done , and could be no otherwise , on no Account whatsoever within his Power , now , nor ever before . If Man by the Necessity of his Being , and from the Exigency of his Condition , as a dependant Being , cannot move , save that way he is premoved ; and cannot but act that way that he is Predetermined or acted ; why then , when he sees the Event , should he wish it were Undone , and Repent him that he did it ; or not rather that God did it , if that be true ? Repentance is not founded in the Obediential Subjection of the Creature , namely , that God could have caused him to do otherwise ; or barely in the Capacity of the Subject to receive such an Impress from the first Cause ; but on the Evitability of the Fact , or Possibility of the contrary , from a Principle Intrinsic and Connate to himself . Yea , who or where is the man , that dare go to God in Prayer , with such a Notion in his head , and hold to it , that he is not to Confess that he could have done more Good , and omitted more Evil , than Eventually he hath ? Neh. 9.16 , 17 , 26 , 29.  Ezra . 9.10 , 14. had not David just Cause to Repent him of his Lie that he told to Abimelech , 1 Sam. 21.2 . and to acknowledge it a preventable Act , ( which is the Sole aggravation of S●n , and true Reason of it , though all Sin is not now Preventable , as some is : ) though I know not why or how he should so do , were it true which is by some Affirmed , that in linea physicâ to the Entity of the Act he was Predetermined of God , to speak every Word and Syllable that he did , ( whereof there was never a one true , ) equally as in the using of his Tongue in the praising of his name . 

Arg. 7.  It leaveth not the least Foundation , whereupon to bottom God's Judicial Process against Man in the Day of Judgement . To resolve man's Damnation into mere Dominion and Sovereignty , is abhorrent to God , and Cross to all Scripture . Nor is there any thing more Repugnant to the Notions of Justice and Righteousness , ( which are the Attributes of God to be Displayed towards all that shall then be Cast , or Peri●h , Rom. 3.5 . 2 These . 1.5 . ) than that he should be thought to Adjudge his Creature to Endless Torment , for that which it could never Help ; or that he should make that a Crime , which himself was the Author or Cause of , or Predetermined it to . Is God Unrighteous when he taketh Vengeance ? absit , God forbid , saith the Apostle : how then shall he Judge the World ? Rom. 3.6 . God may bestow freely his Mercy and special Favour where he pleases : but not so the Effects of his Vindictive Justice and Wrath ; there must be Cause for it , or it were not becoming his Righteousness , and Holiness ; it were a Wrong and Injustice to the Creature , as himself doth admit , and is willing to render accountable to any one that shall Challenge him therein , Ezek 18.25 , 29.  Isa . 5.3 . Now , it 's matter of Fact that the Inquest shall be about , in the day of our Account , Mat. 25.25 , 30 , 35.  Rom. 3.6 . 1 Pet. 1.17 . the substratum of Sin , ( the same , as in all Human Courts of Judicature . ) If then God be the Efficient Cause of the Fact , if he Premoveth men , and Predetermineth them to the Entity , and giveth a Futurition , and Existence to their Acts of Murder , Adultery , etc. rendering them necessary necessitate causali & motiva : on what foot of Account than shall we fix the Equity of his taking vengeance on them for the same ? Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right ? Should a Judge so proceeding , be like unto God ? What colour of Justice were there ? or of meerness in the Recompense ? Heb. 2.2 . 

Arg. 8.  The Predeterminant Hypothesis , It shaketh the Foundation of Revelation , the Authority of the Scriptures , the Rule of God's Judgement . It maketh God the Suggester of Lies , as well as of Truth : then did not the false Prophets deceive the People , when they said , Thus saith the Lord , Jer. 23.17 . ( for it was ens , ) and yet God himself saith , that it was the Vision of their own Heart , and not from him , v. 16.  The Question is , what according to them , God did more in the Inspiration of the true Prophets , than in the false , in linea Physica as they speak ? 

Arg. 9  If God Predetermineth all the Operations of Man , as is affrmed , there is no Reason nor Foundation left for Civil Government , Oeconomical or Political . It were not only Ludicrous ; but highly Injurious . It were a horrid thing for Man not to be aware of it , ( whatever God might do , as they say ) Human Laws do presuppose the Lapse , or Disablement of Man , and with one consent it 's agreed , that no man shall be put to the loss of his Life , or Member penally for Omitting , or doing aught , that is not within reach of human Power to determine concerning ; If all the World be not cheated therein . What Man should be so Irrational as to Reprove or Correct Child or Servant , ( yea his Beast , ) for that which in good Earnest he stands convinced that he could not prevent ? The Fact , or Omition I mean , not the anomy only , which results from the same ? plain People understand well enough what I say , Mat. 21.29 , 30.  

Arg. 10.  It denieth to man his Essential Nature , and specific form , ( the Natural Image of God , in genere physico , wherein he was made , Gen. 9.6 . ) which is to have Dominion over his own Acts ; A Power of Willing , or Nilling , this , or the contrary ( in such sense as hath been opened . ) What is a Natural Faculty or Active power , but an Ability connate to the Subject , ( founded in nature , ) rendering it potent to such an Effect ? Actually so , or , that it may and can reduce into Act ? Voluntas nostra , nec voluntas esset , nisi esset in nostra potestate ; Porrò quia est in nostra potestate libera est , saith Augustine . Yea the former Hypothesis debaseth Man beneath the whole creation of God. it 's not denied but that in the virtue of their first Qualities , and active Principles , ( supposing the General concourse of God , ) other Creatures can Operate ; The fire can heat , and Water cool , and they specify their Operation also by virtue of their proper forms , ( not that the first Cause is hot , or maketh hot in the presence of the one , and cold in the presence of the other . ) By Ingrafture , or Inoculation , Man may specify the active Influence of the first cause , of what Nature it shall give the fruit of such a Stock to be ; Never to be altered without a Miracle . And better were it to move necessarily as the Stone downward , or Fire upwards , than to be moved universally like a clock or an Engine , ( not in all points ; but as to the Effect , without an Intrinsic Power unto the contrary Event , ) especially in a matter of Offence and Punishment , ( of which our question is , and ) with which a natural necessity is by all men granted inconsistent , and would totally excuse . But what needeth to add any more ? 

Finally , the aforesaid notion is not only subversive of all Religion , Policy and humanity , in its genuine consequents , as is before proved , if I be able to judge ; But it 's Expressly repugnant to several plain Texts of Scripture ; As , to Name no more , 1 John. 2.16 . All that is in this World , ( as the Lust of the Flesh , the Lust of the Eyes , and the Pride of Life , ) is not of the Father , ( not the existence of them , ) but is of this World ; or of the Devil , John 8.44 . who is a Liar , and when he speaketh a Lie , saith our Saviour , speaketh the suo of his own , is the Author of it . So Jam. 1.13 , 14.  Let no man say that he is tempted of God to Evil. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own Lust ; That is an Entity yet Sin , and the Conceiver of it , both Father and Mother of that which when it hath finished , bringeth forth Death : Opposed to Grace , which is from above , v. 17. chap. 3.15 , 17.  Psal . 7.14 . Jer. 7.31 . The Lord give us Understanding herein , and a due sense thereof upon our Souls . 

W.M.  

FINIS . 

Psal . 137.7 . Neh. 4 . 1● . 