The judgment of non-conformists about the difference between grace and morality / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (s.n.],[London :1676.)

THE JUDGEMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS' About the DIFFERENCE BETWEEN GRACE. AND MORALITY . 

Printed in the Year , 1676.  

THE JUDGEMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS' , etc.  WHAT advantage the Enemy of God and Man hath got against Truth , Holiness , and Love , by the Divisions of Christians , and especially by the Contentions of their Teachers , Experience hath been long telling the Christian World , by smart and sorrow : Where Envy and Strife hath begun , Confusion and every Evil Work hath followed : Little Breaches tend to greater : The Cause which first made them , will make them wider , by calling in more Causes to its help and service . Distinct Parties have their distinct Interests , as to Commodity and Reputation : And , alas ! what work will selfishness and fleshly interest make ? What Moralities , what Untruths , Injustice , and Unmercifulness is it pregnant with ? What Evil so great , that it will not first venture on , and then palliate , and next justify , and lastly propagate , if God do not mortify , or restrain it ? The foresight of this Danger to the Land of our Nativity , moved some of Us to strive for the prevention of it , while we thought there was place for our Endeavours : But as our labour did but exasperate the Disease , 〈◊〉 our doleful and dear-bought Experience , of the prog ●●ss and calamitous Fruits of Discord , in the space of more than two Apprenticeships , hath wrought no ( perceived ) Cure on men's Minds , nor deliverance to the Church . The Discord , which began about Worship and Discipline , is by some now pretended to be also in Doctrinals , and about the Principles of Civil Government , and Human Society and Peace . And whither increasing Discord , by the power of Interest and Envy , may yet carry the Charge , or how much wider yet Dividers may persuade the Ignorant that the Difference is , we cannot foretell : But because we are sure that all tendeth to the ruin of Brotherly Love , and that he that hates his Brother is a Murderer , and hath not eternal life abiding in him , to save as many on both sides as we can from such a damning sin , we take it to be our duty to detect the Errors of Contentious Dividers , and to hinder their farther widening of the Breach . Which we shall here attempt about this Question , much agitated of late . 

Quest . Whether the Parties called Conformists and Nonconformists do really differ , about the nature and sufficiency of Morality compared with the Grace of Christ ? Neg.  

As to the Explication of our Terms , 1.  What we mean by Conformists and Nonconformists , we have lately showed on another Question : we mean not that if a Papist , or Socinian , or Quaker should join either with the Conformists or Nonconformists , they would not herein differ from others : but that they that are now called Conformists and Nonconformists herein differ not : 1.  Formally , qua tales ; 2.  no nor Materially , qui tales , being merely such . 

2.  We speak only of the Parties : For as to some individual persons , it cannot be expected that any Parties in the World should be wholly made up of men so wise , as that none among them have Ignorance enough to wrangle in the dark . 

3.  The Terms [ Grace ] and [ Morality ] must be anon explained in our Proof . 

Which Proof ( as in our last Case ) we fetch , I From our common consent to the sacred Scriptures , the ancient Creeds , and the doctrinal Articles and Homilies of the Church of England ; which surely contain all that is needful to be held about the difference of Grace and Morality . Nor hath either Party declared their dissent by any contradiction of any of the aforesaid Articles or Doctrines . 

II Our second Proof is , by a sufficient explication , and enumeration of the Points in which we are agreed . 

I The word GRACE. is taken , 1.  EFFICIENTLY , 2.  OBJECTIVELY , 3.  SUBJECTIVELY . 

I EFFICIENTLY , Grace is taken , 1.  For the Efficient Principle : 2.  For the Efficient Action of the first Cause : 3.  For the Efficient Means and its operation . 

1.  Grace taken for the Efficient Principle , signifieth God's efficient Favour , Love , Mercy , or Will to do good freely to the Unworthy . 

2.  Grace taken for God's Efficient Action , signifieth the same Goodwill of God ex parte sui , but as connoting the Effect in fieri vel facto esse . The former is considered as Decreeing or merely Willing ; but this as Effecting . 

3.  Grace taken for the Efficient Means , is an effect of God's free Love , and a second Cause of Man's sanctification , and hath many parts ; of which CHRIST as Mediator is the Head or Chief , and his Gospel , Ministers , Sacraments , and Providences are inferior subservient parts : All which are the Efficient Grace of God.  

II OBJECTIVELY , Grace is all God's free-given Mercy as it is offered and proposed to Man's actual Belief , Acceptance , and Improvement , ( or use . ) 

Even as the word Fides signifieth , 1.  The fidelity or trustiness of God the Promiser or Revealer : 2.  The fidelity or trustiness of the Word promising or asserting : 3.  The Belief or Trust of the Believer ; ( Fidem promittentis , fidem promissi , & fidem credentis . ) So the word GRACE. hath the like three significations : 1.  The Grace of the Giver . 2.  The Grace of the extrinsic Gift . 3.  The intrinsic Grace of the Receiver . 

This Objective Grace , or Free-gift , is , 1.  God himself , as offered us Relatively through Christ to be our reconciled God and Father , with his Love , and our Relation to him as his Children . 2.  Christ himself , to be our Head and Saviour , and our Relation to him , as his justified , saved Members . 3.  The Holy Ghost to be our Sanctifier , our Relation to him and his Grace as offered : This is the Grace offered and given us in Baptism by Covenant , on God's part . Under these are the Objective Means ( the Gospel as it is to be believed , the sanctified Mercies of this present life , the Ordinances as to be used , etc. ) and ultimately , Heaven as the end of all : Glory freely given being the perfection of subjective Grace , and as proposed and offered being the perfection of objective Grace . 

III SUBJECTIVELY , GRACE. , is , 1.  Gracious Dispositions and Habits ; 2.  Gracious Acts ; viz. 1.  Of the Intellect , 2.  The Will , 3.  The Executive power in practice . The word GRACE. hath in the use of Divines all these significations , besides several sub-divisions which the Schoolmen ordinarily make . 

And in Scripture , I For Efficient Grace , see Exod. 34. 6. and 33. 29.  Num. 6. 25.  Neh. 9 17. 31.  Joh ▪ 33. 24.  Psal . 86. 15. and 103. 8. and 112. 4.  Isa . 30. 18 , 19  Joel 2. 13.  Jon. 4. 2. 1  Pet. 2. 3.  Heb. 4. 16. and 10. 29.  Eph. 1. 6 , 7. and 2. 5. 7 , 8. and 6. 24. 2  Cor. 12. 9  Rom. 11. 5 , 6. and 5. 2. and 1. 7. and 4. 16.  Acts 15. 40.  Heb. 29.  

II For objective Grace , see Gal. 1. 6. and 5. 4. and 2. 21.  Jud. 4. 1  Pet. 3. 7. and 1. 10. 13.  Joh. 1. 17.  Acts 20. 24. 32. and 14. 3.  Rom. 6. 14 , 15.  Tit. 2. 11.  Heb. 12. 15. 1  Pet. 4. 10. and 5. 12.  

III For Subjective Grace , see 2 Pet. 3. 18. 1  Pet. 5. 5.  Jam. 4. 6.  Heb. 12. 28. and 13. 9  Col. 3. 16. and 4. 6.  Eph. 4. 7. 29. and 3. 8.  Gal. 2. 9 2  Cor. 8. 6 , 7. and 9 8.  Joh. 1. 16.  etc.  

II The words [ MORALITY ] and [ MORAL ] have also diverse significations . 

I In the first most comprehensive and most famous sense , MORALITY , as distinguished from mere Naturality or Physics , doth signify the Relation of the Manners or Acts of an Intelligent free Agent to the Governing Will and Law of God : And so Actus morales and Actus humani are used in the same sense ; and all Morality is distinguished into Moral Good and Moral Evil , Virtue and Vice.  

II Some have used MORALITY in a narrower sense , unfitly , for so much of Man's duty as is revealed by the mere Law of Nature , and as is of common obligation to lapsed Mankind : And so it comprehendeth the relics of the Law of Innocent Nature ( to love God and obey him , etc. ) and the additional Law of Lapsed Nature , ( to Repent , and use all possible means for our recovery , and thankfully improve the Mercies which we receive . ) And thus it is distinguished from Duty known by supernatural Revelation , and especially the Mysteries of Redemption by Jesus Christ . 

III Some use the word ( improperly also ) for all that Duty which is of perpetual Obligation , whether by natural or supernatural Revelation : And so it is distinguished from Temporary Duties : And thus the Lordsday , Baptism , the Lords-supper , a Gospel Ministry , Scripture ( to be used ) discipline , are said to be Moral-positives , distinct from mere Natural Duties , and from Temporaries . 

IU. Lastly , Some , yet more unaptly , confine the sense to the Duties of our common Conversation towards man , as distinct from Holiness or our Duty to God : And so they distinguish a mere moral honest man , from a godly or religious man  

Though we wish that the needless use of words improperly were not the common Fuel of vain Contending , yet we being not the Masters of Language , must take words as we find them used , and leave all men arbitrarily to use them as they please , so be it they will but tell us what they mean by them , before they lay any stress on them in disputing . 

In reference to these various senses of these words , we suppose that we are all agreed as followeth . 

I As to MORALITY in the first and most famous signification , we are agreed , 1.  That all proper Human Acts are moral , that is , morally Good or Evil : And all Duty and Sin , Virtue and Vice , in Habit and Act , Positive and Privative Vice , are parts of Morality ; moral Good directly , and moral Evil reductively and consequently . 

2.  Holiness to the Lord , or the Love of God as God , is the chief part of Morality ; and what Duty soever is Evangelical and spiritual is also moral . 

3.  Nothing is morally laudable or rewardable , but Moral Good ; and nothing is punishable , but Moral Evil.  

4.  All Morality is seated primarily in the Will , but is secondarily ( as flowing thence ) in the imperate Acts of the Intellect , and inferior Faculties . 

5.  All truly moral Good in lapsed man , is , 1.  From God's Efficient Grace . 2.  And exercised on some Objective Grace . And , 3.  Is itself Subjective Grace , either special or common . 

6.  The Good called Moral in Infidels , and all other ungodly unsanctified men , is such but secundum quid , and not simpliciter , nor in the full or properest sense : Because bonum est ex omnibus Causis essentialibus : And a good Principle , Rule , End , and right Object , especially the formal Object , are all essential to a truly good moral Act : But every ungodly man in every Action doth want at least some one of these . And an Act is denominated in Morality from that which is prevalent in it , and not from every conquered depressed ingredient : We say not that he that killeth his Father or Prince , with the reluctancy of better thoughts and inclinations , doth therein do a good work , though that reluctancy was good : So he that hath some Love to God and Goodness , but more Hatred ; and more love to sinful pleasure ; doth not a work properly Good , which proceedeth from such a mixed Cause . But the evil Principle and End is predominant in all ungodly men . 

7.  But materially , and secundum quid , bad men may do Works that are morally good , and physically very good to others ; as Governing and Protecting Commonwealths and Churches , building Cities and Temples , and Hospitals , relieving the Poor , preaching the Gospel , expounding Scripture , defending Truth , promoting Learning ▪ and in good Nature , Patience , Meekness , Temperance , Chastity , Wit , and Industry , they may be commendable and exemplary , and their Precepts and Practice may conduce much to the good of others . 

8.  Whatever good is found in Heathens or Infidels , or ungodly Men , is to be acknowledged and praised proportionably according to its real worth ; it being all from God , who must not be robbed of his praise . 

9  A Man that hath but Common Grace is better than he would be if he had none , and it is the usual preparatory for special saving Grace . Though many civil temperate persons , by overvaluing Common Good , are hindered from seeking Special Grace , that is not caused by the Good , but by their abuse of it objectively . And though God take occasion from some men's great sins , to affright their Consciences to Repentance and Reformation , that is not caused by the sin , but by God's Mercy : Sin as remembered is not sin in the act of remembering , nor sin as repent of in repenting ; but before in the committing . God may Convert Paul in the act of Persecuting : But Persecuting is not the way or means of Conversion . Special Grace must be sought in the use of Common Grace , and not in a way of negligence , contempt , or wilful sin . 

II Of MORALITY in the second sense ( as taken for Natural Duties , which all Mankind is obliged to by Natural Revelation of God's Will ) we are agreed , as followeth . 

1.  The sum of this Natural Morality or Duty , is to love God as God for himself , and all things else for him , even as being of Him , and through Him , and to Him ; to obey God , and make it our chief care to please him , and therein to place and seek our Happiness , even in everlasting mutual love : To love others as ourselves , and do all the good we can to all for Soul and Body , especially to the most public Societies ; to do justly , and as we would be done by ; to use our Bodies as the Servants of our Souls , and Soul and Body as the Servants of God : And to hate and avoid all that is contrary to these . This Natural Evidence will prove to be the Common Duty of Mankind . 

2.  This Love to God and Man before described is true Holiness ; that is , The Soul's separation and devotedness to God.  

3.  All the Evidence which Nature affordeth us herein , is not seen by all men that are of natural Wit or Industry , no more than all that is revealed by the Scripture is known to all that read the Scripture , or that believe it . 

4.  Holiness is the End of Medicinal Grace , as used by Christ on us , and as used by us towards Christ as the Mediator : Faith in Christ is to kindle in us the holy love of God , and obedience to him : Love therefore as the final and everlasting Grace , is preferred by the Apostle , 1 Cor. 12. last v. and 13. throughout . 

5.  Even our Faith in Christ , and our Obedience to the Gospel ( in Preaching , Sacraments , and such like ) are neither only of natural , nor only of supernatural Obligation , but mixed : Christ and his Ordinances are supernaturally revealed ; but being once revealed , with the Evidence of Divine Authority , natural Revelation than telleth us that it is our Duty to believe and obey . 

6.  That which is of Natural Revelation and Obligation , must be performed by supernatural Grace . Though Nature prove that all Men should love God as God , it is Grace that must dispose and enable them to do it . 

7.  We call Grace supernatural , not only because it is not essential to Nature ( no not to Adam in innocency ) but because in our lapsed state it is not conveyed to us by Natural Generation , but Nature in the state of pravity is deprived of it ; and because God worketh it by the free gift of his Spirit , in a manner beyond the search of man , and by it , as an effect of his love , doth make us lovely , ( in our union and relation to Christ who sanctifieth and justifieth us ) it being his Image on the Soul , which no mere Natural Causes , without this operation of God's Love and Spirit , can effect . 

But yet , 1.  We all agree that Holiness is Nature's health or rectitude , and therefore suitable to it as its perfection , as health is to the Body . 2.  And that the Spirit of God doth ordinarily make use of his appointed means , and especially his Word , for our sanctification . And these being second Causes , which have their proper Natures , may so far be called natural Causes : And that thus far Grace may be said to be Natural . 

8.  This Holy Love being the final Act , on God the final Object , and so being man's felicity itself , it followeth , that all men have so much happiness constitutively , as they have holy love to God and Goodness ; and that no man can be damned that hath the said predominant holy Love , while such : And that such have no cause to fear damnation , any farther than they should fear lest by forfeiting God's Grace they should lose that love . 

9  The Mediation of Christ , and our Faith in him , who is the Glass , the Messenger , and the great Gift of the Father's Love , are the Means appointed by God to sanctify us , by the effecting of this Love , with all its Concomitants and Fruits . 

10.  Therefore as God is called [ Allured in All ] so Christ is called [ Allured in all , ] Col. 3. 11. to Believers , as being the Way , the Truth , and the Life . 

11.  Therefore they that would bring men to the holy and felicitating Love of God , must preach Jesus Christ and his Grace to them , as the means , and bring them to believe in him , and to take it for their Wisdom to know Christ crucified , and glorified , and to learn of him , and obey him , and trust in him , and daily to use him as their Mediator for access to God , acceptance with him , and communication from him . 

12.  To preach up the blessedness of Saints and excellency of holiness , without teaching men how to attain it by Christ , is but to commend health to the sick , without directing them to the Physician and the Remedies : And to hear of a Sanctity and Felicity not attainable , is to be tormented by despair : And to think to obtain it by our works or endeavours , without a Mediator and his Grace ( or by any other Mediator than Christ , ) is the way to lose it by false presumption , and neglect of the necessary means : It being Christ that is made of God to us , Wisdom , Righteousness , Sanctification , and Redemption . 

13.  As Christ on Earth did purchase us this Salvation by his meritorious Righteousness and Sacrifice ; and is now in Heaven our Head and Intercessor , and the Treasury of Grace and Life to Believers , so he sanctifieth us by his WORD and SPIRIT ; and herein differeth from all other Teachers that ever were in the World , 1.  That his Gospel ( Doctrine , Precepts , and Covenant-promises ) are singularly suited to this sanctifying work . 2.  That he sendeth forth his Spirit with it , to work the Souls of men to that which he teacheth and commands , that so they may be effectually taught of God : Without the Spirit of Jesus no word or means will sanctify and renew a Soul.  

14.  Therefore all Preachers must jointly preach GOD and holy LOVE , ( trust , obedience , and delight in him ) as the END , and CHRIST and faith in him , and learning of him , and obeying him in the use of his healing Remedies , as the MEANS : This being life eternal , to know the only true God , and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent , Joh. 17. 3.  

15.  And though the End must be preached as more excellent than the Means , yet the Means must be preached as more mysterious , and above mere natural Revelation . Experience telleth us , that all men quickly learn to confess that they should repent of sin , and love God as God ; but they are hardly taught to understand the Mystery of Redemption , the Person , Incarnation , Works , Office , and Grace of the Redeemer ; and therefore have here need of longer teaching : The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , the Love of God the Father , and the Communion of the Holy Spirit , must be the Preachers subject , as it is the Christians benediction and felicity . 

16.  There are things in Aristotle's Ethics , and in the Ethics of the Stoics and and some other Philosophers , of great worth and use to Christians , to show us what by natural evidence may be discerned : But they are all poor , defective , spirit-less Doctrines and Precepts , in Comparison of the Gospel of Christ , though to carnal wit they seem to excel it in Method , Language , and several Curiosities : And the writings of Christians , who do but expound and apply Christ's Doctrine , do far excel all the Heathens Ethics . 

17.  We have no reason to think that any of the Heathens understood all that Nature itself by way of proving-evidence revealeth : Yea , or that any Christians perfectly understand it ; because natural evidences are exceeding numerous , and none can say that he seeth them all ; and they are of various degrees , some plain , and some obscure ; and even natural verities , as they arise from the great Branches , into innumerable Partitions as smaller Sprigs , are not perfectly discernible by a mortals Eye . 

18.  Therefore no knowledge of Man , much lesle any Heathens writings , are the certain measure of natural verities , in Morality , by which the number and certainty of the obscurer Particles may be known . 

19  Though Heathens know and teach , that we must Love God and Goodness above all : And all that sincerely love God and Goodness shall certainly be saved : Yet this Confession will but more condemn them , that have not , and practise not what they teach ; but , when they profess to know God , by their works deny him , and are void of true sanctifying Grace . 

20.  Therefore it is intolerable in those that are styled the Ministers of Christ , and Preachers of the Gospel , to preach little more than what Heathens teach ; and when they speak of Christianity and Faith , and should open the Mysteries of the Gospel , to do it as drily , scantly , and heartlesly , as if it were done but on the bye , and for Custom or Fashion sake , rather than as a matter of the necessity and importance before described . 

In all this we are agreed . 

III As to MORALITY in the third sense ( as it signifieth Naturals and Positives of perpetual Obligation ) we are agreed , 1.  That all to whom they are promulgate are obliged to the practice of them . 2.  And that for that Practice we need the fore-described helps of Grace ; even efficient , objective , and subjective Grace : For saving Practice special Grace , and for common Practice common Grace . 

IU. And as to the fourth Sense of MORALITY ( as signifying only our Duty to Man , as distinct from holiness to God ) we are agreed , 

1.  That as the Love of our Neighbour as ourselves is the second great Commandment like to the first , so the practice of this in our Duty towards Man , proceeding from Love and Obedience to God , is the second part of our Duty , and to be preached and practised accordingly . 

2.  And it is that part , about a near discernible Object , by which our Love to God must be expressed and made known ; and by which it shall , by Christ himself , be judged of at the last day . 

3.  And it is that Matter in which God will have our obedience to him to be carefully and constantly exercised : Because God needeth us not himself , but as his Government of Man is his ordering us to our own good and felicity , so he obliges us to do good to ourselves , and one another . 

4.  But as Man without God is nothing , and no Man ; so Duty and Love to Man , not depending on Duty and Love to God , is no Duty , no Morality at all : And as to love , honour , or obey Man above God , as the best or greatest , is damnable Idolatry , or Rebellion against God ; so to preach up Love , Honour , and Obedience to Man , as separated from , or not dependant on our Love , Honour , and Obedience to God ( much more as above him , or against him ) were but to preach up Idolatry , or Rebellion . no Man can love Man for God's sake , that loveth not God more ; And no Man can honour or obey Man for God's sake , who doth not more honour and obey God. He that will serve Man more than God , doth as it were make Man his God , and from Man must expect his Protection , Provision , and Reward . 

5.  Profession of Piety to God without true Justice and Charity to man , is but Hypocrisy . While we have time we must do good ( as we are able ) to all Men , for with such Sacrifice God is well pleased , Gal. 6.  Heb. 13.  Christ was our great Pattern in doing good , even to the unworthy , and he purifieth to himself a peculiar People zealous of good works , Tit. 2. 14.  For we are his workmanship , created unto good works in Christ Jesus , which God hath ordained that we should walk in them , Eph. 2. 10.  To be rich in good works is to be rich to God , Luke 12. 21. and to lay up a good Foundation for the time to come , to lay hold on eternal Life , to lay up our Treasure in Heaven , and to make us Friends of ( that which to worldlings is ) the unrighteous Mammon ; and blessed are the merciful , for they shall obtain mercy ; and receiving a Prophet in the name of a Prophet , or a righteous Man in the name of a righteous Man , is the way to have a Prophets , or a righteous man's reward , when Christ will say , In as much as ye did it to one of the least of these my brethren , ye did it unto me . Pure Religion and undefiled , is to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Adversity , and to keep ourselves unspotted of the World.  

As we verily believe that not only the Parties called Conformists , and Nonconformists ( alas ! that we must call them Parties ) but most true protestants are agreed in all this , so we take it to be our Duty to profess our dissent from the Practice of such as would hinder Love and Concord by persuading men that we are really disagreed when it is not so . And as we are the Believing Disciples of the Prince of Peace , that blessed Reconciler , who took down the Partition-wall between Jews and Gentiles , and made them one , so we would serve him with all our power and interest , in building up the Wall of Defence , and taking down every Partition-wall , which unjustly divideth the Church of Christ ; and daily pray that God would humble , convert , and reform those men who have built them up , and will not yet be entreated to give peace to the Churches , and in special to this self-distracting land  

FINIS . 

THE JUDGEMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS' OF THINGS INDIFFERENT Commanded by AUTHORITY , As far as the Subscibers are acquainted with it . 

Written to save the Ignorant from the temptations of Diabolism , ( described 2 Tim. 3. 3. and 1 Joh. 3. 10. 12. 15.  Joh. 8. 44. ) 

Blessed are the Peacemakers , for they shall be called the Children of God. Matth. 5. 9  

Printed in the Year , 1676.  

THE JUDGEMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS' OF Things Indifferent Commanded by Authority . Quest . Whether things antecedently lawful do therefore become unlawful , because commanded by Lawful Authority ? Neg.  

We take the Question as we hear it stated by some Accusers of the Nonconformists , who feign them to affirm it : And some seem serious in the Fiction , as if they did indeed believe themselves ; by which they dispatch these several works of no small moment ; viz.  

1.  They hereby render the Nonconformists contemptible and odious , as Brainsick persons , who keep up a dividing Faction in spite of the Light and Obligation of the Common Principles of Humanity and Society . 

2.  They hereby imprint the Stamp of Satan , viz. the hatred of their brethren , upon the minds of such hearers as will believe them , and receive the Impress . 

3.  They hereby fill Families , Cities , and Countries , with all that Spawn of ugly sins , which are the genuine Fruits of such hatred and contempt , and keep men also from Repentance for any thing that they have said or done ( how cruelly soever ) against such Ministers , and others , as are represented as so odious to them . 

4.  They hereby fortify the People's Souls against receiving converting , or edifying instruction , by such accused Ministers . 

5.  They furnish Papists , Insidels , and other Adversaries , with Matter of Accusation against one part of the Ministers and Servants of Christ : They are able now to say , that such and such Protestant Clergymen themselves reported it . 

6.  They tempt the worse and weaker sort of the accused , to return the like measure to them again , and to judge as they are judged : Satan hereby gets Matter for a Temptation , to call the Accusers Fools in revenge , to bring them to the danger mentioned , Mat. 5. 22. and to hate their brethren for hating them , that they may be as Murderers , that have not eternal Life abiding in them , 1 Joh. 3. 15.  

7.  And lastly , they hereby perhaps quiet their own Consciences , and deceive themselves ; or at least for a while , with some , preserve their Reputations , by making it believed , that their Conformity , or difference from the Nonconformists , consisteth but in the rejection of such wild Opinions , as the Affirmers hold ; and in being the wise Spectators of such as are beside themselves . 

But the Sun will arise after the longest , and the darkest Night : In the mean time this Candle may serve the formerly deceived Reader , to save his Soul from the mortal sin , of hating his brethren wrongfully , which false Accusers would tempt him to be guilty of . 

The Terms need little Explication : 1.  We call things here [ Lawful and Unlawful ] in respect to the Laws of God : For as to the Laws of Men the Affirmation of the Question , were but a mad Contradiction . 

2.  We speak of that which is Antecedently Lawful as Clothed with all its Accidents , save this subsequent one ( being commanded by Authority ) And that the Question is , whether the Command of Authority be an Accident that rendereth it Unlawful . 

3.  We take [ Lawful Authority ] to be a Tautology ; ( for all Authority is Lawful , being in the Sense in the Question nothing else , but a Jus R 〈◊〉 gendi ; and [ Jus Justum , or a Lawful Right ] is a Tautology : If it be not Lawful , or a Jus , it is but equivocally called Authority : ) Yet because the equivocal use of the Word , may to some need such an Expository Epithet , it may here be born . 

And we suppose that the Word signifieth [ Authority over the persons , and in General , over the Affairs in Question ; so that you may see first here what is not the Question , and thereby the more easily perceive what it is . 

1.  The Question is not of a thing before Lawful merely as an Act in genere , vel specie , but Unlawful by some other Accident , e. g. It is Lawfal to kill , and to kill a Man , ( else none could be put to death for Capital Crimes ; ) but it is Unlawful to kill a just Man : And if Rulers Command it , it is still Unlawful ; but not because it is Commanded by them , but because it is forbidden of God. It is Lawful to forbear preaching , ( else Women might not forbear ; ) but not for a true Minister of Christ to forbear it , when men's Souls notoriously need his preaching , and he is able consideratis consideran 〈◊〉 is to perform it : If then Rulers forbid it him , it is still Unlawful to forbear ; but not because they forbid him , but because God Commands him in season , and out of season , instantly to preach , 2 Tim. 4. 1 , 2.  

2.  The Question is not of the Command of Usurpers , Civil , or Ecclesiastical : For their Command sometimes may make a thing Antecedently Lawful to become Unlawful , by Accident , at that time , and to that Person . As it is Lawful in itself to meet an Usurper , and to put off the Hat to him , and to give him Money ; but if he by pretended Authority Command the King's Subjects to appear before him as their King , or to put off the Hat in token of subjection to him , or to pay him Tribute as his Subjects , it is an Unlawful owning of him , so far to obey him . 

It is in itself Lawful to go to Rome , but not in obedience to the Pope , who is an Usurper , if he Command it us . It is in itself Lawful to take an Oath , yea an Oath of Obedience ( viz. To the King : ) But if the Pope , or one of his Prelates would Command the King's Subjects to take an Oath of Obedience to him ; yea , or to perform Obedience as such , it may become Unlawful so to own his Usurpation . 

It is Lawful , and a Duty , to be justly obedient to a true Pastor , or Bishop of the Church : But if Arrians be obtruded on Antioch , A 〈◊〉 exandria , Caesarea , and other Eastern Churches , even by the Emperor Valens , the Churches will resolutely refuse to obey , or hear them : Or if seed vacant one intrude without a true Call , and will tyranically make himself a Pastor , or is obtruded by the Pope , or other Foreign Power , without the consent of the Church ( either the Clergy , or the Flocks ) or any one that hath true power to choose him to that place or Office , it may be a sin to own such an Usurper , though by 〈…〉 in itself . 

3.  The Question is not of men that have Lawful 〈…〉 , and not over the Person in Question : The King of France may have Lawful Authority there , and yet no Authority to Command us in England . 

4.  Nor is the Question of a Ruler that hath Authority in other matters , but not in the matters now in Question . For as Rich. Hooker saith , Though a man be a Lawful Governor , yet if he extend his Commands beyond his Authority , and Command that which he hath no true power to Command , it is not disobeying Authority , therein to disobey him : e. g. If the Judge of the Common-pleas Command that which is proper to the Judges of the Kings-bench , extra proprium forum , they have no Authority . If a Bishop would command Husbandmen when to Blow and Sow , and with what Seed ; and what Clotheses to wear , and what Meat to eat in particular ; or all Physicians what Physic to give each Patient ; these Commands are Usurpations , and make no Duty : Nay unless greater Accidents preponderate to make the thing needful on some other accounts , it may do somewhat towards the making of an Act otherwise Lawful to become Unlawful , when the doing it will encourage and strengthen such Usurpers , and be a scandalous seeming to own their Usurpation . So if a Justice would presume to arrogate the power of a Judge , or a Constable of a Justice , or a Churchwarden of a Constable , or a Magistrate of the Pastors of the Church , etc.  

But because it seemeth doubtful , whether the Question be of one that hath Authority to Command the Lawful thing in Question ; or only of one that hath Authority in General , whether his Authority extend to the Point in Question : and if not , whether his Command make the Act Unlawful to be done : We shall include what we assert in these Propositions , which will show what it is that we deny . 

Pr. 1.  To question whether it be Lawful , yea or a Duty , to obey them Whom we suppose to have Authority to Command the very thing questioned , is but to question the same thing which we first affirm ; and to deny it , is to deny what we first affirm . 

For to have Authority to Command an Action , is nothing else but to have Authority to oblige me to do that Action by Command . And is it a wise Man's Question , whether he that hath Authority to oblige me by his Command to do an Action , doth not , by making it my Duty , make it become Unlawful ? That is , whether Duty be Sin , whether Life be Death , and Light be Darkness ? Why should Men be feigned so mad , as to argue at this rate ? 

Pr. 2.  If the Question be , whether any Ruler have power to Command a thing which would be no Duty , but indifferent , if he did not Command it ? It is to question that which all sober persons must assert , in the disjunctive use of Things , or Actions , as to each other . That is , 

1.  Nothing is to be done or commanded , that is not good before , or made good and useful by the Command : Idle Laws are not good , if idle words be bad . 

2.  The End and Benefit of an Action may be necessary , and the commanding of an Action or Circumstance before indifferent , ( comparatively as to others , ) may be disjunctively necessary , ( either this or that ; ) and the indifferency taken away , and the thing made both Naturally and Morally good , by the Determination of the Command . 

For Instance : It is necessary that the Army keep together , and march in Unity and Order : It is therefore necessary that they all meet , or Rendezvous at one determinate certain place ; and it is necessary that they meet at one determinate certain time , or day : It is therefore necessary that one certain place and time be determined : By Consent it will not be : It is therefore necessary that it be done by Command . None of this is indifferent : But the place , and day , may be antecedently so indifferent , that no Man can see a Reason , why one , rather than the other should be chosen ; no more than why of two equal Eggs I should choose this , rather than the other . In this case it is not properly choosing , but taking : I do not choose this rather than the other , there being no preserence of Esteem ; but only I take this , and not the other ; because I must take one , and I must take but one . And when the indifferent Place and Time is determined of , it then , and thereby , is made profitable to the End , which is Unity and Order . Thus far things necessary in genere ( this or that disjunctively ) and unnecessary antecedently in particular ( this no more necessary than that , ) may be commanded by Authority , and are thereby made Naturally useful , and Morally the Subjects Duty . 

Pr. 3.  If the Question be only in matters of God's worship or Religion , whether the same hold there ; we affirm that it there holdeth also . Which we thus explain . 

1.  no Ruler hath Authority to forbid what God commands , or to command what God forbiddeth , as to Action , or any Circumstance of an Action . 

2.  no Man can command by pretence of an Authority coordinate with God's , but only derived , and subordinate . 

3.  no Man can do any thing which God hath appropriated to himself as his own proper work ; as to make Universal Laws for the whole World , or Church ; to make another Gospel , Divine Covenant , or Sacraments of God's Covenant ; to add to , or diminish , or alter the Word of God ; to alter the Ministry , Church-state , or Laws which he hath made , or to make the like ; or to change his Institutions . 

4.  no Man can command any thing , but what God giveth him Authority to command ; for there is no Power but of God.  

5.  But God giveth Men Authority to command things before indifferent in his Worship , such as we before described about Civil or Military things : That is , It is necessary that the Worship of God be orderly performed in Sacred Assemblies ; and that Unity and Concord be there kept : It is therefore necessary that many meet in the same Place , and the same Time , and use the same Translation of Scripture at that time , and the same Metre and Tune of Psalms , and hear the same Preacher on the same Text , and the same Sermon ; and that the Preacher at that time use the same words and Method of Prayer and Sermon to them all , whether by Notes , or without , etc.  But whether it be this place or that , this day and hour or that ; this Translation , Metre , Tune , or that ; this Chapter , Text , Method , words , or that , may be indifferent before , and needful and a Duty to the People after the Determination of the Ruler , to whom it doth belong . 

Pr. 4.  If a Ruler do not Act quite out of the Matter or Circuit of his own Jurisdiction , about a thing which belongeth not to him , nor by his Determination of Circumstances subvert the thing Circumstantiated , and the very End or Work itself ; though he miss it in a Work which belongeth to his Office , and do it not the best way , but be culpable in his Command , the Subject yet may be bound to do what is so commanded , and is not excused by the faultiness of the Rulers determining Commands . Which we thus explain . 

1.  It belongeth not to a King to govern a Man's thoughts . Therefore if he make Laws for our thoughts , it is doubted by many , whether they oblige ; unless as he is the Official Promulgator of God's Laws , or exhort Men to obey them : Yet knowing that he is God's Minister for our good , if he should Ministerially command us not to think ill of God , or well of wickedness , etc. we will not concur with those that affirm , that no secondary Obligation ariseth from his Command ; as long as we all hold , that if a Church-pastor Ministerially as Christ's Officer , forbid blasphemous , malicious , filthy thoughts , and Command holy meditation , and mental Prayer and Thanksgiving , his Ministerial Command hath an answerable Obligation . It sufficeth us therefore to say , that Kings cannot punish Men , or reward them for their thoughts ; which is from their Natural Incapacity of knowing them : For could they know a Thoughtful Plot of Treason , or a wise and honest contrivance or design for Public good , we cannot say that they might not answerably punish and reward them . 

But to go to clearer Instances : It belongeth to the King to give general regulating Laws to Physicians , to Mariners , to Parents , to Nurses , to Farriers , to Brewers , Bakers , Cooks , etc.  He may forbid Physicians the use of some dangerous Drugs ; and Mariners some times , and places , that are unsafe ; and Parents , and Nurses , to give their Children some pernicious Food , or wicked Counsel or Education ; and Brewers , Bakers , and Cooks , to poison Men , or deceive them in the matter of their Trades . But if he make such Laws as take these men's Callings out of their hands ; If he will choose a Physician for every Patient , and the Medicines that every Physician shall use , with Doses , Time , and other Circumstances ; and what Food every Parent shall give his Children , with the Measure , Time , etc. and so of the rest ; This is to go beyond his Calling , and so beyond his true Authority , and such Laws oblige not . 

So if a King will give such Laws to Christ's true Ministers , as turn them out of their Callings , and take them all upon himself ; it is an acting beyond , and without Authority , and doth not oblige . It is the Office of a Pastor of the Church , to have and use the Keys of the Church , to be the immediate Ministerial Judge of Individuals , who is to be taken in by Baptism , and entertained in holy Communion , and in Sin called to Repentance ; and for Impenitency shut out by Excommunication ; and upon Repentance restored by Absolution . For the right performance of all these the King may give general regulating Laws , subservient to Christ's Laws , to secure and promote their execution ; and he may forbid and punish gross abuses of the Ministry , as well as of Physicians , and other Callings . But if he will usurp the Ministry in the Parts aforesaid , or take those Parts out of the Ministers hand , and as Uzziah burn Incense : If he will choose for the Minister what Text still to Preach on , and what Words in Preaching and Prayer still to say ; and bid him instruct , reprove , comfort , direct , baptism , absolve no man but such as are named to him by the King , nor in any words but such as he prescribeth ; this being , 1.  A destroying of an Office of Christ's Institution . 2.  And an usurping of it without Christ's consent ; such Laws oblige not , but are null as to Conscience , for want of true Authority in the Maker's : As the Sentence of a Judge in foro alieno , or in a Circuit , City , or Corporation , where the Power is appropriated to others . 

2.  And if a Prince , or Inferior Ruler , who hath power to determine Circumstantials about the Callings of his Subjects , shall so determine them as shall overthrew the very End and Work itself , in a Calling which God by Nature , or Scripture , hath made necessary ; this Determination bindeth not , it being an Act without Authority : For it is as true of Magistracy , as of Paul ' s Apostleship , We have this power for edification , and not for destruction , 2 Cor. 10. 8.  & 13. 10.  Eph. 4. 12. 2.  Cor. 12. 19 1  Cor. 14. 5. 12. 26.  

It is the pernicious error of some Papists , to Dream that their Pope and Church hath a Power of obligatory judging in matters of Faith and Practice , in partem utramlibet ; and in this wicked supposition they Cant over and over to the ignorant , Who shall be Judge . To which we say , That Public Judgement belongeth to Public persons ; that is , To the Magistrate [ who shall have Civil Communion ] ( even on Religious accounts , ) and to the Pastors [ who shall have Church-communion ; ] and private Judgement ( discerning each Man's Duty ) belongs to every rational man But all men are Subjects of God , and their judging Power is limited by his Laws . 

If the Question be , Whether there be a God , a Christ , a Scripture , a Heaven , an Immortality of Souls , etc.  Kings , and Pastors , and Councils may , and must judge that there is ; but none of them may judge that there is not ; if they do , it 's worse than hey-boyss : And in Practicals , if the Question be , Whether we may , or must pray for the hallowing of God's Name , the coming of his Kingdom , the doing of his Will on Earth as it is done in Heaven ; or whether we must love and worship God , and hear him , and meditate on his Word ; and whether true Ministers of Christ may , or must Preach in season and out of season ; and seek to instruct and save men's Souls ; whether we must honour our Parents , relieve the Poor , and save men's lives , in danger , from Murderer's , etc.  They have Authority to judge affirmatively , but none at all to judge negatively ; which if they do , it 's worse than thursdays . 

So Kings and Pastors have power to judge that we may not take God's Name in vain , nor be perjured , nor profane his separated day , nor forsake the assembling of ourselves for his Public Worship , nor Murder , nor commit Adultery , nor steal , nor lie , or bear false witness , nor persecute , nor hurt any man injuriously ; but they have no power to judge that we may do any one of these : and if they so judge , or command , it is a nulli 〈◊〉 y to the Subject , and worse to themselves . God hath made no men absolute Judges , but given them a Regulating and Limiting Law to Judge by . 

Even so those Rulers who have Power to Judge and Command some Circumstances of Divine Worship , they have it but as a means of promoting that Worship , and its Ends , by the means of Edifying-order ; and they have no Power to destroy the Worship , or its Ends. For Instance , whoever hath Power to determine of the Place of Public Worship , hath that Power for the Worship , and Worshippers sake ; and is to be obeyed when he doth it accordingly . But if he Command a thousand persons to meet no where but in a Room that will not hold two hundred , or three hundred ; or fifty thousand persons to meet no where but in one Temple , where above three thousand cannot hear ; this is , on pretence of ordering and placing God's Worship , to forbid it to all the rest ; for which God never gave him Power : So also it is , if he command them to meet no where but forty , or thirty , or twenty miles off from their Habitation , or where they cannot go without destroying the Work and End.  

So whoever hath Power to choose the Day , or the Hours of God's Public Worship , hath this Power for the Work sake , and the People's edification ; and is to be obeyed when his Commands are answerable . But if he should Command Men to worship God only once a Year , or once a Month ; or to do it only at Midnight , and so destroy the Work by ill-timing it ; this is a nullity , as being an Act without Authority , and worse , as against the Laws of God.  

So whoever it be that hath Power to appoint Pastors and Teachers to the Churches or Public Assemblies , if they should , as Constantius and Valens , send Arrians to be Bishops , or any other intolerable persons , who through utter insufficiency , Heresy , or Malignity are uncapable , and will do more hurt than good ; or if they would limit the Churches , or Countries , to an utterly incompetent Number , and say , no other shall Preach , but such uncapable persons ; or no more than one to fifty thousand Souls , or where ten or twenty are necessary ; this is to forbid Preaching , or corrupt it , and destroy men's Souls on pretence of Order : And it is a nullity , and worse . 

So if the same Rulers should say , that , You shall Preach only in Country Villages , but not within many miles of Cities , or Corporations , which truly and notoriously want your Preaching ; this were but to forbid such Cities , and Corporations , to hear the necessary Preaching of the Gospel , and the Ministers to Preach it ; and is a nullity and worse , as being both without any Authority from God , and against his Laws . 

3.  But if true Rightful Governors , who have Power to determine Circumstantials , Civil , or Religious , shall misdetermine them ; yet so as not to destroy the Work , or End , nor put Subjects on the breaking of any Law of God ; here their fault will not disoblige us from the Duty of obeying . Though it be a sinful mistake of theirs , we may be yet obliged to do what they Command us . For Instance , 

The Ruler chooseth a Place lesle convenient , that hath no Seats , or an ill access , yet capable of the Assembly ; He chooseth a lesle convenient Hour of the Day ; he placeth the Pulpit in a les 〈◊〉 convenient Place ; he appoints a tolerable , but not the best Translation of the Scripture , and Metre of the Psalms , or Tunes , to be used ; he appoints a Bible of a worse Print ; and ( supposing him Authorised to choose the Preacher ) he appoints not the best , or fittest Preacher which might be had : And whether it be the present Pastor , or any other ( we now dispute not that ) who hath Authority to choose Chapters , and Texts , and word the Sermons and Prayers , if he choose a lesle convenient Chapter , Text , or Subject , and lesle convenient Method and Words in Preaching and Prayer ; all this is his Infirmity and Fault , but yet the People must not refuse the thing so commanded : Not that we must obey it sub ratione ma●● , as ill chosen and inconvenient , but [ Though it be such ; ] not qua but quod inconveniens . 

And the Reasons are , 1.  An inconvenient ill-chosen Place , Time , Text , Translation , Metre , Tune , etc. may be good as a means of Union and Concord in the Worship , which without that would not be had ; and that Union and Concord is a Duty : Therefore so is the necessary means , though it be not the best that could be chosen . If the People will not join with that Translation , Metre , Tune , Subject , Place , Time , which the Minister useth , or chooseth , they cannot join with him in the Worship . Were there no Interposition of Authority , but men's consent , if a thousand of the People are for a lesle convenient means , ( Time , Place , etc. ) and a small part for a more convenient , they cannot concur but in some agreement : And if the mistaken part will not yield to the other , when Unity is necessary , for that Unity sake the rest must yield to them . 

2.  The lesle convenient way may accidentally become a means to avoid Persecution , and the loss of all their Liberty and Public Advantages ; and they that refuse that may be deprived of all the rest . And it 's better worship God , e. g. at an inconvenient Time , Place , etc. than not at all . 

3.  The General Obligation to obey our Governors , is not nullified by every mistake in the Law or Determination : For all Mankind being imperfect , it is supposed that all Government by Man is imperfect : If we should forbear praying till we can pray without all sin , we should never pray ; and if we should forbear obeying till Rulers commands be perfect , or blameless , we should never obey : There is some fault in every Translation of the Bible , every Version of the Psalms , every Sermon and Prayer , that we hear , or make ; and in every Book that we write , and Read. If no Parent , Teacher , Master , Prince , oblige us , but only by such Laws and Mandates as have no 〈◊〉 ault , all Government and Obedience is null , or at an End.  

Obj. no Man is bound to that which is evil . 

Answ . 1.  It may be evil in the Commander , and good in the Obeyer : Not that the same thing is good to one , and ill to the other ( though in other Instances that often fall out ; ) for it is not the same thing : To Command an Inconnveient Time , Place , Translation , Tune , etc. is one Action , and to obey that Command is another . 

2.  We obey it not as evil , but as good : The inconvenient Time , Place , etc. is not good as inconvenient , but as a means of Order and Concord , and so we use it . And the General Nature of Obedience is good ; and if we must do no good , which we cannot do without some adherent evil , we must never Pray , Preach , Eat , Drink , or Trade more . 

Pr. 5. if a Ruler go beyond ( and so without ) his Authority , yet in several Cases we may be bound to do what he Commands , as such . 

For Instance , In case the thing be in itself good , or at least indifferent and Lawful ; and the Honour of the Ruler , or the Peace of the Society dependeth on our material obeying him : It is our Duty to honour the King , and our Parents and Pastors , and to avoid all things that will dishonour them ; or that will encourage others in disobedience , or disorder the Society . If therefore it were granted to be the Pastor's Duty , and not the Kings , toword our Prayers and Sermons , and choose Translations , Chapters , Metres , Tunes , etc. yet if the King do it , though beyond his Calling ; that is , If he appoint us what Chapter to read every day in Public , and Command some Prayers to be read , and some Homilies , or Printed Sermons to be sometime read , which are all good and lawful in themselves , not destroying the Office of the Ministry ; and if by him , or the People , it be taken for Contempt , and a dishonouring him , to disobey him , the General Command of honouring the King , will here oblige us to the Commanded Action . 

And if the Question be , Whether this be formal Obedience , or only material ? We Answer , 1.  It is but material and not formal Obedience , de specie , properly as it is to a Command that is without Authority to that thing . But , 2.  It partaketh of formal Obedience as to the Genu , in as much as we do it for the honour of a Ruler , and because it is his Command who hath Authority to Govern us , though not to do it by this mistaken Action . 

Pr. 6.  If a Rightful Ruler should go quite beyond the bounds of his Authority , so far as that his Command did not at all bind us , yet would it not make an indifferent thing become unlawful , merely because he doth Command it ; what ever any other Accident may do . 

Proved , 1.  Because there is no force in the Inference , [ It is Commanded , ergo , it is unlawful . ] 

2.  Though his Act be culpable and without true power , yet he is no Usurper whom we are obliged to disown ; and all true Governors have their faults . 

3.  The thing may be good , and so a Duty on other accidental reasons , viz. 1.  As a means of Concord : 2.  Of pleasing others to their edification : 3.  Of honouring Superiors : 4.  Of obtaining liberty , and avoiding mischief ; and as such , though not as an Act of Obedience , may be a Duty . 

4.  Else it would be in the power of ill-minded Rulers , to make all indifferent lawful things to be sin or unlawful to us , by Commanding them ; and so to deprive us craftily of all our liberty , and make us Slaves . If Rulers forbidding them , make not all things indifferent sinful ( which many say ) much lesle their commanding them ; else they might command instead of forbidding , and do the same thing . 

We do believe that there may be found some persons in the world of such weak Understandings , and unruly Spirits , as to think that it is a sinful betraying of their Liberty , to do a thing antecedently indifferent , when it is commanded them . Were we acquainted with such a one , we might ask him , 1.  At what Age he would have Mankind begin the practice of this Principle ? Infant's cannot learn it . If before they can feed themselves , they should refuse Meat at the Hour when it is offered them by the Mother , because that Hour was antecedently indifferent ; yea , if Children or Servants refuse their set Meals on that account , it were just if hunger teach them more wit and obedience . If Children will think they betray their Liberties , if they learn that Catechism , or words of Prayer which the Parents teach them , ( even set Forms , ) or if they will not read , hear , or learn , or pray at the Hour appointed by their Parents , because it was antecedently indifferent ; or if they will not go to the Church at the Hour set them by the Minister , because it was before a time indifferent , how should they be brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord ? 

2.  We would ask such a one , Whether this be an obeying of that Command , Col. 3. 20. 22.  [ Children obey your Parents in all things , for this is wellpleasing to the Lord : Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the Flesh ? Are things lawful none of the [ All things ? ] 

3.  If Obedience must be only to things antecedently necessary , may not the Child in such expect Obedience from the Father , in some sort , as well as the Father from the Child ? We mean material Obedience , that the thing be done . 

4.  We hope they will not say the same to God , that they will obey him in nothing antecedently indifferent : And that is , because the very nature of obedience is contrary . And if so , is it no subordinate obedience that is due to Parents and other Superiors ? Government , as such , can make that a Duty which antecedently was none , ( or else all Children and Servants live in constant sin : ) Therefore Obedience , as such , consisteth in obeying such Government . For though the chief work of all Rulers , is to urge the observation of Gods own Laws , yet their secondary work is ( as Corporations have By-laws about Particulars , under the Universal Laws of the Kingdom , so ) to determine of subservient Particulars . And if their Principle practised in Families and Schools , would overthrew all Family and School Order and Obedience , and utterly subvert the Education of Mankind ; let them consider why it should be brought into Kingdoms , Cities , or Churches . 

5.  And we would ask them , Whether they live not themselves in the practice of the contrary ? Do not all Sects , even Quakers , meet at the Place and Time which their Leaders do appoint them ? Do they not hear the words which the Leader chooseth for their Ears ? Do they not command their own Servants and Children things or circumstances antecedently indifferent ? 

Did we hold such Principles , we should have lesle reason to lament the sin of those who have of late written Accusations against us , as Subverters of Government , Order , and Obedience : And if any one can find any word of such importance , in any one called a mere Nonconformist ( which we know not of , ) we have no more to do with it , than the Church of England hath with words of Untruth , Call 〈◊〉 mny , Error , or Nonsense , which we read in the Books , or hear in the words of any Conformists : ( of which we are not willing to imitate such as gather Catalogues or Dunghills of them : ) And the rather because , 1.  We Licenced not such Books : 2.  Nor Ordained such to the sacred Ministry : 3.  Nor have the Government of them ; and therefore are not responsible for them . 

As for those men that have persuaded the ignorant in Print , that we hold the things , to which we deny Conformity , to be Indifferent or Lawful , and avoid them only as Inconvenient or Offensive to the Weak ; and that some of us were forced at the Savoy to assert , that , Nothing may be commanded by Authority which may by accident become Unlawful to the Subject , ( or become his sin by abuse ▪ ) it is a subject of which we shall here say no more , but that , we will not here do so great a dishonour to the Authors , as some of them have done to themselves , that is , to tell the world their Names ; the rest that concealed them , had more tenderness it seems of their Reputation than of their Consciences : What sort of Men believe them , it is easy to conjecture : It is no fault of the Earth to bear them , nor of the Sun to shine upon the Writers or the Believers ; and we hope it is none in us to hear and bear the Calumny , nor ( in our circumstances ) that we have not farther provoked them , by answering for ourselves . We must lament the temptations and dangers of the Age , and the sinful alienation of Minds , Divisions and Distractions , which Incendiaries have caused , and still cause . But for ourselves , we do with peace read and remember , Luke 8. 17.  Nothing is secret that shall not be made manifest , neither any thing hid , that shall not be known and come abroad . Jam. 5. 7 , 8.  Be patient , brethren , to the coming of the Lord — establish your hearts , for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh . Matth. 5. 11 , 12.  Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you , and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely , or my sa 〈◊〉 e : Rejoice and be exceeding glad , etc. Psal . 37. 13.  The Lord shall laugh at him ; for he seeth that his day is coming . Psal . 146. 4.  His breath goeth forth , he returns to his Earth : in that very day his thoughts perish . Luke 23. 34.  Father forgive them , for they know not what they do . 

FINIS . 

THE JUDGEMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS' OF THINGS SINFUL by ACCIDENT , AND OF SCANDAL . 

PUBLISHED To save men's Souls from the Gild of Believing those Men who tell them , that the Nonconformists Asserted , that , [ Whatever may be the occasion of Sin to any must be taken away ; or that , Nothing may be imposed which Men may take Scandal at , or by Accident turn to Sin. ] 

And to help those to Repentance , who have polluted their Souls with Falsehood and Uncharitableness by Believing them , and seconding their Reports . 

Printed in the Year , 1676.  

THE JUDGEMENT OF NON-CONFORMISTS' OF Things Sinful by Accident , and of Scandal . Could we but have prevailed with Men of confused Conceptions , and consounding Pra●●●ss , to have been reconciled to Distinctness and 〈◊〉 engruity of speech ; or at least , with Men of has 〈◊〉 e , temer 〈◊〉 ty , and 〈◊〉 assion , to have endured it , and patiently heard us distinctly tell them what we hold , we might have spared this trouble to the Reader and ourselves . 

Those that cannot bear d 〈◊〉 stinct explication , but in the Dungeon of Confusion still deride or r 〈◊〉 ge at the Light , which rendering things intelligible , doth open the unloveliness of Ignorance , and the error and sin which are its Progeny , are not the Reader 〈◊〉 for whom this is published ; but such as have retained so much of Human Nature , as to love the Light , and be willing to know the truth , and to be patient of a little sober consideration that they may know it . 

That we may make the matter in question Intelligible , we must open the Nature of Morality , and so of Moral Evil ( or Sin , ) and what it is to be Evil by Accident ; and what Accidents make a thing unlawful to be commanded , and what not ; and what Scandal is , and how far to be avoided ; which we shall do in these Propositions following . 

Prop. 1.  MORALITY is either Regulans , or Regulata , ( mensurans , or mensurata : ) The first is Radically in God's own Mind and Will , and is called by many Lex aeterna ; and it is signally , and expressively in God's Laws ; and subord 〈◊〉 nately in Man's Laws , as they are a Rule to Subjects : Of these we are not now to speak ; that is , not of the holiness of God or his Laws , nor of Man's , as they are truly a Rule to Subjects . 

Morality as Regulated is subjected in the Minds and Actions of the Creature ; specially in the WILL , and in our Actions , as VOLUNTARY ; and so even the Laws of Men , as those Men are God's Subjects , and their Laws are Actions good or evil , as Regulated by God's Superior Laws , are the Subjects of the Morality now in question . 

Prop. 2.  This Morality in Man's Will and Actions is nothing else , formally , but their Relation of Conformity or Disconformity to God's Law , as their Rule ; ( and subordinately to subordinate Rules ; ) and materially to the End and OH 〈◊〉 jects . 

Prop. 3.  How far this Moral Relation is immediately founded in a Physical Relation , which is before it in order of Nature , viz. in the said Relation of the Will and Action to the End and Object as such , antecedently to the Relation to the commanding or forbidding Law , we would willingly open , were it not lest we seem , with Men that love not much distinction , to justify or excuse them that censure us as guilty of excess herein ; and we may do what is now necessary to be done without it . 

Prop. 4.  no Being as such , no Substance as such , no Habit as a Habit , no Act as an Act , is Morally Good or Evil : For so they are but Quid Naturale ; and God doth not command and forbid Natural Being's as such . 

Prop. 5.  All Moral Good and Evil is subjected in Natural Being's , or Privations , but not immediately as such ; but as modified , circumstantiated , and related . 

Prop. 6.  Good and Evil make up all Morality ; there is no third Species : There are many things that are Indifferent as to Morality ; that is , neither Morally Good , nor Morally Evil ; but there is nothing Moral-indifferent : Mere Natural Being's and Acts are Indifferent as to Morality ; that is , they are not Moral : But whatever is Moral , is Morally Good or Evil , and not Indifferent . 

Prop. 7.  The Subject and quid absolutum Fundamentale , of all moral good , is , quid positivum , or a real Being ; but the Form of moral evil is ever found indeed in a real Subject , but not always in a real fundamentum . For it is ( oft at least ) in total Omissions and Privations of the Act , and in Privations of some modal or accidental qualification , or rectitude . 

Prop. 8.  Yet the formal relations of moral good and evil , are both true 〈◊〉 Relations ; even Dis-conformity as well as Conformity , ( as curv 〈◊〉 tude and dis-similitude are , as well as rectitude and similitude : ) And a Mere Negative is neither good nor evil , e. g. Negative Nonconformity , which is not Privative Dis-conformity , is no sin ; because there being not the Debitum inessendi , the non-inesse is inculpable . It seemeth indeed to some Learned Men , that non agere may be moral good ; e. g. Non odisse Deum , au 〈◊〉 proximum , non ment 〈◊〉 ri , not to murder , steal , etc.  And it 's true , that the 〈◊〉 is the thing remotely commanded , or , loco materie 〈◊〉 ; but the thing immediately commanded , is the 〈◊〉 agere : The Will by all these Commands is bound positively to nill the forbidden Act , e. g. Murder , Adultery , Lying , etc.  To nill them is the prime Duty or moral Good ( that we say not with Ockam , the only ) and not-to-d 〈◊〉 - them is the secondary , but that is as they are Acts restrained , or forborn , by a Commanding Will : For a Man in Infancy , or the Womb , or in an Apoplexy , or when he is wholly taken up with some other sin , not then to Steal , Lie , Murder , or commit Adultery , is not at all a moral Good. But a mere incogitancy , non agere , non velle , may be a true moral Evil : The reason is , because when a right Volition is commanded , ( as to love God or Man , ) or ●●ight Action , ( to do good 〈◊〉 ) not to do it is a breach of the Command : And not to will and not to do when we ought is the commonest kind of sinning . 

Prop. 9  Right ordered Actions , Dispositions , and Habits then as in , or of the Will , directly , and remotely some non agency , are the only things commanded , called morally Good ; ( save that eorum gratia the Soul and whole man ( or person ) is well and truly called moral 〈◊〉 Good : ) And the PEA 〈◊〉 ivation and I 〈◊〉 ordination of Voluntary Actions , Dispositions , and Habits , are the only moral Evil ; ( save that the person is also called such eorum gratia . ) 

Prop. 10.  An Action may be Indifferent , or of no Morality , as to Election , or Performance ; and yet to Deliberate about that Act may be morally good . e. g. I may doubt of two ways which are equal to my End ( as far as can be known by me , ) whether they be so or not ; or which is the better : I may be obliged to deliberate whether they are equal or not , to guide my Progress , and end my Doubt : And when I have found them equal , I have found that Comparatively neither of them is matter of Election , as by reason to be preferred to the other : But yet because I must choose to g 〈◊〉 on , therefore I must take one way and not the other , because I cannot go both : But this is only a choosing to go , and a taking that way , but not a choosing it , which signifieth a rational preferring it . Here my Deliberation is a moral Act , and so is my choosing to go ; but my choosing this way , rather than the other , is none : For upon deliberating I found that neither was Eligible , and Choice no Duty . 

Prop. 11.  As the smallness of the least Physical Being , though undiscernible , proveth it not to be Nothing ; so the smallness of any moral Good or Evil , ( Duty or Sin ) proveth not that it is no Duty , or Sin at all . 

Prop. 12.  Moral Good and Evil is itself only an Accident ; for Habits , Dispositions , Actions , and Relations , are Accidents ; and Privations are either reductively Accidents ( as some call them ) or lesle than Accidents , even mere nothings , ( though from a Nullity or Privation a moral Relation truly result on the Person . ) 

Prop. 13.  Therefore when we say that a thing is Good or Evil by Accident , we mean somewhat more than that the Good or Evil is an Accident itself , ( for there is no other : ) We mean that it is something acciding ( or added ) to the former Accident or State that maketh it now Good or Evil.  

Prop. 14.  In an Action there is considerable , 1.  The Action as such , or as specified only by the Faculty , ( Intellection , Volition , Imagination etc. ) 2.  The Action as farther specified by the terminating Object ; 1.  In the first respect , the Gradus Actus is Accidens accident 〈◊〉 : And an Act may become Good or Evil , by such Intenseness or Remissness as is ordinate or inordinate . And the Timing it may do the like : ( As to be thinking when I should sleep . ) 2.  In the second respect , an Accident supervening or added to the Object , is said to make that Action Good or Evil by Accident ; that is , by an alteration of the specifying Object by some Accident . And this is the commonest Case , and the Sense in which this Controversy in hand is most concerned ; which therefore we desire to be most observed . 

Prop. 15.  Any Man therefore that knoweth what true Knowledge is , may easily perceive that he that will Dispute about Bonum vel Malum per se & per accidens , if he would not lose his labour , or deceive must use more diligence in explaining these Terms , than they do that toss them about unexplained , as if they were sufficiently intelligible of themselves , to such as some use to make the Receivers of their choleric and splenetic evacuations . Even Bonum & Malum per se , is not such Ver se qua substantiam , nor per se qua Actum , nor per se qua Intellectionem , Volitionem aut Praxin execu ivam ; but per se ut Accidens substantiae ( scilicet Actum ) circa Objectum ( quod est accidens plerumque ) sine altero accident superaddito . So that the same which now is Bonum vel Malum per accidens , is called Bonum vel malum per se , in respect to a supervenient Accident : And excluding all Accidents , or all Good or Evil by Accident ; so nothing in the World is Bonum or Malum morale per se ( except what is anon excepted . E. G. To Love is an Act ; that Act ( as is the Habit also ) is an Accident : To love a Man as godly or wise , or as my King or Teacher , is to love him for Accidents ; that is , Godliness , Wisdom , Authority , etc.  This is Bonum per accidens , and yet Bonum per se , stating the Object thus , without farther Accidents . To love him as an Enemy , and Persecutor , and Silencer of Godly Ministers of Christ , is Malum per Accidens , and yet Malum per se , in respect to farther Accidents . To love the Man is not Evil , but to love him for his Evil. The Exception here is , when we are bound to love the simple Essence , as such , abstracting from all Accidents : The principal Instance is of our love to God , ( of which more anon ; ) because God hath no Accidents , and therefore is loved merely as in his Essence : And no doubt but God is to be loved as in his Essential perfection . But yet we are nono of those that against Pet. Hurtado Mendez , and other Nominals , will undertake to prove , that Relations to the Creatures ( which are Accidents ) do not truly belong to God ; such as that of Creator , Owner , Ruler , Benefactor , etc. we leave that Task to the Thomists ; and to other men's judgements how well they perform it . 

The next Instance is ( our love to Man as Man , ) and so to other Created Essences ; which we deny not , but add , 1.  That Man's Relation to God , as he showeth his Maker's perfections is a Relation , and that 's it that is to be loved morally in Man , at least principally , and never left out : The same we say of other Essences . 2.  And the Wisdom , Goodness , and so the moral amiableness of Man ( at least the principal ) is itself an Accident . The Word of God , and the Worship of God , are Accidents . But yet we say , that the properest Notion of Bonum per se , is , when we love a thing ( but specially God himself ) as in the simple Essence , 〈◊〉 a supervening obliging Accident : And of malum per 〈◊〉 , when God's very Essence is hated , or not loved : But that any morally hate the very substantial Essence of a Creature , we leave others to prove . 

Prop. 16.  This holdeth about the very Negative Laws of the Decalogue , e. g. To kill a Man is in itself no moral Evil ; else it were sin to Execute Malefactors ; and Kings , Judge's , and Soldiers were the most criminal sinners : To kill a Man Authoritatively , that is , a Traitor , or Murderer , is good ; that is , an Act with its due Mode and Object , which are Accidents that make it good . And to kill the Innocent , or without Authority , is sin by this Accident , of an undue Mode and Object . 

To take another Man's Goods or Money is not Malum per se ; for it may be done as a Mulct , or by Law on just Cause , or for the Public defence by Authority , or by his Consent : But to take it without Consent , Right , or Authority , is sin by this Accident . So also of the seventh Commandment . The Law forbids the Act as Clothed with its undue Accidents . The Names of Injustice , Coveting , Murder , Adultery , Theft , False-witness , etc. all signify the Acts with the undue prohibited Accidents . One of our Casuists excepteth only Lying , as simply per se Evil : But he that Lieth , sinneth not because he speaketh those same words , but because he speaketh words that , in relation to his own mind , and to the matter , and to the hearers understanding , are false and deceitful : And that Relative Incongruity of the words is the accident that maketh them sinful . 

Prop. 17.  Man passeth his life among such a multitude of accidents and circumstances , that it is not one , but very many , that every one of our actions is Clothed with , or concerned in , which tend to make it Good or Evil.  

Prop. 18.  A chief distinction here to be observed , is between Immutable Duties , ( supposing our own continued Faculties ) and mutable ones ; and those things are principally or eminently called Good or Evil per se , which are so immutably , and no supervenient accident can ever make them otherwise : And in the most notable Sense those things are called Good or Evil per accidens , which by supervening accidents may be changed from what they were before . 

Pr. 19  That which is thus immutably Good per se , is Man's Duty to God himself immediately , as he is our Owner , Ruler , Benefactor , and End : Considering this Duty not in this or that time , but in kind , in its season ; and supposing our Faculties and Concauses . For if a Man should be exercising even Love to God when he is bound to sleep for the support of Nature , or if a Man should love God with so passionate an affection as would distract him , this , as so used , is not good ; but we never knew any in much danger of so overdoing : Nor is it a Duty for a Man in Infancy , or an Apoplexy , or deep sleep , etc. actually to love , fear , or trust God ; and in other such Cases of Impossibility . But when possible , or in its season , it is immutably a Duty : Not so rarely as the Jansenist charges the Jesuit Casuists to hold , once in many Weeks , or Months , or Years ; but Love constraining us to its holy Fruits , must be the very New Nature as it were of our Souls , and the Business of our Lives . 

Prop. 20.  That which makes this to be Bonum per se immutabile , which no accident can alter , is , 1.  Because the Foundations of our Obligations are Immutable , while our Faculties and Powers endure ( else they would cease , ) for the de 〈◊〉 itum is a Relation resulting from the mere Being or Position of the Human Nature , as related to God : And God will never change : Therefore unless Man cease to be man , or to be able to act as man , the obligation can by no accident be changed . 2.  Because it is a duty to the supreme Ruler and absolute infinite Good ; and therefore the very performance of it is exclusive of all changing accidents : For he that loveth God as a means to his fleshly pleasure and prosperity only , and as lesle good to him than the world , loveth him not as God : And he that loveth him as God , loveth him as the absolute Power , Wisdom , and Goodness , and therefore exclusively as to all Competitors , unless as this love is sinfully defective ; but that accident of defectiveness maketh not our love to God to be a sin , but the deaf 〈◊〉 t of it as to degree or frequency of exercise is the sin . 3.  And also because that God is the Final Object , and Love the Final Act ; which together make up the ultimate end of man ( including the Vision that kindleth love , and the praise joy , and obedience which express it : ) But though mean 〈◊〉 may be oft changed , and may be too much loved , yet the ultimate end is unchangeable , and cannot be too much loved ( by true mental love , distinct from distracting passions ; ) therefore our Obligations to it are according . So that Love to God is the most immutable Moral Good.  

And the same in their place and time must be said of holy Fear , Trust , and Obedience to God , from which no Accident can disoblige us ; no Command or Prohibition of man ; no suffering of body , or danger of life itself ; much lesle the allurements of sensual delights . 

Pr. 21.  Accordingly too hate God , to distrust his known Promise , to disobey his known Law , to oppose or persecute his known Interest in the world , in his Word and Worship , Church and Servants , are immutably evil per se ; which no Accident can make good or lawful : For the Reasons before given . 

Pr. 22.  But where the object is mutable , and the circumstances of things which the Obligation presupposeth , there the duty or sinfulness is by supervening Accidents mutable : Even Incest , which is a heinous sin , was a duty to Adam's Children , because of accidental difference of the case . The kill of an innocent Son , was well consented to by Abraham , when the Lord of Life and of all the world had commanded it ; and that consent was an act of eminent goodness , and accordingly rewarded . The borrowing of the Egyptians Goods without intent to restore them , and the robbing of them by taking them away , was well done , when the absolute Owner of the World had by his Precept altered the Propriety . Thus the altering of the Case may alter Obligations . 

Pr. 23.  But besides the immutable Obligations to God himself , there are many instances of our actions towards men , and worldy Things , which are ordinarily unchanged ; and only some rare or supernatural declaration of the will of God doth change them : For as God the Author and Orderer of Nature , showeth us by experience , that he delighteth much in the ordinary Constancy of his operations , and rarely changes the course of Nature ; so there is an answerable constancy in the ordinary state and order of Things ; and consequently of obligations or duty . And these are the matter of God's common universal Laws , which ordinarily oblige all mankind ; These are the matter of the second Table of the Decalogue ; and are seconds in point of immutable Obligation to the first ( mentioned ) sort ( our natural duty to God : ) For though man be mutable , and God immutable , yet God preserveth so much constancy in Human Affairs , as is just matter of constant universal Laws , ( though they are liable rarely to dispensations or exceptions . ) And as not murdering , not committing Adultery , not stealing , not lying , or false witness bearing are such , so also are the mere Positives of the first Table , such as are the acts of Instituted Worship , and the holy observation of the Lords day . 

Prop. 24.  The Cases of Man's Life , which are more mutable , are the matter of mutable Duty and Sin , which are most usually called Good or Evil per accidens , because that mutable accidents , added to the more constant accidents , make them such by change . And so it is greatly to be noted , that the Act which is a Duty to one Man , in one Place , at one Time , etc. may be a sin to another Man , or at another Time , Place , etc.  And that new accidents may again come in , and make that Action , that was a sin , to become again a Duty : And more new accidents may make it a sin again ; and so over and over : Even as when you are weighing in the Balance , one Grain may turn the Scales the other way , and two more in the other end may turn them back again ; and three more in the other end may yet return them , and so on many times over and over . For Instance , Suppose an honest Man cannot pray without some unseemly faults in utterance ; in secret it is his Duty to pray vocally if that most profit and affect his heart ; if an exceptious Person be known to overhear him , it may be a sin to do it audibly : If his Family be capable of bearing it , it is his Duty to do it as he can : If strangers come in that would by scorn make it do more hurt than good , he may be bound to forbear till they are gone : When they are gone it is his Duty again : A Fire breaketh out , or one falleth into a swoon , and it is his Duty to forbear : When that is over , it may be his Duty again , etc.  

Pr. 25.  Two sorts therefore sin against God , that would tie Men to do the very same things , of such a mutable Nature , without excepting the mutation of accidents : 1.  Those that will tie them to it by peremptory Laws : 2.  Those that will censoriously reproach or condemn them as sinners , that do not do just as they do , when the Circumstances alter the Case : Many are so guilty who complain of other men's Impositions . 

Pr. 26.  Hence it is evident , that Prudence , discerning how the alteration of accidents alter our Obligations , is a very needful thing to Christians , for the same guidance of their hearts and lives : And as Men picture Justice as holding the Balance , so should Christian Prudence be thought on , even as judging of Good and Evil with the Balance in our hand , and putting every Grain of considerable accidents into each end : And much error , censoriousness , disorder , and other sin is in the World , by ignorant men's judging of things by some mistaken word of Scripture , without prudent weighing of Circumstances , and discerning which preponderateth : There were Circumstances in which Paul would shave his Head , and Circumcise Timothy , and become a Jew to the Jews ; and there were Circumstances in which he saith , If ye be Circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing : Stand fast in the liberty with which Christ hath made you free . 

Pr. 27.  Hence the common People , who cannot be expected to have a sufficient measure of such ponderating Prudence , do need spiritual Guides ; who should be good Casuists , and endowed with so much accurateness of Sapience , and Prudence , as to be able to examine all the Circumstances of Actions , ( as Physicians must do about their Patient's Case ) and to see when one Grain or Accident doth indeed determine them to be good or evil . 

Pr. 28.  And the Laws of just Governors being made by Men that must be presumed to be wiser than the ordinary Subjects , in the matters which belong to their own Office ; as also the decision of a spiritual Casuist and Pastor ; if either of them be put into a Balance that before stood equal , are an additional Accident which must turn the s 〈◊〉 ales : Supposing that the former equality , or suspense , was not from the persons sinful ignorance , or negligence . 

Prop. 29.  But in such variety of Cases and intricate difficulties , God doth not lay our safety , peace , and comfort , upon such degrees of accurateness and Prudence as we cannot attain , though truly willing and faithfully endeavouring it by sincere diligence : Nor is God pleased that Men be over scrupulous , or over solicitous , about lesser doubtful Circumstances ; that is , that we neglect the Duty itself , or too much delay it , or live in self-distracting uncomfortable despondencies ; making God's service burdensome and grievous to us , either by an over troublesome and tedious care of some lesle accident , or because we can do the work no more exactly : Like a Servant that instead of his days work and journey , would sit down and spend half the day in crying because he can do no better , or in curious inquiries about lesser Circumstances : But God would have us upon our sincere willingness , and a proportionable fidelity in enquiry , to do his service cheerfully as well as we can ; and to go on as believing that we have a merciful God , a sufficient and a pardoning Covenant , and expect with joy his acceptance of our sincerity . 

Pr. 30.  He that would tell Rulers that they may lawfully command every thing which is not evil in the Physical Action , considered without its Accidents ; or that is not evil in the first Accidents or Circumstances that cloth it , will teach them to cast off Religion and common honesty and justice , and to own more iniquity than ever Mahomet , or any false Prophet to our knowledge , hath defended , and such as Satan himself hath confessed to be evil . 

Pr. 31.  no man may command others any action , which is by accident unlawful to be commanded : For it is sin , if sin by accident . ) But Rulers may command many things , which the Subject may by accident make sinful for himself to do , ( as shall be showed . ) 

Pr. 32.  For there are some accidents rendering the act sinful , which a Ruler may and aught to make provision against , or prevent : And there are some which he neither can prevent , nor is bound therefore to forbear or change his Law. For instance , 

Pr. 33.  no man is bound to forbear a Law or Practice , which is commanded of God , or is necessary to a greater good , ( as God's Glory , the Public safety , the salvation of many , or himself , etc. ) lest some man should turn it to his own sin and ruin : Gods Laws must not be broken , nor the Public Welfare hazarded , to save a particular person from himself , and from his sinful inclinations to ill doing . 

Pr. 34.  As to a circumstance that is indifferent antecedently to further accidents , and if it be determined one way will do accidentally a great deal of good and a little hurt ; and if the other way , it will do a little good and a great deal of hurt ; the Ruler , if he foresee it , must determine it the first way , notwithstanding the accidental hurt ( whether sin or suffering ) which will follow . Because a greater hurt is more carefully to be avoided than a lesle , and a greater good more carefully to be endeavoured than a lesle : E. g. If the Army be appointed to meet at such a day and place , some few Soldiers ( one of a thousand ) will mutiny and not appear : If at another time and place , most of them will mutiny . Or if a congregation be appointed to meet at such an Hour and Place for 〈◊〉 odds Worship , and join with such a worthy Teacher , one of an hundred will schismatically separate : If in another Place , at another Hour , with another worthy Teacher , an hundred to one will separate . Here the Ruler must first avoid the greater Evil that by accident will follow . If one pe 〈◊〉 vish hearer will sinfully separate if the Preacher use Sermon Notes , or if he use such a Translation , such a Metre , such Tunes of Psalms , if he pray freely without a Form , or if he use the same words often as a Form ; and it an hundred to one are for the contrary , and would separate if he did otherwise , the greater Evil by Accident must be avoided before the lesle . 

Pr. 35.  So much are wicked Men inclined to turn all things into sin , that it is not possible to command any thing so good , which bad Men may not make a sinful use of : Sin taketh occasion of God's own Commandments , Ro. 7. 8.  

Pr. 36.  no Ruler is bound to suspect and prevent such unusual dangers of men's sin , or ruin , as fall out beyond all rational foresight or expectation , of whose probable event , or possible at least , there was no just evidence . 

Pr. 37.  Caeteris paribus , an equal certain hurt must rather be avoided , than an equal uncertain hurt , much more an improbable one . 

Pr. 38.  The equal danger of a more Public worthy Person is to be avoided more than the danger of a Private , or lesle worthy Person . And so in other Instances : Rulers must weigh all discernible Accidents , and prudently pr 〈◊〉 for the greatest Good , and most avoid the greatest Evil.  

Pr. 39  Seeing it is Accidents that make most Actions Good or Evil , it is the Office , Skill , and Honour of Rulers to avoid as many ill accidents , and prevent as many sins by accident , as is possible : And as the Multitude of his Patient's Funerals is the Physicians dishonour , and the Multitude of Cures is his honour ; so is it to the Ruler ( allowing necessary disparities ) as to men's sins by accidents . 

Pr. 40.  If Good as Good be amiable , than the greatest Good as such is most amiable , and to be preferred before the lesle : And when the difference is known , or such as Rulers are obliged to know , the lesle cannot be preferred without sin ; and such as is against the very Nature of Goodness , and of Man's William It is not therefore a thing indifferent , nor the matter of God's Counsel , which is no Law.  

Pr. 41.  But to know of several Goods which is most eligible , or the greatest , is a matter of great difficulty in many Instances , in which consisteth no small part of the Christian Wisdom , Work , and Life . The Rules of such discerning are elsewhere laid down , by such as have written on that Subject ; see Christian Direct . p. 137. etc.  

Pr. 42.  A Good that in itself is Lesser may be the matter of a Greater Duty , pro hic & nunc , because the Greater may have another season when the Lesser cannot : E. G. to save a Soul , or to build a Church may be a better work than to quench the Fire in an House : And yet for that time the quenching of the Fire may be the greater Duty , because it can be done no other time , when the other may ; and so both done in their several seasons are better than one alone . 

Pr. 43.  A greater Good may be no Duty to him that is not called to do it ; as preaching to a Woman , or unable Layman : To Rule well as a King is a greater Good than private Business ; and yet private Men must not usurp it , but let it alone as no work of theirs . The Subject must not take up the Ruler's work , nor the Child the Fathers , nor the Wife the Husbands , nor the Scholar the Teachers , because it is better . 

Pr. 44.  A Ruler's Command will not justify all scandal given by the Act commanded , nor make that Act lawful : Nor will all scandal , that we foreknow will thence be taken , excuse us from obeying the Rulers Command in the offending Act. It is therefore a matter of great difficulty and prudence sometimes to discern , whether the Rulers Command , or the scandalousness , or accidental hurtfulness of the Act , put into the Counterbalance , do weigh down the other . 

Pr. 45.  If Governors determine Circumstances antecedently indifferent , ( as the place and hour of Assemblies , etc. ) that way which some will be scandalised at , and turn to their sin and hurt , when they might have avoided this occasion of their sin , by another way , without any , or so great a hurt ; this is the Governors' sin so to mis-do : But it may , notwithstanding , be a Duty in the Subject to obey that Determination ; because , 1.  It is a Command of a Ruler in his place : 2.  The thing is supposed not only lawful , but such as doth more good for Concord , as it is a Determination of Authority , than it doth hurt by men's mistake : ( of which we have spoken in another Paper . ) As , e. g. some are so offended at the old Metre of our singing Psalms , that they will separate from the worship on that account : Suppose that the Magistrate , and Pastors , will use them and no other : If they sin in choosing no better , and if my using them be offensive to them that separate , yet is it my Duty and the rest of the People's to obey the Magistrate and Pastor , and join with the Church in using them , rather than separate as others do ( for many reasons . ) 

Pr. 46.  Of the Nature , Kind's , Causes , and Cure of Scandal given and taken , one of us hath written so much ( Christian Directory , Tom. 4. p. 80. etc. ) as may excuse the omission of the same in this writing . 

But we must still desire the Reader to note , that the word [ Scandal ] is among us variously used : 1.  Sometime by the vulgar for mere displeasing or grieving another , especially in matters of Religion : 2.  Sometime for [ a seeming sinfulness : ] So a Scandal is said to be raised of a Man when he is ( truly or falsely ) accused of sin , especially a disgraceful sin : And a Man is called scandalous , and scandalised , when others ( justly or unjustly ) report him to be a disgraceful Sinner ; and he is called a Scandal in the place where he liveth for that Infamy : 3.  The use of the word in the Gospel is , for any thing that is a Snare or Trap or Stumbling-block to others , to keep or hinder them by Temptation , from Faith , Repentance , Holiness , or Salvation . 

Pr. 47.  Love kindled by Faith , and Faith kindling Love , and Love working in the order of Obedience , is the Sum of all our Duty , or Religion . To love our Neighbours as ourselves , and exercise Love in doing good to all as we are able , is indispensible Duty : ( We speak of Natural and Moral-legal Power Conjunct : Illum 〈◊〉 possumus quod & animae corporisque viribus , & jure possumus : ) Seeing then that Love is the fulfilling of God's Law , no Rulers Law can disoblige us from it ; no , not to our very Enemies : Nor are they disobliged themselves . 

Pr. 48.  He breaketh the sixth Command [ thou shalt not Murder ] who doth not do his best to save his Neighbour's Life in danger : Much more if he voluntarily and unnecessarily do that , which he knew , or aught to know , would be the occasion and means abused to effect it . He that oweth maintenance to another , and denyeth it him , is guilty of his suffering though he take nothing from him : E. G. He that provideth not Food for the Life of his Child , and famisheth him by such omission : He that suffereth his Neighbour to famish when he might relieve him : Yea , or his Enemy , except when in Wars , or a Course of Justice , he may take away his Life . He that seeth his Neighbour in Fire , or Water , or among Thiefs , and could save him by lawful means , and doth not , is guilty of his Blood. So is he that seeth his Neighbour in Drunkenness , Folly , or Passion , making away himself , and doth not save him from himself , if he can . 

Much more is be guilty of Murder , who wilfully selleth Poison to him , who he knoweth doth intend to kill his Neighbour , or himself ; much more his Prince with it : And if we have any Casuists more loose than the Jesuits accused by Montaltus , who will justify this , because that selling Arsenic , etc. is lawful per se , and unlawful only per accidens , ye we suppose that the Judges would be stricter Casuists , in judging him to punishment that sinned thus per accidens : And as God's Laws reaching the Conscience are stricter in such things than Man's , so should the Expositors of them be than the Judges . And we hope that our Casuists will never see a Law so made , that shall Command ( or tolerate ) all Apothecaries to sell Poison to those that they know mean to use it to Treason , or Murder ; and shall say , you are not bound to neglect your Trade , your Right , or Liberty , to prevent another Man's sin , and abusing it to his own , or others hurt : Our Lawmakers will never say , we may Command this , because it is sin but per accidens : When Interest is against their Error , who by Interest were led into it , it will then be easy to see the evil of such commanding ( yea , or conniving at ) sin per accidens . Till than it is hard curing them , whom mistaken Interest blindeth , of the most Inhuman Error . 

Pr. 49.  We therefore who are called Non-con 〈◊〉 ormists , ( and Puritan , by Men whose Interest dictateth reproaches ) do now confess , that , whereas we once hoped that we had differed but in lesser things from our Accusers , we do find ourselves so far mistaken , as that some of them , who have thought it worth their labour to write vehemently for our reproach and increased sufferings , do differ from us in the Vitals of our Religion , even of our Belief , our Love , and Practice . We mean such as hold [ That all the Obligations of Scandal proceed purely from that extraordinary height of Charity , and tenderness of good Nature , that is so signally recommended in the Gospel : — But if it proceed from humour , or pride , or wilfulness , or any other vicious Principle , then is the Man to be treated as a peevish and stubborn Person ; and no Man is bound to part with his own freedom , because his Neighbour is froward and humorous : and if he be resolved to fall , there is no reason I should forego the use of my liberty , because he is resolved to make that his Stumbling-block . Ecclesiast . Polit. page 231. ] 

Because this is contrary to that very Religion in which only we hope for Salvation , we take the boldness to put these few Questions to them who thus judge . 

Q. 1.  Is not Love the fulfilling of the Law , and the End of the Gospel , and Faith working by Love , the Sum of Christian Religion ? Doth not the Law of Nature oblige us to love our Neighbour as ourselves ? 

Q. 2.  Doth not God beneficently love his Enemies ; even the sinful , the humorous , the proud , and the peevish ? Did not Christ come to seek and save them ? Is there not joy in Heaven for their Repentance ? Doth not God welcome such Prodigals when they return , Luke 16. and call , invite , and entreat them to return ? 

Q. 3.  Are we not Commanded to be merciful as our Heavenly Father is merciful ; and to love even our Enemies , and pray for Persecutors , that we may be like him ? And is not this a Natural Common Duty ? 

Q. 4.  Hath not God sent out his Ministers to preach home such sinners ; and commanded them to do it instantly , in season and out of season , reproving and exhorting , and with meekness , to instruct opposers , if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth ? And must we not labour hard , and suffer much , for to win such Souls ? 

Q. 5.  Should not every thing be valued according to its worth ? And are not the Souls of such as you call humorous , peevish , or wilful , worth more than some of that which you call your Liberty ? Are they not worth more than a Pipe of Tobacco , or a Cup of Sack , or a Stage-play , or a needless Ceremony ; which you accounted part of your Liberty ? Would you deny none of these to save many Souls ? 

Q. 6.  Would you not deny your Liberty in a Cup of Drink , or a Pipe of Tobacco , to save the Life of one that in humour would destroy himself ? or his House , who would set it on fire ? 

Q. 7.  If not , doth this Religion of yours much commend itself to the Nature of Mankind ? Or is he that writeth this fit to report us of the other mind , unfit for subjection , or Human Society ? Can Christians be of your Religion ? 

Q. 8.  Are not Souls more worth than Bodies ? And should not the Soul of a Sinner be as compassionately saved by us as his Body , as far as we are able , and at as dear a rate ? 

Q ▪ 9  Is that Man like to profit his Hearers , or be taken for a faithful Pastor , or an honour to the Church of England , who would tell them , [ I would not forsake a Pipe of Tobacco , or a lawful sport or jest , to save any of your Souls , who are vicious , humourous , or peevish ? ] 

Q. 10.  Doth not this doleful Doctrine tell Men consequently , that they should seek to save the Soul of no Sinner in the World ? For if you , 1.  Except all that have humour , pride , wilfulness , or any other vicious Principle ; 2.  And that but so far prevalent as to be resolved to make a Stumbling-block of some liberty of another's : What Sinner almost is not here excluded from your Charity ? Who is it that hath not as great sin as some humorous , or peevish stumbling at some lawful thing ? or who is it that hath no pride , no peevishness , no humorousness , or at least that hath no vicious Principle at all ? Is not that Man perfectly holy ? 3.  And if to save such an one you would not so much as deny any of your liberty for him , what would you do for him at all ? Who can expect that you should bestow any great labour or c 〈◊〉 st to do good , or save a Sinner , that would not lose a Cup of Sack to save him ? 

Q. 11.  Do you not thus reproach Christ , that set a higher price on Souls , when you value them not at the price of a Cup of Drink ? Would you have it believed that they are purchased by his Blood ? 

Q ▪ 12.  Would you have God care no more for your soul , and value it at no higher a rate ? Doth he believe the immortality of Souls who will say so ? 

Q. 13.  Should God give such a Law to all his Creatures , for their acting towards yourself and one another ; q. 〈◊〉 . [ D 〈◊〉 nigh not so much as a lawful Jest , or Sport , or Ceremony , to win and save any one in the world , that out of any vitous principle will stumble at your liberty ; ] what Family , or Commonwealth , could subsist under such an inhuman privation of love ? 

Q. 14.  If you loved your Neighbour as yourself , and did as you would have others do to you , would you deny no lawful thing to save his Soul , though he had some vicious principle ? 

Q. 15.  What will people say of such men as you , if you shall ever preach for Love and Good Works , and would make people believe that its you that are for them , and we against them ; when they compare this Doctrine with your words ? 

Q. 16.  Why do such men call us Puritans , as if we succeeded the old Catharists ( or Perfectionists ) and the Novatians , when we are so far from so vilifying sinners that have a vicious principle , and sin against some lawful thing , by taking it for unlawful , that we know none in the world that hath no vicious principle , and is not to be helped at a dearer rate ? 

And seeing we find such real difference in our very Religion itself , from such as this , we cannot wonder if men of such Principles use us and the Nation no better than they do : But we crave their solid resolving of these Doubts , if they will lose so much of their Ease and Liberty , for the convincing of persons judged so unworthy . 

Pr. 50.  For our parts we must profess , that we take it to be our duty not only to deny a lawful thing , or our liberty therein , for the saving of Souls that have vicious principles and humours , but to bestow our labours , and endure poverty , reproach , persecution , imprisonment , and , when God calls us to it , death itself , to serve Christ in the saving of such Souls . 

Pr. 51.  We suppose that Christ and his Apostles were of the same mind , when Christ would have a right hand or a right eye rather lost , than the Soul should be hazarded by the scandal or temptation of it . And when he would pay Caesar Tribute when he was free , rather than o●●end men . And when he so dreadfully speaketh of them that offend or scandalise one of the little ones , even weak Believers , as that it were better for them that a Millstone were hanged on their necks , and they were cast into the Sea : Mat. 5. and 18. 8.  Mar. 9 42 , 43.  Mat. 17. 27. and 18. 6.  Rom. 14. 13 , 14 , etc. This was S. Paul ' s judgement , [ Let us not judge one another any more , but judge this rather , that no man put a stumbling block , or an occasion to fall , in his Brother's way . I know , and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus , that there is nothing unclean of itself ; but to him that esteemeth any thing unclean , to him it is unclean . But if thy Brother be grieved with thy meat , now walkest thou not charitably : Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died : Let not your good be evil spoken of : For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink , but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost : For he that in these things serves Christ , is acceptable to God , and approved of men : Let us therefore follow after the things that make for peace , and things wherewith one may edify another . For meat destroy not the work of God : All things indeed are pure ; but it is evil for that man who eateth with offence . It is good neither to eat Flesh , nor drink Wine , nor that whereby thy Brother stumbleth , or is offended , or made weak . Hast thou faith ? have it to thyself before God : Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth : And he that doubteth is damned if he eat , because it 's not of faith : For whatsoever is not of faith is sin . This was Paul ' s Doctrine then , even to all the Church of Rome . 

So on , Rom. 15. 1 , etc.  We then that are strong aught to bear the infirmities of the weak , and not to please ourselves . Let every one of us please his Neighbour for his good , to edification : For even Christ pleased not himself . — Now the God of patience and consolation , grant you to be like minded one towards another , according to Christ Jesus . 

So 1 Cor. 8. 9  But take 〈◊〉 eed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a Stumbling-block to them that are weak . — 13.  wherefore if Meat make my Brother to offend , I will eat no Flesh while the world standeth , lest I make my Brother to o●●end . ] 

Remember that he that spoke this had as great Church-authority as any Bishop , and spoke this as an Apostlers and not as a mere private Man  

Pr. 52.  The same Author saith , ( Eccl. Polit. p. 230. ) that this School-distinction ( of scandalum datum & acceptum ) is apparently false and impertinent , and the main thing that hath perplexed all discourses of this Article . ] 

But we see no Reason to think , that the generality of both protestants & Papists are herein mistaken , & this Writer is in the right , or that the School Doctors need go to School to him to reform such Errors : It is a Moral Subject , & Given and Taken are morally meant ; that is , There is scandal culpably given , and there is scandal culpably taken only , and not so given . The distinction is of the Parties culpable . All which is culpably taken is not culpably given : A man that either purposely or negligently speaketh injurious provoking words , doth give the temptation of wrath to the hearer : But he that speaketh words which in themselves have no tendency to provoke , nor was obliged to foresee that they would provoke , doth give no scandal ; ( no nor he that justly and aptly reproveth : ) But a peevish or impatient sinner may yet take scandal from them . He that leaveth Arsenic where he should know that another is like to take it to his death , whether he do it purposely or negligently ( that is by the Wills commission or omission ) is the reputed Giver , or Moral Cause , of that Man's death . But he that leaveth it where he could not know , and was not obliged to fear , that another would so take and use it , may say , It was taken by him , and not given by me . 

An alluring Habit , Actions , and Gestures , which have a Natural tendency to provoke others to sinful lusts , have ever been condemned by all sober Divines as Scandal Given ; which yet chaste persons may re 〈◊〉 use to Take : But if the soberest and modestest Habit prove a Snare , it is a Scandal Taken , and not culpably given : ( As a Thief , if he steal my Knife and cut his own Throat with it , cannot say that I gave it him . ) He that speaketh words which are apt to tempt the hearer to Treason or Rebellion , doth give the Scandal : But if by the reading of any Chapter in the Bible , any will be incited to Rebellion or Disloyalty ; or if by the innocent , necessary , and sober defence of a just Cause , any will be tempted to think unworthily of his Governors or Judges , he taketh Scandal that is not culpably Given him . 

Pr. 53.  If a Man were bound to forbear all that others will turn into an occasion of sin , he should not only lose all his liberty , but omit all his Duty : And to think that we are bound to deny no liberty , or nothing indifferent to prevent or cure the sin of others , is to deny the common Principles of Humanity ; and on pretence of Justice to renounce common Charity , and to become an Adversary to the great Precepts of Christ and his Apostles . Therefore the difficulty is to resolve how far , and in what cases , our liberty must be denied , to save other Men from sin ; and consequently from damnation ; which must be determined by the great General Canons : [ thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thyself : Whatsoever you would that Men should do to you , so do to them : Let all be done to Edification : Prefer a greater Good before a lesle ; and most avoid the greatest Evil : Caeteris paribus , the most Public good ( of many ) is the greatest : Sin is a greater Evil , than bodily wants and sufferings . ] 

no Ruler may Command any thing which is contrary ( though but by accident ) to the Law of God , in Nature and Scripture expressed : Charity and Justice are Commanded by the Law of Nature and Scripture : When accidentally the Man that fell among Thiefs was wounded , and naked , Charity obliged the Priest and Levite to have relieved him . If by accident Fire consume men's Habitations , Charity requireth others to relieve them . 

Especially where the Obligation is great and special , As for Parents to feed their Children : If Rulers forbid them , and so would have them murder them by Famine , the Command is sinful , and the Obligation hey-boyss ; because they cannot dissolve the Obligation of God's Natural Laws . 

And the exercise of Charity to Believers , that are the Members of Christ , is a Duty that none may Countermand ; and the commands of none can disoblige us from : For Mat. 25.  Christ tells us that he will judge Men , according to their exercised Charity to his Servants , to everlasting Life , or everlasting Punishment . Yet Christ foreknew , and foretold Men , that much of this Charity must be exercised against the Wills of many of the Rulers of the World.  

Much lesle may Rulers prohibit the due exercise of Charity to men's Souls , or can oblige Men by such prohibitions : As to instruct an Unbeliever , exhort a Blasphemer , Idolater , Adulterer , a Thief , a Murderer , etc. to repent . 

And much lesle yet may Rulers forbid the means of men's Salvation , to be used by the faithful Ministers of Christ , who by Covenant in their Ordination are specially thereto obliged . 

And least of all may any Rulers Command , or can oblige Men , to kill Men unjustly , or to draw Men to sin , or to deceive them by false teaching , or any thing else , that directly , or by accident , is like to procure their damnation , except in the Cases hereafter excepted . 

Pr. 54.  Though Rulers cannot destroy Charity , they may Regulate it in due Subordination to God's Laws : E. G. They may make Laws that the Poor shall be kept in their own Parishes , and not beg abroad ; and forbid relieving them that so beg . They may forbid Parents to cram their Children to excess . They may forbid Ministers the unnecessary , and irregular , intruding into other men's Pulpits , or Assemblies , or Families ; and such like . 

Pr. 55.  And they may forbid Men doing hurt on pretences of Charity : E. G. Physicians to give Men pernicious Drugs ; or Preachers or others , to seduce Men to Idolatry , or blaspheme Christ , or draw Men to Mahume 〈◊〉 anisme , Socinianism , etc. or to preach Rebellion , or seek to bring the Subjects into subjection to a Foreign Prince , or Ecclesiastical Usurper ; or uncalled and unfit Men , to make themselves unnecessarily Public Teachers , to the disgrace of the sacred Doctrine which they abuse , and hindrance of men's salvation , and of the Public peace and safety . 

Pr. 56.  In a word , Rulers may forbid all things not Commanded by God , though seemingly Charitable , or good by accident , when contrary accidents notoriously preponderate , and it is certain , or most probable , to Men of true judgement , to whose Cognizance it belongeth , that the thing will do more hurt than good , and tendeth more to destruction , than to edification ▪ 

Pr. 57  The Time , Place , and other Circumstances of a Duty may be at the Governors' Determination , when the Duty itself is not : And they may forbid the Duty itself , as to that Time , and Place , etc. when a greater good , at that Time , requireth it . E. G. They may forbid resting on the Lordsday , in time of a Fire , Inundation , or a Siege , when defence is necessary : They may forbid some Public Assemblies in time of a great Pestilence , to prevent infection : They may Command Men out of the Church to quench a Fire , etc.  

Pr. 58.  It is certain that Rulers have not Power from God to destroy the Duties Commanded by God , on any pretences of Regulating , or duly Circumstantiating , or ordering them ; or of being the Judges : ( As is elsewhere showed . ) For they have their Power to edification , and not destruction ; and are the Ministers of God for Good. E. G. If on pretence of forbidding hurtful Preachers and Seducers , they forbid sound Doctrine , or necessary preaching of it . Constantius and Valens might not set up Arrians , and cast out and forbid the Orthodox , on pretence that they were the Judges . So if on pretence of restraining unnecessary supernumeraries , they forbid , or silence , one half the necessary Number : Or if on pretence of keeping Order , they commit the charge of Fifty Thousand or One Hundred Thousand Souls to one , or two Men , who cannot possibly supply the real necessities of Five Thousand of them ; and forbid all others to help the rest , as intruders into another Man's Charge : ( On which pretence they might keep almost all the People from the Gospel , by committing a Kingdom or County only to one Man : ) So also if on pretence of any cross interest of their own , they would prohibit Christ's Gospel : Or if they will forbid Men to preach , because they will not make a Covenant against some Law of God , or will not lie , or be perjured , or profane God's Ordinances , or own false Doctrine , or disown the very Law of Nature , calling this Nonconformity , Disobedience , or Schism . Yea , if they forbid necessary helps to men's Salvation , because the Teachers be not all of one Opininion about some unnecessary Controversy , or Ceremony : As if all the Lutherans would silence all called Calvenists , or they the Lutherans , or Arminians : Much more unlawful is it for Rulers themselves to be the Makers of such snares and occasions of dissent , and then to impose them by such penalties , that none shall preach the Gospel of Christ , that will not consent to them , how great soever the necessity be . As , e. g. God hath not forbidden wearing a pair of Horns : If Rulers should make Laws that none shall preach the Gospel that will not wear Horns in preaching , in token that the Word of God shall push down the Powers of Sin and Satan , this is an unlawful Command . So if on pretence of ordering the Place of Worship , Men be commanded to such a distance , or confined to so small a room , as destroyeth the End of the Work itself , and depriveth most of all possibility of the Benefit . 

Pr. 59  Ruler's ought not to command any thing which will notably do more harm than good , nor make an unnecessary thing a means or occasion of excluding the necessary Worship of God , or Preaching of his Gospel . Nor will their saying that necessary Teaching is not necessary , or that they are the Judges of Necessity , or that Heretics are Orthodox , or the Orthodox are Heretics , or that Usurpers only are duly called , and others are Schismatics , or that ignorant insufficient Preachers are sufficient , or that more in number are not necessary , when indeed they are ; none of this will excuse their sin , nor disoblige Christ's Servants from the obedience of his Laws . 

Pr. 60.  If still ignorant or fraudulent men should ask us , ad rancedinem usque , who shall be Judge of Order and Necessity , we again and again repeat our undeniable Answer ; 1.  That the esse rei is before the scire : Either the thing is really true and good which they judge true and good , or it is false and bad ; and no man's false judging will change the thing : ( e. g. Our Preaching is sound and necessary , or it is not . ) 2.  The Magistrate is the Public Judge who shall be protected or punished by the Sword. The Pastors are the Public Judges who is fit for Church-communion , and who not . And all the Subjects are the rational Private discerning Judges of their Duty : This no man can with a face of Reason deny . But all these are Subjects to God , and limited by him in their Judging Power , and not enabled to judge falsely , that Evil is Good and Good is Evil : what Good is such by Nature or Accident , they cannot make Evil , and forbid what God commands on pretence of judging . They have Power to judge that all the Articles of our Faith are true , but not that any of them are false : They are Judges that the commands of God must be all kept , but have no power to judge the contrary . In what Cases we may be bound to obey them when they err , we have opened in another Paper , and may partly be discerned from what is here said . 

Pr. 61.  The Bishops or Pastors of the Church are above others obliged , to exercise paternal tender love to all the People's Souls . If they are peevish , and humorous , and quarrelsome , and proud , and have other vicious Principles , it is their Office and Work under Christ to cure them , and to use all that gentleness and forbearance which is needful to their cure ; and to become all things ( lawful ) to all men , to win and edify them : ( not doing greater hurt by injuring others , or the Public Good , for the sake of those that are few or lesle considerable . ) If therefore they should either scandalise them and hinder their salvation by things unnecessary , or whose good will not countervail the hurt ; or if they should say , we are not bound to forsake our own Liberty ( no not in a trifle ) for the sake of such as are inclined to offence by their vicious Principles , they seem to us much to forget or renounce their proper Callings , as well as Human Charity to Souls ; as if a Physician should say , I am not bound to medicate any that are sick , but only those that are in health . And if all that have vicious Principles be so far from under the Minister's 〈◊〉 are , we see no Reason why the Kingdom should maintain so needless a Ministry , at so dear a rate ; nor why they should be had in so much honour , and why we should not all be silenced at once . 

Pr. 62.  The sin of tyrannical abuse of Power is so contrary to the Nature of all Good Rulers , and so contrary to their own true interest , peace , and comfort , and final justification before God , and so contrary to the welfare of all Mankind , and doth at this day so much mischief in the world , by serving Satan , maintaining Idolatry , Mahometanism , Popery , and Profaneness , and keeping out the Gospel from the most of the whole world , that the Flatterers that would for their own ends and carnal interests promote it , and make all odious to Rulers that dislike it , will one day be known to be the great Enemies of Princes and People , of Church and State , of Jesus Christ and God the Sovereign Lord of all . 

Pr. 63.  And Confusion , Anarchy , Popular Rage , Faction and Sedition , dishonouring our Rulers , and all Rebellions and Schisms , must be odious to all men of Interest , Wisdom , and true Religion , as being ultimately against the God of Order , and the Glory of his Wisdom and Sovereignty in Government , who is to be honoured and obeyed in Kings , in Pastors , and Parents , and all that are under him authorised to Govern us . 

Pr. 64.  Perjury , justifying thousands in perjury , deliberate lying , covenanting against great and known Duty , corrupting God's Worship and Church Government , cruel denying christendom and salvation to the Infants of thousands of godly Christians , and casting out godly Christians from the Church's Communion causelessly for a gesture , pronouncing all Atheists , Infidels , Adulterers , and other wicked persons saved , so be it they be not unbaptised , excommunicate , or make away themselves ; none of these , nor any such other , in our judgement will ever be made lawful by any Command or Accident , nor will ever be lawfully commanded ; nor shall we ever number them with Things Indifferent , nor revile or persecute any as humorous , obstinate , disobedient , Schismatics , or seditious , for refusing them . 

FINIS . 

What Mere Nonconformity is not : THE PROFESSION OF SEVERAL WHOM THESE TIMES Have made and called NON-CONFORMISTS' . 

Printed in the Year , 1676.  

What Mere Nonconformity is not . That we may not , after near fourteen Years suffering and silence , yet tell the World what our Nonconformity is , without offending our Superiors , and incurring all the censures and farther sufferings which we have reason to expect , is more grievous to some of us , than all the corporal pressures by Ejections , Deprivation of Maintenance , Prosecutions , Fines and Imprisonment which we have undergone ; when we consider not only that the little remnant of our opportunities for Ministerial Work , ( the preservation whereof hath done much to restrain us ) is by the Odium cast upon us made lesle profitable to men's Souls ; but especially , how many thousands do defile their hearts with false uncharitable Conceptions of their brethren , and their tongues with false Reproaches , if not their hands with cruel Prosecutions , because they are falsely informed of our Cause : When we think how Satan is served by this ; how odious sins are multiplied through the Land ; how Christian Love is killed ; and divisions made among all Ranks of Men , and in all places : When we think how God is hereby provoked , the Land dishonoured and endangered ; and how fast the guilty post one after another into another World , where such work will cost them dear ; with many a heart-tearing groan some of us have long said , Must we be silent and see all this ? In a Christian state , must we be condemned , imprisoned , driven about as Rogues and seditious persons , and our Ministry vilified , and that by Clergymen , who think that it is their right to be believed , and not have leave once to speak for ourselves , so far as to tell men , what it is that we take for sin ? and why must we see so many thousands going in such guilt into another World , and distracting a Kingdom that hath been too long distracted , and weakening both the Protestant and the Christian Interest , and by building and keeping up a Wall of separation , serving the great Enemy of both ? and must we not in compassion speak for peace , but only say as Christ , Father forgive them , for they know not what they do ? If God forgive Men he turneth their hearts , and giveth them Repentance . And we are commanded to pray , Forgive our enemies , persecutors , and slanderers , and turn their hearts : And must we pray , and not endeavour ? 

At least , now at last , we shall endeavour to stop them by this short Profession , from believing those Tongues or Pens which tell them , that we make a Schism for things which ourselves confess Indifferent , and that our Nonconformity consisteth in what it doth not : If we must not tell them what it is that we think men command and God forbids , we may tell them what it is not : For this may be some service to themselves . 

But we must premise , that if any that are called by other names , denoting other Opinions besides Mere Nonconformity , or any persons else whosoever , do hold any thing unlawful which we here allow , it is none of our meaning to declare their judgements , which they are fittest to declare themselves : We profess but our own , and such as by familiarity we have had opportunity to understand . 

Three sorts we must here justify ourselves against , who we know are likely to accuse us upon unjustifiable accounts : I Those that will be angry that we so far undeceive the People , as to acquaint them with our judgement , and the untruth of what they have believed of us : How many soever may be guilty of this , it is so diabolical that we suppose few will own it , and therefore we need not any farther dispute it , than to tell them that worldly interest , and wicked means will serve men's turns but a little while . 

II Those that will say that we are not all of a mind ; one thinks more unlawful , and another lesle ; and therefore we are not to be united or agreed with , nor can it be known what will satisfy us all . If the Church's Peace & Concord depend upon such Heads , and Hearts , and Principles , as this Objection doth imply , no wonder if it have no Peace or Concord : We are united and agreed with those that differ from us in more than Circumstances : We will hold Concord with all in Faith and Love and Communion ( if they will admit us without our sinning ) upon the Terms set down by the Holy Ghost and the Apostles , Act. 15. 28. who would have nothing but necessary things imposed , ( or such things whoso Determination one way or other is necessary , though compared each with other they are indifferent ; ) at least not made necessary to Life , Liberty , Ministry , or Communion ; we have long learned from Rom. 14. 15. and from that Spirit which indicted it , not to judge nor to despise each other for things of tolerable difference , but to receive each other as Christ receives us . One Man is not a Church , nor a Kingdom : And if no Men must be of the same Church or Kingdom that have any difference , yea as great as the Objection can reasonably suppose in the Mere Nonconformists , we are sure that no two Men in the World can be of the same Church or Kingdom , except you will Compose it of such as hold nothing at all unlawful , and consequently nothing morally good , which is no Church . We profess that we love them as ourselves , and shall not be guilty of imprisoning , undoing , silencing , or excommunicating them , who wear not the same Clotheses , and use not the same Gesture in singing , hearing , or reading , as we do ; who differ from us in the sense of many a Text of Scripture , who take many things for duty or sin which we do not ; who will not be tied to use no Public Prayers to God , but what we or others write them down ; so they hold one Body , one Spirit , one Hope , one Lord , one Faith , one Baptism , one God and Father of all , and will endeavour to keep the unity of the spirit in the Bond of Peace , Eph. 4. 3 , 4 , 5 , 6.  We are not for cutting off every Member that is of different size or shape , 1 Cor. 12.  God keep us from their mind and guilt and judgement , who will hold Love and Communion with none but those , in things unnecessary , of their own opinion or way , or that would ruin and persecute all the rest . 

III And some Nonconformists that are more than so , or differ from us , will say that we should not have declared thus our judgement , lest by differing from them we seem divided , and expose them to the greater Odium and Persecution , because they cannot go so far as we . 

But , 1.  We protest against the persecution of sober godly Christians , on the account of such differences ; and are we then guilty of what we deprecate ? 2.  Did not Mr. Eton , when he wrote that the Oath of Allegiance and the Covenant bind not , know that most of us were against his judgement ? To say nothing of many more that wrote against Episcopacy , Presbytery , Infant Baptism , Parish Churches , etc ▪ who yet forbore not on any such accounts : Did not Mr. Nye and Mr. Tombs , when they wrote very well for the Oath of Supremacy , know that in Scotland many refuse it as unlawful ? And did they forbear for fear of bringing Persecution on Dissenters ? Did not Mr. Nye write to prove it lawful to hear the Parish Ministers ? and Mr. Tombs write to prove it lawful both to hear and to communicate with them ? And did the fear of bringing Persecution on others hinder them ? 3.  Hath not this Reason ( to keep others from Persecution ) prevailed with us far enough and long enough ? 4.  Would they have us either by speech or silence draw men to believe , that we are of all men's minds whom we would save from Persecution ? Must we tempt men to think that we are Seekers , Quakers , Separatists , Anabaptists , lest we expose them to Persecution ? Is not this such Carnal Policy , as if not repent of , will perish with the Masters of it ? Even to do evil , and to tempt others to evil , and to draw all our Hearers into sin by our Example , by making them think that we hold that to be good or evil which we do not ? and all this on pretence of good ? yea to cherish the sin of many , lest some should suffer ? 5.  The thing is unreasonable , and the pretence is apparently vain : For it is known by our Superiors that we differ already ; and yet they who make this Objection have suffered never the more , but live a quieter life than we have done . 6.  If the Objection implieth , as it seems to do , that we are of their mind that will bear , or live in Communion , with none but those that differ not from them , as far as the Objectors now suppose , we disclaim their dividing Principles , and are not of their mind : If they are not for loving Christians as Christians , and using them accordingly , let them not expect that we should not seem to differ from them . 

And that we do not this that we do without reason , we must thus show : 

I It is sinful when we can help it , to let Clergymen uncontradicted deceive men's Souls , and draw and keep both high and low , even many thousands in sin , by persuading them that we are so schismatical and hateful a People , that our sufferings are no persecutions , because we divide the Church for things indifferent , and stick at nothing but Liturgy , or Forms of Prayer , and Ceremonies , and that we hold Rebellious and Seditious Principles ; or at best , have such humours , foolish scruples and singularities , as render us fitter for the Common Goal , than the Church . Shall our silence contribute still to their deceit , and to the quieting of men's Consciences in all that is done against us , as if it were good service to God and the King ? Shall we have no pity on men's guilty Souls ? 

II On the other side , we have long by sad experience seen , that the misunderstanding of the Case , and perhaps partly of some of our judgements , hath led many of the People who are against Conformity , to overrun moderation , and the truth , and to run into unsound opinions and singularities , and to lay heavier charges on the Liturgy , and the Parish Churches , than there is cause for : And having once overrun us , they expect that we should follow them , and be ruled by them ; and if we do not , are ready to censure us as guilty of sinful Compliance and Conformity : It greatly concerneth us therefore , to keep some from such mistakes , to rectify others , to vindicate ourselves , and clear our Consciences , that we tell Men what our Nonconformity is not , if we may not tell them what it is ? 

I Our Nonconformity is not in holding that the Scriptures are a particular Rule or Determination of all the Circumstances of Church-government and Worship , ( as Time , Place , Utensils , Words , Methods , Metres , Tunes , Division of the Text into Chapters and Verses , Translations , helps by Notes , Written or Printed , Gestures , Habits , etc. ) But Nature and Scripture give us sufficient General Rules or Laws for all such ; as that they be done in Unity , Charity , to edification , decently and orderly , etc. which must be observed . 

II We hold , that when 〈◊〉 un 〈◊〉 etermined Circumstances are lawfully determined 〈◊〉 Authority , yea were it but by the Consent and 〈◊〉 of the Churches of Christ , or the present Conduct of their Pastors , the Assembly should yield Conformable Obedience , and avoid unnecessary Singularities . 

III We hold , that if those , to whom such Determinations belong , should mistake , and not do it in the best and profitablest manner ; yet ordinarily it is the People's duty to obey and hold Communion with that Church , so be it that nothing sinful 〈◊〉 e commanded them to do , and the error of the Determination be not such as overthroweth the Worship or End itself : Of which we have elsewhere fullier opened our sense ( In our judgement of things Indifferent . ) 

iv. We are against no Bishops or Church-government of God's appointment : We all are for an Episcopus Gregis ; and where there are many Chapels and Curates in a Parish , we are far from persuading them to deny such submission to the chief Pastor , as the Law requireth , and as God himself alloweth : Were Ignatius his Episcopacy among us , who tells us this , as the Note of the Church's Unity , that [ to every Church there is one Altar , and one Bishop with his fellow Presbyters and Deacons ] we should be far from persuading any to separate from it : Yea were it Cyprian's Measure of Episcopacy . Yea , there are some among us who have long professed themselves uncertain , whether such a large Episcopacy , as is but the same with the ordinary part of the Church-power of the Apostles and Evangelists , be not jure divino , such as should be still continued ; because , 1.  When Christ hath once settled a Form or Order of Government , a change must not be charged on him rashly , and without proof ; especially as made so suddenly : If the Affirmer prove the settlement , the Denier must prove the Change and Revocation . 2.  Because Christ promised to be with them to the end of the World , Mat. 28. 20. when he appointed them this universal , or indefinite Work. 3.  Because many others , as well as Apostles , had larger Circuits than particular Churches for their Work , ( as Silas , Silvanus , Apollo , Titus , and many more : ) And at their Reformation the Scots Visitors seemed such . That Men of extraordinary worth and gravity may Plant many Churches , and take the care of many , directing , exhorting , and admonishing the Pastors , or particular Bishops , not depriving those Pastors and Churches of the Power and Privileges granted them in Scripture , some of us do not deny . Government by the Word is an ordinary continuing Ordinance of God : But the Apostles extraordinary Work and Office ( to be Eye-witnesses and Ambassadors immediately sent , and endued with the extraordinary Measures of the Spirit ) these we believe they have no Successors in , because they were but for a time . 

And those of us that cannot grant so much , as is aforesaid , and all of us as to an Episcopacy which we think contrary to God's Word , can yet submit to much which we dare not approve of ; and as we take ourselves bound to obey all by what Names or Titles soever distinguished or dignified , who , circa sacra , as Officers of the King , do exercise any part of that Power of the Sword , by his Commission , which we acknowledge in the Oath of Supremacy ; so if any usurp more Power of the Keys than Christ alloweth them , we are not thereby disobliged from living peaceably in our places , nor allowed to raise Sedition , or use any unlawful means to re 〈◊〉 orm it ; though we cannot make a Vow and Covenant never to do any lawful thing , to alter and amend it . 

Much lesle is it true which M 〈◊〉 n of hard Faces have sometimes said , that we are against Bishops , because we cannot be Bishops ourselves . And they that tell Men that every Presbyter would be a Parish Pope , do sure think they speak to Men so silly as to be mocked by an undiscerned Contradiction : A Pope is the Universal Monarch of the Christian World , ( or all : ) Is a Parish all the World ? A Diocesan is the Sole Bishop with us of a Multitude of Churches . Is a Parish a Multitude of such Churches ? If a Man be against one Schoolmaster only over a thousand Schools , shall he be reproached because he is willing to teach one ? Is a King in each Kingdom as unreasonable a thing as a Papal Monarch , or a King of Kings , and of all the Earth ? If it be to the gain of Souls that we are deprived of this Parochial Episcopacy , we can easily bear it ; professing that we hold it far easier to be Governed , than to Govern.  

v. We judge not all Officers , circa sacra , unlawful which are made by Man : As some Circumstances are not particularly determined in Scripture , but left to Men , so are many of the Officers that must execute them . If the King appoint Church-magistrates to keep Peace and Order , to call Synods , and take such cognisance of Causes as belongs to him , or do any part of his work , as is afore said , we will obey them : And so of Churchwardens , Doorkeepers , Sextons , and such others , as some Churches of old made use of , so be it they usurp not any part of the Office which Christ hath appropriated to the Pastors of the Churches . 

VI We are not for Laymens' claim or exercise of the Power of the Keys , whether they be Lay-chancellors , or Magistrates or Lay-officers , or People : But we hold that the Keys of Christ's Church , that is , the Power of receiving in by Baptism , and of Guiding the People by holy Doctrine , and in holy Worship , and of Excommunicating and Absolving , are by Christ committed to the Pastors of the Churches . Though there is also an admonishing Power in Magistrates , and diverse sorts of Penalties , for sins against God , which they may inflict . And the voluntary execution of the Pastor's judgement , by holding or not holding Communion with others , is the People's part ; in which , as reasonable , they have a discerning judgement . 

VII . As to the case of Elders , we all hold that none should be proper Church Governors , by the said Keys , which are merely Laymen , and not Church Officers : And many of us hold that neither Christ nor his Apostles over appointed any Elders to Rule the Church , by the power of the Keys ( distinct from the Magistrates Government by the Sword , ) but only ordained Ministers of Christ , who have also authority to preach and administer both the Sacraments . However , we know that when many of these belonged to one Congregation , one that was the Chief Speaker ( usually the Bishop ) was w 〈◊〉 nt too preach , and the rest to be his Assistants , especially in private Care of Souls ; and those of us that think otherwise , that Christ or his Apostles made such a Church Office as Ruling Elders not-ordained , or that have no power of preaching or administering Sacraments , do not hold such essential to the Church , nor refuse to live in love and peace and Communion with the Churches that have no such Elders . And we all think that so small a difference should make no greater a breach among us . 

VIII . We are against the Excommunicating of Kings , and of other Magistrates , on whose Honour the well-governing and peace of the Kingdom doth depend , ( and are sorry to find some of our sharp Accusers of another mind : ) Our Reasons are , because the dishonouring of them is forbidden in the Fifth Commandment : And Positive Institutions , caeteris paribus , must give place to Moral Natural Laws : Rituals and matters of Order are no Duties , when they make against those Grand Duties which are their Ends , or those that are of fundamental or greater use . And this Christ hath often taught us , by sending the contrary minded to learn what this meaneth [ I will have mercy and not sacrifice , ] and bidding the unreconciled leave their Gift at the Altar , etc.  The End is to be preferred before the Means , which indeed are no Means when against the End. And Church-order is not to be pretended for disordering and confounding Kingdoms , or against the public good and safety . We judge that Bishop Bilson , Bishop Andrews , and such others , have truly heretofore determined , that some wicked impenitent Princes may be denied the Sacrament , but not defamed or dishonoured by a Sentence of Excommunication : Much lesle by any Foreign Usurper , or any Minister at home , that the Prince himself doth not by consent make the Guide of his Soul ; for no other but he that is called to give him the Sacrament if qualified , is the denier of it if he be unqualified ; unless as he is to do what he doth , by the advice and consent of Fellow Pastors . 

But the very use of Excommunication is to punish and reform men by dishonouring and shaming them ; therefore it is not to be used , where we owe such honour by the Fifth Commandment , to our Prince . 

Obj. 1  We are bid also to honour Father and Mother ; 2.  Yea to honour all men . 

Answ . 1.  We dare not justify any Pastor's public disgraceful excommunicating his own Father or Mother , unless where a public obligation for public good requireth it . 2.  But to both instances , we say that a greater end and more public good is to be preferred to a le 〈◊〉 s : And when a private man's honour is forfeited , we cannot give him that which he hath cast away , and God will penally take away till he repent . But when the public order and welfare ( which is above all personal good ) obliges us to honour Magistrates , a subordinat 〈◊〉 Law will not suspend it . Public Excommunication is an Act of Government , to be exercised on the Governed for the Ends of Government . But for a Prelate or Priest , or any other , to do this on his Governors ( though of another rank ) crosseth the Ends of Government : Nor are Subjects so to be tempted to contemn their Rulers , lest they come to think , as Bellarmine and such Papists , that Infidels are not to Govern Christians , nor to be tolerated in their Government ; or as their very Religion teacheth them , Council . Later . c. 3. sub Innoc. 3. that when Princes are excommunicated , they may be deposed by the Pope ; or as their learnedest Doctor's say , that they are no Kings , and to kill them is not to kill the King : See the Testimonies of this cited at large , and expressly , by H. Fowlis in his Book of Popish Treasons . 

If ever any protestants Episcopal , Presbyterian , or Independents , were or be of another mind , ( for the Excommunicating of Kings or Chief Rulers ) that 's nothing to us , who shall neither live nor die by the Faith or Opinion of others : But we should so much the rather here disown it . 

IX . It is none of our judgement , that when men are excommunicated ( by Pope , Prelates , Presbyters , or People , who are the four Pretenders to that Power ) the Magistrate must be their Lictor or Executioner , or must further punish men by the Sword , merely , eo nomine , because they are excommunicate , or because they reconcile not themselves to the Church , by penitence and obedience ; or because the Pope , or Prelate , or Priests , deliver up the excommunicate to him to be punished , or threaten him if he will not do it . The Civil Ruler may punish the same men for the same Crimes , but upon their own exploration and judgement of the Cause , and not as mere Hangmen that must needs execute the judgement of other Judges . Their own Conscience must be satisfied , and they must know what they do , and why ; else to how many base and bloody offices the factious worldly Clergy may oblige them , the Papal Kingdom hath long given men too sad a proof . 

And we must profess , that we are fully persuaded , that we have good Reason to conclude , that so near a Prosecution by the Civil Power , as is the imprisoning and undoing of persons Excommunicate , merely because they stand Excommunicate , and are not absolved as Penitents , hath not a few nor small incommodities Ecclesiastical . 1.  So great a Dominion in the Clergy hath done much to corrupt the Sacred Office , and make men ( naturally proud ) unmeet for the humble Services of the Gospel . 2.  And it breedeth in the People a distaste and hatred of the Clergy , as if they were the grievous Wolves that devour the Flock in Sheep's Clothing , and bear not Grapes and Figs , but wear Thorns and Thistles to p 〈◊〉 ick and hurt them ; and causeth their Exhortations to be the more unsuccessful . 3.  It seemeth to dishonour the Discipline instituted by Christ , as if the Keys of his Church ●●re of no more signification , than the Crown of Thorn● 〈◊〉 Reed with which he was derided , and could do nothing without the Princes Sword. 4.  It contradicteth the experience of above 300 years , when Church Discipline was exercised more effectually than it is now , and that not only without the Sword of the Magistrate , but also against his will and opposition : Yea , it was many a hundred years more , after Emperors were Christian , before the Keys were ever thus seconded by the Sword ; and had not the Donatists , by inhuman assaulting the Orthodox , provoked the Churches and Magistrates , it had been like to have been long before the Sword had been drawn against Heretics at all . 5.  And that which much moveth us is , that it greatly frustrateth the use of the Keys ▪ or Church Discipline , by obscuring the use and efficacy of them : For who can tell whether they do any thing or nothing to that man's seeming Repentance , who must lie in Goal and be undone , unless he will say that he repeneth ? Though the Church must take up with outward Professions , as not knowing the heart , yet must they be voluntary and credible Professions . 6.  And thus how avoidable must the Church be corrupted , when its Communicants are such as choose rather to be in the Church than in the Goal , and all those are thought worthy of its Privileges , who had rather say [ we repent ] than be made Beggars : Whenas in the ancient Churches none had its Communion that did not desire it , and beg for it , though it cost them dear in the world . 7.  And thus Christ's great and precious Gifts seem exposed to contempt , while they are forced upon the Refusers by ways of violence . If the Church be made a Prison , and men be driven into it and locked up , the Place will hardly prove them Christians . 8.  And we fear it will misrepresent Christ's Laws and Covenant-terms to the world , while Christ saith , that none can be his Disciples that do not ( by consent and resolution ) take up the Cross , and forsake all , and follow him , in hope of a reward in Heaven , ( Luke 14. 26. 29 , 30. 33 , 34. ) And this course seemeth to tell men , that if they had but rather be in the Church , than among Rogues and Beggars in the Goal , they shall have Christ , pardon , and life eternal , given and sealed up to them particularly in the holy Sacrament . As if Christ were the Cross-maker , and the Cross to be born by his Enemies only , and not Christ but sin were served by forsaking temporal felicity . 9  And we fear lest it tend to deceive men's Souls , by giving them all the sealed Grant of forgiveness and salvation , who can but rather endure to take the Sacrament , and say I repent , than be undone . 

We doubt not but there is a time for just punishment of sinners : But we read not , that Christ sent men to preach Repentance by any such motives , nor to offer his Blood and Mercy on terms so low , nor to any but desirous Volunteers : And with what confidence or comfort can a Minister deliver the Sacrament to such ? 

All which considered , we are so far from desiring to subdue Kings and Rulers to be the Executioners of the Clergy , and the Servants of their worldly Interest , Pride , or Passions , that we heartily wish that Church Discipline might be left to operate alone , & valeat quantum val 〈◊〉 re potest , and that Church Privileges might be given to none but desirers , and voluntary accepters , and none might be crammed or drenched with the Body and Blood of Christ , but all earnestly invited , and by loving importunity compelled to come in : And that Magistrates may judge and punish Vice , in their proper court , and proper way . 

X. We hold it not unlawful to take Oaths , and make Covenants , Subscriptions , or Declarations of things lawful , when Authority commands us ; yea , we hold Oaths of Fidelity to the Sovereign to be needful ; and are the loather to swear Allegiance to any inferior Officers , or to swear never to endeavour any alteration of them , lest we seem to make them equally necessary and fixed as the King ; and to give them any of his Prerogatives , when they are his Officers , whom he hath power to alter . 

XI . We readily subscribe the Doctrine of Faith and Sacraments contained in the 39 Articles , and differ not therein from the Church of England , that we know of . Though our Religion is only ( objectively ) God's Word , ( as to the Essentials , the Sacramental Covenant , expounded in the Creed , the Lords Prayer and Decalogue , and integrally the sacred Scriptures , ) and therefore if there be any fault in the 39 Articles , it is no fault in our Religion , ( which is confessed to be all true by Papists themselves ; ) yet as our writings , and Sermons , and Speeches , are the expressions of our subjective Religion , so the Confessions of Churches are eminently such ; being useful to satisfy other Churches of our sincerity , and to regulate or limit the Teachers , that by weakness or error are apt to deliver their mistakes , or to oppose the Truth . And though there be some expressions in the Articles , the Liturgy , yea in the Creed called Athanasius' , which we think not accurate , but liable to an ill interpretation , yet when our Consciences tell us that it was truth which was intended , and words are not natural , immutable , but arbitrary signs of the Speakers mind , we are far from affecting to be peevishly or unreasonably quarrelsome or scrupulous , but are willing to overlook infirmity and unfitness of expression , when we see that we are not to own Untruths . 

XII . We much approve of the Method of the Church Catechism , as it first openeth the Essentials of Christianity in the Baptismal Covenant , and then the Exposition of it in the Creed , Decalogue , and Lords Prayer , and then the use of the confirming Sacrament the Lord's Supper : Though we are persuaded , that it needeth more explication and some correction . 

XIII . We are taught by Christ and his Apostles using of the Septuagint , that it is lawful , when the People's usage and acquaintance with it doth render it most edifying to them , to use a defective faulty Translation of Gods own Word , and to call this God's Word , as long as it sufficently expresseth the Doctrine , which is the matter and main sense . And that we may hold Communion with Churches that publicly and privately use such Translations , and that have many other faults in their Doctrine , Discipline , and Worship ; though we cannot justify the least of them , by our professed Assent and Consent , nor make a Covenant that we will never endeavour to alter or amend them . We are apt enough to let sin alone , and not to amend any thing amiss in ourselves and others , so far as sin remaineth in us ( it being a self-de 〈◊〉 ending evil , ) and therefore are unwilling to add to our badness , nor do we need a Law to bind us never to repent or amend , or never to help others in such a case to do it . 

FOURTEEN . We have in a peculiar Explication of our judgement , not only disclaimed , but sufficiently depressed , that unruly Opinion falsely charged on us by some , viz. [ That Things Lawful or Indifferent become Unlawful when commanded by Lawful Authority . ] Though we hold it unlawful to encourage and strengthen Traitors and Usurpers against Christ or the King , by voluntary Swearing or performing such Obedience to them , even in licitis & honestis , as seemeth to own their Usurpation . 

xv. How far we think the Magistrates Laws bind us to things Scandalous , or Evil and Hurtful by Accident , yea by the Weakness of others , we are prepared to open in a distinct Profession by itself . 

XVI . We are far from condemning all Forms of Prayer , and Public Liturgies , as unlawful , ( of which we have His Majesty's Testimony , in his Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs ; ) much more are we far from condemning all the ancient and present Churches of Christ that have used such , or yet use them , throughout the Christian world : And yet farther are we from separating from them on that account , ( for using Liturgies , ) and from encouraging such a Separation . Yea we commonly use a stinted Liturgy ourselves , at least the Psalms read and sung ; and we hold it lawful to use such as are invented by men , that are no Prophets ; seeing we are commanded to use Psalms , and Hymns , and Spiritual Songs , ( which confineth us not only to Scripture words ; ) and all men have not the skill to make Hymns ex tempore ; much lesle would all the Assembly , ex tempore , break forth into the same words : Therefore those that are used by all , must be invented by some : And Ministers with us do ordinarily impose their own invented words on all the Congregation , who must follow them ; as our Metres and Tunes of Psalms are imposed . 

XVII . We think it not unlawful to use as much of the English Liturgy , as we consented to use , when by his Majesty's Commission some of us treated about the reformation , or alteration of it ; viz. in such Assemblies where the People's incapacity maketh not such use of it more hurtful than helpful to their edification , and the comely concordant worshipping of God : Much lesle do we think it unlawful for ourselves , or the People , in this case to join in the reverend and serious use of it with others . We find that even the old Nonconformists ( such as Cartwright , Hildersham , Knewstube , Dr. Jo. Reignolds , Bradshaw , Paget , Ball , etc. ) petitioned for a Reformation , but not an Abolition of it , and wrote and preached against separating from it , or for it , from the Churches that used it ; and many of them not only used much or most of it themselves , but also persuaded to the use of it , and answered largely the Separatists Arguments against such use . And we join with Mr. Ball , and other of them , in thanking God that England hath a more reform Liturgy , than most of the Churches in the World ; and we would not seem to use it when we do not , but do it ( as aforesaid ) in the serious devotion and fervour of our Souls : Nor would we peevishly make any thing in it worse than it is , but would put the best construction on each part of it , that true Reason will justify or allow . 

XVIII . We are far from judging the Parish Ministers to be no true Ministers of Christ , or the Parish Churches no true Churches , or judging it unlawful to hold Communion with them : But if there be any called Ministers or Priests , of these following sorts , we take them for no true Ministers of Christ , ziz . 1.  If by insufficiency they are uncapable of Teaching the necessary parts of Christianity , and Guiding the Church accordingly in the Public Worship of God. 2.  If they are Heretics , denying any of these essential parts . 3.  If they are malignant Opposers of the practice of them : And in a word , If they are such , through incapacity , as are like to do more harm than good . 

XIX . In several Customs ( freely , not by constraint , ) used in many ancient Churches , and in several practices of several Churches of these Times , we find that which we would not by Oaths , or Subscriptions , or Covenants , approve , but with they were reform , and that they had never been used ; when yet we do not for such things dishonour and reproach such Churches , nor inveigh against them in our preaching to diminish their due esteem ; much lesle disclaim them as no Churches of Christ ; but love , and honour them ; and live peaceably under many faults which we cannot reform in the places where we live : So be it no sin be put upon ourselves , we can hold Communion with those that have diverse sins , or faults , in their Ministrations ; not as with their sin , but with their Church in worship , notwithstanding the sin , so it corrupt not God's worship so far as that he himself rejecteth it : For no Man is sinless in his best performance . 

xx. Though the Pastors hold any tolerable errors personally , and though such are usually uttered in their Ministration , and though they be inserted in their Liturgies , so that we may expect to hear them ; yea , uttered as in that Church's name ; we hold not all this sufficient cause to warrant our separation from that Church : For all Churches consist of Men , and all Men are faulty and imperfect ; and such as the Men are , such we may expect their works should be , notwithstanding the Divine assistance : And to separare from all faulty Churches and Worship , is to separate from all the World ; and allow all the World to separate from us . 

XXI . If 〈◊〉 true Church deny us Communion , unless we will commit some sin , or omit some necessary duty ; though we cannot be locally present in such cases , nor approve what they so do , yet we shall not therefore renounce them as no Churches ; but lamenting their sin , and their denying us their Communion on just Terms , we shall continue the Union and Communion of Faith and Love , and be present in spirit , though corporally absent , desiring a part in their Prayers , and owning all that God disowneth not . 

XXII . We hold that no Christians must be disjoined , or separated in any of the seven Points of Union required by the Holy Ghost , Eph. 4. 3 , 4 , 5 , 6. 1.  One Body , ( the Catholic Church headed by Christ : ) 2.  One Spirit , ( the Holy Ghost : ) 3.  One Hope of our Calling , ( Remission , Adoption , and the Heavenly Glory : ) 4.  One Lord ( Jesus Christ : ) 5.  One Faith , ( the Essentials of Christianity believed : ) 6.  One Baptism , ( or Baptismal Covenant with God the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost : ) 7.  One God and Father of all , who is above all , and through all , and in us all ; of whom , and to whom , and through whom are all things . 

XXIII . Though we are not satisfied of the lawfulness of using the transient Image of the Cross , as a Dedicating Sign and Symbol of Christianity , so much Sacramental ( much lesle to refuse from Baptism and Christendom all Christians Infants , unless they will have them so crossed , no more than if a Crucifix were so imposed and used : ) yet do we not condemn all use of either Cross , or Crucifix : Nor do we presume censoriously to reproach and dishonour the ancient Christians , who , living among Pagans' that derided Christ Crucified , did show them , by oft using this sign , that they were not ashamed of the Cross : And though we find that they used more Rites and significant devised Signs and Ceremonies , than we think they should have done , yet we judge it our Duty to love and honour their Memorial : Nor do we take all Rites to be sinful that are significant . 

XXIV . We hold not all the use of Images , even the Images of holy persons , to be unlawful : Historical and memorative use we commonly allow , as the English Geneva Bible showeth by many Pictures : We condemn not them that have Scripture persons and History Painted on their Walls , or on the very Bricks that adorn their Chimneys ; nor that use a Skelleton or Deaths-head ; or that by these are minded of Mortality or the Life to come , and so make a holy use of them , ( as good Men should do of all lawful things ; which therefore are pure and sanctified to them . ) 

XXV . We hold not a Gown , or other mere distinctive Garment for Ministers , to be unlawful , in which , saith the Canon , no holiness is placed ; any more than to Judges , Lawyers , or Philosophers . And some of us hold a Surplice rather to be used , than the Ministry forsaken : And those that think otherwise , think not the matter of so much weight , as to alienate them from Love or Communion with those that use it : For we pretend not to so much perfection , as to be all just of a mind and measure of Knowledge in all things , of no greater importance than this : Nor would we silence faithful Ministers for a Surplice . 

XXVI . Though we greatly dislike the common use of Godfathers' , as they undertake that , as Sole-promisers for the Child , which they never signify credibly the least purpose to perform , and the Parents are excluded from entering their own Children into Covenant with God , and must not speak one covenanting or promising word ; no , nor be urged to be present , etc.  Yet we refuse not the use of such Sureties or Sponsors in Baptism , as are but Seconds to the Parents and only attest the Parent's credibility , and undertake to take care of the children's Education , in case the Parents either apostatise or die ; nor yet such as are Adopters of the Children , and take them to them as their own , and so have the right of disposing of them , and covenanting in their names and stead . Though yet we conform not to the denying of Christendom to the Children of all godly Parents , that either cannot get such Godfathers' , or will not , but offer to enter their own Children into that Covenant . 

XXVII . Many of us hold it lawful to communicate Kneeling , in the reception of the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ : And those of us that think so , and those of us that think otherwise , take it not for such a matter as should hinder Christian Love , Concord , Unity , and Peace ; or allow Men to despise , condemn , or excommunicate one another : But all detest that cruelty that dare cast out the worthy Members of Christ and his Church from Communion , for their difference in that gesture . 

XXVIII . We all hold that God must be orderly and decently worshipped with the Body , as well as spiritually with the Mind : And that reverend gestures and behaviour are fit , not only to express mental reverence to God , but also to excite it in ourselves and others . And that such slovenly , rude , and undecent behaviour , as seemeth to signify profaneness and contempt , or to tempt others thereto , is no small sin , whatever men intent by it . 

XXIX . We all hold that Preaching , Prayer , or Sacraments , should not be made ridiculous or contemptible , by the Ministers incongruous , light , or otherwise unmeet and uncomely words ; nor by tautologies , and such an unmeet stile as tendeth to disaffect the Hearers : ( Though that Curiosity , which consisteth in pedantic , light , and frothy Speech , unsuitable to the Hearers edification , we dislike . ) And OH that God would raise up enough such for his Service , in the Church and World , as are able to express true wisdom , holiness , and zeal , in words beseeming the most Holy Majesty , and the holy Things of which they speak . But yet we judge that various Auditories should have various Styles , though none but clear , and spiritual , and serious : As a labouring poor man will choose a great piece of Brown Bread , before a little piece of Manchet , when idle tender persons will choose otherwise . 

XXX . We are so far from holding it unlawful to use the Creed , and Commandments , and Lords Prayer , as some accuse us , that we take them to be the Summaries of the Christian Religion , as to matter of Belief , Desire , and Worship ; which the Church should use and profess accordingly , and should never be forgtoten . 

XXXI . We are so far from being against Catechising , as some have accused us , as that we take it to be a most needful thing , and no small part of that work which both Ministers and Parents should perform . 

XXXII . We are far from opposing that sort of Confirmation , which consisteth in the solemn transition of persons out of the state of Infant Communion into that of the Adult , by their solemn intelligent owning that Covenant with God , which they entered into by others in their Infancy . The Reasons of which more than one of us have long ago publicly given to the World , ( Mr. Hanmer , Mr. Baxter . ) And the want of which we conceive is a great cause of the pollution of the Church , and of the increase of Anabaptiss , who are scandalised at the omission of it , and the turning it into a Ceremony or Formality . 

XXXIII . We hold it a Duty for all Ministers in their Administrations of Baptism , the Lords Supper , Absolution , and in their Speeches of the dead at Burials , to go as far in charitable hopeful expressions , as Reason will allow ; and to speak and judge of men according to their own intelligent Professions , not rendered incredible by proved contrary Expressions , or notorious contrariety of Practice ; as being no searchers of men's hearts ourselves : And where Discipline is truly exercised , such words are meet , as otherwise are not tolerable . So that if we conform not to the Liturgy in our Administration of any of these Ordinances of Christ , and if we dare not pronounce of all the open Atheists , Infidels , Heretics , Schismatics , Rebels , Perjured , Murderers , Thiefs , Adulterers , Drunkards , etc. who made not away themselves , and were not unbaptised or excommunicate , that [ God of his great mercy hath taken to himself the Souls of these dear brethren , ] nor give thanks for [ delivering them out of the miseries of this sinful World , ] nor pray to rest in Christ [ ●is our hope is this our Brother doth , ] etc. it is not because we deny any of this before granted , but because we dare not renounce the Gospel , that saith , [ He that believeth not shall be damned , ] and [ without holiness none shall see God , ] and [ Except ye repent ye shall all perish ; ] and because we are loath to preach to men all our lives , that which we shall contradict at men's burial , and tempt the ungodly to presumption and damnation . 

XXXIV . Many of us hold it lawful to keep Anniversary Days of Thanksgiving , in commemoration of the great Mercies of God to his Church , by the Holy Doctrine , Labour , Miracles , Lives , and Sufferings of the Apostles , and most famous promoters of the Faith ; so that Superstition and prohibited Creature-worship be sufficiently avoided . And those of us that scruple such Days of man's Institution , yet take not this for any other than a tolerable difference among us . 

XXXV . We are not against such sort of reading the sound parts of the Apocrypha , as we may do by other good Books , sufficiently distinguished from other Scriptures , and used in due time and place ; though we conform not so far as to declare our Assent and Consent to the use of the Calendar , Prescript , or Directory , which requireth them to be read in the Mornings , from Septemb. 27. and 28. till Novemb. 24. even Bell and the Dragon , Susanna , Tobit , when as the Vulgar understand not the word Apocrypha sufficiently , to distinguish them from the sacred Scriptures , when they are equally called the Lessons , and read in the same order . And we are confirmed in this part of our Nonconformity by the Articles of Religion , which discard the Apocrypha , and by the Learned Treatise of the late Bishop Cousins , who hath fully proved that the ancient Churches received not those Books into the Canon , and by many Doctors of the Church of England that charge them with Untruths : Some of us have seen the Writing ( as on good reason is supposed ) of a present Learned worthy Bishop , who showeth that the words of the Angel in Tobit are a Lie , who said that [ he was the Son of Ananie of the Tribe of Naphtali : ] And that so is his saying , [ that the smoke of a Fish's heart will drive away all Devils , that they shall never return ; when Christ tells us of some that go not out but by Prayer and Fasting . ] 

XXXVI . We are far from designing any abasement of the Clergy , nor do we deny , or draw others to deny , any due Reverence and Obedience to them . And though we know that the bare Title and Office will never preserve sufficient respect , for the honour of the Clergy , and the success of their work , without competent qualifications and labours of the persons ; yet would we rather hide than open or reproach the faults of such as are tolerable in that sacred Office , and would do our best for their work sake , to promote the esteem even of those that differ from us , and of some that persecute us . We know that the People are exhorted , to know those that labour among them , and are over them in the Lord , and to esteem them highly in love , for their work sake , 1 Thess . 5. 12 , 13.  And to obey them that have the Rule ( or Guidance ) of them , and to submit themselves , Heb. 13. 17. 24.  And that the Elders that Rule well are worthy of double honour , especially they that labour in the Word and Doctrine , 1 Tim. 5. 17.  We that take it for our Duty to honour all men , and submit ourselves to one another , would not deny any due honour to any of the Clergy that have any preeminence , either in age , grace , gifts , or by the Magistrate's appointment , as his Officers ( as aforesaid , ) or any way given them by Christ : We take it not for a Privilege to be from under Government . 

XXXVII . Our Nonconformity consisteth not in denying a National , Provincial , or other Church Form of man's invention and institution : On these Suppositions : 

1.  So it be presupposed that there is somewhat of Divine Institution predetermined by Christ and his Spirit in the Apostles , ( that is , 1.  That there be such Doctrine , worship , and Discipline as he hath commanded : 2.  That there be such Pastors to exercise them , whose Office he hath described : 3.  That there be such stated Congregations or Societies in which they shall be used , even Neighbour Christians associated for Personal Communion therein . 4.  That all these Churches enjoy the Privileges granted them by Christ , and live in love , peace , and concord , and hold such just correspondence as is necessary thereto , and to the Common End and Good : All this is of Divine appointment . ) 

2.  So that these Divine Institutions be not violated by Human , or by the power of man  

3.  So that Human Churches be not made equal and coordinate to the Divine , much lesle superior , and superordinate ; as if they were to Christ's instituted Churches , what a Kingdom is to a City , or a Regiment to a Troop , and Christ's Churches were but similar parts of the Human Churches , that must rule them . But as the King is Episcopus exterior , or the Governor of the Churches so far as the Sword is to be used ; so , circa sacra , we have before said , that he may make his own Officers , and consequently Provinces for them , and Orders of their exercise : And the Churches in his Dominions may be so called one National Church , as he is the exterior Civil Governor of them all by the Sword , which indeed is but to be a Religious or Christian Kingdom ; as also , ab accident , as these many Churches are under one Christian ( yea were he an Infidel ) King ; and as hereby they have the advantage of fraternal association and correspondency for concord . But proper Denominations are from the Essential Form.  

XXXVIII . It is no part of our Nonconformity to be against the due Use or Authority of Councils , or Synods of the Clergy . We hold , that when one is cast out of one Church for a cause belonging to the Cognisance of many , many may have occasion to take Cognisance of it : And the edification of each other , the satisfactory Debate of Difficulties , the preservation of mutual Love , Peace , and Concord , may make Synods to be useful . But yet we hold that the mayor Vote of Bishops in a Council are not thereby the proper Governors of the minor dissenting part , nor of the absent Bishops ; but that Councils are for Counsel and Concord , and not for direct Regiment of each other , ( though together and asunder the Pastors are all Governors of the Flock . ) And some of us have long ago publicly proved , that Councils were called General at first , but with respect to the Dominions or Empire of one Prince , and not as if they were Universal as to all the Christian World ; and that absolutely Universal Councils never were , or aught , or can , or ever will be called ; and that to pretend that a Papal or Imperial General Council is the Universal Lawgiver of the World , and that they have a promise of Infallibility in what ever they determine , and that we receive our Faith in Christ upon their Infallibility given by him , ( and so we must know that Christ maketh them Infallible before we can believe that he is Christ . ) These and such other nonsense cheats which some are now agitating , are fit to delude none but the grossly ignorant , that are prepared for deceit . 

THIRTY-NINE . Yet we deny not , but that God having first bound us to Unity and Concord as far as we can attain , ( with loving forbearance in the rest , ) when a lawful Synod or Council hath determined of a way of Concord , on lawful Terms , in matters under their Power , there is an Obligation on all the particular Members , to forbear breaking that Union , and violating those lawful Terms of Concord : For where there is not a Governing Law , there may be an Obliging Contract , or Consent . 

And whereas even the Papists now usually teach that even a Councils Decrees bind not the Churches , at least those that had no Delegates , till by actual reception they consent , be it known to the World , that on these Terms the Nonconformists in London seem to have some excuse , if it had been only Indifferent things that the late Convocation had imposed on them : For when the Clergy met to choose Clarks for the Convocation for London , ( at Sion-colledge , ) the mayor Vote choose Mr. Calamy and Mr. Baxter , ( whom the Bishop of London , according to his Power , did reject ; ) so that the City of London neither hath , nor ever had one Clerk of their own choosing in this Convocation which altered the Liturgy ; but the Dignitaries , and the two Clarks chosen by the exterior parts of the Country , were the only persons hence accepted ( that ever we heard of , or could learn : ) And surely our after-consent will hardly be alleged . And London is no inconsiderable part of England . 

XL. We refuse not the Renunciation of the solemn Vow and Covenant , as if we thought it bound us unto any disloyalty , Sedition , or other sin : For we are ready to profess , that it so obliges no Man : It cannot make a Sin to be a Duty or no Sin , nor a Duty to our Superiors to be no Duty ; nor disoblige us from any part of our due Obedience to the King. Nay , we judge that we must not make ourselves a Religion or Law by our own Vows , or bind ourselves to any thing but what we are bound to antecedently by God ; and so our Vows must be but secondary Obligations : And these being our own thoughts , we must needs hold accordingly , that this solemn Vow doth bind as to nothing , but what God doth bind us to antecedently himself ; and what would be our Duty had we never taken it : And therefore should we renounce this Vow , we should still take ourselves bound by God himself to do all the good that in it was Vowed . Whether the Vow of a thing indifferent bind or not , we are not determining ; but as we hold that no such thing should be Vowed , so we declare that it is none of our present case , as is aforesaid . 

XLI . We are so far from refusing the Oxford Oath , or the Subscription , upon any disloyal or rebellious Principles , that we shall hereafter adjoin such a Profession of this Subject , as shall suffice with all Men of common humanity , and impartiality , to justify our Principles of Loyalty , against Malice itself . 

And if yet Malice will go on to keep open our Divisions , and keep us under Odium and unjust Suspensions , and provoke men to forbid us to preach Christ's Gospel , by talking of the late Wars , and charging all on the Nonconformists , we shall now only crave their just Answer to these few Questions following . 

Q. 1.  Are they willing that so many of the English Nonconformists shall have leave to preach Christ's Gospel freely , as never had any hand in the Wars ? If they will procure us this , we are confident that the rest that meddled with the Wars are so few , and so selfdenying , that they will thankfully accept of this liberty for their brethren , though they be silenced , or banished themselves . 

Q. 2.  Was it for matter of War that near two Thousand Ministers were ejected , or silenced , 1662. ? or for something else ? Was this the cause that Mr. Martin of Weeden , that lost an Arm in the King's Army and War , could not have a day abated him in the Common Goal at Warwick , when he preached as a Nonconformist ? And many other Instances we may give . 

Q. 3.  Did ever any of us that now address ourselves to you , go farther in our Principles than Bishop Bilson did , even in his excellent Book of Christian subjection ? we detested all that went beyond him in his Doctrine of Resistance : Or did any of us ever go near so far as your famous R. Hooker in his first and his eighth Book of Eccles . Polity , ( published long ago , and again by Bishop Gauden , and Dedicated to the King , ) whose over Popular Principles one of us , long ago , at large confuted : And were they silenced for this ? 

Q. 4.  We humbly crave them that remember , and knew the persons , to bethink them , whether , 1.  Most of of the Parliament , when the War began : 2.  Most of the Westminster Assembly , when they met : 3.  Most of the Earl of Essex's Colonels , and chief Officers : 4.  Most of the Lord Lieutenants of the Militia : 5.  Most of the Parliaments Mayor Generals , in the Earl of Essex's time : 6.  Most of the Sea Captains , in the Earl of Warwick's time : We say , Whether most of these ( we think ten to one , and in some Instances twenty to one ) were not Conformists ? As sure as Archbishop Abbots was , and all the Bishops , save six , in his days ; on whom Doctor Heyling layeth the cause of our Divisions . 

Q. 5.  And is it just , that all the Conformists be therefore made odious , and all the Conformable Ministers silenced for these Conformists sakes , even such as never had a hand in the business ? 

Q. 6.  If the War had been raised only by Nonconformists , yet why should a thousand or 1400 Ministers now , that were never proved guilty of any Wars , be silenced and ruined for other men's Actions ; any more than the Conformists for the Archbishop of York's , who was a Commander for the Parliament ? 

Q. 7.  Why should no other penalty serve in this case , but silencing us ? to the loss or hazard of the innocent people . Is silencing us our suffering most , or the People's ? If half the Bakers , Brewers , and Country Farmers had been in those Wars , is there no way to punish them , but to put down their Trade , and forbidding them to bring Provision to the Markets ? Would not punishing the innocent , as Drunkards or Whoremongers are punished , satisfy you ? Nor any thing but keeping them from preaching the Doctrine of Salvation ? And that when the Fire consumed the Churches , and when in many Parishes the tenth part of the People have no Church to go to ? 

Q. 8.  Do you think that the Devil and the Papists had rather we were silenced , or not ? Are they pleased with well-doing , and with that which promoteth the Protestant interest , and man's salvation ? And hath the Protestant Religion been secured and advantaged by our usage ? 

Q. 9  If it be that we Preach worse than others , or Preach Sedition , or unsound Doctrine , why are not we accused of it , and judged upon proof ? And why are we not suffered rather to Preach publicly , where witness may be had , than driven into corners , where Sedition or Heresy may be hid by those that Preach it ? 

Q. 10.  If you say that our preaching is needless , Is not your own then as needless , if you preach the same Gospel ? And must you have Lordships , great maintenance , reverence , honour , and obedience , for needless preaching ? And when some Parishes have ten thousand , some twenty thousand , some thirty thousand , some it is thought fourscore thousand Souls , when three thousand cannot come to hear in the Church , why is Preaching any more needful to those three thousand than to all the rest ? or to four persons in a Village , than to thousands in Cities ? When our Preaching and other Ministration ceaseth to be notoriously needful , we profess ourselves joyfully willing to cease : Our Flesh had rather have ease , and a gainfuller Trade of life , than spending-labour , with poverty , reviling , scorn , and imprisonments . 

XLII . To conclude , As far as we are able to understand the most learned , sober , judicious Conformists , by their own words to us , and their writings , they differ not at all from us about the matter itself , which we deny Conformity to , but confess it to be unlawful , ( as to the hardest points of the imposed Subscriptions , Oaths , and Declarations , and Covenants ; ) but they only take the words in such a sense , in which we ourselves could take them , were we persuaded that it were indeed the true meaning of them . And do they that are as much as we against that sense which we disown , and agree with us in the matter , deserve liberty , honour , and preferment , for otherwise interpreting the words of the Law , which the Lawgivers themselves will not interpret ? And doth our supposition that the Lawmakers mean properly as they speak , deserve scorn , silencing , and Goals , from them that will not expound them to us ? The righteous God will be Judge between us . 

For instance , 1.  By [ Assent ] in the Declaration required , we understand [ Believing it to be true . ] But the Conformists that we speak of , understand only [ a Belief that I may use it . ] 

2.  By [ all and every thing contained in the Book ] we suppose is meant [ all and every thing indeed : ] But they say , only the Forms to be used are meant , and many other things in the Book not meant . 

We find after named [ Unfeigned Assent and Consent unto , and Approbation of the said Book , and to the use of all the Prayers , Rites , and Ceremonies , Forms and Orders therein contained and prescribed , ] we think here Approbation and Assent are more than Consent to use ; and we think that the use of all the Orders is more than the use of the Forms : We think that no Word in the Book was intended to be useless , and that the Doctrines , Calendars , ( even that untrue one to find out Easter-day ) Rubrics , and Directories , have each their proper use . We suppose that the foregoing words of the Use , are the End , and the Form of the Declaration is the Means to secure that Use as the End , and that the Means hath more in than the End.  

3.  Some of them suppose , that denying Christendom to Christians Children , for want of Crossing , or Godfathers , and denying Communion to true Christians that receive not kneeling , are none of the Orders to be used : But we think otherwise . 

4.  Some of them think , that [ Admitting none to the holy Communion , till they be Confirmed , or desirous to be Confirmed , ] though it be the very words , is none of the Orders which they Consent to use ; ( and we never knew any use it by any trial of men's desires : ) But we think that nothing in the Book is intelligible , if such plain passages are not . 

5.  Some of them by the words at Burial [ that thank God for taking to himself the Soul of this our dear Brother , out of the miseries , etc. ) understand not his Salvation , but his going out of this World : But we think otherwise . 

6.  When only [ the unbaptised , self murderers , and excommunicate ] are there excepted , some say , all others are meant that aught to be excommunicate ; and so every Priest is made the Judge who should be Excommunicate : But we think , that Exceptio particularis firmat regulam in non exceptis . 

7.  They think that the Words in the Canon [ that Nothing in the three Books is contrary to the Word of God , ] are meant with exceptions as to [ Nothing ] or to [ Contrariety : ] But we take [ Nothing ] for [ Nothing , ] and [ Contrary ] for [ Contrary . ] 

8.  Some of them say , that the Church being the Maker of these Impositions , we are to take them in the Church's sense , which the Bishops may signify . But we think , that we must take them in the sense of the King and Parliament , as the Lawmakers ; and that no Church or Bishops can alter our Religion , or Articles , or Subscriptions , by an Expository Power . 

9  Some of them think , that the words [ on any pretence whatsoever ] in the Subscription , have exceptions : But we know not how any words can be more exclusive of exceptions . 

10.  Some of them think , that [ by any Commissioned ] is meant only [ Lawfully Commissioned , ] and so Subjects are left to judge of the Lawfulness : We find there no such Limitation or Exposition . 

11.  Some of them say , that by [ the Government of the Church , not to be altered ] is not meant the Lay-chancellors use of the Keys : But we think , that their actual Government is the Government actually . 

12.  Some of them say , that by [ no change or alteration ] is meant only of the Essence of Episcopacy : We take [ no alteration ] for [ no alteration . ] 

13.  Some of them say , that by [ not endeavouring ] is meant only [ not seditiously , or by ill means : ] We think , That ubi DEX non distinguit , non est distinguendum . 

14.  Some of them think that no Law or words imposed must be expounded contrary to God's Law , or any former Law , or to the king 's or People's rights . But , 1.  That is to suppose that men cannot contradict themselves or God , or do unjustly . 2.  And than whatever Oaths men put on us we may take them , were the words never so false or impious , because the meaning must still be judged good . 

15.  Some say that we must put the best sense on imposed Oaths , and Covenants , and Subscriptions , that the words can be subdued to : We think that they must be taken in the sense of the Lawmakers , which is to be judged of by the usual meaning of their words , unless themselves do otherwise expound them . 

And so in many other Instances , the Conformists say that they would not Conform themselves , if they understood the words as we do . 

Seeing then that all these worthy Conformists before mentioned do confess , that if the words of the Laws be properly to be understood , and not with their limitations , than the Conformists are in the wrong , and the Nonconformists in the right ; we conclude with these few Questions . 

Q. 1.  Whether we owe not that honour to our Lawmakers , as to suppose that they are able , and willing , to speak intelligibly ? 

Q. 2.  Whether they would have men left as to the Oath of Allegiance , and all other Oaths and Laws , to subdue the Lawmakers words to any sense that the Subject thinks lawful ; and to make themselves Judges of the sense , by departing from the common use of the words , without proof that the Lawmakers meant otherwise ? 

Q. 3.  Whether there be need of much Learning , Conscience , or Honesty , to stretch the words from their ordinary sense , more than to do otherwise ? And whether so to do would deserve honour and preferment , and to do otherwise be a Crime that deserveth silencing , and ruin ? 

Q. 4.  Whether their way of Exposition , or ours , tend more to promote Perjury and Equivocation ; and which more secureth Truth and Honesty ? 

Q. 5.  If once the Conscience of Oaths and Covenants be relaxed , by stretching words to the takers interest , are not the Life's of Princes left in danger , and the Bonds of common Converse loosened ? 

Q. 6.  If this must be the cause of our sufferings , and silence ; is it not justice so to tell the World , and write it on our Cross , that we are silenced and laid in Goals , because we dare not take Oaths and Covenants , imposed in Terms excluding limitations and exceptions , in a limited excepting sense , without the Explication of the Lawmakers ? 

Q. 7.  And if we must be so used , whether any in the whole World be more unfit to silence , imprison , fine , reproach , and ruin us , for misunderstanding the words which we are to Subscribe or promise or Covenant in , ( viz. for taking [ none ] to mean [ none , ] [ nothing ] to mean [ nothing , ] [ not any ] to mean [ not any , ] contrary ] to mean [ contrary , ] [ all ] to mean [ all , ] than those that while they are set to ruin us , will by no entreaties , after our almost fourteen Years sufferings and expectations , be prevailed with to procure us an Exposition of the sense of any of these so much controverted words ? We are more confident that the Lawmakers can more certainly , and infallibly expound their own words , than the Pope or Council can expound Theological difficulties : And if our Accusers will not once endeavour to procure them so to do , nor be entreated to consent it , when Conformists and Nonconformists are chiefly disagreed about the Interpretation of them ; and when our preaching or silence , honour or reproach , maintenance or poverty , liberty or imprisonment , yea , and much duty or sin in the Body of the Nation , lieth upon the resolution of this Controversy , ( what is the Lawmakers meaning , ) we will still refer all to him that judgeth righteously , who will shortly finally end the Controversy ; praying to God , though Men will not hear us , to open our Lips , that our Mouths may sh●w forth his praise ; that he will make speed to save us , and make has●e to help us ; that he , whose service is perfect freedom , will defend us his humbled servants in all assaults of our Enemies , that we surely trusting in his defence , may not fear the power of any Adversaries ; and that these evils which the craft and subtlety of the Devil or Man worketh against us be brought to naught , and by the providence of his goodness they may be dispersed , that we his Servants being hurt by no persecution , may evermore give him thanks in his holy Church ; that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust and confidence in his mercy , and evermore serve him in holiness and pureness of living ; that he will forgive our Enemies , Persecutors , and Slanderers , and turn their hearts ; especially that he will save our Posterity from their Curse , who say , The Blood be on us , and on our Children . For we are not against such a Liturgy as this . 

POSTSCRIPT . Reader , 

IT was intended that a short Account of the Nonconformists Judgement , about the Power of Kings , and the Obedience of Subjects , should have been added ; but by reason of some men's aptness to be offended at all such Publications , and because of the present dispersion of the Collectors , it is pretermitted , with this Profession , That they shall at all times be ready to give such Account of their Judgements , when Authority shall call them , or allow it , as shall satisfy all impartial Men , that they are haters of Disloyalty , Sedition , Rebellion , and Schism . 

FINIS . 

