Short instructions for the sick: Especially who by contagion, or otherwise, are deprived of the presence of a faithfull pastor. / By Richard Baxter. / Baxter, Richard, 1615-1691. (Printed by Robert White, for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in Fleet-street: And for Nevill Simmons, book-seller in Kederminster.,London, :Anno Dom. 1665.)

Short Instructions for the SICK : Especially who by Contagion , or otherwise , are deprived of the Presence of a Faithful PASTOR . By RICHARD BAXTER . Those happy persons who have made it the chief care and business of their lives , to be always ready for a dying hour , have least need of my present counsel : It is therefore those unhappy souls , who are yet unprepared , whom I shall now instruct . And , OH that the Lord would bless these words ; and persuade them yet , ere Time be gone ! 

If sin had not bewitched men , and made them Monsters of senslesness and unbelief , it could not be , that an Endless Life , so sure , so near , could be so sottishly made light of , all their lives , as it is by most , till they perceive that Death is ready to surprise them . But , poor sinner , if this have been thy case , supposing yet that thou art unwilling to be damned , I earnestly entreat thee in the Name of Christ , for the sake of thy immortal soul , that thou wilt presently lay to heart these short Instructions , before Time and Hope are gone for ever . 

I At last bethink thee what thou art ? and for what End and Work thou camest into the world ? thou art a Man of Reason , and not a Brutus , and hast a Soul which was made to Know , and Love , and Serve thy Maker ; and that not in the second place , with the leave of the flesh ; but in the first place , and with all thy Heart and Might . If this had been indeed thy life , God would have been thy Portion , thy Father , and thy Defence , and thou mightst have lived and died in peace and comfort , and then have lived with God for ever . And should not a Creature live to the Ends and Uses which it was made for ? Must God give thee all thy powers for Himself , and wilt thou turn them from him , to the service of the flesh , and that when thou hadst vowed the contrary in thy Baptism ? How wilt thou answer for such treacherous ungodliness ? 

II It is time for thee now to have serious thoughts of the Life which thou art going to : If thou couldst sleepily forget it all the way ; it is time to awake when thou art almost there . When thy friends are burying that flesh in the earth , which thou didst more regard than God and thy Salvation , thy Soul must appear in an endless world ; and see those things which God foretold thee of , and thou wouldst not believe , or set thy heart upon : As soon as Death hath opened the curtains , OH what a sight must thou presently behold ! A world of Angels and of holy Souls adoring , and praising , and admiring that God , whom thou didst refuse to mind , and love , and serve : A world of Devils and damned souls , in torment and despair , bewailing their contempt of Christ and Grace , their neglect of God , and their Salvation , their serving the flesh , and loving the world , and wilfully losing the time of mercy , and all the means which God vouchsafed them . Believe it , sinner , there is an Endless Joy and Glory for the Saints , and an Endless Misery for all the ungodly ; and one of these must quickly be thy case . Thy state is changeable while thou art in the flesh : If thy Soul be miserable , there is yet a Remedy : it 's possible Christ may renew and pardon it : But as soon as thou goest hence , thou interest into a State of Joy or Torment , which must never change : no not when million of years are past . And dost thou not think now in thy conscience , that such an Endless Misery should have been prevented with greater care and diligence , than all the sufferings of this life ? And that the attaining of such an Endless Glory , had been worth thy greatest care and labour ? And that it is far better to see the Glory of God , and be filled with his Love , and joyfully praise him with his Saints and Angels , for evermore , and by a Holy life to have prepared for this ; than to please the flesh , and follow the world a little while , and be undone for ever ! Hast thou got more by the world and sin , than Heaven is worth ? thou art almost at the end of worldly pleasures , and hast all that ever they will do for thee ? But if God had had thy heart and service , he would not thus have cast thee off ; and his Rewards and Joys would have had no end . OH how much happier are the blessed Souls in Heaven , than we ? 

III And seeing you are so near to the Judgement of God , where your Soul must receive its final sentence , it is high time now to judge yourself , and know what state your Soul is in ? whether in a state of Justification , or of Damnation . For this may be certainly known if you are willing . And first you must know who they be whom Christ will justify , and whom he will condemn : And this the Word of God will tell you : For he will judge them by that Word . In a word [ All those whom Christ will justify and save , are made new creatures by the renewing work of the Holy Ghost : Their eyes are opened to see the vanity of this world , and the certainty and excellency of the Glory of Heaven ; and to see the odiousness of sin , and the goodness of a holy life , and to believe that Christ is the only Saviour , to cleanse them from their sins , and bring them to that Glory . And therefore they forsake the sinful pleasures of the flesh , and set their hearts on the everlasting blessedness , and seek it before all things , and lamenting and hating their former sins , they give up themselves sincerely , to their God and Father , their Saviour , and their Sanctifier , to be taught and ruled , justified , sanctified , and saved by him ; resolving whatever it cost the flesh , to stand to this choice and Covenant to the death . ] This is the case of all that Christ will justify and save : The rest who never were thus renewed and sanctified , will be condemned , as sure as the Gospel is true . Therefore let it be speedily your work , to try whether this be your case or not ? Have you been thus enlightened , convinced , and renewed , to believe in Christ , and the life to come , and to give up yourself in a faithful Covenant to God your Father , your Saviour , and your Sanctifier ? to hate your sin , and to live and love a holy life , in mortifying the flesh , and seeking Heaven before the world ? If this be not your case , I should but flatter and deceive you to tell you of any hope of being saved , till you are thus renewed and justified . Never imagine a lie to quiet you , till help is past . no one that is unregenerate or unholy , shall ever dwell with God. Yet you may be saved , if yet you will be truly converted and sanctified : But without this , assuredly there is no hope . 

iv. Therefore I counsel you in the name of Christ , to look back upon your sinful life with sorrow ; not only because of the danger to yourself , but also because you have offended God What think you now of a sinful and of a holy life ? Had it not been better that you had valued Christ and Grace , and lived in the love of God , and in the joyful hopes of the life to come , and denied the sinful desires of the flesh , and been ruled by the Law of God , and spent your time in preparing for eternity ? Do you not heartily wish that this had been your course ? Would you take this course if it were to do again ? and God recover you ? Repent , repent from the bottom of your heart , of the time you have lost , the mercy you have abused , the grace you have resisted , of all your fleshly , worldly desires , words and deeds ; and that you gave not up your soul and life to the Love of God and life eternal . 

v. And now resolvedly give up yourself in a hearty Covenant to God Though it be late , he will yet accept and pardon you , if you do it in sincerity . Take God for your God , your portion and felicity , to live in his Love and praise for ever ; Take Christ for your Saviour , to teach , and rule , and justify you , and bring you unto God ; and the holy Spirit for your Sanctifier , and certainly God will take you for his Child . But see that you be truly willing of his Grace , and resolved never to forsake him more . OH happy Soul , if yet at last , the Lord will make this change upon thee ! And I 'll tell you certainly how to know , whether this late Repentance will serve for your Salvation , or not . If it be but Fear only which causeth your Repentance , and the Heart and Will be not renewed , but you would turn again to a fleshly , worldly and ungodly life , if you be recovered ; then it will never save your soul . But if your Heart , your Will , your Love be changed , and this change would hold if God recovered you to health again , then doubt not of pardon and Salvation . 

VI And if God have thus changed your heart , and drawn it to Himself , be thankful for so great a mercy ! OH bless him for giving you a Redeemer and a Sanctifier , and the pardoning Covenant of Grace . And now be not afraid or loath to leave a sinful world , and come to God Pray harder for grace and pardon , than for life . Commit and trust your souls to Christ ! He had never done so much for souls , if he had not loved them , and been willing to receive them ! How wonderfully came he down to man , to bring up man to the sight of God He is gone before to prepare us a Mansion in the City of God , and hath promised to take us to himself , that we may dwell with him , and see his Glory ! The world which you are going to , is unlike to this ! There is no pride , or lust , or cruelty , oppression , deceit , or any sin ! no wicked men to scorn or persecute us ! no vanity to allure us ! no Devil to tempt us ! no corruption of our own to burden or endanger us ! no fears , or cares , or griefs , or discontents ! no poverty , sickness , pain , or death ! no doubtings of the Love of God or our Salvation ! But the sight of God , and the feelings of his Love , and the fervent flames of our Love to him , will be the everlasting pleasure of the Saints ! These will break forth in triumphant and harmonious thanks and praise in the presence of our glorified Redeemer , and in concord with all the heavenly Hosts , the blessed Angels , and the Spirits of the Just ! This is the end of faith and holiness , patience and perseverance : When Hell is the end of unbelief , ungodliness , sensuality , and hypocrisy . How justly are they condemned , who sell their part of endless Joys , for a shadow and dream of transitory pleasures ? and can delight more in the filth of sin , and in a fading vanity , than in the Love of God , and the fore-thoughts of Glory ! What Love can be too great , what Desire's too fervent ; what prayer and labour can be too much ! what suffering too dear for such a Blessedness ? 

VII . Lastly , Because there are many cases of the sick , which require the presence of a judicious Divine ; if it be possible get the help of such ; if not , remember that God is just , in denying men that mercy in their distress , which in the time of their health and prosperity they rejected with scorn & contempt , and cleave to him whom you may enjoy for ever . 

LONDON , Printed by Robert White , for Francis Titan , at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet : And for Nevil Simmons , Bookseller in Kederminster . Anno Dom. 1665.  

Deut. 6.5 . & 10.12 . & 11.1 , 13.  Deut. 32.29 . Matth. 6.19 , 20 , 33.  Matth. 25.  Rom. 2. 2  Cor. 4.18 . & 5.1 , 7 , 8 , 9  Phil. 3.18 , 20. 2  These . 1.9 , 10. 1  Pet. 4.18 . 1 Cor. 11.31 . 2 Cor. 13.5 . Pet. 1.10 . John 3.3 , 5. 2  Cor. 5.17 . Ephes . 1.18 . Joh. 3.16 , 19  Gal. 5.24 . Rom. 8.9 . Mat. 6.21 , 33.  Mat. 28.20 . Heb. 12.14 . rev. 2.7 , 10.  prov. 11.7 . Job 8.13 , 14.  Luk. 13.3 , 5.  Luk. 15.  Matth. 18.3 . Matth. 11.28 . 2 Cor. 8.5 . Act. 11.23 . Psal . 78.34 , 35 , 36 , 37.  Hebr. 8.10 . & 10.16 . Jer. 32.40 . Phil. 1.21 , 23. 2  Cor. 5.1.8 . rev. 14.13 . Act. 7.59 . John 17.24 . & 12.26 . rev. 21.  & 22 ▪  Mal. 2.7 . James 5.14 . Psal . 73.26 . 