ELEGY On the Universally Lamented Death , of DUNCAN RONALD : Director Depute of the Chancelary , and Writer to his Majesty's Signet . 

Who died at EDINBURGH , August 1700.  

D 

This year at Rome the Jubilee doth stand ; 
But whether Death or Pope doth most Command , 
My Querie ! pray tell me Trauler now , 
Where Death inhabits , Reigns , and pays his vow ! 
If you can tell me , where this King do Lodge ; 
I 'll be thy vassal , and thy sorley Drudge . 
U 

Death ! Death ! our Kings , our Queens , our Nobles all , 
Our Knights , our Barons , Lairds , by thee they fall ; 
Our Dives , Lazrus , Senecas , and Lords ; 
can never scape thy deadly fatal Cords . 
Why is it so ! By hear us alone decree , 
Men must be living , also men must die 
N 

But ah ! Death , now thou carries high thine hand , 
thou soars aloft ; we cannot thee Command : 
thou shoots ( like Cupid ) Arrows from the Skies , 
thou sends thy darts , 〈…〉 the mortal dies , 
Ah me ! why so ! can nothing 〈…〉 
〈…〉 Dimonds' never 〈…〉 
C 

no , no , say'th Death : for why ! my time is come , 
My Sceptre Crown , are old and Reign nigh run ▪ 
I'm but a vassal of the powers above ▪ 
I must display the Banner of my love . 
For death 's my name , a Lion I must be , 
Until my day's be turned to Eternity . 
A 

Now Judgements nigh , the World is near an end ; 
My Sword is sharpest when I must Defend , 
My cause ; and my Commission I display , 
When dust I send to Dust their Natives clay . 
So Queries are but idle , vain to thee ; 
Read Birth , Death , Judgement and Eternity . 
N 

For if I could have spared a Lov'ly Face ; 
Helen of Troy , might damped me with Grace . 
If riches ; Croesus might have bribed me then : 
If Grace or beauty , or the sons of men , 
then might I have had thousands at my hand , 
Of Absoloms , and Solomons to stand . 
If Learning Cicero , Seneca , these Wits , 
Would played me Music , when I took my Fits , 
Alse well as DAVID ; But no Harmony 
Can Wound Me ; Magic , cannot Blind mine Eye . 
Nay , Kings and Emperors are my Trophies still , 
Who then can Bribe me , who has all at William  
R 

Thy DUNCAN RONNALD , Depute of the Rolls , 
The Keeper of Thy Chartors , Seasines , Scrolls , 
Might been Preserved , if Grace or Parts might do : 
But who 's the Man , I spare , of Candour , now . 
Yes , weep ye may , ye Scribes and Writers throng ! 
But ye that Weep , must meet Me ere 't be long . 
OH 

Kindness of Nature , Sympathy Indites , 
Our Mourning over RONNALD , and Invites : 
He was a Man of Geni●usness and Arts , 
Divine and Moral ; Loved by Men of Parts . 
what 's more ; He had the Popular Applause , 
Of Commons , Learning's , Enemies , and Foes . 
N 

He carried Civil in his Post and Chair 
Of Honour's District , void of Anxious Fear ; 
Content with Fortune , Providence's Decree , 
And vain Ambition , Emptiness did 〈…〉 

For fear of With'ring here among his Foes . 
A 

Well spoken , OH Death ! Crown Me with Mortal Rays , 
Come , stay no longer , quickly cut My Days ; 
Since We must Pass to Heaven through Baca's Vale , 
Hoist Anchor , Death , set M●zonss on thy Sail : 
For Die We must , before we come to be , 
With DUNCAN RONNALD in Prosperity . 
L 

For We must walk by Faith , as RONNALD did , 
And get Our Chartor-party , to be ●id , 
In Our Recesses : Prayer must be the Key , 
Love and Assurance , twofold Charity . 
then JESUS Merit's , Jacobs Ladder can , 
Make Scarlet Sins , made whiter than a Swan . 
D 

Death , Death , deny us Fate of Sudden Calls , 
Seize but Gradatim , ever you break Our Walls ; 
then Sound Thy Trumpet , as a Jona Shrill : 
Our Bodies Yield , decay to Dust they william 
For Moulder Dwindle , and consume to Dust , 
Men ( Dust they are ) Return to it they must . 
Hoec raptim & cursum Composuit , Mr. GEORGE DEMPSTER 

