The pilgrims wish , or , the saints longing . 

Discussed in a sermon preached in st Bennet Gracechurch , at the funeral of Mrs Anne Dudson , ( Daughter of mr Isaac calf , heretofore minister of God's word at Chatwell in Essex , and late wife of mr Edward Dudson of London Draper ) who departed this life the 4th day of January 1658. and was interred the 11th of the same month . 

By nath. Hardy preacher to the parish of St.  dionys. back-church . 

Luke 2. 29.  

Lord , now lettest thou they servant depart in peace , according to thy word . 



aug. in joh.  

qui cupit dissolvi & esse cum christo , non patienter ritur , sed patienter vivit , & delectabiliter moritur . 



London , printed by a. m. for Joseph Cranford at the sign of the castle and lion in St. Paul's churchyard , 1659.  

To my worthy friends mr Edward Dudson , and Mrs Elizabeth man . 

The near relation which you both had to the deceased gentlewoman , the one of an husband , the other of an aunt , moveth me to join you together in this dedication . 

The dear affection which you both had to her person whilst alive , and have to her memory now dead , induced you to desire this publication . 

After some delay of time , ( For which i beg your pardon , as being not voluntary , but necessitated by multiplicity of emergent occasions ) i have at length fulfilled your desire : by which means her living works , and dying words , ( As they follow her , so ) will live still with you , for your consolation ; and not with you only , but with all unto whose hands this following discourse shall come , for their imitation . 

Nothing remaineth but my prayers , not for her , she needeth them not , but hers ; i mean yourselves , and her surviving children : of whom the one of you is , i dowbt not , a careful father , and to whom , i trust , the other of you will be instead of their tender mother . that you May all enjoy a prosperous lasting life on earth , and a glorious everlasting life in heaven , is the earnest prayer of 

Your affectionate friend nath. Hardy . 

The pilgrims wish , or , the saints longing . 

phil. 1. 23.  

for i am in a strait betwixt two , having a desire to depart , and to be with Christ , which is far better . 



death is the lot of all men , to desire death the temper of few men ; it is that guest which every man must entertain , and yet scarce any man will bid welcome . Many are so wicked that they scarce think of it , more , far more are so weak that they do not desire it . Indeed to desire death aright , argueth one more than a man , a Christian ; nay , more than an ordinary Christian , a strong saint . such an one was he who uttereth these words ; a star of the first magnitude , a Christian of the highest form . But yet the examples of eminent saints , are set as copies for us to write by ; and though we cannot presently obtain , yet we must seriously endeavour , that the same mind May be in us , which was in this holy apostle , who saith , i am in a strait betwixt two , having a desire , &c.  

In which verse are two generals observable : namely 

death's description , in those words , to depart , and to be with Christ , where we are to take notice of 

The nature of death in general , it is a depature . 

The consequent of it to the good in particular , and that is being with Christ . 

St. Paul's affection towards death in the rest of the verse , where is to be considered , 

The quality and kind of the affection , it is a desire . 

The equity and justice of the reason , inducing to it , because it is far better . 

The energy and strength of it , in the effect flowing from it , in that he was in a strait betwixt two . Of each of these in their order ; 

Beginning with the description of death , and that 

As to its general nature in the word depart . among the many acceptions of the Greek verb , none more sutabler to this place than that which is the most plain : namely to remove or depart , answering to the Hebrew word , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} whereof the Syriack here maketh use , and with which agree the Latin words , migrare , abire discedere . so that the assertion couched in this expression , is obitus , abitus ; dying , is a going hence ; the time of death is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the time of our departure . 

A departure it is , and that both of the soul , and of the person , of the soul , out of the body , of the person , out of this world . i find the apostle Peter in two verses describing death by two words , which set forth this double departure , the one {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a putting off , the soul putting off the body when we die , as the body doth its clothes when we go to sleep ; the other {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a decease , or going out of the Egypt of this world . 

1.  It is a departure of the soul from the body , when death cometh with its sharp edge . the loving knot which nature tied between those two dear friends is cut asunder : as darkness is the absence of light when the sun removeth from our horizon ; so is death the privation of life when the soul removeth from the body . in this respect it is defined by Tertullian to be disjunctio , by St. Ambrose , to be absolutio , by Plato to be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and by the Latin orator , to be discessus animae à corpore , a disjoining , absolving , losing , a separation , migration , and departure of the soul from the body . 

Indeed it is but a departure of the one from the other , not an annihilation of either , anima absolvitur , corpus resolvitur , the soul is let out of the body , and the body is resolved into its first principles , whereof it was compounded , but neither returneth to nothing . Fully to this purpose St. Austin , mors non consumit conjuncta sed divi•… dum origini suae utrumque reddit , death doth not consume but divide those parts which were before conjoined , each returning to its original ; that is as Solomon explaineth it , the dust to the earth , and the soul to God . i grant when a man dyeth he ceaseth to be a man , but not to be ; sic in non hominem vertitur omnis homo , saith the poet and rightly ; but not in non ens , the materials still remain , though the house be pulled down , and the fabric dissolved . 

2.  It is a departure of the person out of this world . The Greek word most properly ad rem nauticam spectat , is used by seamen , who are said to loose from the haven when they depart from the shore , and put forth to sea ; thus when a man dieth , he departeth from the shore of this world , and launcheth into an ocean of eternity . sometimes the word is used of soldiers , who when they remove , take down , and unloose their tents which were fastened to the ground ; thus by death our earthly tabernacles are dissolved , and we remove to another place . this world in this respect is compared to an inn , since as Cicero well , natura nobis commorandi , non habitandi locum dedit , God hath given us here not an house to dwell , but only a place to sojourn in . It is said of our saviour {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , he dwelled among us , but as in a tent ; yea he was born in an inn , to teach us , that he for his time , and surely than we for ours , are but so many travelers still upon departure . indeed it is a very frequent metaphor , by which our present condition is described , we are said by the apostle Peter to be pilgrims and strangers , omnis homo advena nascendo , & compellitur migrare moriendo , saith the father elegantly , every man is born a stranger , and when death comes , he must be gone : in reference to which is that of Job , man giveth up the ghost and where is he ? which is not to be understood absolutely , for to say a man is nowhere at all , is to say he is nothing ; but restrictively , he is nowhere , here upon earth , he is not among the living , he is vanished out of this world . to close up this : 

1.  Since we depart by death , why do we dote on life ? and seeing we must leave , why do we love this world ? if a man in a foreign country , where his stay will be but for some months , should put himself to a great deal of cost in building and planting for his delight ; or one who liveth in an house whereof he hath but a lease for a few years , should lay out a great deal of money in adorning and beautifying it , would he not be accounted a fool ? oh what mad men are we , who set our hearts , and bestow both our love and care upon this world , when we must ere long depart ? let me therefore bespeak you in the language of the prophet Micah , arise ye and depart , for this is not your rest ; you cannot fix or stay long here , depart before you depart ; let your affections depart from the love of , before your persons depart from their being in this world ; and let your souls by divine love go forth , whilst yet they are in your bodies . 

2.  When death comes we must depart ; why do we not make ready for our departure : when we depart , we must walk through a shady valley ? Oh let us provide for our journey , having according to our saviour's counsel , our loins gird , and our lights ▪ burning : or rather ( The Greek word belonging most properly to mariners , ) when we depart , we launch into mare mortuum , the dead sea ; oh let us before hand rig the vessel of our souls , that it May be fit to sail ; let faith be her rudder , hope her anchor , sincerity her ballast , a profession of the truth her sails , love her cordage , good works her fraught , a good conscience her pilot : and being thus provided , whensoever the time of our departure shall come , we May navem committere , with confidence commit our ship into the hands of Christ . and so much shall suffice for the first part of death's description in that word , depart , which is as it were the heart and centre of the text , wherein the several lines meet : go we on to 

The other part of death's character , which is the consequent of it in regard of goodmen , and that is , being with Christ . 

In every local motion , there is a double term , to wit , à quo , and ad quem ; from whence , and to which ; it is so in this departure whereof my text speaketh , the term from which is not mentioned , but hath been already supplied ; the soul departs out of the body , and the man out of the world : the term to which he departs is plainly and punctually expressed , to be with Christ . 

Indeed this is not true of every one who departs by death , but only of the good . Balaam saw so much , which made him wish , oh that i Might die the death of the righteous . when we die , the souls of all go ad deum judicem , to God a just judge ; but only of the good ad christum redemptorem ; Christ a merciful saviour . it is not a common favour to every man , nor yet is it a personal privilege of St. Paul . To me ( Saith this apostle a little before ) to live is Christ ; and here , having a desire to depart and to be with Christ , put them together , and you May see the just latitude of this benefit : every one who in some measure liveth to Christ , when he dyeth shall be with him . what here St. Paul assureth himself of , Christ promiseth to the thief on the cross , thou shalt be with me ; not only eminent saints , such as St. Paul was , but penitent sinners , such as the thief was , shall be with Christ . Blessed are the dead ( Saith St. John ) who die in the Lord , all who by a lively faith and timely repentance die in , are blessed in being with him . 

This being with Christ , is that which all true Christians partake of not before , and in some respect presently after their departure . 

1.  We cannot be with Christ till we depart hence ; this apostle is express , whilst we are in the body we are absent from the Lord . it is one thing to be in Christ , and another to be with him ; that is by faith , and is now attainable : this is by sight , and is not to be enjoyed till hereafter ; we must be in him before we die , else we cannot die in him ; but we shall not be with him till we are dead . it is one thing for Christ to be with us , and another for us to be with Christ , that is our comfort in life , but this our happiness after death : now he walketh among his golden candlesticks , the churches ; but than it is the members of his church shall walk with him ; now his spirit is with us , but than it is , that our spirits shall be with him . it is one thing to come to Christ , and another to be with him , that is a preparation for this ; it being impossible to be with him , to whom we do not come ; but whereas that is the duty of this life , this is the felicity of that other life . finally there was a time when Christ was on earth , and then his disciple whilst alive had the honour to be with him ; but now he is gone into heaven , and therefore we must leave earth or we cannot be with him . 

2.  Not till we die , and withal when we die we shall be with him : from henceforth , is St.  John's word , blessed are the dead . To day was our saviour's language to the thief ; and here being with Christ , is set down as the immediate consequent of our departure . indeed had not St. Paul hoped to be with Christ before the resurrection , his desire of departing had been irrational ; it being far better to live , in doing God's service , then to sleep in a grave : or if he had desired to depart , it must have been only upon the account of being at rest from trouble , not of being with Christ : nay since , as he saith in the next verse , his abiding in the flesh , was needful for the Philippians , his desire to die , and his strait about it , had not only been irrational , but irreligious , had it not been , that he persuaded himself , that so soon as he was departed , he should be with Christ . 

Only a distinction must be here annexed of being with Christ in our persons , and in our souls ; of the former our apostle speaks , as not to be till the last day , when we shall meet the Lord in the air , and so shall be ever with the Lord ; of the latter he is here to be understood ; the union of the soul with Christ , being that which followeth upon its dissolution from the body . St. John in a vision saw the souls of them that were slain for the word of God under the altar , that is , with Christ , who was our sacrifice on earth , and is our altar in heaven ; and when we remember that Christ promised it to a penitent malefactor , we must not confine it only to suffering martyrs . the sum is , at the resurrection shall be the reunion of soul and body , and so the complete glorification of our persons with Christ ; but immediately after death , the souls of all them who were in Christ by faith , are with him by sight . 

It were easy to trace the footsteps of this truth in the writings of the fathers , omnes sanctorum animae cum christo sunt & exeuntes de corpore ad christum vadunt , expectantes resurrectionem corporis sui ; all the souls of the saints going out of the body , go to , and are with Christ , expecting the resurrection of the body . so Gennadius , in St. Augustin , and in another place of that father , it is expressly said , recedens anima ab angelis suscipitur , & collocatur in sinu abrahae , si fidelis est ; aut in carceris inferni custodia , si peccatrix est . The departing soul is received by angels , and if believing , is placed in Abraham's bosom ; if impenitent ; cast into the prison of hell till the appointed day of its being united with the body . were it needful , i could bring many more testimonies of this truth , out of Justin Martin , Gregory Nazianzen , Macarius with others . But let St. Chrysostom suffice instead of all , and that in this place , where he saith , the just after death are with Christ , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , or as a late writer conceiveth it should be , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , not beholding him through a glass by faith , but face to face . 

The doctrine thus axplained and confirmed , becometh a strong argument proving against . 

The psychopannychists , that the soul doth not die , nor yet sleep with the body , until the resurrection ; for the souls of the good are with Christ ; and by the rule of contraries , the souls of the bad with the devil , neither of them are with the body . 

The Papists , that there is no purgatory after death , through which the souls of penitent sinners pass before they be with Christ ; for if they be immediately with Christ , it is in paradise not purgatory ; and if any one should have passed through a purgatory , in all probability it must have been the thief , whose life had been so flagitious , good works were so few , and conversion so immediately before his death . 

That opinion ( Which yet i confess is ancient and harmless , ) of assigning a place of rest and felicity , to the separated souls of the just on this side the heaven of the blessed , for if they be with Christ , it probably followeth they must be where he is , and that is far above all heavens , not only in a , but the place of happiness . 

The Lutherans who affirm the glorified body of Christ to be everywhere , for than it is on earth as well as in heaven : and what need St. Paul desire to go hence that he Might be with him ? but to enlarge in controversies , befits not the pulpit at any time , much less when it is hung with black . my work now is not the confutation of errors , but a consolation of the mourners ; nor can there be a better ground of comfort then this meditation that our godly friends , being departed are with Christ , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , saith St. Chrysostom , let us rejoice over the just not only living but dying . why should their departure which is a means of joy to them , be matter of grief to us ? Why so much troubled , that they can no longer continue with us , whenas they go to be with Christ ? to mourn for another's happiness is the envy of an enemy , if you loved me ( Saith Christ ) you would rejoice because i go to my father . Docens scilicet & ostendens , cum chari , quos diligimus , de saeculo exeunt , gaudendum potius quam dolendum , so St. Cyprian , teaching us rather to rejoice then weep at our friend's departure , who seem to say to us , if you loved us , you would rejoice because we go to Christ . a consideration , which as it May take off our unwillingness to part with , so it should make us willing to go after them ; and this leads me to 

St. Paul's affection , and therein 

The quality and kind of it , namely an affection of desire , having a desire : St. Paul was not only content to die , and willing to live , but content to live , and willing to die ; nor was it a slender wish , but {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a fervent desire , and that not transient but permanent , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , not only desiring , but having a desire as it were fixed and settled in his mind . 

For the further opening of St.  Paul's desire in reference to death , it will be needful to resolve two queries , the one concerning the possibility , whither any man can desire death ? and the other concerning the legitimacy , whither any good man May desire it ? 

1.  It May rationally be enquired , how any man can desire to die ? since only good ( Either in reality or appearance ) is the object of desire , whenas-death depriveth us of good , nay is the worst of temporal evils . 

But to this it is justly answered , that however death considered in itself is an evil , and so formidable , yet to a good man it becometh good , and so desirable . our apostle expressing death as the object of his desire , clotheth it with a smooth word to depart ; and if you please a little more narrowly to look into the use of the word , you shall find it represents death as advantageous , and consequently to be desired . 

sometimes it is used of a man's returning to his home or country : St. Jerome renders it reverti , Turtullian recipi , the mariners going forth to sea , are said {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , to loose from the haven , and when they do this by way of return homeward , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} a return from strangers to ones own home is thus styled ; it is applied to conquerors , coming back from the wars ; and the Lords returning home from the wedding , is expressed by this phrase . whereas all men are in truth , and good men in their own esteem strangers , by death they go home to their heavenly country , quis non peregre constitutus properaret in patriam regredi ; what stranger doth not long to return to his native soil ? nothing more natural to a man then to love his home , death is a departure home . 

sometimes it is used for men's being set free from bonds and prison ; and of oxen , when after their labour in the evening , the yoke is taken from off their necks , the body is as it were the prison of the soul , yea the whole world is but as a larger prison , to a saint from which death sets him free . dissolvi nonquaereret paulus nisi se proculdubio vinctum videret , in that St. Paul desired to be loosed , no doubt he apprehend himself a prisoner . was ever any man in love with his fetters ? and what prisoner doth not groan for enlargement , or captive would not welcome liberty ? death is a departure out of prison . 

Once more , it is sometimes used of going to bed ; we are wearied in the day of our life with manifold labours , at the evening of death we go to our bed ; so the prophet Isaiah's expression of the righteous when they perish they enter into their beds . doth not the weary labourer long to be in his bed of ease and refreshment ? Death is a departure to our bed ; and no wonder if under these considerations of rest and liberty , and returning home , it be the object of desire . 

To all this it May be further added , that the primary object of St.  Paul's desire , was not the departure , but being with Christ . Suitable to this it is that else where he saith , we that are in this Tabernicle do groan being burdened , not for that we would be unclothed , but clothed upon ; that which a Christian so earnestly desires is the state of bliss in the enjoyment of Christ . Death is only desired in order to that , and that upon necessity , because there is no going to Christ without a departure hence : otherwise the best men would abhor it . By this time you see the resolution of the first query , which amounts to this , that death was not by St. Paul , is not , cannot be desired by any one , but only in ordine ad aliud , in order to that which followeth it , and especially the being with Christ . 

The quaere which would next be satisfied refers to the legitimacy , whither , and how far death May be desired ? to which end be pleased to knew , that that desire of death which is lawful , yea not only lawful but excellent . 

1.  Is not active but passive , so the vulgar Latin reads it , cupio dissolvi , i desire to be dissolved . in some cases the truth of our destre is testified by the endeavour but it is not so in this , that command of killing , respects a man's self as well as others , and forbids not only the act but the endeavour ; he that by neglect of good means shortens his life , or by any evil means attempts the hastening of his own death , being no other in God's account , than a self-murderer . we must not desire death as we desire grace ; we ought so to desire grace , as to use all ways for the obtaining it ; we must not so desire death , as to take any course for accelerating it . 

2.  Not impatient but submissive , not repining at God's delays , but waiting his leisure , if God please , or when God pleaseth , is the language of a Christian , as in others , so in this matter . Indeed Simeon prayeth , now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace , but it was as appeareth by that addition ( according to thy word ) because having seen the Messiah , he knew the time of his dissolution was come . we must not limit God to this or that season : and whilst we desire the thing , we must contentedly wait the time . Sapiens è vita non fugere debet sed exire , saith Seneca . A wise man must not fly , but go out of life . he learneth accipere , to receive death willingly , but he hateth arripere , to run upon it desperately : nor dare he break the prison doors , though he be ready ( When God sets them open ) to go forth . Animus piis omnibus retinendus est in custodiâ corporis , nec injussu ejus a quo ille est nobis datus ex hominum vita migrandum , saith the orator . our soul must not be dismissed out of , without his leave who infused it into the body . in this respect the good man hath a desire at once both to live and to die , according to divine appointment . If God will have him continue longer on earth to do him service , he is willing , and if he will take him to himself , he is willing ; resolving still to bow his will to gods . 

3.  Lastly , not carnal , but spiritual . Many there are , who wish themselves in their graves , merely out of discontent at the condition of their life ; either because they have not what they would , or suffer what they would not . Some there are who desire to die , that they May be in paradise , rid of misery , and enjoy felicity : but the right desire after death , is upon higher and spiritual grounds , not so much to be free from sorrow , as sin : to be in paradise , as to be with Christ . indeed , these words to be with Christ , are both incentive and directive to our desire of death . no stronger argument why we should desire it ; no higher end for which we should desire it . what can make death welcome to us , if this of being with Christ will not ? Nor should any consideration make it more welcome to us , than this of being with Christ . and thus you have the second question answered ; the result whereof is , that provided we do not hasten our own death , but are content to tarry God's time , and that we do not only or chiefly wish it for self-ends ; we May , nay we ought to desire ( If God will ) that we May depart and be with Christ : and this is that whereof our apostle hath here given the Philippians and all Christians a pattern . 

But oh my brethren , how doth St.  Paul's desire upbraid our backwardness , and chide our fears ? it was St.  Cyprians complaint of the Christians in his time , and it is still true : obnitimur & reluctamur & pervicacium more servorum ad conspectum domini cum tristitia & maerore perducimu• , excuntes istinc necessitatis vinculo , non obsequio voluntatis : we resist and struggle , and like peevish servants , must to our grief and sorrow , be forced into our Lord's presence , going hence not with a willing obsequiousness , but out of a compelling necessity . Omnes refugiunt terminum ad quem curunt , said Seneca : truly , all men would fly from the goal of death to which they run . i am afraid the most Christians are unwilling that should be granted for which they pray , when they say , thy kingdom come ; in which respect the forementioned father expostulateth . quid oramus & petimus ut adveniat regnum caelorum , si captivitas terre•• delectat ? Why do we daily pray that the kingdom of heaven May come , when as we are so much pleased with a captivity on earth ? the truth is , we are so far from making death the object of our desire , that it is the ground of our fear ; yea , we tremble at the very thought of it . Indeed , that they should fear death , who being called Christians lead wicked lives , is no wonder ; and well were it if many of them did more fear it , than they do . but why ? oh why this pusillamous spirit in good Christians ? let him be afraid to die , who is not born again of water end of the spirit ; who looketh upon the continuation of life , as a respite from torment to come , and his first death to be a passage to a second ? but for belivers , who are the children of God , members of Christ , and heirs or glory to be afraid to depart , how incongruous ? 

receive therefore a word of exhortation , give not over till you have brought your hearts to this sweet frame . he hath not enough coned happiness , that is loath to go to it , though it be through a dead sea ; nor can he be justly thought desirous of heaven , who is unwilling to shake hands with earth . it was justly said to that lame beggar , who refused the offer of his Prince to take him into his coach ; optime mereris qui in luto haereas , thou well deservest to stick in the mire . and surely , it is but fit that they should live and lie in sorrow , who are unwilling that Christ should take them up to himself . what is the devils great design , but to keep our souls from Christ , and shall we comply with him in an unwillingness to depart that we May be with him ? our belssed Jesus willingly came down from heaven to earth , that he Might be with , and die for us : shall not we willingly go from earth to heaven , though it be by death , that we May be and live with him ? especially considering the great advantage which hereby accrueth to us . And that leads me to 

3.  The equity and justness of the reason inducing St. Paul to this desire in those words which is far better . the emphasis of the Greek phrase is very observable ; it is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , better , nay {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , far better ; nay {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , much rather : or ( As our translation ) far better . the Arabic seemeth to labour in expressing it by two words of the same signification , which is far more excellent and transcendent , withal annexing the pronoun ( for me ) which is not mentioned but to be supplied in the Greek . to die in respect of all , is not better than to live ; but in respect of them who dying are with Christ . for St. Paul to die , though it were to be with Chriss , was not better for the Philippians ; he intimateth in the next verse that it was needful for them that he should live in the flesh , but for himself it was better , far , infinitely far better , that he should depart and be with Christ . 

And now i am fallen upon a pleasant subject , the transcendent happiness of being with Christ . but i cannot long insist upon it , nor if i should , am i able fully to unfold it . We shall never know the bliss of being with him , till we come to be with him . only in a few words let me give you a glimpse or taste of its surpassing excellency . 

To this end i shall make use of that threefold good which is the object of men's desire in this world , and maketh them so much in love with it , namely profit , honour , and pleasure ; in all which respects it is far better to be with Christ . 

1.  It is far better in point of profit . Christ is said by the author to the Hebrews , to be appointed heir of all things : being now in heaven , he is in possession of these all things , whereof he is heir : and when we shall be with him , we shall be {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , coheirs with Christ ; who ( Though our elder brother ) admits us to have a share in the inheritance . whatsoever we enjoy in this world is but a small pittance in comparison of that inheritance . Christ in the person of wisdom , saith of himself , with me are riches , yea durable riches . with him , they are not for himself only , but all that are with him : yea , whereas the riches of this world are uncertain , those are durable ; and therefore as to wealth it is better , far better to be with Christ . 

2.  It is better in point of honour . to be with Christ , is to sit together with him in heavenly places ; that is St.  Paul's phrase to the Ephesians . More than so it is , to sit with him in his throne ; that is St.  John's phrase . The saints with Christ have a full view of his glory . so our saviour prayeth ; father i will that those whom thou hast given me , be where i am , that they May behold my glory which thou hast given me . nor do they only behold but participate of it . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , we are glorified together with him ; yea , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , we shall reign with him . they are both St.  Paul's phrases , which latter fully answers to that of sitting with him in his throne . whereas the servants of Christ in this world , are for the most part in a low and mean condition , they shall be no less than Kings when they are with Christ ; having crowns on their heads , and sceptres in their hands , far excelling all secular dignities . And therefore as to honour , it is far better to be with Christ . 

3.  Once more , it is better in point of pleasure . to be with Christ , is to sup with him , so St. John ; and no dainties so sweet as those which are prepared for us in that supper of glory . to be with Christ , is to be with him in paradise ; and no delights comparable to those of paradise . it is to be with the fountain of life ; and no waters so sweet as those which we drink at the fountain . it is to be with the sun of righteousness ; and if there be a great deal of refreshment in the beams which this sun sometimes darts upon us whilst we are here , oh what content is there in being with the sun itself ! The truth is , none of these carnal pleasures which this world affords , can give the soul satisfaction ; so that as the dove found no rest till it returned to the ark ; it finds no content till it come to Christ . our greatest joy here , is the hopes of being with him hereafter : to whom those words of the psalmist May be truly applied ; in thy presence is fullness of joy , and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore . and therefore as to pleasure , it is far better to be with Christ . 

Indeed , well May being with Christ be better than all enjoyments on earth , when it is the best of heaven's happiness . it is true , we shall in heaven be with our godly friends , with all the holy patriarchs , goodly prophets , glorious apostles , noble martyrs , faithful confessors , glorified saints , and blessed angels ; but all this is nothing to the bliss of being with Christ . it is the presence of Christ which is the heaven of heaven : without him heaven would not be heaven ; and with him , even hell would be heaven . Whom have i in heaven but thee , saith David to God . what were these visible heavens without the sun ? what were the empyreyal heaven without God and Christ . 

By what hath been said , it appeareth that St.  Paul's desire of death , was not an extravagant passion , but a well grounded affection , nothing being more rational than that every one should most desire that which is best for him . Oh let us learn to have the same estimation of Christ's presence , and then we shall have the same affection to death which St. Paul had ! The Queen of Sheba said to sol•on , happy are these thy servants which stand ever before thee . but oh how happy are they that stand before , and are ever with thee , oh blessed Jesus ! it was a devout speech of old Bullinger , Socrates gaudet sibi n•oriendum esse propterea , quod homerum , hesiodum & alios prestantissimos viros se visurum crederet : quanto magis ego gaudeo , qui certus sum me visurum esse christum servatorem meum , &c.  secrates rejoiced at death , believing he should see Homer , Hesiod , and other excellent men , how much greater is my joy , who am sure , besides many holy men , to see my saviour Christ , the eternal son of God in the flesh ? Cercidas ( As we read in Caelius rhodiginus ) told his friends on his dying bed , he left this life with delight , in an apprehension of enjoying after his death the company of Pythagoras the philosopher , Hecateus the historian , Olympus the musician , and Homer the poet . Oh with what cheerfulness should we depart in the assured hope of enjoying not only the society of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , but Christ himself ! When the holy apostle St. Peter was upon the mount with Christ at his transfiguration , he cryeth out {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , it is good for us to be here . how much more reason have we to say of being with Christ in heaven , it is good , it is best , infinitely best for us to be there . and therefore as Moses went up to a mount to die , so we should gladly die , that we May go up to that mount where Christ is . 

I end this : there want not many comparisons to be made in this kind , whereby death May be rendered desirable , but none so cogent as this . we should be willing to depart , because it is better to be at home then in a strange place : to be in a palace , than a prison ; in a paradise than a wilderness ; at rest , then in labours ; and to be free from sin , then to fall into it . But much more willing , because it is far better to be with Christ , then abide in the flesh . 

3.  There is only one part of the text behind , and that is the energy of this desire in the effect flowing from it , which is expressed in the beginning of the verse , i am in a straight betwixt two . what those {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} two things were , is easily found out by what hath been already said , as also by that which precedeth and followeth , namely to live , and to die : to depart and be with Christ , and to remine in the flesh . between these two , St. Paul was straightened ; to wit , which he should make choice of , and according to the signification of the Greek word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , was in such a perplexity that he knew not what to do ; like a beast that is put into a pound , or a persons that are besieged in a city . 

There is in every one of us ( Nor was it extirpated in St. Paul ) a natural desire of life ; in which respect it May seem strange that the apostle should be in a straight which of these to choose : but as on the one hand St. Paul had that which was common with him to all men , a natural desire of life ; so on the other , he had that which was peculiar to him , and such as he was , strong Christians ; a spiritual desire of death ; nor was this less fervent than that . No wonder if he were in a straight . 

There was in St. Paul ( As there is in every good minister ) a love to his persons the Philippians , who were a part of his care , in respect of whom he very well knew how advantageous his life would be . I but this holy apostle had an ardent love to Christ , which made him ( As all perfect Christians do ) long to be with him ; yea , as it were impatient of death , and this put him into a straight . much like that which would ( To use Zanchy his comparison ) afflict a tender mother and affectionate wife , when she is called upon to go to her husband in some remote place , and withal to leave her children behind her , when yet perhaps they are not able to help themselves . or ( To use St.  Bernard's allusion ) which would distress a beggar , when being hungry , she is invitad to come into a rich man's table and refresh herself , but she must leave her unquiet child at the door . 

What the result of the apostles determination was , appeareth in the subsequent verse , namely , to be content to abide in the flesh . and it was judicious , yea religious , since on the one hand the prejudice to him in living , would be only a retarding of his bliss in Christ's presence for a time : but on the other hand the danger to them Might be great through his dying , by reason of the many false teachers which endeavoured to subvert their faith , and so destroy their souls , by which likewise would accrue dishonour to Christ . so that charity to the Philippians good , and zeal to Christ's glory , did at last weigh down the scale : but still it was not without much ado , many debating and perplexing thoughts which did arise from his earnest desires of enjoying him whom his soul loved . 

And now that the same desire which was in this holy apostle May be imprinted on our hearts , i shall briefly commend these following counsels . 

1.  let our affections be alienated from this world when the entangled bird would fly upwards , the snare pulls it back : thus doth worldly love hinder us from mounting heaven-ward in our desires to be with Christ . you have ofttimes beheld the sorrowful parting of dear friends , what delays and tears , salutes and looking back , so loath are they to leave each other : thus must it needs be between the world , and him that is a friend of the world . Ejus est in mundo diu velle remanere quem mundus oblectat , saith St. Cyprian : he that is taken with , cannot but desire to continue in the world ; and it is a kind of death to think of parting with it , which he knoweth must be when death comes . and therefore said an ancient truly , the soul can never willingly be separated from the body , till it be taken off from these worldly pleasures . 

2.  let no sin have dominion over us . when the sting is plucked out of the serpent , it is not terrible , but amiable . St. Paul hath told us , the sting of death is sin ; oh let us pluck it out by repentance ! it is impossible for him who lieth in sin to live with Christ : well May he be afraid to die . indeed , if a wicked man desire to die , it is out of ignorance and incogitancy , because he doth not rightly apprehend , or at least seriously consider what followeth after death . Alas , it were far better for an impenitent sinner to live here , though in meanness and misery , then to go hence , and be with devils in torment to eternity . Oh let it be our care in life , to separate stnne from our souls , and then the separation by death of our souls from our bodies , will be a means of the union of our souls with Christ , and consequently an object rather of joy then fear . 

3.  let our faith grow up to a full assurance . it was by faith that Moses refused Pharaoh's treasures , and chose affliction with the persons of God ; and by faith it is that we are enabled to contemn life , and desire death . Those things which are so glorious in the worldlings eyes , are to faith contemptible , and those things which are so dismal when looked upon with an eye of sense , become amiable to the eye of faith : even death which is the King of terrors , is to a believer a Queen of desires . that he who questioneth whether there be a life after death , or who doubts whether he shall partake of it , should be afraid to die , is no wonder . He that knoweth not what shall become of him when he goeth hence , May well be desirous to stay here . and therefore let us strengthen our faith in the promise of eternal life , and make our calling and election sure . 

4.  Finally , let our love to Christ be more and more inflamed . love is desirous of union , and if fervent , will break through all difficulties to the enjoyment of its object : friends delight much in each others society . what loving wife would not willingly be with her husband ? ay , and go to him , though it be over the boisterous seas ? Oh when shall i come and appear before God , was David's wish ; arising from his zealous love to God's presence in his sanctuary . Come Lord Jesus , come quickly , is the voice of the church earnestly longing after his approach , because she dearly loveth him . And from this sweet spring bubled up that affectionate wish of an ancient : utinam essem cum christo meo , oh that i were with my Christ ! Mori timeat qui nolit esse cum christo , as St. Cyprian excellently : let him be afraid to die , who would not be with Christ ; to which he cannot be unwilling who hath a sincere affection towards him . 

Thus let us remove out of the way those stumbling blocks of reigning wickedness , and worldly love ; let us take to ourselves the wings of faith in , and love to Christ ; so shall we make haste in our desire to be dissolved , that we May be with him . 

Having given a dispatch to the text , it now remaineth that i adjoin a few words concerning this our deceased sister , whose remains are to be laid up in the grave . and truly whither you look upon her in her life or death , in her health or sickness , you shall find her a pattern of many graces . She was the daughter and niece of two reverend ministers of the gospel , now with God ; and as i doubt not but she had a religious education ; so she retained the sweetness of that liquor with which she was at first seasoned . That truly reform religion of the church of England , wherein she had been grounded and established : she constantly professed , and in some measure practised . she was an affectionate wife ; a tender mother ; a prudent Mistress ; a friendly neighbour ; a virtuous woman ; and a devout Christian . 

It pleased God of late to visit her with much sickness , which she underwent with much patience , being often heard to say , shall i kick against my maker . in her last sickness she was full of heavenly expressions by which she gave testimony of the graces of God conferred upon her . She renewed her repentance and godly sorrow for her sins , for though she blessed God who had kept her from notorious sins , that she could not but accuse herself for many neglects and infirmities , being much troubled yet she had spent her time so ill , and not done that service for God she ought . Ardent were her longings after God's favour ; often saying , a reconciled God is worth all the world . she testified her submission to God's dispose , by that sweet language , if it were God's will , i am content to live , but not else . her affections were much taken off from the world , for which reason . She said ; she was unwilling her children should be about her bed , least they should steal her heart from God ; and though she had the world at will , yet she accounted all dung that she Might win Christ . it pleased God to suffer Satan to winnow her , but her faith did not fail , and after some conflicts she got the conquest , triumphing over him , bidding defiance to him , casting herself in an humble confidence upon the merits of her redeemer . finally , when she was desired by her friends to forbear much speaking least it should exhaust her spirits ; her reply was , can i spend myself better then for God ? with whom i trust she now is , which since it is far better for her i hope it will not be too much trouble to her relations . let not her dear husband grieve inordinately , since she is gone to her better husband Christ . let not her affectionate aunt mourn immoderately , because she is gone to her heavenly father . let none of her friends weep much for her , who is with her best friend ; rather let all of us learn to follow her in those virtues which she practised that we May attain that glory whereof i hope she is possessed , whither he bring us who hath dearly bought us , Jesus Christ the righteous . 

Amen . 

Finis . 





gen. 1.  party . 1.  2 tim. 4. 6.  2 pet. 1. 14 , 15.  tertul. l. de animâ . c. 27.  Ambros. de bono mortis , c. 2. plat. in Phad . cic. in tusc.  ambros. ibid. aug. l. de spir. . & anim . c. 43.  eccl. 12. 11.  2 cor. 5. 1.  John 1. 14.  1 pet. 2. 11.  aug.  Job 14. 10.  mic. 2. 10.  Luke 12. 35.  partic. 2.  2 cor. 5. 6.  rev. 14. 16.  luk. 23. 43.  1 thes. 4. 17.  rev. 6. 9  aug. l. de eccl. dogin . c. 79.  id. de consid. mort. serm. 2.  just . m. quaest. & resp. orthod 9 75.  greg. naz. in erat . Caesar . Macat . hom. 12.  chrysost. in phil. hom 3.  iren. adv. haer. l. 5.  chrysost. ibid.  Jobn 14. 18.  cypr. de mortal  gen. 2. partic. 1.  hier. Turtul . Luke 12. 36.  cypr. ibid.  Greg ▪ mor. l. 5. c. 40.  isai. 57 2.  2 cor. 5. 4  quer. 2.  vulg. lat.  exod. 20. 12.  luk. 2. 29.  sen. ep. 24.  cic.  cypr. de mortal . sen. ep.  cypr. de mortal . id. ibid. arab.  heb. 1. 0.  rom. 8. 17.  prov. 8. 18.  eph. 2. 6.  rev. 3. 21.  joh. 17. 24.  rom. 8. 17. 2 tim. 2. 1• . rev. 3. 20.  m•• . 4. 2.  psal. 15. 10.  psal. 73. 25.  1 king. 10. 8.  Bulling . mat. 17. 4.  cael. Rodig . l. 21. c. 44.  see my sermon called the epitaph of a godly man . ver. 21 , 24.  zanch. in l•c . bern. serm. 12. in cart . cypr ib. diad•ch . 1 cor 15. 56.  psal. 42. 2.  rev. 22. 20.  cypr. ibid. mr Abraham , and mr Isaac calf . 





























































