A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITEHALL january the 30th . Being the day of the Martyrdom of King CHARLES the First . 

By the Bishop of St. Asaph , Lord Almoner to Their MAJESTY'S . 

Published by Her Majesty's Command . 

LONDON , Printed for Thomas jones at the White-horse without Temple-bar . MDCXCI . 

The BISHOP of St. Asaph's SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITEHALL . 

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITEHALL . 

2 Chron. xxxv . 24 , 25.  

And all Juda and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah : And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah ; and all the singing-men and the singing-women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to this day ; and they made them an Ordinance in Israel ; and behold , they are written in the Lamentations . 

WE are here met this day to humble ourselves before God , for one of the greatest Sins that ever was committed by any People that professed the true Religion ; except only the jews rejecting and crucifying their messias ; and to bewail the greatest loss , I think the greatest , that ever befell any Nation , in the death of any one Person ; both which Sin and which Calamity together , I would have paralleled in one Text , but I know not where to find it in Scripture . 

For the Example of our Saviour is too high to be brought into comparison with any other : And to go lower ( as it becomes us , when we speak of a mere Man , a Temporal Prince ; ) for so excellent Goodness in Man , for such a Blessing in a temporal King , to be so wretchedly lost , so wickedly destroyed , by them that were blessed with it ; there is no Example of the like to be met with , I say , not only in Scripture , but not in any Story that I know , from the beginning of the World to this day . 

In the Age of Gospel-story , while Christ and his Apostles were here , there was then no Christian King upon the Earth ; and if there had been , we may guests what Affection , what Obedience , what Veneration would have been paid him by them that so abounded in their Precepts of those Duties , to Heathen Princes , to cruel Tyrants , to monsters of Men , such as Nero , under whom two Apostles knowing they were to suffer Death , yet commanded every Soul to be subject to the higher Powers , the People to submit to them for the Lords sake , and their Pastors to put them in mind to obey them . 

They which taught thus , ( and we are sure they lived as they taught , ) how glad would they have been to have had those Duties to pay to such a Prince as we have seen , by some great Professors of Religion , but quite contrary to their Patterns and Rules , most contumeliously treated and abused , most sacrilegiously and barbarously murdered . 

Among the jews , who had many Kings of their own Religion , some approved of God , and others taxed as they justly deserved ; it is observable that their Carriage towards them all ( as well the evil as the good , ) was generally such as the Gospel requires of us Christians . If there were amongst them any Murderers of Kings , the Scripture is careful to let us know what they were , wicked Men , Sons of Belial ; and it shows us how they sped , they were put to Death for it , according to the Law of Moses ; it is most careful to separate them from the Generation of God's People , to show their detestation of such persons and Practices . By what we read , we cannot but judge , they would have trembled to think of that which they that called themselves God's People had the impiety to do ; they had the prodigious wickedness to do it , and yet they had the face to call themselves God's People . I am sure 't is in vain , to look for any thing like this in Scripture . 

But to show how the jews demeaned themselves toward their Kings , and first to evil Kings , I ought to take my first measures from their Behaviour towards Saul ; and especially from the most memorable instance of David , whom God himself having declared to be a Man after his own heart , we have the divine Approbation of what he said and did in this matter . 

But of his excellent behaviour toward Saul , besides many other remarkable instances , we have one in the Lesson that was read to you this morning . There you heard , how when one brought David the News of Saul's death , by a sure token , that he had killed him himself , which one would have thought should have been welcome News to one that could never be safe while Saul lived , and that now upon his death was sure to be his Successor ; for all that , David had such a detestation of the Fact , and of the impudence of him that boasted of it , that first he caused him to be put to death ; he pronounced his Sentence in those memorable words , 2 Sam. i 16.  Thy Blood be upon thy head , for thy mouth hath testified against thee , saying , I have slain the Lords Anointed : And having thus avenged his Death , how he mourned for it afterwards , we see in his mourning Song that he composed , and which was read to you out of the same Chapter . 

But we are now upon the Death of a good King , and to show the People's sense of this , and their Behaviour upon it , you cannot pitch upon an instance more likely , than at the Death of josiah . A most remarkable instance in two respects : 

First , Considering their loss of so excellent a Person . 

And Secondly , the many harsh Circumstances of his death . 

For the Person , a holy and good Man , a just and a merciful Prince , such a Prince as came not in many Ages ; in many hundred of years . 

They had three Kings , in whom they gloried above all other ; they were David and Hezekiah , and josias . And yet David had faults , which one would tremble to think of . Hezekiah was not free from Faults , as appeared when God left him , 2 Chron. xxxii . 31.  The least Evil we read of any King in Scripture , is of josiah . Some Indiscretion it was perhaps in him , to engage in that War against Pharaoh Necho . I dare not say it was sin in him , for Scripture hath not said it . But if that was not sin , I am sure we read of none that he had . And in this respect , we may place him above David and Hezekiah ; so the Scripture does in general Words , saying , that like him there was no King before him , that turned to the Lord with all his heart , and with all his Soul , and with all his Might , according to all the Law of Moses ; neither after him arose there any like him . 

He was a singular Prince , and had a singular mark of it in that Prophecy , which named him 300 years before he was born : Behold a Child shall be born to the House of David , Josiah by Name . 

no small things you may be sure he was to do , that God thought worth speaking of , and foretelling so many Ages before . 

When josias was born , and came to be King , he did all those things which were foretold of him in that Prophecy . He abolished that Idolatry and Superstition , that had grown up under his loose Predecessors . He restored and established the true Religion according to the Scriptures : Which Scriptures were lost , ( say the jews ) through disuse , in the Reign of King Amon his Father ; and it appears in his Story , how he brought them to light , and restored them unto their Authority and Dignity . You read how Zealously and Industriously he provided for the Worship of God : for the place of it , by repairing and beautifying of the Temple ; for the Service by furnishing it with Vessels and Utensils ; for the Solemnity of it , appointing Music according to the Commandment of David ; for the Festivals of it , he made all Israel and juda to be present at the Passover ; he brought all their Religions into one , he had that Exercised in one manner , and in one place ; he made all that were present in Israel to serve the Lord their God , 2 Chron. xxxiv . last verse . 

All this the Scripture saith of him , and approves in him ; and therefore we are sure he did well in it . And as well one would think he might have expected at God's hands , especially , if we consider those Scriptures of the Jewish Dispensation ; which stirred men up to Obedience , with the Promise of Temporal Blessings ; and deterred them from sin , with the threatening of temporal Punishments . Among those promised Blessings are Peace and long Life ; for which , who , in Iosias' Case , would not have thought he might have taken God's word ? But with this excellent Prince it seemed to fall out on the contrary . 

For great and just cause , as I shall show you , ( but it may seem very strange the mean while ) when he had done all that in him lay to advance the Kingdom of God ; in an hour unlooked for , his Kingdom was at an end , and his Life with it . Both these were cut off in the 37th . year of his Age , which is but half the Age of Man , the Noon of it as 't is termed in that Prophecy , Amos viij . 8 , 9 , 10.  

't is a remarkable Prophecy , I shall first read you the Words , and then I shall show you the Accomplishment . The words are , Shall not the Land tremble for this , and every one Mourn that dwelleth therein ? And it shall rise up wholly as a Flood , and it shall be cast out and drowned as by the Flood of Egypt . And it shall come to pass in that day , saith the Lord God , that I will cause the Sun to go down at Noon , and I will darken the Earth in the clear Day . And I will turn your Feasts into Mourning , and all your Songs into Lamentations ; and I will bring up Sackcloth upon all Loins , and baldness upon every head : And I will make it as the mourning of an only Son , and the end thereof as a bitter day . 

All this Rabbi Solomon jarchi observes , was fulfilled upon the death of josiah . The King of Egyt there specified , Pharaoh Necho ( or the Lame ) Wars with the King of Babylon ; and Iosiah's Country lying between them , he marches through it with an Army , without his leave , nay against his Prohibition . Which injurious attempt against his honour and safety , while josiah endeavoured to oppose , he engaged himself in a War , which soon after cost him his Life . 

One Arrow puts an end to that Holy Life , that good Reign , that Righteous Government , by which he thought he had secured a lasting peace to himself and his Kingdom . So good josiah is gone ; and judah and jerusalem with him . gone are all those Blessings they enjoyed , and hoped for , by his means . There was nothing more to be looked for , but a bitter day , a day of Captivity ; a bitter day according to Amos' Prophecy ; which they knew , and which if you read over again , you cannot wonder at that which follows in my Text ; All juda and jerusalem , etc.  

For the method of my Discourse upon this Text , 

First , I shall consider what the People of God did in that Age , upon the Death of josiah . 

Secondly , I shall consider the Reasons of their doing it . 

Thirdly , I shall consider how it is applicable to our Occasion . 

First , What they did , it appears in my Text , they lamented him at present , they laid up their Lamentations for future times . They had a set Form drawn up for that purpose , and they made a Law that that Form should be observed ; and so it was unto this day , saith the Text , that is for above 100 years ; how much longer we know not , but so long we are sure it continued ; For it continued from Iosiah's Death , at least till the writing of this Story , and this was written much above a hundred years after Iosiahs' Death . 

Secondly , For the Reasons of it , which are not in my Text , they are easy to be collected out of this Chapter , compared with other places of Scripture . It appears they had great cause to lament the death of josiah ; and that , not for any loss it was to him , but for the great loss to God's Church and People . 

First , And principally for the cause of it , that was for their Sins . And , 

Secondly , For the punishment of their Sins : they were punished at present in the want of his good Example and Government ; and for the future , great cause they had to fear , it might portend and bring on the ruin of their Nation . 

For the Third part of my Discourse ( that is , ) what we are to do in our Circumstances ; it will be very easy to judge , when we have considered what they did in theirs . 

First , At present they lamented King Iosiah's Death , as being no doubt , a great Calamity to their Church and to their Nation . saith my Text , All Juda and Jerusalem mourned for Josias ; in the Arab. Translation , they were cast down with vehement Grief for Josias ; in the Syriac Translation , they laid up mourning and lamentation for Josiah ; it was a great , a public , a lasting Calamity ; it deserved a great , a public , a lasting lamentation . 

Especially my Text saith , the Prophet Jeremiah lamented for Josiah ; the vulgar Translation adds Ieremia's Maxim , jeremiah above all others . no question but as he best knew the worth of josiah , so he most grieved for the irreparable loss in his Death . 

But was that all ? I suppose not ; for jeremiah was a Prophet ; he foresaw the sad consequence of this loss to his Nation : He felt how it Shaken the Foundation of their Happiness : He was concerned , not only for the present , but for after times ; as a wise and good Man , he lamented with them of the present Age ; as being also a Prophet , he lamented for them of future Ages . And to engage the whole Church to mourn and lament with him , he provided a Form , both for the present and for the future . 

Their public Forms in the time of Solomon's Temple , were no other ( that I know ) but Hymns suited to their occasions ; whether ordinary , on their Sabbaths , and New Moons , and other Festivals ; or extraordinary , on their Fasts , and Days of Thanksgiving . 

For every Fastday , they had a 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 or Song of Lamentation . josiah deserved a yearly Fast up-upon the day of his Death . jeremiah composed the Office for it , which was a Song of Lamentation . A Song of Lamentation , so it is plainly exprespressed in the Original , and it is sufficiently rendered in the Septuagint , but imperfectly in our English Translation . He made on him a 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 as the Hebrews , a 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 as the Greeks call it , he made a mourning Song or Psalm of Lamentation . 

Which Song , being ( as I have said ) the public Office of the Church for that day ; he put it it into their hands , by whom that Service was to be performed . Now that was chiefly by singing Men and singing Women : Yet not so , but that all the People joined with them in singing the Public Office , or Psalm in their Lamentations . They do it still to this day , saith the Writer of this Book , who is thought to have been Ezra the Scribe : Sure enough , it was one that lived after the Babylonian Captivity ; for the last Chapter and Verse of this Book , speak of their return from that Captivity , and the same is the first Verse of the first Chapter of Ezra . From hence it certainly appears , that till after the Captivity , that is , for 140 years , they still continued their Lamentation , and still used this Form of Lamentation for the Death of josiah . 

And they did it not arbitrarily , but by a Law which obliged them to it . So my Text saith , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that is , they which then governed made it a Law upon Israel , that every year upon the day on which josiah was slain , these Offices should be used for the lamenting of josiah . Thus Pagnin and Malvenda interpret my Text.  

And that which follows , behold they are written in the Lamentations ; they understand , not of those Lamentations in the Bible , but the whole Body of the jewish Lamentations , that were used upon their solemn Fast-days . Those now extant in the Bible , were particularly composed for the Babylonian Captivity . Which Captivity having occasioned so many Fast-days in the year ; one for the besieging of jerusalem , another for the taking of it ; another for the destruction of the Temple , another for the loss of the Remnant with Gedaliah ; these Lamentations in aftertimes swallowed up the remembranee of all other Lamentations ; and of this for josiah among the rest . 

They remembered it , ( as I have said ) until Ezra's time ; when though perhaps they observed not the day , yet they continued the Office or Form for it . 

But how ? They sung not this by itself , but ( saith my Text ) 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 they used this Among their other Lamentations . But since his time ( as it may seem ) for the shortening of the Office , which was long upon those Fast-days in remembrance of the Captivity , they left out this particular Office for the loss of josiah ; and so probably by this means we came to lose the words of this Lamentation . 

But these four things I have sufficiently proved from my Text : 

First , That there was a general Mourning for Josiah at his death ; 

Secondly , That the Prophet jeremy made a particular Office for it ; 

Thirdly , That this Office was used among others upon the Day of Lamentation ; 

Fourthly , That this Use was established by a Law upon Israel ; and that this Law was observed till Ezra's time , that is , for 140 Years , even till the end of the Babylonian Captivity . 

Next , I am to proceed to the Reason of this Institution . 

The Reason of it was , not for his sake that was taken from them , but for their sakes from whom he was taken . 

As ( for him ) there was no cause to lament . He died in Peace ; or else how could God's Promise to him be fulfilled ? 2 Chron. 34. 28.  It was said to him from God by Hulda the Prophetess , Behold , I will gather thee to thy Fathers , and thou shalt go to thy Grave in Peace . 

But yet it is plain , that he died in War. What shall we say to this ? He that died in War , did he go to his Grave in Peace ? 

then surely Peace in God's Language is something else than in ours . 

It is so , it is Peace with God. Take it so , and there is nothing strange in those Paradoxes of Scripture , that there is no peace to the wicked , but abundance of peace is to the righteous . These and all the like sayings are plain , if you understand them aright , of Peace with God.  

It is certainly true , that whether Peace or no Peace , it must be judged , by having God to our Friend , or to our Enemy . This is a sure way of judging , as sure as it is that God is true ; only the truth of it does not appear in this life , as it will in the future . The Righteous in this life , though he is in Friendship with God , which nothing can break but wilful or habitual Sin ; yet his Peace is disturbed often times , even with Sins of Infirmity , 't is eclipsed with troubles in this World , it is clouded with melancholy Doubts , which even good Men are subject to . It is never perfect and clear while we live in Houses of Clay ; but when these are dissolved , than the Righteous enters into peace , that is , into the perfection of it ; into that clear Light , the calm Sunshine of God's presence for ever more . Now this blessed estate , being that which josiah gained by his Death , according to the promise of God ; a blessedness which none can obtain but by Death ; and which he could not have had so soon by dying otherwise : What reason had they to lament for josiah , that was such a Gainer by his Death ? There was no cause of lamentation for him . 

They only had cause to lament for his Death that lost by it : And that did all juda and jerusalem . They lost all they had to trust to , they lost the Lease of their safety and well-being ; for they held it only by his Life , the holy and good Life of josiah . 

It was decreed against them in the Court of Heaven , after a long Trial , for their National Sins , that they should be carried away into Captivity . There was no Remedy , for the Lord had sworn it , Amos 8. 7.  I will remove Juda out of my sight , I will cast off Jerusalem , which I have chosen , and the house of which I said my Name shall be there . 

It was thus decreed ; but when was it to be executed ? Not in good Iosiah's days ; for it is against God's Rule to punish the good Child for the wicked Father's sake . And besides , God had promised him in the forementioned place , that his Eye should not see all the evil that he would bring upon that place . 

What then ? Should God for Iosiah's sake wholly reverse that Judgement which he had sworn to execute upon Israel ? He could not reverse it , because his Oath was immutable . And yet , for his promise sake , God could not execute it in his days . Thou in his days the People deserved it ; for they were then a wicked People , notwithstanding all the good they derived from his Influence ; they served God , because he made them do it , 2 Chron. 34. 33. they turned to God , not with all their heart , but feignedly , Jer. 3. 10. even in those days , in the days of King josiah , as you read in the 6th . Verse of that Chapter : Yet that hypocritical People , was protected by this Religious Prince ; God's Judgement could not come at them , till he was taken out of the way . 

But when he was removed , they lay bare to the Vengeance of God. then he would have a full blow at them , than wrath was to be poured out upon them to the uttermost . then God's Judgements were to rush in upon them , like the breaking in of the Sea. then they were to suffer those things , which to hear of , were enough to make one's Ears tingle . 2 Kings xxi . 12.  jer. nineteeen . 3.  

And if they understood this , as we are certain they might , and Jeremy did understand it ; we cannot wonder that all Juda and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah , and Jeremy especially : Since they saw , and he saw it especially , their Walls and Bulwarks were broken down by that good King Josia's death . They had lost that good Prince of whom they were not worthy , and were now to expect those things of which they were most worthy . They had great cause therefore to lament themselves before God.  

They could not but do it voluntarily , that were sensible of their Condition . And they did well to make a Law for it , to oblige them that were not sensible . 

But beside this Cause , which was peculiar to them ; there was another in Common to them and us , and all Nations ; that is , considering their own Sin , and God's punishment of it . For the death of a good King is a great public Calamity . And such Calamities are always for the sins of the People . 

I begin first with the Punishment , for of that we are most apt to be sensible . 

And yet many are not sensible of that ; not of a public punishment , till it comes home to themselves , till it touches their own persons and Families ; 't is pity that such should ever want such punishment ; 

But for such as have a sense of Public Affairs , they cannot but be deeply sensible of this ; that , the loss of a good King is a great Calamity to a Nation . 

The death of any King is a loss , unless God change him for a better . But he must be extreme bad that is not better than none at all . It was never worse with Israel then when there was no King amongst them ; for then , every one did what was good in his own Eyes . In the 4 last Chapters of the Book of Judges , God says this four times over , as fit for more than common Observation . 

But specially there is a great loss of a good King , a good Example , a good Governor , one that makes it his business to do all that can be done for the protecting and uniting of his People , for the preserving and advancing of Truth and Peace , of Religion and Righteousness among them . Such a nursing Father to the Church , such a Wise Manager of the State , such a Fortress and Bulwark to his Nation , when he is taken away from them ; what can they think of it ? 

If they are not lost to all Sense , they cannot but be sensible of this . A good King being so great a Blessing to a Nation , we have cause to impute the loss of him to our Sins . We are taught so in sundry places of Scripture . And therefore we are taught to lament for those Sins ; both National and Personal ; for our own sins and the sins of our Nation . 

For our own sins in the first place . It should be every one's care , when we bewail the Public Calamities , to consider , that such are for the sins of the Nation . But the Nation is made up of Individual persons ; and I am one of those Individuals , therefore I am to search into my own sins , ( I speak now as being one that lived and sinned in those times ; ) to lay my hand upon my breast , to examine my own heart , and seriously to consider , how far I contributed to that public Gild which brought down this public Judgement upon us . And as far as I find I contributed to it , to confess and bewail my own sins before God ; to ask pardon ; and that I may be capable of it , to mourn deeply and heartily ; and to show the proof of it in my real amendment ; that as I have thrown in my Talon , into the National sin , so I may do my part in promoting the National Reformation . 

If I have no sin of my own to mourn for , ( which in strict speaking is impossible , ) but if I have no presumptuous and clamorous sin to answer for ; or if my sins are of a latter date ( which is the case of the greatest part of you that hear me ; ) yet for such , they are all to consider themselves as Members of this Nation , and mourn for the sins of the Nation ; for those Epidemical sins , that brought down such a public Judgement upon us . 

For so doing , we have the Examples of Ez. 9 3. of Neh. 9 16. of Daniel 10. 1.  How did those Holy Men Mourn , and humble themselves before God for the sins of Ages past , that brought upon them the Babylonian Captivity ? And yet that Captivity also was past when they poured out their Souls before God , in tears for the sins of their Fathers . How much more have Holy Men lamented for the sins of their own Age ? The Prophet David on this account poured out Rivers of Tears , Psal. 119. 136.  The Prophet jeremy 9 1.  Wished that his head were Water , and his Eyes a Fountain of Tears , to bewail the sins of his Nation . But especially our blessed Saviour himself , though he had no sin , yet he had Tears for them that had , Luke 19 42.  He beheld jerusalem and wept over it , saying , O that thou hadst known , even in this thy day , the things that belong to thy peace ! but now they are hid from thine Eyes . 

Tears are of no use , without hearty endeavours , where endeavours may be used , and we have reason to hope they may do good . And therefore these also were applied , by those Holy Men whom I have mentioned . And these also are required of us , even our utmost Endeavours , every one within the Sphere of his Calling , to bring others to a sight and sense of their Sins ; and to persuade them to join with us , every one , by his particular , to help on the public Reformation . 

This is the end of all Judgements , which are not to final Destruction , Isaia 27. 9  This is the fruit of them to take away our sin . And this is the end of our Sorrow , 2 Cor. 7. 10.  Godly Sorrow works Repentance to Salvation , not to be repent of . And this is the end of our Fast days , as God teaches us : joel 2. 12.  Turn you to me with all your hearts , with fasting , and with weeping , and with mourning ; and rend your hearts , and not your Garments , and turn you to the Lord your God. So Hosea fourteen . 1 , 2.  OH Israel , turn unto the Lord thy God , for thou hast fallen by thy iniquity ; take with thee words , and turn to the Lord ; say unto him , take away all our Iniquity , and receive us graciously ; so will we render thee the Calves of our Lips.  

This aught to have been the Fruit of their Lamentation for josia ; but for want of this , it did them no good ; their Iniquity was their ruin . 

That ours may not be so to us , God grant we may mend that fault in our Lamentation . 

't is our business on this day to lament our josiah , above 40 years after ; as the jewish Church did theirs , 140 years after his Death . I shall first consider the Cause of our Lamentation , and then our Duty in consequence of it . 

On both these Heads , I have much more to say then I can bring within my time . But if I do exceed , I hope you will bear with me ; for I suppose I hinder nothing but what may well be spared on this day . 

Our business on this day , is to lament for the Death of our josiah ; that most excellent Prince , on whose Name his greatest Adversaries have fastened no more , nor indeed no other blame , than God hath left upon the Memory of josiah . 

But whatsoever good we read of in josiah , it is known , to all that knew him , to have been eminently in that Prince , whom we lament on this day . 

They were both alike , born and bred up in the true Religion . But herein the advantage was on our Iosia's side , that this was he true Christian Religion ; which as far excels the jewish , as the clear Sunshine doth the light of a dark misty day . And as we have reason to believe that Josiah had studied his Religion , for he as well taught as commanded both his Priests and People their Duties ; so had our Josia . He understood his Religion thoroughly . It was his judgement that endeared it to his Affection . And with both these together , like a true Defender of the Faith , he maintained it all ways against all sorts of Adversaries . 

Especially , he was a most zealous observer and assertor of God's Worship , as was Josia . He was an heroic Pattern of all Virtues , as was Josia . He was like josias in all the Divine Perfections of his Life ; and for our Sins he was too like him in suffering an untimely and violent Death . 

So the Parallel runs quite through between the two persons ; and it doth not fall short in any part of that Duty that was paid to their Memories . All that my Text saith , was done upon the Death of josia , we have seen , and yet see , the same done to the Memory of our King. All true Servants of God in our Church , do and will for ever bewail and lament for him . We have a Set Form prescribed for it , which was read to us upon this day . And it is to be read yearly upon this day , for ( as my Text saith , ) it is made an Ordinance throughout Israel . 

But in the Lamentation of the jews for josia , there was , as I have shown , a just Reflection made , by jeremiah especially , upon those Sins of the Nation , for which God deprived them of that Blessing that they enjoyed in such an excellent Prince . The like was made afterwards by Daniel , and by Ezra , and by Nehemia , upon those Sins of their People in those Times , which provoked God afresh to send down his Judgements upon them to their utter destruction . 

This is that we have reason to fear ; and their way to prevent it must be ours . Our Reflections upon the Sins of this Nation , as well before the King's Death , as since , even to this day , in order to our Amendment , these are the most useful and necessary Ingredients of our Lamentation . 

And this will be more required of Us , than it was of the jews , in respect of that much greater Light which God hath given Us. We shall find in our Account , that we are the Disciples of Christ ; and that in the upper Form of his School , whatsoever we think of it . We have his Religion in as great perfection , as ever it was in any Nation . 

This advantage we have had by our Reformation from Popery . Ever since , God hath given us the free use of the Scriptures ; and together with it , those helps of Learning that never were before in any Age ; which singular Blessings of God , to set forth to you as they deserve , would be the business of a Book , and not of the end of a Sermon . 

Now what returns to God have we made for all this ? I must needs say , for an Age after the Reformation of Religion , there seemed to be a great Reformation of men's Lives . There was then a zeal for Religion kindled in their hearts , by seeing so many holy Men burn for it in Queen Mary's days . 

But when that heat was over , ( their first love I may call it , ) as they cooled to Religion , so they went off by degrees , from their Primitive Purity and Holiness . It was but too visible in this blessed Monarch's Reign , that they that had the Conduct then of Religion , had not the same zeal for it that they had , whom God made the Instruments of our Reformation . They were indeed more concerned than they for external things , but not so much for that which is the Soul and Life of Religion . 

This gave occasion to others to fly out another way . They called every thing of external Worship , Popery . They were against all Imposition , even in lawful things . They made such a noise against it , as turned men's heads . They so scared them with little things , made great by false Lights , that they run into the greatest Evils to avoid them . Into a War , the worst sort of it , a Civil War ; a bloody Rebellion , that drew a long Train of Calamities after it . It came to this at last : We lost the best King that God ever gave to this Nation . How we lost him , I tremble to say ; and yet we all know ; it is the saddest part of our Lamentation on this day . It soon appeared what a blow this gave to Religion , by the general dissolution of Order and of Discipline in the Church . And to the Nation likewise , by the Confusions that followed ; which , if they had run a little further , we should soon have ceased to be a Nation . 

In this miserable condition , when we lay ( as it were ) gasping for Life , it pleased God out of the Cloud to look upon us . He gave us , as it were , a New Life , a Resurrection from the dead . He restored us , when it was visible that none but he could do it . It was such a mercy to this Nation , such a heap of Mercies together , that all Nations stood amazed at it . 

We cannot but be astonished ourselves , if we consider what opportunities ▪ God put then into their hands . They that were at the Helm , needed but ask and have , whatsoever they thought fit , to settle both Church and State. To have secured Truth , and Peace , and Unity , and Love , and Holiness ; in a word , all that pleases God , and all that makes a People happy . 

We have cause for ever to lament the loss of these Opportunities . But how much more the wretched purposes to which they were misapplyed ? For the gratifying of men's Lusts , for the wrecking of their Revenge , for the enriching of themselves and their Friends . 

For them that had no such designs , they seemed to live like Men without any . Instead of glorifying God , they fell to drinking of Healths . Instead of being stricter in Religion , they grew loser in their Lives . Instead of frequenting God's Worship , they filled the Playhouses , and worse places . Instead of adorning the Gospel , they exposed it to the scorn of our Adversaries : Instead of composing Differences among ourselves , they were rather for widening them . 

This was bad enough otherwise , but much the worse through their fault that should have mended these things . Instead of Reforming , they used ways to debauch us more ; and instead of Uniting , they used ways to inflame our Divisions . 

It was a Riddle , that any Government should suffer such things ; till at last it appeared , they were not only suffered but designed . The design of it was plainly this , to bring in Popery again . And that had certainly returned ; It had prevailed over us ever this time ; if God had not wonderfully delivered us from it . 

It pleased God to give us a second Resurrection , more wonderful than the former . The marks of God's Hand were so visible in it , at first , and are so daily more and more ; that he is blind that doth not see them . There is enough , one would think , to convince even the Atheist to the belief of a Providence . But whosoever doth believe it , should consider the work of God ; and whosoever considers , cannot but see what it drives at : and he that sees that , how can he but comply with his Design ? It is plainly the design of God by this turn , to establish the Protestant Religion in these Kingdoms . And in order to that , to unite us among ourselves : all that can unite in Worship , and the rest in their Interests and Affections . And especially , to unite us in that common design , of driving out all immorality and profaneness out of this Kingdom . It is not sense , it is a plain contradiction , to call that a Reformed Religion , which hath not the power of reforming Man's Lives . 

It is the purifying and Reforming of these , that is the chief business of Religion . And this is the chief design of God's Providence , in this Revolution . That this is God's design , he hath shown us particularly , by giving us such Princes , as enjoin us nothing but what they are Patterns of themselves . I know not what can be a clearer token of the design of God's Providence than this . 

But hath this good Providence of God the effect that he designs , and may justly expect at our hands ? We are so far from it yet , that it is a shame to say what all Men know . We are now , as to our Morals , perhaps as bad as ever we were . I fear I said too much , in saying perhaps : It is too sure , it is notorious to all the World. There never was louder Swearing , never more open Drunkeness , never more impudent Adultery , such daily Robbing , and Kill , not only in Houses , but in the open Streets . And if this Licentiousness should run on , what will it come to in time ? This is a Lamentation , and shall be for a Lamentation . 

We are so far from being fit for those Mercies and Blessings , which we had otherwise all the reason in the World to expect and to hope for under their Majesty's Government ; that now on the contrary , we have reason to fear that God will have mercy on us no more ; that having tried the utmost means to do us good , when those fail , he should give us over as incorrigible . 

My Principal hope is in the Mercies of God. Not his Ordinary Mercies , for we seem to be past them ; but I speak it with respect to those absolute Promises that he hath given to his Church , to be fulfilled in this Age. God's Promises will be made good to his Church , though we deprive ourselves of the benefit of them . 

It was an absolute promise that God made to Abraham , that he would bring his Seed out of Egypt , and that he would seat them in the promised land And God was as good as his word ; though of all them that came out of Egypt , only two had the full benefit of it ; all the rest of them died in the Wilderness . God will fulfil his Promises to them , and only them , that are careful to perform the Conditions . He preserved righteous Lot that was grieved with the filthy Conversation of them with whom he lived in Sodom , when that City was destroyed . And at the destruction of jerusalem , he did set a mark upon them that mourned for the abominations of Jerusalem . He will do the like for all them that fear his Name ; he will preserve them from the common destruction . They sha●● be mine , saith the Lord of Hosts , in the day that ● make up my jewels . I will spare them , as a Ma● spares his own Son that serves him . then shall y●● discern between the righteous and the wicked ; between him that serves God , and him that serves him no●● Mal. iii two last Verses . 

God grant that this may be the lot of all th●● hear me this day . God grant this blessing effects our Lamentations : that beholding the Judgement of God , considering those that are past , and dreading those that are to come ; we may fear to 〈◊〉 against God ; we may not only keep ourselves unspotted from the World , but do all we can to save others from Sin and Death , snatching them ( as the Apostle saith , ) like Brands out of the fire . 

At present , it would be a greater thing to stop the growing course of wickedness , than it will be afterwards to restore Religion and Virtue . And restored , I trust , it will be to a greater lustre than ever , by their Majesty's Zeal , and Wisdom , and Diligence ; which will be wholly applied to this business , when God hath well discharged them of the other , the great burden of War that is now upon their hands . God grant a speedy and happy issue of it , for his Mercies sake , through jesus Christ our Lord  

FINIS . 





Ecclesiasticus xlix . 4.  2 Kin. xxiii 25.  1 Kin. xiii . 2.  Amos viij . 8 , 9 10.  2 Kings xxiii . 27.  2 Chron. thirty . 28.  