A DISCOURSE OF DEATH , BODILY , GHOSTLY , AND ETERNAL : NOR UNFIT FOR SOLDIERS Warring , Seamen sailing , Strangers travelling , Women bearing , nor any other living that thinks of DYING . 

BY THOMAS TUKE . 

PSAL. 89. 48.  

What man lives , and shall not see death ? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the Grave ? 

ECCLS . 14. 17.  

All flesh waxeth old as a garment , and this is the condition of all times , thou shalt die the death . 

JOB . 17. 13.  

The grave shall be my house , and I shall make my bed in the dark . 

LONDON , Printed by William Stansbie for George Norton . 1613.  

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SIR JOHN LEVENTHORPE Knight , and to the right-vertuous Lady , the Lady JOAN LEVENTHORPE , his loving Wife . ( ⸪ ) 

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL , many write , and many more do speak of Death : and it were not much , if as many wrote thereof , as could write at all . For it is the Way , that all must walk in : and although to all it be either very fortunate , or very fatal , yet of the most it is forgotten , till it seem to seize upon them : yea , even we , that speak and write about it , are sometimes too unmindful of it ; perhaps then also , when we speak and write upon it . But howsoever we do forget it , it will be sure to remember us. It hath been wisely said , that to speak and think often and seriously of hell , is a good mean to save the soul from hell : so I suppose that a sad and sober thinking , and remembering of bodily death , will be a blessed help to keep the soul and body from eternal death . It is strange to see the fears of many : yet even the fearful sometimes show small fear of death , except then , when it is to be embraced . Others well near with the fear of death are brought to death . Some will not begin to live , till they feel themselves begin to die . And how many are there , that are a-fraid of death , and yet dare play with the sting of death ? It were no great matter to handle a Snake , when her poisoning tooth is pulled out : but to fly a Snake , and in the mean time not to fear that , which makes her venom , were ( I wot not well ) whether more base , or foolish . I know not why death should not be counted terrible , whiles her venomous and kill tooth is in her head ; but that being once pulled out , why she should affright a man , I see no reason . For why should he fear death , whom death doth help , not hurt , and ease rather than end ? He that dies , whiles he lives , lives whiles he is dead : yea , and that death at last shall meet with death itself . Certainly death cannot be ill to him , that lives well : neither is that worthy the name of death , which is made the door of life . Yet I find the virtuous sometimes appalled with her grisly looks . They are loath to part , that have lived long together : and a man can scarce without some reluctation forsake the house , wherein he was bred , and hath ever lived , since he lived , to dwell in another , though a better , Country . But ( me thinks ) the delicacy of the place , the affluence of all good things there , amongst these the fellowship of the Saints , the presence of that loving and beloved Saviour , the fruition of the All-sufficient God , together with a certain expectation of a joyful return at last , should satisfy the departing Soul , and settle her unruly passions . 

As for you ( Right Worshipful ) I doubt not but that God , to whom you strive to live , hath taught you both ere now to die . I write not these things therefore , as intending to instruct you , but rather to show that the memory of your love doth live within me , and as one desirous by putting you in mind of those things , which ye know already , that , whiles you live , the remembrance of them might not die . Read them at your leisure , and enjoy them . And that God , under whom they were begun and ended , give a blessing to them : unto whose saving grace I do commend you both , beseeching him in Christ jesus to vouchsafe you his love while ye live on earth , and to crown you after death with eternal life in heaven . London St. Clem. Ann. 1612.  November 5.  A day never to be forgotten of true English hearts . 

Your Worships to be commanded in the Lord , Thomas Tuke . 

To the Reader . 

I Suppose there is not one thing more common and less thought of then death . All men must die , yet most men live , as if they thought they should never die . Wherein men are very injurious to themselves ; the sad and settled remembrance of death being a notable furtherance of Repentance , and a profitable mean to keep us from eternal death . For I pray you , why should man lift up himself against his Maker , who ere long must fall into the earth ? Why should we be proud and insolent , who are but dust ? Why should we insult over any man , because we surpass him in wit , wealth , strength , honour , beauty ? Are we not all food for the Worms ? Will not death knock all our bones together ? Is not our life a breath , a bubble ? Why should a man pin his heart to the earth , and set his love on the World ? Shall not the earth devour him ? Will not the world forsake him ? She is certain in nothing , but in uncertainetie , uncertain in nothing , but in her certainty . If she do not him , yet of necessity He must forsake her . We are here but Pilgrims , and Foreigners : Mors manet omnes : and we know not how soon our Pilgrimage will end : neither can we carry the world away with us. We come naked , and we go naked . Why then should we wed our souls to the World ? riches , pleasures , wife , children , friends , honours , and all the things that the world can afford , are all mutable , momentanie , mortal : but man's soul is immortal : wherefore then should it be set upon these things ? Why not upon God , who is an immortal , and immutable Good , only indeed able to give true and full contentment to the soul ? And finally why should men wallow in their sins , and devote themselves unto their lusts ? Shall we not all die ? And as the tree falleth , so shall it lie . In what estate we die , in that we shall be judged . O that we would therefore remember our latter end ! O that we would number our days , and think of our death , that we might apply our hearts unto wisdom ! Lie is uncertain , Death is most certain : if men could duly meditate of this , that is most certain , they could not abuse and misspend that so much , which is precious , but most uncertain . But besides that all men must once die , even by the course of nature ; death being by sin bred in the bone , and will never out of the flesh : God , who hath the keys of life and death in his hand , doth by many means bring men unto their ends : and sometimes he doth punish ungodly wretches by untimely and unexpected death , showing his anger by the manner and occasion of his punishing . Famous were the judgements of God upon those persecuting Tyrants ; Domitian , Hadrian , Valerian , Dioclesian , Maximinus , Aurelian , Arnolphus , Bajazet the Turk , and Mamucha a Saracen . 

The former was slain with Daggers by his own Servants , in his privy chamber , his Wife consenting . 

The second having caused ten thousand Christians at one time to be crucified , and still raging against them ; God took him in hand at last , smit him with an issue of blood , then with a consumption of his lungs , and lights , which he spat out , thirdly with a dropsy , and being in horrible torment he would have killed himself , but being hindered , he died in that miserable estate . 

The third being taken prisoner in the Persian wars , Sapor the King of Persia used him as a block or stirrup to get on horseback , and ( as Eusebius saith ) made him to be slayed alive , and powdered with salt . 

The fourth in hatred of Christianity by public edict commanded the Christians Churches should be beaten down , and their Bible's burned and torn , and themselves to be put out of their offices in the Commonwealth , which had any : but God met with him , plagued him with strange diseases , fired his house with lightning , and terrified him with thunder so , as that not knowing where to hide himself he fell mad , and killed himself . 

The fifth was smitten with a most stinking and vile disease , which increased his cruelty , and at last killed him ; his carcase being rotten and full of worms . St. Chrysostome saith the Apple of his eye fell out before his death . 

The sixth had his throat cut by his own servants . 

The seventh rotten living , and sending forth lice and worms continually , at length died miserably in the twelfth year of his tyranny . 

Bajazet was taken captive by Tamerlaine , carried about in a Cage , and used as his stirrup , and ended his days miserably . 

Mamucha returning from the slaughter of many Christians , was with his whole Army swallowed up of the Sea , few or none escaping of an hundred sail of ships . 

What need I say so much ? The judgements of God are many and fearful in all the world . Morindus a cruel Tyrant in this Island , was devoured of a Monster that came out of the Irish Seas . Popiel a King of Poland , an Vncle-murtherer , and a notable curser , was with his wife ( who consented to his Uncle's death ) eaten up of Rats . Cerinthus perished with the fall of an hothouse upon him . Arrius voided his guts . The Emperors Constantius and Valence , both Arrians , were punished by God ; the former by a sudden , and inexpected Apoplexy , whereof he died ; the latter was burned in a little house , in which he had hid himself in his slight from the Goths . But what need I go so far for examples ? All ages are full of them . And we see how God suffers Adulterers , Drunkards , and other sinners which scape often unpunished , to fall into thefts and murders whereby they come unto their deaths . Which things , if men would duly consider , it would rouse them up by the grace of God unto better care and conscience : which God grant unto us. But I will hold thee no longer , but leave thee to consider the things I have prepared for thee . 

thine in Christ , Thomas Tuke . 

A DISCOURSE OF DEATH : CORPORAL , SPIRITVALL AND ETERNAL . 

There is , as of Life , so of Death , three different kinds ; external or bodily , internal or spiritual , eternal , or of both body and soul . 

external or bodily death is , as Plutarch saith , the Privation of all heat , or as Scaliger speaketh , the Privatien of Life : or as they both say , the Disjunction of the soul from the body , which two by God were coupled to make one living , and perfect man  

Death , is a disjunction of the soul , not a destruction , it is a separation , and not an annihilation . Etsi morimur corpore , nunquam tamen spiritu : for though ( as Martialis saith ) we die in regard of the body , yet we never die as touching the soul : because death ( as Lactantius speaketh , Mors non extinguit hominem , sed ad praemium virtutis admit tit : ) doth not make a man to be just nothing , but admits him to the reward of virtue , if he have been virtuous : or else delivers him up to most grievous punishments , if he have been vicious . 

Among the heathen some there were , that held the death a dissolution of the soul , as Democritus , Epicurus & Dicaearchus : others there were , which held it was immortal , as Pherecydes , Plato , & many more . The Stoics ( saith Lactantius ) held that the souls of men continue , and that ( nec interuentu mortis in nihilum resolui ) they are not brought by death to nothnig . Cyrus' instructing his sons a little before his death saith , that he was ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , etc. ) never persuaded that the soul of man died ; when it left the body : but saith , that the mind , when it is freed from the fellowship of the body , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is then most wise and understanding : and that , when a man is dissolved , every thing in the body ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) besides , the soul returns ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) unto the things of the same kind , that is , are resolved into the elements , out of which they were taken : and therefore he forbids his sons to think ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) that he shall be Nothing any more after his death . In like manner Hermes describing the Nature of man saith , that God made man of both natures , to wit , of an immortal nature , and of a mortal , ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) making the same man to be partly immortal , and partly mortal ; which immortality is to be understood of the soul , experience showing the body to be mortal and corruptible without all remedy . And finally , the Devil himself , as he gave testimony to the divinity of Christ , so hath he by Oracle showed the immortality of the soul : for being by Polites consulted under the name of Apollo Milesius , Whether the soul remained after death , or was dissolved , he answered , that the soul , when it was departed from the body ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) is always free from the weakness of old-age , and continueth altogether unvanquished . 

To these testimonies of the Creature we may for better satisfaction add the witness of holy Scriptures , which are the very Oracles of the great Creator . Solomon saith , that when the body returns to the earth , the spirit returns to God that gave it . esay saith , that the Worm of the transgressors shall not die , & that their fire shall not be quenched , which argues the mortal immortality , or immortal mortatalitie of their souls . Accordingly our Saviour showeth in two parables , that the souls of wicked men die not with their bodies , but remain in torments . The one is of him that said , Soul , thou hast much goods laid up for many years : but God said unto him , thou fool , this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee . The other of another rich Epicure , who was grievously tormented in hell after he was dead . It is true therefore , that as Lactantius speaketh , Mors non funditus perimit , ac delet , sed aeternis afficit cruciatibus , Death doth not utterly kill and extinguish , but everlastingly torment and punish . 

Now if the souls of the wicked die not , but continue ( though indeed afflicted so , as that their life is worthy to be called and accounted death , an ever-dying life , or an everliving death ) it were very absurd to think that the souls of the godly should perish with their bodies . Doth not our Saviour say , upon the death of Lazarus , that had lain dead four days , whom he raised up to life , Whosoever lives , and believeth in me , shall never die ? Did he not say to the Thief , that was crucified with him , To day shalt thou be with me in Paradise ? Doth he not profess that his Martyrs are blessed , that they rest from their labours , and that their works do follow them ? What blessedness have they now ? what is their honour , if their souls do die with their bodies ? And to what end should that his Proto Martyr Saint Steven commend his soul unto him , saying , Lord jesus receive my Spirit , but that he knew his soul did live , when his body was dissolved ? Or why should Saint Paul , if he did not verily believe the immortality of the soul , desire to be loosed , and to be with Christ , and use this boldness of speech unto the Corinth's . We know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed , we have a building of God , an house not made with hands , eternal in the heavens ? And finally , if Christ jesus be like unto his brethren in All things , as the Apostle teacheth , Sin excepted : than it appears , that his Brethrens are like unto him : but Christ hath a soul , which is immortal , and did not die , though his body lay dead a time : their souls therefore live ever , and die not with their bodies . And that we may not seem to forget that memorable speech of our Saviour to the Sadduces , God is not the God of the dead , but of the living : but he is the God of Abraham , Isaac , and jacob : therefore these three are living in their souls , though dead as touching the life of their bodies . 

And thus our faith concerning the not dying of the soul is founded , fed , and fortified by the testimony of the Scriptures , which being of infallible verity , are simply to be believed , for God , the Author , and Inspirer of them . 

Neither is Philosophy here of no use : therefore julius Caesar Scaliger , by three reasons proveth it , taken ( as himself professeth ) from Aristotle , and created Nature . 

First , no simple is resolved into the grounds thereof : for it is composed of no grounds : but the soul of man is a thing simple , and not compounded : for it is an Act , ( and no Act is a Power : therefore it is not compounded ) and a Ground , Principium effendi & agendi , which it cannot be , if it be compounded . It follows therefore that the soul being uncomposed is irresoluble , and so immortal . 

Secondly , the soul is a celestial Nature : namely , a fifth Essence , differing from the Nature of the four elements : unsubiect therefore to corruption , whereunto all bodies elementary are obnoxious . 

Thirdly , if the soul do die , being a simple nature , it must needs be brought to nothing : for it cannot be resolved into the grounds of it , because it hath none ( for grounds are the acts of those things whereof they be grounds : and no such ground as the soul , hath a ground of itself besides God , into whom nothing can be resolved : ) now if the soul should be brought to nothing , then of something nothing shall be made . 

It is true indeed , that the soul and all created natures , may be corrupted & destroyed , how simple they be so ever . For there is but one absolute and prime Beginning or Ground of all things , which is God : all other things are dependant , they are all from and by him . Now whatsoever dependeth on God , at his will the same thing may be changed of God , and altered at his pleasure . But the souls of men depend on God , and therefore at his beck they may be deposed from that essence , in which he made them . Now they are not corrupted , because he will not have them so to be . 

These Arguments are of some solidity , and worthy to be received : but as for that , which some do bring to demonstrate the immortality of the soul , to wit , because ( they say ) it is ( not only A Deo , but also De Deo ) of the very essence of God , which is immortal , it is altogether unreasonable & wicked . For so it would follow that the nature of God should be captivated , deceived , altered , defiled , damned , & tormented . For though indeed we be the Progeny of God , and partakers of the divine Nature , as the Apostles speak , yet are we not parts of his nature , neither doth he communicate by generation his nature to us , as a Father to his Children : For God hath but one natural son , which is Christ jesus , who is begotten from all eternity , and hath the whole Nature of the Father in his person , neither is the Nature of God capable of alteration or division : and for the speeches of these two Apostles , Paul and Peter , they are to be understood partly because God is our Architect and Creator , and partly in respect of those excellent gifts and graces , which shine in men , specially good men , more than in all other creatures , and partly in regard of that new name , state or Nature , which is through the grace of God in Christ bestowed on us. It is true indeed that the Soul in some sense may be said to be Mutable ( in deterius scilicet desiciendo , & in melius proficiendo ) to wit , by waxing better or worse , in respect of good and evil : yea , and Mortal , by dying either to sin by Mortification , or by being dead in sin , through bondage , and submission to it , or else by suffering torments for sin , which deprive it of the joys of life ; but to say that the substance , the essence of the Soul , doth die , doth perish , is dissolved , this is against all sound reason , both Theological , and Philosophical . 

It may be then demanded , if the souls of men die not , when their bodies lose them , whether go they , what becomes of them ? 

The Author of the Questions in justin saith , that the Souls of the just are carried into Paradise , where is the company and sight of Angels , and Arke-angels , and of our Saviour Christ : but the Souls of the wicked into Hell. Death ( saith Chrysostome ) doth not sever us from Christ , but joins us to that company , which is with Christ . And Anselm agreeth saying , So great peace is wrought by the death of Christ , that the souls of the Righteous do now , when they go forth of the body , forthwith enter into Heaven , the Angels being glad thereof . And this appears to be true by that Parable in the Gospel , which saith that the Beggar died , and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom : the Richman also died , and was tormented after his death in Hell. For where should the souls of men be after Death , but either in Heaven with Christ , or in Hell with the Devil ? Non est ullus ulli locus medius , ut possit esse nisi cum Diabolo , qui non est cum Christo . There is not any place for any man , to be any where but with the Devil , who is not with Christ , saith Saint Austen . There are two receptacles for men's souls , Heaven and Hell : Tertium penitus ignoramus : a third place we are utterly ignorant of , saith one . The Scripture speaketh of no more , than two . 

Thus we have seen what Death is , to wit , a disjunction of the soul from the body , and not a dissolution of the Soul with the body ; the soul remaining uncorrupt , and In aeternum , as Lactantius speaketh . 

Death , though , for the Nature of it , it be but one , and the same , to wit , a temporary divorce or separation of the soul and body , which were married or united by God himself , yet in respect of the state , into which men are by it admitted , it is double : and in regard of the means or ways , whereby it is effected , it is manifold : for as Seneca truly speaketh , Mille ad hanc aditus patent , there are a thousand ways to bring a man to Death . 

In respect of the persons dying , and of that estate , which they are let into by death , death is twofold , a death of the godly , and a death of the wicked , a sanctified and comfortable death , a miserable and unhappy death . Of the former , Balaam speaketh in his wish . Let me die the death of the righteous , and let my last end be like his : and David in the Psalm , Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints . Of the latter our Saviour speaketh in the parable when he saith , OH fool this night will they ( the devils he means ) fetch thy soul from thee : And again , The rich man also died , and was buried , and being in hell tormented , etc.  

Furthermore , death we said was manifold for the ways or means thereof . For albeit death be the common way of all flesh , ( Omnibus est eadem lethi via , non tamen unus Est vitae cunctis , exitijque modus , ) yet all men go not the same way unto death . Mille modis lethi miseros mors una fatigat . Death meets with us a thousand ways . As into a great City , or into the main Sea , so unto death there are many ways . It is as the centre , wherein all the lines do meet ; a town of Mart , wherein many ways from contrary coasts do end . Hos bella , hos aequora poscunt : His amor exitio , furor his , & saeva cupido : Vt sileam morbos . Some are eaten up of wars : some are swallowed up of the Seas . The old world was drowned , the Sodomites were burned , the disobedient Prophet was killed of a Lion , the mocking children were devoured of two Bears , Senacheribs' Army was killed with an Angel , Herod Agrippa was eaten of worms , Pherecides of lice , a King of Epirus was killed with a tile , a King of Israel with an arrow , and of France with a dagger , some have been swallowed up of the earth , some have been killed of Serpents , some have been eaten of Wolves , one was killed of rats , some by the fall of towers and trees , some by one means , some by another . 

But we will bring them to some heads , yet here we promise no accurateness . There is therefore an ordinary way of dying , which is upon ordinary causes , and is common to all the sons of Adam since their transgression : or there is a death by causes more rare and extraordinary , as by pestilence , 'samine , battle , opening of the earth , wild beasts , and the like . 

Or thus , there is first a natural death , which is when nature is spent , when her forces are exhausted . A light will go out of itself , when the flame wants oil , wax or tallow to feed on . A mellow apple will fall of itself , and through-ripe corn will shill without shaking . ON this death Eliphaz speaketh , thou shalt go to thy grain in a full age , as a ricks of corn cometh in due season into the barn : and such a death job , and David died , of whom it is said , they died in a good age , and full of days . 

Secondly , there is a civil death , which is inflicted by the civil Magistrate , Who is the Minister of God to take vengeance on him that doth evil . Such a death died Achan under joshuah , and the two thieves under Pilate . 

But it may be asked if the magistrate may lawfully take away the life of an offender , seeing no man is absolute Lord of the life of man , but only God ? To the soiling of this doubt , if any be , we must know that the Magistrate is God's Lieutenant , or God in office , according to the Psalm , I have said ye are Gods , and as jehosophat saith , he executes not the judgements of men , but of the Lord , whose creature he is , and whose person he represents , and who beareth not the sword for naught , but for the protection of the good , and for the terror and suppression of the wicked . Those therefore that are cut off by the Magistrate , as he is a Magistrate , or the Minister of God , as S. Paul doth style him , they are not cut off by Man , but by God , in as much as the authority is Gods , by which they be cut off . And although we be all as one by Christ , yet is it in respect of the Communion of the Spirit , and not by reason of any politic , or worldly parilitie . And albeit Christ hath made us all Kings , yet we may justly say with Christ , Our Kingdom is not of this world , though begun in this world : and our regality may very well stand without wrong to Caesar , or his sword . But to return . 

Civil death is double , just , or injust . A man dies justly , when he dies for some wickedness committed , or for some notable villainy , as high treason , intended and plotted , though not performed . Thus joab was slain at the commandment of Solomon , as also Shimei , both of them by Benaiah . In like manner Bigtan and Teresh were both hanged for intending & seeking to lay violent hands upon their King Ahashuerosh . Thus justly died those Powder-papists , that most barbarously plotted with one blast to have blown up this whole Church and State , under the wings whereof it is protected ; Praise be unto Christ for ever , who hath honoured us with this salvation , and let all good people say , Amen . 

Again , a man dies unjustly , when he dies undeseruedly . Thus died Naboth under Ahab , S. john the Baptist under Herod , the Martyrs of Christ under Tyrants , and Christ himself under Pilate . For though that Christ his death was most just in regard of God , to whom he was to make satisfaction for us , whose room he did willingly stand in : yet Pilate had no just cause to condemn him , nor the jews to accuse him . 

But suppose the Magistrate will take away a man's life without cause , or for maintaining God's cause ; may not a man resist , take up arms against him , or practise his death ? no , in no case : for though he abuse his power , yet thou mayst not break thy patience : the misapplying of his authority , must not make thee forget thy loyalty . David's heart smote him , when he did but cut the very coat of his Sovereign Saul . And Saint Peter saith , It is acceptable , if a man for conscience toward God endure grief , suffering wrongfully . For hereunto ( saith he , that was willingly crucified with his heels upward for his master's sake ) ye are called : for Christ also suffered for you , leaving you an example , that ye should follow his steps : who when he was reviled , reviled not again : when he suffered , he threatened not , but committed it to him that judgeth righteously . Blessed are ye , if ye suffer for righteousness . And be ready always to give an answer to every man , that asketh a reason of the hope , that is in you , with meekness , and reverence , having a good conscience . Yea , fear not their fear , neither be troubled . But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts . For what praise is it , if when ye be buffeted for your faults , ye take it patiently ? 

It is not indeed the praise of Martyrdom ( for non paena sed oausafacis Martyram , the cause makes a Martyr , and not the Cross : ) but if when ye do well , ye suffer wrong , and take it patiently , this is acceptable to God. And thus much of Civil death sustained by the authority of the Magistrate , who ought to be very wary how he smites , remembering that it is more Princelike to save then to destroy , and more difficult to revive one dead man , then to kill a thousand living , and that the smallest member is not to be cut from the body , but for the safety of the body , and finally , that the Emperor Theodosius ( Maluit sibi homines religione , quam timore a stringere ) thought it better to bind his Subjects to him by Religion , then by terror . For ( Multos timere debet , quem multi timent ) he must needs fear many , who will needs be feared of many : ( Quem multi timent , pauci amant ) whom many do fear , few do love : and quem quisque odit , perijsse expedit . But a Prince , that is slow to punish , and ready to reward , and which is sorry , when he is constrained to be severe , as it was spoken of Augustus Caesar , doth most resemble the Prince of Princes , and gaineth the love of his Subjects , which is ( saith Seneca ) Regi inexpugnabile munimentum , an invincible fortress for the King's protection . But we have too much digressed . 

Thirdly , there is a voluntary , or rather a Wilful Death , when a man doth of purpose kill himself . Of this death died Achitophel and judas , who hanged themselves , & such as desperately cut their own throats , & throw themselves into Welles & waters , or burn themselves up ; as she , that seeing her goods and bags consumed with fire , ran in a rage into the fire and there died : thus also died Empedocles a Sicilian Poet , of whom Horace thus writeth , — Deus immortalis haberi Dum cupit Empedocles , ardentem frigidus Aetnam Insiluit — 

That is , whiles that Empedocles desired that men should count him an immortal God , he leapt into the flames of Aetna ; a Hill in Sicily , whence ariseth most horrible smoke and flames of fire , to the end that disappearing on the sudden from the sight of men , he might have been thought to have gone into heaven , and to have been a God , as he did affirm unto his fellow Citizens , the people of Agrigentum . But ( by the way ) mark the hap ; The flame ( as one saith ) more just than he , discovered his imposture : for it cast up one of his pantofles or sandals , and so it was iusily conjectured that the poor ambitious wretch was there consumed . Here sundry Questions are to be resolved . 

First , whether upon any cause it be lawful for a man ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) to kill himself ? 

I answer no , except God do by special and extra ordinary revelation of his will command . The reason is , because a man is not created for himself , but for God : and no man is absolute and Sovereign Lord of his own life : for we are not our own , we are Christ's : our bodies and our souls are not ours , but Gods , as Saint Paul doth teach us. Our bodies are the Temples of God : if any man shall pull down or destroy his Temple , if he have not express warrant for it , God will him destroy . The sixth Commandment saith , thou shalt not kill , now he , that kills himself , kills a man , therefore he violates the law , and so incurs the curse . And whereas true fortitude is occupied about things , that might engender fear , and because ( as Aristotle speaketh ) nothing is more terrible than Death , it might seem therefore that those which kill themselves , are very valiant men , and therefore to be commended as men endued with the virtue of true fortitude . But in truth they are of all other most cowardly , which do kill themselves to avoid discredit , shame , poverty , torments : for because they want discretion , and courage to bear the cross , therefore out of passion , and through saintnesse of Spirit they make themselves away . This is the courage of an Hare , which fearing to be rend in pieces of the Hounds runs under the Hunter . Which kind of fatal foole-hardmesse Ovid doth elegantly set forth in these Verses , Qui rapitur fatis , quid praeter fat a requirit ? 
Porrigit ad spinas duraque saxa manus . 
Accipitrem metuens pennis trepidantibus ales 
Audet in humanos fessa venire sinus . 
Nec se vicino dubitat committere tecto , 
Qua fugit infestos territa cerua canes . 


He that the fates have met with , what doth he seek , 
But things as fatal as the Fates , he met with ? 
He grasps the sharpest thorns , & roughest stones . 
The tired Bird , fearing the greedy Hawk , 
Flies to a man , that is as greedy of her . 
and so the Hind dreading the hounds , that chase her , 
Takes up some neighbour house as Fatal to her . 




What valour was in the fishes in the Fable , which leapt out of the Frying pan into the fire ? What wisdom is it for a voiding shame to rush into a shameful death . Is this courage to kill thyself for fear of being killed by others ? Fortitude hath his name ( a Ferondo ) of bearing : And men are called valiant ( saith Aristotle ) because they endure those things , which are troublesome and bitter . But ( saith he ) for a man to kill himself , that he might avoid poverty , or trouble , doth not betoken courage , but rather cowardice . For it is the point of a feeble and effeminate spirit to shun those things , which are painful . Neither do they endure to die for honesty sake , but that they might escape and avoid some evil , or grievous thing . 

Secondly , it may be asked whether a man may not lawfully hazard his life , yea , and expose himself to certain death for the Church's sake , or for the good of his Country ? 

Yea , no doubt he may and must , if necessity so require . Hereby ( saith Saint john ) we perceived love that Christ laid down his life for us , therefore we ought also to lay down our lines for our brethren . And Saint Paul saith , I pass not at all , neither is my life dear unto myself , so that I may fulfil my course with joy , and the ministration which I have received of the Lord jesus , to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. And when Agabus by the inspiration of the Spirit , had told Paul that the jews should bind him and deliver him to the Gentiles , whereupon some that heard it , with tears besought him that he would not go to jerusalem ; then Paul answered , What do ye weeping , and breaking mine heart ? For I am ready not to be bound only , but also to die at jerusalem for the Name of the Lord jesus . And unto the Philipians he profesteth his willingness to die for their confirmation , Yea , saith he , and though I be offered up upon the sacrifice , and service of your Faith , I am glad , and rejoice with you all : And this kind of death is very honourable . For ( sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae ) the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church . Persecutiembus crevit Ecclesia , Martyriis coronata est . The Church ( saith Saint jerome ) increased by persecutions , and was crowned by Martyrdoms . Tanta est virtus Martyrij , ut per illam credere etiam ille cogatur , quite doluit occidere . So great ( saith Saint Cyprian ) is the force of martyrdom , that thereby even he is forced to believe with thee , that was ready to have killed thee . 

The Phoenix ( as Epiphanius , & others do report ) when she is come to her full age , gathereth in some high mount a pile of Myrrh , Frankincense , and other Spices , which being kindled by the heat of the Sun , she suffereth herself to be burned up ; and of her ashes there first breedeth a little worm , which at last becomes a Phoenix : so the Martyrs of Christ having gathered a pile of virtues and good works , when they see the glory of God , and the good of the Church requires it , expose themselves to the scorching heat of persecution , and sacrifice themselves by patience in the flames thereof , that by their death the posterity of the Church might be preserved , another generation of faithful Christians springing ( as it were ) out of their ashes . Philo saith that the Coriander seed being cut into little pieces , every parcel thereof bringeth out as much as the whole seed would have done : so it may be said that every inch of the Martyrs , every drop of their blood is exceeding fruitful Ligabantur ( saith Saint Austen , ) They were bound , beaten , butchered , burned , & multiplicabantur , and yet they multiplied , insomuch as at last Christianity did prevail ; Emperors , Kings and Queens submitting their souls to the Sceptre of Christ jesus , and being become noursing-fathers' , and nursing mothers of the Church which is the Spouse of Christ , as esay prophesied . 

In like manner honourable and honest is their death , that die for the safeguard of their King and Country . How ready is the hand to set itself before the head , caring for no danger ( that I may so speak ) so that the head may be preserved whole . The King is the Head of a Kingdom : what good Subject or Servant will not willingly glue his life to save the life of his Sovereign ? Dulce & decorum est pro patriâ mori : it is a sweet and honest death ( saith Horace ) which a man endures for his country . Patria est communis omnium nostrum Parens : Our country ( saith Tully ) is the common Mother of us al. Chari sunt liberi etc.  We love ( saith he ) our children , kindred , acquaintance : but our Country alone hath all the loves of all men ( omnes omnium charitates patria una complexa est ) for which what good man would refuse to die to do it good ? For the Commonwealth is a name of an universal City , on which we ought to bestow ourselves wholly , and as it were to consecrate ourselves . A wiseman should refuse no danger for the safety of his Country : for thus ( saith Tully ) he reasons with himself : Non mihi soli , sed etiam , atque adeò multo potius , natus sum patriae : I am not born for myself alone , but also , and much more too for my Country . Vita , quae fato debetur , saluti patriae potissimum soluatur : Let the life , which is due to destiny , be paid especially for the safeguard of the Country : OH fortunata mors , quae naturae debita pro patria potissimum est reddita ! OH blessed death ( saith he ) which being due ( as a debt ) to nature , is paid especially for the Country's good ! And undoubtedly they , that willingly and devoutly lay down their lives for God and their Country , being called thereunto , are of all others most loving , and most courageous : neither do they die but live in happy and eternal memory with God , who no doubt rewards their momentanie cross with an immortal crown of glory in the heavens . 

Thirdly , it may be demanded , whether the death of Christ and of the holy Martyrs may be called voluntary , seeing they died at the command and by the execution of others . 

I answer , their death was voluntarily but not with wicked wilfulness sustained of them . For Christ could have saved himself then , when he suffered himself to be apprehended , condemned , and executed : for he had power to lay down his life and take it up , and might to do what he listed : no man could take his life from him against his will : for being very God he could not be compelled . And for the Martyrs of Christ , they died in deed by the malice of others , and not through the malicious wilfulness of their own spirits : yet did they willingly die , choosing rather to die , then to deny their Lord , and to betray a good cause . A man will cast away his wares rather , then be drowned himself : so the Martyrs would willingly embrace the fire rather , then dishonour God by cowardice , and lose their souls by Apostasy . And that it may fully appear that their death was with their wills ( though not simply , as if they were in love with death , or were weary of their lives ) ask the cause of their profession . What made , who forced them to embrace the faith ? no man , but they willingly through the work of God's Spirit received it . Again , though they did embrace it , yet if they would have forsaken and for sworn it ; they might have saved their lives , and perhaps have come to preferment also , many of them : but rather than they would deny their Lord , that bought them , and his truth commended to them , they did willingly and cheerfully endure those punishments which were laid upon them . There be two sorts of voluntary deaths , the one lawful and honest , such as the death of Martyrs , the other dishonest and unlawful , when men have neither lawful calling , nor honest ends , as of Peregrinus , who burned himself in a pile of wood , thinking thereby to live for ever in men's remembrance . So of Hasdrubals wife , who at the surprising of Carthage , rather choosed to burn out her eyes , and yield her body to her country flames , then to behold her husband's misery , and to be herself a prey unto the enemy : finally of Abimelech , who made his Page thrust him through and kill him , lest it should be said of him . A woman slew him : for a certain woman had broke his brainpan with a stone . But the holy Martyrs suffered themselves to be slain for the glory of God , the honour of his truth , the confirmation of his people , & the remonstration of their gratitude and fidelity , and that they might obtain a better resurrection . 

Fourthly , it may be asked whether this willing & alacrious death of the Martyrs deserved for the worthiness thereof to be rewarded with the joys of heaven ? 

Undoubtedly no : for everlasting life is ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) the gracious gift of God through jesus Christ , and not given for the blood of the Martyrs , which yet no doubt is very precious in his sight . Et si millies moriamur : Although ( saith Chrysostome ) we should die a thousand deaths , Et si omnes virtutes animae expleamus , though we should show the perfection of all the virtues of the soul : Nil dignum gerimus ad ea , quae ipsi à Deo percepimus , yet do we nothing worthy in comparison of thoses things which we have enjoyed , of God. Te coronat in miseratione , & misericordia saith Saint Austen , God crowns us in mercy and compassion . Notabis quod mors Christi sola potuit mererivitam vitam aeternam : You shall mark ( saith Cusanus ) that the alone death of Christ was able to merit eternal life . Alij omnes Martyrs non merentur ex sua morte vitam aeternam . no other Martyr by his death dotht deserve eternal life . Merium meum miseratio Domini my merit , ( saith Bernard ) is God's meruie . And to make it sully clear , by reason that by their deaths they could merit nothing , I demand whether Martyrs stand not bound to Christ for his death , which is their deliverance , to die for him , if he require it ? It may not be denied , a brow of brass would blush at the denial of it . I demand further , who gives them courage and conscience to suffer death ? Even God , of whom we receive , what we have , and who for Christ doth give unto men , not only to believe in him , but also to suffer for him . Even Homer could say , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , that God did increase and daunt the courage of men . And Pindar likewise , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , OH God , great virtues ( and what greater than fortitude and piety ? ) do come to mortal men from thee . I ask thirdly , is God bound to the Martyrs to give them courage , constancy , fidelity patience ? no verily : for God is ( Liberrimum Agens ) a most free worker , tied to no man further than he list himself . He will do what he will , he hath mercy on whom he listeth . And who hath given unto him first ? I demand yet once more ; Is it by God's gracious assistance , or by their own proper strength , that the Martyrs did use their gifts and virtues well , and not lose them , or use them indifferently ? no man , though his head were made of steel , could say but that it is by God's grace that he doth continue constant in grace , and use his gifts with profit . For who doth confirm us unto the end , but God ? who but he doth perform the good work begun , until the day of jesus Christ ? By whose power are we kept and guarded through faith unto salvation , but by the power of God ? Of whom are we to desire strength , confirmation , perfection , and establishment but of God ? Whom to are we to ascribe them , but to God. It follows therefore that the Martyrs for their very martydomes stand rather bound to God , than God to them . no man having freely bestowed upon another a gift , is bound by the good use of the said gift to bestow more , but he that receiveth it , is rather bound to him , that gives it . But all the works of grace whatsoever , though never so well used , are freely bestowed upon men by God , who also of his free good will doth enable them to use them well : therefore God is not bound by the good use thereof to bestow more . And so consequently all holy Martyrs stand obliged unto God , and all their reward ( which is very great : for according to their passions and their patience , such shall be their everlasting possessions in Paradise ) is of God's mercy , and not for their merits . 

Fiftly , it may be asked if a man seeing his neighbour about to cut his own throat , to drown , poison , hang , or otherwise to kill himself , be bound in conscience to hinder him , if he may possibly ? 

I answer , he stands bound by the law of charity . For if a man should save his neighbours sheeepe from drowning , or his house from burning , how much rather ought he to save his neighbour himself from perishing ? It is true indeed , which the Poet saith , Inuitum qui seruat , idem facit occidenti : He that saves a man against his will , doth as he , that kills him , that is , he out of his corruption of heart , and distemper of brain accounts him as his murderer , that would save his life , because he accounts it worse than death to live : but our neighbour's corruption may not let our courtesy , his weakness and wilfulness must not cause us to be uncharitable : and though he by reason of distemper will take him for his enemy , that saves him , yet God , to whom every man owes his life , doth accounted it charitable , and agreeing to sound reason , that a man should to his power hinder any man , that out of will and weakness seeks his own destruction , and will not hold him guiltless of murder , that wittingly and willingly suffers his neighbour to make himself away , if it lay in his power to have hindered him with the safety of himself . 

Sixtly , it may be demanded , whether for a man wilfully to kill himself be a great sin , as it is commonly reputed , and whether it may be forgiven ? 

To the first branch of the question I thus answer . It is a most grievous sin for a man wilfully to murder himself . For first , he sins against God , who out of his goodness lent him his life to use it to his glory , and not to cut it off with shame and wickedness . Indeed if a man's life were his own , and not Gods , he might do with it what he would . Commonly a man makes himself away for one of these causes ; either because he count's his sins unpardonable , and that with God there is no mercy for him : and this made judas hang himself , who notwithstanding his vile treason , and abominable covetousness , which brought him to it , might have found mercy , if he had had the grace by Faith to have come to Christ , and with true repentance to have returned : but to all his other sins adding these of final desperation , and wilful murder , he did wilfully deprive himself of mercy . judam traditorem non tàm scelus , quod commisit , quam indulgentiae desperatio fecit penitus interire : The villainy ( saith Saint Augustine ) that the Traitor judas committed , was not the cause of his utter destruction , so much as his despair of pardon . Sceleratior omnibus , OH juda ( saith Leo ) & infaelicior extitisti , quem non paenitentia duxit ad Dominum , sed desperatio traxit ad laqueum . thou wast , OH judas , more wicked and more wretched , than all men , for that Repentance led thee not to the Lord , but Desperation drew thee to the halter . Yea , but a despairing man will say , I have been a most grievous sinner all my life long , how should I look that God should forgive me ? let no man distrust ( saith Saint Austen ) let no man , guilty to himself of his old offences despair , Novit Dominus mutare sententiam , si tu nover●s emendare delictum , mend thou thy faults , and God will vouchsafe thee favour . Let thy end be good as the thieves was , and Christ will receive thee into his kingdom . Let no man despair of pardon ( saith Isidore ) though he repent about the end of his life : for God doth judge every one as his end is , and not as his life was . And suppose that God will not forgive thee : wilt thou therefore by kill thyself make thy sin the greater , and send thy soul the sooner into Hell ? this is very madness , and extremity of folly . But why shouldst thou despair ? Desperatio certa mors est : desperation is certain death , faith Ambrose , Aeternae civet atis ianuas nobis desperatio claudit : Desperation doth shut the gates of heaven against us : Desperare est in infernum descendere , to despair is to descend into Hell , ( saith Isidore ) On the contrary , Prima salus est declinare culpam , secundae non desperare veniam , to avoid the fault is the first step to salvation , and the second is not to despair of pardon . Dost thou despair of mercy , as thinking that God cannot help and pardon thee ? He can do all things : with him nothing is impossible : neither can the fountain of his mercy be drayned dry . My sins ( said Cam ) are greater than can be forgiven . Mentiris , Cain , maior est Dei miserieordia , quam omnium peccatorum miseria : thou liest , Cain , ( saith Saint Austen ) God's mercy is greater than the misery of all sins . 

Or dost thou despair , because thou thinkest God will not forgive thee ? 

Tell me , OH vain man , hath God made thee of his counsel ; how canst thou thus think with reason ? Why dost thou imagine that God hath no mercy for thee ? Is it because thou art a grievous sinner ? Who is not so ? Is it because thou art not worthy of mercy ? who is worthy ? Man's worthiness is unworthiness , and his merits , demerits ; if mercy succuored not , misery would swallow all men . But why will not he have mercy on thee ? Is not God merciful and tenderhearted ? Be merciful to thyself by repentance and true hope , and doubt . less God will be merciful to thee by pardoning thee . Dost thou think that he will not hear thee , if thou callest ? Be not injurious to thyself : The Lord is near unto all , that call upon him in truth . Come unto me , all ye , that are heavy laden , saith Christ , and I will refresh you . justly doth he lack , that may have for ask . Thinkest thou that God delights in thy death ? Be not injurious to God. As I live , saith the Lord , I desire not the death of the wicked , but that the wicked turn from his way and live . Turn thee , turn thee , and despair not , and thou shalt live . Tertullian here exclaimeth , jurat Deus , Vivo , dicens , cupit sibi credi , God sweareth saying . As I live ; He desire's that men would believe him . OH beatos , quorum causa iurat Deus ! OH miserrimos , si nec iuranti Domino credimus . OH blessed men , for whose sake God doth swear ; but OH most miserable wretches , that we are , if we will not credit him , though he do swear ! But thou hast lived long without repentance , thou hast long abused his lenity , and hast settled on thy lees , it is now just that God should set the feet of his justice on thee , and tread upon thee like unsavoury salt , it is too late to repent , repentance is hid from his eyes . It is true that God may justly deny thee mercy now , seeing thou hast neglected thy good , misspent thy time , abused his gentleness . But God neither doth always , neither hereafter will be ever do all which he may may justly do : but he sometimes shows mercy , when men are most miserable , and have very long abused his patience towards them . He vouchsafed mercy to the Thief upon the Cross , that no man by reason of long or grievous wickedness should despair of mercy . Despair not then , OH Man , but hope in God : he can forgive thee , if he will : he hath not told thee that he will not : he will forgive thee , if thou wilt repent : repent then , and repent of these desperate imaginations , and he will remit thee . Cry out , and say , OH Lord , help , OH Lord forgive , Turn me , OH Lord , unto thee , and I shall be turned . Draw me , and I will run ●fter thee . hide thy face from my sins , & put away all my misdeeds . create in me a clean heart , and cast me not away from thy presence . 

And this is one common cause , to wit , the despair of pardon , which makesmen make themselves away . 

Another is very vanity of mind , and to avoid reproach , insamy , beggary , contempt , and the despite of the enemy . Thus Saul commanded his Armour-bearer to thrust him through with his sword , lest the Philistines should kill and mock him : and because his Armour-bearer would not , therefore he killed himself : And his Armour-bearer seeing him dead , fell likewise upon his sword , and died with him . In like manner Achitophel seeing his counsel was not followed , and no doubt fearing the wrath of his Sovereign , which he had by his treachery deserved , went home and hanged himself . Lucretia stabbed herself to renown her chastity . Cleopatra applied venomous Serpents to her body , because she would not be carried as a Captive in triumph . others ( we have heard ) have hanged themselves , because the price of corn hath fallen against their covetous desire and expectation . O , what horrible injury is here offered unto God Such surely either think God is not , or that his eye minds them not , or else they presume upon his mercy , or distrust his providence : but how ever it be , it is sure there wants true wisdom , and fortitude of spirit , they forget to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God , and are not contented with his corrections , and finally take upon them as if they were the Lords of their own lives , and forget to wind their care upon his providence . 

Now seeing these are causes of such selfe-murdering courses , we must needs accounted such selfe-slayers guilty of grievous sin , whereby they are very injurious to Almighty God , the Lord and author of their lives . 

Secondly , he that murders himself is injurious to the Church of God. For whereas he should obey the doctrine taught him , which she commends unto him from Christ her Husband , he flatly shows himself disloyal , unthankful , and unruly : and is by this his wilful murder a grief unto her , & scandalous by his lewd ensample . And whereas his life should upon necessity have been given away in her service and for her security , it cannot now be , neither can he perform such service for her , as he ought and might have done , if this murderous spirit had not possessed and spoilt him . 

Thirdly , he that murders himself , offers wrong unto his Country . For as he was born in her , so he was born for her . His life , which he owed to death , should ( if need had been ) have been offered up in her service : but by this unnatural murder of himself , he deprives her of all help and honour , which otherwise she might have enjoyed of him , if true valour , faith , and wisdom had possessed him . 

Fourthly , he offers wrong unto his Parents , which under God were the causes of his life . And is this all the thanks , the comfort , and credit , he does them , for their generation , and education , care and cost , to make himself away , to be his own hangman or executioner ? Such a Son is a Shame to his Father , and an Heaviness unto his Mother , and by his wickedness deprives them of that help and comfort , which God and Nature claimed at his hands . 

Finally , he is injurious unto himself : first to his soul , making himself guilty of murder , and so of death : Secondly , to his body , which with his own hands he doth destroy , and deliver to corruption , being never able to repair it by himself again , and deprives it of that honest and comely burial , which otherwise it might have had with the bodies of the Saints : Thirdly , he mars his credit , making himself famous by an infamous death , and gives just occasion to men greatly to suspect his salvation . 

We are now come to the second part of the Question , Whether may this Selfe-murder be forgiven ? Undoubtedly it may , if God will ; for God's mercy is greater than the mischief and malice of any sin or sinner : and the death of Christ is of merit sufficient to wash away the foulest wickedness , that can be committed . This therefore I say , a man that kills himself , if he do repent of his murder , before he be dead , he may , and shall be forgiven . God's mercy may be bestowed , Inter pontem & fontem , between the bridge and the water , between the stab and death . The sin against the Holy Ghost might be forgiven , if the sinner could repent : but because he cannot repent by reason of the hardness of the heart , which shall not be removed to death , therefore he cannot be forgiven . But Selfe-murderers are not always ( as those sinners ) punished with final hardness and impenitency , and therefore they may be forgiven , and no doubt are sometimes , then when God doth give them grace to repent , and groan unto him for his mercy . But let no man presuming upon God's mercy dare to commit this barbarous villainy , lest by presuming on mercy , he meet with judgement , which is the ordinary portion of presumptuous offenders : but rather let him pray and say with David , Keep thy Servant from presumptuous sins , and let the meditation of mine heart be acceptable in thy sight : for indeed the meditation and intention of murder is too too wicked and abominable . 

To conclude , it may be demanded whether a man be guilty of his own death , if he shall be killed , when out of a private humour , and desire of revenge he doth either make , or take a challenge ? 

Yes no doubt : for though he did not simply will , but rather nill his own death , yet because he left his calling , and did willingly agree and condescend unto the means of his death , which is fight , he becomes thereby guilty of his death . And it is not enough to say that he did not intend to work his death , but rather to save his credit , and honour , by offering or accepting the challenge , and by sighting . For neither God , nor the positive laws of our kingdom do allot and allow those means of saving men's reputations and of righting themselves by them , but utterly condemn them , and punish the usurpers of them : & besides , whatsoever he meant to effect by those irregular courses , yet the event shows ( when he is slain by them ) that they were the means of his slaughter , to which he gave consent without constraint . Yea , I add further , that whosoever holds this paradox , which is so commonly received in the world , That the giving of the lie , or of foul-mouthed language , must necessarily for the saveguard of honour be revenged with a Stab , a Stroke , or a Challenge of a combat , He is an embracer of a murderer's doctrine , and by holding it makes himself a very Murderer in the judgement of GOD , who condemns all murdering positions , intentions , & desires , as well as the acts of murder . And thus much concerning voluntary Death . 

Violent death is when by force a man doth die . Such a death did Absalon die , when as full against his will he hanged in the Oak , where he was slain hanging , by joab and his ten servants . The like death died Daniels accusers , who being cast among the Lions were crushed and killed of them . In like manner also this kind of death those eighteen died , upon whom the Tower in Siloam falling slew : and of this death Horace saith , he had almost perished by a tree that fell upon him . 

And that we may briefly conclude our discourse of the kinds and ways of dying , one man dies more easily , another with more difficulty , and greater pains : One dieth in his full strength , being in all ease and prosperity : his breasts are full of milk , and his bones run full of marrow : and another dieth in the bitterness of his soul , and never eateth with pleasure . One dieth being wasted with long sickness , and lingering diseases : another dieth suddenly , without warning , and beyond his expectation . Now it may be by the way demanded , Whether it be lawful to pray against sudden death ? I answer thus ; because our corruption is great , our sins are daily , our adversarieslie and subtle , ready to take all advantages , and because without repentance men may not look for pardon , and because as death doth leave us , so the latter day shall find us , therefore lest we should be taken unprepared , it is fit and needful for us to pray that God would not take us away upon the sudden : or if it shall seem good unto him to remove us suddenly , that he would be pleased not to take us away unprepared for him : but that , whensoever he doth remove us , he would pardon & accept us , & be pleased to smite us , whiles we be either in some holy work of his service , as preaching , prayer , meditation , or the like , or else in some honest work of our honest calling , or at the least in no evil plot , nor about any evil act . 

Now finally , of sudden deaths some are by the distemper of the passions , as the death of such as die of fear , sorrow , or joy . Thus died that good old Poet Phileman , who being near an hundred years old , and seeing ( as he lay ) an Ass eat figs , fell into an extreme laughter , and having called his servants , he bade them give the Ass some drink after his figs , and laughing very earnestly so died . 

Plutarch also writeth of one Polycrita , who with joy conceived , for that her life was granted , whereof it seems she was not a little fearful , fell down suddenly , and so died . Again , some that die suddenly , are taken away by the extraordinary hand of God , as Dathan and Abiram , whom the earth opening her mouth by Gods command devoured : thus also two sons of Aaron , Nadab , Abihu , suddenly were killed by fire sent out from God. Nabal also the Lord suddenly smote and slew , not long after his churlishness toward David . Others have died by the special permission of God , though by the means of the devil himself : as jobs children , who were suddenly slain with the fall of the house upon them , which was blown down with a sudden storm , raised doubtless by the power of the devil . Others have been suddenly dispatched with their own hands , as Lucretius the Poet : some have been suddenly killed of others as Eglon , whom Ehud slew with his dagger , or as the Princes and people of the Philistines , on whom Samson with the source of his arms pulled down the house , in which they were assembled : or also as Sisera , whom jael slew with a nail driven into his head , as he was sleeping in her Tent : but all these perished without treason : but some others have been suddenly dispatched by treason , as Senacherib , whom his own sous slew , as he was in his Idols temple , & as Elah whom his servant Zimri killed , as he was in his drunkenness : and thus with inhuman barbarity should our noble king with many mother have died in the Parliament house by the malice of wicked jesuits and their bloody scholars , had not God from heaven delivered them , Whose name be praised for evermore , Amen . 

And thus from the kinds of death we pass unto the causes . 

The first and highest Ruling cause of death is Almighty God. David saith to the Lord , thou hast made my days as an hand breadth . Hezekiah saith , thou wilt make an end of me : to whom said God , I will add unto thy days fifteen years . By which it appeareth that God is ( vitae necisque , arbyter ) the Author and Ordainer of life and death . Yea the Lord by that commination unto Adam . In the day that thou eatest thereof , thou shalt die , doth plainly show that in his hands is the power of life & death . Finally he saith , I form the light , and create darkness , the light of prosperity , the darkness of adversity , the light of life , the darkness of death , I make peace , and create evil , the evil , not of sin , but of sorrow , of troubles , bloodshed , famine , pestilence , death . 

To all things ( saith Solomon ) there is an appointed time , a time to be born , & a time to die : & who hath appointed this time , but GOD , who hath put times and seasons in his own power , as our Saviour teacheth ? And surely , if God number the very hairs of our head , doubtless he hath numbered the days and hours , and minutes of our life , and hath set down the period of our age . And if a poor Sparrow cannot light on the ground without his will , surely than no man can fall into the ground but by his william Even the wiser heathen knew this , therefore Hector saith in Homer , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that God did call him unto death . Tertullian another Doctor saith , Deus universa utique , disponendo praescituit , & praesciendo disposuit , that God hath foreknown and disposed all things : if all things , than the lives and deaths of men . Saint jerome saith , What good things or evil things soever be in the world , Non absque , providentia , & fortuito casu accidit , sed judicio Dei , not one of them comes to pass by chance , and without providence but by the judgement of God , if nothing , than not murders , manslaughters , kill . Finally , Saint Austen saith , Voluntas Deiomnium , quae sunt , ipsaest causa , that the will of God is the very cause of all things , that are : and to conclude with the Prophet's speech : Who is he that saith , It cometh to pass , and the Lord commands it not ? 

It will be thus perhaps objected , If God be the Author of death , than it seems he delights in the destruction of his creature : for by death life is put out , and the bodies of men are corrupted . 

I answer thus , Death is a punishment , or at the best , and to the best a trial , a correction , a passage to a better life : now God ordains and appoints death , not simply as it is a destruction , but either as it is a punishment of wicked men , or a correction and trial of the godly , and as a means of deliverance to his elect from worldly and wicked miseries . Even as a wise , potent , and just King appoints places of execution , executioners , and the death of grievous malefactors , not as though he delighted in them , but for the maintenance of justice , the punishment of vice , and for the good of the Commonwealth : Or as a Father , who maketh and useth rods , not because he taketh pleasure simply in whipping , or in rods , but because he desire's the good of his children , and that they might be afraid of evil : Or finally , as a Landlord that pulls down his Tenant's house , not because he delights simply in pulling down of houses , but for that he purposeth to cure it of all rottenness and ruins , and to build it for him new and fair again . 

It may again be thus objected : If God appoint and ordain every man's death , then if a man murder himself , or if he be killed by another , or be unjustly put to death by a Tyrant , God ( you will say ) appointed and ordained that man's death , which you will say is harsh . 

I answer , and let my words be well observed . Our Saviour jesus Christ we all know was most wickedly put to death by the judges injust sentence at the malicious pursuit of the jews : now Saint Peter saith expressly that he was delivered by the determinate council of God , and that his enemies were gathered together against him : and what to do ? To do ( saith Peter ) What soever thine hand , and thy council had determined before to be done . Thus therefore I say , if any man kill himself , or be killed by others , no more is done then was of old determined by the hand and counsel of Almighty God.  

thou wilt then reply , if a murderer do but what God willed and determined to be done , than he is to be excused as one that fulfils the will of God.  

Not so : and the reason is , because though he did that act , which God would , and determined in his secret and eternal council to be done , yet he did it not upon those grounds , & for those ends , which God did propose unto himself . For all the works of God are done in wisdom and justice : but the murderer is set a work by the devil , and his own inward corruption . When the Father delivered his son , ( saith Saint Augustine ) and Christ his body , and judas his master , wherefore is God in this delivery just , and man guilty , but that because in one thing , which they did , the cause is not one , for which they did it ? Again , though a murderer do what the hand and counsel of God hath determined to be done , yet that is no warrant for his murder , because he sins against the revealed will of God , the which is to be obeyed of every man unto death : now Gods revealed will is that we should not murder . 

It will be said then that the revealed will of God ( which forbids murder ) is contrario to his secret will , by which he doth determine and appoint it . 

I answer , the revealed will is not contrary to his secret will : for the revealed will forbids murder simply as it is murder : but the secret decrees and wills it , not as or because is is murder , sed propter coniunctum bonum , but for some good conjoined with it . For it is not possible that God , who is the fountain of good things , yea and goodness itself , should will any evil for itself . 

But that no man be mistaken , that readeth these things , I will here briefly show mine opinion in this point of murder . 

First , I say God is not the Author of murder , as it is murder , but doth detest and condemn it , and puts no ( not the least ) malice into any man's heart , which stirs him , or moves him unto murder . 

Secondly , I say that which God doth about murder , is comprehended in these actions . 

First , as the universal cause of all things he sustaineth man and all his actions , so that no man could either be , or act any thing , but that God doth sustain him . For by God we are , we live , and move . All a man's actions therefore , as they are actions , and every man , as he is a man , is the work of God , and therefore also good . The action then ( which is the material part or subject ) of murder , the naked action ( I say ) is of God , not the murder , which is the formal part , indeed the deformity of that action . 

Secondly , God withholdeth his grace from the murderer , and leaves him to himself , being tied to no man further or longer than he list . Now , as Hugo de Sancto Victore saith , Peccatum necessary sequitur ex gratiae subtractione , Sin necessarily , follows upon the withholding of grace : but how ? not as the effect follows the efficient : for God doth not put any murderous thought or intention into their hearts : but he doth only deny them his grace , which should make them tender hearted & loving : he gives Satan leave to egg them on , and offers them sundry objects by themselves good , which they turn into occasions of evil , having neither will nor power to stay themselves . And God may thus deal , because he is bound to no man  

Thirdly , God ordereth and disposeth the murder , and that is thus : he directes it so , as that it proceeds no further , nor no otherwise , than he pleaseth : sometimes he turns it to another end , than the murderer thought of : sometimes he makes a way by it to punish some other sin , and sometimes he turns it to the good of them , that are murdered . 

But I will set down some sentences of the learned , of whom I have light my candle : which I will propound as Answers to these ensuing Questions : 

First , is there any thing , whether good or evil , which is not by the will of God ? 

Non fit aliquid , nisi omnipotens fieri velit , vel sinendo ut fiat , velipse faciendo : there is nothing done ( saith Saint Austen ) but that which the Almighty will have done , Either by permitting it to be done , or by doing it himself . 

Secondly , may not a man will that with an unjust will , which God doth with an holy ? 

Fieri potest ut hoc velit homo voluntate malâ , quod deus vult bonâ . It may fall out ( saith Saint Augustine ) that a man may will that with a will , that is evil , which God doth will with a good . 

Thirdly , Is it good that there should be evil ? 

Quamuis ergo , quaemala sunt , in quantum mala sunt , non sunt bona : tamen ut non solum bona , sed etiam sint & mala , bonum est . Nam nisi esset hoc bonum , ut essent & mala , nullo modo sinerentur ab omnipotent bono : Although ( saith Saint Augustine ) those things , that are evil , as they are evil , are not good ; Yet it is good that there should be not good things only , but evils also : for except it were good that evilles be , they would by no means be permitted of that Good that can do all things . 

Fourthly , is that , which is against the word , at any time done with the will of God ? 

Intelligendum est omnia vel adiunante domino perfici , vel deserente permitti : ut intelligas tamen nolente Deo nihil prorsus admitti . Understand ( saith Saint Augustine ) that all things are either done by God's help , or suffered to be done by his forsaking , that thou mayst know that there is nothing at all committed if God nill it . Propterea namque magna opera Domini exquisita in omnes voluntates eius , ut miro & ineffabili modo non fiat praeter eius voluntatem , quod etiam contra eius fit voluntatem : for therefore ( saith he ) the great works of the Lord are exquisite according to all his wills , that after a marvellous and unspeakable manner , that is not done besides his will , which is also done against his william  

Fiftly , doth God will no more , than his will is to work himself ? 

Est Dei voluntas beneplacitum eius , voluntas eius operatio eius & voluntas Permissio Eius : the will of God ( saith Hugo ) is his good pleasure , his will is his operation , and his will is his permission . 

Sixtly , doth not God will contrary things , if he do will those things , which he doth in his law forbid ? 

Yea ( saith Perkins ) if he should will that the same thing should come to pass , and not come to pass in the same respect and manner : but God forbiddeth sin , as it is an evil : and doth will it should come to pass , as it hath respect of good . Here upon Thomas Aquinas saith , Deum velle mala sieri , & Deum velle mala non sieri , non opponuntur contradictoriè , cum utrumque sit affirmatum , this is no contradiction to say that God doth will that evils should be done , & that God doth will that evils should not be done , seeing both the propositions are affirmative . 

Seventhly , doth God make men sinners , or doth he only order them ? 

Saint Austen saith , God makes men just and order them , peccatores autem , in quantum peccatores , non facit , sed ordinat tantum : but God makes not sinners , so far forth as they be sinners , but only orders and disposes them . And again , as God is the best Creator of good wills , it a malarum voluntatum iustissimus ordinator , so is he a most righteous orderer of evil wills . 

Eightly , is it injurious to God to say that he draws good out of evil , and useth evils , as a wise Physician doth poison , unto good ? 

Clemens Alexandrinus saith , it is a point of divine wisdom , virtue and power , not only to do good things , but also to bring the devices of the wicked to some good and profitable end , & utiliter iss , quaevidentur mala utatur , and to use those things profitably , which seem evil . Austen saith , Deus quasdam voluntates suas utique bonas implet per malorum hominum voluntates malas : God doth accomplish certain good wills of his , by the naughty wills of naughty men . And Fulgentius saith , De malo opere cuinslibet non desinit ipse bonum operari , that God ceaseth not of every man's evil work ▪ to work that , which is good . 

But tell me yet again , though God put no corruption into any man's heart , yet doth he not incline the will to sin by offering a man objects , and by leaving him to himself , as a Shepherd stirs up his sheep to eat by setting Hay or Grass before it , or as a Huntsman stirs up his Greyhound to a course by showing him the Hare , and letting the slip go ? 

Manifestum est , etc. It is manifest ( saith Saint Austen ) that God doth work in the hearts of men ( Ad Inclinandas corum voluntates ) to incline their wills , whither he pleaseth , either to good things for his mercy , or to evil things for their deserts , sometimes verily with his open judgement , sometimes secret , but always just . And Bellarmine saith that by a figure God exciteth men to sin , As an Huntsman setteth the Dog upon the Hare , by letting go the Slip , that held in the Dog . 

If these things then , which are spoken of sin in general , be applied unto the particular sin of Murder , it will appear that every Murderer doth ( as it is said of the Murderers of our Saviour ) Whatsoever the hand and counsel of God had foredetermined to be done , and that God doth permit , limit , and order him , as it seemeth best in his holy wisdom . 

Now we have seen how God is the Ordainer , and Inflicter of Death . 

But further we must know , that death comes by Sin , as the Apostle showeth , and before sin there was no death at all . For death is the wages of sin . Quoniam mors non naturae conditio , ised poena peccati , sequatur necesse est poena peccatum . Because death ( saith Saint Austen ) is not the condition of nature , but the punishment of sin , it is necessary that the punishment should follow the sin . For it is most certain that God hath not made death ( as though be were in love with death for itself sake ) neither hath he pleasure in the destruction of the living : but unrighteousness bringeth to death , and man by forsaking God hath procured his own death . And although ( as saith Siracides ) Life and Death come of the Lord , yet not upon the same ground . For vita is a donante , Life is a gift of God , that gives it : but Mors is a vindicante , Death is a punishment inflicted of God , avenging , as Saint Austen teacheth . But let us hear Saint Paul By one man , saith he , that is , by Adaem , sin entered into the world , and death by sin . 

And that we may briefly dispatch the causes of Death , we must understand , that as Death is of God For sin , so it comes by diverse means ( as hath been touched afore ) all which from the greatest to the smallestare determined , ordered and directed by the Lord , so as that none of them come to pass , but according to his most holy providence . And thus we leave the causes of death , and come unto the Subjects thereof . 

Albeit jesus Christ the Son of Mary died , yet we must know it was not by his own desert ( for he knew no sin , he was no Sinner ) but because it was his will to die , that by his death he might deliver us from eternal death , and sanctify our death to be the door of life unto us.  

And although Adam died , yet it was not because he was a man , but because he was a Sinner . For if Adam had never sinned , Adam had never died , because God had granted him this grace , Vt posset non mori , si eius mandatis obsequeretur , as to be able not to die , if he did obey his precepts . 

This than I say , All the children of Adam by reason of sin ( in which all but Christ are conceived and born ) are all without exception subject unto death . By one man ( saith Saint Paul ) sin entered into the world , and death by sin , and so death went over All men . The law of sin ( saith Austen ) is that whosoever shall sin , must die . The Law of death is whereby it is said to Man , thou art earth , and unto earth thou shalt return . Out of it we spring , because we are earth . Et in terram ibimus propter meritum peccatiprimi hominis , And to earth we shall return for the first man's sins desert . 

But you will say , How is it that Infants of a day old do die , seeing that they commit no sin ? 

I answer , Sin is either the corruption of nature , or any evil , which proceeds as the fruits thereof : or thus , sin is either original , or actual : the former is in Infants , though not the latter . For even Infants are conceived and born in sin , being naturally unclean and guilty of Adam's first transgression . The stame of the root corrupted is so propagated & diffused through all the branches , which arise thereout , that as Saint Austen truly speaketh , Nec infans quidem unius diei a culpâ sit primae praenaricationis alienus , indeed an Infant of a day old is not free from the fault of the first transgression . 

But it may be asked , how Infants can become guilty of that , they did not give consent to ? I answer . 

The fall of Adam and Eve is the fall of all their Children begotten after the common order , even as the righteousness of Christ is become the righteousness and salvation of all his Children : because as Christ , so Adam was no private person , but represented all Mankind , which was now within his loins . Because ( saith Anselm ) the whole nature of man was ( in protoplastis ) in our first form Parents , and nothing thereof was out of them , the whole nature was weakened , and corrupted . As therefore , if it had not sinned , it should have been propagated such , as it was of God created : it a post peccatum , qualem se fecit peccando , propagatur : so since it hath sinned , it is propagated such , as it hath made itself by sinning . Fuit Adam , & in illo fuimus omnes perijt Adam , & in illo perijmus omnes . Adam was ( saith Saint Ambrose upon the Gospel of Saint Luke ) and in him we all were : Adam perished , and in him we perish all ; In him , because we were all in him , because we are all of him , and he as our Head and Representer received and lost for us all . 

But it will be objected that Infants baptised have no sin , it being taken away in baptism , how haps it then that Infants baptised die ? And how is it that the best Believers die , seeing that their sins are washed away in the blood of Christ ? 

I answer , with the Augustane Confession out of Saint Austen : Sin is remitted in Baptism ( non ut non sit , sed ut non imputetur ) not so that it should no longer be , but that it should not be imputed . It is destroyed ( saith Anselm ) not as if it were made nothing , sed ut non cogamur ei seruire , but that we might not be compelled to serve it . But to give a full answer ; the reason why the Lord inflicts death on them , that are baptised and do believe , is not as if their sins were unforgiven , for they are for Christ forgiven fully : neither yet is it to be supposed that they should have died , though they had not sinned : for death is not the condition of Nature , but the Daughter and desert of sin : neither yet doth God take away their lives , as intending thereby to punish Them : for if sin be forgiven them ( as it is indeed ) then also all the punishments due to sin , which follows sin , as the shadow doth the body : God therefore inflicts death upon his Elect , not as a judge offended with them ( for he loves them most dear , and their death is precious in his sight ) but as a Father , a Friend , or gracious King ▪ who by death doth humble , try , amend , and deliver them from worldly miseries , sinful diseases , and earthly discontentments , and brings their souls into heavenly Canaan , to the fellowship of Christ , and those blessed Spirits of Men and Angels , that tend upon him in the Heavens . 

To return therefore to the point a fresh . Every child of Adam is subject unto death . It is appointed unto men that they shall once die , saith Paul , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Death is a debt that all men owe. I go the way of all the Earth , saith David , that is , I draw near to death , which is the common course of all men living upon she earth . Moriendum est omnibus , All men must die , saith Tully . 

Tendimus huc omnes , met am properamus ad unam . 
Omnia sub leges mors vocat atra suas . 


To death ( saith Ovid ) we do All of us go , it is the mark we hast to , she causeth all to be in thrall her laws unto . Omnes una manet nox , & calcanda semel via lethi . Omnes eôdem cogimur . Death waits for all , the way thereof must needs be once trod . Thither we are driven All , saith Horace . There is no writ of privilege to exempt us : her eyes are pitiless , her heart is inflexible , and her hands will hold no bribes . Piety , virtue , goodness cannot put by her stroke . Hector in Homer is reported to have said unto his wife , that no man could kill him before the time of death destinated unto him , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 



〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : but as for destiny , ( and such a thing is death ) he told her that no man , neither good nor bad , could scape it . 

— Nec pietas moram 
Rugis & instants senectae 
Afferet , indomitaeque morti : 


Pretty ( saith the Poet ) will cause no stay to death . Abraham , Moses , joshuah , job , David were godly men : but yet the Scripture saith of them all ; they died . 

Strength is not able to withstand death . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Hercules was a strong man , yet the strength of Hercules yielded unto death , which overcame him . Milo was renowned for his strength of body , yet Milo was weaker than death . Samson was stronger than ever any mere man was , yet was he overcome of death . 

Fortitude and valour of spirit cannot outstand death , but the most courageous that ever lived , yielded unto death . David and his Worthies were valiant men , yet all of them are dead . Abstulit clarum citamors Achillem , Achilles' famous for his courage was taken away by death . 

Wisdom is a most excellent virtue , yet it is unable to conquer death . Solomon the wisest King that ever reigned , is of death dispatched . Wise men die as well as Fools , and go whensoever death calleth them . 

Eloquence is not able to charm death , but the most eloquent men that ever lived , have also died , as Tully , Demosthenes , and the rest . 

Nobleness of birth and royalty are unable to encounter with death , and overmaster it . Alexander , julius Caesar , and the most victorious Princes , that have ever reigned , have stooped unto death , which subdueth all men ! Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas , regumque turres . Death can find way into Prince's palaces , into the courts of Kings as well as into the peasant's Cottage . Magistrates are Gods in office , but yet as mortal as their subjects . I have said ye are Gods , but ye shall die as a man , and ye Princes shall fall like others . Agamemnon , Cyrus , Nabuchadnezzar , and Augustus Caesar , were mighty monarchs : but yet death hath preied upon them all . 

Old age is venerable , youth is stout and lusty , swiftness and activity are commendable : but death reverenceth not the grey hoires of the aged : it respecteth not the green locks of the young : neither is there any by swiftness of foot or dexterity of hand able to outrun and outmatch death . 

Mista senum ac iwenum densantur funera : Old and young die in heaps together . Death will not die under any Magistrate , neither will she be overawed with the hore-head , or grave behaviour of any aged father . Both old and young are a prey unto her . All is fish that comes unto her net . The Lamb's skin is common in the market , as well as the old sheep . Mors & fagacem persequitur virum , nec paroit imbellis iwentae poplit ibus timidoque , tergo . Death follows him , that fly's him , and spateth not young folks , though fearful of him . Serius aut citius sedem properamus ad unam : First or last we must all die . Yea but the beautiful peradventure may find better favour . no doubtless : Rebecca , Bathsheba , Ester , Helena , Irene were goodly creatures . Absalon and Achilles were gallants , yet all these with many more are dead and gone . Asahel was as swift as a Roe , yet death outwent him , won him , Goliath was a great fellow , but death was the greater . 

Achitophel was very politic and subtle , Aristotle learned , Aesop witty , Mithridates a good linguist : but they be dead all . Rich and poor , Craessus as well as Codrus , wise and foolish , high and low , young and old , bond and free , all men must die . Omnia peribunt , sie ibimus , ibitis , ibunt . All must away , I , thou , and every man besides . Intrasti , ut exires : we came all into the world to go out again . Contra vim mortis non est medicamen in hortis . no physic can prevent death , no charm can let it , no wile can catch it , no bribe can blind it , no grief can move it , no lest can abash it , no place , no pleasure , no man , no means can stay it . All go to one place , and all was of the dust , and all shall return to the dust . Shall all men then die ? have all men then in former ages died ? 

Surely Saint Paul directed by God doth tell the Corinth's that All ( meaning them that live at the very last gasp of the world ) shall not die : but all must be changed , by which sudden change they shall be stripped of all corruption and mortality . And again , if ever any man in former days have not died , or if any man shall be translated without death into heaven , as Enok and Elias , who are now in their glorified bodies with Christ in heaven , it must be confessed that such a translation and assumption is of mere favour by a singular privilege , and not common : for commonly all men do die , and come not into heaven , till they have been dead . In like manner , if any man have been , or shall be smitten into hell alive in body ( as Romulus , who by a devil was carried away in a mighty tempest of thunder & lightning : or peradventure Abiram and Dathan ) this is to be counted to be by a singular and extraordinary judgement : for ordinarily all wicked men do die before they go into hell . 

Having spoken of the Subjects of death , we come now to speak of the time , and number thereof : where we are to note these things . 

First , that God in his counsel hath determined the year , the month , the week , the day , yea the very hour , minute , and moment of every man's death that dieth . He that denies this , denies the providence of God.  

Secondly , this time prefined by God for death , cannot be avoided by man , or prorogued . For the counsel of God shall stand ( saith esay ) and his purpose shall be performed . Even Homer brings in his jupiter , affirming , ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) that whatsoever he doth will , shall irrevocably and undoubtedly be fulfilled . Seeing therefore the day of death is defined in the decree of God , it is not to be imagined that any man can ever die sooner , or tarry longer than the time by God appointed . 

Certa quidem finis vitae mortalibus adstat , 
Nec devitari lethum pete , quin obeamus , 
A certain term of life to each there is appointed 
And die we must , death cannot be avoided . 
Lanificas nulli tres exorare puellas 
Contigit : observant quem statuere diem . 
The purpose of God doth stand unalterable , 
His day for our death he keeps unchangeable . 


For though it be true that the Scripture saith of Hezekiah , that God added fifteen years unto his days ? yet it is not meant as if God did alter his eternal purpose concerning Hezekias his death , but gave strength unto nature now decayed in him , by reason of his grievous disease , so as he should be able by his grace to hold out fifteen years longer : not longer than God had from eternity determined , but longer than he now had reason to look for , being wasted and worn with sickness and sorrow . 

Thirdly , the time of deaths coming is not to all alike , or the same : for one dieth old , another in his full strength , and from some , ( Prima , quae vitam dedit , hora carpsit ) the hour that first gave them life , did also take away their life . 

Fourthly , no man can tell certainly how long he shall live , nor certainly foretell the very time of his death , unless God do teach him , or unless death be present and visible in his causes , Quis est , quamuis sit adolescens , cui sit exploratum se ad vesperum esse victurum ? Who is there ( saith Tully ) though he a youth , who is certain of his life till evening ? 

Fiftly , death is a daily attendant . Mors quasi saxum Tantalo semper impendet . It hangs and hovers over us always . There is not one moment of life without some motion unto death : We die daily ( saith Seneca ) for every day we lose some part of our life . Et tunc quoque , cum crescimus , vita decrescit , and even then , when we do increase , our life doth decrease . Hunc ipsum , quem agimus diem , cum morte dividimus : this very day , which now we live in , we divide with death . And as every man doth carry death about him in his forerunnrs , even so also every man the longer he carries it , the nearer he is to it , as a glass , the longer it runs , the sooner its run out , less sand remaining in it . 

Sixtly , death befalls one man ordinarily but once . It is appointed to men that they shall once die , saith the Apostle , Et calcanda semel via lethi : the way of death must once be trodden , saith Horace . Yet some we doubt not but that they have died twice , as Lazarus , and the man that rose from death , when the Prophet's dead body touched him , as he lay in his grave , and some others also : but this was extraordinary . Thus much for the time and number of death : I will add here moreover two things : first that it is an easy thing for a man to be deprived of his life : secondly , that as death doth leave us , so the judgement of God in the latter day shall find us.  

Of the easiness of deaths coming we need no long discourse : experience shows that men are many ways easily brought to death . Our nature is very frail of itself , and besides subject to many exterior anuoyances . Nun fragiliores sumus , quam si vitrei essemus ? Are we not more brittle ( saith Saint Austen ) then if we were of glass ? Vitrum enim et si fragile est , tamen seruatum diu durat , for though glass be brittle , yet being kept it lasteth long . But though we keep ourselves never so well , yet death will steal upon us , and overcome us. For what is your life ( saith Saint james ? ) It is even a vapour , which is easily dissolved . And for external means , how easily can any thing kill , if God permit ? A little fire , a little water , a little weight , a little bullet , a bone , a fly , what not , who not ? Eripere vitam nemo non homini potest : at nemo mortem : mille ad hanc aditus patent : There is none , saith Seneca , but can take away a man's life , but no man can hinder death : to it there are a thousand passages . There are not more rivers run into the Sea , than ways leading unto death . It is much more easy to destroy then to build , to fall then to rise , soon is an house burned down , that hath been long in setting up , corruption is readier than generation , and a tree that hath been an hundred years a growing is blown down or cut up in one day , and may easily be soon consumed to ashes . Our life is transitory . For ( puluis & umbra sumus ) we are but dust and shadows ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) nothing but a breath and a shadow . The continuance of our life is very uncertain . Quis scit an adijciant hodiernae erastina summae tempora Dij superi ? Who knows if God will let him live to morrow ? And how easily may death arrest us ? It is an easy thing to blow out a candle , or to put out a little fire : so it is an easy thing to cut asunder the thread of life : easily is the life of man extinguished ; a little smoke or vapour ( such as is the life of man ) is easily and soon resolved , and vanished out of sight . 

For the second ; In what estate a man's last day shall find him in this estate ( saith Austen ) shall the last day of the world receive him : Quoniam qualis in die isto moritur , talis in die illo iudicabitur : For as he dies in this day such shall his judgement be in that day . As the tree falleth , so it lieth . For this life is the only time allowed unto man to provide against damnation . Quando hinc excessum est , nullus iam poenitentiae locus : When we are once gone hence ( saith Saint Cyprian ) there is no place for repentance . 

I come now to speak of the commodities , that come by death . Death unto the Reprobate and ungodly doth bring no good , but deprives them of all earthly benefits : and though it rid them of many crosses , which they did perhaps endure , whiles they lived , yet it makes them no true gainers , but sets them in further misery , for measure greater , and for continuance longer . For the wicked are in bitter and inextricable torments so soon , as death hath preyed upon them ▪ 

The true commodities then of death belong truly to the Elect and Godly , whose death is sanctified by the death of Christ , who by his death hath been the death of sin , which is the cause of death , and by fulfilling the Law for us hath made an entrance for us into heaven . 

First of all , by death the Children of God are delivered from all worldly troubles and vexations . Mors est malorum remedium , & portus humanis tempestatibus : Death is the remedy of all earthly evilles , and brings us out of all storms and tempests . 

Secondly , by Death the godly are delivered wholly from sin : after death they sin not at all : but in their souls , and after the Resurrection in their souls and bodies , they do serve God purely ; God in his providence ordaining that the Daughter should eat up the Mother , that sin the mother of death , should be devoured by death . 

Thirdly , by death the souls of the Faithful are brought into Abraham's bosom , and enjoy the fellowship of those only , who are just and holy , and do live in all peace and quietness in a Paradise of everlasting pleasures , where the King is Verity , the Law Charity , the peace Felicity , and the Life Eternity . Precious is the death of the Saints ( saith Bernard ) precious without doubt , as the end of labours , as the consummation of a victory , tanquam vitae ianua , & perfectae securitatis ingressus , as the door of life , and the entrance to perfect security . 

And the only discommodity , that death doth bring unto the godly , is that it deprives the soul of the body for a time : which discommodity is not void of many commodities , which do make amends . For by this departure of the Soul , a man is taken from the sight and sense of many sins and sorrows , many crosses and calamities : he loses earth , and gaineth heaven : he forsaketh men , but findeth Angels and holy Spirits : he loses the company of his friends on earth , but enjoys the face and fellowship of God , of Christ in heaven : and though he leaves his body , which he loves most dear , yet he shall not be deprived of it always : he goes but as it were out of a smoky and sluttish house , waiting a time ( yet with unspeakable joy all the while with pleasing companions there where is good being ) till it be renewed , and made clean . Whereupon Saint Austen saith . Qui cupit dissolui , & esse cum Christo , non patienter moritur , sed patienter vivit & delectabiliter moritur , He which desireth to be dissolved , and to be with Christ doth not die as a Patient , but lives as a Patient , and dies with delight . 

Indeed Death to the wicked is full of discomforts . For it deprives them of their worldly promotions , profits , and pleasures : it robs them of their Friends and Familiars : it deprives them of their bodies : it abridges them of the light of the sun , the society of the living , and the comfort of the creatures : and finally , it closeth them up in Hell with Devils and Reprobates , there to be tormented in endless , easeless , and remediless tortures , Vbi mors optabitur , & non dabitur , where death shall be desired , but not granted to them . 

Having thus far discoursed of bodily death , we will now see whereto it is compared , and then answer a few questions , and so come to apply the former doctrines to our edification , and this with as much brevity and perspicuity , as we may conveniently . 

Death is compared to a Physician , because it cures men of all earthly miseries , as the Physician's cure men of their maladies . But herein it overgoes all Physicians : for whereas it kills them all , they are not all able to kill it . 

It is also likened to an Haven . For as an Haven affordeth quietness , and comfort to those , that have been tossed with winds and waves upon the Seas : so death unto the Godly is a quiet and safe harbour , freeing them from all that hard weather , and tedious travels , which they did endure in the world , which as a Sea , is full of changes , crosse-windes , tempests , and vexations ; according to that of the Scripture , The righteous are taken away from the evil . They rest from their labours , and their works follow them . But yet here is some dissimilitude in two other respects . For first , the haven entertains and comforts all , whether good or bad : but death affords no true rest , no true comfort , but to the godly only . For much more miserable are the wicked after death , as may appear by the parable of the rich Epicure in the Gospel : Secondly , sailors tarry not long in the haven , but put forth again , when they see convenient , into the Seas a fresh : but men , when they once come into Death's Haven , there they continue till God will , there they tarry , and never return more into this mortal life , they never come more upon this glassy Sea , unless it be by an extraordinary work of God. He shall return no more to his house saith job , neither shall his place know him again . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Diseases come and go , and return again : but death comes but once , neither did any man ever see ( saith Agathias ) a dead man to come again . Let the holy Land be excepted , and it will not be denied , I think , except perhaps in Troas once a dead man was by Paul revived . 

Thirdly , Death is compared to the Night . For as the night is the privation of the light , so death is the privation of life : as the night follows upon the going down of the Sun , which is the fountain of light , so death ensueth the departure of the soul , which is the Author of life . But yet here also is some odds : for the night comes and goes , and comes again : the Sun doth set and rise again : but when our life is gone , when our death is come , we return no more to a life with men on earth : our night ends not , our Sun riseth not , until that determined time of the Resurrection be fulfilled , which how long or how soon it will be , before it be expired , God , that hath appointed all times and seasons , can only tell . 

Furthermore , Death is compared to a Medicine or Remedy , for it cures all crosses , it is a salve for all sores , a medicine for all maladies , and the remedy of all calamities , Quae morbos placat , pauperiemque levat . But here is the difference ; a man may choose whether he will use a medicine or no : but death will not be denied , cannot be eschewed , That cunctis legem , recipit cum paupere regem . And where as medicines are applied during the residence of the Soul in the body : this medicine is the reliction of the body , the discession of the Soul out of the body . 

Again , Death is like Fire , that saith not , It is enough : so is Death unsaturable , it is not contented with those infinite million , which it hath already devoured , but still waits to swallow up more . Indeed here is great diversity in another respect . For there is no fire made by man , but it will either be put out , or go out : but death is a fire , that man by sin hath kindled , which he is not able to extinguish , neither will it die of itself . Christ alone is able to slake it with his blood : he will be the death of death . 

Moreover death is likened to an Haruester with his Sickle cutting down the corn without partiality , or respect : so death moweth down all , and spares none : Mors resecat , mors omne necat , nullumque veretur : it cuts up all , kills all , fears none . And as the Haruester cuts down the corn , but is not cut up himself of the corn , neither can be : so death takes away all , but itself is killed of none . Mors mordet omnes , mordetur a nullo : it bites all , it devours all , it is bitten , it is devoured of none . Yet here also is something unlike : For Haruesters tarry till the corn be ripe : but death stays not always till men come to ripeness of age , but like a woman , that longs , pulls the green Apple off , before it be half ripe , or like hungry cattle , which crop up corn as soon as it sprouts up . Pelles quot pecorum , tot venduntur vitulorum . Infants die as well as old men : the Calf's skin is as usually sold in the market , as the old Cows , and the Lamb goes to the shambles as well as the Ewe . 

Seventhly , death is compared to a cruel Tyranness , that pity's neither age , nor sex : and so death , altogether pitiless , spares neither man nor woman , neither young , nor old . Esop's wit , Irenes' beauty , Tully's tongue , the Infancy of David's first child by Bathsheba , no respect whatsoever can withstand death , obtain her favour . Indeed here is a difference : for as Iwenall saith , Ad generum Cereris sine caede & vulnere pauci Descendent reges , & sicca morte tyranni , few tyrants scape unmurdered : but no man can tyrannize over death , no man can kill her . He that could kill a thousand with an Assesiaw , could not kill death with all his weapons . Euulsisque truncis Enceladus iaculator audax . He ( if any such ) that could pull up trees by the roots and cast them like darts , could not strike a dart through death . And they , that have been most skilful in poisons , could not save themselves from the poison of death , and poison her : no sinner can subdue her . 

Moreover , death is compared to a woman winged . For death is fruitful and very swift : it often takes men ere they be aware , and like a Sergeant is at their backs before they look for her . 

Again , death is like the Sea , which is terrible , not to be drained , not to be turned out of his channel , and which breaking banks and prevailing without mercy carries all away with it , which it meets with . And as into the Sea , so unto death , there are many ways and means to bring men . 

Besides , it is compared to the Lion in the fable , to whose den many beasts went , but none returned : so many die , but from death to life again we see no man to return . It accepts as many as comes , but like a covetous niggard , it keeps all and parts with none . 

Finally , death is compared to Sleep . Homer calls Sleep the Brother of death ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) And Diogenes being wakened out of a dead Sleep , and asked of his Physician , how he did , answered I am well , Nam frater fratrem amplectitur , for one brother embraceth another . 

And Gorgias being near unto death and sleepic , if any man asked him how he did , returned this answer , I am somnus incipit me fratri suo tradere . Sleep begins now to deliver me to his brother , meaning death . Which two are something alike . For death is common as sleep : and a dead man is deprived of worldly cares , and is at rest in his soul , if godly , and his body lieth in the grave as in a bed : but yet a man sleeping is not wholly deprived of the use of his body : for the pulses beat , the stomach digesteth , and the breath comes & goes : but death deprives a man wholly for a time of all use of his body : Again , a man wakes out of his sleep and returns unto the works of his calling a fresh : but a dead man wakes not to the works of his former life : neither can he be awakened out of the sleep of death , but by the power of God , of whom alone the day of our resurrection is seen and known . 

Thus much for the things , where unto death may be compared . 

There remain certain Questions concerning death , worthy to be soiled , which I remembered not in time to set in their more proper places , neither are they here so methodically digested , as plainly resolved . 

First , it may be demanded whether any death may be said to be natural , seeing it destroys life , which is according to nature , Quae cupit suum esse , which delights still to be ? 

I answer , a thing is said to be natural more ways than one . Death being simply in itself considered is not natural : but forasmuch as that which doth necessarily follow the nature of a thing , and hath the beginning or ground of his existence therein , to which that , which is violent , is opposed , is called natural , That death therefore , which follows the consumption and dissipation of the natural moisture by the natural heat , seeing it comes of causes , which are within the body , in that respect is called natural . 

Secondly , it may again be asked , what natural death is properly ? 

I answer , that properly is called natural death , when natural heat faileth , by reason that the moisture is dried up by it , as a lamp goeth out when the oil is spent . And this death is with much ease , and with little or no pain , as Aristotle writeth . 

Thirdly , it may be asked , what violent death is properly ? 

I answer , that is called violent death , when by accident , either the moisture is drawn out of the body , or the heat extinguished by some inward or outward violence and oppression . Inward violence is by poison , gluttony , drunkenness , or such excess , as when a lamp is drowned in the oil . Outward violence is when a man is strangled with an halter , as a fire suddenly choked with some huge heap of earth , or ashes , thrown upon it ; and many more oppressions of life there are of this kind . So that , taking violent death in this largeness of sense , it will appear that few die a natural death . 

Fourthly , it may be demanded , when a man doth die , or when the soul doth leave the body ? 

I answer , then when there is a defect of those instruments of the soul , whereby life is prolonged . When the body is become unfit for the soul to work with , then doth the soul forsake the body , which it loves most dear , and not before . Death comes not by the impatience & fickle-mindednesse of the soul , but by reason of the impotency and unaptnesse of the body ; as a workman leaves his tool , when it is become altogether unfit for his use . 

Fiftly , but whence is it that one man dieth sooner than another , that nature fails in one sooner than in another ? 

I answer , the highest reason hereof is God's decree : but the Principal natural cause of the length of life is first a fit composition of heat and moisture in the sinews , marrow , spirits , etc.  And secondly , the long and fortunate continuance of this good temper , which being interrupted by diseases and other oppressions death necessarily follows , & a man's life is ended , as an artificers occupation than ends of necessity , when his tools are worn and passed working with , 

Sixtly , whether natural death be by no means to be avoided ( if a man escape violence ) seeing that the radical humour , as it wastes , may be repaired by nurriture , and therewith maintained ? 

I answer , that the radical humour may indeed by nourishment be daily renewed , yet that restored moisture is not so good , as that which was wasted of the beat : it is not so pure as that , which was of the seed : it is not so well wrought and excocted as the seed , neither so exactly mingled and attenuated . Seeing therefore that which is restored , is not so pure as that , that was wasted , the heat for want of convenient matter to feed upon at length is dissipated and put out . Neither is the quantity of the humour restored so much to be respected , as the quality : whereupon Auicennus saith that , Though there were as much restored , as is daily wasted , yet must we of necessity die . And besides all this , we are all Sinners , unable to keep such a precise and regular diet , but that we shall offend herein , and old age will steal upon us , do what we can . Festinat enins decurrere velox Flosculus augustae , miseraeque , brevissima vitae Portio , dum bibimus , dum serta , unguenta , puellas Poscimus , obrepit non intellecta senectus . Sensim , sine sensu senescimus . 

Seventhly , what difference is there betwixt the death of a man , and of a beast ? 

I answer , when a beast dies , his soul doth vanish , and is dissolved : but when a man dies , his soul still continues . For the soul of a beast is mortal : but the soul of man is immortal , as hath been showed . God ( saith Gregory ) created three living spirits : one , which is not covered with flesh : another which is covered with flesh , but dies not with the flesh : a third which is covered with flesh , & dies with the flesh . Primus Angelorum secundus hominum , tertius brutorun animaelun : the first is of Angels , the second of men , the third of brute beasts . And albeit the Scriptures sometimes speak of the death of the souls , yet either the person or the life is to be understood , or such a death as is not the extinction and deletion of the soul , but her separation from God , who is her comfort and contentment . Secondly , the death of a man is wont to be with much comfort , or else horror of hell itself , our conscience telling us of another state after death : but beasts , because they have no conscience , no hope of heaven , nor fear of hell , are not therefore subject to such passions , either of joy or sorrow . Thirdly , when beasts die , they die for ever : but though death devour us , as the Whale did jonas , and bind us as the Philistines did Samson , yet we shall come forth again , the bands and snares of death shall be broken , and we shall be delivered . For it is most true which Saint Bernard saith : There is a threefold state of holy souls : the first in the corruptible body ( and that is in this life : ) the second out of the body , ( and this is after death ; ) the third in the body glorified ( and that shall be at the Resurrection , ) And so there is a threefold condition of wicked souls : the first is in their bodies of sin : the second is in misery out of their bodies by death dissolved : the third shall be in eternal torments within their bodies at the Resurrection : which Resurrection shall be of men , both just and unjust , but not of beasts . 

Eightly , Whether may death be said to be evil ? 

Thales said that death was no more evil , than a man's nativity : wherefore being asked by one , that heard him say so , Cur igitur tu non moreris ? Why do not you die then , Thales ? He made him this witty answer : Ob hoc ipsum , quia nihil refert . Potius enim habetur , quod accersitur : which is as if he should have said , The reason , why I die not , and forsake my life , is because there is no difference betwixt life and death one is not better than another : for that is counted the better , which is desired . If therefore I should hasten mine own death , it might be well supposed that I do account death better than life , whereas I make no difference between them . But to pass by this conceit of Thales : that we may answer rightly to the question we must distinguish . 

Death considered simply by itself , and as it is an effect of sin , is evil : for if life be good , than death must needs be evil : and if it be an evil to be in Hell tormented , then to an evil man death must needs be evil , because by death his soul is brought into affliction in hell , and he altogether deprived of those benefits of life , which he did before enjoy . 

But death being considered as bereaved of her sting , which is sin , and as it is sanctified by the death of Christ to be the door of life unto his members , it is not in this respect evil , but rather good . Chrysostome saith well , Mors nonest malum : sed post mortem poenas dare malum est , Death is not evil , but to suffer punishment after death is evil . Death is an evil , not in regard of god's justice , for so it is good : but it is evil to him , that suffers it ; for it is a punishment , and a very curse to the wicked : But unto the godly it is become a benefit ▪ the grave is as a bed , Death is as a sleep , and the soul is at peace with Christ . 

9  Whether is the day of a man's birth or death the better ? 

I answer , if a man's birth and death be simply considered , surely it is better to be born , then to die , Melius est nasci , quam denasci . But if we remember how we are born in sin , how we sin , as long as we live , and that our life is full of crosses : and if withal we do remember that death , if we die God's Servants , doth deliver us from all worldly evilles , both of sin and sorrow , and is the mean , whereby our souls are brought unto the Cape of Hope , and Haven of pleasing rest , then surely we may say with Solomon , the day of death is better than the day that one is born in : & melius esse denasci , quam nasci . 

10.  Whether is better to die quickly , or to live long ? 

I answer , it is better for a Reprobate to die betimes even in the cradle , then to live till old age : because his sin increaseth with his years , and his punishment shall be answerable to his sin . But for an Elect and godly man to die quickly , is better than to live long , and not better . 

It is the better in this sense , because he is the sooner delivered from sin and sorrow : it is not so good in another regard , namely because by his long life he may do much good unto others , and he may come to such growth of grace , & to show forth such abundance of good works , as that his glory in the life to come may be much augmented : for as we do excel in grace in this world , so we shall exceed in glory in the world to come . 

11.  Whether is it lawful for a man to hasten his death , that he might be the sooner with Christ ? 

I answer , we may not do evil , that good may come of it . The end makes not an act good , but the good ground of it , the good form and the good end together . thou shalt not kill , saith God , as not another , so not thyself . Non est nostrum mortem arripere : It is not for us ( saith Saint Hierome ) to catch at death , but to accept it willingly if others inflict it . Vnde & in persecutionibus non licet propriâ manu perire : wherefore also , when we are persecuted , it is unlawful to kill ourselves . 

12.  Whether is it lawful to desire death , or no ? 

I answer thus : To desire death merely for death's sake , and only or principally to be rid of grievances is a certain weakness ; and unlawful . But to desire death to be delivered from all sin ; and to be with Christ , and in the last place ) to be rid of crosses ( and annoyances , so long as we refer all to the good pleasure of our God , it is undoubtedly lawful , and according to Paul's ensample . It was well said by Saint Austen : Potest iustus iustè optare mortem in vitâ amarissimâ : si non concedat , iustum pativitam amarissimam : a just man may justly wish for death , when his life is full of Wormwood : but if God grant not this , just it is to suffer this most bitter life . 

13.  Whether may a man pray against death ? 

I answer , to pray against death as it is the stipend of sin it is allowable : again to pray against death , till a man have learned how to die is lawful , provided that he study and desire to be prepared and instructed : to pray against death , till a man have effected some good work , which he desired to see done before his death ; & generally if a man's ends of his deprecation of death be good , it is lawful for him to pray against it , Provided , that he commit all to the will of God , resting himself therewith content , resolving with job , that though the Lord do kill him , yet to put his confidence in him , and so long as his breath is in him , to speak no wickedness , nor to forsake his righteousness . 

14.  Whether is death to be feared ? 

When thou hast walked much and long ( saith Seneca ) thou must return home . It is folly to fear that , which thou canst not avoid : he hath not escaped death , who hath deferred it . Hac conditione intravi , ut exirem , I came into the world with this condition , to go forth again . Therefore for a man to torture himself with the fear of Death , and as it were to die for fear lest he should die , is baseness of Spirit , and unchristian . 

But yet altogether to be without fear of death is not good : for death being against Nature , doubtless Nature cannot but something fear it : and for a man nothing to fear it is a certain oppression of Nature . Besides , the fear of death , if moderate and mixed with Faith in the Death of Christ , doth further to repentance and sanctimony of life , and ( quasi clavis carnis omnes motus superbiae ligno crucis affigit ) doth fasten all proud and carnal motions as it were with nails unto the Cross . Again , the moderate fear of Death makes us meditate the deeper of it , & nihil sic revocat a peccato , quam frequens mortis meditatio , and nothing ( saith Saint Austen ) doth so much recall a man from sin , as doth the often meditation of his death . And finally , there is no better way to vanquish the terrible aspect of death approaching , than a well tempered fear of Death before it do come . Sic mors ipsa , cum venerit , vincitur , si prius , quam veniat , semper timeatur . Death , when it comes , is overcome , if , before it do come , it be always feared . 

15 Whether is the suddenness of death in itself an evil ? 

I answer , if the death be not evil , the sudden coming of it is not evil : Anselm saith well : Non nocet bonis etc.  It is not hurtful to good men , though they be slain , or die suddenly : non enim subito moriuntur , qui semper se cogitaverunt morituros : for they die not suddenly , which have always thought they should die . Precious in the sight of the Lord , always is the death of his Saints : as it is said , Quacunque hora iustus moriatur , iustitia eius non auferetur ab eo . Whensoever a righteous man dieth , his righteousness shall not be taken from him . And as the Common saying is , Qualis vita , finis ita , a good life hath a good end , how sudden soever it falleth out . 

16 Whether is it unlawful to lament the death of Parents , Children , Friends , Kinsfolks , and honest Christians ? 

Not to be grieved at all for their death , is a sin to be lamented with grief of heart . For they are our flesh , we have enjoyed comfort by them , and are now deprived of it : and their life sometimes is very profitable to the Church and Kingdom . To grieve then is a thing both natural and honest . Contristamur ( saith Austen ) set non sicut caeteri . We sorrow , but not as others , that are hopeless . Non culpamus affectum ( saith Bernard ) but excessum , we accuse not the affection , but the excess , Saint Paul forbidding the Thessalonians to sorrow for the dead , doth not simply forbid all sorrow : but Sorrow not ( saith he ) as other , that have no hope . For if we believe that jesus is dead , and is risen , even so them , which sleep in jesus , will God bring with him . And he himself professeth that God had mercy on him , in sparing Epaphroditus , Lest ( quoth he ) I should have sorrow upon sorrow . What should I heap up the examples of Abraham mourning for his wife Sarah , of the Israelites for Samuel , of the Maccabees for judas their noble Captain , of David for jonathan , of the Widows for Dorcas , of Martha for Lazarus ? Infinite are examples hereof . But this our mourning must be moderate , and mixed with hope . For they are not ( amissi but praemissi ) lost . but sent before us. And ( Sapiens eodem animo fert illorum mortem , quo suam expectat ) a wiseman will take their death , as he doth expect his own . Filium meum memini me genuisse mortalem moriturum . 

Thy child , that 's born to day , and dies to morrow , 
Loseth some days of rest , but years of sorrow . 
thou losest wife , and friends , and parents dear , 
The Heavens find them , though thou lose them here . 


17 But of all the means of death : which are very many , which doth death most certainly follow and attend ? 

Seneca shall give the answer . Other kinds of death ( saith he ) are mingled with hope . A disease endeth , a fire is extinguished , a man escapes a ruin , which was likely to have oppressed him , the Soldier being ready to cut the neck asunder held his hand back : nil autem habet , quod speret , quem senectus ducit ad mortem : but there is no hope of escaping lest for him , whom Old-age leads unto death . 

18 Of all , that die : who commonly forget themselves and die without sound repentance ? 

The sinner ( saith Caesarius ) is smitten with this punishment ( Vt moriendo obliviscatur sui , qui vivens oblitus est Dei ) that he should forget himself at his death , who forgot God in his life . Et vix benè moritur quimalé vixit , and he , that lived ill ( saith Saint Austen ) doth scarcely die well , 

19 Whom to is death most terrible , and unwelcome ? 

Surely to those , whose GOD is their Belly , whose portion is the world , whose end is damnation , and whose conscience affrights them . Death ( saith Tully ) is terrible to those , who lose all things with their life , not unto them , whose praise is immortal . 

20 Who die most cheerfully , and with least discomfort ? 

They questionless , whose conscience witnesseth with them . Venientem nemo hilaris mortem recipit , nisi qui se ad illam rectè composuerit , no man gives death a cheerful welcome , when it comes , but he that hath rightly prepared himself for her . He dies most readily that lived most religiously . 

21 Is there any thing in the world more certain , and withal more uncertain than death ? 

no verily . What ( saith Saint Bernard ) in human things is there more certain , than death , and what is found more uncertain , than the hour of death ? She pities not poverty , she reverenceth not riches , she spares not wisdom , manners , age : nisi quod senibus mors est in ianuis , iuvenibus vero in insidijs : saving that death looks old men full in the face , but lies skulking to take youngmen napping at unawares . 

22 Doth death make no difference between the bodies of the rich and the poor , the noble and the simple ? And are all these worldly differences among men become dead by death ? 

We are all born naked ( saith Saint Ambrose ) and we die naked : there is no difference among the carcases of the dead , unless perhaps the bodies of rich men do savour more strongly by reason of their riot . And as a Merchant's Counters upon his counting table may stand for a greater or lesser number , as he pleaseth , but are all alike , when they are shuffled together , and put in the bag : even so these earthly differences , which were amongst men , whiles they lived upon earth , do all take their end , and die , when death hath once shuffled them together on heaps in the grave . Alphonsus , asked what made all men equal ? answered Ashes . 

23.  But of all kinds of death , which is the best , and worst ? 

Doubtless of the best the death is the best , and of the worst the death is the worst . Of the death of good men , I suppose the death of Martyrs to be the best , because it is endured with show of the greatest virtues , and ( as I think ) is best rewarded : and they lose that for God , which is most dear to nature , namely life . 

And of Malefactors their death is the worst simply , who have lived and die most wickedly : but theirs is counted most odious and infamous , who either murder themselves , or else die by Law for their outrageous villainies . Bias being asked , What kind of death was evil , answered ( Quod legibus constitutum est ) That , which the Laws ordained , meaning that which men have deserved for their wickedness , as treason , murder , robbery . In like manner he in Plautus saith , So I die not for my faults , I care not much though I perish here : Qui per virtutem peritat , non interit , He that dies for well-doing , doth not die . 

24.  Why do not men know the very time , that is appointed for their deaths ? 

Saint Austen shall answer , Latet ultimus dies , ut obseruentur omnes dies : A man's last day is kept secret , that all days might be observed . Ad hoc fortè nescis , quando veniet , ut semper paratus sis : therefore it may be thou knowest not when he will come , that thou mightest be always prepared . I suppose ( saith Plutarch ) that Nature knowing the confusion and shortness of our life , would therefore have the period of our life unknown to us : for it is commodious for us. For if we should forknow it , many would pine away with untimely mourning , & would prevent death with death : he means the fear of death would kill them , whereas otherwise by course of nature they might have lived longer . 

25.  Whether is a man worse at his death , or at his birth ? 

Peiores morimur , quâm nascimur , we die more evil than we are born , saith Seneca . But this is our fault & not natures , if we consider it simply without relation to corruption . Indeed we are born in sin : but that sin is not acted of us , but by propagation derived to us : but before we die , if we live the age of a man , we die after the commission of many actual transgressions . Nevertheless by the grace of God in Christ a man's death may be better than his birth , & much more comfortable . For to be born is a work of nature , but to die with Christian faith & fortitude either for Christ , or in Christ , is a work above nature . I have read of some , that are said to die , or to sleep in Christ : but I read of none , that is born in Christ : reborn , and born a new in Christ we may be said , but not born . In brief , There is no man born justified and absolved . But a man may die justified and absolved . Now it is better to die justified , then to be born a sinner : It is better to die the child of Christ , then to be born the son of Adam . This than I say ; an old man dying ( if we regard him by himself ) is worse than an infant newly born : but if we consider an Infant without Christ , & an old man in Christ , certainly it is much better for him to die with many sins forgiven in Christ , then fot the other to be born ( though but with one sin ) out of Christ , & so to die in that estate . 

26.  Of all kinds of death considered simply without respect of grace , or sin , which is the best ? 

julius Caesar said that sudden death was best , and a sudden death befell himself . But ( as I take it ) a sudden death , except it be by the course of nature , without violence , is not the best . For that doubtless is the best , which is most agreeable unto nature : now a natural death is not simply sudden , because it is not without messengers , and signs foregoing : yet sometimes it comes on the sudden , that is , in a trice , or before a man thinks , or while he thinks , he may live a while longer , or when he thinks not of it , sometimes whiles he sleeps , sometimes whilst he is awake , as a mellow apple which drops of , whilst a man sometimes is lookng on it . 

27.  Whether is it lawful for a man to pray that God would tell him directly when he shall leave the world and die ? 

I would not say it is altogether unlawful , by reason of some extraordinary occasions . But usually and ordinarily it is not expedient . For revealed things belong to us , but not the secrets of God , such as are hidden seasons , locked up within God's breast , as the day of our death , & the day of Christ's coming . And as it is no way fit to pray to know the day of judgement , the very time of the judges coming , so neither is it to pray to know the certain hour of death . For though our end may be good , yet that is not enough to make a prayer good , but it must be made in faith according to the will of God. But the curious enquiring into such things hath a check in the Scriptures . And though David pray , Lord let me know mine end , and the measure of my days , what it is , and let me know how long I have to live : yet he means ( as I take it ) not to beg the knowledge of the very point & article of his death , but desire's God to give him grace to acknowledge , consider , and duly to acquaint himself with the shortness and frailty of his life , as to me it seemeth , by considering the words ensuing , and by comparing it with Psal . 92. 12.  But howsoever it be , we know ( Legibus vivitur , non exemplis ) that good and obedient Christians must live by laws . and not by ensamples . But I demand , why wouldst thou know the very moment of thy death ? That thou mightest prepare thyself the better for it ? Thy meaning may be good , but this thine aim is of little moment . Know this , thou art a man , die thou must : this very day may see thy death : prepare thyself this day . thou mayst die any day , to day , to morrow , next day , be therefore prepared every day , to day , to morrow , next day , any day , every day : Miserable man , why dost thou not prepare thyself every hour ? Think of thyself as if thou wert now a dying , for thou knowest thou must die . It is not for thee to know the times or the seasons , which God hath put in his own power . If God will not have thee know them , then desire not to know them . It is enough for us to know we must die : how soon , or when , it skills not : it cannot be long to : for we are but foam , and fume . 

28.  What honour ought the living to perform unto the dead ? 

I answer , they ought moderately to be touched with the loss of them : they ought to give them honest burial : they ought to commemorate and imitate their virtues : they should praise God for his graces given them , and for receiving them to mercy , out of a miserable & merciless world : they ought to maintain their credits : they ought not to misuse their bodies , neither speak evil of them : if the deaf ought not to be evil spoken of , much less the dead : for who deafer than a dead man ? who further off . Who less able to answer for himself ? 

Having thus ended these questions concerning death , and dead men ; I come now to set down some principal uses of that , which hath been said before . 

First , seeing death destroys not the soul , though it dissolve the body , we see that the soul is of a more noble nature , than the body , and therefore more to be esteemed , and with greater care and love to be kept and tended . As God excelleth all souls , or as the Lady excels her handmaid , so the soul excelleth all bodies . What would a man have evil ? Surely nothing , not his wife , not his son , not his servant , not his horse , not his ground , not his fruit , no not his coat : and wilt thou have an evil soul ? For shame take care of it , that it be not evil . Evil it is , or good . For ( Omnis anima aut Christisponsa , aut Diaboli adultera est , ) every soul ( as Saint Austen speaketh ) is either the Spouse of Christ ( and then good ) or the devil's harlot , and so is evil . If evil , than thy state is evil ; and if death find it evil , it leaves it evil : and this soul which cannot die , in respect of dissolution , yet it doth die in regard of consolation , being separated by evil , as well from God ( who is the soul and solace of the soul ) as from the body , which in life it did enjoy with joy . And forsomuch as the soul doth survive the body , and live , when it is dead , it should comfort men against the dread , that death brings with it . For they shall not be Nothing , nor Nowhere . Death doth subdue but one part , and that which is the base of them . 

Secondly , seeing God inflioteth death , without whose providence it could not come , it teacheth us in all patience , quietness , and humility to be contented with his work , not opening our mouths against him , though he take us away in the flower of our time , or by the cruelty of wicked men . And to them , that truly serve God according to his will , it cannot but be a comfort that when they die , they die not without the knowledge , but by the will and disposement of their gracious and loving Master , who is able to save them in death , as he did Daniel in the Lion's den , and the three Children in the fiery furnace . 

Thirdly , seeing death is the fruit of sin , it should teach us to detest sin . Death is not very pleasing , but rather odious to flesh and blood : How much more odious than should sin be counted , by which death found entrance into the world , and without which no man had ever died ? Diseases , death , and damnation come by sin : diseases hinder health , death endeth life , and damnation deprives man of the joys of salvation : will any wise man than delight in sin , a thing so odious , hurtful and unhappy ? Solomon being directed by the Spirit of God calls him a Fool that maketh a mock of sinew , and as a pastime to do wickedly . Doth any man love the plague , the gout , the palsy , the stone , the cramp , the canker , or the dropsy ? I suppose no man All these diseases are the consequents of sin : the world had not known them , had she not been acquainted with sin : and certainly these diseases are not more hurtful to the body , than sin is to the true health and life of the soul . Sin is a Tiger , a Bear , a Lion , an Asp , a Viper , a destroyer both of body and of soul . 

Fourthly , the inevitable necessity of Death , which lies upon all the world , condemns the immoderate fear of Death in many men . There is no man so ignorant , but knows he must die : yet when death is threatened , what fear is there , what fainting , what tergiversation , what impatience is there to be seen in many ? Quid fles miser , quid trepidas ? Eye wretch why dost thou weep ? why dost thou tremble ? This yoke is laid upon every neck : thou goest the way that all mê go . To this wast thou born , this hath befallen thy Father , thy Mother , thine ancestors , to all men before thee , and to all that succeed thee . wilt thou not think to come thither at last , whither thou hast been a going always ? Nullum sine exitu iter est : there is no journey without an end . We make our life unquiet with the fear of death , and such is the madness of men , that some by the fear of death are brought unto death : we ought to fortify ourselves , that we love not our life too well , and that we hate not death too much : and when reason adviseth us , to die , and not to fear . Vir fortis & strenuus non fugere debet de vita , sed exire , a man of courage and spirit should not fly out of life , but go out . To die is not glorious , but to die courageously is glorious . 

Finally , seeing all men must die , and seeing Christ will find them at the day of judgement , as the day of their Death doth leave them , it behoves all men to prepare themselves for Death , that it may not hurt them , but rather help them . To this end these things are to be considered , and performed . 

First , he that would have comfort in his death , must believe in God the Author of life , in jesus Christ , who saves us from the power and evil of Death , Verily , verily , I say unto you ( saith Christ : ) He that heareth my word , and believeth him that sent me , hath everlasting life , and shall not come into condemnation , but hath passed from death to life . And to Martha speaking of himself he saith , I am the Resurrection and the life : he that believeth in me , though he were dead , yet shall he live , and whosoever lineth , and believeth in me . shall never die , meaning the death of the damned . Now Christ , who thus speaketh to us , is omnipotent , and true : Verbum eius ab intention non dissentit , quia Veritas est : nec factum a Verbo , quia Virtus est . He is Truth , and therefore he speaks , as he means : and he is Might itself , therefore he does as he speaks . But he doth profess and promise that those , that believe in him , shall not perish by death , but live for ever : therefore we may be bold upon his word , and should stir up ourselves to believe . And let no man deceive himself : For he only doth aright believe in Christ , who believes him in his word and Sacraments , and in his Ministers speaking according to his word . In vain it is for men to say or think they believe in Christ , who believe not his Law , who regard not his Sacraments , who believe not his Servants , declaring to them their Master's mind . This faith is not faith , but fancy . 

Secondly , he that would die the Death of the Godly , must repent of the sins of the wicked . For without Repentance it is impossible to escape the damnation of unrepentant Sinners . Return ( saith God ) and iniquity shall not be your destruction . Cast away all your transgressions : For why will ye die ? Qui per poenitentiam peccata diluit , angelica foelicitatis consorsin aeternum erit . He , which by repentance purgeth away his sin , shall be partaker ( and saith Saint Austen ) of Angelical happiness for ever . Now a true penitent person must be thus disposed . First , he must plainly and from his heart confess his sins to God. Secondly , he must earnestly beg pardon of his sin , desiring God for Christ to be reconciled to him . Thirdly , he must resolve fully to leave his sinews , and to practise all holy , and honest duties . If the wicked will return from all his sins , and do that , which is lawful and right , he shall surely live , and shall not die . It is not enough to set himself against one fault , but against all , all , all , without exception of any . For one wing belimed may cause the whole bird to be taken , and one discase may be the death of all the body : so one unrepentant of known enormity , even one ( though there were no more , ) may , yea and will be the ruin of the soul , the destruction of the sinner . Fourthly , where an injury is done unto our neighbours , there ought we to seek reconcilement , and to give them satisfaction . For he , that having offended man , seeks not to be reconciled to him , doubtless shall never truly be at peace with God. Briefly , he that would show himself a true penitent , must be truly grieved , because his repentance is so poor , his devotion so cold , and his life so bad . 

Thirdly , he that would die comfortably in Christ , should live obediently to Christ . For he that obeyeth not the son shall not see life , but the wrath of God abideth on him . Now he , that will prove his obedience unto Christ the Lord , must show it unto the Bishops and Ministers of the Church , his Servants speaking unto them in his Name according to his Law . Obey them ( saith the Holy Ghost ) which have the oversight of you , and submit yourselves . Certainly they , that dishonour , disobey , and disdain them , dishonour , disobey , and disdain Christ their Master . 

Fourthly , it behoves us to weine our affections from the world : for the pleasures and vanities of the world are very bands and bolts unto our souls , if we wed ourselves unto them , and they will make us altogether unwilling to depart . 

Fiftly , do good unto the poor and afflicted members of Christ jesus ; pray for them , visit them , and advise them , help them , feed them , clothe them , harbour them . By mercy and truth iniquity shall be forgiven , saith Solomon , Charge them that are rich , saith Paul , that they be rich in good works , and be ready to distribute and communicate , laying up in store for them a good foundation against the time to come , that they may obtain eternal life . That which is given to poor christians , because they be christians , is given unto Christ himself , who will recompense our temporal gifts with eternal glory . Poor christians are as a rich fieldif : the rich will sow the seed of their charitable almesdeedes on them , they shall by the heaven's blessing receive a plentiful crop of eternal happiness . On the contrary , he shuts against himself the doors of God's mercy , who will show no mercy to his afflicted brother . 

Sixtly , he that would have comfort in his death , aught to live , or at least to die in the love and reverend affection to the Church of Christ : neither mean I only the Catholic Church , part whereof is triumphing in heaven , and a part warring on earth : but that true visible Church , in which he is born and baptised , and to the obedience whereof he is most properly called . For I do very much doubt of the salvation of all such as die unreconciled to the church , out of love with that church , unto the love and obedience whereof God doth call them . Let our Papists therefore , Brownists and such like spirits take heed unto themselves , how they live and die , out of love and loyalty to this church of England , whereof they should be loving and obedient members : but unto which indeed they stand ill-affected , disobedient , and undutiful . They malice her , they write and speak against her , they speak evil of her , and of her chiefest members . I mean not to dispute of her lawfulness and truth : this is all I say : if she be found to be a true Church of Christ , as it will appear one day , I do much fear that these her enemies , her slanderers , her disobedient and unruly children , will not be able to stand unconfounded before her Head , & Husband , Christ jesus , who then will recompense to every one according to his works , even everlasting life to them , which through patience in well-doing seek glory , and honour , and immort alitie : but unto them , that are Contentious , and disobey the truth , indignation and wrath . It behoves us therefore for our better assurance of comfort and salvation , to know the true Church , and to cleave unto it being known . 

Seventhly , let a man set his house in order , and dispose of his estate . It was the last wise work , which Achitophel performed . 

And finally , when death seemeth to approach ( if it give him any warning ; as usually it doth ) let him commend his soul with Steven into the hands of Christ , Lord jesus receive my Spirit , craving for mercy , and not forgetting that the joys of Heaven , after which he gaspeth , are far more complete , and are able to give a thousand times more true contentment to the soul of man , than all the transitory pleasures , profits , and preferments of this world can do . He that is thus composed for death , shall not die , but live for ever : his death shall be as a pleasant sleep : his grave as a bed : and his soul shall rest in peace with Christ , till the time appointed for the Resurrection of our bodies be fulfilled . 

O that men would think of these things , practise these things ! Wouldst thou have comfort in thy death ? then seek and sue for comfort in thy life . Wouldst thou be armed against the fear of death ? then die betimes to sin : Death is a Serpent , her sting is Sin : pull out the sting by true repentance , and thou needst not fear the Serpent : Death can not hurt thee , if thou hurt not thyself by Sinne. Death is not ( Interitus ) Death to the penitent , ( Introitus ) but an entrance into heaven : and the way is made , and the door is opened by true repentance , and by Faith in Christ , who is the Sun of our glory , and the Salvation of our soul , by whose death letum delethum , mortua mors est ) death is defaced , and dead itself . But wouldst thou give hope of the truth of thy turning ? then turn , whilst thou mayst run on , repent when thou mightest yet sin : defer not thy turning till thy death , lest it be thought that the world doth forsake thee , and not thou the world , and that sin rather leaves thee , than thou dost leave sin , and that the cause of this turning is , not the love of GOD and godliness , but the fear of death , and the apprehension of damnation only . Take heed therefore , and deal plainly with thyself . I know many men think well of themselves , and would count themselves much injured , if they should be censured as evil members , which yet how they will avoid , I cannot see . This is my reason , they are notorious and ordinary prophaners of the Lords day ; even those hours , that are destinated to the public worship of GOD , even those very hours , are misspent usually in eating and drinking , in buying and sclling and gaming . 

This is a mortal sin ( stat against the Law of God and his Church ) and is commonly practised of many : how is it possible for these Sinners to have any true comfort ? How can they be saved ? Undoubtedly so continuing they are in the state of death , and not in the state of grace . For he that oheyes sin is the Servant of sin , is not born of God , doth not serve God. And there is no way to scape but by true repentance , which consists in Aversion from sin , and in Conversion unto God ; these are the two celestial Poles or Hinges , whereon repentance turneth . I name this one sin : but there are others , as drunkenness , whoredom and such like , which bear sway with many , and if they look not to it , will sway and weigh them down into the pit of Hell. It behoves us all therefore to look unto ourselves . Death and the judgement are the things most certain : but when , or how , or where our death shall happen , that we know not . If we should be taken away in our sins , all the world could not save us : but if we repent unfeignedly , then happy are we : death cannot come amiss : we may embrace it , kiss it , welcome it : we lose the earth , but we find Heaven , we go forth of the wilderness into Canaan , out of the Region of death into the Land of the living , the everliving , we go from Sinners to Saints , from Men to Angels , to God , with him to live in immortal glory , and in glorious immortality , in that Kingdom , wherein all shall be Kings , and of which there shall never be an end ; unto the which , God for his mercy bring us through jesus Christ , unto whom with their Holy Spirit be all honour , praise , and glory this day and evermore , Amen . 

Having finished our discourse of Corporal ( or temporary ) death , it remaineth that we say something of Spiritual , and Eternal deatb . 

Spiritual death is either of the wicked , or of the godly . 

The spiritual death of the wicked is a certain spiritual separation of them from spiritual and Christian grace and goodness , when as they lie dead ( without all godly feeling ) in sins and trespasses , their hearts being alienated from God , and true godliness . 

This is a most miserable kind of death : for they , that are thus dead , are the Servants of sin , the Vassals of Satan , the Children of wrath , out of the state of grace , and in the Region and shadow of death , liable to damnation , which to escape they can have no hope , while they continue in that estate . 

The spiritual death of the godly is threefold . 

The first is , whereby they are dead to sin . This death stands in the disallowing and condemning sin in the judgement , in the nilling and refusing it in the will ; in the hatred of it and grieving for it in the affections , and finally in the declining and forsaking it in the life and conversation . 

This death is the separation of the soul from the approbation , love and embracing of wickedness . It is of God through Christ , and with much comfort and contentment . For he , that dies to sin , shall never die fot sin : he that dies to sin , doth live to God : and whosoever lives unto God in this world , shall live for ever with GOD in the world to come . To die to sin is to live a Saint : and precious in the sight of the Lord is both the life and the death of his Saints . They be like the Mountain that was not to be touched : They that touch you ( saith the Lord ) touch the apple of mine eye : and we know that the apple of the eye is very tender . 

The second Spiritual death of the Godly is whereby they are dead to the Law : and this is because the Law doth not condemn them , that are in Christ jesus , who by justifying us through his righteousness doth deliver us from the curse of the Law , and rids the conscience of those terrors , which the Law might cause by sin unpardoned . 

The third death Spiritual of the Godly is , whereby the world is crucified or dead to them , and they dead unto the world . 

The World is dead to them , when as they dote not on the world , but contemn all worldly things , and accounted them as nothing in comparison of Christ jesus , and his benefits . This death is very needful : for he , that lives to the World , lives not unto GOD : and he lives to the World , to whom the World is not dead , but who dotes on the World , shall perish with the World : he that lives not to God in this life , shall not live with God in the life to come . 

Godly men are said to be dead to the World , when the World coutemnes them , hate's them , persecutes them , and wishes ( as it were ) to be rid of them . This kind of death is the ordinary portion of the Godly . For they being not of the World , but of God , whom the World knows not , and being but as Foreigners and Strangers , it is no marvel if the World frown on them , and show herself an unkind Stepmother towards them , it is no wonder though wicked Worldlings beaten them , by't them , bark at them , and fly at their throats : for thus Dogs use to deal with Strangers , which they know not . 

And thus much we have seen what death is in respect of the World , to wit , the Separation and abalienation of our hearts from the World , or of the World from us : and so much also for Spiritual death . 

The third kind of death is called Eternal death , or the second death , which is the Separation of the soul from God , or the everlasting punishment of the whole man , consisting of soul and body , from the comfortable presence of GOD , in hell fire . 

The Provider and Inflicter of this death is God , who is a most just judge , Whose very soul doth hate the wicked , and him that loves iniquity . Tophet ( which indeed is Hell ) is prepared of old . He hath made it deep and large ; the burning thereof is fire and much wood : the breath of the Lord like a River of brimstone doth kindle it . By which we see that Hel-fire is prepared , and kindled by the Lord  

Now God doth not ordain and inflict death for itself , as if he did delight in death and destroying : but it is for the clearing of his justice : for if wicked men should never be punished , they would imagine either GOD is not , or that he is not just . But all the world shall know that God both is , and that he is just , and therefore he will punish wicked sinners , and by that mean declare his just judgement against vicious wretches . 

The deserving cause of death of sin , as ignorance of God , disobedience of the truth , especially of the Gospel of Christ jesus , and obedience of unrighteousness , as the Apostle showeth , as also want of charity , and charitable behaviour towards the poor and needy members of Christ jesus , as he himself doth teach us. Neither are these sins only meritorious of death , but even every sin , though the smallest want of that , which the law requireth , is in itself odious , and deadly . For the wages of every sin is death . 

The persons subject to this death are all the Sons of Adam , is as much as all are Sinners : yet all of them shall not die this death , namely they that are redeemed by the blood of Christ , who by his death hath delivered them from this death , by them through sin deserved . 

Those than shall die this death , that were reprobated of God , and who by their wickedness and hardness of heart , which could not repent , have treasured up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath . Departed from me , ye cursed , saith Christ into everlasting fire . The cursed then are they , that must die this accursed death . I never knew you saith Christ , Departed from me , ye workers of iniquity . They that shall die this death are such as Christ knew not , owned not , never acknowledged for his : and such as whiles they lived , were very hypocrites , nourishing some sin or other in their bosoms , though they did many glorious and good works , as preach , baptism , eiect devils , cure diseases , and were perhaps of great account with men . The Apostle saith that the Lord jesus will render vengeance at his appearing unto them that know not God , and obey not the Gospel . So that all , which are ignorant of God , and which disobey the Gospel of his Son , shall die this death . 

This than I say , All impenitent sinners shall be damned , all that believe not in jesus Christ , as Mahometaus , incredulous jews , and all other Infidels , and all that profess Christ in name , but deny him in example : All these living and dying without sound repentance shall die this death . And I prove it thus . Except ye believe , saith Christ , that I am he , you shall die in your sins : but the jews believe not that jesus the son of Mary was the messias foretold : therefore they shall die in their sins . He that obeys not the Son , shall not see life , but the wrath of God abideth on him : but neither jews nor Mahometans obey Christ jesus : Therefore neither of them shall live , but die . Peter being full of the holy Ghost said , that Christ is the Stone , even the fundamental stone of man's salvation : Neither is there ( quoth he ) salvation in any other : for among men there is given none other Name under heaven , whereby we must be saved . All therefore , that either deny him , or believe not in him , and do not know him , whether jew , Turk , Persian , Moor , Indian , American , or who else soever , all such shall be damned , cannot be saved . For by his knowledge shall my righteous servant ( Christ jesus ) Instifie many . And we , which are jews by nature , and not sinners of the Gentiles , know that a man is not justified by the works of the law , but by the faith of jesus Christ . God ( saith Saint john ) hath given unto us eternal life , and this life is in that his Son . He that hath that Son , hath that life : and he that hath not that Son of God , hath not that life . But Mahometans , jews , and Infidels have not that Son , therefore they have not eternal life ( in spe ) and shall not have it ( In Re , ) but so continuing shall undoubtedly die the damned death of the wicked , for aught that man can tell . 

I say further , that those , which profess Christ in word and in show , but deny him by their deeds , addicting themselves to wicked lusts , as whoredom , pride , drunkenness , avarice , idleness , epicurism , those ( I say ) shall undoubtedly perish without mature and true repentance . Know ye not ( saith Saint Paul that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God ? Be not deceived , neither fornicators , nor Idolaters , nor adulterers , nor wantoness , nor buggers , nor theives , nor covetous , nor drunkards , nor railers , nor extortioners , shall inherit the kingdom of God. But among Christians there are offenders in all kinds of the sins aforesaid , therefore ( if they shall die in them ) they cannot possibly scape damnation . Our Lord saith , that The fearful and unbeleening , the abominable and murderers , whoremongers , sorcerers , idolaters , and all liars ( wherewith the Christian world aboundeth ) shall have their part in the lake , which burneth with fire and brimstone , which is the second death . And finally S. jude speaking of sundry wicked Epicures cept into the Church , saith that for them is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever . 

Thirdly , I say that all they which professing Christ do notwithstanding add unto the faith of Christ , and coin articles , which they do propose as necessarily to be believed to salvation , all such I say by this their presumption do cut themselves off from Christ , and shall undoubtedly perish except they shall repent . In like manner they that do take from the faith any essential point , and needful absolutely to salvation , they also are subject to damnation , which without repentance they cannot scape . ye shall put nothing unto the word , which I command you , neither shall ye take aught therefrom : It was twice at least given in charge by Moses . When Moses was now dead , and the government cast upon joshuah , God gave him the same lesson in effect : thou shalt not turn away from it to the right hand , nor to the left . In like manner Agur saith . Put nothing unto his words , lest he reprove thee , and thou be found a liar . I protest ( saith Christ ) to every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book , If any man how precise , how pure , how holy , how austere , how sanctified soever he seem , or how learned soever he be , and wit tie in the judgement of men , shall add unto these things , God shall add unto him the plagues , that are written in this book , and if any man shall diminish of the words of the book ( he meaneth the true sense and substance of the words ) of this prophecy , God shall take away his part out of the book of life , and out of the holy City , and from those things which are written in this book . If any subject , or subjects shall presume to repeal the laws of the kingdom , or to make new laws , and to urge men to receive and obey them , the king in the mean time unacquainted with their proceeding , or disliking it , they show themselves busy bodies , rebellious , turblent : and taking upon them as kings they incur the displeasure of the king , and deserve no better than death itself : even so are they the Children of death , who teach their Traditions in the Church , which is the kingdom of Christ , for the doctrines of God , and devose new articles of saith not heard of in the ancient Church , and press them upon us as necessarily to be believed , and they likewise , who destroy the faith , or maim it by their subtractions , and denials of Articles necessarily to be believed . 

Let them look to it therefore , that deny the Trinity , or the Divinity of Christ , and which deny salvation by Christ alone , and they , that teach worshipping of images , adoration of relics , prayer for the dead , transubstantiation , and all they , that believe it is of necessity to salvation , for every Christian to be subject to the Bishop of Rome , affirming all to be Heretics , that refuse him to be their chief Pastor on earth . 

Finally , all wicked and impenitent Sinners without exception of any , shall die this death . Wit , wealth , birth , beauty , strength , friends , attendants , these things cannot exempt them . Tophet is prepared for Kings , if wicked : and Christ ( as jude speaketh out of an ancient Prophecy ) will rebuke All the ungodly . Saul shall not be delivered by his crown , nor Nabal by his Coffers ; Achitophel shall not be helped by his counsel , nor Absalon by his beauty , nor Haman by his honour , nor Caiaphas by his priesthood , nor any man by his greatness , by his high Offices , and spacious Kingdoms . These things cannot save the body from Death , much less able are they to save the soul from Hell. Nec prece , nec pretio : the judge will not be persuaded by prayer , nor blinded by bribing , nor perverted by any mean , but will reward every man according as his work shall be , without respect of persons . 

The nature of this death is not easily to be described to the full : for neither hath the eye seen , nor the ear heard , neither hath it entered into man's heart to conceive the pangs and torments , that are prepared for the wicked . Only they , that feel them , are able ( if able ) to express them . 

Nevertheless seeing the Scriptures are not wholly silent , we may be bold to speak by their direction . 

First therefore the damned are deprived of the favour of GOD , and the comfort of his presence . 

Secondly , they do endure horrible and very painful punishments , both in Soul and body . 

Thirdly , their pains are endless , their tortures abide without ease for ever . 

All these three Saint Paul affirmeth in one Verse together , when he saith , they shall be Punished with everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord , and from the glory of his power . Here is ( Paena Damni ) the punishment of loss and lack at the least expressed , and the eternity of it , if not also ( Paena Sensus ) the punishment of feeling pangs , and torments : but our Saviour showeth that the wicked shall suffer Everlasting Pain : and esay saith that their worm shall never die , nor their fire be quenched . There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth . Planè fltetus ex dolore , stridor dentium ex furore , They shall weep ( saith Bernard ) for sorrow , and grind their te-th through rage . Hell fire is full of pain , and altogether void of comfort . In fire there are two things , heat and light : Hell-fire is hot , but dark : if it give light , it is not the light of comfort , but of misery , to let the damned see those things , which might affright and grieve them . But this fire is not ( as I suppose ) such fire as ours is , neither is their worm such a worm as creeps upon the earth , or as is bred in our body : but it pleaseth the Holy Ghost by these words to point out , and as by simitudes to show unto us the griefs and gripes of the damned , which shall be with much pain and horror , as the burning of a fire , or the gnawing of worms . The Devil and the wicked ( saith Damascene ) shall be delivered up into everlasting fire , Non materialem , qualis est apud nos , not unto a material fire , as is with us , but into such as is known to God. And Saint Austen doth thus somewhere dispute about this point : If the fire of Hell be corporal , it must be fed by corporal fuel , which being once wasted it also must go out , But it 's certain that hellfire shall never fail , therefore it is spiritual : but if it be a corporal fire , but by creation everlasting , then must the souls of men feel a corporal fire 

The Gluttons Soul in the parable was tormented grievously , burned extremely : but with what fire ? with hellfire indeed ; but it is improbable that elemenrary or bodily fire could affect a spirit out of the body . 

But let us not dispute what kind of fire it is , but rather study to keep ourselves from feeling it . 

This fire , saith Christ , is everlasting , semper urens , nunquam exurens : torquet , non extorquet : punit , sed non finit : it always burns , but never burns them up : it pains them but kills them not : it afflicts , but ends not . It is called Ignis inextinguibilis fire unquenchable : for it neither is put out itself , neither doth it extinguish those , whom it doth torment . 

Hell-fire ( saith S. Gregory ) seeing it is ( incorporeus ) not bodily , it is neither kindled by the help of man , nor fed with wood , but being once made it continueth unquenchable , and stands not in need to be kindled , neither wants it heat . 

Neither must it seem hard that the pains of the wicked must endure ever , For though indeed their lives had an end , some sooner , some later , yet if we consider the infinity of his person , whom they sinned against , and again that their sins left an immortal and indelible stain in their souls , and finally the eternal aversion of their wills , that if they had lived ever , they would have sinned ever : if we consider these things ( I say ) it will appear there is no cruelty or injustice in the Lord to punish them with eternal perdition , so as that their death shall be without death , their wants without want , their destruction without destruction . 

And that , which doth aggravate their misery is that their companions are no better than the Devils , and the place of their abode no sweeter no better than Hell itself , which of all places in the world is the worst , the habitation of Devils , void of order , full of horror , ubi nulla spes boni , nulla desperatio mali , where there is no hope at all of any good , and no despair of evil . 

But yet in Hell there shall be differences and degrees of pains , even as in heaven there will be degrees of glory : For pro disparibus ponderibus peccatorum , erunt etiam disparia tormenta paenarum ) as Saint Augustine speaketh according to the different degrees of sins there shall be different degrees of torments . The servant , that knows his Master's will , and doth it not , shall be worse beaten than he , that knows it not , and doth it not . Christ tells the Scribes and Pharisees that , because under the cloak of Religion they preyed on Widows , therefore they should Receive the Greater damnation : and says that they make their seduced proselytes Two fold more the children of Hell , than themselves . And speaking of them , that contemn the Gospel offered them , he saith , It shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom and Gomorrha , in the day of judgement , then for that City . 

As for the situation of Hell ; to say precisely where hell is , it is not easy : below it 's doubtless , as may appear by sundry places of the Scripture , and far from heaven : but that there is an Hell , to wit , a place appointed for the tormenting of wicked Angels , and ungodly men , it is clear enough : our chiefest care should be so to demean ourselves that we may never come there . 

And assuredly whosoever is in the state of grace shall never come into that horrid place prepared only for graceless and wicked people . 

He is in the state of grace , which depends wholly on the grace of God , which turns not his grace into wantonness , which delights not in ungracious wretches , which maketh much of those means of grace , which God hath in his Church : and finally , who out of a grateful spirit doth bestow himself , his soul & service upon God , labouring tooth and nail with might and main for the advancement of his honour , and the welfare of his house , which is the Church , being sorry at the heart that his service is so simple , his weaknesses so many , and his obedience so unperfect as it is , Certainly this man shall not die , but live eternally : not hell , but : heaven shall be his habitation : God doth honour him with his grace in this world , and will crown him with eternal glory in the world to come . 

Trin-vni Deo Gloria . 

Because these few pages left untouched should not be lost , I have set down some Positions which are not disagreeing from the matter handled . 

The first Position . 

Death is not the End of man , if we speak properly . 

THE end is that properly , to which a thing is ordained , or for which it is , But when God mad : a man , death was not the end he shot at : dissolution is not the scope of God's creation , nor of Parent's generation . Again , the End by itself and of it own natnre is only good : but death of itself and in it own nature is not good , but the privation of life , which is a certain good : death came in by sin , is the fruit of sin , and is ( as the Apostle showeth ) an Enemy . which shall be destroyed as an enemy : and therefore death properly is not good , but evil : therefore properly death is not the end of man Furthermore , Finis est , quod maximè volumus , that is the end , which we do chiefly desire : but neither God nor man doth chiefly desire death . A good Christian desires death , not for itself , but to be with Christ , to be unburdened of his concupiscence . Many men out of distemper of mind and an ill-informed will do covet death , and kill themselves : but yet it is not for death itself , but for some respect besides : as Cato Vticensis killed himself with his own sword , because he would not fall into the hands of julius Caesar : Sophronia to keep her chastity from the lust of Decius the Emperor , who daily assaulted it by her husband's consent slew herself : Portia the wife of Brutus , unable to bear the news of her husband's death , killed herself with eating burning coals : Labienus hearing his books were condemned to the fire , killed himself , because they should not die before him . Siluius Italieus murdered himself to rid himself of the torments of his grevous and incurable disease . Pontius Pilate , being banished to Vienna , and feeling the gripes of an accusing conscience , and fearing punishment for his misdeeds , to prevent all , killed himself . These and such like are the ends of Selfe-slayers , and not death itself . And albeit God do appoint men to die , yet it is not death he aims at , but the manifestation of his justice in punishing sin , of his power in raising men dead to life , and for such ends , as are best known unto himself . 

To conclude then , Death is not properly a man's end non 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 sed 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 not the highest scope of God's creation : nor a man's perfection or be atitude , which is the full and final fruition of Almighty God : but it is a certain Extreme , or the end of privation , which end is the corruption and the dissolution of a thing . 

The second Position . 

It is just with God to smite Sinners with death , even in the very act of their wickedness , and with that wherein they do offend . 

Cornelius Gallus and Quintus Elorius , two Roman Knights died ( as Pliny lib. 7. recordeth ) in the very action of filthiness . Arichbertus , elder son to Lotharius King of France died , as he was embracing his whores . Anacreon the Poet , a notable Drunkard , was choked with the husk of a grape . A certain African called Donitius eat so much at a Supper that he died there with . Philostrates being in the Baths at Sinressa , devoured so much wine , that he fell down the stairs , and almost broke his neck with the fall . Alexander the son of Basilius and Brother of Leo the Emperor , being a very belly-god , one day having crammed himself too full , as he got up his horse , he burst a vein , whereat flowed such store of blood that he died . These and many more such are the judgements of GOD upon Sinners and are in him most just . For first his will is the rule of justice : but these punishments he doth will and ordain ( for there is no evil in the City , no punishment , which he sendeth not ) : therefore these must needs be just . Secondly they are deserved : for the wages of sin is death : and in that God doth not strike every Sinner alike , the reason is , because he is tied to no Law , but is a Law unto himself , and may do what he william But sometimes he is pleased to smite suddenly , to terrify the wicked , and to keep his own in obedience , and to let all men know that there is a God , that judgeth the world , and hates wickedness , and wicked men . 

The third Position . 

A wicked man , though wickedly and cruelly murdered , is not not therefore discharged of his wickedness unrepented of , and saved . 

Senacherib was murdered of his sons , yet for that his own Idolatry & other sins were not forgiven . For men are not saved for any good thing either done by them , or for any evil sustained of them . The Eastern Emperor Zeno was such a loathsome Belly-god , that his wife Ariadne fell to loath bim , and on a day as he lay senseless ( as his manner was ) through gurmandizing , she got him into a tomb , and throwing a great stone upon it , pined him to death . This was a just punishment of a glutton , in regard of God , though unjust in respect of her , that did it . This than I say , If a man out of the state of grace be murdered , or die by an injust sentence of the Magistrate , yet he is not therefore delivered from the sentence of God , but must suffer as he hath deserved ; that his untimely death being also long of his sin . And though a wicked man or one not within the state of grace may die not deserving it of man , as Archelaus King of Macedonia , who was murdered of one Cratenas , whom he loved dear , or as that forenamed father was of Adrameleke and Sarasar his sons , yet is this their death justly sent from God , whom they knew not , worshipped not , served not , as they should have done . Yea their death may be justly punished in their murderers ( as Cratenas was himself also after murdered ) and yet death deserved at the hands of God. For though God and the murderer agree in the act , yet not in their grounds and ends : God therefore pursues the murderer , because he violates his law so souly , he not bidding him , but forbidding him to murder , and putting no malice into his heart to make him murder , giving him no commission , but only a certain permission , which God being Lord of all , and bound to no man , may justly do . 

The fourth Position . 

The number of such as shall suffer eternal death , is greater than of them that shall be saved . 

Many are called , but few in comparison of them are chosen : now none shall be saved but the chosen . There are , & have been many , that never had a verbal calling . An infinity of people there is at this day in the world , as of Turks , jews , Indians , Tartars , and other savage nations , in number beyond Christians : & of all that rabble there can be no hope of life , so long as they live out of the Church , and by no extraordinary favour , know Christ , who himself doth teach that the way of life is straight , and found of few , but that the way to death is broad , and full of travellers . And finally , even among Christians , only those shall be saved which embrace the true faith , and are obedient unto Christ , in those particular true visible . Churches , in which they were bred and baptised , and to the obedience of which God doth call and tie them . Now how few these are to heretics , schismatics , and other factious firebrands , and evil livers , as drunkards , fornicators , earthwormes , idle and unprofitable wretches , the multitude of sins and sinners which swarm like the fly's of Egypt in City and country doth demonstrate . 

The fifth Position . 

Whosoever doth simply and sincerely will and desire to be delivered from eternal death , shall not die , but live eternally . 

I Make it plain thus ; he that wills the end simply and sincerely , doth seek out means unto it , & doth use those means : for if he know the means whereby he may obtain his desire , & yet neglects to use them , and cares not for them , he shows his desire is but confused , uncertain , & unsincere . If therefore a man with an honest and true heart do will , wish , & desire to live , and to escape death , he will seek out means to accomplish his desire , & when he knows them , he will be careful to use them . It is an old and true saying , Wishers and Woulders were never good Householders : the meaning whereof is to tax the foolishness of such , as wish and would , but will take no pains , will use no means . An idle peeson would be rich , but he will not labour : a truant would be a scholar , but he will not study . The truth is that he , that indeed would enjoy a thing , will use means to compass it : If then I would not die , but live , I must not run on in sin , I must not distrust God , I must not disobey the Church of Christ , and kindle coals of contention , I must not contemn the word and Sacraments , but I must believe in Christ , repent of my sin , beg their pardon , reverence my Minister , love my brethren , and take heed I give no offence . Now he , that doth carefully use the means of life , and avosdes the ways of death , shall undoubtedly live , and not die . But he , that saith , I would live , I would not die , and yet goes the broad way , and regards not the narrow path , this man surely is wrong : his will is not simple and sincere , but confused and mishapen ; and except he reform his course , he shall perish notwithstanding his wishing and woulding . Tell me , if a man shall say , he would be in health , and yet will use no means of health , no good diet , no labour , nor the like , but delights only in eating , drinking , glouzing , sleeping , idleness ; tell me , does this man indeed will health , and a good temper of body ? He doth not doubtless : he may wish health , but he will take no pains for it , which argues very foolishness . Every man would be saved , who would die ? Balaam would not : no man would : yet in the mean time who useth the means ? Who leaveth his sins ? Who fights with his lusts ? Who honoureth his Minister as the man of God ? Who thirsteth after Christ ? Who is loving and obedient unto the Church ? Is not sin committed & countenanced ? Is not the Sabbath commonly , and notoriously profaned ? Do not oaths , drunkenness , pride , idleness , and hard-heartednesse abound ? And are not many to seek ( as it were ) in the Alphabet of religion . They know not which is the true Church , which are the people of God , which is his house . What miserable times do we live in ! How vain is the world ! Men would fain live , they would not die , they say , and yet they care not for the ways of life , whereas if men did truly and effectually will to live , and to avoid death , they would not run the broad way , but would show themselves wise men , that is , as well seek out and use the means as affect the end . 

The sixth Position . 

Though a man feel not the fruits and working of the Spirit in him , yet he must not despair of life , and think he is ordained to death , and must needs be damned . 

A Man may be called before death , though now he be in sin over head and ears , and altogether void of mercy : God's arm is never too short to save , his ear is never too dull to hear : neither doth any man know what the purpose of God is . Paul was as bad as one God ; did call him , & so was the Thief , that was called on the Cross . 

Again , a man may be in the state of grace , and yet sometimes feel no comfort , no working of the Spirit , even as a man in a swoon or sleep doth live , though he knows not so much , and a child ( we see ) lives before it knows it lives . 

I say finally , what though thou feelst no grace ? what though thou be'st nothing so good , as thou shouldst be ? wilt thou therefore despair ? Is there no way with thee , thinkest thou , but death ? Wrong not thyself : where is thy faith ? we live by faith , and not by feeling . It is not thy graces in thee , that doth save thee , it is God's grace in Christ unto thee , of which grace thou mayst be partaker , though thou feelest no graces in thee . And know this , that it is not so much thy love of God and thy knowledge of Christ , which is saving to thee , as God's love , whereby he loves thee , as Christ's knowledge , whereby he knows thee , who knows and loves thee before and better , than thou canst know and love him . And certainly , if thou dost earnestly seek and affect his grace , thou hast grace : for it is a grace to desire grace : and it argues that , if thou dost truly seek Christ for Christ , thou hast already found Christ , or rather that Christ hath found thee . And finally , what if thou findest not all the works of the Spirit in thee ? If thou findest but one , there is reason of quietness . If feeling no grace , thou dost feelingly desire and covet grace , one drop of grace , this is a grace , a voice of the Spirit , and there is reason of comfort , and why thou shouldst not be dismayed . One green leaf upon a Tree will show the tree is alive , one sigh doth argue life . This than I say , if out of the want of Christ thou desirest Christ , if feeling the want of the Spirit thou dost desire and pant after the Spirit , assure thyself thou art not void of grace , Christ doth love thee , the Spirit hath taken possession of thee : stand not in thine own light , be not over wise , but be ruled , and remember that Christ cries , Come , unto them , that are heavy jaded , and is so pitiful that he will not quench the smoking Flax nor break the bruised Reed . ( ⸪ ) 

Trin-vni Deo Gloria . 

FINIS . 





Heu viwnt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur , aut velut infernus sabula vana foret . Note . 1.  Pet. 2. 11.  Linquenda tellus , & domus , & placens uxor . Hor. Carm. l. 2. odd . 14.  2.  Tim. 6.  jam. 7.  Eccl. 11. 3.  Note . Domitianus . Apud Sucton . Hadrian . Spartian . lib. 2. cap. 12.  Valerian . Euseb . hist . lib. 7. cap. 30.  Dioclesian . Ruffin . Maximinus . Nicephor . Aurelian . Arnolphus . Stow Anno mundi . 3659.  Munst . Cosm . lib. 1. cap. 32.  Socrat. Zozom  Ruffin . l. 2. c. 13  

Three sorts of Death .  Plut. comp . aq . & ignis .  Scal. Excre . 307 Sect. 23.   Plut. the consolat . Scal. ibid.  Note . In Epist . ad Burdig . De divino praemio , lib. 7. c. 16.  Lact. de diu . praem . l. 7. c. 6. 7. 13.  Lib. 7. c. 10.  Xenoph l. 8. de Instit . Cyri.  Vid. Lactantii l. 7. c. 13.  Lact. l. 7. c. 13. de diu . praem . Lact. ubi supra . Scriptures proving the immortality of the Soul . Ec. 12. 7.  Is . 66. 24.  Luk. 12. 19 20.  Luk. 16. 22. 23.  Lib. 7. c. 12 ▪ de diu . praem . joh. 12. 26 : Luke 23. 43  Luke 14. 13.  〈…〉  Act. 7 59  Phil. 1. 23.  2.  Cor. 5. 2.  Heb. 2. 17.  & 4. 15.  Mat. 22. 32.  Exerc. 307.  Sect. 20.  Philosophical arguments showing the soul of man to be immortal ▪  Arg. 2  Arg. 3.  Note . Note . Acts 17. 28.  2.  Pet. 1. 4.  Note . Note . How the soul may be said to die . Quaest . Quaest . 75.  Hom. 16. in Ep. ad Rom.  In Col. 1.  Luke 16. 22. 23.  Aug. lib. de pec ; merchant & remis . c. 28.  Author Hypog . l. 5.  lib. 7. de diu . prem . c. 12.  Of a double Death . Num. 23. 10.  Psal . 116. 15.  Luke , 12 , 20.  Luke . 16. 22 , 23.  Many ways of death . josh 23. 14.  Maximianus . Statius . A Simile . Silius . 2.  King. 13. 14.  2.  King 2 , 23. 24.  2.  Chron. 32. 21.  Act. 12. 23.  1.  King. 22. 34 , 35.   Hatto Archbishop of Mentz . Anno Domini 940.  Read Numh. 18 , 19 30.  Of the kinds of death . 1.  Kind . A Simile . job. 5. 26.  1.  Chron. 29. 28.  job. 42. 17.  2.  Kind . Rom. 13 4.  josh 7. 25.  Mark. 15. 37.  Quest . Sol.  Psal 82. 6.  2.  Chron. 19 6.  Rom. 13. 1.  Gal. 3. 28.  Revel . 16  Job . 18. 36  1.  King. 2. 31. 46  Anno 1605.  Novemb. 5.  1.  King. 21. 13.  Mark . 6. 27.  Note . Quest . Ans . 1.  Sam. 24. 6.  1.  Pet. 2. 19 22. 23.  1.  Pet. 3. 14. 15.  16 , 14 , 15.  1.  Pet. 2. 20.  Cyprian  Ambros . de Obitu Theodos . Sed piger ad poenas Princeps , ad praemia , velox , Quisque dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox , Ouid. de Pont. l. 1. eleg . 3.  3.  Kind : 2.  Sam. 17. 23.  Act. 1. 18.  De Art poet sub finem . Quest . 1.  Ans . 〈…〉  Rome 14 8.  1.  Cor. 6 19  & 3. 23.  & 6. 20.  Ex. 20. 13.  Eth. l. 3. cap. 6.  Note . De Pont. l. 2. eleg . 2.  Eth. l. 3. c. 9  Lib. 3.  Cap. 7.  Sub sinem . Quest . 2.  Aus . 1.  Joh. 3. 16.  Acts 20. 24 : Acts 21 , 11.  12 , 13  Phil. 2. 17.  Cyprian De laud. Martyrij . A simile . A Simile . De Civit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 6.  Isa . 49 23.  A Simile . Hor. l. 3. car . ode . 2.  Or. 1. in Cat.  Offic. 1 , Cic. 2. de Leg.  Ad Heren . l. 4.  Phil. 14.  Quaest . 3.  Ans . Math. 26. 53.  john . 10. 18.  1.  john . 5. 20.  Note . A Simile . Note . Two kinds of voluntary death . Judg. 9 53. 54.  Heb. 11. 35.  Quest . 4.  Ans . Rom. 8. 23.  De compunct . cord . De verb. Apost . ser . 2.  Excit . l. 9  Serm. 61. in Cant.  How it appears that Martyrdom merit's not of God.  1.  Cor. 4. 7.  Phil. 1. 29.  Iliad . 2.  Rom. 9 18.  Rom. 11. 35.  1.  Cor. 8.  Phillip 1. 6. 1.  Pet. 15  1.  Pet. 5. 10  Note . Ans . Hor. de . Art Puct sub . sinem . Note . Quest . 6.  Ans . One reason against self-murder . The first common cause of selfe-murder . Lib. the util . Poenit.  Ob , Ju Ps . 50.  Sol.  Lib. 2. the sum● bono . Ambros . in Luk. l. 2.  Isid . ubi supra . Ibid.  Hug. l de vera sap . Quest . Sol.  Gen. 4. 8. 23.  Quest . Ans . Psal . 145. 18.  Mat. 11. 28.  Ezck. 33. 11.  Ob.  Sol.  Lam. 5. 21.  Cant. 1. 3  Psal . 51. 9 10. 11.  The second common cause of Selfe-murder . 1.  Sam. 31. 4.  2.  Sam. 17. 23.  Hor at . car . in l. 1 Od. 7.  Reason 2. against selfe-murder . 3.  Reason . 4.  Reason . 5.  Reason . Second part of the 6. quest . Ans . Selfe-murder may be pardoned . Note . Note . Psal . 19 13 , 14.  Quest . 7.  Ans . Note . A Paradox of our unwise Gallants .  I take not Violent in the largest sense . 2.  Sam. 18. 9 14. 15.  Dan. 6. 24.  Luke . 13. 4.  Lib. 2.  Carm. ode . 17.  Other ways of dying . job. 22. 24 , 25.  Quaest . 3.  Ans . It is not unlawful to pray ( as in our Litany ) against sudden death . Note . Of sudden death . Valer. Max. & Hen. Steph. ex Gregor . Gyrald . De virtut mulierum . Num. 16. 30. 31 32.  Levit. 10. 2.  1.  Sam. 25. 38.  job. 1. 18. 19  Jud. 3. 21.  jud. 16. 30.  jud. 4. 21.   1.  Eg. the Phil. and Sisera . Isa . 37. 38. 1.  King. 16. 9 10  An 1605.  Novemb . 5.  Of the causes of death . God inflicteth death . Psal . 39 5.  Isa . 38. 12.  Gen. 2. 17.  Isa . 45. 7.  Ec. 3. 1. 2.  Act. 1. 7.  Math. 10. 29. 30  Iliad 22.  Contra Marcel . In lerem . c. 12.  De gen . cont . Manich. l. 1. c. 2  Lam. 3. 37.  Ob. 1.  Sol.  In what sense God may be said to ordain and cause death . A Simile . Ob. 2.  Sol.  Act. 2. 23.  Act. 4. 28.  Ob. 3.  Sol.  no murderer is excused by God's decree . Epist . ad Vinc. 38.  Note . Ex. 20. 13.  Ob. 4.  Sol.  Note . Three actions of God about murder . 1.  Act. 17. 28.  Note . Act. 2.  Note . Act. 3.  Quaest . 1.  Sol.  Enchir. c. 95.  Quest . 2.  Sol.  Enchir. c. 101.  Quest . 3.  Sol.  Enchir. c. 98.  Quest . 4.  Sol.  De Praed . & Grat. c. 15.  August . Enchir. c. 101.  Quest . 5.  Sol.  Lib. 1 de Sacr. c. 7. part . 4.  Quest . 6.  Sol. Depraedestin & great . p. 48.  Sum. 9 19 art . 9  Quest . 7.  Sol.  De Gen. ad lit . imperf . cap. 5.  De civet . Dei l. 11. c. 17  Quest . 8.  Sol.  Strom. l. 1.  Euchir . ad Laur. c. 101.  Quest . 9  Sol.  De great . & lib. arbit . cap. 21.  De amiss . great . l. 2. c. 13.  Acts 4. 28.  Sin the mother of Death . Rom. 5. 12.  Rom. 6. 23.  Depraed . & great . c. 11.  Wisd . 1. 13. 15.  Eccles . 11. 14.  Aug. retract . l. 1. c. 21.  Rom. 5. 12.  Note . Who are Subject to Death . 2.  Cor. 5. 21.  joh. 10. 15. 18.  Rom. 3. 25.  Bucan . loc . 11. q. 13.  1.  Cor. 15. 22.  Rom. 5. 12.  Lib. contra Fortunat . disput . 2.  Gen. 3. 19  Quest . Ans . Why Infants die . Psal . 51. 5.  Aug. de praedest . & great . cap. 2.  Quest . Ans . Why Infants are guilty of Sinne.  Lib. 16. the excel . Mariae . c. 10.  Quest . Reu. 1. 5.  Ans . In cap. 6. ad Rom.  Note . Note . Psal . 116. 15.  All men must die . Heb. 9 27.  2.  King. 2. 2.  Tuscul . 1.  Ouid. ad Liviam . Hor. Car. l. 2. odd . 28. l. 2. ode . 3.  Iliad . l. 6.  Hor. carm . lib. 2. odd . 14.  Homer . ll . 18.  Hor. carm . l. 2. odd . 16.  Psal . 49. 10.  Hor. l. 1.  Carm. odd . 4.  Psal 82. 6.  Hor. carm . lib. 1. odd . 28.  Hor. carm . l. 3. odd . 11.  Ouid.  2.  Sam. 2. 18.  Eccl. 3. 20.  Quest.  Sol.  1.  Cor. 15. 5.  Of the time of Death . Isa . 46. 10. 11.  Iliad . 1.  Lucret.  Martial . Isa . 38. 5.  Note . Seneca . Herc. fur . Death's hour is unknown . Tul. 1. de finib . Epist . 23.  Note . A Simile . Death is but once . Heb. 9 27.  Carm. l. 1. odd . 18  2.  King. 13. 22.  Death takes possession easily . jam. 4. 14.  Hor. car . l. 4. odd . 7  Eurip. Hor. 16.  A Simile . As death leaves so the judge finds men . Ad D●oscor . Eccl. 11. 3  Cyp. Tract . ad Demetrian . Of the commodities of death . To whom death is ●ndeed a benefit . Commod . 1.  Vid. Plutarch . de consolat . ad Apol.  Commod . 2.  Commod . 3.  Note . A simile . In joh.  Death is discommodious to the wicked 1. 2 3 4 5.  Aug. and Julian . ep . 211.  What to death may be compared . Simile 1.  Death is a Physician . Adissimile . Death is an Haven ,  isay . 57 1.  Reu. 14. 13.  Adissimilitude . In two cases Death is unlike an Haven . Luke 16.  A second dissimilitude . Job . 7. 10.  Vid. Nat. 〈◊〉 . Myth . l. 3. c. 13.  Acts 20. 9 10.  Death is a Night . A dissimile . Agath . in Nat. Com. ubi supra . A dissimile . Pro. 30 16.  Death a fire . A dissimile . Death is a Reaper . A Dissimilitude . Death is a Tyrant . A Dissimili . Satyra 10.  judg. 15. 15.  Horat. Carm. l. 3.  Od. 4.  Death is a flying woman . Death is a Sea.  Death a Lion.  Death a Sleep . Laert. lib. 6.  Plutarc . Consol . , ad Apoll.  A Dissimilitude . 28 questions about Death . Quest . 1.  Sol.  How death may be said to be natural . Note . Quest. 2.  Sol.  Natural death described . Quest . 3.  Sol.  What violent death is . A Simile . A Simile . Quest . 4.  Sol.  Note . A Simile . Quaest . 5.  Sol.  The causes of long life . A Simile . Quest . 6.  Sol.  This answer belongs to the state of man's fall by sin . Note . Note . Jwenal . Satyr . 80.  Quest . 7.  Sol.  Three living spirits created  How man's soul is said to die . 2.  Difference . 3.  Difference . In Cant. ser . 107  john . 5.  Act. 24. 15.  Quest . 8.  Sol.  Laert. lib. 1. c. 1.  Ans . How death is an evil , and how not . Note . 1.  Cor. 15.  Quest . 9  Sol.  Psal . 51. 5.  Note . Ec. 7. 3.  Quest . 10.  Sol.  Note . Quest . 11.  Sol.  Rom. 3. 8.  We must not die till God call us.  Quest . 12.  Sol.  Phil. 1. 23.  Quest . 13.  Sol.  lu what sense a man may pray against death . Note . job. 13. 15.  job 17. 3. 4. 6.  Quest . 14.  Sol  Epist . 88  Note . How death may be feared . Aug. l. 2. the doct . Christ . Greg.  Quaest . 15.  Sol.  When sudden is evil . Quest . 16.  Sol.  How we may lament the death of our friends . De verb. Ap. ser . 3 2.  In Cant. ser . 29.  1.  These . 4. 13. 14.  Note . Phil. 2. 27.  Note . whiles I was a writing these things , it pleased God to take from me mine only son , before he was a fortnight old . Quest . 17.  Epist . 30.  Sol.  Quaest . 18.  Sol.  In admonit . 6.  Quaest . 19  Sol.  In paradox . Quaest . 20.  Sols  Quaest . 21.  Sol.  Death both certain and uncertain . Quaest . 22.  Sol.  A Simile . Quaest . 23.  Sol : Whose death is best . Whose death is counted worst . The juster the Law , the worse the death . Quest . 24.  Sol. Why God keeps from men the time of their deaths De consolat . ad Apoll.  Quest . 25.  Sol.  Epist . 22.  Note . Note . Note . Quest . 26.  Sol.  What is the best death , without reference to sin or virtue . A Simile  Quaest . 27.  Sol.  Why it is unlawful to pray to know the time of our deaths . Tu ne quaesieris scire ( nesas ) quem mihi , quem tibi finem Dij dederint . Seu plures hyemes , seu tribuit jupiter ultimakm . Hor. car . l. 1. odd . 11.  Rom. 14. 23.  Psal . 39 5.  Note . Spacio brevi spem lougant reseces . Dum loquimur , sugerit invida aelas . Hor. car . li. 1. odd . 11.  Act. 1. 7.  Quest . 28.  Sol.  The honours performed to the dead . Levit. 19 14.  Uses of the former discourse . ● . The bodic is base than the soul . A Simile . Note . Why should a man have an evil soul , that would have a good body ? A comfort against the fear of death . Use . 2.  Why death is to be born with patience . A comfort to a good man dying . Dan. 3.  & 6.  Use . 3.  A reason to hate sin . Sin a very Crabtree . Pro. 14. 9  & 10 23.  Use . 4.  Inordinate fear of death to be suppressed . Senec. 78. epist . Epist . 24.  Epist . 78.  Use 5.  Rules of preparation against Death . 1.  John 5. 24.  john 11. 25. 26.  Note . Who is a right believer , and who fantastical . Rule 2.  Ezek. 18. 30. 31.  Five duties of a true penitent . Ezek. 18. 22.  Note . A Simile . Rule 3  jobn 3. 16.  Heb. 13. 17.  Rule 4.  Rule 5.  Pro. 16. 6.  1.  Tim. 17. 18. 19  Note . Mat. 25.  A Simile . jam. 2. 13.  Rule 6.  English Papists & Brownists are liable to damnation . for their obstinate Schism . Note . Reu. 22. 12.  Rom. 2. 7. 8.  Rule 7.  isay 38. 1.  2.  Sam. 17. 23.  Acts 7. 59  The death of the godly commended . 1.  Cor. 15. 56.  Note . Note . A false imagination of sundry persons  Ex. 20. 8. 10.  Rom. 6. 16.  1.  Joh. 3. 8. 9  Ezek. 18. 21.  Is . 1. 16. 17.  Of spiritual death . Eph. 2. 1.  Col. 2. 13.  The spiritual death of the Godly , is threefold . What death to sin is . The preeminence of a Saint . Ex. 19 12.  Zak. 2. 8.  Rom. 7. 4.  Gal. 2. 16. 19  Note . Gal. 6. 14.  When the World is dead to a man  How a man is said to be dead to the World.  job. 15. 19  & 16. 3.  1.  Pet. 2. 11.  Reu. 22. 8  What eternal death is . 2.  These . 1. 9  God the inflicter of eternal death . Psal . 11. 5.  Is . 30. 33.  Note . Rom. 2. 5. 8.  Death the fruit of sin . Rom. 6. 23.  2.  These . 1. 8.  Rom. 2. 8.  Matth. 25. 41. 42.  Who are subject to eternal death . Who shall die this death . Math. 25. 41.  Math. 7. 23.  2.  These . 1. 8.  joh. 8. 24.  Note . joh. 3. 36.  Act. 4. 8. 11.  1 Pet. 2. 4. 6  Act. 4. 12  Isa . 53. 11  Gal. 2. 15. 16  2.  joh. 5. 11. 12  In hope . In actual possession . Note . 1.  Cor. 6. 9 10.  Reu. 21. 8.  jude. 4. 13.  Note . Deut. 4. 2.  & 12. 32  josh . 1. 7.  Pro 30. 6.  Reu. 22. 18. 19  How dangegerous it is to tract or add unto the word of Christ . A Similitude . Note . As Antitrinitarians , Arians  As Papists . no salvation for sinners during their impenitency . isay 30. 33.  jude 15.  Reu. 22. 12.  Rom. 2. 6.  Eternal cannot be fully described . Three things about this death to be noted . 1.  Paena damni . Paena Sensus . Aeternitas Paenae  2.  These . 1. 9  Math. 25. 46.  esay 66. 24.  In fire two things . Note . Hell-fire is not like our fires . Lib. 4. de ortho . c. 28.  Lib. the cogn . verae vitae c. 40.  Luke 16.  Note . Math. 25. 41.  In 20. cap. job.  Note . Why the death of the damned is for ever . The companions of the damned . The Place . Difference of torments . Lib. 4. contr . Donat . c. 19 de Bap.  Luke 12. 47.  Math. 23. 14. 15  Math. 10. 15.  Where Hell is . isay 30. 33.  Luke 16. 26.  Reu. 9 11.  & 20. 3.  & 17. 8.  Num. 16. 30. 33  jude 6.  2.  Pet , 2. 4.  Note . Whom Hell shall not receive . Who is in the state of grace . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Aristot . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 1 Cor. 15. 26.  Aristot . lib. 1. de Anima . Rom. 6. 23.  Note . 2.  King. 19 37.  Why God punisheth a murder , which he doth permit . Math. 20. 16.  joh. 3. 18.  Heb. 5. 9  joh. 27. 9  Math. 7. 13. 14.  Note . Note . Ezek. 18. 21.  joh. 3. 16.  Note . Note . isay 59  Note . Note . 1.  joh. 4. 10. 19  Note . Note . Mat. 11. 28.  Mat. 12. 20.  