The Waters of Marah Sweetened . A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mistress CLARE WITTEWRONGE , Elder Daughter to Joseph Alston Esq AND Late Wife to John Wittewronge Esq : Who was Interred at Stantonbury in the County of Bucks . Octob. 22. 1669.  

By Mr. John Mason , Minister . 

1 Cor. 15. 56 , 57  

The sting of death is sin , etc.  But thanks be to God which giveth us the victory , through our Lord Jesus Christ.  



Col. 3. 4.  

When Christ who is our life shall appear , then shall ye also appear with him in glory . 



LONDON , Printed by John Macock . 1671.  

Hebr. IX . 27 , 28.  

And ▪ as it is appointed unto men once to die , but after this the Judgement ; So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many , and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time , without sin , unto salvation . 

MAN is born to die , and he dies in order to his last Judgement . This is an hard Sentence ; but the latter part of the Text mollifies it ; So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many , and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time , without sin , unto salvation . 

The Proposition is terrible , but the Reddition is comfortable . 

The Scope of the Apostle in this Chapter is to prove that the Sacrifice of Christ exceeds in worth and merit all the Sacrifices of the Law. And one Argument is this , That the Sacrifice of Christ was so perfect , that it needs not to be repeated ; But whereas the Sacrifices of the Law were offered by the Highpriest yearly , our Lord Jesus by one single oblation of himself hath obtained eternal Redemption for us . And this Argument is illustrated in the words of my Text ; As men die once , so Christ died once for men ; for his death was equivalent to many deaths : And as men after death must appear to be judged , so Jesus Christ after his death shall appear to judge men . He shall die no more , but whenever he appears again , it shall be to judge the world , and to save his Elect. This proves the virtue and merit of his death ; for if Christ by his death had not wholly discharged himself from the imputation of sin , he must have been a Prisoner , and not a Judge . 

Now as the words show us the sufficiency of Christ's mediation , so in the second place the suitableness thereof to those estates whereunto all mankind is ordained . We must all die of necessity , we must all come to Judgement ; but this we have for our comfort , Jesus Christ is gone before us in Death , and will meet us in the day of Judgement 

And from hence we raise this Observation . 

Those last , inevitable , and dreadful estates of Death and Judgement are sanctified and sweetened to all true Believers by the precious Death and glorious Appearance of Jesus Christ.  

Death and Judgement are the terrors of mankind , but they are consecrated into blessings and comforts by the death of Christ , and the appearance of Christ.  

The Doctrine falls into two Parts . 

1.  Jesus Christ hath sanctified to us a dying estate by his own Death . 

2.  He will sweeten to us our day of Judgement by his own Appearance . 

To begin with the first . 

We are all subject to a state of death , and that , not by hap or chance , but by the appointment of the living God.  

It is appointed unto men once to die . 

1.  In God's secret and everlasting Decree . 

2.  In that express Decree , Gen. 3. 19  Dust thou art , and unto dust shalt thou return . God hath said it , and hath performed his word in all ages ; So that we must needs die , and are as water spilt upon the ground . 

Now seeing we cannot possibly avoid a dying condition , let us see how we can digest it . And truly if we look back upon its first Institution , and the occasion of it , we shall find it to be full of malignity and bitterness . 

For what is death , but the curse of the great God upon rebellious man , the bitter fruit of sin , a period to all earthly comforts , and the beginning of an everlasting Hell ? Death destroys vital union , dissolves the knot of natural Relations , divorces the wife from her husband , pulls the child out of his father's bosom ; it mars the greatest beauties , stains the pride of earthly glory ; it degrades the Honourable , binds the strong , beggars ▪ the rich ; it casts us out of our houses and possessions , disappoints our earthly expectations ; In a word , it rends a man asunder , and sends part of him into the prison of the Grave ; and the other part into the dungeon of Hell. And now what will ye do in the day of Visitation ? How will you save yourselves ? To whom will ye flee for help , and where will you leave your glory ? Can your hearts endure , or your hands be made strong in the day that the great God shall deal with you ? OH unhappy Mortals , that are born to such misery , who have no sooner entered a single life , but are liable to a double death ! 

And surely if the Son of God had not died in our Nature , we should envy the condition of Toads and Serpents ; we should curse the day of our birth , and tremble before the day of our death . But Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many . This offering hath mitigated our state of mortality . For as it is appointed to men once to die , so Jesus Christ was appointed to die once for men . He died once , that we might not die ever . The blood of God was an acceptable sacrifice to the Justice of God. Infinite blood hath satisfied infinite Justice . So that wheresoever this blood is sprinkled , it redeems the soul to God , even from the hand of all her enemies . Particularly death threatened us with Hell and Damnation ; But now the death of Christ is the plagues of our death , and the peace of our souls . And what is it now for us to die , but to pass into the bosom of a reconciled God , to leave the world , and to go to our Father ? 

We die still , yet it is upon a new account . As good Josiah , though he died in blood , yet he went down into the grave in peace . The sentence of death , though it be still passed upon us , yet its commission is altered through Christ. Before it was a Sergeant to carry us to the dark and dreadful prison of Hell ; but now it is as it were a Porter to set open Heaven-gates for us . Death hath a new Commission , and a new aspect by virtue of the death of Christ.  

It is 1.  Innocent . 
2.  Useful . 


1.  Innocent . The death of a faithful Christian ( for I am speaking now of sincere Believers ) I say , the death of a faithful Christian doth him no hurt : What hurt is there in putting off a suit of old clotheses ? I must shortly put off this earthly Tabernacle , says the Apostle Peter , and it did not greatly trouble him . What hurt is it for an imprisoned soul to be enlarged ? Or for a wearied body to take a short nap in the dust ? Jesus Christ hath sucked out all the venom of death . Christ's death hath swallowed up the bitterness of ours . 

Christ hath taken away 1.  The Sting . 
2.  The Curse . 
3.  The Shame . 
4.  The Terror . 
5.  The Enmity . 
of Death . 


1.  Jesus Christ hath pulled out the fiery sting of death ; 1 Cor. 15. 56.  The sting of death is sin . Gild is the vigour of death . Gild and sin makes death to be venomous and deadly ; But a Child of God dies not upon the account of sin , neither in his sin , nor for his sin . Christ was offered up to bear our sins . That was the business of Christ's death , to be a sacrifice for sin . But our death is a service , not a sacrifice . This is enough to make our death tolerable ; 't is no punishment for our sins . 

2.  Christ by his death hath taken away the Curse of our death . Death at the first was threatened as a Curse , and as an Instrument of God's revenging Justice . But Jesus Christ by suffering the cursed death of the Cross , hath taken away the curse of our death . Here is more comfort for us , Christians ; death is not envenomed with the wrath of God ; It is no blow in anger , no token of his displeasure , no Curse , but only a rougher sort of love . 

3.  Jesus Christ hath taken off the shame of a dying condition . Death was a shameful penalty inflicted upon ambitious man , that would needs have been a God. Death was sent to reproach him , to slain the pride of his glory . But our Lord clothed himself with our shame , you know , how he was buffeted , derided , spit upon , crowned with thorns , arrayed with mock-apparel . Why was this ? but to take off the reproach of our sufferings , and the shame of our death . 

4.  Jesus Christ by his agonies and tremble , and terrible sufferings , hath freed us from the terror of death . There is a fear of death arising from the natural constitution of man ; this is a guiltless infirmity , which all are subject to . But then there is a slavish fear of death , as it is penal , as it is an issue of the primitive Curse , and as it is a dreadful entrance into a state of damnation . Now true Believers are delivered from the spirit of bondage through the blood of Christ. This also enables them to check their natural fear , as Hilarian did , when he cried , Get thee out , my soul , get thee out ; thou hast served Christ these seventy years , and art thou now afraid to die ? 

Lastly , The Enmity of death is slain by the death of Christ. It intends us no mischief . Though i● may seem to threaten us at a distance , yet ( like Esau ) it is friendly in its address . It is an enemy to our nature , but it is no enemy to our happiness . It divides us , but it doth not destroy us . Nay this last enemy is become one of our chiefest friends . For when the world disquiets us , pains torment us , Friends and Physicians are of no value , Death proves our Cure. When sin besets us , temptations assault us , the Devils buffet us , death proves our deliverance . 

You see , my Beloved , what an innocent thing death is ; you may touch it , handle it , converse with it , it will do you no hurt . It is but a necessary Ceremony and Formality , through which we must pass into everlasting glory . 

As it is Innocent , so it is Useful ; For it is a blessing of God , a blessing of the new Covenant . Death is yours . Dear Christians , All are yours ; And as the Ministers of the Gospel are yours , and the world is yours , and life is yours , so death is yours ; yours in Covenant , yours to serve you . If ye are Christ's , death is yours ; but if you are not Christ's , you are Deaths , you are deaths prisoners ; but in Christ we are deaths Masters . For all true Believers , though they have not made a Covenant with death , yet they have death in the Covenant . We call death a Debt of Nature , but to us it is the gift of God ; A Legacy rather than an Exaction , A Privilege rather than a Burden . It is a conquered Enemy , and is become Tributary to us . 

1.  It gives us rest from all our labours . rev. 14. 13.  Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord , for they rest from their labours . These are our working days , our dies profesti , the days of our toil and pilgrimage ; But there remains a rest for the people of God , Heb. 4. 9  There remains a Sabbatism ( as it is in the Original . ) And death is the evening of our everlasting Sabbath . 

Here God's people are labouring under sin , and against sin , under temptations , and against temptations , in their heavenly Callings , and in their earthly Callings . But then these weary Pilgrims shall be at rest , when their souls shall be lodged in the bosom of Christ , and their bodies shall rest in a bed of earth . Our souls shall rest in Heaven , and our flesh shall rest in Hope . 

2.  Death enters us into our Master's joy , into the presence of God , where there is the fullness of joy . Here the Children of the Bride-chamber are fasting and mourning for the absence of the Bridegroom . Here they hang their Harps upon the Willows , and how can they sing songs in a strange land ? But when once they come into their Lord's presence , they shall break forth into singing ; Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads , sorrow and sighing shall fly away . 

3.  To die is gain . For it perfects our knowledge , Grace and Communion with God. Alas , here we know but in part . The The Apostle tells us , We are but children , we think as children , we discourse as children ; but when we are grown up to a full stature in Christ , when we are once got to Heaven , we shall put away these childish things . then we shall see God as he is , and know him as we are known , and shall behold his face in righteousness , and shall be satisfied with his likeness . then our Faith shall end in vision , and our Hope in fruition , and our Graces shall be perfected in glory . Our love shall burn , our zeal shall flame , our holiness shall shine ; then our peace shall be as a river , and our righteousness as the waves of the Sea. then we shall have perfect , immediate , uninterrupted Communion with God.  

This it is to die in the Lord  

But after death comes Judgement . There is a vain Argument that Lactantius confutes ; Epicurus slighted death upon this account , because said he , Whilst we are , death is not ; and when death is , we are not ; And therefore death is nothing to us . 

But this man erred , not knowing the Scriptures , nor the power of God : For after death comes Judgement , wherein the souls and bodies of men being reunited , all Nations , Tribes , and Languages shall appear before the living God to give an account of their lives , and to receive their final sentence . Now it is the dreadfulness of the day of Judgement , that makes the day of Death so terrible . And the poor guilty soul was not more loath to part with her body in the day of Death , than she shall be to re-enter it in the day of Judgement . 

When the Lord Jesus shall appear from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire , to take vengeance on all those that know not God , and obey not the Gospel of Christ , where then will guilty sinners appear ? Or where will you hide yourselves from the presence of the Lamb ? Alas , there will be no possibility of escaping his terrible presence ; you shall see him coming in the Clouds , you shall hear him pronouncing your dreadful Doom , you shall feel him pressing down your souls with the power of his wrath . 

But fear not , little flock ; for your Enemies shall not sit in Judgement ; when you shall come upon trial for your lives , to have your everlasting estate determined : It is your Friend , your Brother , your Advocate that shall be your Judge : 't is he that led you by the hand through the valley of death , that shall meet you in the day of Judgement . then you shall say , Lo , this is our God , our Jesus , we have waited for him , and he will save us . then the object of our Faith shall be the object of our Sight . Him whom our souls have loved , and longed for , we shall see with these eyes of ours in that day ; We shall see him coming in the clouds with power and great glory , we shall see him not with scorn , but with admiration , not with trembling , but with rejoicing . 

Christ's first Appearance was very mean. He appeared as the Son of man , or rather as a worm , a reproach of men ; all that saw him laughed him to scorn . But hereafter he shall appear as the God of all glory , and the Judge of quick and dead . In the days of his flesh he appeared as a Prisoner at Pilates Bar , and as a Malefactor on the Cross ; then indeed he stood charged with the sins of all his people , but in the day of Judgement he shall appear without sin unto their salvation . 

The glorious presence of the Lord , that shall be as a devouring Fire to consume his Enemies , shall be a warm Sun to refresh his Saints . And that day , that shall be a day of terror to guilty sinners , shall be to us a day of refreshing from the presence of the Lord  

it 's wonderful to think , what infinite honours and privileges shall be conferred upon us ( poor dust and ashes ) in that day . How we shall be caught up in a Chariot of clouds , and shall meet the Lord in the air , where we shall receive kind salutations from him , and smiles , and blessings , and acknowledgements of service , and Crowns of glory , and shall be made his Assessors whiles he is judging the world , and after all this , shall attend him into his glorious Palace , where we shall ever be with the Lord Let us comfort one another with these words . 

The very thought of Christ's last Appearance , how sweet is it to a believing soul ! 

This day of Life , is a day of Trouble ; but the day of Judgement , is a day of Redemption . 

This is a day of Confession , but that is a day of Absolution . 

Here we are slain all the day long , but that is our Coronation-day . 

Here in Man's day we are judged by the world , but in the Lord's day we shall judge the world , Angels , and men . 

OH most blessed day , that ever shone , being thus enlightened by the bright and glorious Appearance of the Sun of Righteousness ! 

Now if Death and Judgement are thus sweetened , and blessedly altered through Christ , as you have heard ; then OH how happy are the Saints departed . rev. 1413.  Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth . They are Blessed from henceforth ; Here their Blessedness commences , even in this same point which puts a period to their sins and sorrows . And the Spirit of God bid his Amanuensis write it down , as a remarkable note , that a Christians Blessedness takes date from the time of his death . Till than he was a wretched sufferer under a body of death , and a mass of corruption , but now he is a blessed Triumpher . His sins have left him , his good works follow him , and Heaven affords him Rest.  

I confess , 't is a common Error among the worst of men , that when they die , they shall be at rest ; and in their pains , they will wish to die , that they may go to rest . But alas , 't is only those that die in the Lord , that shall rest from their labours . Cursed are they that die out of the Lord , that die in the old Adam only , and upon the old score . I have spoken nothing all this while in favour of the unregenerate ; Let them not boast with Agag , surely the bitterness of death is past , for death will hew them in pieces , as the unmerciful Executioner of Divine Justice . They that die out of Christ , die in all the sins that ever they have committed . Those dreadful words which our Saviour spoken to the Pharisees , will reach them — ye shall die in your sins ; and whither I go , ye cannot come . Their dying , alas , what is it but a going to Hell ? 

As the rich Glutton , when he died , the next news that we hear of him is , that he is in Hell ; The Devil did not make him roar till he had him there . Death stings a wicked man , and leaves its sting in him , and casts all its venom upon him . 

A wicked man is a great loser by his death ; he loses all he is worth , he loses his Heaven here , his Paradise , and his heart's delight ; Death sends him into another world begging . And he that had his Cups of Wine here , would there be glad of Drops of Water . He is a great sufferer by his death ; for it is the Devil's Trap , wherein he takes his soul ; it is the Door of Hell , which let's him into that abhorred place of everlasting Torments . 

But , OH how safe and quiet are those that are fallen asleep in Jesus ▪ They are resting securely , they are unconcerned in the troublesome affairs and changes of this life : nothing disturbs their rest . Abraham is ignorant of us , saith the Church ; but he is Acquainted with God and Christ , and that is sufficient . He is ignorant of us and our Calamities , but he is sensible of his own Mercies . 

Alas , here can be no perfect happiness on this side death ; for whiles we are present with the body , we are absent from the Lord  

It was excellently spoken of Queen Elizabeth , whiles I call things passed to mind , behold things present , and expect things to come , I hold them happiest that go hence soon . 



Surely all the Faithful have cause to bless the Lord for a state of mortality . Job loathed to think of a state of immortality upon earth , Chap. 7. 16.  I loathe it , I would not live always . The soul of this righteous man was like a bird caged or pinioned , and if she had her freedom , she would soon fly away , and be at rest . What delight could she take in such an unclean cage , in such a rotten , ulcerous body , in such a base treacherous world ? she would fain be gone , and is waiting and requesting for leave . It was once the speech of a good man , I have been seeking death these forty years , and cannot find it . I care not when , nor where , nor how I die ; 

And seeing our lives be so miserable , it is our happiness that they be mortal . Truly our condition would be very sad , if we should have immortal sins , immortal cares , immortal miseries , but death proves mortal to them all . And whereas our bodies shall be recovered from a state of death in the Resurrection , our sins and sorrows die and rise no more . 

I must needs say , 't is an happiness to be Christ's Soldier in the field of this World , but OH how happy are his Courtiers ! They are resting in their beds , whiles we are toiling in the house of bondage . They are singing on the Shore , whiles we are floating on the Waves : we are sowing in tears , but they are reaping in joy , and rejoicing as in the joy of harvest . We are wrestling with Devils , but they are conversing with Angels . 

But when the Lord Jesus shall descend from Heaven with a shout , with the voice of the Archangel , and the Trump of God , then shall these blessed souls attend upon him ; and they shall immediately recover their proper bodies after their long separation ; and then soul and body shall mutually comfort and welcome one another , and rejoice together , being both dressed up into a conformity to the glorious Image of God , the King of Glory , and arrayed suitably to the solemnity of that day . 

Imagine we two Travellers sweetly and sociably walking together , till night overtakes them ; one of them loses himself in the dark , and being tired with his journey , lies down , and falls asleep ; The other being more vigorous and lively , walks on till he spies a light in a stately Lodge , there he knocks , and finds good entertainment , and is kindly invited to stay . There he refreshes himself after his travail , and enjoys himself : yet he wishes' for the company of his fellow-traveller to complete his felicity . When morning light appears , he goes out , and seeks his Companion that had been sleeping upon the cold earth all night ; there he renews his acquaintance with him , and brings him into the presence of his newfound friend , where they both share in his courtesy and bounty . 

These two Travellers are the soul and body of a Christian. Their days journey is the twelve hours of their life ; the night is death . Both walk friendly together , till night parts them ; the weary body falls asleep ; the active soul keeps on her way till she comes to the light of Heaven , where she is most kindly treated by the Lord and his Angels . But yet in the midst of her entertainment , she cannot forget her old mate , but is ready to say , Lord , I have a body below , which used to pray with me , and to fast for me . Well , it is not long ever morning-light appears , and then the soul looks abroad , and takes acquaintance with her body , and carries it into the presence of her noble and gracious Lord , where both are welcomed with his Smiles , and enriched with his Favours . Such honour have all his Saints . 

How happy is our Friend departed ? She is with her Father above , with her Husband above , and with her Children in Glory . 

I shall not insist much on her praises : for though Solomon saith , A virtuous woman shall be praised : yet he says in another place , Her own works shall praise her in the gate . 

They that knew her most , loved her best . Among several good things that were found in her , there are four which I would not have buried with her in the Dust , but shall publish them as worthy of your Imitation . 

1.  Her private Conversing with God.  

2.  Her affectionate Hearing of God's Word . 

3.  Her professed Esteem of the Merits of her Saviour . 

4.  Her frequent , savoury Discourses of her own Mortality . 

Her Infirmities she oft bewailed , and they served but to enhance the price of her Saviour's Blood. She professed she was willing to die , that she might cease from sin ; And upon her Deathbed she rejoiced in hope of the Glory of God. She hath left us such Evidences of her Holiness , that we doubt not of her Happiness . And how happy are the Saints departed ! 

Again , Learn from hence how to die , and how to prepare for Judgement . We all know , we must die ; but who knows how to die ? Death is the way of all the Earth , but an happy death is a way that few find out . Now seeing we cannot make a Covenant with Death , let us labour to have Death in the Covenant . Wouldst thou die and go to the Grave in peace ? 

then 1.  Meditate on the Death of Christ. Some harden themselves against the fear of death , because 't is the general Lot of Mankind : All must die , say they . It is appointed for all men once to die . But alas , what Comfort can it be to them to be bound up in a Bundle of Tares , and to be cast into unquenchable fire ? But , poor Christian , let this be thy Comfort , that death was the Lot of Jesus Christ , that he hath consecrated a dying state for us in his own Body , and that he poured forth his Soul unto death , that our Souls might be bound up in the Bundle of Life . The Life of our Souls lies in the Blood of Christ. OH my Beloved , take heed of slighting a crucified Christ. They that are against Christ , either in their Judgements or Hearts , that dispute against him , or live against him , seem to hate their own Souls , and to be in love with Damnation , as it is in prov. 8. ult . How can such ever look death in the face , that hide their faces from Christ , and esteem him not ? Where will they find such another Saviour ? In vain do you run from Mountain to Hill , Christ , Christ alone can secure you from the Plagues and Hellish terrors of death . He is the Foundation of an Holy life and Happy death . The readiest way to learn this long Art of dying well , is to study the Death of Christ. Now the Intendment of the Death of Christ , was not merely to teach us to die Patiently , but to enable us to die Comfortably . And if thou wouldst depart this Life in peace , than first possess thy Soul with a right apprehension of the Death of Christ. Study the words of the Apostle , Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many , and to them that look for him shall he appear the second time , without sin , unto salvation . In these words , you have four things touching the Death of Christ very considerable . 

1.  The Death and Blood of Christ was Vicarious , instead of many . Many deaths were summed up in his one death . He was offered upon the Cross , to bear the sins of many . The Jews thought he died worthily for his own sins , for Blasphemy and Treason : no , but it was our Blasphemies and Treasons , our sins against God and Man , that he died for . Isa. 53. 4.  — We did esteem him stricken , smitten of God , and afflicted ( viz. for his own sins ; that was their great mistake , which the Church of God corrects in the next verse . ) But he was wounded for our transgressions , he was bruised for our iniquities , the chastisement of our peace was upon him . 

2.  Observe , Christ's deaths was an Offering ; He was offered in Sacrifice to God upon the Altar of the Cross. He did not fall as a Sacrifice to the Rage of the Jews ( for he could easily have rescued himself out of their hands ) but he was offered up to the Justice of his Father . Eph. 5. 2 — Christ hath loved us , and hath given himself for us , an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour . 

3.  In respect of sin , Christ's death was not only Penal , but also Expiatory . He bore the sins of many , i e. the punishment due to them , even what was equivalent to a thousand Hells . There are not such Torments to be found in Hell , as he suffered upon the Cross , where he bore the sins of his people . And yet he did so fully discharge himself of sin , that at his second Coming , he shall appear without sin . 

4.  In respect of his Enemies , the Death of Christ was Victorious . Once he was devoted for his people , Cursed , Tortured by a bitter death : But in death he overcame Death , and all the Powers of Hell. And therefore Death could not hold him , the Grave could not detain him , the wicked One could not touch him , Heaven could not refuse him . He died once for sin , but he shall die no more , for his death was Triumphant over sin : And he shall shortly appear without sin , to the terror of his Enemies , and the Salvation of his dear People . 

We should treasure up such sweet Notions of a dying Jesus , to prepare us against our dying day . 

To die , my Friends , is a solemn Work ; it is a loud Summons that calls the Soul to appear before her Judge . We go from Funeral to Funeral , and may see death riding through our Towns , but little do we think what it is to have Death come home to ourselves . OH what strange thoughts of heart , what hurrying of passions will the sight of death beget , when it lays close Siege to a man , and begins to make its breaches upon the Body . then the Soul views and reviews herself ; As all the Virgins looked into their vessels , when they were awakened by the loud Cry at midnight , to see if they had Oil for their Lamps . then all the signs of Grace , and grounds of Hope must be brought to trial ; then she examines whether her matters be right and good , whether her condition be safe . But be it safe or perilous , death comes in haste , as Martha to her Sister , The Master is come , and calls for thee ; and thou must away : then all the world could not redeem one hour for Repentance . Now how if thou shouldst be surprised , and taken away by a sudden stroke , and arrested by death , before thou hast well thought of it , what a sad blow would that be ? 

OH therefore now be wise , be wise , for thyself ; It is a great point of wisdom to consider our latter end ; As the Lord saith , OH that they were wise to consider their latter end ! I beseech you therefore , familiarize death in your thoughts , make it near . What thinkest thou ? durst thou die this night ? durst thou meet thy Judge this night ? Thy heart , it may be , trembles at the thoughts of this OH spare me a little . But then ask thyself , why thou wouldst not die , what art afraid of ? Let me offer some consolatory Meditations to a poor Soul that is trembling under the fears of death . Art thou afraid of the wrath of God ? then meditate , But Christ died as a propitiatory Sacrifice to satisfy the Justice of God. He drank off the very dregss of God's wrath in the Cup of his Death . 

Art thou afraid of losing thy Soul for ever ? OH but Jesus Christ died for the Redemption of poor Souls . His Soul went for our Souls , and his life for our life . He gave his life a ransom for many , Mat. 20. 28.  The price of Christ's Blood is a Souls Ransom . 

Art thou afraid of falling short of Heaven ? But the Death of Christ opened our passage to Heaven . The renting of the vail of his blessed Body made an open passage into the Holy of Holies . 

Art thou afraid thy sins should find thee out in another world ? then meditate , The Lamb of God , that great Sacrifice , takes away the sin of the world . Sin was condemned in the Death of Christ , and receives its final execution in the death of a Christian.  

Art thou afraid the Law should condemn thee ? then remember , the Death of Christ hath rebated the edge of the Law , and hath abolished the Curse of the Law.  

Art thou afraid the Devils should fetch away thy soul at death ? But the Lord Jesus hath destroyed him that had the power of death , and hath bruised the Serpent's head , by the power of his death . 

Thus you should anoint your heads against your Funeral , with the precious Ointment of the Name of Christ , and bathe your souls in such heavenly comfortable Meditations . 

2.  It is not enough for us to meditate on the Death of Christ , but we must apply it to ourselves by a lively Faith , that it may have an influence upon our death . Have Faith in the Blood of Christ. The Blood of Christ is the Wine and Marrow of the Gospel-feast , the strength of our Sacraments , the foundation of an everlasting Covenant . This Blood seasons all the mercies of a Believer , sanctifies all his offerings ; It makes his heart cheerful , his life comfortable , his death precious , his grave sweet , his soul fit to enter into the Holy of Holies . OH derive the stream of it upon thy soul.  

thou canst not instantly believe that Christ died for thee , yet labour to stay thy heart upon the satisfaction , sufficiency , and worthiness of the Death of Christ. hide thyself in the clefts of the Rock , the Wounds of thy Saviour . Embrace a crucified Christ , and lay him in thy heart , as Joseph did in his Garden . Why hath the Righteous hope in his death , but because he hath Faith in the Death of Christ ? A living Faith in a dying Christ is a sovereign remedy against the plagues of death , and an infallible prevention of the pains of Hell. Joh. 11. 26.  Whosoever life's and believes in me , he shall never die , as we read it . But yes , he shall die once by God's appointment ; but he shall not die 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , ( as in Original ) He shall not die ever , he shall not die to eternity . Death is cast into the lake of fire . They that are thrown into the Lake of fire , meet with death there : In the Lake of fire they are ever dying . But he that hath faith in the Blood of Christ , passeth from death to life . What was it that gave the Israelites safe passage through the red Sea ? Read Heb. 11. 29.  By faith they passed through the red Sea as by dry land ; which the Egyptians ( through presumption ) assaying to do , were drowned . Even so death will drown us and sink us into Hell , if we have not Faith to clear our passage for us . 

Lastly , Would you hold up your heads in the day of Judgement , then look for the Coming of Christ. Woe be to those souls to whom Christ shall come unlooked for . OH how sadly shall the drowsy world be surprised by the sudden Appearance of Christ ! But Christ shall appear to the Salvation of those faithful Servants , that are watching and waiting for his second Coming . He shall come to them , not as a Thief in the night , but as a Friend in the day . Faith and Love combine together in an earnest expectation of Christ , and that is the reason , that it is so kindly accepted , and so richly rewarded . And therefore , good Christians , keep watching , if you have any affection for Christ. Cannot you watch one hour ? It is but yet a little while , and he that shall come , will come and will not tarry . You have but two things to do , and Christ will either meet you or send for you ; and that is to finish your work , and to fill up the measure of your Graces . God hath something to do for us , and something to do by us , and then he will take us to himself . 

1.  We must be careful to dispatch our business , and to finish our Task . Herod might threaten death , but our Saviour could not die till he had finished the work which God gave him to do . So neither shall a Christian die , till his work be done . We read , Act. 13. 36.  David after he had served his own generation by the will of God , fell on sleep . Or , as others read it , When David had served the will of God in his age and generation , etc.  Both are true ; He was serviceable to God , and an useful Instrument in the Church ; and when all his work was ended , he fell on sleep , and sweetly rested in the Lord  

2.  Again , We must fill up the measure of our Graces . There is a certain measure and proportion of Grace assigned to every Member of the Body of Christ. Some have more , some lesle : Every one shall have his proper sufficient measure . A Christian shall not enter into Glory , till he hath received his measure of Grace . Read the Parable of the seed growing secretly , Mark 4. 26 , 27 , 28 , 29.  And observe that passage , After that the full corn is in the ear , and the fruit is ripe , immediately he putteth in the sickle . When our Grace is like full Corn in the ear , when the fruit of God's Spirit is ripe in us , then immediately comes the sickle of Death ; then we are meet to be partakers of an inheritance with the Saints in light , OH then we shall come and appear before God.  

Consider what hath been said ; For , you see , all flesh is grass , and all the glory of man as the flower of the grass ; the grass withers , the flower thereof falls away ; But the Word of the Lord endures for ever . 

FINIS . 





Doct  Acts 20. 28.  Host 13. 14.  2 Pet. 1. 14.  Gal. 3. 13.  Heb. 2. 13.  1 Cor. 3. 22.  1 Cor. 13. 9 , 11.  II Part of the Doctr.  2 Thess. 1. 7 , 8.  Psa. 22. 6 , 7.  1 Cor. 4. 3.  1 Cor. 6. 3.  Use 1  Joh. 8. 24.  Joh. 8. 21.  Isa. 63. 16.  Job . 7. 16.  Use 2.  Mat. 25.  Joh. 11. 29.  Deut. 32. 28.  Heb. 10. 19 , 20.  Joh. 1. 19  Gal. 3. 13.  Heb. 3. 14.  rev. 20. 14.  Heb. 10. 37.  Luke 13. 23.  Eph. 4. 7.  1 Pet. 1. 24 , 25.  