A SERMON PREACHED AT MAPPLE-DURHAM in Oxfordshire : AND PUBLISHED at the request of Sir RICHARD BLOUNT . By I B. D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty . 

Quoties 〈◊〉 , toties iudicamur . Hierom.  



LONDON : Printed by T. S. for john Hodgets . 1616.  

ROMANS 6. 23.  

The wages of Sin is Death ; but the gift of God is eternal Life , through jesus Christ our Lord  

All Scripture cometh from one fountain , which is the spirit of God : and therefore all Scripture is fit to perfect the man , of God. But as in Paradise , though there were one Fountain , yet it was divided into four Rivers , whose waters were diversely rellished , according to the nature of the soil through which they passed : Or as in an Instrument of Music , though one wind give a general sound , yet by the diversity of the Pipes and Organs , the Tones are varied : So the holy Scriptures , inspired by one spirit , have an accidental difference , according to the nature of the Penmen of the facred Scripture . 

Hence is it that Gregory compared some Scriptures to Jacob's hazel rods ; partly peeled , and partly covered : other Scriptures to Achabs' house of ivory , without any covering . 

The Scripture that I have read , is of the former sort , which craveth your attention whilst it is enterpreted : craveth your affection when it is applied : And justly doth it crave both ; the Holy Ghost joining together Ima summis , the highest and the lowest things , as Leo speaketh . The first proposition being of Death . The second of Life . Death , of all things the most terrible . Life , of all things the most comfortable . 

To leave an impression in you , I will compare them to the two remarkable Trees in Paradise . The first is as the Tree of the knowledge of good & evil . The second , as the Tree of immortality . The first the experimental Tree of Death . The second as the Sacramental Tree of Life . 

Both of these have a double consideration . 

In the tree of death , you may consider . First the bitter root , which is sin , and the evil fruit , which is death , the wages of sin . 

In the tree of life , you may consider the sacred root , which is God's gift ; and the happy fruit , which is eternal life by jesus Christ our Lord  

Sin the root of death . Death the fruit of sin . The gift of God the root of life . Life the fruit of the gift of God , are the four corners of the Altar , upon which at this time , we will offer up our sacrifice unto God.  

Sinne.  

The first is Sin , which Saint john doth define to be the breach of God's law . A law so much urged by the justice of God , that our Saviour Christ proclaimeth that heaven and earth shall pass away , but one jod or title shall in no wise pass from the law , till all be fulfilled . One jod , which is but a letter amongst the Hebrews , as the grain of Mustard seed , the least of all letters , but one point ( . ) of a letter . From whence the Rabines have observed , that God changing the name of Sarai to Sara , took one jod from her name ; which that it might not be taken from the Law , he added one jod to Osheah , and called him jehoshuah . 

A Law so urged that S. Paul repeats the sentence of God in a language of fear & trembling . Galat. 3. 10.  Cursed is every man that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do them . We are ( bound ) , we are ( All ) bound , all to ( Do ) to do ( All , ) all to ( continue ) to continue under pain of a ( Curse , ) a curse , which implieth , a river of brimstone , and the breath of the Lord to set it on fire . 

This is the sentence of God against Sin : against every Sin : against the least Sin : whether it be a sin of Thought , or Word , or Act , or Degree , or Delight , or Desperation , or Omission . God hath concluded All Sin to be the Root of Death and destruction . 

How just then is the Complaint of S. Augustine ? Vaepeccatis hominum quae sola inusitata exhauressimus : Woe to the custom of sin , that taketh away the sense of sin , and causeth us to fear none but unusual , monstrous , & prodigious impieties . 

Common civility keepeth many a man from redness of the eyes , the inheritance of the Drunkard : from rottenness of the bones , the leprosy of the Adulterer : from jezabells' dogs , the sepulchre of the Oppressor . But Covetousness , Pride , Envy , Detraction , Bribing , Flattering , Idle-complementing , and Fashioning of ourselves to all luxurious ambition , and foolish-vanities of the world , are now become Free-denisons of Court , of City , of Country , that challengeth the privilege of the unrighteous judge , neither to be afraid of the justice of God , nor to be ashamed in the sight of men . 

I do confess , that there are Essential , and Accidental differences of sins : Some do grieve , some do resist , some do quench the spirit of God : But yet every sin in the own nature hath the sting of a Viper , and doth wound us mortally . 

Take a view , and you shall find that Adam lost Paradise for eating of an Apple : Some say it was an Indian fig , an enticing bait of sweetness . You shall find that God drowned the world for Imaginations . Gen. 6. 5.  You shall find that 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , words of feathers , dalliances , chamberings , wantonness , and the scum of lasciviousness shall make us give an account at the day of judgement . Sagitta leviter volat , sed graviter vulnerat : Idle words are as feathered arrows , which fly lightly , but wound the soul deeply . Yea , you shall find that there are sins of Gesture , Quando cum oculis fabulamur : When saith S. Augustine we speak lewdly with our eyes : which God so punished in Lot's wife , that she is a pillar of Salt until this day . These sins , so small in our estimations , so familiar to our corruptions , so usual in our conversations , so glued to our affections , they have poison in the root , and the fruit of them is death . We read in Ecclesiastical history of Cassianus a Schoolmaster of Children , and a Scholar and Martyr of Christ , who by the commandment of the Tyrant , was stabbed to death by his Scholar's pen-knives . 

We read in Scripture of Amasa , whose bowels were shed out by the sword of joab . Of Sis●raes' head gored with a nail : we read of Acha● who was wounded in his breast with an arrow . We read of Christ , whose side was pierced with a spear . All these did not wound a like deeply , but all did wound alike deadly . 

Spears , swords , arrows , nails , pen-knives , all instruments of the death of the body . Deeds , swords , looks , gestures , thoughts , all causes of the death of the soul . 

Our sins in Scripture are compared unto sands , which are very small considering them severally , and yet the greatest ship is easily swallowed up of quicksands . There is not a sin of any nature , but is as big as one of Herod's worms which devoured Herod's bowels . Noli despicere peccata tua quia parua sunt ; nam et plwiarum guttae paruae sunt . Despise not ( Augustine ) thy sins because they are little ; for the drops of rain are small , and yet they are the bottles of the heaven , and the fountains of the Ocean . 

To conclude this point . no sins are lesser than the point of those thorns that pierced the head of Christ. Pro quibus abluendis sanguis Christi effusus : For the washing away of which Christ shed drops of blood in the garden , and opened the spouts of blood on the Crosse. So bitter a root is sin , that it could not be taken away , but by the death of our Saviour : And as sin is a root so bitter ; so no better is the fruit , which the text calleth Death . The wages and guerdon of Iniquity . 

The wages of Sin is ( Death . ) 

Death is the Fruit ; but death as wages : For it is not a singular , but a plural death . The least sickness in the stomach , pain in the head , ache in the tooth , consumption in the lungs , wind in the belly , gravel in the kidneys , are the harbingers of death , are the wages of sin and iniquity . But to speak more distinctly . Death ; saith S. Augustine is threefold . First , Quando Deus deserit animam volentem : When God forsakes the Soul , that will be forsaken . Secondly , Quando anima deserit corpus : When the soul forsakes the body that would not be forsaken . Thirdly , Quando anima nolens tenetur in corpore : When the unwilling soul is manacled to the body . The first expressed in the young man Matth. 8. 22. to whom Christ said , Let the dead bury the dead . A strange speech ; for a man would think that the dead were more fit to be buried , then to bury : But therefore was it delivered by Christ , that every Christian man may know , That a sinner's body , is but the breathing Sepulchre of a sinner's soul . The second expressed in Lazarus : john 11. 39  Lord , by this time he stinketh , for he hath been dead four days . Whose body in life is a beautiful cask of ivory , within four days after the soul's departure , is nothing else but a stinking and loathsome carrion . The third expressed in Dives , Luke 16. 24.  He prayed to Father Abraham , therefore he had a Soul : He had a tongue to be cooled ; therefore he had a Body . 

That wretched man may know that this is everlasting Death , when soul and body are coupled together with everlasting chains of sorrow , that they may be sensible of their endless torment . 

But howsoever these three deaths are the wages of sin , yet there is a difference in the manner : For the death of the soul is the wages of sin , as an act of order : The death of the body , as an act of justice : The death of soul and body as an act of proportion . 

First , there is order in disorder . Man's disorder : God doth order . You read Exodus 7. 13. that Pharaoh hardened his own heart ; before God hardened the hart of Pharaoh . Durities est hominis peccatum , obduratio iudicium Dei : they are the words of Calvin , upon the third vers , which I purposely allege . Hardness of heart is man's sin ; hardening of the heart is God's judgement . 

You read in 1 Sam. 10. 9 10. that God gave to Saul an other heart . 1 Sam. 15. 26.  Samuel said to Saul , thou hast cast away the Lord , & the Lord hath cast away thee . 1 Sam. 16. 14.  The spirit of the Lord departed from Saul , and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him . So you see that Saul first resisted God's spirit , before God sent upon Saul an evil spirit . In the very root of Reprobation ; Adam first sinned , and then God punished . 

It is the Conclusion of Augustine , which shall conclude this point . Ad bonum prior est voluntas Creatoris , ad malum prior est voluntas Creaturae . 

God's will in goodness , is the first efficient . 

Man's will in wickedness is the first deficient . 

Sin goes before , and Death of the soul follows in order as the wages of sin . 

Secondly , Bodily-death , when the soul is breathed out , as it was breathed in ; when the body which was composed of dust , is resolved into dust , is the wages of sin , as an act of justice. It is the sentence of God , Genes . 3.  Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy Wife , and hast eaten of the forbidden tree ; thou shalt return to dust , from whence thou wert taken . Because thou hast eaten , thou shalt return to dust . Therefore if man had not eaten , he should not have returned to dust . God's power was as sufficient to have translated Adam from Paradise , without death , as to take up , Elias to heaven in a Chariot of fire . Let no Scotist , nor Andradian , nor jesuit bewitch you with any Philosophical speculation , as that of Plato , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : every thing that is composed , must be resolved . Nor with that of Damascen 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : everything that is made is subject to be marred . Nor with that of Aristotle , that every body composed of contrary elements , disposed into contrary humours , must at length have a natural date of corruption . For S. Paul tells you , that death is not the dissolving of what God created , but the wages of sin , which man committed . Will you know the reason ? You see by experience that the same Sun remains in the same substance , and individual circle , but all sublunary bodies do continue in succession . 

If then Philosophers give probable reason of this difference , because they say , Forma coeli tollit contradictionem materiae : The form of heaven taketh away all contrariety , & preserves them in an eviternity . Shall we think then that Afflatus oris divini , that the breath of Gods own mouth , as Tertullian calls the soul , had not a celestial power in the creation , to have eternally preserved a corruptible body from corruption ? Again , Divinity hath made it plain , Genes . 2.  God created two sorts of trees in Paradise : All the common trees in the garden for eating , but one celestial tree for preserving . Reliquae arbores erant alimento , arbour vitae erat sacramento : The other trees were for aliment , the tree of life was for a Sacrament . 

Examine then the cause of natural death , which is the decay of radical humour : If then the eating of the tree of life , did not , as ordinary meat , only refresh the body , but as a Celestial cordial , did repair the natural sap of the body , than no question but the Angel's sword that kept our first Parents from the tree of life , brought upon them , brought upon us , Legem moriendi , as the Fathers speak , the Law of Death and destruction . This is God's justice , when man defaced God's image in his soul , to take away the power of the soul . This is God's justice , when man eats of the forbidden fruit , to forbid him to eat of the fruit of Life . 

In the third place , the Death of Soul and Body is the Wages of sin , by way of proportion . 

For if any man shall wonder at the severe judgement of God , that extends his indignation to eternity , when the act of every sin is but short and momentary . If any man shall think that there is no proportion betwixt a finite time of sinning , and an infinite time of punishing : Let that man give a reason of the justice of man , and compare it with the justice of God. Why is Theft by the Laws of Man punished with Death ? The time of stealing is but short , but the punishment is for ever . Tollitur de numero viventium . A thief , saith S. Austen is taken from the living , and shall never again return to life : Therefore though the act be temporal , the punishment is eternal . Again , by the justice of Man , every delinquent is proportionably punished , according to the quality of the party offended . 

By the Laws of the Romans , a simple Murderer was crucified , but a Parricide was sewed in a sack , with an Ape , a Cock , and a Serpent , and flung into the Sea , that he might neither have the light of the Sun , nor a breath of air , nor any to pity him , whilst he was alive ; nor a Clod of earth , nor a leaf of grass to cover him , nor any other creature to bury him when he was dead . 

By the Law of julia , an Adulterer was beheaded : But by the Law of the twelve Tables , an incestuous vestal virgin was buried alive . 

If then the quality of the person against whom we sin , doth proportionably increase the quantity of the punishment : Man sinning against the infinite majesty of God , deserveth by proportion an infinite torment . Go a little farther . Inquire at the bar of Heaven , why sinful souls are harried to eternal sorrows ? What did God give ? Did he not create man in perfection ? Did he not give a power to live for ever ? Therefore saith Anselmus . Factus est malo dignus aeterno , qui inse peremit bonum quo potuit esse aeternus : Was not he worthy by proportion of eternal death , who lost in himself , and by himself the power of eternal life ? 

Let no bastard-brood of Origen deceive you with pretence that the immortal worm shall die , that the everlasting fire shall be quenched . 

You read in the 25. of Matth. 46.  The wicked shall go into everlasting punishment ; The righteous into everlasting life . From hence S. Augustine hath most gravely observed . here is Death everlasting , & Life everlasting ; both equal . Therefore , Aut utrumque cum fine diuturnum ; Aut utrumque sine fine perpetuum : You must make either both to have an End , and then no Eternity of Heaven : Or both to have no End , and then there is an Eternity of Hell.  

I doubt not therefore but that it is sufficiently cleared by way of explication , that the death of the soul , of the body , of soul and body , are the wages of sin , by an act of order , of justice , of proportion . But as these things are sufficiently cleared , so I beseech you suffer them to be effectually enforced . 

For first . If the Death of the soul be fearful , and therefore more fearful because less sensible ; as Physicians speak of Hectic fevers , which are never discerned perfectly till they kill mortally . 

We can behold a Lazar at Dives gate , & be sensible of his sores . We can see 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the moving rubbish of men , as Nazian . styles them , and be sensible of their sorrows . But could we behold a Lazarus and Leprous soul , whom the dogs of hell will not lick ; could our eyeballs fasten upon so loathed an object , we would exclaim with S. Bernard : Si meipsum non inspicio , meipsum nescio : Si inspicio meipsum far non queo : If I look not into myself , I am like unto a frantic man that know not my own madness ; If I look into myself , I am like a desperate man , that cannot endure 〈◊〉 own vildness . 

We may learn from every Corse ●hat is buried , what the daughters of Israel ●ere to learn from CHRIST crucified : Weep not for me , but weep for yourselves . 

Plangis corpus quod deserit anima : Non plangis animam quam deserit Deus ? thou dost bewail a body forsaken of the soul , and dost not bewail the soul forsaken of God.  

S. Austen confesseth that in his youth ( as many wantoness do ) he read the Love History of Aeneas and Dido with great affection : And when he came to the death of Dido , he wept for pure compassion . But , OH me miserum , ( saith the Father ) I bewailed ( miserable man that I was ) the fabulous death of Dido , forsaken of Aeneas , and did not bewail the true death of my soul , forsaken of her jesus . How many unhallowed tears are sacrificed to the idols of our eyes , which yet are as dry as Pumises in regard of our souls ! 

I will conclude this meditation with S. Austin's devotion . Nihil est miserius , misero non miserante seipsum : Nothing is more miserable , than a miserable soul that doth not comprehend her own misery . 

Again , is the Death of the Body the Wages of sin ? This also is a fearful thing . 

Fearful in the preparation . 
Fearful in the separation . 
In the preparation : For all our Life is but a consumption unto Death ; sorrows of mind , and sicknesses of the body , are but the harbingers of the grave . 

Search the Gospel , you shall find one blind , another deaf , another lame . One Lazar lying at Dives gate , another at the pool of Bethesda , a third at the beautiful gate of the Temple . You shall find hear a Leper crying , there a woman with an issue of blood adoring . Here the house untiled by the sick of the Palsy , there the graves haunted by men possessed of Devils . Nescias utrum apelles vitam mortalem an mortem vitalem : We cannot ( saith S. Austen ) tell what to call our Life , whether a Dying Life , or a Living Death , when every day our houses of clay do crumble to corruption . 

Bodily Death is Fearful in the Separation . For it is not a Law written in letters of ink , but of blood , bred in the marrow of our bones , and centred in our bowels : That skin for skin , and all that man hath for the safeguard of his Life . 

Never was there a great cry in Egypt , till there was a great slaughter in Egypt : And then Magnus' clamour , a great cry and Lamentation . 

Never was Bethlem in woe , until Herod's sword was bathed in the blood of infants . And then vox audita , A voice was heard in Rama , Rachel would not be comforted . 

There was nothing but carousing to the gods of gold & silver in the feasts of Baltazar , till the hand-writing appeared upon the wall ; but then Mutatus est vultus , the King's countenance was changed , his joints were dissolved , his knees failed , his heart fainted . 

The Soul and the Body are old friends , so enchased one into another , that they cannot part without sighing . Bos bovem requirit , saith Hierome : If an Ox do bellow at the loss of his yoke-fellow ; questionless then there is a natural , and fearful Horror , when the soul is rend from the body . 

And yet behold , we are prodigal of our lives , to spend them upon Harlots , as the youngman in the Gospel , who after his surfeiting with his droves of Harlots , could not any way be satisfied amongst the herds of Hogs . 

In the 5. of john , verse . 3.  There lay a multitude of impotent folk at the pool of Bethesda : Some blind , some halt , some withered . So many sick , so many sinners . It is plain by Christ's words : Sin no more , lest a worse thing come unto thee . Sin no more : Therefore he sinned before : therefore he sickened , therefore jezabell died , therefore all the world shall be dissolved . 

It is the wicked man's curse , that He shall not live out half his days . Why , doth God alter his decrees ? Surely no ; But man having a general period of Life , by natural constitution , that if sickness within , and casualties without do not take away life , he may attain to the years of his Fathers . But wicked men pull upon themselves ordinary rottenness , and extraordinary judgements : They live not out half their days . 

To conclude . Why will you die , OH you house of Israel ? 

no man is so fearful at his Death , as the Carnal man that is Prodigal of his life . But if this were all , the Epicure would do well enough . He would say of his Death ; Quando mors est , nos non sumus , quando nos sumus , mors non est : When Death is , we are not ; When we are , Death is not . There is therefore another Death which imprisons a damned soul in a tormented body . Where Death is , and Man is . Vbi anima est non vivendi causa sed dolendi : Where , saith S. Austen , the soul is not to give comfort of life ; but to give the sense of eternal Death . The apprehension of which Death , hath drawn water out of rocks , and cloven iron hearts in sunder . It is the excellent speech of Luther . Qui novit quid sit certare cum formidine aeternae mortis , in sanctorum fletibus nullos excessus reperiet : He that knoweth what it is to strive with the fear of eternal Death , shall find no strangeness in the affected passions of the Saints of God.  

You read of Peter that he wept bitterly . Of jeremy that he was drunk with wormwood . Of Mary that washed Christ's feet with tears . Of David , that he caused his bed to swim . Of jonas , that he cried out of the belly of hell . Their hearts whilst they sinned , were like frozen snowballs : when they melted with apprehension of eternal fire , they thawed out at their eyes , and caused a flood of tears . 

It is observable in Christ's prayer , Luk. 13. 34.  Father , forgive them , they know not what they do . In the Converts prayer , Act. 2.  Men and brethren , Quid faciemus , what shall we do ? When they crucify , they know not what they do : when they hear they have crucified , they know not what to do . 

I will conclude this point , with another passionate meditation : That a sorrowful soul apprehending the wrath of God , and the infinite punishment due to sin . Such a sinner goeth to heaven by the very gates of hell ; his sighs , as pillars of smoke perfumed with myrhhe , ascend up into the presence of God , to implore mercy , being fully assured in the midst of all his fears , that howsoever Eternal Death is the wages of sin , yet that the Gift of God is eternal life through jesus Christ our Lord  

This is the Tree of life , the Root whereof is the Grace and gift of God by jesus Christ : The Fruit eternal Life , and happiness . 

Of these the time will not permit to speak largely ; and yet no Tongue can speak sufficiently . 

In the Root , we may first observe that it is a Gift . Death is wages , no Gift . Life is a Gift , and no Wages . Wages supposeth Demerrit . Gift supposeth no Merit . If it be a Gift , then is it not deserved . If it be Deserved , then is it no Gift . In one word S. Bernard hath concluded it . Sufficit ad meritum scire , quod non sufficiant merita : It is sufficient to know of Merits that there is no sufficiency of our Merits . 

A Gift than it is : but not every Gift . A gift it is , but not every way a Gift . For first ; It is Donum Dei , the Gift of God ; to make a distinction from men's Gifts . And next it is per jesum Christum , by jesus Christ , to distinguish it from the common Gifts of God. First : It is the Gift of God ; not the pharisees Gift . Math. 28.  They gave large gifts to the Soldiers , to equivocate & lie artificially : Say that whilst we slept his Disciples stole him away . But the Gifts of God are not given to corrupt us , but to amend us. It is no pharisees Gift . Neither is it Dionysius Gift , to rob the temple , that they may build an Hospital . The price of Christ was such a Gift to buy the Potter's field to bury strangers , but it is the Field of Blood until this day . 

God takes not life from one , that he may give it to another . Our Salvation is not builded upon the Angel's Damnation : But in the due order of causes , he would have all to be saved . 

It is not Jacob's Gift , for fear of Esau , to pacify Esau's wrath . For whether we live , we live unto the Lord , or whether we die , we die unto the Lord ; whether we live therefore or die , we are the Lords , Romans 14. 8.  

It is not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , as the Greek Orator speaks , the Huksters' Gift : who look for more , for the reward of their gift , than the price of the gift : For our living for ever , adds nothing to God's blessedness , but to our happiness . 

It is not any man's gift , which is subject to repenting , for the unthankfulness of the receiver : For the gift of life in the Saints of God , hath this power , that as it giveth Happiness , so it worketh thankfulness . He that is not thankful to God , hath not yet received the first fruits of Grace . 

All these ways is it distinguished from the gifts , of Men : But above all these , it is per jesum Christum , by jesus Christ ; and so it is above all the gifts of God : For without Christ the Sun riseth upon the just and unjust . Without Christ ; Esau hath the fat of the earth ; Naball his Flocks of sheep ; Nimrod his Herds of beasts ; Nabuchadnezzar his pile of wonderment ; Herod his robe of stars . But Eternal life , as it is God's gift , so it is Christ's purchase , not of gold , but of Blood ; not of the blood of Goats , but of the precious blood of jesus Christ.  

Look in every link of the chain of Heaven : How are we predestinated to the Adoption of Children ? By jesus Christ , Ephe. 1. 5.  How are we called to Glory ? By jesus Christ , 1 Pet. 5. 10.  How are we justified ? In jesus Christ , Rom. 4. 26.  How are we sanctified ? In jesus Christ , Ephes. 2. 10.  In what is our Hope ? In the resurrection of jesus Christ , 1 Peter 1. 13.  In whom is our Peace ? In jesus Christ , Rom. 5. 1.  Who is the Mediator of Redemption ? jesus Christ , 1 Timothy . 2. 5.  Who is the Mediator of Intercession ? Our Prayers are offered upon a golden Censure by the Angel of Covenant , which is jesus Christ , Revel . 8. 3.  He maketh continual Intercession for us , Romans 8. 34.  Who hath conquered Death ? jesus Christ , 1 Cor. 15. 37.  By whom attain we eternal salvation ? By jesus Christ our Lord , 1 Thess. 5. 9  

Our Praedestination , Calling , justification , Sanctification , Hope , Peace , Redemption , Intercession , the Conquest of Death , our Purchase of Life ; All come unto us by the Merits of jesus Christ.  

OH then disconsolate soul , whosoever thou art , that art tossed with woes , confounded with fears , amazed with the terrors of eternal Death . here is Balm of Gilead , dropping from the Root of less : Be not disquiered ( OH blessed soul ) trust in God ; it is his Gift , not thy Merit . 

Trust in Christ , it is his Purchase , not thy Price . Trust in God , the fountain of Mercy . Trust in Christ the Fountain of Merit : And they will deliver thy soul from the broken Cistern , from the waterlesse pits , from the windy Clouds , from the withered reeds of thy own imperfections . 

God so loved the world that be gave his Son . 

Christ so loved the world that he gave himself . 

He is the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world . Mentitur johannes fiest peccatum mundi , quod non tollit Agnus Dei : It is the plain speech of S. Hierome , that S. john the Evangelist had told a lie if there were any sin of the world , which the Lamb of God had not taken away . 

The Grace of God by the sole Merits of Christ is the sacred Root of Eternal Life and Happiness . 

But of the golden apples of eternity how shall I speak ? It is the confession of Philosophy , that our understanding of heavenly things , is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , as the eyes of Bats and Owls , that cannot behold the Sun's glory . 

It is the Profession of Divinity , that these joys were never perceived of the eye : Never received by the ear : Never conceived by the heart of man , 1 Corinth . 2.  Yet , as the Apostle speaks , Videmus per speculum , we see in a Glass ; as Elias , we see under a Mantell , the glory and happiness of heaven . 

For what is more glorious on earth than a Kingdom ? A Kingdom is promised , Luke 12.  Fear not little flock , it is your Father's pleasure to give you a Kingdom . What is the honour of a Kingdom , but a Crown ? A Crown is promised , yea an incorruptible Crown of Glory , 1 Corinthians ▪ 9  

What is in a Crown more precious than the massiness of Gold , and lustre of jewels ? And these are promised . Aeternum pondus gloriae : An eternal weight of glory , 1 Corinth . 5.  And our Bodies to be like the stars in beauty , 1 Corinthians 15.  

But what speak I of Stars ? The Scripture saith , that our Bodies shall be like to the Body of jesus Christ , whose glory is shadowed out with the comparison of Angels . Matth. 28. 3.  The text speaketh of the Angel , that his countenance was like Lightning , and his Raiment like Snow . Matthew 17. 2.  The text speaketh of Christ's transfiguration , ( the glass of his glory ) that his Face did shine as the Sun , and his Garments ▪ as the Light.  

Our glory shall not be like to the Angels , lightning , and snow ; but to Christ the sun and light of heaven . So that at the day of judgement , Leah shall not arise with blear eyes ; nor Mephibosheth with lame feet ; nor Ehud with a withered Arme.  

But the Bodies of the Saints shall arise , as so many glorious Suns , from the Horrizon of Earth , to the circumference of Heaven . 

I am swallowed up in contemplation , and must conclude with the history of the Queen of Sheba , unto King Solomon , 1 King 10. 6.  She said unto the King , It was a true report that I heard in my own land of thy Acts and Wisdom : Howbeit I believed not , till I came , and mine eyes had seen : and behold the half was not told me . 

First , we are farther from Heaven , than the Queen of Sheba from Solomon . 

Secondly , we hear of Heaven , as the Queen of Sheba of Solomon . 

Thirdly , our report is true of Heaven , as their report of Solomon . 

Fourthly , you do not believe our report of heaven , no more than the Queen of Sheba the report of the Wisdom of Solomon . 

But when your eyes shall see God , and enjoy Heaven , you will confess , that not half the Glory was reported in Earth , which you find in Heaven . 

When the Queen , that is the Church , shall stand on the right hand of the Lamb , glorious in diverse colours , in the infinite , incomprehensible variety of happiness . 

To this Kingdom , this Crown , this Eternal weight of glory , good Lord bring us , for the infinite Mercies , for jesus Christ's infinite Merits . Amen . 

Laus Deo.  





Prologue in jobum .  esay 30.   In Enchiridio .  Homo ▪ Iliadot . 6.   Bernard . c De Doctri Christia . lib. 1.   Prud. Peristeph . Hym. 4.  August . August . in Enchi . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . De 〈◊〉 Dei. 1  2  3  Non lege naturae sed merito peccati . Aug. the civet . lib. 13. cap. 15.  In Tim●o . Ortho. fidei . De long ▪ et brevi . vitae . De resurca●nis . Aug. the civet . dei . lib. 13. c. 20.  Lege , de ciu . dei . lib. 21. cap. 11.  Chrysost.  Luther . 