A SERMON PREACHED At FLITTON in the County of Bedford , At the Funeral of the Right Honourable HENRY Earl of Kent , the sixteenth of March 1614  By I B. D. D.  

LONDON , Printed by William Stansby for Richard Woodroffe , and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard , at the sign of the Golden Key , near the great North door . 1615.  

A SERMON PREACHED AT FLITTON IN THE COUNTY OF BEDFORD , AT THE FUNERAL OF THE RIGHT HONOURABLE HENRY Earl of KENT , the sixteenth of March , 1614  

LUKE . 2. 29.  

Lord , now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace , according to thy Word . 

The first words of S. johns' Gospel ARE , that in the beginning was the Word , john 1. 1.  

The beginning of Saint Marks Gospel Is , that a voice went before the Word , Mark , 1. 3.  

jesus was the Word , john was the voice . From johns' preparing and jesus coming , the Fathers have observed that Christ the Word of God , was in the dispensation of his Incarnation , accompanied with the voices of man  

When he was two years old , voce lamentantis , with the voice of lamentation . A voice of Ramah , Rachel weeping for her children , and would not be comforted , Matth. 2.  

At his Baptism , voce proclamantis , with the voice of proclamation : And behold , a voice from Heaven , saying , This is my well-beloved Son , etc.  Matth. 3.  

In his Preaching , Voce acclamantis , with the voice of acclamation . They that went before , & that followed after , cried Hosanna , etc.  Math. 21.  

At his Death , Voce exclamantis , with the voice of exclamation : The Centurion was afraid , & said , Truly this was the Son of God.  

But of all the voices which accompanied the Word , Four have a prerogative : which are not simple voices , but settled songs . 

The first , the Angel's song , as in Luke , the second Chapter , and fourteenth verse . 

The second , blessed Mary's song , Luke 1. 46.  

The third , Zacharies song , Luke 1. 68  

The fourth Simeons' song , the text of this Scripture . All of them remarkable : For the Angels they were messengers of Heaven : Mary's song , she was the mother of our Saviour : Zacharies song , he an anointed Priest. Simeons' song , he an inspired Prophet . But above ALL , Simeons hath the Prerogative . 

For the Angel's song was in the fields . Mary's song was in a Chamber , betwixt her and Elizabeth . 

Zacharies song was at a feast , but a private feast , of a few mountain people . 

But Simeons' song was in Jerusalem the great City , and in the Temple , the most public , and most sacred place of jerusalem . 

The text than is a voice attendant upon the Word : Is a song , which is a comfortable voice : Is a public song ; A solemn song , A Church song ; A song in the Temple : All which might have been sufficient motives to warrant the choice of this Scripture , at this mournful time , to comfort the living ; at this solemn time , to honour the dead . But these are common Inducements : For the text is yet more fit . It is Cantus funebris : A funeral song . Cantatur Cygnus funeris ipse sui . A white Swan , whose Almond tree is blossomed , sings his own Epitaph . 

And of these songs we have but two in Scripture : 

One of Moses in the old Testament . 

And this of Simeon in the new Testament . 

Both Old men . Moses one hundreth and twenty Simeon , saith Nic●phorus , Ad tantum senium provectus , continued to a great age , that he might see Christ.  

Both Great men . Moses Ruler of the People forty years . And Simeon , saith Galatinus Master of Gamaliel , an Honourable man among the people . 

Both Good men . Moses God's servant , and Simeon , God's servant . 

Both Fit to honour the memorial of an old , Honourable , Religious Peer . But Simeon the fitter ; For Moses' eyes only beheld Canaan . But Simeons' eyes beheld Christ . And that it may appear , that the text is fit , not only in the body and bulk , but in every branch ; It is like one of David's Psalms , which are entitled , Cantica graduum , Psalms of Degrees ; Arising like Jacob's Ladder , step by step , till you come to peace . 

Which peace the Scripture noteth expressly to be the Compliment of Abraham's blessing : And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace , thou shalt be buried in a good old age . 

Peace which Saint Austen doth determine to be the perfection of happiness , Finis civitatis huius in quo summum habebit bonum , vel pax in vita aeterna , vel vita aeterna in pace dicendus est . The end of the Saints in the City of God , is either peace in life eternal , or eternal life in peace . 

The first step , is the time ( I follow the Greek Original ) Nunc , now . 

The second is the passport , Dimittis , let depart . 

The third is the subject , Seruum tuum , thy servant . 

The fourth is the Prince , Domine , OH Lord  

The fifth is the promise , Secundum Verbum , according to thy Word . 

The sixth is the Condition , In pace , in peace . 

1 The time present . 
2 The desire fervent . 
3 The servant dutiful . 
4 The master powerful . 
5 The promise infallible . 
6 The condition comfortable . 
Are like the Throne of Solomon with six steps of Ivory over laid with gold . A Throne fit for Solomon the Prince of Peace . 

Nunc.  

The first step is the Time. Now , And Now it was , that Christ was in the Arms of Simeon . Never a better ( Now ) to die , then with Christ in our arms . 

( Now ) Simeon prays , for death ( before ) Simeon prayed , for life . 

( Now ) let me depart , Therefore ( before ) let me not depart . 

This is probable by collection ; but apparent by relation , verse 26.  It was revealed unto him , that he should not see death , before he had seen the Lord Christ. Simeon ( then ) was promised to see Christ in the flesh : Simeon ( therefore ) desired life till he had ( seen ) Christ in the flesh . So long as he expected the consolation of Israel ; so long he desired life in Israel . But when his first desire was accomplished : his second desire ( was , ) to be dissolved . Both the desires of Simeon , ( both in life and death ) are lawful , if lawfully desired ; Hezekiah may desire life with mourning and chattering , esay , 38. 14 if his desire be to plant Religion . 

Saint Paul may desire death with groaning , Phil. 3. 23.  If it be to have Christ in fruition : As Simeon desired ( life , ) to have Christ in Contemplation ; as Simeon desired ( death ) to have Christ in possession . But every man doth not so desire ( life , ) doth not so desire ( death . ) There is a Nabal that desire's to live to shear his sheep , and to make a feast like a King , though the next day his heart die within him , & he become like a stone . There is a fool , Luk. 12. that desire's long life , to build barns , to gather goods , to lay up fruits , to take ease , to eat , to drink , to be merry , to be mad : Vt Ebrij & ructantes intrent in paradisum : That reeling and belching ( saith jerome ) they may fall into an Epicures Paradise . 

There is a Nebuchadnezar that desire's to live , to mount up his piles of wonderment , & his turrets of Babel , though in the midst of his pride , he be turned into an Ox . There is an Absalon , who desire's to live , that he may wear a Crown upon his head , though he be hanged by the hair of the head , and he be stricken with three Darts through the liver . 

There is an Achab , that desire's to live , to take possession of Naboths vineyard , though in the place where the Dogs licked the blood of Naboth , Dogs shall lick the blood of ( Achab. ) There is an Haman that desire's to live , till he may be revenged on Mardoche , his enemy , although a gallows of fifty foot high , an eminent place for execution , be the end of a mischievous Courtier's promotion . 

All such desires of life , ( whose ends are our corrupt passions , ) are unlawful desires . And although they have as Tertullian calls it , Volaticum gaudium a winged pleasure in their lives : yet they shall have Talentum plumbi , as the Prophet speaketh , a Talon of lead , an intolerable pressure of their conscience in their death . 

But as life may be unlawfully desired , so likewise death may be desired unlawfully . It cannot be denied , but Elias prayed for death in a wrong ( Nunc. ) 

In the 1.  King. 19 verse 3.  Elias fled from ( jezabel ) fled in the ( morning , ) fled for his ( life . ) Yet in the fourth verse : at ( evening ) when he was a little weary with flying , he prays for ( death . ) Now , OH Lord , take away my life . 

A very strange passion , that one day's journey should make such an alteration . 

It cannot be denied , but jonas had a wrong ( Nunc. ) 

In the second Chapter of jonas , and the second verse , he cries out of the Whale's belly : he calls it the belly of hell , he cries and calls for ( life . ) But in the forth Chapter of jonas , and the third verse , some three or four days after , he begs and sues for ( death . ) Now , OH Lord , take my ( life . ) 

What was the reason of this sudden alteration ? It was not reason : but passion ; because the Ninivites did not ( die ) therefore he would not ( live . ) 

But Elias did not well , to call for death for a little affliction . jonas did not well , to be angry with God , and to desire to die , to despite God's great affection . 

no affliction in ourselves ; no envy at others are warrantable motives to desire death . We must not be like Elias , to die fainting : we must not be like jonas , to die chase . They that desire death in passion , do desire death only for fashion . It being long since observed by Saint Austen , that when sickness comes , the harbinger of death , Medici adducuntur , manera promittuntur , Physicians are requested , rewards are promised , prayers are conceived , vows are offered , that death may be deferred . 

Would you have a sanctified rule , to know a sanctified ( Nunc ? ) when to desire ( life , ) when to desire ( death , ) take Simeon for both . 

In Life . 

Desire so long to live , till you may see Christ : otherwise the first death will be terrible , the second death will be intolerable . It is the contemplation of Bernard : Tu quomodo exibis , anima misera , quae ducem itineris jesum non nôsti ? OH miserable soul , with what horror wilt thou go from a body of earth , which knowest not thy jesus the Lord of life , and the way to Heaven ? If a man should live as long as Methusalem ; though his head were as white as silver ; and his skin as writheled as parchment ; yet if he knew not Christ , he is not fit to die . 

It is a miserable comfort to have lived long , and to have lived little , Diu fuit , sed non diu vixit . Such a man ( was ) a great while , ( lived ) a little while . Better it had been , for such a man , to have been strangled in the womb , then to have died an Embryo in Religion . Let us therefore ( then ) desire to leave the earth , when we know the way to Heaven . 

In Death . 

When you have known Christ , then desire to be dissolved , and to be with Christ.  

then imagine all the honours of earth to be but Anselmus his Butterflies , which children follow from bush to bush , from flower to flower , at which they catch with childish passion : the Butterflies sometimes flying before them , sometimes behind them , sometimes close by their eyes , sometimes through their fingers : and if they catch them , they are but Butterflies . So light a thing is ( Honour , ) so slight a thing is ( glory , ) such a vanity , such a Butterfly . 

then conceive all earthly pleasure , to be but Boetius his gloriosa pericula , glorious perils . 

then understand all worldly riches to be but Cyprian his speciosa supplicia , glittering punishments . 

then suppose all things under the Moon to be but Saint Paul's Retrimenta & Stercora : retriment and dung , in comparison of the fruition of jesus Christ in Heaven . 

In Sum 

Desire to live , till you are inspired with grace , desire to die , when you are assured of glory . 

This was the time wherein Simeon desired to depart . And with which time , it is time for me to depart , and to come to Simeons departing . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 

Let depart , Is the word in English , whose original importeth three senses . 

First , to depart out of Prison , Acts 5. 40.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , they let the Apostles departed out of Prison . 

Secondly , to depart from a place of exile , into our native Country , Matth. 14. 22.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , until he let the people depart , from the Wilderness , to their own Houses . 

Thirdly , to depart from an Office , in which we were placed by Superior Authority , Act. 13. 3.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , they let Paul and Barnabas depart , when they had fulfilled their Ministry . 

In all these three senses , Saint Ambrose doth interpret it . 

In the first sense , our soul is supposed to be in prison , and desires to depart , Psal. 116. 16.  Dirupisti vincula mea . thou hast loosed my bonds . In the fifteenth verse , Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of all his Saints : ( Death and Bonds , ) but Death doth lose the Soul from the Bonds of the Body . 

Psalm 142. 7.  It is the prayer of David , Deduc è custodia animam meam . Bring my soul out of Prison , that I may praise thy name . 

2.  Cor. 5. 1.  We have ( saith Saint Paul ) Domum subterraneam , It is translated an earthly house , but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , signifieth a house under earth , ( a very dungeon . ) 

By all which Scriptures , the soul seemeth to be manacled , imprisoned , and cast into the dungeon of the body . Not that any man should communicate in the error of Origen , to conceive that our souls were created in Heaven , and for their demerits were tumbled into houses of Clay , but to express what Saint Paul lamenteth , Luke 7. 23.  That he saw another Law in his members , warring against the Law of his mind , and bringing him into captivity to the Law of sin . But to express the complaint of Cyprian Quae clementia est amare pressuras , & poenas , & lachrimas mundi ? What a madness is it for men , to dote upon their golden fetters , their guilded prison , their painted dungeon , for every man to be his own Suff●nus , and like Narcissus , to be enamoured of Earth , of Dust , of Slime , of our Bodies , of rottenness , and Corruption ? When the silliest Bird that flies , is not content with a cage of Ivory . 

In the second sense , our life is supposed an exile , and we desire to go into our Country , Psalm 39 12.  I am a stranger with thee ( saith David ) and a Soiourner , as all my Fathers were . Et ideo tanquam peregrinus ad illam Sanctorum omnium Patriam ●estinabat . And therefore ( saith Saint Ambrose ) David made haste to be indenized , & possessed of the Kingdom of Heaven . Why doth the fire move upward ? Why do the stones fall downward ? Why do the waters glide through rocks of Flint , to pay their natural tribute to the Ocean ? Why doth the Air fly from the bowels of the earth , with shaking of the World's foundation ? But that every thing moveth impetuously to the Centre from whence it was taken . 

It is the speculation of Philosophy , that Lapis cum stat , amovetur : That a stone lying stone-still , hath notwithstanding a secret motion to the Centre . 

It is the subtlety of the School . Aquinas was the Author , that whilst we are in this life , we turn and change as the Moon . Quiescimus in desideriis : We rest in the desire of rest , and yet we have restless desires . But in Heaven there is Desideriorum quies , the very Centre and quiet of desiring , where our desires shall not be satiated , but they shall be satisfied . It is the sweet contemplation of Saint Austen , Fecisti nos Domine , àte , & inquietum est Cor nostrum , donec revertatur ad te : Lord , our souls they came from thee , and never are quiet till they return unto thee . 

In the third sense , Our life is supposed an Office and place of charge , and we must not depart without the leave of our Superior . Militia est vita hominis super terram : Our life ( saith job ) is a warfare , God placed some in the foreward , some in the rearward , some in the wings , some in the battle , every man hath a station , and no man must depart without his Dimittis , without his Passport . Neither the light of Nature , nor the light of Grace , directeth a man in any case to put out the light of life . 

In the monuments of Heathen History , Lucretia , Cato , Cleombrotus , are honoured for their own dishonour : for if Lucretia was unchaste , why is she honoured : If she were chaste , why was she murdered ? Si non est illa impudicitia qua invita comprimitur , non est haec iustitia qua casta punitur . If it were not want of Chastity in her that was forced unwillingly , it was want of justice in her that was slain unjustly . 

If Cato did well to tear out his own bowels , why did he command his son , his own bowels , to beg his life of Caesar ? Tantum gloriae ipsius Caesaris invidit , he so much envied Caesar's glory , that he was transported to unreasonable fury . Cleo●brotus read Plato's Phoedo unaduisedly , else would he not have destroyed his body , to obtain the soul's immortality . Maiori supplicio afficiendus est , desertor vitae ; quam desertor militiae : he is more to be punished , that voluntarily forsaketh his life , than he that flieth from his Captain and Leader . The very light of Nature teacheth , that there is more valour to endure a miserable life , then to embrace a wretched death . 

But the light of grace commands us not to kill others , much less to violate our selves . Samson cannot be excused , except by God he was secretly inspired . Nisi quia Spiritus latenter hoc iusserat , qui per illum miracula faciebat . Except the Spirit of God did secretly inspire him , who did miraculously upon his prayer at his death strengthen him . 

Those sacred Virgins , who in the sack of Rome sought to prevent the barbarous Adulterer , by a voluntary murder of themselves , committed a certain sin , to prevent an uncertain shame . Non sit tedio vobis vita vestra , siludibrio fuit hostibus castitas vestra . OH blessed Souls ( saith Saint Augustine ) Why should you be weary of life , when your Chastity was a prey to your enemies ? How could you endure the shame of the Cross of Christ , that cannot endure the rumours of Pagans' ? There is no shame , no sorrow , no misery , that should force a Christian to a desperate prevention . Consider what Saint Paul , Phil. 1. balanced together , I am in a straight betwixt two , having a desire to depart , and to be with Christ , which is far better , nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you . Quasi sapiens amplectitur mortis lucrum : Quasi seruus non refugit vitae obsequium . As a wiseman he desireth death , as a servant he endureth life . 

Will you have another rule for the act of departing , as you had for the time of departing ? Behold Simeon , patient in life , patient in death . He would not live without a ( permittis ) a promise to see Christ ; he would not die without a ( dimittis , ) without a licence to enjoy Christ. Saint Augustine speaks plainly , and yet acutely . 

Some men that are crowned with Roses , and enjoy the World's Paradise , they desire to live . Some men who are wasted with sorrows , they desire to die . Now saith the Father , Si habes vitam in desiderio , habe mortem in patientia ; Habes vitam in patientia , si habes mortem in desiderio : If you have life in desire , yet die patiently ; If you have death in desire , yet live contentedly . 

In sum . 

( When ) God will , be not troubled to die . ( Till ) God will , be not troubled to live . 

To be thus prepared , Simeon thought it his duty ; for he confesses that he is a servant . And you know a servant comes , when his master bids come ; goes , when his master bids go ; and therefore it is not , Dimitte me , let me depart : nor let Simeon depart ; But let thy servant depart . Speak , Lord , for thy servant heareth ; give leave , OH Lord , for thy servant obeyeth . 

Seruum tuum . 

I find this title of Servant , given to them by God , which I am sure never intended to serve God. jer. 25. verse 9  jer. 27. verse 6.  Nabuchadnezzar my Servant . esay 44. verse 28.  Cyrus' my Shepherd , and a Shepherd is a Servant . 

I find on the contrary , that the best Saints of God have no better title , josu. 1. 2.  Moses' my Servant is dead , job 1. 8.  Hast thou not considered my Servant job ? 

This Contrariety , imply some difficulty . If Nabuchadnezzar , and Cyrus be God's Servants , what privilege is it for Moses and job to be the Servants of God ? One plain distinction makes a perfect resolution . It is one thing to serve God actively , and another thing to serve God passively . All the world are God's Flails , Gods Mallets , Gods Sceptres of Iron , to break in pieces his enemies as a Potter's vessel : but some few in the World are his Trumpeters , are his Labourers , are his Ambassadors , his Messengers of fire , are his Angels , his ministering Spirits . 

Bears , and Lions , and Caterpillars , and Worms , are the Executioners of his justice : But Lambs , and Doves are the voluntary instruments of his mercy . 

Nabuchadnezzar burned the Temple : Cyrus did build the Temple : Both ( did ) the will of God : Neither ( intended ) to do the will of God : Both were God's Servants in execution : neither of both were God's Servants in affection . Both served him with the hand , neither with the heart . 

But to be God's Servants in affection to God , and in protection from God , is a singular prerogative : For if the Servants of Solomon were happy , much more happy are they who serve a greater than Solomon If the Angel in the Revelation acknowledgeth himself to be the Apostles fellow-seruant : how great an honour is that , to be entertained into such a service , where the Angels are our fellows ? You call me Master , saith Christ ▪ ( and you do well ; ) for surely he doth very ill , that hath not Christ for his Master : very ( Ill ) indeed since it is man's necessitaled condition , to be a Servant . 

Ye were the Servants of sin , Rom. 6. 20.  Ye are the Servants of righteousness , Rom. 6. 22.  In both estates , still Servants . Ye cannot serve God & Mammon , two Masters ; but you must serve God or Mammon , one Master . We must not halt betwixt God & Baal , but we must adhere to God or Baal . We must either serve the Devil , as Simon Magus : or we must serve Christ , as Simon Peter . It is the piercing contemplation of Basil , that he envied the Devil's happiness , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , who neither made us , nor died for us , but seeks our body's destruction , and our soul's perdition ; yet he hath more Servants than jesus Christ , that came down from Heaven to redeem us , and offered up his blood to save us.  

It is S. Augustine's experience , that to serve God is liberty , to serve sin is slavery . Seruus tot Dominorum , quot vitiorum , ( saith the Father ) a man is a slave to so many Masters , as he is subject to vices . 

Many a great man endures Cham's Curse , he is Seruus Seruorum ; A Slave of his Slaves . Many a wiseman could not be abused , as Herod was by Blastus his Chamberlain , Acts 12.  Verse 20. if their own guiltiness did not make them fear their own Servants . He that will not be the Slave of men , let him be the Servant of God. A good conscience is far richer fare safer , than the Breastplate of Aaron , or the golden shield of Solomon . 

To draw to a conclusion . 

Will you have a third rule , to know when you are God's Servants ? Behold Simeon , earnestly desiring to be with his Lord  

Simeon had a pattern of Abraham's servant , Genesis 24.  He went along journey to fetch a Wife for Isaak : he jaded ten Camels ; he came at evening to the house of Bethuel , he would not eat till he had told his errand , the next morning he would go to his Master . send me away , verse 54. hinder me not , verse 56.  send me away that I may go to my Master . I will not stay ten days for the Damsel , not one day to refresh my weary Camels . I came in the evening , I will return the next morning . 

Here is a true Servant , as soon as he had Rebecca , nothing pleased him but to return to Abraham . Here is a Simeon , as soon as he had Christ , nothing can content him but to return to God.  

Excellent is the meditation of Cyprian , Eius est mortem timere , quinon vult ad Christumire : That man fears death , that fe●res to come to the Tribunal of Christ.  

You say , you are God's Servants , you boast of your faith , you talk of Heaven : let me see the Character of God's Servants : show me the power of your faith . Express the desire of Heaven . 

There is a secret infidelity : our tongues and hearts are contrary : to fear death , and to desire eternal life , are things incompatible . Volumus ab eo praemijs honorari , ad quem venimus inviti . How can we ( saith Cyprian ) hope for Heaven's happiness , when we are dragged thither with a fearful unwillingness ? 

God is not bound to make every Saul a King , that only seeks for his Father's Asses . 

To conclude , if we be God's Servants , why do we fear to go to God ? If we fear to go to God , how are we Gods Servants ? Simeon desired to be gone : and we will leave him , and so pass from the Servant's condition , to the Lords Dominion . 

The Servant was dutiful , and the Lord is powerful . 

Lord 

IS the chief word in the Text , and the chief word for the time : For we see the Hearse of a dead Lord , and we hear the power of a living Lord  

There are many in earth , who are called Lords , but they are Lords of earth , and those Lords are earth , and those Lords must return to earth , as you see this day fulfilled in your eyes . He , who is the son of joseph , Lord of Egypt ; the son of jacob , Lord of Caaaan : who is the son of Isaak , who is the son of Abraham , who is the son of Nachor , who is the son of Sem , who is the son of Noah , the son of Adam , He is the son of Dust.  

There is a Lord of Lords , who hath the power of life and death , who raiseth out of the dust , and setteth with Princes : who poureth contempt upon Princes , and layeth their honour in the dust . For none of us ( saith the Apostle ) lives to himself , and no man dyeth unto himself . For whether we live , we live to the Lord : and whether we die , we die to the Lord : whether we live , therefore , or die , we are the Lords . 

The very word which Simeon useth is , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : Lord , saith Varinus , hath reference to a Freeman . Master , to a Bondman . Intimating in the very propriety of syllables , that man is a very Bondman , under the despoticall power of God.  

Which principle of Religion , the light of Nature seeth . 

In a storm at Sea , every Idolatrous Mariner calls upon his God : In a drought at Land , every Churl howls upon his bed : even those who never think on God in their life , will call unto the Lord for fear of death . 

But by the light of grace , Elias in his agony : jonas in his fury , Lord , take my life ; ( death they desired , but death by God permitted . ) The Apostles in their fear , Lord , save us , we perish . The thief in his pain , upon the Cross , Lord , remember me when thou comest into thy Kingdom . Stephen under the stones , Lord jesu , receive my spirit . Saul , cast down from his Horse , but cast down lower in his soul . Lord , what wilt thou have me to do ? 

Lord , Lord , is the Echo of misery , is the suppliant for mercy . 

Saint Basil gives the reason , GOD created 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the inward man of the soul . God fashioned 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the outward man of the body . And God joined soul and body together , with an incomprehensible union . 

Fire and Water are not so contrary , as flesh and spirit . Tell me then , what are the strings ? what the buckles ? what are the cords of love ? what slime of Euphrates ? what Gum of Arabia ? what Cement and Glue do join an immortal , incorporeal , insensible soul , in a house of Clay , in a body of earth , the most gross , most base , most solid element ? Surely , we are wonderfully made : None but God did compose us ; none but God can preserve us ; none but God , by his permission , or direction , ordinary , or extraordinary administration of second causes , can dissolve us. He with a breath gave us breath : he with a word takes away our breath : and all our thoughts perish . 

Let no Asa trust in his Physician : no Naaman's trust to the Rivers of Damascus : no Absalon to the lustre of Beauty : no Maximus to the strength of an Elephant : no Herod to the flattering clamour of Idolising People , that we are not men , but Gods. Those , who in regard of their constitutions , communicate in the sanguine of the Rose , and in the snowy beauty of the Lily ; their bodies are ( saith Saint Chrysostome ) but nidus hirundinum . A Swallows nest , composed of dirt and straw : they are no fairer than jonas Gourd a Worm struck it at the root , and the Gourd withered . The greatest Lord that lives , may make King Philip's Fable , his Motto , and Moral . 

Menippus , the Satirical Philosopher , meeting Mercury in the Elysian fields : amongst all the ghosts , would needs know , which was Philip the great King of Macedon . He ( quoth Mercury ) is Philip of Macedon , that hath the bald head . Menippus . I know him not by this , for all their skulls are bald . Mercury . He which hath a flat nose , is Philip of Macedon . ( Menippus . ) Why , all have flat noses , ( Mercury ) He with the hollow eyes , is King Philip of Macedon . ( Menippus ) Why , all have hollow eyes , bare teeth , naked ribs , open pores , disjointed members , all are carcases . Mercury . Why then , Menippus , in death there is no difference betwixt a King , and a Beggar . 

We must say , that he that was Lord of Solomon the Prince , he was Lord of Simeon the Prophet . We must say with job , the Lord giveth , and the Lord taketh away . The balance of life and death , in which the highest , and lowest are weighed , is only turned by the imperial hand of God.  

Simeon therefore , as in the rest , so in this , he is curious to die , he asketh death of him , who only hath the power of life and death : So absolute a power , that as the Psalmist speaketh , Dixit , & facta sunt : he spoke the word , and all things were made . So , Dicat , & non sunt : let him speak but a word , and all things will be marred . Therefore Simeon , to the duty of a servant , and the power of a Lord , addeth Secundum Verbum tuum : according to thy Word . Knowing , that it is the duty of a servant , to depart at the least word of his Master . 

Secundum Verbum tuum . 

This clause is plainly interpreted vers . 26.  Simeon had a revelation by the holy Ghost , that he should not see death , till he had seen Christ. This was God's word , and this was a certain word ; but yet look into this word , and for one certainty , you shall find two uncertainties . 

First , the Text saith , Expectabat consolationem : he expected the consolation of Israel . To see Christ , he was certain : but when to see Christ , he was uncertain . 

Again , he was to live , till Christ came , that was certain ; but whether he should then immediately die , that also was uncertain . Nicephorus saith , he died presently at that instant . But the Scriptures and Apostolical Fathers are altogether silent ; therefore it is dangerous to be confident . Simeon therefore had an absolute certainty of life , no absolute certainty of death . 

no more had Moses and Aaron , they were certain to die , and never to enter into Canaan : but they were not certain , when they should see Canaan from the Mount , and so die . 

Hezekiah that was promised fifteen years' life , must so be understood , as he was threatened a present death ; both condicionall and limited to the order of second causes , which have not in them an absolute necessity , but a voluble contingencie . God did not make Hezekiahs' body impassable against external violence ; nor incorruptible against internal corruption : But thus saith the Lord : I have heard thy prayer , I have seen thy tears , I will add fifteen years of strength . I will repair the defects of nature , and extend them to a possibility of fifteen years , with an implicit condition of thy repentance , and so of thy life's continuance . Yea , to go a little farther , that which Christ said of the day of judgement , is applied by the Fathers to the day of death , that neither the Angels , nor Christ the Lord of Angels , doth know that day and hour , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : He knoweth that , saith Nazian , as God , but as Man , he doth not know it . I am not ignorant , that the School and some of the Fathers do interpret those words in another sense ; But Bernard , Ambrose , and Chrysostome do concur with Nazian ▪ affirming that Christ , as man did not know it : not because he could not , but because he would not . Ne eam ignorantiam feramus molestius , quaecum Christo & Angelis , nobis est communis : that we may bear that ignorance patiently , which is common to us with Christ and his Angels . Many men ( I confess ) are sick of lingering consumptions , the infallible harbingers of death ; and yet they are not certain of the moment of their consumption . 

Many at the beginning of their sickness , feel in their hearts , a presage of their death : and yet they languish in hope , and know not the certain hour of their dissolution . 

The general rule remaineth , that Simeon knew not , that no man knoweth the place , the manner , the moment of death . 

First , not the place : and it is no great matter , since Rachel died in the highway , aswell as jezabel in the streets : since josias and Achab both died in the field : since Saul and jonathan died both in one battle , and their carcases were hung up as Trophies of a bloody Victory in a barbarous City . 

Will you hear a Philosophical comfort ? Earth , you know , is the Centre , & heaven is the world's circumference . If any man shall draw a Circle with his pen , with a point in the midst of the Circle , the Circle is equally distant from all points of the Circle , unto the point of the Centre . There is therefore , from all parts of the point and Centre of the earth , an equal distance to the Circle and Circumference of Heaven . What matter therefore though the bodies of the Martyrs were entombed in the entrailss of wild beasts ? though their ashes were scattered upon Rhodanus ? though their carcases were made a prey to the fowls of heaven ? What glory was it to Marshal's fly , though it were buried in concreted Crystal ? what shame to Naboth , though his blood was licked up of Dogs ? What hurt to the Virgins in the sack of Rome , whose bodies were unburied upon earth , whose souls were received into heaven ? Nec vivorum culpa , qui non potuerunt praebere ; nec mortuorum poena , qui non potuerunt sentire : It was neither ( saith S. Augustine ) the fault of the living , who had no power to bury the dead , nor the punishment of the dead , who had no sense of the afflictions of the living . 

We know not the manner of our death , and it is a very trifle . 

job compares man to a flower : esay to grass : john B. to a tree . Is it any great matter whether the flower be cropped , or the grass be mowed , or the Axe be laid to the root of the tree ? 

At the death of Christ there were three crosses ; upon those crosses were three persons ; The Thief blaspheming , The Thief repenting , The son of God praying . Quid similius istis crucibus ? quid dissimilius istis pendentibus ? What more like , ( saith S. Augustine ) than those crosses ? what more unlike than those persons ? 

We do not know the time of our death , and it is good for us , we do not . In nature peior est letho , timor ipse lethi , the fear of death is more terrible than death . Caesar had the death he desired : and surely that he deserved , to die suddenly by the hands of the Senators of Rome . 

But Nature hath only a Trumpet of lead , the Ark of God hath a Trumpet of silver . Look no farther then to another song in this Gospel . 

Zacharias song agrees with Simeons' song , Luke 1. 54. 55.  That we being delivered out of the hands of our Enemies , might serve him without fear , all the days of our life . 

Men would serve God , as they do their servants , with reversions . In ultimis diebus mortis : in the last days of their death : but God will be served , In omnibus diebus vitae : In all the days of our life . 

Nature saith , OH cives , cives , quaerenda pecunia primùm , virtus post nummos first : seek gold , and then serve God : first betray Christ , and then buy a field of blood to bury strangers . First make many beggars by usury and oppression , and then build an Hospital , the monument of a bloody devotion . 

But grace saith , Quaerite primùm regnum Dei : first seek Gods Kingdom , and all things else shall be cast unto you . All the rubbish of the world's treasure , are but casting ; adiectanea , chippings and shave , compared to the Pearl of heaven . Latet ultimus dies ut obseruetur omnis dies . Therefore ( saith S. Augustine ) We know not our last day , that we may observe every day . Epicures and Balaams that have lived ill , quando anima in extremis labris , when the soul sits on their lips , to take her flight , than they send for their Minister , to teach them to die well . 

We may then give you a little Opiate divinity to benumb you ; we cannot give a cordial to secure you . 

We may tell you , that one thief went from the gallows to glory : but we must not conceal that God opened the mouth of one Ass , which is no privilege for common Asses . And yet I will be liberal on God's part ; I will promise heaven assuredly to that sinner , that doth repent but one day before he dies . 

You hear this mercy with greediness ; turn not the grace of God into wantonness : be sure you repent one day before you die , whereof you cannot be sure , except you repent every day . 

God at some times , ( it may be at this time , ) doth touch your hearts . Deus in meloquebatur , & ego nesciebam : When good motions come into our hearts , God speaks , and we do not know it . 

If you quench the Spirit : the Spirit blows where it listeth , and when it listeth : You know not therefore , whether if to day you will not hear his voice , to morrow you shall hear his voice . Nemo promittat sibi , quod Euangelium non promittit : let no man promise to himself , what the Gospel hath not promised . 

God hath promised grace to the penitent , but God hath not promised grace to morrow , or life to morrow to repent . How can there be peace in the conscience , when the whoredoms , and witchcrafts of jezabel remain in the Soul ? There is no peace to the wicked , saith my God.  

If Simeon had not repaired his soul in life , he never could have had the settled peace of conscience in death . 

But peace in death is the fruit of a sanctified life , is the end of Simeons' petition , is the end and period of the Sermon . 

In Pace . 

Which peace was implicitly promised to King Hezekiah in his life : explicitly unto Abraham in his death . 

Let there be peace in my days , was Hezekiahs' prayer , esay 39 8.  

thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace ; this was Abraham's promise , Gen. 15. 15.  

Not that we are to think , that Peace was only communicated to Hezekiah in Life , to Abraham in Death . But to express in their persons , the world's passions . 

Every man is either a Dives , dreaming of nothing but ease and peace in life : 

Or a Balaam , desiring nothing but grace and peace in death . 

It is a vulgarisme of note ; Such a man died like a lamb , though he lived like a Lion.  

As though Consumptions may not spend our choleric humours : Apoplexyes may not stop our vital passages : Palsies may not take away our speech : Dropseys may not exhausted our spirits . There are many defects in nature , that may cause men to die quietly , but not religiously . 

Sisera , after a draught of milk , was no more sensible of the hammer of jael , than Holofernes , after a ton of wine , of the sword of judith . 

Look therefore to the Text , unto Simeons' peace . Which whether you interpret with Euthinius , pro pace cogitationum : for peace of mind , opposed to doubting : Or with Cyprian , pro pace securitatis : for peace of security , opposed to falling : or with Irenaeus , pro pace mortis : for peace in death , opposed to labouring : or with Origen , pro pace conscientiae : for peace of conscience , opposed to despairing : In all these , the rule of Bernard is certain . Vis in pace mori , sis seruus Dei : would you die in peace , you must serve the God of peace . 

no Simeons service . no Simeons security . 

We are not to doubt , but Simeon prayed for that peace , which Christ promised , john 14 27.  Pacem meam : My peace I give unto you . Christ's peace is the peace of a Christian. But Christ's peace is joined with , jugum meum ; my yoke : crucem meum ; my cross : seruum meum ; my servant : verbum meum ; my word : and then pacem meam ; my peace . 

He that takes upon him Christ's yoke by obedience active ; Christ's Cross by obedience passive ; he that serves Christ in conscience , and according to Christ's word , in science : let him never doubt , but that in all duties , in all crosses , in all service , in all controversies , he shall have God's Angel to comfort him in a furnace of fire . Let him never doubt but that the sting of death shall be extracted , the power of hell shall be conquered , the gates of heaven shall be opened , the bosom of Abraham shall be prepared , and he in the eternal peace of Saints and Angels shall be glorified : unto which peace Simeon is long since ascended : Where it is best to leave him : It being just , that as we found Christ in the arms of Simeon ; so we should leave Simeon in the arms of Christ : there being no better way to end , then with the peace of God , which passeth all understanding , and surpasseth all commending . 

But though I have done with Simeon , I have not begun with the parallel of Simeon : it being an unreprovable custom in God's Church , that as you read , 2.  Chron. 32. 33. that all judah and jerusalem did honour Hezekiah at his death : so for Ambrose to honour Valentinian ; Satyrus , Theodosius ; for Nazian ▪ to honour Basil ; Gregory , Gorgonia ; for Eusebius to honour Constantine ; for Augustine to honour his Monica ; Hierome his Nepotian ; for us to pour out a sacrifice of thanksgiving , for the religious life , and Christian death of the Saints of God. Only we must remember , that we are Preachers , and not Orators ; we must not speak for affection , nor for faction . Nullubi citius proficitur , quam in haereticorum castris : Ibi enim esse , est magnum esse . A man ( saith Tertullian ) is never more easily , more speedily , more hyperbolically magnified , then among Schismatics and heretics : to be one of their faction , ( though otherwise never so unworthy ) is to be a man of estimation . Every molehill is made a mountain , where partiality sways the balance . 

I will seek no farther than the Text , wherein I find Dominum and Seruum , both titles given to Princes . 

I said , Ye are Gods : there is the title of a Lord ; David the son of a handmaid , there is the title of Servant . These two titles shall be to me , as Hercules' Pillars ; Nequid ultra : nothing beyond them , nothing but contained in them . 

First , I will consider him , as a Lord of men . Secondly , as a servant of God. So shall we give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's , and unto God , that which is Gods.  

He was a Lord whose Hearse we here attend ; And a Lord , as Elizeus was a Prophet , with a double mantle of Honor.  

His Barony of Ruthen extended from Edward the first . 

His Earldom of Kent extended from Edward the fourth : yea , and so extended ( witness his arms of unstained Honour ) that as his Progenitors received Honour from the royal favour of Princes ; So they continued their Honour by loyal service to their Sovereigns . 

I confess indeed , that many times , the virtues of our Progenitors , are but figleaves , to cover the nakedness and worthlesnesse of our own persons . But yet , saith Basil , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : A green leaf doth give a beauty to a golden Orange . So Antiquity , that perpetuates the silver cord of Honour , to posterity ; it gives a lustre to Nobility . A lustre it gives , and yet it is but a blazing Star , and Meteor , compared with the fixed Stars of our own virtues . 

Descend we therefore to the person of this Honourable Henry , and let us search without fraud , or flattery , what Heroical virtues commended him to his King : what Political virtues commended him to his Country ; what Economical virtues commended him to his servants . 

Alas , you know that he was troubled with many infirmities ; as S. Paul writes of Timothy : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , even in the pain and daily crudities of his stomach . He might say with old and honourable Barzillai , 2.  Sam. 19 32. that he was a very old man , ( three score and fourteen years old ) that he could not hear the voice of singing . What then were the motives unto Queen Elizabeth of immortal memory , to invest him ? to King james of incomparable judgement , to continue him in the Lieutenancie of this Country ? To communicate unto him the supreme image of their own glory . If the times had been secure , the charge had not been so honourable nor so observable ; because goodness and virtue are not ever respected in times of safety . Cashi runneth by the mountains , and Ahimaaz runneth by the plains , and both unto David . But in times of danger , when the Commonwealth was like to the Moon , subject to alteration , and change , that in those times he should be honoured with such a charge , might seem to be no other , then to lay Pelion upon Ossa , one burden , upon another . There can be no other reason given , than what Ambrose said of Theodosius , Senior aetate , validus fide ; he was feeble , but he was faithful . He was a Barzilla , a lover of his King , a lover of his Country . I know , you remember the times of fear and amazement in Eighty eight . When the Bulls of Rome roared , the Cannons of Spain thundered ; when Traitors were bred in our own bowels , Horseleeches were shipped to suck the Country's blood ; then by the care of this Honourable Lord , your Troops were trained , your Armoury was surveyed , your people by his presence were encouraged , your villages and towns were guarded , your Captains and Leaders were counselled , all things without excess of charge , without corruption and falsehood , without partiality and hatred , were sufficiently provided : and he and you for your mutual and faithful offices , were of the Queen and Council most remarkably honoured . 

You know that when your late great Queen was translated from a Crown of earth , to a Crown of Stars , that there was need of a skilful Pilot to rule and stern the ship of State , in so sudden a storm ; which how well it was governed ; how carefully and loyally your peace , against all malcontents , was preserved , yourselves can best relate it , whose fears made you most sensible of it . To conclude therefore the commendation of his Heroical and Noble virtues , we may invert the speech which Tacitus reporteth of Galba the Emperor , Omnium iudicio , indignus Imperio , nisi imperasset . Such infirmity , by all men's judgement , had been unfit for government , had he not been Governor . 

For his Political virtues , which commended him to the love of this Country , I require no other jury , than your eyes and ears . It is the contemplation of the Singer of Israel , that justice and Peace have kissed each other . It is true in many what S. Austen hath paraphrased , Vnam vis , & aliam non vis : some men are so tyrannous , that they will have nothing but extreme justice ; some men so effeminate , they would have nothing but disordered peace . It was a question of State , recorded by Suetonius , whether it were worse to live under Nero , where a man might do nothing ; or under Claudius , where a man might do any thing ? Our Honourable Earl caused justice and peace to kiss each other . 

Just he was , a Solomon , that no harlot could deceive him : merciful he was as David , that no injury , no , not that which concerned his Honour , his Barony , his estate , could habituate in him an Italianate , and eternal malice . When the Laws of the Kingdom had determined his right and title , his own heart was Chancellor , to quench the fire of contention . 

Just he was , to keep the Country free from the sons of Belial . 

A peacemaker he was to compromise , and to end unchristian controversies . 

Just he was , and feared not the gratest . 
Loving he was , and contemned not the least . 


I can remember , that when I was brought up at the feet of this Gamaliel , that every Thursday ( which is now by God's direction , contrary to your first resolution , the day of his memorial ) he road to a neighbour-towne of Amptill , where he first frequented God's Temple ; to hear a Sermon , and to offer up a sacrifice to God ; and then consulted with the justices , and Officers of trust , for the peace of the Country : There might you see every Thursday as at the Pool of Bethesda , the Orphan and the widow , the poor and afflicted , seeking and finding of comfort : There the Recusant and ill-affected subject , were convented , examined , persuaded ; and if all would not serve , restrained , from infecting the credulous multitude . 

So that God's Religion was countenanced , the oppressed were succoured , the darnel was severed , the peace and civility of the Country , by such a solemn and ordinary meeting , was maintained . 

If I speak false , accuse me : If I speak truth , testify with me : for many of you know the substance , when I remember only the shadow . 

For his Economical virtues , as he was 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a Lord of a Family : three things are observed by the Philosopher . 

First , the choice of a wife . 

Next , the entertainment of servants . 

The third , the care of our estate , that we be not hurtful , but helpefull unto others . 

The Wife is the first : for she either is our helper , or our tempter ; our good , or our evil Angel . 

But before I can speak a word of her , of whom I learned first to speak , I must make Saint Austin's confession . Pudet me illius aetatis , in qua me vixisse non memini : I am ashamed of my infancy amongst you , in which I do not remember that ever I lived . 

But could I remember , what some of you have told me , ( whom I am bound to believe ) I should here give public thanks to God , that hath called me to his Ministry , upon this occasion Collater alley to honour her memory , who for her recreation , vouchsafed to instruct me in the Alphabet and elements of learning . 

I beseech you give way a little to my affectionate thankfulness , if I interueyne our Earls honours , with his wife's virtues . 

Her first life's blood was derived from ancient Gentry , but her service in Court , her excellence of body , and graces of mind , transplanted her into the stock of more ancient Nobility . 

Our Earl found her the Widow of that great Earl , Edward of Derby , found , and a while kept her , a most beloved , loving , gracious , compassionate , religious , and noble Lady : whose untimely death without issue , divided a pair of honourable Turtles , divided their bodies , but not their souls ; 34. years he spent , as a mourner of her Funerals ; divided their bodies , but not their loves ; for though her body lies buried at great Gaddesden , which necessity did enforce ; yet all that jacob could do for Rachel , he hath done for her , in joining her pillar upon his own sepulchre , making one individual monument for them both , in this Chapel ; to testify to all the world that happy union , of which , neither life nor death could make a disjunction . 

Such was his Lady , such was their love . 

I would to God the discontentments of great Lords and Ladies did not make it remarkable . What a shame is it , when our honourable marriages are like that of Pompey with julia , of Anthony with Octavia : which are not made to unite hearts , but houses ; nor to join affections , but factions : the issue being as fatal , as the beginning was unfaithful ? But I had rather pour forth prayers to God for reformation ; then spend unregarded words of reprehension . 

Let it suffice , that they there lie together in one grave , of whom you cannot judge , whether their honour were greater , or their love . 

The next thing in a family , is the entertainment of servants : which this Honourable person knew best to choose , because himself had been a servant . Though he was born of a most Noble family , yet being a younger brother , ( as the unjust , yet usual custom of our Country is , ) he was compelled by necessity to serve in a Noble Family : but after , was preferred to the service of the late Queen of happy memory . In both which he gained such experience , that he knew with jacob how to reform his household : that no Idolatrous Baalite , no Idle-bellied Cretian , no profane Esau , no Ruffian Lamech , no blasphemous Rabsache , no inordinate persen , should by his will and knowledge , shroud their abominable vices under his Honourable virtues . He well knew the sharp speech of Aristippus , who replied to a wonderer of a great train of servants : At plures muscas in culina : he had not ( saith the Philosopher ) so many servants in his Hall , as he had flies in his Kitchen . Servants , who are fed like great horses , only for pomp and show , are usually irreligious and unprofitable creatures . But those servants whom he entertained , those he trusted , accounting it a French lightness , to entertain a few Pies , and to change them as often as their Liveries . 

His ancient servants , fit for a settled and an Honourable house , sufficient for their number , and extraordinary for their qualities ; whereof some had continued with him ten years , some twenty , some thirty , some forty years , those ( according to the means and measure of his estate ) he rewarded at his death . Others , who served him less time , he honoured either with a Ring of remembrance , or comforted with half a years' wages for their present maintenance . Generally he commended them all to his Honourable Brother , that howsoever they had lost a loving Lord , yet they might find a Noble Master . 

It was a great part of his care at death , that his servants might be provided for the means of life . 

I must not forget to conclude this point , with the remembrance of another Legacy . Our Noble Earl did so remember his own servants , as he did not forget Gods poor servants : 50. pounds he allotted by his will , to be distributed to Christ's brethren , to feed them , to cloth them , or in such manner to comfort them , as their necessity required , and his brother's judgement should order ; that as his soul was to be comforted by the blood of the Lamb : So , ( as job speaketh ) the loins of the poor might be warmed with the fleece of his sheep . 

The third point was the care of his estate , which , as he publisheth in the Record of his Will and Testament , he found almost ruinated , by the vain prodigality of Richard Earl of Kent . He knowing therefore that Honour without means , is but a glorious burden , but the Tower of Babel , the seminary of confusion , he made a careful frugality , the fuel of his continual hospitality . 

Great things by providence are attained , by prodigality ruinated . 

You read in the 15. of Luke of a prodigal son , in the 16. of Luke , of a prodigal servant : and prodigality brought both to beggary ; the one with shame came crying to his father ; the other said , he was driven to cozen his Master . 

Our honourable Earl therefore professeth in his Will and Testament , that he did not build yonder Monument of stone for any vain glory , but as an Emblem to his posterity , that their house was ruinated by Richard's prodigality , was restored by Henry's frugality . 

Such a curse followeth Absalon : 

Such a blessing followeth joseph . 

I call not evil good , I apparel not vice with the Livery of virtue . It was not baseness , but providence that laid the foundation ; It was not oppression , but time , that finished this building . 

You of this Parish know his voluntary contribution to public charges , whereof he was freed by Law. You of the Country know his perpetual housekeeping , his relieving of the poor , his feasting of whole Towns at public times , and solemnities . 

He knew full well , that a man may better cheap keep a constant and good house , than an unconstant and wicked harlot . In one word , jacob provided , and God prospered . But all these Heroical , political , Economical virtues are common unto Traian , aswell as to a Christian ; all these things without grace , are not a natural , but a painted flower of glory . 

Except we can find that he was as good a servant of God , as he was a Lord of men ; omnis humana justitia similes est corpori caput non habenti : All human justice ( saith Lactantius ) is but like a body without a head ; Is but the shadow , Is not the substance of virtue . 

Let us leave him therefore as a Lord of men , and consider him as a servant of God.  

To express which attribute of a servant , I find two other words in the Text ; the first doth express the duty of life : the second doth afford security in death . 

I Secundum verbum , according to God's word in living . 2.  In pace , according to Gods will in dying . 

His life was secundum verbum , according to God's word , whether you consider his public or his private devotions . 

His public devotions in favouring and honouring the Lords Prophets ; like another Obadiah , he fed them at his own Table , he used them with all respect of their calling , he accounted them as the Angels of God's Church , and not as many politikes do , the basest of jeroboams Priests : He knew that those that served at God's Altar , were not to be accounted as the retriment of the people . It being an infallible consequence , that he who despiseth God's Ministers , doth contemn God in his Ministers . If Christ be Christ , Christians will honour the Ambassadors of Christ.  

Atheism is the mother , and contempt the daughter of profaneness . 

Next , his devotion appeared in the doctrine and discipline of truth ▪ against superstitious Idolatry , and ignorant novelty . 

Let me record what I know , what he knew and professed , ( For although juy cling about the Oak , yet is not the fruit of the Oak . ) It cannot be denied , but that some that had more zeal than knowledge , and I fear ( notwithstanding their frequent lip-labor ) more knowledge , than conscience , ( I am sure more sacrifice , than obedience ) shrouded themselves under his protection , which through the defect of his hearing , he could not avoid , being compelled to entertain such , as the partiality of some about him did commend unto him ; but for his own judgement , he ever desired men of religion , void of ostentation ; men of conscience , free from faction : accounting the established Apostolical discipline of the Church of England , to be preferred before the lunacies , and Fancies of Consistorian confusion . 

Lastly , his public frequenting of God's Temple , ( not his private Chapel ) where ( through want of hearing ) he was rather a Spectator , than an Actor , gave so good example to his household , to the Inhabitants of the Town and Country , as the good that came thereby , did testify to all the world , how much it concerns every great person , to be either a Michael , a Leader of Angels , or a Lucifer , a Captain of Devils : I express myself . Truth and Religion seek no corners , no woods , no chambers , no places , no persons , of darkness . God doth give that blessing to the public Temple , that he doth not give to a private Chapel ; Indeed they are Chapels of ease , more for their ease , than their honour . As though we cannot adore the God of heaven , except we be attended like Beronice , with pomp on earth . If at the day of judgement we shall all stand in the Valley of jehosaphat : If the four and twenty Elders do cast their Crowns at the feet of the Lamb : I beseech you , must we ( for flate ) contemn the public assemblies ? Our most noble , most humble Earl , knew , that in respect of our sins , the blood of the poor Virgin's Son doth equally wash the soul of a Lazar , aswell as of Caesar. Therefore as there is but one common salvation , so there aught to be a common , and a public , and a joint humble Invocation . 

His private devotions were performed without a Trumpet : I will not make them more by Art , than they were in heart . Pray he did : pray he did every morning and evening ; pray he did in his own person ; pray he did in his Chamber , without any other witness , than the witness of a broken spirit to God. Some one ( necessarily ) saw , and observed him , ( as Daniel was observed to pray towards jerusalem , ) but he did not pray to be seen , though he was seen when he prayed . As Christ went up to Mount Olivet , which mountain he choose for solitariness , not for greatness . 

His prayers ended , his body refreshed , his mind quieted , the rest of the day he spent in reading the Scriptures and the Commentaries of holy writers , in revolving the Histories of Church and State. In few words , the vanities of the world did not draw him from a constant and continual course of Piety . So that the latter part of his life , was like the daily revolution of the Sun , in a seasonable and infallible and a certain Sphere of Virtues . 

His death was the last Scene of all his labours , which ( as I was informed ) was like to Simeons in the comfortable peace of his soul . Great is God's mercy , when the earthly Tabernacle of the body doth so sensibly decay , that we find our deaths , before we feel it . His body , you know , was ploughed with furrows of age , which caused him to keep his bed , before any ( but himself ) saw his period . A Physician was sent for , whose presence is mixed with fear and comfort ; but to him , who was prepared , his Physician brought neither comfort , nor fear . 

He rejoiced , that he trusted not with Asa in his Physician , but in his God. And according to that confidence , he exhorted his affectionate brother , with words of grace and piety ; He put his house in order like Hezekiah , and with great patience expected the hour of his dissolution . His want of hearing excluded all possibility of external comfort , but he felt a Comforter within , which none can tell , but he that enjoys him ; yet the inward joy of his salvation , sent forth ( as Austen speaks of the Egyptians ) quasdam eiaculationes : certain winged darts unto Heaven . His heart was like a Furnace , and his words ( though short ) were as so many sparks of devotion . I have a relation from his Chaplain , to whom in private he disclosed the burden of his conscience . 

His body being decayed with age , and wearied with sickness , our Adversary , who is a seeking Lion , sought to devour him : His private confession showed the particularity of his temptation . 

The Devil presents to his melancholy fancy , the power of Witches ; tempting him to conceive , that for his sins , God had forsaken him , and given him over to the malice of Sorcerers ; striving to make him think that this his weakness and sickness , was hot a defect of nature , but an effect of Satan . Thus was our good Earl winnowed ; but he that prayed for Peter , prayed for Henry , that his faith might not fail . 

And fail it did not ; God's Spirit brought unto his memory , the mercy of God to David repenting , the power of God against Balaams cursing ; and now he found the comfortable fruit of reading the Scriptures , in them he found Balm of Gilea● , comfort and consolation against the power of hell and darkness . He concluded an humble confession , with a firm resolution : that God would be merciful ( as to David , ) that God would be powerful ( against Balaam ) that God would not forsake him , notwithstanding his sins ; that he would not forsake God , notwithstanding his sickness . 

If any man demand and say , Is this the peace of Simeon , where there is such temptation ? I answer ; that peace is the end of a combat ; In that soul where there is no spiritual combat , there is no spiritual peace . 

For as we teach against the Church of Rome , that our faith is not swallowed up of doubting : So we teach according to truth , that a true faith is troubled with doubting . When a man considers his own demerits , than he justly doubts of mercy : when a man considers Christ his merits , he firmly trusts in God's mercy . As in a battle , all the time of the skirmishing , there is doubt : But when the enemy flies and is put to rout , than there is no doubt . So in the soul , all the while the Devil flings his fiery darts , there is doubt : but when he is conquered by the sword of the Spirit , than there is no doubt . As therefore you read of the Pool of Bethesda ; First , the Pool was troubled , and then the sick were healed : so this noble Earl first felt a troubled spirit , to try him , and then the joy of the holy Spirit to comfort him . 

And surely it was the holy Spirit ; for it never left him , after it had found him . The last words that ever man heard him speak , were three Amens to his Chapleins prayers , concluding his life as the holy Ghost doth the Scripture , Amen , Revel . 22. 20.  Amen , Revel . 22. 21.  As Christ concluded his Cross , Amen , This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise , Luke 23. 43.  To which Paradise , I doubt not , but his blessed soul is gone before . God grant that ours may follow after ; That we may all depart in peace , to the fruition of eternal happiness . 

Amen , Amen , Amen . 





 Gre. in Ho. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 sonat ut Verbun possit audiri , Chrisost. sup . Matth. Vox est sonus confusus , qua vult aliquid dicere ille qui clamat . Verbum est sermo mysticus , quo Deus mysterium suae voluntatis ostendit : Gloss. Verbum clamat in voce . Beda , Per vocem nunciatur , per Verbum ostenditur .  Luk. 2. 8.   Luk. 1. 41.   Luk. 1. 39   Luk. 2. 25.   Luk. 2. 27.   Martial .  Deut. 31. 3.   Deut. 31. 2.   Lib. 1.  Cap. 12.   Citatur à Kimitio , in hunc locum .  Act. 5. 34.   jos. 1. 2.   Luk. 2. 25.   Deut. 34. 4.   Luke 2. 30.   Gen. 15. 15.   De Civit. Dei  lib. 19 cap. 11.  〈◊〉 .  1.  King. 10. 18   Verse 25.   1.   2.   1.  Sam. 25. 2.   And 36. 37. v.   Contra jovini .  Dan. 4. 33.   2.  Sam. 18. 9 and 14.   1.  King. 21. 19   H●st . 7. 10.   De Paenitentia .  Zach. 5. 7.   1.  Kings 19 4   Lib. de morte .  Citatur a Ludolpho , in 2.  Lucae .  Sen●●● .  Meditat.   Consolati . Philosophica .  Epist. 1. ad Dom.   Phil. 3. 8. 9   Libro de bono mortis , cap. 2.   Libr● de mortalitate .  De bono mortis , cap. 2.   Con●e● .  job. 7. 1.  Editio Hieroni.   Aug. de Civit. Dei , lib. 1. cap. 19   jibid. cap. 23.   Plato in Phoedone .  Aug. de Civit. Dei , lib. 1. cap. 21.   Aug. de Civit. Dei , lib. 1. cap. 27.   Ambro. de bono mortis cap. 2.   Tract . 9 in Epist. johan.   jer. 50. 23.   Psal. 2. 9   esay 58. 1.   1.  Cor. 3.   1.  Cor. 4.   Heb. 1   16.   16.   2.  King. 2. 24.   1.  King. 13. 25.   joel 1. 4.   Io. 4. 7.   Mat. 3. 17.   2.  King. ult.   Ezra 1   1.  King. 10. 8.   Mat. 12. 42.   Rom. 22. 9   Mat. 6.   1.  King. 18.   Hom. Ethi .  In verba Apostoli .  Gen. 9 25.   Lib. the Mortal .  Rom. 14. 7.   jonas 1   Osc. 7.   1 King. 18.   jonas 2.   Luk. 23.   Act. 7.   Act. 9   In Psal. 8.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Homi. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉  Lucian .  Bernard . De Civit. Dei. l. 1.  2.  Manner .  De Civi . li. 1.  3.  Time.   Seneca .  Mat. 6.  Vt dum semper ignoratur , quasi proximus esse credatur . id . Bas. ut nec impij desperarent , quasi nullum tempus relictum poenitentiae , nec boni , quasi longum tempus patientiae .  Cyprian .  Ser. Par. 38.  Bor. unus latro in fine bene poenituit , ille quidem ut nullus desperet , solus autem ut nullus praesumat .  Ang. conf . Aug. de verbis Domini .  Praese . adversus Haereticos .  Psal. 82. 6.   Psal. 186. 16.   In Psal. 1  Deaf many years .  2.  Sam. 18.   In obitu .  Verba Taciti de Galba . Omnium iudicio indignus Imperio , nisi imper asset .  Conf. 1.   Dioge . Laer. in V●a Arist.   Luke 15. 21.   Luke 16. 3. 4.  Death .  Peter . 