Mercy in her beauty : or , the height of a deliverance from the depth of danger . 

Set forth in the first sermon preached upon that occasion , by nath : Hardy , Master of arts , and preacher to the parish of s. dionis back-church . 

psal. 118.17 , 18 , 19  

I shall not die , but live , and declare the works of the Lord . 

The Lord hath chastened me very sore , but he hath not given me over to death . 

Open unto me the gates of righteousness , i will go into them , and i will praise the Lord . 

basil. mag. hom. 9  

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

aug. in psal. 41.  

Quia magis crebra sunt mala , dulcior •rit misericordia tua . Etenim scriptum est quodam loco speciosa misericordia domini in tempore tribulationis , sicut nubes pluviae in tempore siccitatis . 



London , printed by j. g. for nath : web and will : Grantham , at the black bear in St.  Paul's churchyard , near the little north-door . 1653.  

Sermons preached and printed by mr Nathanaell Hardy m.a. and preacher to the parish of s Dyonis back-church . 

justice triumphing , or the spoilers spoilt : a sermon preached on the 5th of November in the cathedral church of st Paul's . 
the arraignment of licentious liberty and oppressing tyranny , in a sermon at a fast before the Lords in parliament ; in the Abbey-church at Westminster . 
faith's victory over nature , a sermon preached at the funerals of mr John rushout junior . 
the safest convoy or the strongest helper , a valedictory sermon before the right honourable Sir Thomas Bendish baronet , his majesty's ambassador to the grand signior at Constantinople . 
a divine prospective representing the just man's peaceful end , a sermon at the funeral of the right worshipful Sir John Gayr knight . 
love and fear the inseparable twins of a blessed matrimony , a sermon occasioned by the nuptials between mr William Christmas and Mrs Elizabeth Adams . 
divinity in mortality , or the gospel's excellency and the preachers frailty , a sermon at the funerals of mr Richard Goddard minister of the parish of st Gregory's by Paul's . 
Printed , and are to be sold by Nathanaell Webb and William Grantham at the black bear in st Paul's churchyard near the little north-door , 1653.  

To the right worshipful , worshipful , and well-beloved , the inhabitants of the parish of s. dionis back-church , health and wealth , not only in this life , but chiefly in that which is to come . 

Worthy friends , 

it is a full decade of years since i first was called by divine providence to begin the work of my ministry among you : and it is not yet half so many months , since in human probability both my ministry and life seemed to be at an end : but the wise and gracious God ( in whose hands all our times are ) hath mercifully lengthened my days ( Blessed be his name ) for the greater good of my own , and ( i hope ) of your souls . 

these sermons which upon this comfortable occasion i lately preached , were by some of you desired to be made more public , which i have fulfilled , so much the more willingly , that i Might testify before the world , first , my infinite obligation to almighty God for so remarkable a deliverance ; and withal my manifold engagements to a great part of you for your affectionate love , and multiplied courtesies . 

and now ( My dearly beloved , and longed for in the Lord ) give me leave ( having this opportunity ) to acquaint you with my serious thoughts and earnest desires , and i trust through God's grace that the transcript of them before your eyes , will help to make a deeper impression of them upon your hearts . 

and first , i thank my god through Jesus Christ for your steadfastness in the faith , and your mutual amity , whereby you become exemplary to many parishes in this wavering and contentious age . Oh that not only you , but all the persons of this land were alike minded , one towards another according to Christ Jesus . 

next , let me in the bowels of our common saviour beseech you , and if this will not prevail , charge you before God and the Lord Jesus Christ , who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom ; that as you drink in the heavenly rain which cometh oft upon you , so you endeavour to bring forth herbs meet for the great husbandman who dresseth you . I bear you record ( and that without flattery ) you are attentive hearers , oh that you May be all forward doers of the word . 

there are some amongst you whose love towards me hath been , not only in tongue and in word but in deed , and that in a more than ordinary measure . but yet , let me freely tell you . There is nothing ( If i know my own heart ) would so rejoice me as to see the fruit of my weak labours , in the holiness of your lives . believe it , this is the greatest kindness a persons can show to their minister , since whereas by a liberal contribution they add to his comfortable subsistence upon earth , by a religious conversation , they increase his eternal reward in heaven . 

And now brethren , i commend you to God , and to the word of his grace which is able to build you up , and to give you an inheritance among them which are sanctified , humbly entreating you to strive together with me in your prayers to God both for me and your selves , that i May so preach and live , you May so hear and do , as that we May behold each other , and all of us our redeemer with joy in the last day . so prayeth 

Your faithful servant for Christ's sake in the gospel , nath : Hardy . 

Phil. 2.27 . the former part . For indeed he was sick , nigh unto death , but God had mercy on him . 

If you please to peruse the five last psalms of David , you shall find them beginning and ending with an hallelujah : praise ye the Lord , being the alpha and Omega , the prora and the puppis , the first and the last words of each . Not much unlike is saint Paul's practice in the epistle to the Romans , who almost in the very entrance placeth an {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , i thank my god through Jesus chrict , and closeth with a {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , to God only wise bee glory through Jesus Christ . in imitation of these patterns i shall place thanksgiving , both in the front and rear of my discourse . Indeed what fit prooemium to a gratulatorie sermon than a Benedictus ? Blessed therefore be God , who kept his unworthy servant from falling into the grave , a land of silence and forgetfulness , and hath now vouchsafed him the liberty of entering into his house , the place of prayers and pr•yseses . Blessed be God , who hath brought my feet from lying in a sick bed to stand in this holy mount . finally blessed be God , who hath given me a joyful occasion of handling , and just cause of applying this scripture to myself , by changing the third person unto the first ; for indeed i was sick nigh to death , but God had mercy on me . 

This text naturally spreadeth forth itself into two main boughs , each of which have three branches sprouting from them . 

Here is observable a distress , and a deliverance ; a danger , and an escape , an affliction , and a liberation : the former in those words , he was sick nigh to death ; the latter in these , but God had mercy on him . 

In the distress we have observable , the 1.  quality of the danger what it was , in the word sick . 
2.  extremity of the measure , how great it was , in those words nigh unto death . 
3.  eminency of the person , whom it befell , in the relative he . 


In the deliverance we have considerable , the 1.  efficiency of the author , by whom it was conferred , in the word God . 
2.  The excellency of the benefit , how expressed , in those words had mercy on him . 
3.  The opportunity of the time , when vouchsafed , in the exceptive but . 


These are the several branches of this •acred tree , into which i have climbed by the ladder of human industry , from which by the hand of divine assistance i have gathered , and by the same hand shall now scatter among you such fruit as hath refreshed my own , and ( I hope through God's blessing ) will nourish your souls ; and so i begin with the 

distress , he was sick nigh to death ; and therein the quality of the danger in that word sick . 

The philosopher , observing the property of man's constitution , describeth him by risibile , to be a reasonable living creature , that hath the only power of laughing ; but the divine considering the misery of man's condition no less , aptly characterizeth him by flebile , an unfortunate wretch , that hath the most cause of weeping : in this respect it is not unfitly taken notice of , how the newborn babe cometh into the world crying , as if by the language of its present tears , it would foretell the sadness of its future sorrows . 

Among those many evils with which the life of man is beset , this of sickness is one . 

one to which all are subject , quis non aegrotat in hac vitâ ? quis tanguorem •on experitur ? nasci in hoc corpore mortali incipere aegrotare est : who in this life doth not more or less taste of sickness ? yea from the cradle to the crutch , birth to death , womb to the tomb , we are continually liable to it . 

one of which we May say , as Leah of Gad , a troop cometh , and to which that devil's name in the gospel May fitly be applied legion : the poet instancing in one kind of disease , speaketh of a band of fevers , Nova sebrium , 
Terris incubuit cohors : 


and Galen reckoning up the diseases to which one part of man's body , the eye is subject , numbereth 112. how great an army than must this commander have , who begirteth this castle of the body in every part and corner , and that with several soldiers ! No wonder if the holy tongue , as it calleth men {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} which signifieth dying men , because they are continually under the power of death , so it styles them {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} sickly men , because they are exposed to such variety of sicknesses . 

Finally one which exceedeth all those other miseries of this present life , what dissension is in a city , discord in a family , surfeiting to the stomach , ignorance to the mind , that is sickness to the body , disturbing and oppressing it ; yea , it is the worst evil of cold , hunger , and nakedness , of heat , thirst , and warmness , that they hasten upon us sickness and death . 

That i May the better open this distress , give me leave to delineate it both in the effects that flow from it , and the cause from which it floweth . 

There are two grievous attendants which sickness commonly bringeth along with her , namely pain and weakness ; by pain it taketh away the comfort of all enjoyments , even of life itself ; Barzillai being old , said to the King , can thy servant taste what i eat , or what i drink ? Can i hear any more the voice of singing men , and singing women ? wherefore should thy servant be a burden to my Lord the King ? not much unlike May it be said of the sick man , can he eat , or can he drink ? Can music , or any other pleasures than delight him , when he is a burden to himself ? and as by reason of pain , it renderth life uncomfortable , so by reason of weakness , unserviceable , disenabling the body from the performance of any work : alas , how can the clock go when the weights are plucked off ? or the watch move right , when the wheels are out of order ? 

both these sad effects are fitly expressed by two words , the one in the Hebrew , the other in the Greek tongue , and it is the word which our apostle here useth . The Hebrew word — {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} signifieth both doluit and aegrotavit , to be sick , and to be sorry : well are they expressed by one word ; since they commonly go together , both smarting pain in the ••dy , and dolorous anguish in the mind being caused by sickness ; in this respect the English word disease , is very apposite , because it diseaseth and disturbeth the person ; of this David complained in his sickness , when he saith , my bones are vexed , and my soul is also sore vexed . the Greek word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} implieth both aegrotari , and imbecillem esse , to be sick , and to be weak , and therefore the noun of this verb is elsewhere rendered infirmity : this inconvenience likewise David found by his disease , when he said , i am feeble , and sore broken ; weakness being the inseparable concomitant of sickness . 

meditations , which ( i would to God ) were more deeply imprinted on the minds of men , those especially , who put off their repentance , and the working out of their salvation till a sick bed , as if when they are in pain , they could repent with the more ease , or when they are weakest , they were strong enough for this work : alas , do you not know how unfit such a time is for any , but much more a religious employment ? This no doubt is one reason why saint James , who in other afflictions adviseth men to pray for themselves , in sickness counselleth them to call for the elders of the church to pray over them , because then for the most part they are unable to pray themselves : in this respect it was ( As i have read ) the saying of a virtuous gentlewoman upon her sick bed , let none defer their preparation nor their prayers unto the bed of their sickness , for then the mind is too much troubled with grief of body to be employed , as they ought , in spiritual exercise . Tell me , whoever thou art that delayest till this time , how knowest thou , but such a sickness May seize upon thee as in a moment , May take away thy life ? or if not , bereave thee of thy senses ? or it May be so painful , that it is all thou canst do to wrestle with the pain ; nay , let me tell thee , for the most part such procrastinators , when that time cometh ▪ either repent not at all in their sickness , or it proveth but a sickly repentance . Oh then ( my brethren ! ) be wise in time , do not lay the greatest load on the feeblest horse , put not the weakest servant to the hardest labour , put not off the main business of thy soul's health to the doleful time of thy body's sickness . 

You have heard what sickness doth , or rather undoeth ; it would not be amiss to inquire whence it came , and how it was brought into the world . Indeed ( As Christ saith in another case ) it was not so from the beginning . Man in innocency was create with a body of so equal and lasting a temperature , that ( Had he not sinned ) it had neither been taken down by death , nor put out of frame by sickness . Sin it is which is fons mali , morbi , mortis , hath brought in evil instead of good , death of life , and sickness of health . the physician being asked the cause of diseases , answereth , and most truly , mali humores , evil humours in the body . but the divine resolveth it more fully , mali mores , ill manners in the life . Philosophy teacheth , and experience confirmeth it , that passiones animae sequuntur temperamentum corporis , the minds passions much follow the body's temper . Divinity preacheth no less truly , that the disorder of the body followeth upon the distemper of the mind ; man's soul was first sick of sin , and so the body becometh infected with sickness for sin . it was the first sin of Adam which brought forth , and it is our own actual sins that nourish this degenerate brat , wherewith mankind is so miserably infested . 

A meditation , which ( If well pondered ) would learn us to bear sickness whensoever it cometh upon us without murmuring , and yet with mourning . 

1.  Why shouldst thou repine at God when any disease seizeth one thee ? True , he is the efficient , but thou art the meritorious cause ; he inflicteth , but it is sin that deserveth ; he punisheth , but it is not till thou hast provoked him , blame not his justice , but thank thy own wickedness , the moth that frets the garment is bred of it ; the tree giveth life to that worm which killeth it . thy sickness , oh man , is of thyself , and thy own ways and doings are they which procure these things to thee . 

2.  When sickness smiteth thy body , let repentance smite thy thigh ; when the disease rageth in thy members , let thy soul be angry at thy sin , and as thou complainest of the effect , so labour to be sensible of the cause : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} saith the divine excellently , sickness is an wholesome discipline , it is so when it teacheth us to know our folly . Happy disease which openeth our eyes at once to see , and weep for our sins ; oh my soul , it is sin hath caused thy body to feel sickness , let sickness cause thee to feel the weight of sin ; it is wickedness hath brought this weakness , let this weakness bring thee to a sight and sense of thy wickedness , why shouldst thou hold that sword in thy hand , which hath so sorely wounded it ? or hug that serpent in thy bosom , which hath so painfully stung thee ? rather since the fruit is so bitter , pluck up the root , and let not sin reign any longer in thy mortal body , seeing it hath made thy body so mortal . and so much for the quality of the danger : i pass on to the extremity of the measure , nigh unto death . 



it is that , which in some sense is true of every man alive , this world is a region of ghosts , dying men , yea , young men in the prime of their days , strong men in the full vigour of their age , are nigh to death , because death May then be near to them . The philosopher being asked what he thought of life , turned him round and vanished out of sight , thereby intimating , how easily and speedily life May be taken away : and some of them have no less truly than aptly represented the distance between life and death by oculus , apertus and clausus , an eye open and shut , which is done in a moment . but though this in some respect be verified of all men , yet it is more especially true of two sorts of persons , to wit , old men , and sick men , since old age is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} a natural disease , and a disease is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} an accidental old age , both must needs tend and hasten to death . 

As for old men , they are so nigh to death , that the proverb saith , they have one foot in the grave , young men May die soon , but they cannot live long ; the dimness of light in their eyes , and vapours that sometimes are drawn up into their brains , argue the sun of their life to be setting , the hoary frost , or rather white snow upon their heads , proclaims that the winter of their deaths is approaching . The more strange it is to see them doting on , who are going out of the world , and as if they could set up under ground , their minds are most earthly whilst their bodies are ready to drop into the earth : the more sad it is to think how both unwilling and unfit they are to die , who yet are so unlikely to live ; and as if with the eagle they could renew their youth , they flatter themselves in hope of life , when yet they are as it were within sight of death ; how short are such men of that heathen Seneca , who said of himself , ante senectutem curavi bene vivere , in senect ute bene mori , my care in youth was to live , but in old age to die well , than no doubt perceiving his death to be at hand . 

As old men , be they never so well , so sick men , by they never so young , are nigh to death ; what Anacharsis said of seamen , that he knew not whether to reckon them among the living or the dead , is no less true of sick men , who indeed are not dead , because they breath , and yet not living because not lusty ; every man carrieth death in his bosom , but the sick man at his back , or rather in his arms before his face . 

In sum there is a threefold propinquity of death , possible , probable , certain ; it is possible the healthiest , strongest , and youngest May die quickly ; it is certain old men ( Though they outlive far younger ) cannot live long ; and it is probable that the sick man's death is at hand . 

But yet this in the proper sense is not true of all sicknesses , that distinction of sin cannot hold in divinity , according to the popish acception , that some are venial , others mortal , since s. Paul saith indefinitely , and meaneth it universally , that death is the wages of sin , but analogically it is true in physic of diseases ; some are only painful , others mortal , the gout in the toe , a pain in the teeth , a prick in the finger ; these , though they cause pain , yet are not in their own nature deadly , nor is the patient accounted the neere• death for them . 

besides , of mortal diseases there is a difference , some are a long time untwisting , others in a short time cut asunder the thread of life : thus the dropsy is a great while in drowning , the palsy in shaking down , and the consumption in drying up the body , whilst the fever in a few days burneth , and an apoplexy , or aposteme in a few hours suffocate it . 

And yet once more in violent diseases , there is a difference , we do not say of every man whom a fever smiteth , that he is presently nigh to death ; whilst the body is vigorous , the physic prosperous , we account the patient hopeful ; but those , in whom the virulency of the disease so far prevaileth , as that both the strength of nature , & skill of art seem unable to grapple with it , are only and justly looked upon as nigh to death . 

Such , no doubt , was Epaphroditus his case , for though some conceive this danger Might arise from stripes and scourges , which Nero should command to be inflicted on him at Rome , yet it is more rationally and generally concluded , that some violent sickness , by reason of a long journey , had seized upon him ; and though it is likely this good man was not negligent ( According as ability and opportunity was afforded ) to use means , yet the disease did so increase , that as to life his condition was desperate , and therefore s. Paul saith of him he was nigh unto death . 

to this low and weak estate is God pleased many times to bring men among others , chiefly for a double end , and that he May mind them of their dissolution , and quicken them in their devotion . 

Of all things we are very prone to forget our latter end , and therefore God by sickness puts us in mind of it , we are apt to put death far from us , and therefore by some grievous disease God bringeth us nigh to death ; a presumption , we shall not die yet , maketh us not think of dying at all , and whilst marrow is in our bones , colour in our faces , appetite in our stomachs , strength in our joints , health in our bodies , we easily persuade ourselves we shall not die yet ; no marvel , if to fix our eyes upon the grave , God chasten us with pain upon our bed , so that our life abhorreth bread , our flesh consumeth away , and our soul draweth near to the grave . it was the confession of Alexander , when let blood with an arrow : all men call me Jupiter's son , but this wound proclaims me a mortal man : and yet more divine was that of Antigonus , who acknowledged his disease to be sent as a monitor , lest otherwise he Might have grown insolent through the forgetfulness of mortality . Sicknesses especially , when desperate , are warning pieces to tell us the murdering piece of death is ready to destroy , every ache tolls the bell , but these , as it were , dig the grave , and cry dust to dust ; and good reason it is , that when we cast the thought of death behind our backs , death itself should by these diseases look us in the face , and as it were , pluck us by the throat . 

2.  In health we are no less apt to forget God than our selves , but sickness mindeth us of him , in prosperity perhaps we mumble over a pater noster , but adversity teacheth us to cry abba father : Lord , saith the prophet , in trouble have they visited thee , they who before were strangers , now would be familiar with God , and give him a visit ; they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them , it May be before they did say a prayer , but now they pour out a prayer . 

Though man by the formation of his body be made with an erect countenance , yet he seldom looks up to heaven till some disease hath laid him upon his back ; nor yet many times will a slight sickness prevail : God promiseth himself concerning his persons , in their affliction they will seek me early , but for the most part it proveth otherwise ; ubi desinit medicus , ibi incipit theologus , the divine's work begins not with many till the physician 's is done , it is late enough not to seek God till affliction comes , and yet we seek God not early , but late in affliction . the woman in the gospel sick of a bloody issue , goeth not to Christ till she had spent all ( And that to no purpose ) upon physicians , the prodigal thinketh not of going home to his father , till he is brought so low , that he would fain be fed with husks , but cannot get them : nor do many lift up their eyes or hands to heaven , till they are scarce able to lift up either . indeed necessity is an excellent Mistress , especially of devotion : most men will not pray till they must , it is misery , which like Jonah's fish , puts them upon humble supplication , who never thought of God under the gourd of prosperity . in which respect , that Latin proverb was not taken up without just cause , qui nescit orare , discat navigare ; he that knoweth not how to pray , let him turn mariner : and no doubt those violent storms , which make the seas to roar , will teach him to pray . when those young Persian gallants being beaten and pursued by their enemies , came to the river Strymon , which was so frozen that their boats could not launch , and yet it began to thaw , so that they feared the ice would not bear them , then ( Though the day before they reviled both god and his providence ) most timorously they fall upon their faces , and ardently beg of God that the river Might bear them over from their enemy's pursuit . The smart lasues of God's rod drive them home , and draw them near to him , who before were far from him . 

The Greeks' aptly express the declining estate of a kingdom by {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} falling upon the knee , and its ruined estate by {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} falling upon the mouth ; expressions , which though they principally refer to the condition , yet withal intimate the disposition of men in an afflicted condition , they whose knees in health were like elephants , without joints , could not , or rather would not bend , in sickness fall upon their knees , nay , when nigh to death , fall upon their mouths in humble adoration and earnest invocation upon God . and for these causes , that men May both look forward to their end , and upward to their God ; he is pleased to bring them downward , almost to the gates of death , and chambers of the grave . 

To end this , let us all make account of , and prepare for straits . in health , expect sickness , in sickness look for death , or to be brought nigh to it . Diseases May come unsent for , let them not come unlooked for ; if they happen not , thou art not the worse , and it is labour well lost ; if they do , thou art the better fitted , and it is time well spent . do not flatter thyself in health , as if the mountain of thy body were so strong that it could not be moved : alas , one blast from heaven cannot only move , but remove , shake , but overturn it , rather even then when thou art fed with fat pastures , clear waters , thy table spread , thy cup full , thy body hail , often think of walking through the valley of the shadow of death : happy is that man , whom when sickness arresteth , and death approacheth to , can say , and say it truly , this is no more than what i have looked and provided for all my days . and so much be spoken of the second particular , pass we now to the third . 

3.  eminency of the person , whom this extreme disease befell in the relative he.  if you would know who this he was , be pleased to cast your eyes on the 25. verse of the chapter , where you find his name to be Epaphroditus , one that was not only a good man , but a man of God , not only a servant , but a minister of Christ , and one so eminent , as that saint Paul dignifies him with the titles of his brother , and companion , and fellow-soldier ; and yet of him it is here said that he was nigh unto death . 

saints as well as sinners , ministers as well as the persons , are liable to desperate diseases . in respect of temporal evils they have no more privilege than others : and no wonder , since 

1.  That which is the cause both of sickness and death , remaineth in them , to wit , sin : indeed the power of sin is weakened , therefore they cannot be hurt of the second death , but the being of it remaineth , and that necessitateth the first : they are so freed from the guilt of it , that they shall not taste the torments of hell , but yet they May drink deep of the miseries of this life : sin will not leave the best man till it hath brought him to his grave , well May it bring him to his sick bed . 

2.  In respect of their bodily constitution , they are earthly houses , that will moulder away , till at last they fall : earthen vessels subject to flaws and cracks , till at length they break . the saints are the sons of God by grace , but still the sons of Adam by nature , the ministers are angels in respect of their office , but still they are men in regard of their persons , and being of the same mould , and subject to the same dangers with others . 

3.  More specially , the very calling and employment of ministers is such , as exhausteth their spirits , weakeneth their bodies , and accelerateth both diseases and death : our apostle saith of epaphrodit ▪ that for the work of Christ he was nigh to death ; v. 30. the work he there meaneth is most probably conceived to be the travelling of this good man to Rome , with supplies for his wants , ( To relieve a Christian , especially a messenger of Christ , is the work of Christ ) but it is no less true of the work of Christ , which is p•culiarly the ministers , since the pains they take in preaching , oft times Christ brings them nigh to death . it was said of Archimedes , studiis quibus obtinuit famam amisit vitam , the studies which got him credit lost his life ; and it May be said of many ministers , the fastings , watchings , labours preachings , by which they profit the people's souls , hurt their bodies . thus like the candle they waste themselves that they Might enlighthen , yea , like the salt they dissolve themselves that they May season others . 

4.  Finally , God hath choice and singular ends at which he aimeth , when he bringeth his own servants or ministers into such desperate sicknesses , and that both , in regard of sin and grace . 

1.  In regard of their sins , that they May be either purged or prevented , by which means their sickness becomes their physic , and the malady itself a spiritual remedy . it May be they have fallen into some gross sin , and therefore they fall into some grievous sickness : so was it with those unworthy communicants , concerning whom saint Paul saith , for which cause many of them were weak , many sick , and some slept . it May be God seeth them prone to commit some heinous fault which he restraineth them from by some dolorous sickness , as s. Paul had a prick in his flesh that he Might not be puffed up in his mind : so God sometimes wounds his servants bodies , as knowing , that otherwise they would have wounded their consciences . 

2.  In respect of their graces , that the truth of them May be tried , the acts of them renewed , and the strength of them increased . God hath many ways to try men , among which sickness , especially if dangerous , is a sor•tryall , and therefore when the devil , by God's leave had tried Job in the loss of his cattle , servants , and children , he obtaineth licence to inflict sores upon his body , making this his last ( As accounting it his fiercest ) onset , indeed then is the trial of a man's faith , when God seemeth as if he would slay him , of his hope when all things are desperate , of his love when God frowneth upon , nay beateth him , of his patience when the pain is sharp , of his courage when the sorrows of death compass him , of his perseverance , when he holds fast his integrity to the death . 

To close up this , let it be a lesson of comfort , of charity , and of diligence . 

1.  Of comfort , when any sickness seizeth on thee , remember whose lot it hath been as well as thine , and be not discouraged . When Christ would encourage his disciple against sufferings , he useth this argument , for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you : mat. 5.11 . it is that meditation which May revive us when we are in pain and misery , so it fared with others of God's faithful ones before me . that argument of Eliah indeed was somewhat passionate , 1 king. •9 . 4 . it is enough now , oh Lord , take away my life , for i am not better than my fathers ; but it is a pious reasoning for every Christian to say , i am content Lord , if thou take away my health , exercise me with diseases , i am not better than Job , David , Hezekiah , Epaphroditus , and others of thy faithful servants and ministers ; who am i , that i should think much to pledge those holy men of God , though in a bitter cup ? 

2.  Of charity , and that both to thy self and others . 

1.  condemn not thy self as if God hated thee , because he corrects thee , or as if he were more angry with thee than others , because he chastiseth thee more severely than them . indeed it is good in a time of sickness to reflect upon thy self , examine thy ways , and if conscience accuse of some great misdemeanour , to humble thyself , and acknowledge thy disease the just reward of thy offence , but otherwise , do not conclude thy own guilt or God's hatred merely from the premises of sickness , though virulent . 

2.  censure not others as if they were therefore the worst of sinners , because in their bodies the greatest sufferers . This is ( indeed ) that hard measure which God's persons and ministers often meet with : when the barbarians saw a viper upon Paul's hand , they presently condemned him as a murderer ; and David complaineth of his enemies , that when he was sick , they spoke mischievous things against him : nay Job's friends ( Though good men ) were deceived with this fallacy , and accuse Job of hypocrisy because of his calamity . and thus it is still , if a zealous Christian , or faithful minister be visited with a doleful sickness , his religion must be no better than dissimulation , and his doctrine heresy : but surely it is either ignorance , or malice , or both , that filleth men's mouths with such censures . 

It is true , there never was sickness without sin , but the sickness is not always proportioned to the sin : these things come alike to all , was the wise man's observation , nor doth any sickness befall any man which May not befall the best man . I know some assert a saint to be plague-free , grounding it upon the promise in the psalm , that no plague shall come nigh his dwelling : but you must know , this is only a temporal promise , and therefore ( As indeed all such ) hath a double condition annexed unto it . The one ex parte personae , on the saints part , which is to make the Lord , even the most high , his habitation ; if then good men , in pestilential times , through a distrustful fear , make the creatures their refuge , no marvel if the plague infect them and their dwellings . the other ex parte rei , in regard of the thing itself , which is only assured so far as it May make for God's glory and his people's benefit . we read in the former part of the tenth verse there shall no evil befall him , whereby is intimated that the plague shall not then come nigh to , when it is evil for a good man , but if at any time God see it good , either for the manifestation of his own glory ( To wit , of his justice in so severely punishing his own , of his power and mercy in delivering from so deadly a disease ) or for the spiritual advantage of his persons ( In humbling them for some scandalous sin by so smart a chastisement , in exercising the strength of their patience by so sore a trial ) not the holiest person is in such cases exempted from the plague , nor is it improbably conceived that Job's botches , Hezekiah's boils , David's sores were not much different from , if not altogether the same with the plague , who yet all of them were choice and eminent saints . Oh then , let us take heed how we lay the load of heavy censure upon the backs of God's ministers and servants . 

3.  Of diligence , that 

1.  we who are ministers , improve the time of our health in feeding the flocks of Christ , since when sickness cometh , we shall be disenabled from our employments : nay perhaps we that have taught others , May then have need to learn ourselves . 

you who are the persons , get all the good you can from us , whilst we are in a capacity of doing good to you , ere long the candle of our lives May burn dim by reason of some sickness , yea , be blown out by death , and then we can no longer give light unto you . Oh therefore walk in the light while you have it , be willing to learn while we are able to teach , account our labours precious , and let them be profitable to you , whilst God maketh us able to bestow them among you , which we shall not be , when that befalls us which did Epaphroditus in the text , to be sick nigh unto death : and so i have given a dispatch to the first general , namely the distress : i now proceed to 

2.  The deliverance , and therein the 

1.  efficiency of the author , God . indeed both life and death , health and sickness , are in God's hand : that of the poet , vna cademque manus vulnus opemque tulit , 

May in this respect be fitly made use of ; the same hand of divine providence is that which maketh and closeth the wound : he killeth , and maketh alive , he bringeth down to the grave , and bringeth up , so singeth Hannah . I form light , and create darkness , i make peace , and create evil , i the Lord do all these things , is God's own saying by the prophet . thy head cannot ache without his leave , nor leave aching without his help ; but though both are from him , yet with some difference . of sickness , he is only the efficient , sin is the meritorious cause . Of health he is so the efficient , as that his mercy is the impulsive cause , for which reason perhaps it is here said , God had mercy ; that which moveth him is his pity , and that which helpeth us is his power . 

true it is , God is for the most part pleased to make use of means in effecting health , but this ariseth from the greatness of his goodness , not any defect in his almightiness , as Aquinas pithily . 

That he needeth not means , appeareth in as much as he sometimes worketh without any . Such were the cures Christ wrought upon Peter's wives mother , the centurion's servant , and the impotent cripple , whom his word only restored to health . Nay many times the means he useth are improbable , yea , of their own nature apt to produce a contrary effect . What virtue could there be in the waters of Jordan to cleanse Naaman's leprosy ? or in the lump of figs to heal Hezekiah's sores ? yea , the spita and clay which Christ made use of , were more likely to put out a seeing , than recover a blind man's eyes . 

he standeth not in need of means ; but the most probable means stand in need of him . it is to put honour on the creature that God vouchsafeth to use it as an instrument ▪ and when the creature becometh an instrument of any good , it is only as in the hand of God , working with , and by it . For , tell me , when any are recovered , who is it that put the medicinal quality into the drugs which heal them , but the god of nature ? who giveth that wit and skill to man which findeth out their qualities , and accordingly maketh use of them , but the god of knowledge ? finally , who is it that commands a blessing upon , and giveth success to the means , but the god of power ? Man liveth not by bread only , nor is the patient cured by physic only , or chiefly , it is a word proceeding from the mouth of God that maketh the one effectual for continuation , and the other for restauration of health . 

To apply this in a threefold admonition : 

1.  Art thou wicked ? as thou desirest health to be preserved , or renewed , make thy peace with God by repentance : it is the ground upon which the Jewish converts mutually exhort each other to this duty , come let us return unto the Lord , for he hath torn , and he will heal us , he hath smitten , and he will bind us up , though it be that indeed , which God out of his philanthropy sometimes vouchsafeth , yet it is a fond presumption for any to expect that he should be a physician to them who are enemies to him . me thinks an ungodly wretch should imagine that God speaketh to him in the words of the prophet , when thou criest let thy companions deliver thee ; or , as he saith to the children of Israel , when they committed idolatry , go and cry unto the gods which you have chosen , the lusts which you have served , let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation . had that accusation of Rabshakeh been true , his argumentation was solid , when he sent that message to Hezekiah , but if thou say to me , we trust in the Lord our God , is it not he , whose high places , and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away ? and surely the conscience of a wicked man ( If not seared ) cannot but check him in the like expressions , wilt thou say i trust in God for health , or recovery ? Is it not he whose name thou hast blasphemed , patience thou hast abused , and worship thou hast neglected ? be wise therefore , oh ye sinners , and instructed ye wicked of the earth ! make him your friend who must be your refuge , offer the sacrifice of righteousness , and then , not till then , put your trust in the Lord . your life , your health is in his hands ; look that your doings be right , and then your persons shall be precious in his eyes . 

2.  Art thou sick ? learn whom to invocate , and on whom to depend for health , upon no other than God . 

Far be it from any of us in sickness ( With Saul in danger ) to run to the pythomise , and seek help of the devil . Satan's best cures are deadly wounds ; it is far better to continue sick , then by such means to get health . since whilst thy mortal body is for a time restored , thy immortal soul is desperately endangered . 

Nor yet let us with the Papists seek to any saints as mediators with God for our recovery . whilst they have their several saints for several diseases ; Sebastian for the plague , Anthony for the gangreen , Patronilla for agues , and Benedict for the stone : let us have recourse to the one God in all diseases . whilst they think it too great sauciness to be their own spokesmen to God ; and therefore go to saint somebody to prefer their petitions for them : let us hold it the best manners to go our selves of our own errands to God , not doubting but that he , who bids us come , will bid us welcome . 

finally , let us not •read in Asa's footsteps , who sought not to the Lord , but to the physicians ; nor yet let us tread antipodes to him in seeking to the Lord , and not to the physicians , whilst he affoards them : but as Gideon commanded his soldiers to cry , the sword of the Lord , and of Gideon ; so let us ever say , the blessing of the Lord , and the skill of the physician . indeed where opportunity is vouchsafed , those two must not be severed . God will not usually help without means , and therefore they must be used ; the means cannot possibly help with•ut God ; and therefore in the use of them his blessing must be implored . they are equally bad to neglect and to rest on second causes , to expect succour either from them originally , or without them instrumentally , to rely on God without means , or trust to means without God . surely , what the King said to the woman , if the Lord do not help thee , whence shall i help thee ? that all creatures say to us in any distress , if the Lord help not , whence shall we ? except the Lord build the house , they labour in vain that build it , except the Lord keep the city , the watchman watcheth but in vain , saith the psalmist . indeed he doth not say quia , because the Lord builds the house , but visi , as excluding •umane diligence : but except the Lord build , thereby including divine providence : nor doth he only say , nisi d•minus consenserit , adjuverit , but nisi aedificaverit , custodicrit , unless the Lord consent , ( A word which only implieth his will ) or unless the Lord help , which extendeth to any kind of assistance ( The meanest thing that concurreth to any work , being causa adjuvans , an auxiliary cause ) but unless the Lord build and keep , which imply the concurrence of his power , as well as will , and that as the principal agent in the building and keeping : the same assertion is no less true in this pres•nt case , except the Lord heal the patient , the physician admnistreth but in vain . Heal thyself , is only true of that physician , to whom it was spoken : no other physician can of himself either heal himself or others . Tangit te rex , sanat te deus , was no less truly than humbly spoken when the royal touch was given , the King toucheth thee , God cureth thee . it is so here , the physician prescribes the medicine , but God by that commands health . oh therefore that physicians in administering , patients in receiving , would only depend upon , and sue for divine benediction , when the one writes a recipe with his pen , let him pray with his heart ; when the other receiveth the potion into his stomach , let him lift up his eyes to God , who saith of himself , i am the Lord that healeth thee . 

3.  Art thou recovered ? know whom to praise , and to whom to ascribe the cure : could the ingredients of thy medicine speak , each would say of health , as the depths and the seas , of wisdom , it is not in me : it is , i am sure , the voice of all pious physicians , non nobis , not to us ( oh man ) not to us , but to God be the praise of thy recovery . and therefore whilst the atheist looketh no further than nature and art , let the Christian look higher at God and his blessing : and as he must not forget that respect which is due to the physician , as the instrument , so let the chiefest honour be given to God as being the principal efficient . The truth is , for the most part , such is our foolishness , that whilst we fix our eyes upon the blessings we receive , we turn our backs upon the god that bestoweth them , and we are more ready to father them upon any other than him , who is the true donor of them . Oh let not only gratitude but justice , teach us to give God his due , when we gather the fruit let us cast down our eyes on the root from which they sprout , when we feed upon the acorns , let us lift them up to the tree from whence they fall , and being refreshed by the flowing stream , let us reflect upon the springing fountain . Oh my God , it is in thee that i live , let me live to thee ; from thee i have received health , to thee i return praise ; i have the comfort , take thou the glory of thy great mercy . and so i pass forward to the 

2.  excellency of the benefit , how expressed , in those words , had mercy on him . 

In mercy there are two things considerable , affectus , and effectus , the passion , and the action , the inward pity , and the owtward bounty , that is in the heart , this in the hand ; that the bowels of mercy , this the works of mercy ; that called by the Greeks' {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and this {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and both these , though not in the same sense , are attributed to God , and here to be understood . 

1.  In mercy there is a laying of another's misery to heart , the gre•ke word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} is derived from the Hebrew {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} which signifieth ejulare , plangere , to bewail and lament : a condolency with our brother's calamity , being a choice ingredient of mercy . this is that which the holy ghost asserteth of God in scripture , where it is said , in all their afflictions he was afflicted : and again , my bowels are troubled : and again , like as a father pittyeth his children , so the Lord pit•yeth them that fear him : but withal , we must know , that in these phrases the most high is pleased to condescend , and speaking to men , to speak of himself , as if he were a man . there is not then any sorrow or compassion in him who is impassible , but by this is represented his good will towards his persons , whereby he is propense to succour them . And because the afflicted person finds oft times much ease and solace in that sympathy , which another expresseth towards him , that we May know the like solace is to be found in God , this compassion is attributed to God ; and indeed is , though not formally , yet aequivalently , nay eminently verified of him . To bring this home , in that God is said to have mercy on dying Epaphroditus , it implieth thus much , that God beholding and taking notice of , was as it were affected with his imminent danger , having after a sort a friendly pity , and motherly yearning , or rather a fatherly goodwill towards him . but this is not all that mercy includeth , and therefore know , 

2.  In mercy there is an endeavour to relieve him whose misery it condoleth , as she suffereth with , so she doth for , and ( According to her ability ) either helpeth him to bear the burden by putting under her shoulder , or wholly •aseth him of it by removing it from his shoulder . hence the definition of mercy is well given to be such a compassion of another's misery , as puts upon a cheerful employing our power for the sustaining him under , and delivering him •ut of it . this is that which in a proper and genuine sense agreeth to God , whose property is to deliver his out of their afflictions , and preserve them from destruction : and this no doubt , is that which our apostle here especially intends in this expression , God had mercy on him , that is , he did remove his misery , and prevent his death by curing him of that sickness which had brought him nigh to it . 

let the same mind be in us that is in God : when our brethren are under sickness , or any other distress , to have mercy on them . it was our blessed saviour's reasoning with the Ph•riseeses , though not altogether to the same purpose , which of you shall have an ass or an ox fall into the pit , and will not straightway pull him out ? surely one man is of more worth than many asses ; and shall we not , in what we May , succour him when fallen into some grievous sickness ? 

That good Samaritan in the type is no other than Christ in the truth , who pitied and healed man when dangerously wounded by sin , and as it was the design of his death to cure mankind of his spiritual sickness , so his practice in the course of his life to go about doing good and healing . if we call ourselves Christians , whom should we imitate but Christ , by performing all offices of love to the sick ▪ which lie within our sphere ? and if we have no o•le but that of compassion , no wine but tears and prayers , let them be poured into the wounds and diseases of thy neighbour ; so shall we be disciple of Christ . but the text leads us yet one step higher from Christ , as man , and as god-man , to Christ as God , acquainting us with God's mercy to a sick man : and what more befitting man then to imitate God by practising this godlike work of mercy . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a merciful man is great and honourable , and that for this reason chiefly , because he is like to God , in which respect Gregory Nyssen , and Nazianzen call such a man a God , as having stamped upon him the character of a deity . Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children , is saint Paul's counsel in general , be you merciful , as your father also is merciful , so our blessed saviour adviseth in special : and yet more particularly , as God had mercy on sick Epaphroditus , so let us on our sick neighbour , by visiting him , ( If we can by our skill or counsel do him good ) however by compassionating him , and interceding with God in his behalf . 

And because this duty is that which ( Though so honourable ) we are averse from ; give me leave to carry it a little further , & let you see it is profitable , as well as honourable . Not only that you May follow God in mercy , but that you May upon the like occasion obtain mercy from God , show mercy to ot•erss . It is a sweet promise to feed on in a time of sickness . the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing , thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness . that bed must needs be easy which God maketh , nor can he faint , whom God strengtheneth , but to whom is it made ? him and none but him who considereth the poor , so our translation , b•t the Hebrew word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} May as well be rendered sick , one that is weakened by a disease : he who considereth others in their sickness , shall be supported by God in his . which of us , beloved , doth not desire that God May show that mercy to us in our distress , which he did here to Epaphroditus ? but how can we except God should grant that to us , which we deny to others ? Blessed are the merciful , saith Christ , for they shall obtain mercy : be then oh man to thyself , a pattern of mercy , and show with that speed , and in that degree , mercy to thy sick , weak , languishing neighbour , which thou wouldst have God vouchsafe to thee in the like condition . But a little more to unbowell this clause . 

The mercy here intended ( As you have already heard ) was the prolongation of life , and restauration of health to Epaphroditus : and here a double question falls in to be resolved , How this can be called a mercy ? and 
If a mercy in itself , yet how a mercy to him ? 




qu. 1.  It is a plausible objection which is made , that life prolonged is no mercy , because it is a calamitous continuance in an evil world : what is this world but a coffer of sorrows , labyrinth of troubles , school of vanity , market of fraud , theatre of tragedies , flood of tears , and map of ruins ? and can it be a favour for a man to continue long in a place of miseries ? the earth we tread on , the air we breath in , are as a sea , wherein winds and storms are ever blowing ; and can it be a favour to be still tossed up and down upon a blustering tempestuous sea ? Finally , this life is not a life but a calamity , yea , rather a death than a life , because so miserable : to live long is to be long tormented , and can this be a mercy ? 

answ. to all this it is briefly , but fully answered . That though there be many evils in the world , yet the world is not evil , nor is it evil to abide in the world . these miseries are only accidental to life , and so hinder not , but that preservation from death is a mercy . and therefore the Greek fathers upon this scripture do hence most rationally confute the manichees , who affirm the world in its own nature to be bad , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} so St. Chrysostom , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . So Theophilact in particular . What sayest thou to this , oh heretical manich•e ? if the world be wicked , and the life which we now live in it , how doth the apostle call this a mercy of God , that he lengthened Epaphroditus his days ? The other life is better than this , surely than this must be good , an immature death is threatened , and inflicted as a judgement , surely than the continuance of life must be a mercy , as those forementioned fathers excellently argue , 

life is a mercy , and yet health is a greater mercy . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} was written upon the porch of Apollo's temple , health is the Princess of earthly blessings : and Plato tells us that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} was sung by every one to his harp at the schools , and at festivals . Beauty , riches , health , were the three things Pythagoras said should chiefly be implored of the gods ; but among them health the chief : indeed , it is that which maketh life itself to be a mercy , since non est vivere sed valere vita , to live is not so much to breath , as to be well . 

mercies than they are ( especially ) when conjoined , and being so in their own nature , ought so to be esteemed of by us : in which respect we ought to pray and give thanks for them as blessings . it is no less a fault to undervalue , then to overprize our lives and health : this latter ( I confess ) is the more common , but the former is no less culpable : we must not be so much in love with life as to dote upon it , because it is short , yet we May so far love , as to desire , and endeavour that it May , yea , with the apostle here , account it a mercy , when it is prolonged . 

i end this , if deliverance from death be a mercy , how great a mercy is deliverance from hell ? if it be a blessing to have the danger of a mortal disease prevented , oh what is it to have the guilt of our deadly sins pardoned ? finally , if the health of the body be a favour , how choice a benefit is the soul's health ? surely by how much hell is worse than death , sin then sickness , yea , by how much the soul is better than the body , by so much is the one to be preferred before the other . Oh my soul , thou wast sick , desperately sick of sin , so sick that thou wast not only nigh to death , but dead in sins , and trespasses ; but God had mercy on thee , he hath sent his son to heal , to revive thee , by being himself wounded , nay , slain : and his spirit to cure , to quicken thee by killing thy sin , and renewing thy nature . Thou art indebted to thy God for temporal , much more for spiritual : bless the Lord , oh my soul , for thy life of nature , health of thy body ; but let all that is within thee praise his holy name for thy life of grace , and eternal salvation . 

qu. 2.  But it is further enquired , though this recovery were a mercy in it self , yet how could it be so to Epaphroditus a godly man ? Had it been deliverance by death , this were a mercy indeed ; but deliverance from death seemeth rather an injury than a courtesy , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , we May easily refel the heretic , but how shall we answer the Christians who desiring to be dissolved knoweth not how to esteem the deferring his dissoluttion a mercy ? had Epaphroditus been a wicked man , it had been a great mercy to spare him , that he Might make his peace with God by the practice of faith and repentance ; but to him , whose peace was already made , what advantage could the prolonging of his life afford ? death itself to a good man is a deliverance , a total , final deliverance from all sorrow and misery for ever : and can that be a deliverance , which keepeth off our deliverance ? per Augusta pervenitur ad augusta , this red sea leads to Canaan ; through the valley of death we pass to the mount of glory : and can that be a mercy which retardeth our felicity ? is it a courtesy for a man to be detained from his wages , and held to labour ? to be hindered from rest , and called to work ? to be withheld from his country , and wander in a wilderness ? finally , to be kept out of a palace , and confined to a prison ? and yet , all this is true of a godly man , who when nigh to death , is called back again to live longer in this world . 

answ. to answer this , though upon those forementioned considerations , it cannot be denied but that death is a mercy to a saint ; yet those hinder not , but that in other respects the continuance of life is a mercy , even to a godly man . as for that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which the Greek fathers speak of , as if saint Paul's language were more according to custom than truth , and that when he calls recovery a mercy , he rather speaketh as men do account , than as it is indeed , it seems to me somewhat harsh , that to {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the opportunity of gaining more souls to God , which this preservation afforded him , is a far more rational solution . upon this account it was saint Paul looked upon the prolongation of his own life as needful : so he expresseth it in the former chapter . And here , for the same reason , he calleth the restauration of Epaphroditus to health a mercy . to this purpose saint Hieromes' note upon the text is very apposite , misertus est ejus ut majorem docendo colligat fructum , God had mercy on him , that he , being a minister , Might by the preaching of the gospel , gather in more souls , and do more good . 

obj. but you will say , this seems not to be a full answer : indeed , had the apostle said , but God had mercy on you , namely the Philippians , this would be very suitable ; the recovery of a faithful minister is , no doubt , a mercy to the persons ; but still it remaineth a doubt , how the apostle could say , as here he doth , God had mercy on him , to wit , Epaphroditus . 

repl. to which i reply , that the opportunity of this service was not only a benefit to the church , but a mercy to him , in as much as by this means . 

1.  He became a greater instrument of God's glory ; it is an high honour , which God vouchsafeth to that man , whom he makes use of to serve and honour him ; and to a pious soul nothing is dearer than God's glory , desiring rather to glorify God than to be glorified with him : this saint Paul declares to his hope , yea , his earnest expectation , that Christ Might be magnified in his body whether by life or death . no wonder then , if considering how much Epaphroditus his life Might conduce to God's glory , he reckoned it as a mercy . besides , 

2.  He increased his own reward ; the longer a good man , especially a good minister liveth , the more sinners he converteth , and they that turn many to righteousness , saith Daniel , shall shine as the stars for ever and ever , nay , every soul that a faithful minister wins to God , is as a new gem added to that crown , which shall one day be put upon his head . 

Thus than the case stands ; Epaphroditus indeed , by dying , had received his reward , but by living he did the more service ; by dying he had obtained glory from God , but by living he brought glory to God : and our blessed saviour saith , it is a more blessed thing to give than to receive ; by dying he had enjoyed his recompense sooner , by living he made it greater , that would have accelerated , but this augmented it , so that even in respect of his own future happiness he was no loser but a gainer by the prolonging of his life , and therefore most justly doth saint Paul say , God had mercy on him . 

briefly , and yet clearly to state the whole matter . 

life and death May be considered and compared four ways , 

1.  In their formal nature , and so death is a privation , life a position of good ; and therefore death evil , and life good , 

2.  In their causes , death is a fruit of sin , life an effect of love ; our wickedness deserved the one , God's goodness conferreth the other ; in which respect , death is threatened as a punishment , life promised as a reward . 

3.  In their natural and proper effects , death bereaveth as well godly , as wicked men of the society of friends , possession of their estates , yea , all the comforts which this world affords , whereas by life we have the fruition of them continue to us , so that in this regard also , life is far better than death , even to a good man . 

4.  Lastly , in their accidental consequents , when a wicked man dyeth there followeth torment , but whilst he liveth there is hope of his repentance , yea , many times it so falls out , some come into the vineyard at the eleventh hour , and to such life is a choice mercy indeed : when a godly man dyeth he is carried into Abraham's bosom , placed in a state of bliss ; but by living longer he honoureth God , edifieth the church , worketh out his salvation ; he gaineth both the more time to prepare himself for , get assurance of , yea , make an addition to his future glory , and therefore in this likewise , and so in all comparisons life hath the pre-eminence , and the continuance of it is justly called by the apostle a mercy . 

to close up this , life continue , health restored , are mercies ; oh let not us by abusing them to sin turn them into judgement , who can believe it ? and yet we May often see it , men change blessings into curses by their iniquities , and as parisiensis excellently expresseth it , ipsa beneficia sibi faciunt poenalia & instrumenta contra seipsos divinae justitiae , they make benefits to become punishments , and the fruits of God's mercy instruments of his justice . the truth is , it was not so much life as the right use , saint Paul conceived Epaphroditus would make of his life , which moved him to call it a mercy , multis periculo & pestilens sanitas fuit qui tutius aegrotassent : indeed these things are good or evil to us according as we employ them . It had been a greater mercy to many impenitent sinners that they had continue sick , or died , then that they were recovered . let us therefore lay out our life , our health , according to our several places , in God's service , so shall it prove glory to God , benefit to others , and a mercy to us : oh my soul , thou hast received , as it were , a new life , improve it in new obedience ; health is restored to thy body , employ it in the service of thy god : why should thy honey be turned into gall , thy shield into a sword , thy delicates into poison ? Oh let thy life be expended by thee , as it was intended by God ; so shalt thou have cause to take up the apostles language ; God had mercy on me . and thus much shall suffice for the second particular , i hasten to the 

3.  opportunity of the time , which is the last branch employed in the ex•eptive but . and a comfortable but it is ; indeed , the sickness , like a flood was carrying him away , God puts in a but and stops its current ; Epaphroditus was falling into the pit , but ▪ God reacheth forth an hand to uphold him . God doth not so preserve him that the sickness should not come , nay , when it is come he doth not hinder it from increasing , but when it is come to the height , than he rebuketh the disease , and saith , hitherto th•u shalt come and no further . all hopes of his recovery in man's eyes are perished , and lo , he is raised by the hand of God . Means either are not afforded , or however unable to help . God becometh his physician , and commandeth the cure . it lets us see thus much , that 

when all hopes are liveless , and helps seem fruitless , then is the season of God's deliverance . that child's condition is very sad , whom the father and mother forsake ; but then the psalmist finds God ready to take him up : and the causal particle in the original is very considerable , not only when , but because he was as a forsaken babe , God vouchsafeth to protect and provide for him ; our extremity being not only the opportunity when , but a motive why God will deliver . It was a doleful complaint which the poor cripple made to Christ , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , i have not a man to put me into the pool , but even that narration is an efficacious prayer ; the absence of man's help , being the season of Christ's presence and succour . saint Paul speaking of our blessed saviour's incarnation , saith , it was when the fullness of time came ; if you will know when that full time was , the evangelist answereth , it was in the days of Herod the King : and if with chrysologus you look into those days , you shall find them days of extreme misery to the jewis• nation , their temple profaned , liberty suppressed , worship abolished , and the whole state full of confusion . in those days was the fullness , because indeed the fitness of time come for him , who was the redeemer , to appear ▪ and the horn of salvation to be raised up . in which respect the Messiah is called by Moses a fit man , or according to the original , a man of opportunity . Thy way oh God is in the sea , and thy paths in the great waters , saith the psalmist . by which expressions no doubt he chiefly intends ( As appears by what followeth ) to note the imperceptible secrecy attending upon many of God's dispensations , so that we can no more discern the reason of them , than we can any impression of a ships passage in the sea , but yet withal it is not an improbable allusion to understand sea and great waters representing doleful and perilous distresses : God's usual course being to manifest himself not in the shallow river of a slight trouble , but the deep sea of some desperate calamity . The disciple enter into a ship , but Christ come not , the sable mantle of the night covers them , and Christ cometh not , the wind bloweth , the storm rageth , the waves arise , and yet Christ appeareth not , but when they have rowed 25. or 30. furlongs , being far from land , and in the depth of danger , than they see Jesus walking on the sea , and drawing nigh to the ship to succour them . To this purpose is s. Cyril's observation upon this story , Christ doth not presently at the beginning of the storm appear to his disciple , but when they had rowed far from land . Christ is not always at hand upon the first onset , but when through prevailing fear , & almost over-whelming danger , our spirits begin to fail , than he breaks forth as it were in the midst of the waves , calming the storm , expelling our fear , and preventing our ruin . 

It is very observable in that hundred and seventh psalm , when the prophet celebrateth God's goodness to several sorts of men in their dangers , that their deliverance was not vouchsafed till their danger appeared remediless : of travellers it is said , they wandered so long in the wilderness , till by reason of hunger and thirst their soul fainted in them , and then , not till then upon their crying the Lord delivered them ; the captives are said to sit in darkness and the shadow of death , by reason of their b•ndss , yea , to fall down and none to help them , and then this want of help obtaineth help , at their earnest cry God saveth them out of their distress ; when sick , men are brought so low that their soul abhorreth all manner of meat , and they draw nigh to the gates of death , than God sendeth his word and healeth them : finally , the seaman's soul is melted because of trouble , they reel to and fro , and stagger like a drunken man ; yea , are at their wit's end , not knowing what course to take , ere God begins to make the storm a calm , and so bringeth them out of their distress . thus God , as he can , so usually he doth help at a pinch , when Jacob wants bread at home , Joseph is heard of abroad : when the prodigal wants abroad , he is minded of going home ; and when we look with David on the right hand , and there is no man , yea , on the left hand , nay round about us , and all refuge faileth us , restat iter coelo , 

we May look up to God , and God is ready to look down from heaven and help us . 

And now if you shall inquire why God is pleased to cull out such a time of succour , when in extreme peril , of curing , when sick nigh to death : i answer , it is both in reference to himself and us . 

In regard of himself , 

1.  partly that it May appear to be his work , those effects in the production of which , God is as it were causa socia a copartner , making use of probable means , too often the instrument is more looked upon than God ▪ but those effects wherein he is causa solitaria , the sole agent ( Effecting them as it were by his own hand ) enforce men to acknowledge it is his doing . quando humana omnem spem negant , tune divina dispensatio clare fulget , in the daytime , when other stars appear not , we know the light which shines is only from the sun ; so when secondary means succeed not to whom but God can the patient ascribe his recovery ? and for this reason , ne opus coelestis dextrae assignaretur virtuti humanae , that the creature May not rob him of his glory , he chooseth that time to deliver when the creature can afford no succour . 

2.  chiefly , that in such works he May appear to be a God , in as much as his almighty power and mercy , hereby become illustrious : it is the prayer of David , show thy mevailous loving kindness ; the Septuagint and vulgar ( Agreeing in this with the Hebrew ) render it , make thy mercy's wonderful , and surely when our misery is most doleful , God's mercy is most wonderful , and therefore , saith saint Gregory , we most admire God's benignity , when we call to mind our calamity : indeed God bringeth us nigh to death , that we May know ourselves how frail and mortal we are , that he May know us , or rather make known to us and others our graces , and when we are nigh to death he hath mercy , that we May know him , not only speculatively , but experimentally , how great and mighty , how good and gracious he is : the truth is , omnipotenti medico , nullum vulnus insanabile , no wound is incurable to this omnipotent physician : and that he May appear to be so , he often deferreth the cure till human skill and help faileth . in such deliverances , the characters of God's almighty goodness are plainly written so , that the blind Egyptians can read them ; and therefore seeing the Israelites escape an imminent danger they acknowledge the Lord fighteth for them . 

In respect of us , that the deliverance May be the more acceptable to us , as well as honourable to him , to every thing , saith Solomon , there is a season , and indeed it is the season that putteth a beauty upon every thing ; in this regard , that of the prophet quam speciosi , how beautiful are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings , is rendered by Tetullian , quam tempestivi , how opportune , that which is seasonable being ever beautiful ; indeed in every opportune mercy there is a double beauty , the one in the thing conferred , the other in the time of conferring it . It is the prayer of the church to God , gird thy sword upon thy thigh with thy glory and thy majesty , which latter words the vulgar Latin reads cum specie tua & pulchritudine tua , that is to say , with thy beauty and thy beauty : and this is then most fully verified , when God girds his sword to defend his church in her lowest misery , and offend his enemies in their highest insolency . It is a sweet and choice expression of the prophet , the Lord will wait that he May be gracious , which though it be chiefly intended of his forbearing judgement , yet it is no less true of his withholding mercy : God therefore oft times delaying , that he May appear the more gracious in bestowing deliverance ; so true is that of the father , deus cum differt non negat sed commendat dona , God in suspending intends not to deny , but only to commend his mercy . Abraham's child was more welcome at seaventy , than if he had been given at thirty , and the same Isaac had not been so precious , had he not been as miraculously restored as given . In fine , the language of a depopulating war is the best rhetoric to extol the blessing of peace , how welcome is a calm to the mariner after a blustering storm ? and health is never so amiable , as when it brings letters of commendation from a long and dangerous sickness . 

to apply this , it is a meditation which should encourage us , to trust in God , even when things are at the worst , and though all other succours fail , not to let go our hold of him : as Appelles striving to paint a drop of foam falling from a horse's mouth , after long study , despairing , let his pencil fall , and that fall did it , quod assequi non potuit casus expressit , effecting by chance what he could not by art , and when both nature and art can go no further , divine providence undertaketh , nay , effecteth the work , and therefore , as the apostle saith of joy , i say of hope , hope always in the Lord , indeed , magnae indolis est sperare semper , it is an argument of an heroic mind , to hope always , and of a pious mind to place that hope on God ; David saith of himself , i have hoped in thy word , the Septuagint read it {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and the vulgar Latin accordingly super-speravi , which as s. Ambrose interpreteth it , is ad sperandum semper crescere & spem spei adjungere , to add hope to hope , & that even than when affliction is added to affliction : excellent to this purpose is that counsel of the Greek father , when external means are least , let thy confidence be greatest , for then God displayeth his power most , not at the beginning , but when things are desperate , for this is the season of divine help . it is our great fault that in dismal dangers we open the eye of sense , and only poor upon the extremity of the trouble , whereas it becometh a saint , even then to open the eye of faith , and lo•ke upon the energy of God's power . 

And to carry it one step further , let even the depth of misery be an encouragement to our confidence , in as much as that is a time of deliverance : when the night is at the darkest , we know daybreak is nearest , the lowness of the ebb argueth the flowing in of the tide to be at hand : so May we conclude divine succour approaching from the premises of a grievous calamity encompassing . we read in the vision of the wheel , which Ezekiel Laid him by the river's brink with no other shelter but an ark of bulrushes : how likely is this helpless babe to be starved with cold , or tumble into the river , or be devoured with a wild beast ? But behold , whilst the child is in this imminent danger , and the parents in perplexing fear , providence so ordereth it , that Pharaoh's daughter becometh as a mother to the child , and the child's mother is appointed to be his nurse , whereby his life is preserved . 

How nigh in all probability was the Israelites destruction , when before them a sea , through which there could be no wading , on either side mountains , over which there was no climbing , behind them a mighty host , with whom there is no contesting , and yet from whom no means left of escaping . But lo , in this depth of misery God hath mercy on them , even to a miracle ; the sea divideth , and at once becometh the Israelites passage , and Egyptians grave . 

How small did the distance seem between Jonah and death , when the merciful mariners were enforced for saving their own lives to cast him into the merciless sea , and yet there he sinketh not , a divine hand as it were holding him by the chin , when in the sea swallowed by a greedy whale , and there he dyeth not ; God would not deliver him from the tempest , he will from the whale ; that which was most likely to consume him becometh the means to preserve him , within three days the whale delivereth him safe , whole , and alive upon dry ground . 

who ever thought to have seen those three worthies alive after they fell down bound into the midst of a fiery burning furnace ? But behold a martyrdom effected without dying , whilst a fourth like the son of God appeareth , at whose command the fire forgetteth to burn , or so much as scorch . 

who did not expect but that Daniel being cast into a den of ravenous lions , should be devoured before the next morning , nay , the next hour ? But see , the lion's mouths are stopped by an angel , and since they cannot feed Daniel , are forced to keep a fast with him . 

Were not Paul and his company in great jeopardy of death , when the thick clouds had for many days obscured the light of sun and stars from them , the violent storms exceedingly tossed the ship , enforced them to cast out the goods , yea , every moment they expect themselves to be made a prey to the roaring waves , all hope that they should be saved being taken away ? but behold , that night an angel of God standeth by Paul , and from God assures him of his and their preservation . 

To come yet nearer to the instance of the text : 

It was no slight sickness afflicted David , when he said , my heart panteth , my strength faileth me , as for the light of mine eyes it is gone from me ; the disease ( It seemeth ) had seized upon all his spirits , his animals in the dimness of his eyes , his natural in the failing of his strength , his vital in the panting of his heart ; and surely then it must needs bring him very nigh to death ; yea , it seemeth David feared it , which made him so earnestly pray against it in another psalm : but when death is near , God is near too , hearing his prayer , and preserving his life . 

It is said of Hezekiah , that he was sick unto death , the disease was such that he reckoned his bones should be broken , and an end made of him , yea , he received a sentence of death from God by the prophet , set thine house in order , for thou shalt die and not live : but that threat was only like Abraham's precept , not a declaration of what God intended to do , but only a probation to try what Hezekiah would do ; and therefore notwithstanding the disease was deadly , God becometh his physician , prescribeth a plaster of figs , and Hezekiah is healed . 

The centurion's son is visited with a fever ; that fever bringeth him to the very point of death , when as at the centurion's entreaty , Christ with a word commands his recovery . 

That woman's condition was desperate , when she was at once brought low in estate and body : her goods are gone , her disease continueth , the physicians have emptied her purse , but cannot stay her flux , nor is there any likelihood but that this sickness will at length bring her to her grave . But her deplorable state is a fit occasion for Christ to magnify his mercy , whilst by a believing touch of his garment he maketh her perfectly whole . 

Finally , Martha sends Christ word •hat Lazarus is sick ; Christ delayeth to come , only lets her know this sickness should be for God's glory : being sick he dyeth , dying is buried , and having been some days buried he rotteth , nay stinketh in the grave ; and now is the time come for Christ by his powerful voice to raise him from the sleep of death , and bed of the grave . 

lo here , more than a jury of textual witnesses , to which many more Might be added ( besides this in the text ) all asserting this truth , and thereby assuring our faith of God's deliverance in the worst extremity . to all which give me leave to add one more , even my own late experience of God's marvelous kindness vouchsafed to me . 

It is not many weeks ago since it pleased the wise God to visit me with a sore and violent fever ; that fever so exhausted my spirits , and enervated my body , that i Might well take up David's expression , there was but a step between me and death : much about that time when the days of the year are at the longest , the days of my life seemed to be at the shortest . thus was the first part of this text verified , i was sick nigh to death , indeed so nigh , that i was as a dead man in the opinion of the learned , yea , actually dead and buried in the report of the vulgar , and truly i had ere this been not only four days with Lazarus , but more than four weeks putrifying in the grave , had not divine goodness prevented : but God had mercy on me , and so the other part of my text is likewise fulfilled : when the sickness had almost weighed me down into the pit , God was pleased to put a grain of mercy and turn the scale , so that i am here ( Beloved ) this day , before God , angels , and men , as a bird escaped out of a strong snare , as a prey plucked out of the jaws of a devouring lion , as a brand snatched out of the fire of a burning fever . 

What therefore remaineth , but that as in the beginning , so now in the close of this discourse i take up a gratulation , bless the Lord oh my soul , and let all that is within me praise his holy name ; when i forget to mention this deliverance , let my right hand forget its cunning ; when i cease ( As opportunity offereth itself ) to publish this mercy , let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth ; nor yet would i be ••one , in this work of praise ; do you ( All you here present ) join with me . I doubt not but many , the most , nay all of you in some kind , at some time or other , have had experience of eminent deliverances : oh call them now to mind , & let your grateful remembrance come up as a memorial before the Lord : i doubt not but many of you , yea , very many , did put up prayers , fervent prayers at the throne of grace for this mercy ( Which i now celebrate ) my recovery . indeed brethren , i look upon my health , as s. Paul on his preservation , as a gift bestowed on me by the means ( To wit , for the sakes and prayers ) of many ; and surely as prayers have been made , so fit it is thanksgiving should be returned by many on my behalf , it were a shame to be zealous in begging and cold in blessing ; to cry aloud give us our daily bread , and only whisper hallowed be thy name . Blessed therefore be the Lord God of his unworthy servant , who alone doth wondrous things ; yea , blessed be his glorious name for ever , and let all that have been petitioners for me say with me at least in their hearts , amen , amen . 

And now my dearly beloved parishioners , and friends in the Lord , what is my desire , but that you May have cause in allusion to the following words of this verse , to say , God had mercy , no• on him only , but us also ; that my preservation May be for your edification , as well for my consolation : that you , who have already found benefit by my weak ministry , May be more strengthened ; and those , who have heretofore been unprofitable , May now be bettered . which that it May be so , it shall be my endeavour ▪ let it be your prayer for me , that i May do this work of Christ more diligently and faithfully than ever ; it shall be my prayer for you , let it be your endeavour to hear the word of Christ more attentively and obediently for the time to come . so shall you have cause to bless God for me , and i to bless God for you . yea at that last and great day you shall have joy in me , if my preaching become a means of your conversion and salvation ; and i shall have joy in you , whose conversion and salvation shall prove an increase of my reward , and an addition to my glory . which God grant , &c.  

Finis . 





psal. 31.15 . rom. 15.5 . 2 tim. 4 1.  heb. 6.7 . jam. 1.22 . 1 joh. 3.18 . act. 20.32 . rom. 15.30 . 

rom. 18.16 , 17.  gen. 1.  vagiluque locum lugub•i compl•t ut aequum'•• , cui tantum in vit• r•fiat tra•sire malorum . lucr.  aug in ps. 111  gen. 30.11 . Mark 5.9 . horat. od. 3.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . pythag. apo. in Jambl . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Greg. naz. orat. 16.  2 s•m 19.35 . tria haec in •mni m•rbo g•avia sunt , m•tus mortis , dolor corporis , intermissio voluptatis . 

Sen. ep. 77.  

psal. 6.2 , 3.  mat. 9 17.  Psal. 38.8 . quando haec tam gra••ia fa•iet vicino jam exitu , etiam à medi•c•ium actione exclusus fa•isc••te jam corpore ubi ex•rcebit districtionis officium censor animus salv. ad ec•l . Cathol.  . 1. iam. 5.  Langhorn's •un . Se•m. of m. s Mary Swaine . quia deus non irridetur , ipse se decepit qui mortem multis temporibus vixit & ad quaerendam vitam semivivus assurgit & tu•c officio•us app•rct quando dominica saervituti omnia corporis & anima subt••huntur officia . Faust . Epist. prma . 

Mat. 19.8 . gum omnes homine• velint poevitentiam in sine vitae suae accipere , u•x paueo• videmus •am secundum quod desiderant adipisci . Elig . de caex . dom : home sext . 

nihil est quod de calamitatibus nostris deo imputare possumus , nos calamitatum nostrarum auctores sumus . salvide gub. l. 8 à deo punimur sed ipsi facimus ut puniamur . id ibid. jerem. 4.18 . gr. Naz epist 70.  mort•m omni aetati commun•m •ss• sentio . Cic. de sen•ct . tun••repida••• cum pr•pè a vobis credimus •sse morte• , à quo propè non 〈◊〉 . parata omnibus lo•is 〈◊〉 . Sen ep•st 30.  tres sunt nun•ii ••rtis , c•su• , infirmit•s , se ••ctus , casus nuntiat mortem late•tem , infirmit•s ap••••tem , senoctus p•aescut•m . Hugo de . S. vict. de claust . An.  nihil habet qu•d spere• quem senectus ducit ad mortem sen.  Ep. 30 quemadniodum s•nectus adolescentiam s•quitur , ita mors senectutem . i• . ibid ped•te•••m morior dixit Alexis •en•x lente incedens . 

ch•ron me momordit dixit Daemonax sen•x pro cane , innuens s•nectutem morti vicinam . erasm. apoth. l 6.  & 8.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 

Crat. Antiph . 

juvenibus incer•us hujus vitae terminus insta• , senibus vero cunctis maturior ex hac luce •xitus breviter concordat cypr. de 12. abus. saec . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

Diog laert. l. 1.  

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . G• . Naz. o•at . 19  

forsita• quia verberatus est ab infi••elibus in m•nisterio . Anselm . in loc. ch•ysost . in v. 29.  

humana •rugaelita•is nimia in pr•sp•ris r•bu• oblivio est . q• . Cu•t . l. 4.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Greg. naz.  Job 33.18.19.20 . omnes ( inquit Alexander sagitta ictus ) jurant me jovis esse filium , sed hoc vulnus homin•m esse me cl•mat . •en . Ep. 59  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . plut. apoth. is• . 26.16 . hos. 5. ult. luk. 8.43 . Luk. 15.16 . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . chrys. in psal. 119.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . suid.  dr. jer. tay. sermon . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Chryso . in psal. 129.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Greg. naz. orat. 17.  psal. 23.4 . ver. 25.  ibid.  p•ccatum separan• inter nos• & deum peni••us auferri non pot•st , donec liberemur a corpo•e . b•rn . de 3. in adv. serm. 6.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . oecumen. ib. causa morbi suit n•mia diligentia in me curando , in doc•ndo evangelio , in d•f•nd••dá m•á causá , in vigil•is j•jun•o , lucub•ationibus , &c.  Aret. ibid. 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . greg. naz. orat. 19  

1 cor. 11.30 . 2 cor. 12 7.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ▪ 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Chrys. t. 7. de morb.  & med. quo•dam p•cscicus deus peccare posse , in salutem flagellat cos infirmitate co•poris , ne peccent : ut cis utilius sit fra•gi languoribus ad salutem , quam remanere in•olumeses ad d•mnationem bern. de int.  Dom. cap. 46.  

probationes diversae sunt credentium , alius por aegritudinem , alius amissione charorum , alius per damum pecu•iae probatur . ambr. in loc.  

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Chrys. t. 7. do morb.  & med.  Act. 28.4 . Psal. 38.13 . quàm praeposterum judicium corum qui ex variis malis , quibus nonnulli magni viri & doctores ecclesiae laborare nonnunquam solent , finistre de illorum doctrina & salute judicare . Zanch in loc.  

Eccles. 9.2 . Psal. 91.10 . 

ver. 9  gen. part . Ovid . 1 sam. 2.6 : Isa. , 45.7 . sunt aliqua media divinae providentiae , nox propter defectum suae virtutis , sed propter abundantiam suae bonitatis , ut dignitatem causalitatis etiam creaturis communicet . aquin. part 1. q. 30. a•t 3. luk. 4.38.7.10 . John 5.8 , 9 2  King's 5.14 . Isa. 38.21 . John 9 , 6.  mat. 4.4 . hos. 6.1 . creatorem nobit p••pitium redda•us , qui pot••s est nos cum morbis •ffligere , tum sana•e . 

Ephe. de vi• . spirit . T. 1. isa. 57.13 . Ju•geses 10.14 . Isay 36.7 . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . chrys. in psal. 4.6 . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . chrys. t. 7. de morb.  & med.  2 chron. 16 12.  2 Kings . 6 27.  psal. 127.1 . frustra •st •mul• humana d•lig•ntia nisi divina a•••dat provid•ntia . m••c . ibid. id ibid. Luke 4.23 . ezod. 15. •6 . Job 28.14 . Peter 5.1 . faciem quodamodo ponentes ad ea quae fecit , dorsum ponimus ad artificem qui fecit . 

si quando nobis prosperi aliquid praeter spem nostram & meritum deus tribuit , alius ascribit hoc fortunae , alius •ven••t , alius confilio , nullus d•o . 

Salv. de cub . l. 7.  

misericordia nonnullis quod mi••rum cor faciat . 

Aug con•r . adv. leg. l.   . C ▪ 20.  misericors dicitur aliquis si qua miscrum cor hab•nss . 

Aquin p•r . prim q. 21. art . 3. isa. 63.6 . I•rem 3• . 20 . Psal. 10• . 16 . n•bis non sibi loquitur , atque ideo nostris u•itur in loquendo . hil•r . in Ps 126 {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . greg. naz. orat. 16.  

Mise•icord•a est ali•rae miser•ae in co•d •ostro comp•ssi• qu• uti••• ( si possimus ) subven••e compellimur . aug. de civit . dei . L 9 c. 8.  

tristari de miseriâ alterius non competit deo , sed rep•ll•re miseriam alicri•s hoc m•ximè ei competit . aquin. par . prim . qu. 21. a•t . 3.  nomen misericordiae pro op•re . zanch. in loc. dicitur misericordia , quod miseriae ••jusdam est remotio , est. ibid. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . &c. greg. naz. orat. 16.  

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Athanas. qu. 15. de parab. . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Greg. naz. orat. 16.  a Ch•isto dicti es•is ch•istiani ; 〈◊〉 eá viá qua christus ambularet , & vos d•betis ambulare . bern. ser ad p•st . Pr. 20.6 . Sep• . v•re magnus qui divini •peris interpres est ut imitatur amb. in ps. 118.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Greg. nys. de beat.  Or. 5.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Greg. naz. orat. 16.  

Eph. 6.1 . Luke 6.36 n•hil digniu• quam u• homo sit autoris sui imitator , & secundum modum propriae facultatis div. ni •it •peris executor . leo de quadr . Serm. 5.  

Psal. 41.3 prospicit p•uperi , aegro aegroto , attenuato . vatabl ibid. improbus petito• , qui quod aliis negat sibi postulat , homo esto tibi misericordiae forma , si• quomo do vis , quan•um vis , quam cito vis m•sericordia• tibi sieri , tam cito alii , tantum , tali••r ipse m•sercre . chrysol. serm. 43.  

Mat. 15.7 . vita mari est similis , namque ut mare vita pro•cllas : haec habet & u•ntos naufragiumque f•equ••s . an•h sacr. 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . philem. yant••st tribu , lat•o h• jus mis•rae vi•ae , ut nec vita fit dicenda , sed potius mors , vel qu ppiam aliud morte detertus . 

Idiot de pati . Qu•d est di•i viu•re •isi di• torqueri . 

Aug. de verb . dom . Serm. 17 chrysost. in loc. theoph. in loc. o•cum . in loc. 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . theoph. ibid. 

Aristot. eth•l . 1. c. 8 plat. in gorg. ma•t . Ep. 70. l. 6.  

una est catena quae nos allig nos ten•t , amor u•tae qui ut non est abujiciendus , ita miu•ndus est . sen. ep. 27.  corpus infra animam est & quaevis anima vilis excellentissi•o corpore excellentio• invenitur . 

Aug in Ps 145.  

ch•ys••n loc. mors po•it finem omnibus , malis in h•ic vit• , da• terminum malis in hoc sae•ulo , ••imit omnem calam•tatem . been . de mod . viv . Se•m 30.  m•ritur quide• justus sed secure , quippe c•jus mors ut praeso•t•• exitu• est vit• , ita i•troitu• meli oris . id . Ep. 1•5 . erit janua vitae , initium refrigerii erit , sanctae illius men•is sca•a & ingressus in locum tabernaculi . id. in serm. chrysost. in loc theoph. in loc Chrisost. ibid. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Oecu . in loc.  

Phil. 1.24 . Hieron. in loc. 

considerandum est non esse parvam dignationem quum se deus in nobis glorificat . calv. in lo. phil. 1.20 . qui christo vivunt , salicit•r in spem gloriae coelest•s exercentur . calv. ibid. dan. 12.2 . act. 20.35 . qui• hoc credere queat , mutamus naturam rerum iniquitatibus nostris , &c. salv. de gub. l. 6.  Paris . de universo prim . part pars tertia . c. 9  Petrarch dial . de valet . corp. est perniciosa s•nitas qu• ad inobedientiam ducit . 

Bern. de interdom . 

Jo. 5.7 . en horam tuam domine , ades enim deus cui homo deest . velasq. in phil.  

Herodes g•ntis judai•ae invasit regnum , libertatem sustulit , prophanavit s•ncta ; quicquid cultu• est , abolevit , merito ergo genti sanc•ae quia •umana desunt , divina succurrant . 

Chrisol . serm. 116.  

psal. 77.19 . ioh. 6.19 . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Cy. alex. in joh.  Psal. 107.3 , 4 , 5.  

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Greg. nyss. tract in ps.  

ver. 10 , 12 , 13. ver. 1• , 20.  ver. 26.27 , 28 , 29.  psal 142. •4 . Velasq. in phil.  permittit deu• crescere pericula ut periclitan•ium merita augeantur : extremè autem periclitantibus opem f•rt ut suam pot•ntiam demonstret . mend in lib. 1. reg. cap. 2. n. 6.  

Psal 17.7 . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Sept. mirifica misericordia• tu•• . vulg.  

tunc nol is m••sericordiae dei mirifica•tur cum nobis ad memoriam miseriae nostrae revocantur . g•eg home 18. in ezech.  

n•h•l extat quod dei pot•ntiam vincat , nih•l quod omnipotenti illi nutui obsistere u•leat . sophr. arch. home in bible pat . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Greg. naz. orat 32.  Isa. 52.7 . Te•tul . contra . Mar. l. 5. c 2. psal 4.5.3 . Isa. 30.18 . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Cyr. alex. in joh. 6.19 . erasm. fimil . phil. 3 1. flor. l 4. c. 8.  just•s s•mper sperat & in adversit positus & fre••••ibus afflictu••rumni• d•spera•c•o••ovit ▪ 

Ambr. in ps. 118. oct. 19  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . &c. chrys. in psal. 117.  

•zek . 1.16 . quid mirabilius ••ll•inger• po•uit illa , quae cum dolor• pnerum •xposucrat , nunc cum gaudio cum recipit . fer. com. exod 2 8.  Exod 14 21.  aquae quae timebantur dextr• laeuâque famulis dei murus eff•ctae , non solum perniciem nesciunt , sed & munimen exhibent . orig. home in exod.  

patien•er susti•uit abs•rb•ri jonam à ceto non ut absorberetur & in totum periret , sed ut evomitus magis , subigeretur deo , & plus glorificaret deum qui i•sperabilem salutem ei d•••ss•• . •raen . adv. haer. l. 3 c ▪ 22.  

oh martyrium & sine passione perfectum , satis p•ssi satis exusti sunt , quos propt•rea d•us texit , ne potestatem ejus •en••ri vid•rentu• tertul. Scorp . cap. 8.  venit leo & l. b•ravit leonem •b or• l•onis : rab. in lap. super loc. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Chrys. in act. quod genus morbi & naturae vires attinet prorsus esset moriturus nisi singulari dei consilio servaretur . musc. in loc. 

solo jussu salu•ë reddidit qui voluntate omnia creavit . greg. mag. in evan. home 28.  

post certamina desperata medicorum post medicami•a sumptu•sa , post inanem & e•tiquissiman curam ubi ars et peritia dese •rat jam curantum ubi languentis omnis jam consumpta fucrat substamia ipsi authori reverendum vulnus non casu sea divinitus occurrit , ut quod humana arte tot annis curari n•n potuit , sola fide & humilitate cura retur . chrysol. serm. 33.  videtis quemadmodum dat locum morti , licentiam dat sepulchro , corruptioni posse permi•tit , negat nil put edini , nil foe•tori : atque ut Tartarus vapiat , trah•t , •abeat , admittit , atque agit , ut hum••a spes tota pe eat , et tota vis must lanae d•speration•ss accedat , quatenus qu•d facturus est divinum 〈◊〉 , non humanum . chrysol. serm. 63.  

1 sam 20.3 . June the 10. my disease was at the highest . 

psal. 103.1.137.5 , 6.  2 cor. 1.11 . psal. 72.18 , 19  










































































































