A SUBPAENA from the high Imperial Court of Heaven , to be served upon all men : upon an Information preferred by JUSTICE against Mankind . 

With the Answer , and Reply from MERCY , and her directions how to come to Heaven , if we avoid Sinne.  

Shrink not from this Subpaena , which is penned ; 
esteem it well , for sure thou must appear : 
What thou hast been , and how thou dost offend . 
each word & thought will be prescribed there . 
Rightly that judge , will thy Records forth call ; 
daily therefore prepare unto thy trial : 
None is exempt , all must then prostrate fall 
at Death's command , no man can make denial . 
Now then provide , on pain of thy damnation , 
here to amend thy former evil ways : 
O sinner , learn to seek for thy salvation , 
if thou in Heaven wouldst have eternal joys . 
OH jesu arden's 〈◊〉 . 

Imprinted at London by I White . 

1620.  

A SUBPAENA . 

The Information of justice . 

Almighty GOD , 
thou Monarch of all might . 
Who made the Sea , the Earth , 
the Heavens and all : 
who 's Malestie , 
whose power is infinite : 
at whose command all powers do prostrare foll : 
By whom all Monarches of the world do reign ; 
who setteth up , and pulleth down again . 
Justice complains , whereas our of thy Grace , 
thou mad'st a Creature of the earthly frame , 
And put him in a most delightful place , 
with all abundance richly in the same , 
Where nothing wanted to content desire , 
which heart or soul for solace might require . 
His Will and Wish were joined both in one , 
his liberty was absolute in mind : 
no fear of Death ; for sinning there was none , 
he had restraint but only in one kind : 
On pain of Death , he was forbid to taste 
the Fruit in midst of Paradise was placed . 
Being alone thy Majesty thought good 
to make a Woman for his more delight , 
Which should be of the self same flesh & blood ; 
his consort and his comfort day and night : 
But at her motion he forthwith rebelled , 
and justly was from Paradise expelled . 
By disobedience he did thus begin 
to bring Mankind in bondage to the Devil 
He was the first original of sin , 
which brought in death with all succeeding cu● 
That by his fall , posterity was stained , 
both Hell and Death by disobedience , gained 
Now did he see his nakedness and sin . 
and might detest the cause of such a fall , 
He lost that state he was created in , 
to bring in Death upon himself and all , 
He lost thy favonr being so beloved : 
to cast him off in justice thou wast moved . 
But thou ( although by so rebellious deed , 
he was to death and just damnation brought ) 
Didst make a promise , by the Woman's seed , 
death and damnation should be over wrought : 
And what he lost by his committed crime , 
both that and more , should be regained in time : 
In the mean space , thou leftest him Natures law , 
a Chancery within his secret breast : 
Which Conscience might keep his flesh in awe , 
in flying sin , and following what was best : 
But weak or wilful whether was the cause , 
he flieth out and breaketh Nature's laws . 
A second Law thou didst by Moses give , 
more full and which did Nature's law express : 
But after neither of them he doth live , 
his sinful actions evermore increase : 
He doth complain and says , they Laws are such 
his weakness great , their burden is too much . 
Fullness of time brings in the Law of Grace , 
the promised Seed to Eva was foretold , 
Should clear the guilt , and help all Adam's race , 
is now performed ; and what hath been in hold , 
In debted thralls to death , to Hell for sin , 
jesus frees all , and calls the reckoning in . 
This Law of Grace , which as himself hath said , 
the burden's light , and easy for to bear : 
Who bears this yoke , was never overlaid , 
when love bears all , and not enforced fear ; 
But for this law , as allthe rest he careth , 
for love or fear , the breach of neither spares . 
For heavenly joys thou didst man create , 
Though Lucisor through pride from thence did fall 
thou wouldst advance him to that glorious state 
what Angels lost , man should attains to all : 
Where Angels fell , they had no reparation , 
their fall was wilful , and without temptation . 
But man was tempted by a potent foe , 
who most envying that an earthly wight 
Should by his Maker be advanced so : 
sought by all means with hate of malice might 
To wrist him our of favour and of grace . 
to put him from that everlasting place . 
Man that did fall through Adam's strong temptation 
him to redeem , thou sentest thy only Son , 
Resoring him to favour and salvation : 
What Adam lost , the Woman's seed hath won 
Who fell not tempted , is adiud'gd to Hell : 
Man is redeemed , who by temptation fell . 
Eternal God , what should thy Mercy move , 
for to forbear this deadly sinner so ? 
He yields no show of thanks for all thy love , 
no benefits make him his sin forgo : 
What thou dost hate , that wicked life he follows ; 
as Hogs in dirt , in silthy ways he wallows . 
Thy Laws can not his sinful life restrain , 
his care is for thy benefits but small : 
His life declares thy threats he holds but vain : 
his works do show he loves thee not at all ; 
Long suffering Mercy makes him so to trust , 
that he forgets that thou art also Just . 
Like as the Child cares not for Father's threats , 
words are but wind , he follows on his play : 
This creature so himself and thee forgets , 
till thou thy Rod of justice on him lay : 
In all his pleasures , from thee he doth fly , 
he seeks thee not , but when he fears to die . 
What is that seeking , forced by constraint , 
all youthful days to run it out in pleasure , 
And when that Death , or sickness makes him faint , 
than he seeks homeward ; thou must wait his leisure : 
Not like to Abel , offering thee the best , 
but like to Cain , the worst of all the rest . 
His prime of Youth , and all his golden years , 
his wits and , wealth , all given to the Devil : 
When fe●ble age drawn on , with hoary Hairs , 
that now 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to practise former evil : 
When sin 〈◊〉 him that he can sin no more ▪ 
he seeks to thee , who served thy foe before . 
Caused thou in justice such presumption like , 
the benefit thou giv'st him out of Grace , 
To draw him , home , before thy hand would strike 
to turn all to a clean contrary case ? 
God's Mercy passeth all his Works ( he sayeth , ) 
therefore presuming , he his sin delayeth , 
Thy Mercy is to such as do repent ; 
but not to sinners , which remain in sin : 
Who was a sinner , if he have intent 
to change his life , he may thy Mercy win : 
But who presuming , sinneth in that kind , 
by justice , he may never Mercy find . 
He runneth on , such arguments are rise , 
with him who takes in sin so great delight , 
They may give colour to a sinful life , 
presuming thou in justice wilt not smite : 
A damned life doth evermore invent , 
such reasons which may further his intent . 
This creature cares not that thy Son was slain , 
the only cause such pains he did abide , 
To pay his debts , and bring him home again ; 
wounded in hands , in heart , head , feet , and side : 
Though for his sin , thy dearest Son did die ; 
his hourly sins do still him crucify . 
Vertue● 〈◊〉 fled and banished away . 
what virtue now at all is put in ure ? 
All deadly sins do each where bear the sway 
O great jehovah , how canst thou endure ? 
Fullness of sin doth now so much abound , 
it annoys the heavens , & overcharge the ground . 
Behold my case , OH God , I may be bold 
to say , my Sword and balance are sore shaken : 
Canst thou endure I should be bought and sold , 
that poor men's suits for bribes should be forsaken : 
Descend , OH God , to earth down from the skies , 
for none but thou , redresseth poor men's cries . 
Who cares for poor ? yet poor as dear to thee , 
as is the greatest Monarch which doth reign ; 
His ransom like , and Heaven for him as free : 
yet poverty is held in great disdain : 
So did the Glutton Lazarus despise , 
but now this joys , and he in torment lies . 
Do they love thee , when thou thyself hast said , 
who doth relieve and giveth to the Poor , 
Doth all to me , and they shall be repaid 
full weight and measure , yea an hundred more ? 
They show their trust and love to thee is small , 
the Poor get nothing , though thou givest all . 
Thy Creatures made for man in thy creation , 
in Sea , on Land , in and above the Skies , 
They all agree in making exclamation , 
they still pour out for justice gricuous cries : 
thou gav'st them Man , for to be rightly used ; 
but clean contrary they are all abused . 
For nature's use , Apparel is charged quite , 
all is converted to excessive pride : 
The Sun , the Moon , the Stars , the day , and night . 
cry their abuse may be in justice tried ; 
Thy meats & drinks , thy Gold & earthly treasure 
are all abused in Just and fleshly pleasure . 
Shorten the time ( Almighty : ) 't is too long 
that man runs on in wickeanes and sin : 
Hastenin justise to revenge thy wrong , 
send Death abroad to call all sinners in ; 
Grant out Subp●nass , let not Death make stay , 
but to thy judgemeus bring all flesh away . 
A Subpaena from the Court Imperiall . 

THE GOD of Gods , 
who all the world hath wrought , 
And out of Nothing , 
made the world's wide frame : 
Who man's salvation by all means hath sought , 
and by his blood hath ransomed the same : 
By this Subpaena giveth charge to thee , 
thou fail not at his judgement feat to be . 
And that thou fail not for to bring in place , 
all those Records thy Conscience doth hold ; 
That Chancery can best declare thy case , 
what it is now , what it hath been of old : 
Of this thy charge thou mayst not make denial , 
for that 's the day appointed for thy trial . 
Fail not upon the hope of thy salvation , 
to clear thy reckoning at that dreadful day : 
Provide thyself on pain of thy damnation , 
to free thy charge ; and answer as thou may : 
Within this world thou mayst to Mercy trust , 
but I have sworn that day I will be Just . 
Witness myself , who at thy first creation , 
made thee a Man ; the Heavens and all for thee , 
Witness myself , who to work thy Salvation , 
sent my dear Somie , by Blood to set thee free , 
Doc not refuse these Mercies , which are mine , 
lest Hell's damnation fall out to be thine . 
The Speeches of Death , provided to execute the Subpaenae . 

Iam at hand ( full well I know my charge ) 
with all post haste I 'll make a quick dispatch 
But let me have Commission at large , 
then shall I frustrate many a sinful match : 
then God by man shall not be so offended , 
for with my Dart , all flesh shall soon be ended . 
I 'll make the proud to stoop , for all his pride : 
Ile'bring the Rich for all his Gold away : 
The Leecher shall not in his silth abide : 
the Glutton shall not for his dainties stay : 
They are now careless , but when I do wound , 
I terrify the loftiest lives on ground . 
O how they offer to redeem their days , 
they would give all so death would set them free ; 
If Death would be corrupted any ways , 
not all the world so rich as Death might be : 
In health and youth , who value Death but small , 
when death doth strike , to Death they offer all . 
But what says Mercy , she doth look as if 
she would endeavour to procure my stay : 
She loves me not , she holds me as a thelfe , 
who would so soon her darling bring away , 
If she begin to speak , I know her mind , 
out of her love , she pleadeth for Mankind . 
Mercy her speech for Mankind . 

Great King of Heaven , 
justice speaketh true , 
Man justly doth provoke 
thy wrath and ire : 
If thou in justice shouldst pay him his due , 
he hath deserved everlasting fire ; 
But in this World thy Mercy thou hast placed , 
whilst it endures , so let thy Mercy last . 
send out Subp●●●s that I grant it fit . 
to let men know they have a reckoning day , 
For execution , stay thy justice yet , 
their lives amend perhaps some sinners may ; 
't is known thy Mercy yields the more content ; 
than justica can , if sinners would repent . 
't is not the sinner's death thou dost desire , 
't is his conversion thou hast ever sought : 
If man receive for sin a sinner's hire , 
it comes from that which he himself hath wrought : 
Grace and Salvation thy desire is known : 
if Hell and Death , the sin and fault his own . 
Respite the time , that I may do my best , 
to let men know the danger they stand in : 
Thy hate to sin , by justice is expressed : 
I 'll try if Love may move him from his sin . 
justice is stern , Severity plays his part , 
Mercy ( perhaps ) may sooner move the heart . 
The speech of Mercy to Mankind . 

When all Mankind by Adam's fall had lost 
both Paradise , the hope of Heaven & all : 
In those distresses , than I helped most ; 
I promised upon that grievous fall , 
In time a Fruit should spring from Woman's seed , 
should clear the guilt , and cancel Adam's deed . 
What I did promise , I performed truly , 
the precious choice I took for mankind's sake 
God's dearest Son , who did perform it duly , 
for man's salvation , did man's Nature take ; 
And by his Passion , whereas man was thrall 
to Death and Hell , he freed him out of all . 
justice doth now as ever heretofore , 
call on that sinners may receive their due ; 
And I endeavour now as evermore , 
for man's repentance , and Salvation sue : 
At Mercies suit , God ever granteth Grace , 
and for repentance giveth sinner's space . 
OH that I might make suit , with that success 
to mortal men , as when I do to God ; 
That they would yield to me that readiness , 
to fly the danger of his heavy rod : 
I ever found God ready upon trial , 
why then should man give Mercies sure denial ? 
I sue not for myself , but for thy gain , 
to make them heyrens of Heaven & those joys : 
I 'll show them how they may thereto attain , 
and reason why to sly all worldly toys , 
If Man will put what I direct in ●●e , 
of Heavenly bliss and joys he shall be sure . 
The true state of a Sinner . 

First let me show what is his grievous state , 
who doth in sin , and sinful life delight : 
Which misery may force a man to hate 
the causes which do work that woeful plight : 
What mischief more , then live in fear and grief , 
when heaven or earth can yield him no relief ? 
If to the Heavens he dare lift up his eyes , 
his hart & soul with trembling fear do grudge 
His Bird in breast most heavy on him lies , 
and tells him thence he must look for his judge : 
Whose terror is to all which run astray , 
most dreadful at the main tribunal day . 
If he the World and all her creatures view 
upon the earth which creep , that fly , or swim , 
Their thought & sight will make his heart to rue , 
that all were made for him , abused by him , 
no thought that is , will sinners more dismay , 
than things abused , at their dying day . 
The Usurer how is he racked with Gold 
when he is dying , gasping out his breath ? 
What torment hath the Lecher to behold 
fair Dames , when he is yielding unto death ? 
In life , what did delight the sinner chief , 
at Death , doth force the greatest woe and grief . 
To hear of Death , the sinner's hart doth shrink , 
the day of Doom doth rend his soul in twain 
t i's terrible to call to mind , and think 
how Death and judgement hast to him amain : 
no day nor night the sinner findeth quiet 
a spotted soul and conscience doth deny it , 
Those black Records within the dismal book , 
fast locked within the closet of the Breast , 
When as the sinner thereupon doth look , 
with fears and terrors then is he oppressed : 
In all the world no torment , grief , or pain , 
are like the thoughts which do the conscience stain . 
These are the foes which inwardly do dwell 
which sinners do about them ever bear , 
Who still torment them in their inward Hell. 
racking and rending of them every where , 
When others laugh they make a pleasant show , 
with face dissembling in the mainest woe . 
Let mortal men consider in this case , 
think of the time they are to tarry here ; 
Behold the Sun how swift he runs his race ; 
so do man's days , their death approacheth near : 
Forfeit not Heaven for the flowers of May , 
what are they worth once withered away ? 
Let man consider in his Conscience thi● , 
when he hath rashly done some deadly sin , 
And comes to think that he hath done amiss , 
what grief of mind he forth with falleth in : 
But when the time of doing good is spent , 
those thoughts do yield him joy & all content . 
Man was provided for eternal joys , 
his proper Country is with God above : 
Why should he dote upon these worldly toys ? 
what is the gain of all this worldly love ? 
A Conscience cloyed , and naked sent away , 
a sore accuser at the latter day . 
Consider on the work of thy Creation , 
how far thou art in debt to God therefore , 
then think upon the work of thy Redemption , 
in which thy debt is multiplied more : 
Let these two things thy heart & conscience move 
urge not his wrath who thou art bound to love . 
When wicked thoughts , or motions breeding sin 
within thy heart temptations do inflame : 
When that thou findest Reason doth begin 
to yield consent to execute the same ; 
then have recourse to meditate on this , 
and hardly thou shalt dare to do amiss . 
A daily Meditation , which Mercy offereth to Mankind . 

The day of Death . 

Think now thou liest on thy dying bed , 
thy heart , thy head , thy Senses all do fall , 
Striving for life , each member ghastly spread , 
trembling at death , which makes so fierce assail : 
If at Death's hour , thy sins thou dost defy , 
then dare not live , in state thou dar'st not die . 
Think furthermore thou hast all worldly pleasure , 
and every thing which may the flesh delight : 
Suppose thou hast thy fill of worldly treasure , 
what is all worth , when death shall claim his right : 
What was once sweet , is turned now to sour , 
the case quite altered in this dreadful hour . 
For now those things that were thy heart content 
thy wealth and pleasure , force thy bitter woe : 
With trembling conscience , now thou dost repent 
the day , the hour , thou didst abuse them so . 
The judgement day . 

Think furthermore , 
thou heardst the dreadful sound , 
The Trumpet calling of the dead to rise : 
And all the world of flaming fire round , 
the judge appearing dreadful in the skies : 
Ask now thy conscience , durst it in bad thought 
〈◊〉 wicked life before that seat be brought ? 
If that thy conscience tremble for to think 
upon the terror of that dreadful day : 
If that Tribunal make thy heart to shrink , 
let them this thought drive sinful thoughts away 
And dare not do those wicked actions here 
in which thou dar'st not at that day appear . 
Conside thou who now in health dost live , 
the day of death , & dreadful hour will come , 
Of all thy debts thou must a reckoning give , 
thou canst not voided this dreadful day of doom : 
no wit , no wealth , no beauty , force , nor strength , 
but must come to this judgement at the length . 
The pains of Hell.  

The pains of Hell they must endured be , 
most infinite for torment and for date ; 
For sin is wrought 'gainst infinite degree , 
'gainst God whose power exceeds all estimate : 
When infinite that Godhead is offended , 
those pains in justice , never shall be ended . 
Eternal torments correspond the Will : 
shouldst thou live ever , thou wouldst ever sin : 
thou justly then deservest torments still , 
who would still run that course thou livest in ? 
Eternal torments justly do agree , 
where Will and Sin would both eternal be . 
no thought , no tongue , can comprehend or tell 
what are the torments of that damned Fire : 
The plagues , the scourges , tortures are in Hell , 
which justice doth provide for sinners hire : 
A rueful noise , when damned Souls forlorn , 
cry ever , woe the hour we were born . 
The joys of Heaven . 

Think what it is to come to heavenly bliss ; 
to live with God , where Saints & angels dwell 
Those glorious joys which God provides for his 
no heart , no tongue , can comprehend or tell : 
no care hath heard , or eye did ever see 
the heavenly bliss , or joys of that degree . 
Where Majesty so infinite excelleth , 
hath all abundance Majesty may have : 
Where the omnipotent in glory dwelleth , 
with those elect whom jesus blood did save , 
All joys must be still flowing in that place , 
where Saints behold the glory of his face . 
These heavenly joys are certain , without date , 
Old-age renews to youth without decaying : 
Eternal health and treasures without rate : 
no fear of cross or trouble overswaying . 
Who would dote on the worldly pleasures so , 
for love of them to let the Heavenly go ? 
Lo here 's the end of every mortal man , 
which he comes to at first or at the last : 
there 's no avoidance since the world began , 
Time fly's away , and Death approacheth fast : 
Consider then of things that shall endure , 
take Mercies offer , and thy Soul is sure . 
The young man says , these are too grave for me , 
the old man says , these thoughts do charge me sore 
To please their humours each of these agree , 
to slight them off , and think of them no more , 
shift as they will and let them take their pleasure : 
but let them know Death stayeth no man's leisure . 
Counsel to prepare ourselves to return to God , before the day of our Death ; for after death there is no repentance . 

IF ye love God , or fear ye Hell's damnation ; 
OH then repent , defer the time no more : 
here in this life you may obtain salvation , 
now seek , OH seek , for heavenly joys therefore 
After that Death thy soul away hath taken , 
none can repent the time is then too late : 
Duly therefore let since away be shaken , 
remove thyself from wicked sinners states ▪ 
Each day or night , ye● 〈◊〉 the time doth know 
when Christ our judge , in judgement seat will stand 
Ever do think thou hearst his trumpet blow 
sure the time is even now at hand . 
The Books to the Reader . 

This debt is due upon Doom's day , 
which you are summoned to pay : 
wherefore my Author well content , 
because he warns you to repent : 
Repentance true God doth require , 
it keeps you from eternal fire . 
FINIS . 

Vi veneranda Sons . 

