A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr. JOSIAH REYNEL Esquire , the 13. of August 1614 in East-ogwell in DEVON . 

By john Preston Minister of God's word in East-ogwell . 

LONDON , Printed by Nicholas Okes , for Richard Boulton , and are to be sold at his shop in Chancery-lane . 1615.  

TO THE RIGHT WORSIPFUL SIR THOMAS REYNEL , SIR GEORGE REYNEL , SIR CAREW REYNEL , KNIGHTS : Mr. RICHARD REYNEL Esquire , Grace , Mercy and Peace in the blessed LORD JESUS . 

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL , 

IT may seem strange that I have joined you all together in one Inscription , when every one of you severally are worthy of a better gift than here is exhibited , or by me can be given ; yet herein I have done no more than nature , brotherly affection , and Christianity hath done . That I have clothed this in the livery of your Patronages , I might have given many reasons : First , for that you are lovers of true religion , and favourers of all true professors . Secondly , because it was preached at the interring of your dear brother . Thirdly , because I had rtaher the whole world should condemn me as unjust , & the curious and captious carp at me , than you should so much as think me unthankful . I owe unto you all a double debt , of Love , and of Service . Of love , the more I pay , the more I owe ; though a debt once paid , be no more due , yet love being paid , is still due . Service I will be ready to pay to the uttermost , though it come short of your great deserts , and of my manifold desires : I that yield to all in learning , will yield to none in love and service to you . But to you right worshipful and worthy Patron , I owe a treble debt , of Love , of Service , and Thankfulness : Of love , for your extraordinary kindness in preferring me , and for that countenance you have continually given to my weak Ministry : Of service , such as I can perform , I will not fail ; daily beseeching God for the increase of his spiritual graces here , and eternal glory hereafter , both to yourself , and all such as are d●ere unto you . Of thankfulness , in patronising i being absent , kindly entreating me present , and for affecting me long before I was by you preferred . Of some I shall be hardly censured , of others thought ambitious in seeking men's favours . For this I care not , so the well-affected Christian may think of the shortness of his life , and thereby prepare to die ; and being ready , to be willing to die , and you be pleased to procure a quiet passage under your patronages for those few indigested meditations , which were by God's permission , and his assisting Spirit , first preached , and now published : I ascribe the patronage to you , the use to the godly , and the success to God. The God of peace give you the peace of God which passeth all human understanding , and afford you many comforts and joys in this life to the end , and in the next his joy without end . 

Your worships in all faithful service , JOHN PRESTON . 

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr. JOSIAH REYNEL Esquire , the 13. of April 1614 in East-ogwell in Devon . 

PSAL. 39 5.  

Behold , thou hast made my days as an hand breadth , and mine age is nothing in respect of thee : surely every man in his best state is altogether vanity . 

THE Princely Prophet David , who was a man after Gods own heart , 1.  Sam. 13. 14.  The chosen of God , Psa. 78. 70.  A man gracious with God , Act. 7. 46  The servant of God , Ps 89. 20.  The type of Christ. Acts 2. 25.  Nay Christ is called the son of David , Math. 1. 1.  The sweet singer of Israel , a man that had tasted the full cup of God's mercies , and had been plunged in many troubles , insomuch as he said : Great are the troubles of the righteous , Psa. 34. 19  He doth often complain of his troubles , and that with great grief and bitterness of mind , and chiefly in this place . This Psalm is partly narrative , partly precative : In the first part David declareth how he had purposed with himself to take need of murmuring against God , which might arise through the injuries of men . In the second part he desireth that God would certify him of the vanity of this life , and therefore he saith : Lord let me know my ●●d , and the measure of my days what it is : let me know how long I have to live . Psal. 39 4.  In another place he saith : Teach us so to number our days , that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom . Psa. 90. 12.  David in these words doth not desire death , but he requesteth that he may be brought to a serious consideration of his mortality , as is evident by the words , Let me know my end : that is , the end of my natural life , of my days , which by thy decree I must live in this world , and then he saith ; Behold , thou hast made my days as an hand breadth , and mine age is nothing in respect of thee : surely every man in his best estate is altogether vanity . 

Here note 4 things . 1 A note of attention , Behold . 
2 A confession , thou hast made my days as an hand breadth . 
3 An asseveration : surely , 
4 An amplification , every man in his best estate is altogether vanity . 


It is as much as if the Prophet had said ; Behold , I will show and declare unto you by a twofold comparison , that the Lord hath made my days short ; for they are but as an hand breadth , which is one of the shortest measures , and the time of my life is as nothing , or like to nothing ; and surely every man , not only such as are of base condition , but the mighty and the noble are vanity . 

[ Behold , ] This word behold , consisteth of few letters , less syllables , yet very significant : Sometimes it is a badge of admiration , as Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son , and thou shalt call his name Immanuel , esay 7. 14.  Sometimes a sign of alteration , as Behold I will make all things new . Reu. 21. 5.  Sometimes a token of gladness ; Behold , I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be to all people , Luke 2. 10.  Sometimes a point of demonstration , Behold the place where they have laid him . Mark. 16. 6.  Sometimes it shows a thing unknown , Behold I will send you Eliah the Prophet , Mal. 4. 5.  Sometimes it is taken scornfully , Behold the man that took not God for his strength , but trusted in the multitude of his riches , and put his strength in his malice . Psalm . 52. 7.  Sometimes it is a note of attention , Behold I stand at the door and knock , etc. Reu. 3. 20.  Declaring his love to the Laodiceans . In this one word behold , here is comfort for such as faint , and God's love is showed towards such as repent . In this place it is a note of attention , to put us in mind of the brevity and shortness of our lives . 

Here observe , that every word in the Scripture is remarkable , and this word behold is not a word of course , but a note to stir up our attention . It is like the sounding of a Trumpet before some weighty Proclamation , or like the ringing of a great Bell , before the Sermon of a famous Preacher : it is set down to move us to attention to hear for afterwards . esay 42. 23.  One figure may stand for many hundred , one counter for many pounds , one little box may contain many jewels : So one word of the Scripture may point out unto us many things worthy our observation , and what can be greater than to hear , to learn , and to learn to know how short our life is . Let him that hath an ear hear . Revel . 3. 6.  

The use may reprove such as will not be warned , by any mark or note , nor stirred up to hear , but become voluntary deaf Adders , refusing the voice of the charmer , though he be most expert in charming , Psal. 58. 4. 5.  They will not hear Christ crucified , Gal. 3. 1.  They are enemies of the cross of Christ , Phil. 3. 18. who is able to kill our sins , and quicken our souls . When the balm tree is cut in summer , that the sweet liquor drop forth , the inhabitants preserve it in viols : when the Word , which is the spiritual balm , is divided by preaching , 2.  Tim. 2. 15. the people should bring empty pitchers with them , as the widow did at the command of Elisha , 2.  King. 4. 5. the empty pitchers should be attentive ears ; but either they are without mouths , or without bottoms ; without mouths to let in one drop of grace , or without bottoms that when we have put it in and look to see it again in your lives , behold it is run throughout , as water through a sieve , and scarce leaves any wet behind it . It is not enough to eat meat , unless the stomach retain it ; so it is not enough to hear , unless men lay it up in their hearts , as Mary kept the sayings of Christ in her heart , Luk. 2. 51.  We must have ears of atention , and hearts of retention . In vain doth the Preacher open his mouth , unless God open the heart , when God opened Lidia's heart , than she attended to the things which Paul spoke , Act. 16. 14.  As men come so they speed , and as the affection is , so is the profit : If they bring empty pitchers they may be filled , but if their vessels be full of wickedness , they can never be filled with goodness : As we do Gods works to holiness , so we shall find comfort to holiness : It is to be feared , lest many go home with unfallowed Host 10. 12. nay with unhallowed hearts . 

Secondly , for instruction to us , where God is an admonisher , there let us be admonished ; where he is a Teacher , there let us be scholars ; and if he have made our days as an hand breadth , then let us resolve to die , and prepare for death . It is decreed in the high Court of Parliament , that all shall die , even in heaven , Heb. 9 27. for we must die , and we are as water spilt on the ground . 2.  Sam. 14. 14. which cannot be taken up again . Wise Solomon , godly David , religious josiah , faithful Abraham , just Lot , righteous Noah , zealous Moses , trusty jonathan , diligent Peter , and careful Paul , have died ; it is certain we shall die , but the time uncertain , and the place . The time is uncertain , God came to David's child in his infancy . 2.  Sam. 12. 18. to the widow's son in his yourh , Luk. 7. 12. to jacob in his old age . Gen. 49. 33.  God hath ordained and limited to every living creature his appointed time wherein to live and grow , and next to decrease and die ; and as it pleaseth God to prolong or abridge their lives , so he disposeth of the second causes , and means whereby he will have it brought to pass , and so every one hath his certain limits and term of life set him . job saith , Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth , and are not his days as the days of an hireling . job. 7. 1.  Again , Are not man's days determined , the number of his months are with thee , thou hast appointed his bounds which he cannot pass ? job. 14. 5.  In the same chapter , All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my changing shall come . 14.  God hath appointed how long every man shall live , and though four score years be no long course , yet there are but few which hold out to the uttermost end thereof , in regard of them that stay by the way . Some are cut off even before they have begun their course , and some in the midway , and that through so many sorts of sicknesses , with other inconveniences and accidents , that a man cannot possibly comprehend , or conceive them all . As death spares not any person , so it respects not any place . A man may be murdered in the field as Abel was , Gen. 4. 8.  A man may fall backward sitting quietly in his chair , and break his neck as Eli did . 1.  Sam. 4. 18.  Or die in the Temple as Senaherib did esay 37. 37.  Or at the Altar as joab 1  King. 2. 34.  While jobs sons were feasting , the house falls upon them job. 1. 19  While the scoffing boys were mocking , Bears came from the wilderness and devoured them 2.  King. 2. 24.  While Corah and his company were contending , the earth opened and swallowed them up Numb . 16. 31. 32.  While the Captains and their fifties were fetching the Prophet perforce to the King , fire falls from heaven and consumes them . 2.  King. 1. 10.  Thus death doth follow us wheresoever we go , and is ready to seize upon us wheresoever we are . 

thou hast made my days as an hands breadth . Some say thou hast set my days short , some thou hast made my day's mourning ; some , thou hast made my days of four fingers wide , Taphat signifieth the measure of the palm of the hand , which is of four fingers . The meaning of the Prophet is this : thou Lord hast made my life short , like the palm of an hand , which is of four fingers , which is one of the shortest measures . 

Seeing the life of man is but as an hand breadth , it affordeth this doctrine , that man's life is short , and of no long continuance . Our life is compared to grass esay 40. 6. which withereth . To a shadow which passeth Psalm 102. 11.  To smoke that vanisheth , Host 13. 3.  To a bubble that is dissolved : To a weaver's shuttle for swiftness , job. 7. 6.  To a spider's web which is soon swept away . To a cloud that goeth away . job. 7. 9  To a flower that fadeth , job 14. 2.  To a vapour which is soon dispersed , jam. 4. 14.  Remember that my life is but a wind job. 7. 7.  no marvel if when the wind blows the leaf fall , if when the death appeareth , the night end . There is one saith , our life is an heavy sleep , fed with false and imaginary dreams , and he calleth it a Comedy , or rather in our days a Tragedy of transitory shows and disguised people . Sometimes to a birds nest made of straw and dung , that the winter soon dissolveth . There is another calleth it a child's game , that buildeth houses of sand on the shore , where every wave washeth them away . Is our life so short ? then it is better to die then to live , and the day of death is better than the day of birth . Eccles. 7. 3.  The day of death is not a perishing but a parting . The soul is not lost to the body , but only sent before it to joy . If the soul be painfully laid off , it is joyfully laid up . Through our nativity we come to the race , through death to the reward : through birth to the flood , through death to the haven ; through birth to the fight , through death to the victory ; through birth to labour , through death to rest ; by birth to sorrow , by death to joy ; by birth to life , which is full of all sorrows and troubles , by death to life eternal which is free from all sorrows . Death is rather the flight of sin , than the detriment of man dying , because to the just death is not the end of nature , but of sin , as a Father saith . To leave this world and inherit a better should seem nothing . Death is a passage from sin and corruption to glory and immortality , from this earth to heaven , from the company of sinners , to the company of Saints ; from sorrow , to solace ; from pain , to peace ; from sickness , to safety ; from persecution , to triumph ; from the bondage of Pharaoh , to the liberty of the sons of God. The consideration hereof made Solomon , who for wisdom might seem a God , for government deservedly might be King , and for learning might be a Prophet , to say ; All things under the Sun are vanity and vexation of spirit . Eccl. 2. 11.  Seeing all things in the world are vanity , better is a good death than a bad life , and the day of death better than the day of birth . When we are born we are mortal , but when we shall rise again , we shall be immortal : we are alive in the womb , to die in the world , but dead in the grave to live in heaven . Our life is not compared to an ell or yard , to a pace or to a cubite , to a mile or to a furlong , to a fathom or to a foot , but to an hand breadth , a very short measure . Man that is born of woman is of short continuance . job. 14. 1.  Few and evil have the days of my life been . Gen. 47. 9  The time of our life is three score years and ten , if a man come to four score , than there is nothing but weakness . As jonah his gourd was soon come and soon vanished , jonah 4. 6. so man is soon born and soon dead . This world is as a Stage , and man as an Actor , when he hath played his part he is gone . Our lives shorten as if the book of our days were by the penknife of God's judgement cut less . Before the Flood they were in Folio , they lived almost a thousand years , Methushelah lived nine hundred sixty and nine years , Gen. 5. 27. the whole chapter will show us how long the men lived before the Flood . After the Flood in Quarto , than they lived an hundred and twenty , and an hundred and seventy . Gen. 25. 7.  In David's time in Octavo , three score and four score years , but with us in the days of the Gospel , in Decimo sexto in the least volume , now at forty , fifty , or sixty years , old men , and so we are dying almost so soon as we begin to live . The Elements are more mixed , drossy , and confused , our new sins call for new plagues ; the air is more infected and contagious , and our sins of drunkenness and surfeiting do not want to second all the rest : we may observe that neither planers above , nor plants below , yield us expected comfort . So God for our sins doth cause the heaven to be as Brass , and the earth as Iron , and the air with the winds to be tempestuous , and so almost every thing which was created for man's use is become his enemy , and all because we turn all things to vices corruption , which were given for nature's protection : and therefore what we have diverted to wickedness , God hath reverted to our revenge . We are sick of sin , and therefore the world is sick of us. How soon doth the sand run down in the hourglass , how quickly doth the Sun begin to set ? so speedily doth our time pass away . Future things are always beginning , present things always ending , and things past are dead and gone ; while we live we die , and then we leave dying , when we leave living : Better it is therefore to die to life , then to live to death , because our mortal life is nothing but a living death , and life continually flieth from us and cannot be withheld , and death hourly cometh upon us and cannot be withstood : no armour resisteth , no threatening prevaileth , nor no entreaty profiteth , against death's assault . If all perils spare our life , yet time and age in the end will consume it . As a river that riseth in the Forest passeth by many rocks , runneth and tumbleth , and maketh a noise , yet in the end entereth into the sea : so fareth it with man's life , he cometh into the world with pain , and begins his course with pitiful cries , and is daily molested with sicknesses , and never ceaseth running , till in the end he fall into the sea of death : As every man hath his Genesis , so he must have his Exodus , and as we are born to live , so we are born to die . Our dying on earth is but the taking of our journey to heaven : Why are we unwilling to lose that , which cannot be kept ? The good Pilot sitteth at the stern to guide his ship ; and so a good Christian to direct his life must think on death : death is the door whereby we must go out of bondage , and therefore as he that is in prison taketh great comfort to sit upon the threshold , that when the door is opened , he may the sooner get out : so we must always have our minds fixed upon death , for pass we must , but how or when we know not . Emosinarius having his Tomb in building , commanded that it should be left imperfect , and that his servants every day should put him in mind to finish the same , that so he might prepare to die . 

The use of this doctrine is , forasmuch as our life is short , and nothing almost shorter , let us prepare for death , for we must die . Be ye prepared , for the son of man will come at an hour when ye think not , Luk. 12. 40.  All estates of men are exhorted to prepare , old and young , rich and poor , Prince and Peasant : the danger is great , if men be found unprepared : as death leaveth men , so the day of judgement shall find them . If the tree fall toward the South , or toward the North , in the place that the tree falleth , there it shall be . Ec●le . 11. 3.  As Ishbosheth being found asleep , was killed by Rechab & Baanah , 2.  Sam. 4. 6. 7. even so if we be asleep in sin , and unprepared , we shall be killed by Satan . Because the five foolish virgins had not oil to maintain their lamps , the Bridegroom said , I know you not . Mat. 25. 12.  Because the man which came to the wedding was not prepared , he was cast into utter darkness , Mat. 22. 13.  As he is left behind that is unprepared when the wind serveth , and the ship under sail , even so he is left in damnation that is not prepared for the Lord when death cometh . Many men prepare for life which is uncertain , and forget death which is certain . I say unto all men , Watch , Mark. 13 37.  The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night . 2.  Pet. 3. 10.  a thief as well for stealing on us , as stealing from us : he comes in the dark when no body sees , treads on wool , that no body hears , watcheth an hour that no body knows . It may be he will come when men are banqueting , as on the old world , Luk. 17. 27.  Or when they are drunken , as on Belshazzer , Dan. 5. 25.  Or when they are committing filthiness , as on the Israelitish man , and the Moabitish woman . Num , 25. 8.  Or when they are coveting , as on the rich man , Luk. 12. 20.  Or when they are gormandising , as on the glutton , Luke . 16. 22.  Or when they are lying , as on Ananias , Acts 5. 5.  no thunder now can beaten into them a fear of that which then no power shall ease them of . We know Christ will come , let us prepare for his welcome . We are all householders , our bodies are our houses , our souls our goods , our senses are the doors and windows , the locks are faith and prayer . The day of our death will come as a thief ; a thief cometh when men do not look for him : so the day of death cometh suddenly . A thief cometh not when the master of the house is watching , but when he is asleep : so many times the day of the Lord cometh on men , not when they seem to watch , but when they are secure and careless : let our repentance watch , let it never sleep , lest we perish . But men now put far away the evil day , and they flatter themselves with the remoteness , the vision that he seeth , is for many days to come , and he prophesieth of the times that are far off , Ezek. 12. 27.  Surely there is no peace to the wicked , Esa. 57 21.  Their rose buds are not withered , their dances are not done , sleep conscience , lie still repentance , they will not prepare for death . God made garments for Adam of dead beasts skins , Gen. 3. 21. to put him in mind that he was condemned to die , and to make the remembrance of death familiar unto him , that the loss of life might not affright him , who always beware the livery of death upon him : so we feed daily upon dead creatures , this should teach us to prepare to feed dumb creatures . 

Secondly , because our lives are short and sinful , it should work in us a willingness to die . Blessed are they which die in the Lord Reu. 14. 13.  First , they are blessed in respect of the place : for if we consider the world wherein we live , it is a vale of misery , a prison , and a place of vexation and trouble , as the Apostle saith , We know that every creature groaneth with us also , and traveleth in pain together unto this present , Rom. 18. 22.  But heaven is a place of joy , rest , and of comfort . This place is of no certain continuance , here we have no abiding City , but we look for one to come , Heb. 13. 14.  But heaven is of continuance : for the foundation thereof is God. Secondly , they are blessed in regard of their company : for here we live among the wicked and sinful men ▪ but there we shall enjoy the company of innumerable Angles , Heb. 12. 22.  It was an excellent change when David was called from a Shepherd to be a King : so was it an excellent change in Saul when he was called from seeking his father's Asses , to be a King ; yet this is nothing in respect of their estate which are called from this world to heaven , where there is light without darkness , wisdom without ignorance , understanding without error , reason without obscurity , memory without oblivion , and joy without sorrow , where , whatsoever shall be desired , shall be present ; neither shall any thing be desired which is not comely : where God shall be seen without end , loved without loathing , and praised without wearying . Thirdly , in regard of their condition they are blessed , for they rest from all their labours : for they which die in the Lord , or for the Lord , are with the Lord Paul desireth to be dissolved , and to be with Christ , Phil. 1. 23.  Death considered in Christ , and joined with a good life , is to Gods elect an advantage , Phil. 1. 21. nothing else but a bridge over this tempestuous sea to Paradise , God's mercy made it so ; not by making death in itself good , but an instrument of good to his . Why is any man unwilling to die ? Death doth not separate us from God , but it maketh us draw near to God : then do we draw near to God , when we are separated from the body . As Pharaohs Butler could not see the face of the king when he was in prison , but being loosed from his bonds , he both saw him , and gave the cup into Pharaohs hand , Gen. 40. 21.  So as long as we are in the prison of our bodies , we cannot see the face of God ; but being loosed , we shall see God face to face , 1.  Cor. 13. 12. and enjoy that unspeakable good which God hath prepared for them that love him . 1.  Cor. 2. 9  Hast thou feared God in life ? then do not fear death : for the sting of death is taken away by Christ , so that as honey is not truly honey when it hath lost its sweetness ; nor vinegar truly vinigar , when it hath lost its tartness ; nor Aloes truly Aloes , when it hath lost its bitterness : so the death of the righteous is not truly death , having lost his sting , fearfulness and terrors in the godly . The dying out of this world is not a death , but a life rather , and therefore as julian said to Christ ; OH Galilean , thou hast overcome me : so may death say to them , OH Christian thou hast overcome me . What is death that thou fearest it ? it is a departure from this wicked world , a dissolution of the bodies of the godly from bonds , that they may be with Christ ; it is a returning to our heavenly Country from this pilgrimage , it is a deliverance from the misery of the world , it is a return from banishment to our father's house , it is a preparation for the glory of the resurrection . Why dost thou fear death ? Death hath only the name of death , not the sting of death . As the brazen serpent in the wilderness had the form and shape of a serpent , but not the life a serpent , nor the sting of a serpent , Num. 21. 9  So death hath the likeness and semblance of death , but it hath no sting , it hath no venom , it hath no poison . If a Bee sting a dead carcase , she loses not her sting ; but if she sting a living man , she loses her sting : so death stinging us which were as dead flesh , did not lose his sting ; but stinging Christ , he hath lost his sting : therefore we may now say ; OH death where is thy sting . 1.  Cor. 15. 55.  Thy sting is no sting unto us , but a crown of rejoicing . 1.  Thess. 2. 19  It is a Midwife to bring us out of the womb of this world , into the land of the living , Psa. 27. 13.  Death is as a ship whereby we fail from earth to heaven . Do not fear the grave : for thou sowest but a carnal and corruptible body , to reap an incorruptible and spiritual in the resurrection . Be willing to change dross for gold , and corruption for incorruption . If one enemy find favour at another enemy's hand , why should a dutiful child fear to go home to his heavenly father , a penitent soul to his sweet Saviour , and an obedient member to be joined with his head ? If he came into this world to redeem us , why should we doubt but at our death he will receive us. He that accepteth his enemies , will he reject his friends ? He that bought us so dear , will he refuse his pennyworth ? If he affected our company so much on earth , ( as that he said ) My delight is to be with the children of men , Pro. 8. 31.  Hath he now so forgotten his old love , as not to admit us into his company in heaven . He came hither to buy us an inheritance , and he went from hence to prepare it for us. joh. 14. 2.  And when we are to enter into possession , will he exclude us ? no , no : The eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him , to deliver their souls from death . Psa. 32. 18. 19  Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints , Psal. 116. 15.  Precious , as the end of labours , as the consummation of victory , as the gate of life , and the ingress of perfect security . Let us remember his love in adopting , his truth in promising , and his power in performing , and our fear of death will soon be altered into a desire of the same . He come to open heaven gates , and what meant he , but that we should enter in ? He came to us on earth to innite us to him , and why departed he from the earth , but to have us follow him ? He abandoneth none , but abandoned by them . He is easily found where he hath been carefully sought . Well , death to the good is counted a quiet haven , and to the bad it is counted shipwreck , The wayfaring man doth willingly demand where his mansion and stay shall be . The servant doth often accounted when his year is ended , the husbandman doth always expect harvest , and a woman with child doth wait for her time of delivery : so the servants of God do think of their death , & so look where their treasure is , there will their heart be also . Math. 6. 21.  If a Prince should command a Beggar to cast off all his rags , and bid him prepare himself to come into his presence , and live daily in his company , would the beggar delay , or be sorry because he shall enjoy the company of a Prince ? Much less should we delay , or be sorry , when God , the Prince of Princes , calleth us by death into his privy chamber of heaven . Therefore let beasts , and heathen , adulterers , and murderers fear death , because they think , and it is certain , that all their joy ends with their death ; and let not Gods children fear death , because it is an entrance into joy , and eternal felicity in heaven . 

And my age is nothing in respect of thee . Some read it age , some substance , some life ; in the original , My time is nothing in respect of thee ; nor this life nothing in respect of the life to come . It is some thing in the eyes of men , which see only things present ; but before God , which seeth things to come , which is eternity , which wanteth all measure , it is altogether nothing . 

This teacheth us , that our life , how long soever it be , being compared with the eternity of God , is as nothing ; and worldly prosperity being compared with eternal felicity , is as nothing . God is infinite , and our life is finite : it were a most unequal valuation to compare , and much more to prefer things which are in no proportion of goodness to the things which are undervalved ; for between temporal and eternal , heavenly and earthly things , can be no proportion . One day with the Lord is as a thousand years , and a thousand years as one day . 2.  Pet. 3. 8.  I am Alpha and Omega ( saith God ) Reu. 1. 11. the first , and the last , without beginning and without end . But man had beginning , for he was made of the dust of the earth , Gen. 2. 7. and man shall have an end of his time , for he shall return to dust , Gen. 3. 19  What proportion is there between God and man ? God is the Creator , man the creature : God is Immortal , man mortal ; God the Maker , man made by God ; God the Potter , man the vessel of earth ; God is mighty , man is weak . If persecution happen , saint not , God is mighty ; if poverty , shrink not , God is wealth ; if thy conscience grieve thee , run to God he is merciful ; if thy ignorance dismay thee , run to God he is wisdom : Worldly prosperity is of short continuance , but heavenly happiness shall continue for ever . 

This serves to instruct us to prefer the life to come before this life , for in the world to come there is life without death , rest without labour , health without grief , light without darkness , day without night , and happiness without end . The eye hath not seen , the ear hath not heard , neither came into man's heart , what God hath prepared for them that love him . 1.  Cor. 2. 9  In heaven there is no sickness nor sorrow , no crying out nor complainig . There is no need of the Sun , neither of the Moon to shine in it , for the glory of God did light it , and the Lamb is the light of it . And the people which are saved shall walk in the light of it , and the Kings of the earth shall bring their honour and glory unto it : And the gates of it shall not be shut by day , for there shall be no night there . Reu. 21.  23. 24. 25.  As God is our light here , so he will be in heaven , He is the Sun which borroweth not light from another . He is the Way . joh. 14. 6.  The Door , joh. 10. 9  The Vine , joh. 15. 1.  The living Bread. joh. 6. 51.  He is the light by participatton here , and by fruition in heaven . Our Saviour said , I will be with you to the end of the world , Math. 28. 20. that is , he will be with the godly , as long as any be on earth , and he will be with them for ever in heaven . Christ will not be light to the wicked in this life , and therefore he will be no light to them in the life to come . He will be life to none that are appointed to death , nor the bread of life , to such as had rather the Onions and Garlic of Egypt , than Milk and Honey in the heavenly Canaan . To whom God doth give the light of Grace here , to them he will give the light of glory in heaven ; to whom he denyeth the one , he will never give the other : If God make us partakers of Christ's Ignominy , he will make us partakers of his Glory . 

Secondly , seeing all things are mutable in this world , let us lay up our rest in the world to come . There is nothing under the Sun which is perpetual , but all subject to diverse mutations : kingdoms are subject to mutability , as we may see by Israel and judah , how did they flourish for a time , now they are gone , and their Kingdoms possessed by others ? How often hath the government of Rome been changed ? Famous Cities have come to naught . One Generation passeth , and another succedeth . Eccl. 1. 4.  In another place he saith : Surely the light is a pleasant thing , and it is a good thing to the eyes to see the Sun . Though a man live many years , and in them all he rejoice , yet he shall remember the days of darkness , because they are many , all that cometh is vanity , Eccl. 11. 7. 8.  Man is not perpetual , for man is born to die , as we see daily by experience : Houses built with great cost and charge become ruinous : Trees have but a time and then wither . What is there under the Sun that is perpetual ? The light of our eyes is but for a time , but the happiness of the godly lasteth for ever . The rich man can have his riches but for a time , nor the great man his honours , nor the King his Crown , nor the wanton his pleasures , but the godly man's happiness lasteth for ever . The true difference between earthly things and heavenly consisteth in this , earthly things are much desired , but being obtained they content little , heavenly things are desired little , but once gained , satisfy much ; and therefore lay not up treasure upon earth , where the moth and canker corrupt , and where thieves dig through and steal . Math. 6. 20.  

[ Surely , every man in his best state is altogether vanity . ] Every man of what sort or fashion so ever he be is vanity . Solomon saith , All is vanity : Eccl. 1. 2. and David saith , The children of men are vanity , the chief men are lies ; to lay them upon a balance they are altogether lighter than vanity . Psal. 62. 9  And man is like to vanity ▪ Psal. 144. 4.  That is vain which is subject to diverse changes , which is mutable , frail , and passing away ; so every man , rich , and poor , noble , and ignoble , Prince , and people , are changeable , like a bubble made of vanity . 

This doth teach us that all sorts of men , and all sexes are frail and changeable : To day living , to morrow dead , as some of our neighbours round about us , to day rich to morrow poor , as job. 1. 21.  To day in honour , to morrow in the dust . One cryeth mine head , as the Shunamites child did . 2.  Kin. 4. 19 another is sick with a fall , as Ahaziah was , 2.  Kin. 1. 2.  Another cryeth in his feet as Asa. 2.  Chro. 16. 12.  Another sick to death , as Hezekiah , Esa. 38. 1.  Another's soul panteth , as David's did , Ps. 42. 1.  As that part of the wheel which is highest , is presently lowest again : so that man which the world lifts up one while , anon after casteth down again , so mutable is the estate of every man All things in the world will either leave us or else we must leave them . They will leave us ; riches taketh her to her wings , as an eagle . Pro. 23. 5.  Honour's leave many , as Haman ; dignities , as Bellisarius . We leave them , As the Partridge gathereth the young which she hath not brought forth : so he that getteth riches , and not by right , shall leave them in the midst of his days , and at his end shall be a fool . jer. 17. 11.  

The use of this doctrine serves to humble all sorts and sexes , that they wax not proud . Art thou a king , thou art subject to mutability ? thou art vanity . Art thou noble , art thou rich , thou art but vanity ? like a Venice glass soon broken , thy days are but as an hand breadth ; thy time is nothing , if it be compared with the eternity of God , and thou in thy best estate , whether youthful , or in prosperity , thou art frail and subject to divers mutabilities and changes , thou art mortal and thou must die . 

And now ( beloved ) lest I should tyre myself , and your Christian patience , I will but lap with Gideons' soldiers , judges . 7. 6. and touch the honey as jonathan , with the tip of my rod. 1.  Sam. 14. 43. and so brifly will speak as the present occasion , and your expectation requireth : that as I have hitherto spoken of death , so now I may say something also of this dead subject presented here before your eyes . This worshipful Gentleman , descended from worshipful parents , who were well known to many living among us. His education was in learning , first in schools in the country ; then to Oxford , where he became so studious , that he excelled many of his rank . From thence he was sent to the Inns of Court ; there he made such proceedings , that he might have been inferior in nothing to such as are right honourable , if he had continued ; but he choose rather to live privately with contentation , then in great places where contentment is hardly to be found . I will speak with your fovourable patience , something of his learning , of his life , and so of his death . 

First touching his learning , he was a good Grammarian , he did both write and speak good latin : touching his writing , his book written in latin , dedicated to the King's Majesty , will testify the truth thereof . Touching his speaking of latin readily , such as have conferred with him , can relate . He was a good Philosopher , a good Historian , some Graecian , a man well read in Physic : and for distillations , and secrets ; few can second him . Touching divinity , he had read the Bible , and expositors thereon , both old and new , ancient and modern . Divinity was his study now for the most part , wherein he did so busy himself , that he intended ( if it had pleased God ) to have printed a book of the grounds of Christian religion , collected in latin , wherein he showed great reading , good judgement , and multiplicity of knowledge . It were to be lamented , were it not that the good pleasure of Almighty God was such , that so much learning should go to the grave , and such good parts as were in him , should be buried in the earth . 

Secondly , his life was answerable to his learning , he was sober in his carriage , affable in company , gentle , and of an humble spirit towards all ; not covetous , for he was dead to the world ; not proud , no quarrel , no drunkard ; and for any thing I can speak ( or any other charitable Christian ) blameless from all great , enormous , and scandalous offences ; being full of the works of the spirit : he was a peacemaker , he would persuade such as did contend , and take pains to compose strife : he would give of his own to end that which malice had begun : he was charitable to the poor , and pitiful to the distressed . His brethren & sisters have lost for a time , the company of a dear and comfortable brother : his kindred a good Counsellor , the poor an almes-giver ; and other Ministers & myself , a kind friend , and I doubt not but God hath received his soul . Lastly , touching his sickness & death , his sickness was Morbus haereditarius ( as himself would call it ) accompanied with a fever . In his sickness he was patient , & willing to leave this miserable world . And as his life was quiet , so he died quietly . Now the Lord grant us grace so to spend all our days in his fear , that at length we may die in his favour , and receive the reward of everlasting life . 

FINIS . 





1.  Sam. 13. 14.  Psal. 78. 70.  Acts 7. 46.  Psalm . 89. 20.  Acts 2. 25.  Math 1. 1.  2.  Sam. 23. 1.  Psalm . 34. 19  Psalm 39 4.  Psalm 90. 12.  esay 7. 14.  Revelat. 21. 5.  Luk. 2. 10.  Mark 16. 6.  Mal. 4 5.  Psalm 52. 7.  Revelat. 3. 20.  Doctr.  esay 42. 23.  Revel . 3. 6.  Use 1  Psalm 58 , 4. 5.  Gal. 3. 1.  Philip . 3. 18.  2.  Tim. 2. 15.  2.  King. 4. 5.  Luk. 2. 51.  Acts 16. 14.  Host 10. 12.  Heb. 9 27.  2.  Sam. 14. 14.  2.  Sam. 12. 18.  Luk. 7. 12.  Gen. 49. 33.  job. 7. 1.  job. 14. 5.  Gen. 4. 8.  1.  Sam. 4. 18.  esay 37. 37.  1.  King. 2. 34.  job. 1. 19  2.  King. 2. 24.  Num. 16. 31. 32  2.  King ▪ 1. 10.  Doctr.  Esa. 40. 6.  Psal. 102. 11.  Host 13. 3.  job. 7. 6.  job. 7. 9  job. 14. 2.  james 4. 14.  job. 7. 7.  Eccles. 7. 3.  Per nativitatem ad stadium per mort●m ad brevium pervenimus . Eccles. 2. 11.  job. 14. 1.  Gen. 47. 9  Psal. 90. 10.  jonah 4. 6. 7.  Gen. 5. 27.  Gen. 25. 7.  Use 1  Luke . 12. 40.  Eccles. 11. 3.  2 Sam. 4. 6. 7.  Matth. 25. 12.  Matth. 22. 13.  Mark 13. 37.  2.  Pet. 3. 10.  Luke . 17. 27.  Daniel . 5. 25.  Numb . 25. 8.  Luke 12. 20.  Luke 16. 22.  Acts 5. 5.  Amos 6. 3.  Ezek. 12. 27.  esay . 57 21.  Genes . 3. 21.  Revel . 14. 13.  Rom. 8. 22.  Hebr. 13. 14.  Hebr. 12. 22.  Philip. 1. 23.  Philip. 1. 21.  Genes . 40. 21.  1.  Cor. 13. 12.  1.  Cor. 2. 9  Vicisti Galilae . Vicisti Christiane . Numb . 21. 9  1.  Cor. 15. 55.  1.  Thess. 2. 19  Psalm . 27. 13.  Prou. 8. 31.  john . 14. 2.  Psal. 32. 18. 19  Psalm . 116. 15.  Matth. 6. 21.  Doctr.  2.  Pet. 3. 8.  Revelat. 1. 11.  Gen 2. 7.  Gen. 3. 19  Use 1  1.  Cor. 2. 9  Revel . 31. 23.  24  25  joh. 14. 6.  joh. 10. 9  joh. 15. 1.  joh. 6. 51.  Math. 28. 20.  2  Eccles. 1. 4.  Eccles. 11. 7.  Math. 6. 20.  Eccles. 1. 2.  Psal. 62. 9  Psal. 144 4.  Doctr.  job. 1. 21.  2.  King. 4. 19  2.  King. 1. 2.  2 Chr. 16. 12.  esay 38. 1.  Psalm 42. 1.  Proverb . 23. 5.  jer. 17. 11.  Use . judg. 7. 6.  1.  Sam. 14. 43.  Descent . Education . Learning . Life . Death . The stone . 