Helps for discovery of the truth in point of toleration : being the judgement of that eminent scholar tho. Cartwright , sometimes divinity-professor in the university of Cambridge in the reign of Queen Elizabeth of happy memory , and then a famous Nonconformist , for which through the tyranny of the Bishops he suffered exile . Wherein the power and duty of the magistrate in relation to matters of religion is discussed ; as also whether the judicial laws given by Moses to the Jews are abrogate by the coming of Christ . More particularly in relation to some sins , viz. blasphemy , adultery , &c.  Occasionally handled in a controversy between the said public professor t. c. and doctor Whitgift . here also by the way is laid down his judgement in the case of divorce , and that the party innocent May marry again . 

London , printed for Thomas banks , at the sign of the seal in Westminster hall . 1648.  

To the reader . 

Christian reader , 

For understanding this piece of Mr.  Cartwright's , thou art to consider , that it is an extract out of a book of his written for a reply to the then Bishop of Canterbury dr. Whitgift . and finding that he unfolds many truths for the settling of men's judgments in these times , as concerning the force of the judicial laws of Moses given to the Jews , concerning the punishment of blasphemy , adultery , &c. it was judged likely to prove useful to the church of Christ if it were made more public , the old book being near worn out of print . 

The extent and continuance of the law moral , ceremonial , and judicial , with their several uses , not being well considered , hath been the cause that many errors of late times have been pleaded for . Something of the law was abrogated by the coming of Christ : this being hinted and taken hold of by the ignorant and unstable , they understand it of the abrogation of all , both ceremonial , judicial and moral , and so open a gap to licentiousness . Thus by confounding what should be distinguished , many absurdities have their rise . There is something moral among the judicials , which will stand against all opposition . There is somewhat in the moral which is abrogate to the believer , as the curse , the condemning power , the irritating nature , &c.  qui bene distinguit , bene docet . i leave the clearing of some of these things to this ensuing extract : the Lord grant us discerning spirits , together with hearts to walk in the light of his truth , when we discern it . 

Helps for discovery of the truth , in point of toleration . 

My former assertion was , that we have a word of God for our direction in all things which we have to do . my reason illustrating this truth was this , that otherwise our estate should be worse than the state of the Jews , who had direction ( As is on all hands confessed ) out of the law , even for the least things ; and whereat it is the virtue of a good law , to leave as little undetermined , and without the compass of the law , as can be , my adversary d. w. imagining that we have no word for divers things , wherein the Jews had particular direction , supposeth a greater perfection •n the law given to the Jews , then in that which is left to us . 

That this is a principal virtue of the law , May be seen •nd evidenced thus ; first , because conscience that is well ••nstructed and touched with the fear of God , will seek direction from the light of God's word , even in the smallest actions . Secondly , common reason will urge it , the Masters whereof give this rule , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , &c. arist. ad theod. viz. it greatly behooveth those laws which are well made , as much as can be to determine of all things , and to leave as few things as May be to the discretion of the judge . 

I added , that the new testament is a noble addition to the old , that it maketh the old more manifest , and bringeth greater light ; which expression ( Though d. w. wrangleth withal ) is no other than Mr. Calvin useth on 2 tim. 3. where he calls the gospel an addition to the law : let us therefore now consider , whether in the matter of the judicial law , that which i have set down be strange and dangerous , as dr. w. surmiseth . 

I do not affirm , that the magistrate is simply bound to the judicial law of Moses ; but that he is bound to the equity , which i also call the substance and marrow of them , in regard of which equity , i affirm that , there are certain laws among the judicials , which cannot be changed . 

Hereof i gave example in the laws which command , that a stubborn idolater , blasphemer , murderer , incestuous person , and such like should be put to death . 

For the first point , that the equity of the judicials doth remain , and therefore ought to be a rule to direct all laws by : to let pass the authority of mr Calvin , mr Beza , and other writers of our time , who have written with any judgement of this matter , ( Who do in plain words affirm , that there is a perpetual equity in them , and that our laws , though they differ in form , yet ought to retain the reason or ground of them ) i say to let that pass , i assert , that all these laws , moral , ceremonial , and judicial , being the laws of God , and by his revealed will established , must so far forth remain , as it appeareth not by his will that they are revoked . 

To bolt out therefore this truth , seeing the altering or revoking of any law must be by our saviour's coming only , let us inquire what those laws are which he put an end unto . 

This thing May be considered in that division which s. Paul useth , where he saith that our saviour Christ came to make peace , first between God and men , and then between men and men ; that is to say between the Jews and gentiles . 1.  The ceremonial law therefore being a law of enmity ( Which as a wall held out the gentiles from joining themselves unto the Jews ) was necessary , among other causes , in this respect to be taken away . Secondly , the curse of the law , for the breach of any of the laws of God , either pertaining to the Jews in times past , or unto us now ( Being that which maketh the wall between the Lord and us ) was , for our reconciliation with his majesty , necessarily to be removed : whereupon it followeth , first , that the moral law ( As that which hindereth not our reconciliation with God , nor our good agreement with men ) is in as full strength as ever it was before the coming of our saviour Christ : for the curse of the law besides that , it is in regard of the elect , rather fulfilled and executed in the person of our saviour Christ , than abrogated . 2.  Besides that also , it hath a necessary use as yet towards the elect , not only to drive them to the faith which is in Christ Jesus , but also to keep under the remnants of rebellion , even of them which have already believed . And 3.  Besides that , the force thereof is daily , and shall be for ever executed upon the wicked . 4.  Besides all this , seeing this curse was annexed not only to the breach of the moral law , but also of the ceremonial and judicial , there is no just cause , why the moral law should be said to be abrogated . 

Secondly it followeth hereupon , that those judicial laws of Moses , which are merely politck , and without all mixture of ceremonies , must remain , as those which hinder not the atonement of Jews and gentiles with God , or of one of them with another . Besides this , it being manifest , that our saviour Christ came not to dissolve any good government of commonwealth , he can least of all be thought to come to destroy that which himself had established . 

Of this point dr. w. hath two contrary sentences , one of musculus , which saith that the judicial law is abrogate , the other of Beza , which is , that the judicial law being given to the Jews , is not yet abrogate , so that if they had any estate of commonwealth in the land of Canaan , they should be constrained to use that form of government , which was given to them by Moses . 

Now albeit those laws given unto the Jews for that land , do not bind the gentiles in other lands , forsomuch as the diversity of the dispositions of the persons , and state of that country , gave occasion of some laws there , which would not have been in other places , yet forasmuch as there is in those laws a constant and everlasting equity whereupon they were grounded , 2.  And the same perfecter and further from error then the forge of man's reason ( Which is even in this behalf shrewdly wounded , ) is able to device ; it followeth , that even in making politic laws for the commonwealth , Christian magistrates ought to propound unto themselves those laws , and in light of their equity by a just proportion of circumstances , of person , place , &c. to frame them . 

Now to prove this truth , that the equity of the judicial law remaineth , ( Not as a counsel which men May follow if they list , and leave at their pleasure , but ) as a law whereto they be bound , i shall prove by an argument taken from that of the apostle in 1 cor 9 where after he had alleged divers similitudes , fetched from the common use of men , to prove that a minister of the gospel ought to be maintained upon the church's charge ; least it Might be objected that these were but human reasons , he citeth one of the judicial laws , as the eternal law of God , deut. 25. 4.  Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth &c.  Where it is manifest , that he doubteth not to bind the conscience of the corinths unto the equity of that law which was judicial , and so urgeth it ver. 10.  

Likewise of the finding of the priests in the service of the altar , commanded in the law , he concludeth , that those which preach the gospel should live of it . And this maintenance of the priest , albeit in the manner of the provision it was merely ceremonial , yet as it was a reward of their service , due by men ( As the punishments also , if they had failed in their duties , ) was mere judicial . Whereupon it followeth , that in those judicials , to all the circumstances whereof we are not bound , we are yet bound to the equity of them . 

It remaineth to show , that there are certain judicial laws which cannot be changed , as that a blasphemer , contemptuous and stubborn idolater , &c. ought to be put to death . They which would have this left at liberty , have nothing to allege to colour their looseness , but the coming of Christ and his passion : but they do not see how this their arguing faultreth divers ways . For , 

1.  It is a childish error to think , that our saviour Christ came to exempt men from corporal death , which the law casteth upon evil doers , when as he came not to deliver from death , which is the parting of the body from the soul , but from that which is the separation both of body and soul from the gracious presence of the Lord . And if it were so , that our saviour Christ had born in his body this civil punishment of public offenders , it must thereupon follow , not that it is in the liberty of the magistrate to put them to de•th , but that he must , will he , nill he , if they repent , keep them alive . For if our saviour hath answered that justice of God in his law , whereby he hath commanded that such malefactors should be put to death , it should be great injustice to require that again in the life of the offender . 

2.  Again , this opinion is injurious to the death of Christ ; for if he were for this cause made manifest in the flesh , that he Might destroy sin , which is the work of the devil , 1 ioh. 3. 8. this imagination of a liberty left to the magistrate , whether he will put them to death or not , doth make Christ build again that kingdom of sin which he hath destroyed : for , when both in common reason , and by the manifest word of God , the Lord giveth this blessing unto the punishment of such grievous offenders by death , that others ( Not only which see , but also ) which hear of them , have the bridle of fear put upon them , whereby they are withheld from the like crimes , it must needs follow , that whosoever maketh our saviour Christ author of this looseness , in not punishing such offenders , maketh him forthwith to loose the bridle whereby others are stayed from throwing themselves down the hill of wickedness which was before committed : and what is , if this be not , to make our saviour Christ a troubler of commonwealths ? 

Moreover , if our saviour Christ by his coming loosed these civil punishments , and purchased this grace of his father for blasphemers , &c. that if they could find favour in the eyes of the magistrate , they Might escape the hands of death , which the law of God adjudgeth them unto : how cometh it to pass , that the apostles , to whom the Lord committed the publishing of all that pardon which he obtained for us , did never make mention of the slaking of these punishments ? If our saviour Christ had obtained this liberty , it was worthy the preaching ; and therefore unless d. w. can show something out of the writings of the apostles , to warrant this sanctuary , which he would so fain build to the support of blasphemers , murderers , &c. it followeth , that the apostles , by his saying , have not answered the trust committed unto them ; but if all godly minds do abhor these absurdities , there is no cause why they should like of this corruption of the doctor , whereupon all these depend . Nay in that the apostle putteth a sword in the hand of the magistrate , and in the use of it maketh him a minister and servant of the vengeance and justice of the Lord against sin : he striketh through this opinion , which imagineth that our saviour Christ came to hang the sword of the Lord's justice upon the pleasure and will of man . For the magistrate being the Lord's officer , as the sheriff is the magistrates : it is no more in his choice to withhold the sword which the Lord hath put in his hand to draw , then in the power of the sheriff , to stay the execution of that judgement , which the magistrate himself hath lawfully commanded , 

Now seeing there is a sword in the magistrates hand , by the doctrine of the apostles , and that also which the magistrate must of duty draw ; i would gladly know where that necessity of drawing this sword can be found , if it be not in these crimes of blasphemy , &c. which i have set down ? 

And if he say that Paul , by the sword understandeth all manner of civil punishments , as well by the purse , as by other bodily chastisements which spare the life ; i grant it , but by an usual manner of speech which is figurative , and noteth the whole by the part , he rather chose to utter those punishments by the sword , then either by the whip or purse : whereby he did not only not exclude this necessity of punishing malefactors with death , but laid rather a straighter bond upon the magistrate to execute those which commit things worthy of death . 

Hitherto generally of putting those to death , which commit things against the laws remaining still in force , as they were in times past established by the blood of the transgressors : now i will come to the particular crimes set down , and first for the crime of adultery . 

It is to be considered that the crime of adultery is a breach of the holy and ancient , both institution and solemn covenant of the Lord , then that it is an injury done unto the innocent party in the most precious possession that can be , in things pertaining to this present life , joined with dishonour cast not only upon the person , but upon all his children , and in a manner on all those that belong unto him . Thirdly that this fire doth not only wast the family where it is , but maketh a breach into the commonwealth , whilst the right of inheritance , either of lands or offices is oftentimes thus translated from the true inheritors , while the children which are so begotten , having oft times less care and cost bestowed on them in their education , become hurtful members of the commonwalth ; whereby all May clearly see the perpetual equity of the law of God in the revengement of this sin by death . 

And when the Lord addeth this for a reason of putting the adulterer to death , that the evil May be taken out of Israel , unto the heap of discommodities before rehearsed for fault of executing this judgement of death , he threatneth the whole commonwealth with mischief to fall upon it ; and the equity of this punishment by death hath so lightsome colours upon it , that it hath upholden itself against the ignorance and injustice of all which have not willingly put out that sparkle which standeth in the discretion of honesty ; for even before this candle light of the law of God was set up , not only the godly ( As Job ) which were in some part reform of the general blindness , but even those that were not of the church of God , as Abimelech the King of Gerar , and the very Canaanite ( As long as there was any step of equity among them ) did see that the filth of this sin was such , as aught to be washed away with the blood of the offenders . For whereas Isaac feared the assault , both of his life and of the chastity of Rebecka , the King ordained that whosoever either laid violent hands on him , or had to do with his wife , should die ; and in that Judah called for Thamar to be led forth to death in the land of Canaan , where himself was but a private man , for that she being made sure unto an husband , played the harlot : he gave to understand , that the Canaanites , who had even then filled a good part of that measure of sin unto the brink , whereof they came afterward did notwithstanding pursue adulterers unto death . 

And when the Lord did afterward give testimony to this punishment by the express words of his law , it is manifest , that the law which God hath written in the table of the hearts of all men , pronounceth the sentence of death against adulterers : so that unless men will like giants fight against the light of nature , or say , that our saviour Christ came to abolish that which in all times and with all nations ( Not altogether spoilt of the discretion of honesty and dishonesty ) was observed , it followeth , that the punishment of adultery by death , and consequently much more the punishment of incestuous meetings by death , standeth in as full force now as ever it did before the coming of our saviour Christ . 

The exceptions against this doctrine are of no value , for if this be the truth of God there can be no prerogative against it , unless he can show some higher court than heaven , and some chief justice above the Lord . 

It is not denied , but the punishments by death whereby men have established laws which themselves have for their better commodity devised , May be either mitigated or taken away by those to whom it appertained ; neither is the magistrate by any thing which i have set down bound to mitigate the punishment of thieves . For , their punishment May grow by the circumstance of place , as in Scythia where all things lying open to the spoil , had need to be locked up by the straighter punishment , and sometimes by the disposition of the persons lighter handed than others , as if one had to do with the Lacedæmonians , or some nation in whom that sin had taken deeper root . And i will not deny , but even these crimes of murder and adultery May vary by divers circumstances , and therefore the magistrate May according to the quantity of the fault appoint the manner of death sharper or milder . but that there is any place , time , or other circumstance , which can lessen these crimes that they should not be worthy of death , upon the reasons before alleged , i utterly deny . 

it May be objected , that the law of our saviour Christ touching divorcement for adultery , mat. 5. 32. had been to no purpose , if the adulterer ought of necessity to be put to death . 

first , he that urgeth this May be justly charged with a mistake in bringing in our saviour Christ there as a maker of laws under the gospel , whereas he made none in those places , but expounded the law of God , which he had made from the beginning ; the other refusals made by the Jews of their wives , were never any laws but permissions only : and therefore in their abolishment there was no law of God abrogated . 

Secondly , it was necessary to use that exposition , notwithstanding that the punishment of the law by death remained ; for besides that the Jews being under the government of the Romans had those civil punishments by death suspended upon the pleasure of their officers , who were often corrupted : our saviour Christ foreseeing all things did foresee what looseness would follow in this behalf , and therefore as the office of a good teacher required , he instructed the conscience , and taught that albeit the magistrate fail in the execution of the law , yet that the former yoke being broken , men were at their liberty to enter into a new contract of marriage with other ; whereby he met with the corrupt opinion of those which dream that the knot of marriage is not cut asunder by adultery during the life of the parties married . 

Now for the opinion of musculus before quoted , at pa. 3. although his manner of speech ( In saying that all Moses is abrogated ) be hard , yet it will appear that d. w. hath wrested this learned man's words from his meaning , and that he is but a snatcher at syllables ; for the meaning of that learned man musculus was , that these laws are abrogate , as given by moss , and do notwithstanding remain as they contain a perpetual equity ; and that this is his meaning May be proved by comparing him with himself , for in the same title of laws he writeth thus , there are ( Saith he ) that think that Christ did abrogate the punishment prescribed by the law against adulterers , when he saith , neither do i condemn thee , go and sin no more ; these be gay fellows , they think not of this , that our saviour Christ came into the world , not to judge or punish , but to save sinners : and yet in the mean season not to take away the punishments of the law , given of God his father by Moses ; whereupon he said not simply , thou thoughtest not to be condemned , &c. and so showeth , that if she had been condemned according to the sentence of the law , that the Lord would not have spoke against it . This our saviour's refusal to condemn this woman taken in adultery , doth no more cease the punishment due to adultery , than his refusing to judge in the division of an inheritance when he was requested , doth countenance anabaptistical community , or doth prove , that inheritances should not be divided , in both these he refuseth to meddle , as impertinent to that spiritual work he intended ] Calvin in his comment on John , calleth it popish divinity , that the sentence of our saviour Christ , jo. 8. should bring any favour to adulterers , as touching the civil punishment . 

As for Mr. Beza , it is known that he proveth that heretics ought by the law of God to be put to death , whereby it appears that he believes those judicials which give sentence of death against the crimes here set down to be still in as full force as ever they were . Unto which i could add Peter martyr , who hath a long dispute of the necessary observation of this law against adulterers , and as i have showed there is none of these crimes but even the law of nature will teach us , that they ought to receive the reward of death . 

the dr. proceeds , and seeks to make one difference between the law and gospel , to lie in relation to the severity of the law and lenity of the gospel , in respect of temporal punishment . 

the answer . i say that in this very point , a great part of the error of the manichees doth consist , for they were led to condemn the justice of God under the old testament , because of the outward punishments which were exercised partly by the hand of God by judgements from heaven , and partly by the ministry of men at the commandment of the law ; therefore the favour of manichism is still hot as ever it was . 

But since i am entered into the mention of this , the truth is , that even in these outward punishments , the dispensaton of God under the law , is divers from that under the gospel ; for under the pedagogy of the law , as he crowned the obedience of it for the most part with greater abundance of outward blessings , than he doth the obedience of his saints under the gospel : so did he with more terrible , more often , and more manifest judgements , revenge the breach of it in that time , than he doth now . And herein indeed is the difference which the dr. is groping after but cannot hit on it ; but that this should bring any diversity in the set and ordinary punishments prescribed by the law , i for my part cannot understand . The contrary rather i can gather ; for even as although the Lord doth not now by outward blessings give so plentiful testimony to the obedience of the gospel , as then of the law : yet the magistrate ought to be as diligent to procure the good of the church as ever he was in the time of the law : even so although the Lord by bodily punishments doth not so severely revenge as he did then , yet the magistrate May not remit any thing therefore of that severity which he was wont to use . Nay more , even as the magistrate ought so much the more carefully to procure the outward welfare of the church now , as the Lord withdraweth his hand that way , more now than he did then , even so ought he to keep by so much an harder hand over the punishment of sin now , than he did then , as the Lord more rarely thundereth by his judgements from heaven , now , than he did in time of the law . 

And sruely , if ever there had been any time wherein the magistrates sword Might have rested and rusted in the sheath , the time of the law of all had been most fittest : when the Lord did so visibly sit in judgement , and himself in proper person hold the assize . 

The causes of this diversity between the law and gospel May be seen in those learned men mentioned , which handle the point . 

It is enough for me , so to help the dr. out , with what he traveled with , that i have showed , that what is by me here laid down is nothing hindered , but greatly helped by this difference which he bringeth between the law , and the gospel . 

next , the dr. finds fault with my interpretation of that place of Zachary , concerning putting to death him that prophesied falsely , his reason is , because ( Forsooth ) by that means the parents should have power of death upon their children ; therefore ( Saith the dr. ) there must be some other sense sought out , then that which the words do purport . 

whereunto i answer , that Moses showing what ought to be done against those false teachers which go about secretly to withdraw from the true worship of God , saith , deu. 13. 6 , 9 that though it be his brother , his son , his daughter , or his wife , he shall not spare but kill them : tell me now i pray you , doth not Moses mean there truly , and as his words sound , that the false teacher shall die ? If you cannot deny it , than you see that your reason which you here assign is nothing worth , for there also it is commanded to the father to kill his son . 

But if you list to learn , you May perceive that by these words understood simply , there is no power given to one private man to kill another , nor for the parent ( As a private man ) to kill his children : but this manner of speech is grounded upon the law of God , deut. 17. 7. whereby it was provided , that the witness which had accused should throw the first stone against the convicted person ; forasmuch therefore , as both Moses and Zachary after Moses , will have the father accuser of his own child , if the knowledge of his enticement to idolatry remain with him alone , therefore also they ascribe the killing of the guilty person unto them , as a thing belonging to the duty of the accuser . 

Oh! but your words seem to give suspicion of a difference between the Jews and us , what is that ? why that Christian parents should rather put their children to death , then to be withdrawn by them : so that the Jews have an absolute commandment to put them to death , but the Christians have it under condition , if they cannot otherwise keep still the true worship of God . 

But where and in what shop is this difference quoined ? For how shall they be sure they shall not be withdrawn by him , unless they procure him to be put to death ? 

And although they were out of the peril of being with-drawn , how are others provided for , whom he May corrupt ? And if it were possible that poison which he hath , could not hurt any other , where is the revenge of God's glory which hath been dishonoured by such false teaching ? and in the maintenance whereof the zeal of God's children as well under the gospel as under the law doth consist ? 

I conclude therefore that place of Zachary ( Against your fond distinction ) that the same severity of punishment which was used against false prophets then , aught to be used now under the gospel against false teachers , comparing one person and circumstance with another . As he which hath fallen from God , and gone about to draw others away , to be handled according to the law prescribed in that 13. of deut.  if this be extreme , i am content to be so Counted with the holy ghost . And though in some cases of idolatry , upon repentance life is given , yet in this case and some other expressed in the law , as of open and horrible blasphemy of the name of God ; i deny that upon repentance there ought to follow any pardon of death , which the judicial law doth require . 

Besides , it is an anabaptistical tenant to avoid all punishment of sin whatsoever , to maintain that , for whatever offence a man commit , if he show tokens of repentance , he May be delivered from bodily punishment : for what murderer , what traitor , &c. which though he be never so unrepentant and obstinate in his sin , hearing that upon repentance there is a way to escape death , will not enforce himself to show all tokens of repentance ? 

Let this truth therefore be further enforced by this argument . forasmuch as i have showed out of the new testament that he who killeth a man , and taketh away his corporal life ought to die , it followeth much more , that he which taketh away the life of the soul should die : and if it be meet to maintain the life of man by the punishment of death , how should the honour of God , which is more precious than all men's lives , be with smaller punishment established ? 

Therefore to close up this question , i will add this ; that the magistrates which punish murderers and thieves , and treasons , with other transgressors of the second table severely , and are loose in punishing the breaches of the first table , begin at the wrong end , and do all one with those , who to dry up many rivers continually fed by one fountain , begin at the channels where it divideth and parteth itself into many arms : which as it is an endless labour , so is this also which they go about ; for whereas s. Paul teacheth rom. 1. that God for revenge of the dishonour of his name , giveth men over to wicked minds , to the committing all kind of filthiness , and of all kind of sins against the second table , be they never so horrible ; and so maketh the breach of the first table the cause of the breach of the second : it cannot be ( Let the magistrate lay as good watch as he can , and aggravate punishments as much as he can , ) i say it cannot be but where either the first table is broken , or the breach not duly revenged , but swarms of treasons , thefts , murders , adulteries , perjuries and such like , must needs break out in those governments . 

And therefore as the short and easy way to dry up the channels and rivers is to stop up the head and fountain of all , so the only remedy of purging the commonwealth of these mischiefs , is to bend the force of sharp and severe punishments especially against idolaters , blasphemers , contemners of true religion , and of the service of God . 

And therefore i conclude , that those which would have the severity of the law against idolaters , &c. abated , do at unawares not only thereby utter the small price which they set either of God's glory , or of the salvation of their brethren , but withal declare themselves enemies to commonwealths , and of all both civil and godly honesty of life . 

Finis . 





☜  calv. instit. l. 4 c. 20.  Sect. 15.  Beza de comburendis haereticis . eph. 2.  pa. 97.  ☞  1.  Argument . pag. 98.  pag. 99  deut. 19  2 argument , to prove the judicial law still in force . joe . rom. 13.  pag. 101.  lev. 19  iob. 31. 11.  gen. 26. 11.  gen. 38. 24.  an objection answered . 1.  Answer . 2.  Answer . joh. 18. 31.  joh. 8.  pag. 107.  see also bezae confessio christianae fidei , ca. 5. de ecclesia sect. 44.  dr. vv.  t. c.  ob.  zach. 12.  reas. the answer of t. c.  pag. 112.  pag. 108.  arg.  pag. 117.  arg.  pag. 118.  














