THE HEROINAE : OR The lives OF ARRIA , 
PAULINA , 
LUCRETIA , 
DIDO , 
THEUTILLA , 
CYPRIANA , 
ARETAPHILA . 


LONDON , Printed by R. Bishop , for john Colby , and are to be sold at his Shop under the King's head Tavern , at Chancery-lane end in Fleetstreet . 1639.  

TO The true Heroine Lady , the Lady DOROTHY SIDNEY , The HEROINAES are humbly presented by G. RIVERS , To receive Fame from her Favour . 

Madam , 

That I approach so fair a Shrine with so course an Offering ; accuse not my unworthiness , but your own worth ; which like a Loadstar is pleased to attract the coursest mettle , to make known her power . Were it not a profanation to sunder that symmetry of Virtue and Beauty , ( pieces , of which you are the whole , and which worthily beget wonder and love ▪ I might aspire to level praises to some few particulars : but since such a disunion cannot be made by a weak pen without cracking or disordering th● goodliest frame of Nature ; Madam you must give me leave only to admire you in great , as the great Subject of all admiration . If in writing You , I fall short of sense ; it is Love : if I overreach it ; it is Wonder : so is sense and language oppressed ▪ or heightened by the subject that admits no mean . Madam , if this Pamphlet of You rise in the opinion of the World , it is You ; if it fall , it is I ; I , that have battered my brains against as great a miracle as the Philosopher's stone . If you please to receive it with a favour answerable to the ambition it is offered , I shall accounted it the greatest honour that can be done to him , in whose esteem ( Madam ) You are the first and last of these Stories ; the unparallelled Lady DOROTHY SIDNEY , the incomparable ARETAPHILA . 

ARRIA . 

Whilst the Roman State was governed , or rather mangled between the Fencer , the Fiddler , the Juggler , and the Player , lived Cecinna Paetus , sometimes Consul , a man every way worthy that high title , of a Spirit moulded for great designs , that would break through all interruptions to advance his Honour : He , a faithful friend to Scribonianus , in whose faction he had engaged his life and fortunes ; after his overthrow was taken prisoner by the Soldiers of Claudius Nero. When he was taking Ship , ( a Triumph for Rome ) he desired the Officers that Arria his Wife might accompany him ; holding it a grand discourtesy , since she had shared his prosperous fortunes , to deny her his miseries : but the Soldiers , of men the best studied in cruelty , were more ambitious to tyrannize over his mind ( the greater Triumph ) than his body ; and well advised how sorrows are substracted by being divided , denied his most passionate prayers , and hoist sail . Many of them were fly's engendered from his heat , who now fled him as an inhospitable clime , too cold to nourish flattery . They beheld him as one whose misfortunes were infectious , not to be sympathised ; or as a Rock that stands the shock of the impetuous Wind , to ruin those that touch it . Adversity is the true touchstone of Virtue and Friendship ; Friendship follows the good fortune , but Virtue the bad . That calmness of mind which attends some high fortunes , is grounded rather upon Policy than Virtue : he that swells when he is full , intends to break himself ; who then will be proud when he is prosperous ? As it is an argument of baseness to be elated ; so it is true magnanimity , not to be dejected . Friendly offices , like Rivulets to the Ocean , are tributes reflecting to the fortunes , not the men : let these once decline , the other like Fry will swim against the sinking stream : or like Mice , shelter themselves from the approaching storm . So Paetus out lived his happiness , and his friends : only his dear Arria , having hired a Fish-boat , followed along by the Shore of Sclavonia ; so noble was her piety ; as if she did congratulate those extremities , as the trial of that unshaken faith , that well-knit affection , not to be raveled from her Paetus by the strongest battery of fortune . With so mean advantage as one small Bark , so small attendance as one mean Fisherman , no Sail but Resolution , no Pilot but that high Spirit that threatened destiny , and dared the utmost power of Fate , she embarked herself into the dangers of the Seas . When she was arrived at Rome , and in the Emperor's presence , junia the Widow of Scribonianus , chief partner in her captivity , did familiarly accost her : to whom with words made for disdain , she made reply ; dost thou live , ( said she ) shame of our sex , and monument of our shame ! thou , in whose arms Scribonianus thy Husband was slain ! What stands between thee and death , now he is removed that hindered thy prospect ? Unworthy woman , that prizest loathed life above thine honour , and lovest thyself above thy Lord ! Arria , thy courage ( said junia ) is ill placed : the Gods that sent us hither , gave us life as their greatest blessing , not to be appropriated to ourselves , but communicated to our friends and Country ; if we should live only to ourselves , we should live only to undo all ; since this great All subsists by each particular : is then the whole of us our own , when the least part of us is not only ours ? Grant our lives were entirely ours ; yet are they not of that small consequence , that like our clothes we may divest us of them when our misguided fancies tell us they are out of fashion . then if Scribonianus ( to whose departed soul thou slanderest my affection ) had held an end like this , an end of misery , or a way to happiness and honour ; he had counselled me to die , and had not lived himself to have been slain . Fond Woman ( replied Arria ) how thine own arguments condemn thee ! If the Gods give us life as their greatest blessing , then surely blessedness is the quality and virtue of life : when they withdraw this , they call us ( if our faint souls could hear them ) nay , even nature herself whispers to us to be gone to some better place . If our Friends and Country have part , or all of us , to whom do we belong , if they discard us ? must we live wretched till the decay of nature doth remove us ? So patiently the poor silly Cottager awaits the good hour his house shall fall upon his head . If Scribonianus thy Husband had not died honourably in the Camp , ( so great an opinion have I of his Virtue ) he had died as honourably in his Tent : but when thou leav'st the World , the World shall not leave to say of thee , that junia outlived her Virtue , and her Love died sooner than herself . 

The Emperor by these passages perceived whereto she tended , that she would live no longer then till she had a power to die ; commanded her to be straight guarded : but this restraint was rather a spur then a bridle to her actions travelling to fame : for she enraged that her death was denied her , flung out of the Chair where she sat , and violently ran her head against the Wall , with which blow , she much wounded , fell into a deadly swoon : but as soon as her keepers had recalled the unwelcomed life to her , the life that grieved her , not that it was gone , but returned ; she thus bespoke them : You see how vainly you employ your care to keep a prisoner that will be free ; you may make me die with more pain , and less honour ; but not to die at all , this is beyond your power : whilst I wear a hand commanded by a heart that knows no fear , I shall not despair of death , nor shall I long protract a loathed breath in such wretched times that make life but the nursery of sorrows , and seminary of misfortunes . Some few days she wasted in comforting , and condoling with her friends the general calamities wherein the most virtuous were involved , under that monster of men , Nero , then tyrannising . then she retired into Paetus lodging , and there thus spoke her last : The soul imprisoned in a necessity of being miserable , must break through all fence of nature into an honourable end . This very precept nature herself imprinteth in us ; she denyeth not the iron-bound Slave a death to free him from the toilsome Oar ; doth she deny the Sun-scorched Pilgrim his night's sleep ? no , nor the world-beaten man his eternal rest . Surely then , she allows us to shake off her interest , when we are sunk below her succour . Paetus , thy life is not linked to nature , but to fame : fall then by thine own sword , and thy spirit wound up in thine honour , mounts to the Palaces of the immortal Gods : If thou faintest under so brave a resolution , or enviest thyself the glory of thy end ; know , that ere two days expire , thou thyself expirest : but how ? by whose hands ? beheaded by a base hangman , offered up a tame sacrifice to insated tyranny . Awake the Roman in thee ; shall high Paetus ( whom when the World unworthy of his Virtue , ingratefully flung off ) clasp broken hopes and fortunes , to save himself with the shipwreck of his fame ? shall he , to whom thousand servile necks did bow , stoop to the baseness to beg life , while his death is in his hands ? Cato and Scipio ( whom this age is more prone to adore then admire ) held it not honourable to beg life , though they might expect more from Caesar's Virtue . But what canst thou hope for from a Tyrant abjured by all the Virtues , one that approves nothing in Sovereignty but Power , and that guided by Passion to insatiate revenge ? then ( as if she had disinherited her Husband's spirit ) she drew out the poniard from his side : Paetus , ( said she ) how I have not entertained life , nor death but for thy sake , this last act of honour be my witness . Do this Paetus : then she plunged the dagger into her heart , and having drawn it out , she delivered it to him again ; trust my departing breath , Paetus , ( said she ) not the wound it gives me , but thee , afflicts me . There died the noble Arria , there did that soul fly to eternity ; that soul that was too great to own her liberty to any power but to her own . Paetus blushing to be indebted to a precedent for his death , especially his Wife ; took to him the dagger that was so lately guilded in his Arria's blood , and with these words hastened to his end . Had fortune answered my resolution , and crowned my enterprise with happiness ; I had entered Rome , envied by the most noble , not pitied by the basest . I now see how the success of human affairs depends not upon valour , but uncertain fates ; and our actions elevated by the height of spirit , do but entrench us deeper into misery . But though I am bereft of all the advantages of fortune , and of honour : yet am I Master of a mind unconquered ; over which nor Tyranny nor Fate shall triumph . then embracing her dead , he sighed , and said ; Pardon , blessed spirit , my too long absence from thee ; I have borrowed this little leave of life but to admire thy Virtue , which being above my wonder , I must soar unto that height where it is ascended , to search out her true perfection : Pardon my soul that she ascends not to thee in an ecstasy ; fain would she : but this dagger claims her liberty that gave thee thine . then he thrust it into his heart , and there the dagger acted his last and most faithful service ; slew his Master . 

Pro Arria . 

THE first Being tied the first two into one , and form two different sexes into one body , and one soul ; the bodies by alternate use so proprietated , not to one , but both : the souls so sympathising in affections and in passions , as both became one to both . They that keep this mystery inviolable , know no outward respects of power to divide them into two : If Paetus be unhappy , Arria is unfortunate : Paetus is doomed to die ; and shall Arria live to see him slain ? Hath he outlived his hopes , and can she hope to outlive him ? But why would she die ? was the fear of the Emperor's cruelty mingled in her cause ? What fears she that fears not death ? what Emperor is cruel to her that dares die ? what cruelty is to be paralleled to that which bereft her of her life ? It was Paetus slew her ; Paetus ? had Arria lived , Paetus had not slain himself ; therefore Arria died : died because Paetus should die : O unheard of cruelty ! o unparallelled affection ! Arria died because Paetus could not live . Paetus by death redeemed himself from what was worse than death ; from torture : Arria redeemed her honour , and her Paetus from torture , and dishonour . Fortune made her miserable , that Virtue might make her happy : her faith so firmly tied her love , that death could not undo it with her life . Her fortunes were so engrafted in her Paetus , that with his they did bud , flourish and wither ▪ Her life was fastened to his strings of life : with him she lived , with him she died . 

Contra Arriam . 

Through what forbidden paths doth passion hurry us , when once our reason is unseated ! Arria would die rather than be led in triumph : did death redeem her ? no ; death was but fortune's headsman to execute her she had condemned . The Emperor's power extended no faerther than to afflict her withered body : not able to endure this weak revenge , she yielded up her mind a triumph to her fortune , and herself unto her sorrow . If fear did not surprise her , then engaged in Paetus treason , she was her own wrack and torture , scorning all Executioners but herself Who then condemns her death , when it was due to justice ? But what law exacts of her this justice ? The Gods forbid her to kill another , much more herself , being nearer to herself than any other . Nature by her law claims life , as her due debt , payable when she demands it . If she died because Paetus should die ; she did but invite him to her rage , not to her virtue . But I think fear , the common defect of Nature in women , deprived her of her life : for death appeared so accoutred in the terrors of wrack and hangman ; that she died for fear of death . 

PAULINA . 

Lvcius Annaeus Seneca the Philosopher , and Tutor to Nero the Emperor , was Lord of great Revenues , to which his virtue , not his fortune was his title ; his mind was richly embroidered with all the studied ornaments of learning ; a good part of his life he exercised in the Court , where while the Prince's ears were open to Philosophy , his heart and hand were both unbent to him ; his favour and his nobleness , like rivals , strived which should with most devotion serve their Sovereign : but when debauchery usurped upon the Emperor , the Tutor was devanced and disgraced . In all these extremities Seneca in himself was so well poised , that neither the greatness of fortune could bribe him into riot , the height of knowledge into pride , nor the Courtier into flattery : nor did he know any man great enough to make him less ; nor could his mind , which Philosophy had placed above the World , decline with fortune . In his old age he married Pompea Paulina a young , fair , and nobly descended Roman Lady , a Lady of that worth , that no Roman but he that did enjoy her , did deserve her . Nero having let lose the reins of reason , and himself to all licentiousness , so tyrannised , as if he did persuade himself that an Emperor was above the Law , and must also be without it : what his will prescribed , his tyranny did execute , and so , as if his actions were accountable to no power but his own . Among his chief and most remarked cruelties , it is not the least he expressed against his Tutor Seneca ; to him he sends his Satellites to denounce his death : the fashion of those times was , when a person of quality was condemned to die ; he was allowed the liberty to choose his death , and a time proportioned according to the Emperor's rage , to dispose of his affairs : but if his revenge flowed so high , that it would brook no delay : then he enjoyed no time to do any thing but die : if the condemned resisted his decrees ; then he commonly appointed , that by some slave he should be barbarously murdered : but the nobler Romen held it nearer way to honour with their own hands to anticipate their fates , and in unhappiness stayed not the enforcement of tyranny or nature . Seneca , with an undaunted look receiving the sentence of his death , called for ink and paper to write his last Will and Testament ; which the Captain denying him , he turned about , and then bespoke his friends : You see , my loving friends , ( said he ) I cannot gratify your affections with my fortunes : I must therefore leave you my life , and my Philosophy , to enrich your minds with the invaluable and nere-to-be-depriv'd-of treasure of precept and example . I shall desire you by all the ties of friendship , and by the glory you shall purchase by it , to endear my life and death ( which shall not stain the honour of my life ) unto your memory : then gently reproving them who seemed too sorrowful , he said ; to what other purpose have I furnished you with precepts of Philosophy , then to arm your minds against the assaults of Fortune ? Is Nero's tyranny unknown to you ? What man is Master of his own life under him that massacred his Brother , that used upon his Mother that cruelty which never yet knew name ? then he turned him to Paulina , in whom sorrow had swelled itself so high , that rather than break out , it threatened to break her heart : My Deer , ( said he ) I am now going to act what I have long taught ; my hour is come , and nothing so welcome to me as my death ; now I am unloaded of this flesh that clogs my soul , I shall with more ease ascend unto eternity , to enjoy a condition without a change , an happiness without a period : wherefore , my dearest Paulina , forbear thy too immoderate passion , lest thy grief disgrace my end , and thou seem to value my death above mine honour : enjoy thy youth , but still retain those seeds of virtue , ●herewith thy mind is ●●chly stored : I confess , for thy sake I could be content to live , when I consider that in my breast life's a young Lady , to whom my life may be advantage . Paulina's love now raising up her courage , and her courage her dejected spirit ; Think not Seneca , ( said she ) that like your Physician , I will leave you when the hope of life forsakes you ; but I will follow like your Wife , your fortune . This resolve shall tell you how much your life and doctrine hath availed your Paulina . When can I die well , but then when I cannot live well ? When I am bereft of thee , in whom all my joys are so wealthily summed up , that thy loss will make my life my greatest curse ; then will I die in honour , and think it fitter for my fame , then linger out my life in sorrow . Trust me , my Paulina ( said Seneca ) I cannot but admire thy love , knowing from what height of virtue it proceeds : as I will not envy thee thy death ; so I wish a glory may await thy end , great as the constancy that advanced thee to it . then he commanded his Surgeon to cut the veins of both their arms , that they might bleed to death : but Seneca's veins , shrunk up through age and abstinence , denied his blood a speedy course ; therefore his thighs were also lanced : but lest his pains might insinuate too far into Paulina's torments , and a new addition of sorrow meeting with her loss of blood , might make her faint , he sought to mitigate her fears by the discourse of death . 

Why should ( said he ) this monster nothing so affright us ? while we are living , we are dying , for life is but a dying being ; when we are dead , we are after death : where then , or what is death ? It is that inconsiderable atom of time that divides the body from the soul : what is it then in this afflicts us ? Not the rarity , for all the world that is not gone before , will follow us : is it the separation , and tied to that the jealousy how we shall be dealt with ? upon this hinge , I confess , turns the wickeds fear : but the Stoic , whom Philosophy hath taught the art of living well , death frees from misery , and wafts him to the haven of his happiness . For this necessity of death , we are bound to thank the Gods ; for it redeems from a worse of being eternally miserable . The separation , as it is natural , so it is the only means conducing to our better being . The body being the corruptible and ponderous part , falls naturally to the earth whence it was first elemented : the soul etherial gains by this loss ; for being purged from the dross of weight , and of corruption , is made heaven's richest ore ; so refined , that the great God's image may be stamped upon it , and ascends unto the skies from whence it first descended . Nor do I hold this dis-junction to be eternal ; for when the world by the revolution of times and ages , whirls about into her first Chaos , then shall they meet again never to be sundered . The soul shall be so purified by the immortal Gods : that it shall neither hope , nor fear , nor grieve ; that it shall be freed from all those discording passions , and affections , that here transport it from itself . The body so spirited that it shall know no necessity of nourishment , and therefore no weight , alteration , or mortality . Of great consequence then is death to our well-being ; since before it we can accounted none happy ; we see it end all miseries ; we see it make none miserable ; why then should we fear it , or condemn it ? What have the wisest thought it , but the Port we all must touch ? He that scarce arrives at half a man hath as little to quarrel at his fate , as he that in a week reaches his haven , whereas by the troubled winds he might be bound up in the more troubled seas a year . Nor is he that is his own death , being condemned to die , shipwrecked even at the very shore : for honour and the Emperor allow the liberty , and to die by the most abject of men , an hangman , is to die dishonourable . For this boon I gratulate the Gods : but more that they are pleased to call the perfect Seneca unto their joys , the Seneca that hath not yet outlived himself , nor returned into his infancy . There Paulina , not through fear ( knowing none but what proceeded from her love ) but through decaying nature fainted ; therefore Seneca taking his leave caused her to be removed into the next chamber . In Seneca all these incisions were not of force to force out life ; he therefore commanded his Physician to poison him ; but wanting natural heat to convey it to his heart , the poison was rather a nourishment then a destruction to his nature : then he was laid in warm baths , by this forced heat the poison in his full source , and violence raged in his withered body . While he had life he discoursed freely of life and death ; his end approaching , all bloody in his bath he bathed his head , and said , I vow this to jupiter the Deliverer ; Nature at the last conquered by those strong assaults , yielded up her Fort ( which weakness had so song fortified ) to death her common enemy . So lived the famous Seneca , and so he died that with the Gods his soul 's immortalised , with the world his fame . 

Nero informed of Paulina for whom he seemed much troubled : for though pity had no entrance at his iron breast : yet fear the Tyrant's tyrant ●old him that her death ( being one of the most nobly allied in Rome ) would make his tyranny and hate the greater : he therefore sent with all possible speed to recall her life now posting to her stage , and entering the dark confines of death . Her servants receiving the command unbound her , and closed up her incisions , she more than half dead , devoid of sense , thus against her will returned unto her life , and very honourably : for that of life she lost , did witness to the world , that nothing but want of power restrained her from her death . 

Pro Paulina . 

Paulina , when Seneca was condemned to die , would die herself . was ever constancy raised higher in a woman's breast ? She did not die , there she expressed the true valour that derives itself from virtue , and that spirit that issue's from the truest honour . That she would , but could not die , are both Nero's act ; that she could live , or die , her own . That she was Mistress of her fortune , witness that she did live ; how she valued her Husband's death , that she would die . Fame and virtue did both attend her in the progress of her actions : had she died , it had been thought the wretched times had interest in her end : but in her life she conquered the extremities of life and death . The rule of virtue ties us to live so long as we ought , not as we list : then is the fittest time to die , when we can live no longer . To die , is at the height but like a Roman : but to dare to live when life is tedious , this is as much above the Roman , as the true substance of virtue , that false shade of honour . Had she then died , she had acted but the Roman : but she lived to exceed the noblest of all Romans , but herself . 

Contra Paulinam . 

WHY revolted she from her resolve , when Seneca himself allowed it ? Did he teach her so to live that she durst not die ? or did she distrust his happiness that she would not follow him ? She had too much of death to have more , and those pangs so much endeared her to her life , that she would live at any rate , rather than break through fleeting torments into honour . While Seneca was yet alive , she was dying ; he dead , she returned to life : Was her life vowed to him , when his death revived her ? Nero called her back ; the greater was her shame to take Sanctuary in her Husband's murderer . Sure death was far more terrible than Seneca did speak it : she fled to a most inhuman Tyrant for protection . Seneca did not force her to die , nor Nero to live ; one day gave her her liberty : she had as much strength , as life ; and that little power she could use , was able to force out that little life she did detain . She would die , in the extremity of sorrow for her husband's fate : but she did live to repent her both of her sorrow , and her death . 

LUCRETIA . 

When Rome , in the glory of her active Spirits , had pressed out her youth more ambitious of honour than life ; for the common exploit , the siege of Ardea : Sextus Tarqvinius entertained the night with the Roman Nobility in the pride of luxury and riot : The ruins of Kingdoms were sacrificed to Bacchus , the sea and land ploughed up to appease ingenuous gluttony . They , as frolic as youth , and wine that made them so ; unlock the treasures of their hearts , their Wives , and their beauties , to the admiration of unsound ears : But Collatine the most justly prodigal of his Wife's fame , tells them ; nor Italy , nor the World holds her , that stands in parallel of wonder with the fair and virtuous Lucretia . Tarquin divided between astonishment and rage , that Collatine his servant , should be his Sovereign in happiness : mounted upon the wings of lust and fury , fly's to Rome , where his eyes having encountered the Idol of his heart , and he the noon of night to enjoy it ; with his sword and taper breaks into her chamber , into her presence : she affrighted at the sword , and blasted by the light that lust gave life to , trembling like a prey with more horror than attention , hears him thus bespeak her . Madam , wonder not at my unlooked for arrival at Collatium , or at this visit so unseasonable : but applaud the wonder of your beauty ; the silent night will speak my purpose , when in my restless bed a flame kindled from your fair eyes burned through my soul , consumed my Country's service , my hopes of honour , than which nothing but your fair self is so near unto my thoughts . Let not the slave Fear intrude upon your princely breast , nor this steel divorce those Roses from the Lilies , drawn to hew out a way through all obstacles , to encounter Paradise . The same love that armed those eyes with Lightning , arms these hands with Thunder ; bids them grapple with great jove , were he rival in my affection . This night I must enjoy thee Lucretia , or on thy name engrave an infamy , that Time , nor Time's heir , Eternity , shall never devour : If thou move or hand , or voice for aid ; thy groom I 'll slay with thee ; then fling his loathed trunk on thine , and swear I found him fast manacled in thy embraces : cease then to be fair , or to be cruel , and return me the Prince ravished from me , by the all commanding beauties that attend thee . The sin unknown is unacted , nor shall the sourest virtue mis-read those blush's the liveliest pieces of innocence . Accuse not Nature of tyranny , she made not so delicate an object to tempt , but satisfy the appetite : yield then ; or this sword must enter that adamant , from whence all pity is barakadoed . She conjured with this tyranny of compliment , with as undistracted words as could be pumped from the deepest confusion of thoughts , makes her reply . 

Renowned Sir , let true pity as really enter your ears , as false is banished mine . In Tarquin's shape I entertained you ; wrong not the Prince so far , as to prostrate his fame to so inglorious an action ; he that hath the eyes of all Rome fixed on his virtues , and must hereafter look like a Prince in Story , shall he have all his glories sullied by the conquest of a woman ? Shall he be read King of all the Romans but himself ? wanting this Sovereignty , all his honours shall be buried in his infamy : then punish Great Sir , the Traitor to your virtue , this face ; tear it to a loathing ; so shall you appease the lewd rebellion of your blood , and make your victories , still ending in yourself , discourse for all posterity . But if you are conquered by your lust , you shall revenge your worth in her dishonour , who shall not be unpitied of men , or unrevenged of the Gods. This said , she wept the rest . But he not daunted at that majesty of sorrow that sat enthroned in cry ▪ stall , nor at her words that would charm the most inhuman : but rather whet , then refined in passion , unloads his lust , and with the night posts undiscovered to Ardea . no sooner had the Morn unchained the prisoners of the Night , and spread his light ( welcome both to miserable and happy ) through the vast regions of the Skies ; that light that was so lovely to her , because it came to light her to her end : but she sends to Ardea for Collatine and Brutus , her Husband and Uncle . Long before the day was fled into the other world , they at Collatium did arrive . First they saw her face stand in that amazed silence , that they could read , not hear the full contents of sorrow ; they in that expected some great cruelty had been used upon her , which had deprived her of the tongue to rell it . But this silence was but a pause in her great soul , whether she might stoop to that wretched body , as to borrow those organs which commonly convey our friends calamities into our ears : but lest she should detain them too long locked up in wonder , hasting to her ease , she unbent her soul , and gave vent unto her sorrow . 

Fortune , ( said she ) hast thou now hit the mark thou hast long aimed at , my poor heart ; take to thee now thy triumph , and leave me to my injured virtue . Brutus and Collatine , you are come from Ardea to hear the story that will break my heart ere I am delivered of it ; should I truly tell you how low I am rammed in misery , If should be far too low for you to pity me , unless your love should lead you to dishonour . In what Court shall I appeal to justice ? The grand God's act , and licence what I suffer : the household Powers are not of power to keep their Laws inviolate . Shall I address , me to the King ? his own Son hath dishonoured me : to him I would appeal , would he revenge his guilt , as I mine innocence ; then would I speak him a true Prince ; when to advance his justice higher than his sin ; he made her way through patricide and treason to her power . But he love's his lust too well to loathe his life ; of him I cannot expect justice who hath injured me , nor of you mercy whom I have injured : I have tainted your blood with mine own . Tarquin hath conquered this body , Lucretia this mind . You true Romans Brutus and Collatine , in whom my life was truly happy , I conjure you by all the ties of blood , love , and religion , be as cruel to Tarquin , as he to Lucrece , she to herself , who with bold steel carves on her breast the Tragedy that shall stagger the piety , or awake the pity of all posterity . Her life and language had both this period ; for having tied their vows to her revenge , her soul too pure for her body , disclogged itself of clay , and broke the vault of mortality . So riseth day disrobed of night : so did her soul ascend to immortality . It is beyond the art of words to express what valiant sorrow , what noble rage , this cruelty of hers had stamped upon these two princely breasts . Silence at the instant had tonguetied all language , wonder had penned up all tears , immensity of fury had transcended all bounds of passion : so much had they to speak , they could not speak ; so great was their sorrow they could not sorrow ; so were all the powers of the soul knit and contracted into the project of revenge , that till they were scattered into their offices , passion was not discernible ; then the object lessened , wonder descended to passion , passion to expression ; then discolouring the crimson flood , and with their tears washing her body white as her innocence , they took it on their shoulders , set it in the Forum , where Collatine , when the Auditory was ripe for his Oratory , bespoke the Roman cofluxe . Romans , and Countrymen , this day presents to your wonder a fact of that height of impiety , so degenerating from all humanity ; that in it hell hath plotted the dishonour of this whole nation , this whole age . Were not your affection stronger tied to the Orator , than the Oratory : I should not hope to persuade you that the breast of man could travel in such a prodigy of exact villainy . You see a monument of that misery that vindicates the pity of Tigers , or Tyrants : much more of minds ennobled with virtuous actions . The Tragedy ( not long to wrack your expectation ) I will briefly declare . Sextus Tarqvinius ( I know not with what colourable excuses he painted his designs ) left Ardea for Rome ; honour could not bridle his false fury of affection , nor the public interest in the State overpoize his private passion ; I say , he posted to Rome . Rome ! where the Gods have their Temples , the Virtues their Sanctuaries , that thou shouldst breed a Monster to profane thee ! no sooner had he entered Rome , but he entered my house ; where like a Prince , a kinsman , like the happy messenger of Collatine's happiness , ( o , that vice should be so bravely disguised ! ) he was received by Lucretia , received in a bravery of affection too high for the apostate from virtue ; his face did not discover the false heart that lay in ambush to surprise her honour , nor his virtue show itself , as it was , the stalking horse to his covert . The ceremonies of hospitality finished , he retires to his lodging , though not to himself ; now when the brother of death had summoned to still music all but foul ravishers , thiefs , and cares ; with his drawn sword he leaps from his own , enters Lucrecia's bed , her he ravisheth . She having possessed us with a full relation of her misfortunes : She Empress of a mind unconquered of sin or sorrow , with this poniard let out the life Tarquin had made loathed ; And now OH Countrymen awake your Roman virtue , flesh your swords and valours upon the revenge of the proud usurper of public liberty , the cruel murderer of private innocence : you cannot offer to the Gods a more grateful sacrifice ; nor will they ever in requital , forsake that State that forsakes not the defence of virtue . 

Such impression strikes Thunder upon Oaks , Earthquakes on Mountains , as Collatine on the Roman hearts . Their thoughts were torn , and divided from themselves , anger boiled into malice the policy of passion , both flowed into resolution : then like an unpent torrent from some high precipice , the multitude violently ran to precipitate him made high for a precipice ; which in the perpetual exile of the Tarquins was accomplished . 

Pro Lucretia . 

THE Roman Story big with variety of wonder , writes Lucretia the female glory : she forcibly abused by Tarquin , declares her innocence to the world , and confirms it by her death . There were two in the act , one in the sin ; one adulterer , and one chaste ; her body conquered , her mind truly heroical , not stooping to the lure of false pleasure ; that remained as untainted , as unforced . Why died she being innocent ? to be innocent . Why received she her death from her own hands ? haply to prevent it from another's ; then had she subscribed to guilt , and not left life without stain . For a Roman to outlive honour was dishonourable , for her to survive her infamy , was to act it . Curtius' spurred on by honour , did ride into the Gulf . Regulus , rather than his faith , would prostitute himself to the witty cruelty of the Carthaginians . To honour did the three hundred Fabiis sacrifice their lives . Honour chased the Tarquins out of Rome ; but Lucrece out of life . To wipe off all thought of guilt which malign censure might imprint upon the act , she slew herself . He that condemns her for the murder , accuseth her of the adultery ; life had been her guilt , whereas death was her innocence ; through her life she made way to her fame , to which life and fortune are slaves , not to be entertained farther than they tend to her advancement . I confess , torn hair and face , and eyes bankrupt of tears , and her own virtue was of force to possess the world she had been ravished without the witness of her death : why then died she ? Her shame was too great to be supported by her life ; nor any thing but her death revenged her and all Rome , of the insulting Tarquins . then Lucrece in the height of glory sacrificed herself , as well to the State , as to her innocence . 

Contra Lucreciam . 

Why died she if she were innocent ? why if an adulteress ? is death due to innocence , or to adultery ? was it that her crime was greater than Tarquin's , that she was slain and he banished ? The Roman Law puts not to death the adulteress : but what law screwed to tyranny destroys the innocent ? The body might be purged by the adultery : not soul of the adultery by murder . This revenge may argue chastity before and after : but not in the nick of the act , which yielding to some secret enticement , might stain her thought ; then loathing herself for the act , held death a more satisfactory revenge then repentance . But , it was Tarquin's lust stained her : no , it was Lucrece ; if Tarquin's lust slained her , it was not Tarquin's , but her own . The will left free by divine providence , is not constrained by human power . If her will was ravished , why do we extol her for murder who died for adultery ? had she slain Tarquin , her act had been no way to be justified ; but how is this aggravated ? Lucrece is her chaste and innocent self ; Tarquin her foul ravisher , and greatest enemy . She than did sacrifice her life to her honour : could not her insatiate thirst of glory be slacked but by her blood ? Was it not unworthy Tarquin to be her conqueror against her will ? and was it not more unworthy Lucrece , not to endure the conqueror against her honour ? Her virtue was more debased by being enslaved to common praise , than herself to carnal delight . Had she kept her mind unconquered she had lived the mirror of women : but her weakness pressed her down to die in her despair , rather than live after she was dishonoured . 

DIDO . 

Belus King of Tyre left Pygmalion & Dido heirs to his Kingdom : but the Tyrians as impatient of of a Duarchie , as Pygmalion of a Rival : yielded allegiance solely to him not of years to write man Dido was married to her Uncle Sichaeus , Hercules Priest : this Sichaeus the sponge of Fortune , filled only to be squeezed ; was slain by his Nephew and Brother Pygmalion . He a man of treasure vast enough to betray his life , jealous of the security of his greatness , trusted it to the earth : but Fame ( the most injurious Hyperbole ) drew it up ( perhaps greater than it was ) the many fathoms of earth , where it lay rammed from the eye , not the envy of the Prince . Unkind Fortune , that dealest with us as the Persian with their slaves , crownest us for a Sacrifice ! Dido a Dowager by her Brother's tyranny , begins to feel a tyranny of sorrow ; that ( had not nature resolved to keep perfect as much of her as was hers ) had made her a Widow also to her beauty ; her fair face clouded with discontent : but her fairer soul with no more passion , then betrayed mortality ; she betakes her to the male contented of the Tyrian Lords . Since Brothers ( said she ) are enemies , let us seek to our enemies for Brothers ; since pity is fled human breasts , let us seek it ( for such a creature there is , nature tells me ) among savages . Though we cannot expect it from his nature ; yet his youth might enfeeble him to it : but his very infancy is a monster ; what then will his riper years produce but the exile of all humanity ? What distant respects will he know that wades through his own blood to his ends ? if an innocent Uncle and Brother be slain ; if a Sister be not , where is a Subject secure ? Miserable Strato , thou wert a Prince by thy slave , to beget a Prince to make slaves of Princes ! Miserable Tyre , now more oppressed by one Tyrant , than before by a thousand slaves ! Wretched wealth , to thee quiet poverty is a Prince ; thou hast divorced me from my Sichaeus , thou hast made me the football of a Tyrant Brother , tossed from his Kingdom , into what unhappy shore is not yet known unto my thoughts . My Lords , I speak to minds too noble to be stifled in the narrow confines of fear : follow your Princess , whose virtue the spite of Fortune shall not wrack into despair . Her words proceeding from the height and sweetness of her mind , were as great a spur as the hope of liberty to advance them into action : then as in a thoughtful mind refreshed with wine , Care itself keeps her revels : so were their thoughts ( before dejected ) now lifted to that pitch , that valiantly affronts the hard affronts of Fortune ; then with all speed they rigged a fleet , and Dido with her treasure , and the Tyrian Lords in the advantage of night hoist sail . The Cyprian was the first shore they touched ; where ( as the fashion of the Country was ) their Virgins were assembled , to sacrifice for their chastities to Venus , before their marriage . Fourscore of these untouched Dido ravisheth from the barbarous sacrifice , and sails with them into Africa ; where when she was arrived , she purchased as much land of the Inhabitants as might be covered by an Ox's hide , which cut in thin pieces , made a great extent of ground : but scarce to contain a City two and twenty miles in compass . There was the famous Carthage built by Dido , which after times dilated into a great Empire . By the consent of all there was a yearly rent paid for the land on which the City was founded . The concourse of Africans ( which hope of gain brought thither ) was great as their gain they received by traffic , which invited them to settle themselves there . The many conspiring hands in no great space of time wrought it to a perfect City : but in the interim , their wealth that flowed thither in high tide , made Carthage the envy of Hiarbus King of the Mauritanians . He summons ten of the Carthaginian Princes , and with them treats of marriage with their Queen ; which if fairly may not be obtained , he resolves to try the force of arms . Dido hearing this unwelcome message , desire's respite of resolution till the City was finished : which accomplished , she in no wise would yield unto Hiarbus , whom lust linked to rage and avarice , had armed against her and his honour . Dido now the creature which melancholy divorceth from society ; desire's three month's absence from her friends , whom she tells she must go whither her own and the City's fate did drive her : in which time a little remote from the City , she erected a stately Pyre , which having kindled , and invoked Sichaeus ghost ; she a little eased herself against her fortune . What a monster of misery ( said she ) received life with Dido ? The World hath dealt with me , as Love with those it hath distracted ; allowed me happiness but by some short intervals . First I was born Princess of Tyre , then by my Brother's tyranny I was exiled ; after long conflicts with the Winds and Seas , I arrived here in Africa ; here I built this great Carthage , of which I am entitled Queen ; then I thought me placed above my envy , or my fate : but as those wretched creatures that are drawn higher , the more to be strapadoed : so was I made great , great for Hiarbus envy ; so was I wound up to the height of happiness and honour , only to fall never to rise again . Prosperity and adversity might be termed the fever of life , did not our best days afflict us more than our worst . In our happiness , the fears that do attend it make us miserable ; the hopes that await our unhappiness , make us happy in our lowest unhappiness ; which estate would a wise man choose , that which will be better , or that which will be worse ? then to be happy , is to be miserable . As the pain of the soul transcends the pain of sense : so is misery to be valued above happiness . For as what shall be is the greatest wrack of thought ; so what is , is the clearest relief , the clearest satisfaction . In our height of happiness we know we shall be , in our lowest misery we know we cannot be worse ; then to be miserable is to be happy . If I desire felicity , I desire misery ; for I rise only to fall . If misery , than happiness ; this makes me Fortune's , that makes Fortune my triumph . Where is then content , since banished the height of State ? If in the low estate , then must I seek it in the Wilderness , and in some un-sun-seen Cave waste out the remnant of my days ; there Pygmalion and Hiarbus follow me ; there reigns as great a confusion of thoughts as at the Court : then welcome Death , thou didst divorce me , thou shalt unite me to my Love. Purged from earth , to the Skies I fly , and intwine my soul forever to my loved Sichaeus . then she leaped into the Pyre , and there consumed . 

The meeting of Dido and Aeneas ( in which Virgil's Muse hath sweat to the dishonour of them both ; her for love , him for ingratitude ) is so merely fabulous , that it is scarce worth the expense of paper to disprove it , only I am bound to vindicate her honour . Rome ( as Eutropius writes ) was built three hundred ninety four years after the destruction of Troy , none computes the time less . Carthage was built seventy two years before Rome , so justine writes . So there must be of necessity two hundred years between the Trojan Prince and the Carthaginian Queen . Seven hundred years this City stood unconquered ; so long they sacrificed to Dido as their tutelar Goddess ; at last by Scipio , thence called Affricanus , it was burned , there their devotion ended with their fortune , and themselves . 

Pro Dido . 

WAS it the Queen of Carthage , or the Queen of beauty that Hiarbus coveted ? If Carthage was his end , money was his matrimony ; if beauty , he sought a woman , not a wife ; if a wife , to make his lust warrantable . Dido in Sichaeus buried all husband , in Hiarbus all man Love is the good which by being diffused , is corrupted ; she that love's one , another , and a third , takes men in at the coil , and love's only for her pleasure . The object of true love is but one ; from the infancy of time to her decrepitude the love between two hath been held most honourable . He that took from the first man his wife , did not make every rib a wife ; not only to show us how out of the least of numbers he could draw infinites upon infinites : but especially that our desires might move within the narrow compass of love , not expatiate themselves to lust ; that as the first man was all the men in the world to his wife : so now the husband should be the wife's Horizon , that where ere she is placed , he may be all she sees . The objects of lust are as various as numerous : as there are lovely beauties , and to attend them , fond desires . The wanton woman darts forth her unruly heats more freely than the lesse-offending Sun his beams ; he with the day , in courtesy to nature , withdraws his fires : she day and night carries the rage of dog-days in her breast , and never sets but then when she can rise no more . Dido would not wed Hiarbus , because she thought all nuptial rites had not their period in Sichaeus . Death is the divorce of man and woman , not of husband and wife ; that contract flesh ties and unties : but this is that of souls , which eternity cannot undo ; it is as immortal as themselves , not deadened in being singled from earth , but revived to a greater perfection : if then her soul did entirely love , the soul of her soul must be her only love . But Hiarbus sought lawful marriage . Why did he force it ? Dido refused marriage , she could not love . Marriage to her had been a rape , another had enjoyed her against her will : if a rape must be avoided with the loss of life ; through how many death must she fly a loathed bed , where every night she shall be ravished ? Did her virtue attract Hiarbus ? why did he not covet her virtue in her prosperity , as in her misery ? He that hath lost the effect and quality of virtue in himself , will not value it in another , and with reason ; for her virtue was his greatest enemy ; forced her chastity so to whom she had been married , that like the Phoenix she would marry to nothing but her ashes . 

Contra Dido . 

Why refused she marriage ? because it was lawful , it was not incestuous ; was it a crime because it was no sin ? Religion and honour allow her to marry Hiarbus ; neither Sichaeus : he was a King , a stranger ; this a Subject , an Uncle Marriage is the tie of strange bloods , not of the same . Nature bids us affect , not love our kindred ; in this , affection screwed to love , is unnatural : could she then marry Sichaeus , and not Hiarbus ? did she think the Priest in Sichaeus a warrant for her incest , and not the King in Hiarbus for a lawful contract ? Hath the King the liberty to make the Law , and the Priest to transgress it ? Hiarbus desire's the establishment of the law of Nations ; but Sichaeus violates the law which Nature wrote within him . The Gods suffer her to outlive her incest : she will murder herself rather then entertain a virtuous Love. Hiarbus used force . Why should she refuse it ? The safety of Carthage depended on the marriage : she liu●d to build it , and would die to ruin it . Had she burned a Martyr to her Country , her act had been too great for Chronicle : but she would die to satisfy her passion , rather than live to preserve the City . Her love to Sichaeus was that she valued above Hiarbus . She would vex a living King to appease a liveless Trunk , and rather obey a Block then a Stork . But Sichaeus stands in competition with Carthage . O unequal balance ! a womanish fancy poised against a public good . What other reason than had she to burn , but because she would not marry ? 

THEUTILLA . 

France the richest embroidery of beauties , bred a maid from heaven inspired with all those excellencies which first made the virtues of her sex . History writes her birth ignoble : but as it is the greatest Solecism in honour for high bloods not to flow into high attempts : so it is a real ennobling of meanness of birth to be guilty of more than noble actions . Nobility and beauty are a fair varnish of virtue , the lively shadows of that unseen substance , which were it visible , nothing so lovely : but being the true Idea of the mind , cannot be discerned with the eyes of the body . Without this ( so much of nothing hath the unworthy honourable ) they are but the compliments of man , serve only to fill up this vast vacuum of honour . She basely noble , not nobly base , born under a smoak-dried roof ; which though of itself it received no more of heaven's influence then through the loopholes made by the rage thereof ; yet her presence made perpetual day . But let her birth be strangled in the womb of History . She was Natures fairest paper , not compounded of the rags of common mortality : but so searsed and refined , that it could receive no impression but that of spotless innocence . How unfortunate had her beauty been , had she had no other championess than herself , the sequel of Theutilla will declare . 

Amalius , Dynasta of France , rich in treasure , magnificent in retinue , Lord of all the world admires , but himself , which he most admires ; there was no deity to whom he should own his fortune , but his unworthiness : for he was more hospitable to himself then to others , and freelyer feasted his senses then strangers . In sum , he was what a virtuous man is not , what a voluptuous man should be . It happened one time , the time pointed at in Chronicle ; when his soul ( the slave of his sense ) dancing and floating like a toast in his wine , was seized on by sleep ; the wine itself had paid the drawer of his wine his appetite . then was he quiet , when he was dead drunk . How fruitlessly were spent those thousand lamps of oil ? those thousand pen-plowed reams of paper about the immortality of the soul ? Who hath a soul that will not here question it ? what is become of it ? is it only for this interim metamorphized into a beast ? or doth it die ? if into a beast , since the prince of man , let it be transmigrated into the prince of beasts , the Prince's beast . Who so sottish , so gross of conceit , to think the Lion , a creature of that invincible valour , and now commanded by reason ; having rescued so fair a Lady from so foul tyranny , will transgress the laws of honour , let her lose to her loss of liberty , her loath some dungeon ? Or doth she die ? or will you mince it into an intervallum of life , a three hour's death ? it than follows , the soul thus dying will die eternally . But to return to Theutilla . Amalius servants have made the neighbouring Villages their rendevouz ; where having discovered Theutilla , and in her as much as the world could boast of ; they ra vished her from the weak resistance of her parents , and laden with the rich triumph of nature , return unto their Lord , and lock her up in his lodging , whose sense and fancy was so strongly locked up in yron-sleep , he had not power to dream of what he would have acted . She thus forfeited to dishonour , and night the friend of dishonour , enjoying no more of light then the courteous candle , which betrayed to her eye and hand a sword , which she taking to her , revolves her present condition . 

If the soul straightened ( said she ) in a necessity of ill-doing , must try all her power to gain her liberty : surely she must not refuse any opportunity conducible to the preservation of her purity . Death is then an honourable freedom , when it takes us from the danger of living ill . As we came into the world with nature ; so we must go out with honour ; we must not rest on nature for our ends , since before her summons , thousands of extremities do beset our lives . There she paused . Welcome ( said she ) my dear , dear Preserver ; to thee I owe this last , this most glorious act of my well-spent life ; to thee posterity shall be as much beholding as Theutilla ; thou shalt redeem the errors of after times in women . then she , born for what she did , drew the sword , anviled and filled for her sex's glory : no sooner ( said she ) have I unsheathed thee , but I must sheathe thee again , Where ? In this guiltless breast of mine . Call up thy too degenerous spirit . Of what bravery can it accuse the act ? thou murder'st a poor innocent maid . Shall posterity brand me with that weakness ? Shall it say , that not able to stand under the miseries of life , I was pressed down by the hard extremity of fortune to despair to death ? no , my tide of fury flows into another channel ; here is a revenge fit for thy spirit , fit for thine arm ; thine honour shall be proud to riot in his blood , whose blood would riot in thine honour . Thus than I shake off woman , and her frailty ; thus do I strangle the monster lust that revel's in thy veins ; and to complete my vengeance , send thy sin-surfetted soul into the land of endless night , where it hath already ta'en sure footing , With that , her spirit restless in the revenge of words , eager of action , directed her arm , which gave Amalius so fatal a wound , that it seemed her hot-metled fury was bridled with exactest discretion , and nothing wanted the attempt but passion . Bravest Theutilla , sooner shall the Father's bowels be silent at the sight of his long unseen Son , than posterity forget thy name . Amalius now miserably groaning , now miserably opening his eyes to shut them again more miserably , had little more of life then what could give her life , in appeasing the fury of his servants that rushed in to her destruction . What means ( said he ) is Chaos of confounding noise ; this unwelcome Train , to the more unwelcome Pomp of death ? whither rush ye , ye betrayers of innocence , ye servants of nothing but my lust ? O may mine infamy find a grave as soon as life ; and you sooner : that the world may want a witness of it . I conjure you by the relation that ties you to my commands , and this last ; spare her life , whose chastity the Gods are pleased to spare . then , to make a minute of his life famous , he contemplated on mortality . 

Nature ( said he ) that first digested this All into an exact method of parts , preserves it likewise by a constant concordance of the same , without the which it would soon resolve into the first nothing : only man , ungoverned man , Nature's Masterpiece , revolting from her allegiance , deposes her Lieutenant Reason , le 's in the Usurper , Passion , to untune the harmony that preserves the soul. Hence is it that death , the privation of being , in this disorder seizes the Fort , hurries the Governess captive to an eternal , a never redeemed imprisonment . The Sun , the Sea , have both their bounds , and man his stage from life to death , of equal length to all , though one runs faster than another . The world whirls about continually till it be dissolved ; and man's brain not satisfied in the bare necessaries of life , moves in an unbounded motion , till styled by the period of action , the undoer of Nature , Death . There is but one door at which we enter this Labyrinth of life : but infinite are the ways we turn and wind out of it . The infant no sooner with much difficulty raked out of the womb , ( punishing the Mother's guilt of his short-lived misery ) enters the Tomb , flashing through the world , being but a lightning of life . Pleasure or business wears out the riper man's vitals , and forceth out life , let Nature block it up never so strongly . The aged man , because a burden to himself , sinks under his own weight . These are ordinary ways out of this world into the next : but to be hurled out by violence of Fate , this is the doom of strictest Justice that makes eternity our curse . This is the hard fate my just merit hath encountered , to be punished by the sex I have so much abused . This was his last : for Nature , though she could not tell him he had lived long enough ; told him he had been long enough dying . There she withdrew herself from him , and sealed up his eyes to the eternal sleep of eternal night . 

Pro Theutilla . 

Reason is the only , and noble difference between the free and servile creature , and they whose actions are not moderated and well poyzed by her power , deviate from themselves into the slavery of Sense . Theutilla , if she could obtain of herself to yield to sense , why should not Amalius obtain it ? If to reason ; why should she not kill Amalius ? or why should she be ravished ? Herself then was Victor of her sense , and to conquer reason she conquered Amalius . Never had her virtue a fairer trial , then when her honour was a martyr staked to unlawful flames ; never could her honour be more honourably releived , then by her virtue ; nor both , then by this act . Though Virtue being within her , Honour being above her , was not to be really violated without the Theutilla that was below her : yet must Amalius be sacrificed , as well to deprive her of the interest he might have in her dishonour , as to make opinion clear as her actions . It was that mind that stooped not to her body , that made her of consequence ; not her beauty : the other sullied , who but Amalius would value this ? or one whose sense is so scattered in the admiration of the outward form , that he discerns not even those deformities of soul which are detected ? It was necessary for her fame not only to resolve not to yield : but to prevent occasions that might prejudice her virtue , or her honour . But why was Amalius slain , not master of the opportunity he knew not ? why was she forced thither ? Because she would not yield ; because she should be ravished . But haply her handsome prayers had wrought him to an handsome repentance . Is beauty , the lodestar that attracts hearts of steel to it , the Orator that pleads against itself ? Amalius , had his eyes been open , had not read contradictions in her face , nor made so obscure a Comment upon so clear a Text. He had seen her but as he had seen her ; her eyes inviting all eyes , her lips all lips , her face Love's banquet , where she riots in the most luxuriant feast of sense : not as she was the model of Divine Perfection , so innocent she knew not the meaning of a Mistress . Theutilla , had she had no other Sword but her innocence , might satisfy herself in that defence : but Conscience is but one witness to one , and her actions must endure the trial of another touchstone beside her own . Amalius would easily confront her meanness . then allow her this great revenge of little innocence . 

Contra Theutillam . 

A Mind well habited to virtue , enjoys all true content within itself , knowing nothing without it to transport it from itself . Why should she then strain her virtue to a vice ; in the too nice satisfaction of others , unsatisfy herself ? Why should she , to prevent unlawful love , act a more unlawful revenge ? Why should she revenge an unacted injury ; commit a certain murder , to avoid an uncertain rape ? Had she been absolutely tied either to die , kill , or be ravished ; she had showed a greater height of spirit in enduring , then revenging her dishonour . For the passive valour is more laudable than the active : this being often the fruit of a desperate , dejected ; that ever of a well-settled mind . Her valour was her crime , her cowardice : for as she had the false spirit of a man , unjustly to kill a man : so had she the true false spirit of a woman , to act a greater , lest she should sink under a lesser evil . Perhaps glory transported her to an attempt ( as she flattered herself ) above a man : did she not also descend into the cruel weakness of her sex , slay a man that had already paid earnest to a sleep never to awake , that had already pawned himself to Death ? Did she not go lower , sacrifice his soul to the fury of furies , herself ? whither did her blind rage lead her , to punish innocence , to salve her honour that was not wounded ? This act carries little Valour in it , less Virtue . 

CYPRIANA . 

THE Island Cyprus , Nature's choicest storehouse , where she had reposed the chiefest blessings of the earth , flowing in wealth , the wantonizer of the mind , and by it once dedicated to the Queen of Love , courted and feared of the neighbouring Nations : while secure in her own height ; the Othomannick Army , infinite in number , invincible in valour , unappeased by cruelty , breaks in like a sea , that threatens to eat her into another Island , if not devour her . Christianity was their crime , a wrong proud enough to unsheathe a Turkish blade ; life was their greatest guilt , which must be wiped off by cruel death . That which to nature was preposterous , the soldier made methodical ; the infant torn from the mother's breast , was mangled into as many atoms as it had lived minutes , and hewed out into more Sacrifices than it had sins : if sorrow was too weak to conquer the surviving distressed mother ; the sword ( therein courteous ) supplied it , and entombed both in the womb from whence they did unfortunately spring . Wives and Maids were first ravished , then slain for adultery . Father and Daughter , Mother and Son , Brother and Sister were all incestuously piled up ; there was nothing wanting but new lives to satisfy the guilt of death . The Island was an heap of carcases in despair of being repeopled but by Cannibals or Crows . Was ever cruelty so barbarously expressed ? Was ever steel refined for such cruelty ? Mustapha having almost dislimbed the Island , bends his fury to the head ; besiegeth Salamina , renowned for rich Citizens , brave Buildings , and stately Temples ; erected by the Telamonian Teucer , during the Trojan sieige . Dandalus the Governor , forced to submit himself to the Turkish yoke , after exquisite tortures , is beheaded ; and to strike a greater terror in the survivors , his head is carried upon the point of a sword through the razed City . Nero had here seen his cruel wish accomplished , the head of thousands of heads struck off at one blow . The highest rate the Citizen could amount to , was too cheap for the security of life , where innocence was punished in stead of treason . Mustapha , his sword now surfeited in human blood , spurs on his sacrilegious fury to revenge him of the Gods : he razeth the Temples , whither the wretched Salaminians were fled for refuge ; the Altars are profaned ; Hymen's holy Tapers are lighted to rapes and adulteries at the very Altars . Murders are their Sacrifices ; innocent lives drop like beads from their bloody hands , their more bloody devotions . Good Heaven ! where is your thunder ? awake your sleeping armoury : is not your whole Host blasphemed ? Good Earth ! where is thy Earthquake ? cannot these monsters move thee ? The consecrated vessels are profaned to servile uses . The shrines of Saints that called the adoration of farthest Pilgrims , are demolished ; all , holy , and profane , a e miscellaniously sacrificed to fire and sword . Mustapha , his rage and avarice appeased , bethinks him of a present to appease Selimus his Master's lusts ; he sends captive the choicest beauties of both sexes ( doomed to another destiny ) to the distained Carpathian Sea , where his fleet lay at anchor . The captives shipped , and ready to be wafted in their own blood to Byzantium ; when the divinely inspired Cypriana wrought the miracle , worthy the memory of all time . She , servilly employed in the powder-office , with a countenance that gave a majesty to her misery , and scorned the subjection of sorrow ; resolves a powder-treason : a candle she had flaming in her hand ; but a purer flame shot from heaven into her breast : from no other place could so generous a mind be fired . This fire ( said she ) purer then the element of fire , shall both burn and cure , shall extinguish the lurking inflammations of lust . Nothing of Cyprus shall be transported to Byzantium but my fame , powerful to perfume the contagion of their sin . OH Heaven ! to thee , the Sanctuary of innocence , fly's my untainted soul : if my spirit enlightened by thine , act thy vengeance , thy mercy reward me ; if I transgress thy Commission , if I let out my life before thou requirest it : pardon the weakness of my virtue , pardon her that sacrificeth herself a spotless creature to thy most sacred throne . If thy justice exclude me thy pity , o pity these innocents' ; rain all thy revenge on me , bury my name from the discovery of posterity ; let not them , because they feel my fate , feel thy vengeance . then gave she fire to the Powder , that knew as little mercy as the Turk . The Masts and Sails were hoist nearer the Skies , then when the boisterous element conspires a shipwreck ; the ribs torn from the body , flew like murdering shot through the next ship ; where the unquenched pitch seized the powder , so that both were swallowed by the same fate . Into these two ships were congested the Prime of the Turkish Soldiery , the Cyprian captivity dispatched by Mustapha to Selimus at Byzantium . The miserable Salaminians now upon the shore , paying the last office of affection , to see the last of their wives and children , were more delighted then terrified at the spectacle ; they looked on death not as a punishment ; but as the most honourable divorce , and last refuge of honour . Death had in it more courtesy than horror : for as it was the last , so it was the least of their evils . Did they weep at their misfortunes ? so did the Sea : with a general acclamation they thanked the Gods that had heard their prayers , desiring their friends should be rather a prey to the merciless waves , than Selimus lusts , for which , by the misfortune of beauty , they were reserved untouched . Mustapha now again whets his sword , which before revenge had dulled ; there was not a life that was not his prey , till he had left the Island breathless ; then , like a Tiger besmeared in the blood of tamer beasts , he returns to his Fleet ; and laden with the spoils of the Country , but most with infamy , hoiseth Sails to Bzyantium . Now is he in the Carpathian sea ; where may he see nothing but monsters ugly as himself ; may wind and water roar to him the name of blood . If sleep — charming-care steal on his restless mind ; may the Cyprian Ghosts awake him : may every minute be fear of endless death , and may his sin fright away his repentance : then in view of the Byzantium Towers , the great Seraglio , and his own Palace ; may he be betrayed by his nearest friend to a rock that splits him ; from thence let him sink into the lowest dungeon of Avernus . 

Pro Cypriana . 

THE Country is wasted and spoilt of her riches : but honour is shipped up a prisoner to Byzantium . Is there no refuge ; no redemption ? sword and fire can preserve this , as well as sword and fire consume the other . Policy allows not captivity a sword : but cruelty allows her a candle , the clearer to see her slavery . Ignorance is the happiness of misery which is not felt before it be understood . Had Cypriana a slavish mind in a slavish body , she had owed her attempt to fortune , not to virtue ; and merited more scorn than praise : but Nature that gave her a soul above her sex , studied a discretion proportionable to manage it . Had she well weighed , always to redeem her honour with honour ; she could not better inform , or in a more ingenuous way relieve herself , then to make the emblem of her slavery the instrument of her freedom ; her justice was witty , to punish the Turk by the same means he had punished them . Was it their misery , or their cruelty to which she owed her life ? She was halde from a glorious death , to an ignominious life , to an inglorious death . She was captivated by her own beauty , and felt the greatest tyranny of it herself , why then also should her greatest offender be unpunished ? she did not kill herself for fear of the Turk : for her breast was armed to meet death in any shape of horror , she had before beheld him unaffrighted in all his ghastly forms . Life was below her honour ; her honour not above her friends , which nor life , nor death shall divorce from her affection . As they had accompanied her to her slavery : so it was equal to her liberty . Unworthy is she of life , that life's by unworthiness ; unworthy is she of an handsome death , that seeks it by an ignominious life : but she soared to the height of glory : for she would not go a voluntary slave to her dishonour , when death might relieve her : but she died , and in herself bequeathed three wonders to the World ; a free Slave , a virtuous Prostitute , and an innocent Murderess . 

Contra Cyprianam . 

Whether was the Turk or she more cruel ? he slew his enemies , and strangers : she , her friends , kindred , and her self . Had she life to revenge it with self-murder ? or were she wronged by another , must she therefore be revenged on herself ? Was a life freely given bought at too dear a rate ? or because she might feel their power , must she use her own ? What was it that looked on her more terrible than death , or that she looked on through a multiplying glass ? was it slavery ? that is the common fate of virtue , that stands unmoved by misery , unshaken by despair . Had the Turk slain her , he had not deprived the world of the opinion of her virtue : but the very substance is shipwrecked by herself . The Turks cruelty was her courtesy : for though he triumphed over her ; yet he gave her the opportunity to triumph over misery , and show that height of spirit that scorns any thing without her should afflict her : but she disdained to be beholding to their courtesy , or her own virtue . Was dishonour the thing beyond death or captivity ? had she as much of woman as not to fear a death from herself , and not as much , as not to fear a dishonour from another ? could she hate her virtue , and her sin ? could she better revenge her of her virtue , then by her dishonour ? Why should she fear what might befall her in life , who was regardless what might befall her after death . then was slavery the terrible , joined with dishonour her twin sister . Had she been transported to a Nunnery , where virtue is necessitated , had not that been a slavery ? would not her will break into a thousand sins , who broke through life into a false liberty ? But less than death , slavery , or dishonour , only sense of her dishonour deprived her of her sense ; why should she be affrighted by a shadow , when her sense could be wronged by none but herself ? 

ARETAPHILA . 

Aretaphila , a Cyrenaean , the last ranked in these Stories , but first in my thoughts , which by the order of birth may claim the privilege to do wonders . As some things are less curiously performed which are ordained for common use , not for the ornament or wonder of the world : so have I , like a French Volunteir on a Lute , all this while scattered slight airs , which may perchance surprise an indifferent eye : but now like the glass that twists the Sunbeams to steal fire from heaven , I must in writing her , so lessen and contract so much of her as may sink into our narrow faith , or narrower reason . If our Poets profanely rake heaven for comparisons , for each part of a rotten Mistress that shall ne'er be part of it ; one whom sin , to prevent age , hath carcassed in her cradle : to what heights must I ascend to reach a Subject fit for all fancy to work , not play upon ; one that is above all heights ? Sometimes she is pleased to stoop to be admired , adored ; not that she falls lower to rebound higher : but that we are admired for admiring her , and we her prisoners feast ourselves with the fragmentarie offalls of her Fame . Thus do I admire her , till I admire myself out of breath ; then she beckons to my soul ( the reason I cannot reach ; but I obey ) to come , whither I will not tell you : but now I am returned a re-transmigrated-mountebank-pedler , I will open to your Optics that which shall purblind the whole art ; at your two nostrils you shall snuff in both the indies ; for your palates , ( because the cleanest feeders are the cleanest meat ) you shall have the whole sect of Epicures ; if their opinions stick in your stomaches , you shall take all the sums of Arabia in a Tobacco-pipe to concoct them : Here is that will chain your care to the perpetual sound of Aretaphila : For your touch , are you a Midas ? here is a Diamond set in gold , within two days it will be a Rhodian Colosse ; then will it magnify to an Escurial ; then to a World ; then to ten Worlds ; then to Aretaphila : thus Fortune blows dust up to a Lady , then to a Countess , then to a Queen : thus Gold and Diamonds at length come to be Aretaphila , in whose name they have been valued . Please you to look into this inward Drawer , you shall see all the secrets of nature , that have befooled the grand Clarks of all the World. Here shall you see reason for the ebb and flow of Seas , and of an Ague that resembles it ; here shall you see the wrack of your bodies wracks , how he is the only Physician of himself . The wounded Roman State , like a broken Tobacco-pipe , was cured by blood . War cures the Turkish Lethargy . The Egyptian Dropsy is cured by drinking ; one month in a year the whole Country is drunk . The Plague cures Grand-cairo of her diseases of repletion : but the Ague only an Ague . It is an opinion of some , that every particular person hath two Angels , one waits at his right hand , the other at his left ; this lefthanded Devil is the thing we speak of ; if we be fairly dispossessed of him , we may say , the better Angel hath got the victory : but if by the holiogopheron hotontiperistaton , one Devil drives out another . Here you see this little little Pepper-corn ; Princes are captives , Emperors are subjects to this Pymee-tyrant , this is Love. Let him be pitied , he swells higher than Atlas ; heaven and earth is not a load for his little finger . Let him be scorned , then ( like a Prince's cashiered Favourite ) he is frowned from a Duke to a male contented Gentleman ; then he crosseth his crossed arms , and looks upon his fate with that regreet a younger Brother in the Low-countrieses doth his followers , who make his misery their food , and are the only flatterers of low fortunes ; the little wink rereares the other ; four stivers in hot water defends this from the world , and which is worse , himself . Love hath been a tenant to this heart for many years , and hath now left it like a Farm in the eighteenth year , ploughed up and harrowed out of heart ; under three years sleep it will not again be tenantable . Here you may see the brain working like a Powder-mill , let the brass be overwrought , he is blown up ; and the rest of man is as confused as a beleaguered Town : screw him not up like a treble Lutestring , in a storm , to a French tune , and he will show you the wonders of heaven so distinctly , that you shall confute a whole kennel of Almanacs . But o ! whilst I am quacking , my Aretaphila is fled ; fled like the last age ; or faster , like yesterday ; and my soul , like a skie-climbing Falcon , spirited as the air she fly's in , hath gotten height , and wind , and thinks to seize her : but o ! she is heightened into the incomprehensible ; she is lessened into the invisible ; she is greatned to the un-by-any — fancy — fathomable . Shall we ask Sense what she is ? Sense will tell us ; her face is the unclouded Welkin in the infancy of day : her eyes the Sun and Moon that sleep by turns , lest they should leave the World in darkness : her tongue the harmony of Spheres and Nature : her breasts Heavens milky way , spangled with azure Stars : her arms Castor and Pollux : her other parts , because of lower function , are but the Symmetry of all the beauties of her sex : she is too much first to have any second ; from the third , fourth , and fifth form of women , from a million , or all of them you may take some piece of her , not all , for she herself is the All. Ask Reason what she is ; Reason will tell you , she is her Directress , that she keeps the elements at peace within us : our fire she confines to religious zeal , and suffers it not to inflame either to lust or superstition : our watery element she hath designed to quench unlawful flames : our sighs to dry our blubbered eyes , when tears have tired them : our earth like the earth to tread upon , or make no other account of it then of a skin-purse that holds ten thousand pound : the money outed , the purse is laid aside till it be refilled by the same treasure . Ask Faith what she is : Faith that ties us morally to riddles , religiously to mysteries ; and Faith will tell you , she hath yours , and mine , & an hundred other souls in one soul : nor doth her soul receive extension : for a soul fills no room , though she be all over the body , and she all over ours ; yet none knows where , nor how . If with some Philosophers we will give them but such dimensions , that twenty of them cannot stand upon the point of a needle ; then may it follow that two or three thousand of them may be circumscribed ( in which compass I think so many miser's souls may ) in a local inch : if they have any dimensions , they may be circumscribed ; if circumscribed , then follows the unheardof absurdity ' that they are bodies . We are circumscriptive ; other Angels definitive : but her , immortal fame hath made ubiquitive , and repletive . There are orders of Angels , the first of higher knowledge , because of nobler function ; the knowledge of the second but derived from the first : yet those and these Angels know no more of each other than they are pleased to reveal to one another : but she , first of the first rank , knows all of them and us , and we weakly enlightened , have so much of her , as the watery elements of the Sun , but bare reflection . Some Angels protect Cities , others Countries ; but the noblest are Guardians to us frail and mortal men ; all these offices were by her undergone on earth ; to what high flights of exercise is she now soared ? But I must stoop , and draw near her into her low estate . Faith tells us she stands one contrary without another : were there , or were there no night : yet were she an everlasting day . Were there none bad : yet were she unparalleldly good . Were there any or none to be compared to her : yet were she superlative . All of her is an even proportion of extremes . Faith tells us , now she is beyond our apprehension , that she is nothing , yet all of every thing . But now since she is , let us see what made her this all ; she was Wife to Phedimus , a Cyrenaean Citizen . As when we see the Eastern Morn shoot his fiery-pointed darts , we say they are the Tipstaffs to usher into the World the approaching Snnne ; presently we see himself attended by his Page , the Day ; anon he goes to bed , than it is night : So shall you see the Aretaphila in her glimmering , Wife to Phedimus ; then in the bright of day , Queen and protectress of the Cyrenaeans ; after that her return to the solitary distaff : then like a man that hath lost the other eye , I 'll bid good night to all the World. Nicocrates the Tyrant having made the sword his Orator to pled his Title , usurped dominion over the Cyrenaeans ; among other his bloody butcheries , he put to death the innocent Phedimus ; and then forced the incomparable Aretaphila to be his Queen . She resenting the public calamities more than her private injuries , meditates a remedy for both , and by advice of her nearest friends , attempts the poisoning of the King. The Tyrant had an old woman to his mother , named Calbia ; this carcase , a better name I can hardly afford her outside , was the inside of a Sepulchre ; her head was unthatched as an old Parsonage ; her eyes ( like lights at the last snuff , when the extinguisher is ready to make their Epitaphs ) sunk low into their candlesticks ; her ears now deaf , now happy ( such was her tongue ) they have lost their sense ; her nose wormed like a piece of Homer of the first bind , offended with her breath , bowed to her chin to damn it up ; her cheeks holed as the earth in dog-days drought ; her lips fit to be kissed by none but by themselves ; her teeth rotten as her soul , hollow as her heart , loose as the shingles of an old silenced steeple , scragged as a disparked pale , stood at that distance one could not bite another ; her tongue so weakly guarded , scolds like the alarm of a clock ; her chin was downed with a China beard of twenty hairs ; her breast lank as a quicksand , wasted as an hourglass at the eleventh use ; one arm , one leg , one foot she doffed with day , and as a resurrection , donned with the morrow ; her bones ( pithless as a Stallion for seven Posterities ) the slightest fears might now make rattle in her skin ; her body ( wasted to no waste , blasted with lust as an Oak with lightning ) was as familiar with diseases , as a Physician : to conclude ; she is odious beyond all comparison : one sight of her would make the heat of youth recoil into an infant continence . Yet she maintains two Painters & three Apothecaries to maintain this old-old ugliness , as the rare thing she hath been these fourscore years in getting . But I have too long , like a Sexton , conversed with rottenness . She was Calbia , and in that , her soul was a well acquainted with sin as a Confessor : she was Nicocrates Mother , and in that name she carried to the fair and virtuous Aretaphila , the envy of age , the wormwood of a mother-in-law ; a word that is the original that signifies all that is ill in the sex : yet for the relief of some few particulars , read it like Hebrew , and it yields something that is good . This Calbia discovers the poison-plot . then , as eagerly as my young Master in the Country fastens on the red-deere-pie ( tougher than Drakes biscuits that went round the world , hoary as Methusalem ) entailed by his Grandsire to the house for ever ; she seizes the fair Aretaphila into her talons , more gripping than poverty itself ; nails that scratch like the law , and are as good a cure for the itch as the Goal for thiefs ; her she brings to the rack , there intending , after confession , with most subtle tortures to let out her life . O , that Love in his Olympiads should be drowned in those fair eyes ! those eyes , more eloquent than all Rhetoric , that would raise an Anchoret from his grave , and turn the Fiend Fury into the Cherubin Pity , that those eyes should be of no other use then to vent sorrow to inexorable ears ! that those white and red roses ( which no rain but what fell from those heavenly eyes ) could colour or sweeten , should wither in their prime ! those lips that stain the rubies , and make the roses blush ! those lips that command the scarlet-coloured morn into a cloud to hide his shame , should kiss a merciless and sinew-sundring rack ! that breath which makes us all Chamaelions' should be wasted into unregarded sighs ! that those breasts eternally chaste , and white as the alps ; those legs , columns of the fairest Parian marble , columns that support this monument of all pens , should be stretched into anatomies ! that her body that would call a soul from heaven into it , should be mangled like one that hath hanged in chains these three years ! that her skin , smooth as the face of youth , soft as a bed of violets , white as the queen of innocence , sweet as the bean-blossomes after rain ; that that skin , the casket of that body , the karkanet of that soul , should be jaged and torn with that remorseless pity we commonly bestow upon a scarecrow ! After long racking , when Calbia saw she could rack no confession ; then when more torment would have been a relief ; she was taken down from the rack , and her body was pinned , as an unwelcome courtesy , upon her soul . Thus noble and pious guilt is twin-brother , and carries the same face with innocence : so was she spirited , that those tortures could scarce try her patience , less her truth ; and though Calbia was not fully possessed of any course to put her to death ; yet had she cruelty enough to do worse than kill her to make a cause . But , Aretaphila , though her Country's liberty , and her own honour lifted higher than the flatteries of life , or fear of death ; resolved in spite of cruelty or fate , to live whilst she had offered Nicocrates and Calbia to her oppressed Country's rage : therefore the second time she was brought to the rack , when fearing she should be sacrificed to Calbia , not Calbia to Cyrenaea , to calm Nicocrates , she thus bespoke him : 

Great Sir , when you were pleased to lift my humble fortunes up to those glories that willingly engage a woman's pride ; when by kind fate , and kinder Nicocrates , I was snatched from base private arms , to the embraces of a Prince : were these cheeks died into ingratitude and cruelty to make them lovely ? can your breast harbour such a thought ; that this breast which you were pleased to think worthy to harbour yours , can swell with those two monsters abandoned by the most infamous of our sex ? But since ( such is my hard fortune ) I am reduced to that misery as to defend mine innocence ; hear me Nicocrates ; not that I beg life ; for I scorn to stoop ( now I am suspected ) so low as to take it honourably . This potion ( which the comments of envy interpreted a poison ) is a confection , not of Cantharideses for thy lust : but of all those ingredients that may strengthen virtuous love . This ture innocence had no design upon thy life , which ( o thou allseeing Sky witness ) I value as much above mine own , as mine honour above mine enemy : but fearing lest like a needle between two loadstarres , the stronger might attract thee ; and my unworthiness ( how happy am I in it since it pleads mine innocence ! ) might betray me to a worthier Love ; I devised this potion to make thy love lasting as mine , which else would soon consume , fed with such withered fuel as this poor declining face ; this face that can boast nothing but her sorrow , which ( since derived from you ) is most welcome to these eyes , and is received as your Ambassador , into this heartless heart . O let these tears for ever drown these eyes ! o let this sorrow sacrifice this innocent heart in all her glory to the great Nicocrates ! o let Aretaphila , the Aretaphila that is ( since she ) — 

There ( though no tongue could praise her but her own ) the Tyrant impatient ( such oratory have tears in a fair face ) to hear more , tearing his hair , his rage too hasty to be silent ; he expressed as much spleen to Calbia , as she to Aretaphila . What furies ( said he ) fled from their black region have possessed thy blacker soul ( fir to lend rage to all the horrid hags of Tartary ) to act a deed , which , o you Heavens ! can you behold without rain and thunder , your combined sorrow & rage ? can you rend the clouds which are but the sucked up vapours of the earth ; and not her that takes in all the poisonous sin of hell to fortify her wickedness ? Accursed fury ! cursed from the cradle to the tomb , cursed above all that ever Heaven and Earth yet cursed ! May all the sins of me , my Name , and House return into thy venomed soul , till they have pressed it into the low despair of nere-below-repenting sinners . then in his fury , too great for more words ; he had racked his Mother Calbia ; had not the virtuous Aretaphila stepped in between him and his revenge . Nicocrates now gladly possessed of her innocence , endeavours by studied favours to raze out all the injuries imprinted on her body and her soul : but she like an Anvil , too much heated by the last blows to cool suddenly ; meditates upon another , and more safe way for the Tyrant's death . She had a Daughter , every way exactly perfect , for she was Daughter to Aretaphila . The Tyrant had a brother called Leander ; you have already all that commends him ; he was an haire-braind , wild-headed , unreined young man ; one whom lust or ambition might flatter into the most desperate attempts . Aretaphila wrought so far with the King , that a match between her Hero-daughter and the young Leander was by his consent concluded ; her she counsel's to insinuate into her Husband's rashness , and persuade him ( and o what will not this pestiferous night-geare do ! ) to besiege his brother's Crown . Leander not contented with the Kingdom he enjoyed in her ; thought now nothing less than to raise himself as high as his ambition , bribed his Swiz — servant Diapheries , who in the first nick of opportunity murdered Nicocrates . whither do these crowns and sceptres , the worlds magnalia , but indeed the balls of Fortune , hurry thee , fond Leander ? thou hast not killed the Tyrant for the Country : but slain thy brother for the Crown . Through how many restless nights , and less restless thoughts do we encounter these sweet-bitter joys : and as the more we grasp the water into our hands , the less we hold : so is content the farther from us , the more we seek it in these fading glories of the World ; which like an ignis fatuus , first lights us through wild untrodden paths unto themselves ; then through vast airy thoughts they lead us up to that precipice , from whence we fall , and there they leave us . Aretaphila could not appease her revenge till she had plucked up the Tyrant by the roots . First she incensed the Citizens against Leander , the Traitor to his Prince , the parricide of his Country , the fratricide , and lastly the muderer of her Husband . They with one consent adjudged him to be sowed up into a sack , and cast into the sea . then judgement proceeded to Calbia , whom they condemned to the fire , and she was burned alive . Diapheries not worth naming , and therefore I think not worth hanging , the Story mentions not his punishment . The Cyrenaeans now prostrate their lives and fortunes to the devotion of Aretaphila , that was owner of them both ; they offer her divine honours , and beseech her to take further protection of the Country . But she who to do her Country service , could subdue her thoughts to be a Queen ; can fall from that height , to rise above all Crowns , into her own content ; she shaking off those glorious loads of State , retired from all the crowding tumults of the Court , into a solitary and truly happy countrey-condition ; there to spin out her thread of life at her homely distaff : where we will leave her a verier wonder than the Phoenix in the Desert , the alone Paragon of all peerless perfections . Her actions ( so above the criticism of my purblind judgement ) I am not able to comprehend , much less contradict , or controvert . I am silent , lest you should pass that censure upon me for her ; which Famianus Strada did upon Horace for Plautus ; that my judgement is judicium sine judicio . 

FINIS . 

The Heroina hath nothing of woman in her but her sex , nothing of sex but her body , and that disposed to serve , not rule her better part . It is as Nature left it , neglectful , not negligent ; neat , not stretched upon the tenterhookss of quaintness of dress or garb ; with Nature it decays , with Mechanic art the ruins are not repaired . Her soul is her heaven in which she enjoys eternal harmony : her conscience is her Sanctuary , whither , when she is wounded she fly's for refuge . Her affections and passions , in constant calm , neither flow nor ebb with Fortune ; her hope is not screwed up to ambition , nor her fear dejected to despair . Her joy is confined to smiles , her sorrow to tears . Prosperity is the type of what she shall be ; Adversity , her rolling iron that smooths her way to Paradise . Outward happiness she owes not ●o her Stars , but her Virtue that rules her Stars . If she be lashed by Fortune , it is but like a Top , not to be set up , but kept upright . Religion , not Pride or weakness makes her chaste . She understands not the common conceit of love , nor entertains that familiarity with man that he may hope it . Flattery , the inseparable companion of Love , she scorns , though she cannot flatter herself . If Love enter her breast , it is in the most noble way directed to the beauty , nearest the most perfect beauty . If she marry , it is only to propagate ; the very act tending thereto she singles from the thought of sin . Virtue is the reward of her Virtue ; her soul is not so servile , as to be tied by the hope of happiness , or fear of misery to be what she is : but is clearly satisfied for doing well , that she doth well . She is temperate , that her soul may still be Sovereign of her sense . She entertains pity as an attribute of the Divinity , not of her sex . She is wise , because virtuous . She is valiant : for her conscience is ungalled , and can endure the sharpest touch of tongue . If she be enwrapped in the strait that she may sin , she relies upon the highest Providence , which forbids her to use a remedy worse than the evil . 

FINIS . 

