The Constancy of True Love , OR . An Excellent Relation of the Untimely Death of Two Faithful Lovers . To the tune of Down by a Forest 



IN that fair fragrant month of May , 
When earth her curtains doth display , 
I did by chance my corpse repose 
Upon a bank , which Woods did close , 
With green and levy bowers about ; 
A place to shun the tedious rout 
Of Tib's and Tom's , for this intent , 
This flowery seat I did frequent . 
Nature had striven to show her feat 
In the composure of this seat ; 
For in a U●lley plain was found , 
This place by hills encircled round . 
Both lofty Beech and Cedar's tall 
Did shelter this rich Sylvan hall . 
here Satyrs and the Naiads , 
Here Silvans and the Dryads , 
Here rural gods and tripping Nymphs , 
Did hath their corpse in the pure lymphs , 
And crystal streams which made a noise 
In compassing this place of joys . 
no fairer place nor fountain found 
Diana ' with golden tresses crowned , 
And Lad●● guarded in this seat , 
the wihstling wind cooled summer's heat 
Here the nine Muses us●e to dance , 
Here the kind graces used in prance ; 
Here Phoebe his warbling harp did tune , 
The lifesome months of May & june . 
Here Philomela tuned melody . 
Hither the chirping birds did fly , 
Here Thrush & blackbird from their throats 
strained diverse sundry pleasant notes , 
Here the Nymph Echo in bellow ground 
Di● the la●● 〈◊〉 resound ; 
What harbour could the world spare 
more trim , more neat , more sweet more tear ? 
Here as I sat musing alone , 
Me thought I heard one grieve and groan , 
Ah me poor wretch , this creature said , 
Where at my senses grew afraid . 
I started looking here and there , 
To view the subject of this fear : 
A Lady object to mine eyes , 
I sound the effect of all these cries ; 
I hasted to inquire the c●use 
Which did her weeping eyes amaze : 
Behold , quoth me , my Love ( alas ) 
Whose crimson blood here dies the grass . 
The sweetest creature here lieth dead , 
That famous Europe ever bred ; 
I have my wronged Lover slain , 
His death shall be the death of twain . 
I prayed her then for to relate , 
The cause of his untimely fate ; 
She then scarce fetching of her breath , 
Begins the Story of his death . 
Blind Cupid ( quoth she ) with his dart , 
In tender years did wound his heart , 
Made subject to the love of me , 
An actor of this tragedy . 
His heart and mind together tried , 
His love and mine together ti'ed , 
Our parents sought to cross our will , 
But we continued constant still . 
Though time the disadvantage gave , 
And we no place for love could have , 
Yet still we sought to recompense , 
Love with true love without offence . 
We dwelled in neighbouring houses ni● , 
And getting conference thereby ; 
We did appoint under this tree 
Is meat but disappointed be . 
The second part , To the same tune . 



When bright Aurora péeped out , 
And Phoebus newly looked about , 
I first ( according to my vow ) 
made haste unto this plighted bough : 
Here as I stayed for my Love , 
Whose coming over-late did prove , 
A Lion with inhuman paws , 
Came to that well to cool his jaws . 
His mouth was all with blood besmeared , 
This instrument of Death I feared , 
I stead to hide myself for fear , 
And left behind my mantle there . 
The Lion having slaked his thirst , 
Run where I left my garment first , 
But when he saw no place for prey . 
He s●u●ed with blood my Livery : 
And having m●s●ed thus the same , 
Thither he went whence first he came : 
But I knew not that he was gone , 
And therefore stayed I hid alone . 
In the mean time ( O grief ) came he , 
Who promised ha● to meet with me , 
And under this our plighted bough , 
He sought performance of our vow . 
He found not me , but found my Coat , 
All bloodied by the Lion's throat , 
Which when he saw with blood belayd , 
My absence made him sore afraid : 
What should he think , but that some beast , 
Upon my carcase made his Feast : 
He thought that the grim Lion's whelp , 
Devoured me being void of help . 
While he these events thus did brook , 
The instrument of death he took , 
A naked sword , which by his side , 
Ready for Combats he had tied : 
I have , quoth he , wrought my Love's death , 
The end of her shall end my breath , 
And thereupon thr●st to the hilt 
His sword , and thus his blood he spilt . 
That the first Passenger might know , 
The dismal events of this woe , 
He wrote and pinned a note thereof , 
Upon his Hat to show the proof : 
Which I being void of sear at last , 
And thinking all the danger past , 
Returning from that hideous bed , 
Whereto I from the Lion fled , 
I found this Copy of his death , 
And his dead carcase void of breath : 
no sch●●o sighs no griefs , no groans , 
no trickling tears , no mournful m●●neses , 
no ejaculations , no cries , 
no doleful Ditty . or Elegies , 
Shall serve for to be ●asle his end , 
Which for my love his life did spend . 
In life his love did me pursue , 
But by his death he proved it true : 
If he then for my s●k●●id die , 
As much for him why should not I ? 
Since death hath us denied our right , 
then friendly death shall us unite , 
And I will follow him in haste , 
Who thought he followed me being past . 
These words assoon as she had spoken , 
She gave herself a deadly stroke : 
She drew the sword out of his breast , 
And in her own the same she thrust . 
And as in life their hearts were one , 
So are their lives together gone , 
In spite of parents , time or place , 
Fond love will run his wished race . 
Thus have you heard a Tragedy 
Acted by lover's constancy , 
God send such lover's better speed , 
Where fervency true Love doth breed . 
FINIS . 

Imprinted at London for Francis Coules and are to be sold at his shop in the Old-bayley . 

