Laws and ordinances of war , established for the better conduct of the army , by his excellency the Earl of Essex , Lord general of the forces raised by the authority of the parliament , for the defence of King and kingdom . 

And now enlarged by command of his excellency ; and printed by his authority , London , for Luke Fawn . 1643.  

Robert , Earl of Essex , Viscount Hereford , Lord Ferrer of Chartley , Boucheir and Louvain : captain general of the army raised by the authority of parliament , for the defence of King and kingdom . 

To all the officers of the army , colonels , lieutenant-colonels , sergeant-majors , captains , other officers and soldiers of horse and foot , and all others whom these laws and ordinances shall concern . 

Which laws and ordinances hereby published to all the said persons respectively and severally , are required and commanded to observe and keep , on the pains and penalties therein expressed . 

Laws and ordinances of war . 

Of duties to God . 

i.  First , let no man presumes to blaspheme the holy and blessed trinity , God the father , God the son , and God the holy ghost ; nor the known articles of our Christian faith , upon pain to have his tongue bored with a rod-hot iron . 


ii  Unlawful oaths and execrations , and scandalous acts in derogation of God's honour , shall be punished with loss of pay , and other punishment at discretion . 


iii  All those who often and wilfully absent themselves from sermons , and public prayer , shall be proceeded against at discretion : and all such who shall violate places of public worship , shall undergo severe censure . 


Of duties in general . 

i.  All such as shall practise and entertain intelligence with the enemy , by any manner of means or slights , and have any communication with them , without direction from my Lord general , shall be punished as traitors and rebels . 


ii  No man shall relieve the enemy with money , victuals , ammunition ; neither harbour or receive any such , upon pain of death . 


iii  If a town , castle , or fort be yielded up without the utmost necessity , the governor thereof shall be punished with death . 


iv.  But if so be , that the officers and soldiers of the garrison , constrain the governor to yield it up : in such a case shall all the officers be punished with death , and the common soldiers who have been active , or have given their consent in constraining the governor , shall cast lots for the hanging of the tenth man amongst them . 


v.  And withal to know in what case and circumstances a governor , and the militia of the garrison May be blameless , for the surrendering of a town , castle , or fort , it is hereby expressly signified : that first they are to prove the extremity of want within the place , insomuch that no eatable provision was left them for the sustenance of their lives . Secondly , that no succour or relief in any probable wise could be hoped for . Thirdly , that nothing else could be expected , but that within a short time the town , castle , or fort , with all the garrison , and arms , ammunition , magazine , and appurtenances in it , must of necessity , fall into the hands of the enemy . Upon proof of which forementioned circumstances , they May be acquitted in a counsel of war , else to be liable to the punishment above expressed . 


vi . Whosoever shall be convicted to do his duty negligently and carelessly , shall be punished at discretion . 


vii . Whosoever shall presume to violate a saveguard , shall die without mercy . 


viii . Whosoever shall come from the enemy , without a trumpet , or drum , after the custom of war , or without a pass from his excellency , within the quarters of the army , or within a garrison town , shall be hanged up as a spy . 


Of duties towards superiors and commanders . 

i.  Whosoever shall use any words tending to the death of the Lord general , shall be punished with death . 


ii  No man shall presume to quarrel with his superior officer , upon pain of cashiering , and arbitrary punishment ; nor to strike any such , upon pain of death . 


iii  No soldier shall depart from his captain , nor servant from his Master , without licence , though he serve still in the army , upon pain of death . 


iv.  Every private man or soldier , upon pain of imprisonment , shall keep silence when the army is to take lodging , or when it is Marching , or Imbattallio , so as the officers May be heard , and their commandments executed . 


v.  No man shall resist , draw , lift , or offer to draw , or lift his weapon against any officer , correcting him orderly , for his defence , upon pain of death . 


vi . No person shall make any mutinous assemblies , or be present or assisting thereunto , or in , or by them , demand their pay , upon pain of death . 


vii . No man shall resist the provost-marshal , or any other officer , in the execution of his office , or break prison , upon pain of death . 


viii . None shall utter any words of sedition and uproar , or mutiny , upon pain of death . 


ix. . A heavy punishment shall be inflicted upon them , who after they have heard mutinous speeches , acquaint not their commanders with them . 


x.  Whosoever shall receive an injury , and shall take his own satisfaction , shall be punished by imprisonment , and as it shall be thought fit by the marshal-court : but he that is injured shall be bound , if he do not forgive the injury , to seek reparation by complaint to his captain , or colonel , or other superior officer , and it shall be given him in ample manner . 


Of duties moral . 

i.  Drunkenness in an officer , shall be punished with loss of place ; in a common soldier , with such penalties as a court-martial think fit . 


ii  Rapes , ravishments , unnatural abuses , shall be punished with death . 


iii  Adultery , fornication , and other dissolute lasciviousness , shall be punished with discretion , according to the quality of the offence . 


iv.  Theft and robbery , exceeding the value of twelve pence , shall be punished with death . 


v.  No man shall use reproachful , nor provoking words , or acts to any , upon pain of imprisonment , and further punishment , as shall be thought fit to be inflicted upon enemies to discipline and service . 


vi . No man shall take or spoil the goods of him that dieth , or is killed in service , upon pain of restoring double the value , and arbitrary punishment . 


vii . Murder shall be expiated with the death of the murderer . 


Of a soldier's duty touching his arms . 

i.  All soldiers coming to their colours to watch , or to be exercised , shall come fully armed , upon pain of severe correction . 


ii  None shall presume to appear with their arms unfixt , or undecently kept , upon pain of arbitrary correction . 


iii  If a trooper shall lose his horse or hackney , or footman any part of his arms , by negligence or lewdness , by dice or cards , he or they shall remain in quality of pioneers and scavengers , till they be furnished with as good as were lost , at their own charge . 


iv.  No soldier shall give to pawn , or sell his armour , upon pain of imprisonment , and punishment at discretion ; and wheresoever any armour shall be found so sold or pawned , they shall be brought again into the army . 


v.  If a trooper shall spoil his horse willingly , of purpose to be rid of the service , he shall lose his horse , and remain in the camp for a pioneer . 


vi . If one borrows arms of another to pass the muster withal , the borrower shall be rigorously punished , and the lender shall forfeit his goods . 


vii . None shall presume to spoil , fell , or carry away any ammunition delivered unto him , upon pain of death . 


Of duty in Marching . 

i.  None in their March thorough the counties shall waste , spoil , or extort any victuals , money , or pawn , from any subject , upon any pretence of want whatsoever , upon pain of death . 


ii  No soldier shall presume , upon no occasion whatsoever , to take a horse out of the plow , or to wrong the husbandmen in their person , or cattle , or goods , upon pain of death . 


iii  No soldiers , either horse or foot , shall presume in Marching to straggle from his troop or company , or to March out of his rank , upon pain of death . 


iv.  No soldier shall presume , in Marching or lodging , to cut down any fruit-trees , or to deface , or spoil walks of trees , upon pain of severe punishment . 


Of duties in the camp and garrison . 

i.  No man shall depart a mile out of the army or camp without licence , upon pain of death . 


ii  No man shall enter , or go out of the army , but by ordinary ways , upon pain of death . 


iii  No man shall presume to draw his sword without order , after the watch is set , upon pain of death . 


iv.  No man shall give a false alarm , or discharge a piece in the night , or make any noise without lawful cause , upon pain of death . 


v.  No man shall draw any sword in a private quarrel within the camp , upon pain of death . 


vi . He that makes known the watchword without order , or gives any other word but what is given by the officers , shall die for it . 


vii . No man shall do violence to any that brings victuals to the camp , upon pain of death . 


viii . None speak with a drum or trumpet , or any other sent by the enemy , without order , upon pain of punishment at discretion . 


ix. . A sentinel or perdue found asleep , or drunk or forsaking their place before they be drawn off , shall die for the offence , without mercy . 


x.  No man shall fail wilfully to come to the rendezvouz or garrison appointed him by the Lord general , upon pain of death . 


xi , No man that carrieth arms , and pretends to be a soldier , shall remain three days in the army without being enrolled in some company , upon pain of death . 


xii . No man that is enrolled , shall depart from the army or garrison , or from his colours , without licence , upon pain of death . 


xiii . No private soldier shall out stay his pass , without a certificate of the occasion , under the hand of a magistrate at the next muster , upon pain of losing his pay , during all the time of his absence . 


xiv . He that absents himself when the sign is given to set the watch , shall be punished at discretion , either with bread and water in prison , or with the Woodden horse . 


xv . Whosoever shall express his discontent with his quarter given him in the camp , or garrison , shall be punished as a mutineer . 


xvi . No officer , of what quality soever , shall go out of the quarter to dinner or supper , or lie out all-night , without making his superior officer acquainted , upon pain of cashiering . 


xvii . All officers whose charge it is , shall see the quarters kept clean and sweet , upon pain of severe punishment . 


xviii . None shall presume to let their horses feed in sown grounds whatsoever , or to endamage the husbandmen any way , upon severest punishment . 


xix . Whosoever shall in his quarter , abuse , beat , fright his landlord , or any person else in the family , or shall extort money or victuals , by violence from them , shall be proceeded against as a mutineer , and an enemy to discipline . 


Of duties in action . 

i.  No man shall fail immediately to repair unto his colours ( Except he be impotent by lameness or sickness ) when an alarm is given , upon pain of death . 


ii  No man shall abandon his colours , or fly away in battle , upon pain of death . 


iii  If a pikeman throw away his pike , or a musketeer his musket or bandilier , he or they shall be punished with death . 


iv.  No man shall burn any house or barn , be it of friend or foe , or wilfully spoil any corn , hay , or straw , or stacks in the fields , or any ship , boat , carriage , or any thing that May serve for the provision of the army without order , upon pain of death . 


v.  None shall kill an enemy who yields , and throws down his arms . 


vi . None shall save a man that hath his offensive arms in his hands , upon pain of losing his prisoner . 


vii . Whosoever in skirmish shall fling away his powder out of his bandiliers , that he May the sooner come off , shall be punished with death . 


viii . No soldier shall imbezzell any part of the prey till it be disposed of by the Lord general , or others authorised , upon pain of death . 


ix. . No officer or soldier shall ransom , or conceal a prisoner ; but within twelve hours , shall make the same known to the Lord general , or others authorised , upon pain of death . 


x.  No man upon any good success , shall fall a pillaging before licence , or a sign given , upon pain of death . 


xi . A regiment or company of horse or foot , that chargeth the enemy , and retreats before they come to handy-strokes , shall answer it before a council of war ; and if the fault be found in the officers , they shall be banished the camp ; if in the soldiers , than every tenth man shall be punished at discretion , and the rest serve for pioneers and scavengers , till a worthy exploit take off that blot . 


Of the duties of commanders and officers , in particular . 

i.  All commanders are straightly charged to see almighty God reverently served , and sermons and prayers duly frequented . 


ii  All commanders and officers that find any of discontented humours , apt to mutenize , or any swerving from direction given , or from the policy of the army set down , shall straight way acquaint the Lord general therewith , or others authorised , as they will answer their neglect . 


iii  Any officer that shall presume to defraud the soldiers of their pay , or any part of it , shall be cashiered . 


iv.  No corporal , or other officer commanding the watch , shall willingly suffer a soldier to go forth to a duel , or private fight , upon pain of death . 


v.  What officer soever shall come drunk to his guard , or shall quarrel in the quarter , or commit any disorder , shall be cashiered without mercy ; and the next officer under him shall have his place , which he May pretend to be his right , and it shall not be refused to him . 


vi . A captain that is careless in the training and governing of his company , shall be displaced of his charge . 


vii . All captains or officers that shall outstay their pass , shall be punished at the Lord general's discretion . 


viii . All officers , of what condition soever , shall have power to part quarrels & frays , or sudden disorders betwixt the soldiers , though it be in any other regiment or company , and to commit the disordered to prison for the present , until such officers as they belong unto are acquainted with it : and what soldier soever shall resist , disobey , or draw his sword against such an officer ( Although he be no officer of his regiment or company ) shall be punished with death . 


ix. . A captain or officer nonresident in the place assigned him for garrison without licence , shall have one months pay defaulted for the first offence , and two months for the second : upon the third offence he shall be discharged of his command . 


x.  After the army is come to the general rendezvouz , no captain shall cashier any soldier that is enrolled , without special warrant of the Lord general . 


xi . No captain or officer of a troop or company , shall present in musters , any but real troopers and soldiers , such as by their pay are bound to follow their colours , upon pain of cashiering without mercy . And if any victualler , free-booter , interloper , or soldier whatsoever , of any troop or company , shall present himself , or his horse in the muster , to mislead the muster-master , and to betray the service , the same shall be punished with death . 


xii . No provider , keeper , or officer of victual or ammunition , shall embezzle or spoil any part thereof , or give any false account to the Lord general , upon pain of death . 


Of the duty of muster-masters . 

i.  No muster-master must wittingly let any pass in the musters , but such as are really of the troop or company presented , upon pain of death . 


ii  All captains shall cause their troops or companies to be full and complete ; and two days after the general Mustering , they shall send to the Lord general a perfect list or roll of all the officers of their troops and companies , and likewise of all the troopers and soldiers that are in actual service , putting down distinctly on the head of each man his monthly pay . 


iii  The like roll or list shall the captains send to the Lord general , and to the treasurer of the army upon every payday , during the service , with a punctual expression at the bottom of the said roll , what new troopers or soldiers have been entertained since the last payday , in lieu of such as are either deceased or cashiered , and likewise the day whereon they were so cashiered and entertained . 


iv.  Which said list or roll shall be subscribed , not only by the captain and his lieutenant and coronet or ensign , but also by the sergeants and corporals respectively , who shall declare upon their oath , that the troopers and soldiers enrolled in the said list , are real and actual troopers and soldiers of the respective troops and companies . And whosoever shall be convicted of falsehood in any of the premises , shall be cashiered . 


v.  No muster-master shall presume to receive or accept of any roll to make the musters by , but the forementioned rolls , upon pain of the loss of his place , and other punishment at discretion . 


vi . No man shall presume to present himself to the muster , or to be enrolled in the muster-rolls by a counterfeit name , or surname , or place of birth , upon pain of death . 


Of victuallers . 

i.  No victuallers shall presume to issue or sell unto any of the army , unsound , unsavoury , or unwholesome victuals upon pain of imprisonment , and further arbitrary punishment . 


ii  No soldier shall be a victualler without the consent of the Lord general , or others authorised upon pain of punishment at discretion . 


iii  No victualler shall entertain any soldiers in his house , tent , or Hutt , after the warning-piece at night , or before the beating of the Ravalee in the morning . 


iv.  No victualler shall forestall any victuals , nor sell them before they be appraised by the marshal general , upon severe punishment . 


Of administration of justice . 

i.  All controversies between soldiers and their captains , and all others , shall be summarily heard and determined by the council of war , except the weightiness of the cause require further deliberation . 


ii  All officers and others who shall send up any prisoners unto the marshal general of the army ; shall likewise deliver unto the marshal , the cause and reason of the imprisonment ; and without such cause and reason shown , the marshal is expressly forbid to take charge of the prisoner . 


iii  When a prisoner is committed to the charge of the marshal general , the information of the crime which he standeth committed for , is to be given in to the advocate of the army , within 48 hours , after the commitment , or else , for default thereof , the prisoner to be released , except good cause be shown ; wherefore the information cannot be ready within that time . 


iv.  The goods of such as die in the army or garrison , or be slain in the service , if they make any will by word or writing , shall be disposed of according to their will . If they make no will , then shall go to their wives , or next kin . If no wife or kindred appear within a year after , shall be disposed of by the appointment of the Lord general , according to the laws civil and military . 


v.  No magistrate of town or country , shall without licence imprison any soldier , unless for capital offences . 


vi . In matters of debts or trespass , or other inferior cases , the magistrate shall acquaint his captain , or other chief officer therewith , who is to end the matter with rhe consent of the complainant , or to leave the party grieved to take his remedy by due course of law : and if the officer fail of his duty therein , the Lord general upon complaint of the party grieved , will not only see him righted , but the officer punished for his neglect in this behalf . 


vii . No man shall presume to use any braving or menacing words , signs , or gestures , while the court of justice is sitting , upon pain of death . 


viii . No inhabitant of city , town , or country , shall presume to receive any soldier into his service , or conceal , or use means to convey such runaways , but shall apprehend all such , and deliver them to the provost Martial . 


ix. . All captains , officers , and soldiers , shall do their endeavours to detect , apprehend , and bring to punishment all offenders , and shall assist the officers of the army for that purpose , as they will answer their slackness in the marshal's court . 


x.  If the marshal shall dismiss without authority , any prisoner committed unto his charge , or suffer him to make an escape , he shall be liable to the same punishment due unto the dismissed or escaped offendor . 


xi . All other faults , disorders , and offences not mentioned in these articles , shall be punished according to the general customs and laws of war . 

And to the end that these laws and ordinances be made more public and known , as well to the officers , as to the common soldiers , every colonel and captain is to provide some of these books , and to cause them to be forthwith distinctly and audibly read in every several regiment , by the respective marshals in presence of all the officers ; in the horse quarters by sound of trumpet ; and amongst the foot by beat of drum : and weekly afterwards , upon the pay day , every captain is to cause the same to be read to his own company , in presence of his officers . And also upon every main guard , the captain is to do the like , that none May be ignorant of the laws and duties required by them . 


These are to authorise you to print for the use of the army , the laws and ordinances of war , by me established , and of late enlarged by my command , for the better conduct of the service . And likewise by these presents to forbid all others to print the same at their perils on the contrary . 

given under my hand , 25. novemb. 1643.  Essex . 

To Luke fawn , stationer . 





blasphemy . cursing . neglecting divine worship . intelligence with the enemy . relief of the enemy . yielding up of forts . careless service . violating of a safe guard . violating of the Lord general . quarrelling with officers . departing from captains and Masters . silence in the army . resisting against correction . unlawful assemblies . resisting of the provost Martial . seditious words . concealing mutinous speeches . receiving of injuries . drunkenness . unnatural abuses . adultery . theft . provocation . seizing upon dead men's goods . murder . full armour . slovenly armour . losing of horses and arms . pawning or selling of armour . wilful spoiing of horses . borrowed arms . embezzling of ammuition . waste and extortion . taking of horses out of the plow . straggling from the colours . spoiling of trees . swerving from the camp . going in or out by ways . drawing of swords after setting the watch . giving a false alarm . drawing swords in a quarrel . revealing the watch word . offering violence to victuallers . speaking with the enemy's messengers . a sentinel asleep , or drunk . failing at the rendezvouz . remaining enrolled in the army . departing without leave . out staying a pass . absenting from the watch . discontented with their quarters . lying or supping out of the quarters . keeping of the quarters clean . letting of horse feed in sown grounds . repairing to the colours upon an alarm . flying . flinging away arms . burning and wasting . killing an enemy who yields . saving of men armed with offensive arms . flinging away powder . imbezzelling of the prey . concealing of prisoners  pillaging without licence . retreating before handy-blows . commanders must see God duly served . commanders must acquaint my Lord general with dangerous humours . defraud of soldiers pay . stopping of duellers . drunken and quarrelsome officers . careless captains . officers outstaying their pass . all officers bound to part quarrels . officers nonresident in garrison . cashiering of soldiers . mustering of false and counterfe•t troops . commissaries of victuals and ammunition must be true . muster Masters conniving at counterfei•ss  captain's must send a roll of their men to the Lord general . every payday . subscribed by all the officers of the troop or company . muster-masters must use no other rolls . counterfeit names in the rolls . victuallers issuing naughty victuals  no soldier must be a victualler . unseasonable hours kept by victuallers . summary proceedings  the provost Martial must look to his prisoner . goods of the destinct . civil magistrates imprisoning soldiers . for debts and other small offences . braving the court of justice . receiving of run aways . detecting of offenders . offences whatsoever to be punished by the laws of war . 











