Orders and institutions of war , made and ordained by his majesty , and by him delivered to his general his excellence the Earl of Newcastle . 

With the said Earls speech to the army at the delivery and publishing the said orders prefixed . 

Printed for j. Johnson . 1642.  

Orders and institutions of war . 

inprimis , it is by us ordered , that no colonel captain or other officer or soldier , shall be admitted into our service , but such as shall take the oaths of supremacy and allegiance . 
2.  No Papist of what degree or quality soever shall be admitted to serve in our army . 
3.  All colonels are commanded to have a special care that the due service of God be performed in their several regiments , by the chaplains to each regiment every Sunday twice , except some contingent occasion of moment be a lawful impediment for their forbearance . 
4.  All colonels , lieutenant colonels , captains and other inferior officers are commanded to repress all disorders in their several quarters , as they will answer the contrary to our council of war if the default be found in them . 
5.  Whosoever shall presume to swear or blaspheme the name of God in our quarters ; for the first offence shall suffer twelve hour's imprisonment ; for the second , he shall suffer four and twenty hour's durance ; and for the third he shall be whipped and cashiered our army . 
6.  Whatsoever soldier shall be found drunk and so neglect his duty , shall be punished at the discretion of our court of war , according to the heinousness of the fact , and the detriment arrived by his default to our service . 
7.  What captain or other officer that shall inflict punishment , or strike any soldier without good cause of offence given ; for such punishment or blow shall upon complaint made receive censure from his superiors . 
8.  What captain or other superior officer or inferior , that shall detain the soldiers pay after 't is delivered to him by our treasurer or his subordinate officers , upon complaint made shall make full repayment of such monies and then be cashiered our service . 
9  Whereas there is and hath been in most services divers enormous abuses committed in musters by muster-masters , commissaries and officers for that purpose , making their companies seem complete by men hired out of other companies : we do therefore command all colonels , captains , and other officers , to take especial care that their companies be full , and no such enormities committed : every muster-master so offending being liable to capital punishment , and every man so hired shall suffer death , for his second offence ; for his first , lie in irons during ours or our general's pleasure . 
10.  What soldier soever that shall presume to steal from or plunder any of our good subjects in his March , or in any town where he is billeted , shall suffer death , if the thing so stolen or taken be above the value of twelve pence , if under , he shall be punished according to the discretion of his officers . 
11.  Whosoever shall wilfully act any murder upon the persons of any of our good subjects , soldier or other shall suffer death . 
12.  Whosoever shall force or ravish any woman within our quarters , or any other place , shall suffer death . 
13.  Whosoever draweth any sword in the presence of our general to do any harm with it , shall lose his hand . 
14.  Whosoever draweth his sword when his colours are flying , or upon any March , he shall be harquebusered : if it be done in the place where he is billeted , he shall only lose his hand and be banished our quarters . 
15.  Whosoever draweth his sword in the quarters after the watch is set , with intention of mischief to any , shall suffer death . 
16.  No man shall hinder our provost-marshal or his inferior officers from execution of any charge given them by our general , who presumes to do it shall suffer death . 
17.  All that is to be published and made known to all men , shall be openly proclaimed by sound of drum or trumpet , that no man plead ignorance for the neglect of his duty . Who so is found disobedient shall be punished as the fault is of importance . 
18.  No man shall presume to make any alarm in the quarter , or shoot off his musket in the quarter but shall be severely punished . 
19  After advertisement is given to set the watch , he that shall absent himself without some lawful cause , shall be punished with irons . 
20.  He that is found sleeping upon his watch in any place of danger shall be harquebusered . 
21.  He who shall come off the watch where he is appointed to stand , or he who shall drink himself drunk so long as he hath the guard shall be harquebusered . 
23.  Whosoever repairs not to his colours when he hears the trumpet sound or drum beat shall be punished with irons . 
24.  Whensoever a March is beaten , every man shall follow his colours , neither shall any through presumption stay behind without leave , upon fear of punishment . 
25.  If any stay behind in a mutinous fashion he shall be punished with death . 
27.  He who doth run from his colours in the field , shall be punished with death ; and if any other soldiers kill him in the mean time , he shall be free . 
28.  When occasion of service is , he who doth first run away , if any can kill him he shall be free . 
29.  What regiment or company shall begin any mutiny , the first beginner shall be punished with death , and the rest that consent to him shall be punished according to the discretion of the council of war . 
30.  Whosoever soldier or other that shall directly or indirectly hold intelligence with the enemy , or disclose any of our secrets to them or any of them , shall as traitors be punished with death . 
31.  What regiment of horse or foot shall treat with the enemy , or enter into any league with him without our leave or our generals , shall be punished with death . 
32.  Whosoever shall give over any of our towns to the enemy that May be defended against them , unless in case of necessity shall be punished with death . 
33.  No man shall presume to send any challenge to any other of his fellows , nor to fight any duel in the quarters or without , upon pain of death . 
34.  They who shall hold any manner of conference with the enemy , without licence from our general , shall be punished with death . 
35.  Every one that shall not be contented with that quarter which is assigned him shall , be accounted a mutineer . 
36.  If any cast away any of his arms , either in the field , or in the quarters , he shall be whipped thorough the quarters , as an example to others . 
37.  He who doth pawn any of his arms , or any ammunition whatsoever , or any other necessaries whatsoever used in the field , for the first & second offences shall be whipped thorough the quarters , for the third time he shall be punished as for other theft : also he that bought them , or took them to pawn , be he soldier or victualler , or other , shall lose his money , or be punished as he who pawned or sold them . 
37.  No man shall presume to set fire on any town , village , house , barn , outhouse , haystacke , or mill of any of our subjects , whoever shall be found guilty of any such crime , shall suffer death without mercy . 
38.  No man shall presume to wrong any who hath our warrant or our generals for his safe passage , be he friend or enemy , upon pain of death . 
39  He who doth beat his host or hostis , or any of their servants , the first and second time , shall be put in irons ; the third time he shall be punished at the discretion of our officers . 
40.  None shall presume to wrong any man that brings necessaries to our quarters , nor take his horse from him by force , whosoever doth , shall be punished with death . 
41.  No soldiers shall come to the muster , but at what day and hour they are commanded : no colonel nor captain shall presume to muster his men without command from our general . 
42.  If any horseman do borrow either horse , pistol , saddle or sword to muster withal , so much as is borrowed , shall be forfeited , and he that doth it shall be put out of our service , and he that dareth them shall forfeit one half to the captain , the other half to the provost . 
43.  If it can be proved that any horseman do spoil his horse willingly of purpose , to return home , he shall be held a coward , lose his horse , and be turned out of the service . 
44.  No soldier whatsoever , horse or foot , shall be cast off by his captain , or any inferior officer , without consent of the colonel . 
45.  No colonel nor captain shall licence any soldier , either horse or foot , to depart the field without leave of the general , as he will answer the same , and incur our displeasure . 
46.  Any soldier , gentleman or other , that shall be maimed , or lose any limb in this our present service , shall have a competent pension allowed him to subsist upon during his life . 
47.  If any captain , or other commander , do lend his soldiers to any other captain , it shall be done in the presence of our muster-masters , that so our service be not neglected . 
48.  All our soldiers we do hereby strictly require to avoid all quarrels and offences one to another , to give due obedience and fit respects to their captains , lieutenants , ensigns and other inferior officers . 
49.  We also require , and strictly command all ensigns , lieutenants , captains , to give the same respects to our officers of the field ; as sergeant-majors , lieutenant-colonels and colonels . 
50.  As we expect they and all the rest of our army by our express command , do the right honourable , our trusty and well-beloved cousin and councillor , William Earl of Newcastle , his excellence , whom we have constituted and ordained general of all our present forces . 
51.  And we do hereby will and require our said trusty and well-beloved cousin and counsellor , William , Earl of Newcastle , his excellence , our general , so constituted and ordained , to see all these , and all other our ordinances of war whatsoever , put in execution by his immediate officers , that so our cause May succeed prosperously , and we , with the almighty's assistance , be victorious over all our enemies . 
His excellence , the Earl of Newcastle's speech to his colonels , and other commanders , at his receiving the charge of general , and the precedent orders from his majesty . 

Lords and gentlemen , my noble friends and fellow soldiers , i could have heartily wished , that either the Earl of Lindsey , who before commanded you , had evaded his untimely destiny ; or th•• his sacred majesty had been pleased to have conferred the successive managing of this office to one of better abilities than myself but since i am invested with this charge , i shall study to demean myself like a faithful subject to my Prince , a true legitimate son to my mother the commonwealth , and a just and loving chief to you all ; to use incouragementsses to men of fortitude , is an implicit diminution to their valours . I shall not therefore so much undervalue yours , as to intrude an exhortation upon your courages , only i shall desire you will keep those men under your commands free from disordiers , performing with all care and diligence , these institutions which i now as your general am engaged to deliver to you from his sacred majesty : we are here in our own country , a sad and lamentable affair it is in arms , and must employ our hands against ourselves , our brothers ; if we must fight , i make no doubt of your deportement in the affairs of war , but could heartily wish , and so i hope you do all wish with me , that we Might be happy in a fair and sudden atonement between his majesty and his high court of parliament ; 't is not improbable , but it May be effected , if not , i hope you will all fight as valiantly as i shall lead you on resolutely , and ( If it so please God ) bring you off with safety . 

Finis . 








