THE CURE OF THE FEAR OF DEATH . 

Showing the course Christians may take to be delivered from these fears about death , which are found in the hearts of the most . 

A Treatise of singular use for all sorts . 

By NICHOLAS BIFEILD , Preacher of God's Word at Isleworth in Middelsex . 

HEB. 2. 15.  

He died , that he might deliver them , who through the fear of death , were all their life time subject to bondage . 

LONDON , Printed by G. P. for Ralph Rounthwaite at the Flower de-luce and Crown in Paul's Churchyard . 1618.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE AND NOBLE LADY THE LADY ARM HARRINGTON , Grace and comfort from God the Father , and the LORD JESUS CHRIST be multiplied . 

MADAM , 

When I had seriously bethought myself in what doctrine especially to imply my Ministry , in the place in which the Lord had by so strong and strange a providence settled me : amongst other things I was vehemently inclined to study the Cure of the Fear of Death ; both because it may be usually observed , that the most men are in bondage by reason of these fears ; as also because I am assured , that ourlives will become more sweet ; yea , and more holy too , when the fear of death is removed : And the rather was I incited hereunto , because I have observed some defect about this point , in the most that have written about Death . I am not ignorant of the censure , which many may give of this project , as accounting it an impossible thing to be effected ; but my trust is , that godly and discreet Christians will restrain censure , when they have thoroughly viewed my reasons . 

My unsaigned desire to do service unto GOD'S Church in relieving such Christians herein , as are not furnished with better helps , hath emboldened me to offer this Treatise also to the public view : I have presumed in your Honour's absence to thrust forth this Treatise under the protection of your Honour's name : and withal I desire heartily to testify my thankfulness for the many favours showed unto me and mine , while your Honour was pleased to be my Hearer . I should also much rejoice , if my testimony ( concerning the singular graces God hath bestowed upon you , and the many good works in which you have abounded in the places of your abode ) might add any thing , either unto your Honour's praises in the Churches of Christ , or unto the establishment of the comfort of your own heart in God , and his Son jesus Christ.  

I have not made choice of your Honour in this Dedication for any special fitness in this Treatise ; for your Honour's condition , in respect of your age , or absence in a place so far remote . For my earnest trust is , that God will add yet many years to your happy life on earth ; and besides I have had heretofore occasion to know how little you were afraid to die , when the Lord did seem to summon you by sickness . 

That God , which hath ennobled your heart with heavenly gifts , & so made you an instrument of so much good , and contentment , unto that most excellent Princess , with whom you now live , and towards whom you have showed so much faithful observance , and dearenes of affection , and carefulness of attendance : Even the Father of mercy , and God of all consolations , increase in you all spiritual blessings , and multiply the joy of your heart , and make you still to grow in acceptation , and all well-doing : Humbly craving pardon for my boldness herein : I commit your Honour to God , and to the word of his Grace , which will build you up to eternal life : resting 

Your Honours in all humble observance , N. BIFEILD . Isleworth , july 14. 1618.  

The chief Contents of this Book . 

THE drift is to show , how we may be freed from the fear of death . Pag. 1. 2.  
First , it is proved by eight apparent Arguments , that it may be attained to , Page 4. to the 12.  
Secondly , it is showed by fifteen considerations , how shameful and uncomely a thing it is for a Christian to be afraid to die , Page 12. to 28.  
Thirdly , the way how this fear may be removed , is showed : where may be noted : 
An exhortation to regard the directions . p. 29. 30.  
Two ways of Cure : 1.  The one by Meditation ; 2.  The other by practice , p. 31.  
The contemplations either serve to make us to like death , or else to be less in love with life . p. 32.  
Seventeen Privileges of a Christian in death . pag. 33. to the 52.  
The Contemplations that show us the misery of life , are of two sorts : for either they show us the miseries of the life of nature : or else the miseries that do avoidable accompany the very life of grace . p. 53 , etc.  
The miseries of the life of nature , from pag. 54. to pag. 67.  
The miseries of a godly man's life are twofold : 1. which appears both in the things he wants ; 2. and in the things he hath , while he lives , p. 67. etc.  
Six things , which every godly man wants , while he lives . p. 68 to 75.  
What should make a godly man weary of life , in respect of God. p. 75. to 85.  
And what in respect of evil Angels . p. 85 , etc.  
And what in respect of the world . p. 88 , etc.  
And what in respect of himself . p. 113 , etc.  
Eight aggravations of God's corrections in this life , p. 78.  
Eight apparent miseries from the world . p. 89 , etc.  
Fifteen manifest defects and blemishes in the greatest seeming felicities of the world . p. 98. to 113.  
Many aggravations of our misery in respect of corruption of nature in this life . p. 113 , etc.  
The remainders of the first punishment yet upon us. Pag. 121.  
The removal of the objections men make about death , from whence their fear riseth , and these objections are answered . 1.  About the pain of dying , where are ten answers , pag. 125. etc.  
2.  About the condition of the body in death . p. 133.  
3.  About the desire to live longer yet . p. 139.  
4.  About the pretence of desire to live long to do good . p. 145.  
5.  About casting away of ones self . p. 149.  
6.  About parting with friends . p. 153. etc.  
7.  About leaving the pleasures of life . p. 159 , etc.  
8.  About leaving the honours of life . p. 162.  
9  About leaving their riches . p. 168. etc.  
10.  About the kind of death . p. 171.  
The second way of curing the fear of death is by practice , where seven directions are given . From page 173. to the end . 

THE CURE OF THE FEAR OF DEATH . 

CHAP. I  

Showing the Scope and Parts of this Treatise . 

THAT , which I intent in this Treatise , is to show , how a godly man might order himself against the fear of death ; or , what course he should take to live so , as not to be afraid to die . This is a main point , and exceeding necessary : Life is thoroughly sweet , when death is not feared : a man's heart is then like Mount Zion , that cannot be moved . He can fear no enemy , that doth not fear death . As death is the last enemy , so it works the longest and last fears ; and to die happily , is to die willingly . The main work of Preparation is effected , when our hearts are persuaded to be willing to die . 

Now in the explication of this point , I would distinctly handle three things . 

First , I will prove , that to live without fear of death , is a thing may be obtained ; one may be delivered from it as certainly , as a sick man may be cured of an ordinary disease . 

Secondly , I will show , how uncomely a thing it is for a Christian to be afraid of death : that so we may be stirred up the more to seek the cure for this disease . 

Thirdly , I will show by what means we may be delivered from the fear of death , if we use them . Of the two first more briefly : and of the last at large . 

CHAP. II  

Proving that we may be cured of the fear of death . 

FOR the first : that the fear of death may be removed ; and that we may attain to that resolution to be willing to die , without loathness , is apparent diverse ways . 

First , it is evident : Christ died to deliver us , not only from the hurt of death , and from the devil , as the executioner : but also from the fear of death too . Now Christ may attain to the end of his death , unless we will deny the virtue of Christ , and his death , and think that notwithstanding it cannot be obtained , Heb. 2. 14 , 15.  And the more apparent is this , because in that place he shows , that there is virtue in the death of Christ , to cure this fear of death in any of the Elect , if they will use the means : For as our sins will not be mortified , though there be power in the death of Christ to kill them ; unless we use the means to extract this virtue out of the death of Christ : so is it true , that the fear of death may be in some of God's Elect : but it is not because Christ cannot deliver them ; but because they are sluggish , and will not take the course to be rid of those fears . The Physician is able to cure them , and usually doth cure the same disease ; but they will not take his Receipts . 

2.  The Apostle entreating of the desire of death , saith , That God hath wrought us unto the selfsame thing , 2.  Cor. 5. 5.  We are again created of God , that we might in ourselves aspire unto immortality ; and are set in such an estate , as if we answered the end of his workmanship , we should never be well , till we be possessed of the happiness in another world : which he shows in those words of being absent from the body , and present with the Lord , ver . 8.  

3.  The Prophecies have run on this point . For it was long since foretold , that Christians knowing the victory of Christ over death , should be so far from fearing death , that they should tread upon him , and insult over him : OH Death , Where is thy sting ? etc. isay 25. 8.  Host 13. 14. 2.  Cor. 15. 54 , 55.  

4.  It is a condition , that Christ puts in , when he first admits Disciples , that they must deny their ownelives : and not only be content to take up their cross in other things , but their lives must not be dear unto them , when he calls for it , Luk. 14. 26.  

5.  We are taught in the Lord's Prayer , to pray That God's Kingdom may come : And by his Kingdom he means the Kingdom of Glory , as well as the Kingdom of Grace : Now in that we are taught to pray for the Kingdom , it shows we should desire it , and that by prayer we should be more and more heated in our desires . 

6.  We are born again to a lively hope of our inheritance : Now if we be afraid of the time of our translation thither , how do we hope for it after a lively manner ? A desire of going to heaven is a part of that seed cast into our hearts in our regeneration , 1.  Pet. 1. 3 , 4.  

7.  We have the example of diverse men in particular , who have desired to die , and were out of fear in that respect : Gen. 49. 18.  jacob waited for God's salvation : and Paul resolves , that to die , and to be with Christ , is best of all for him : Phil. 1. 21.  Yea , in Rom. 7. 23. he is vehement ; OH wretched man that I am , who shall deliver me from this body of death ? Simeon prays God to let him die , Luk. 2. 29.  And the Prophet in the name of the godly , said long before Christ : OH that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion , Psal. 14. 7.  And we have the example of the Martyrs in all Ages , that accounted it a singular glory to die : And in 2.  Cor. 5. 2 , 7. the godly are said to sigh for it , that they might be absent from the body , and present with the Lord ; and so do the first fruits of the Holy Ghost , those eminent Christians mentioned , Rom. 8. 21.  

Last : not only some particular godly men have attained to this ; but the whole Church is brought in , in the 22.  Ch. of the Reu. praying for the coming of jesus Christ , and desiring too , that he would come quickly : And 2.  Tim. 4. 8.  The love of the appearing of Christ , is the Periphrasis of the child of God.  

Thus of the first point . 

CHAP. III  

Showing how uncomely it is to fear death . 

FOR the second , how uncomely a thing it is in Christians to fear death , may appear many ways . 

1.  By the fear of death we shame our Religion ; while we profess it in our words , we deny it in our works : Let Papists tremble at death , who are taught , that no man ordinarily can be sure he shall go to heaven when he dies . But for us ; that profess the knowledge of salvation , to be astonished at the passage to it , shows ( at least ) a great weakness of faith , and doth outwardly give occasion of disgrace to our Religion . 

2 By that , which went before , we may see how uncomely it is to be afraid of death : For thereby we disable the death of Christ : we frustrate the end of God's workmanship : we stop the execution of the Prophecies : we renounce our first agreement with Christ : we mock God in praying that his Kingdom may come : we obscure the evidence of our own regeneration ; and we transgress against the example of the godly in all ages . 

3 Many of the Pagans' greatly settled their hearts against the fear of death by this very reason : Because there was no being after death ; and therefore they could no more feel misery then , then before they were born : And shall we Christians , that hear every day of the glorious salvation we have by Christ , be more fearful than they were ? Let them fear death , that know not a better life . 

Shall we be like wicked men ? Their death is compelled ▪ Shall ours be so too ? They by their good wills , would not lose their bodies in this life , nor have their bodies in the next life : But since God hath made us unlike them in the issues of death ; Shall we make ourselves like them in the loathness to die ? Let Foelix tremble at the doctrine of death and judgement : Act. 24. 25.  But let all the godly hold up their heads , because the day of their redemption draweth nigh , Math. 24 , etc.  

5.  Shall we be afraid of a shadow ? The separation of the soul from God , that is death , if we speak exactly : but the separation of the soul from the body , is but the shadow of death . When see we men trembling for fear of spiritual death ? which is called the First Death ; and yet this is far more woeful than that we call the bodily death . But as if the death of the body were nothing , the Scripture calls Damnation , The second death , never putting the other into the number . 

6.  This fear is called a bondage here in this text : And shall we voluntarily make ourselves Vassals ? Or shall we be like slaves , that dare not come in our Master's sight ? 

7.  If we love long life : Why are we not much more in love with eternal life , where the duration is longer , and the estate happier ? Are not we extremely infatuated , that when God will do better for us , than we desire , yet we will be afraid of him ? 

8.  Shall we be worse than children , or madmen ? neither of them fear death ; And shall simplicity , or Idiotism , do more with them , than reason or Religion can do with us ? 

9  Do not all that read the Story of the Israelites ( in their passion desiring to be again in Egypt , and violently murmuring at the promise of going into the Land of Canaan ) condemn them of vile ingratitude to God , and folly in respect of themselves ? For what was it for them to live in Egypt , but to serve cruel Taskmasters about brick and clay ? And was not Canaan the place of their rest , and a Land that flowed with milk and honey ? Even such is the condition of all those , that wish Life , and are afraid to Die. What is this world but Egypt , and what is it to Live in this world , but to serve about brick and clay ? Yea , the Church , that is separate from the world , can find it no better than a Barren Wilderness . And what is Heaven , but a Spiritual Canaan ? And what can Death be more , then to pass over jordan ; and victoriously overcoming all enemies , to be possessed of a place of matchless rest ; of more pleasures than Milk or Honey , can shadow out ? 

10.  Adam might have had more reason to fear Death , that never saw a man die an ordinary Death ; but for us to be affrighted with Death , that see thousands die at our right hand , and ten thousand at our left , and that daily , is an inexcusable distemper . The gate of Death is continually open , and we see a press of people , that daily throng into it . 

11.  When Moses had cast down his Rod , it turned into a Serpent ; and the Text , noting Moses weakness , saith , He fled from it : But the Lord commanded him to take it by the Tail ; and behold , it became a Rod again : Even so Death at the first sight is terrible , like a new-made Serpent , and the godly themselves , through inconsideration , fly from it : But if at God's commandment , without fear , they would lay hold upon this seeming Serpent , it will be turned into a Rod again ; yea , into a golden Sceptre in our hands , made much better by the change : Neither do we read , that ever at any after , Moses had any fear of this Serpent , when he had once known the experience of it : And have we often , by the eyes of faith , seen the experience of this great work of God , and shall we still be running away ? 

12.  It is said , Rom. 8. 20. that all creatures groan , waiting for the liberty of the sons of God. And shall we be worse than bruit beasts ? Doth the whole frame of nature , as it were , call for this time of change ; and shall man be so stupid , or carried with such senseless fears , as to shun his own felicity ? 

13.  Consider whether it be more commodious for us , that Death come to us , or that we go to Death : For one thing is certain ; It is in vain to eat that , which cannot be avoided . For it is appointed unto all men once to die , Heb. 9 24.  What man is he , that lives , and shall not see death ? Psal. 89.  Death is the way of all flesh , josh. 24.  Now this being granted , let us consider of it , Death is like an armed man , with whom we must once fight . Now if we be advised & will go to death , we may get on our armour beforehand , and so the encounter will be without danger to us , because the weapons of our warfare are mighty through God , & we are assured of victory through jesus Christ. Now on the other side , to tarry till Death come unto us , is as if a man that knows he must fight with a sore Adversary , would through slothfulness , go up and down unarmed , till he fall into the hands of his enemy : & must thou fight with him at such disadvantage ? 

14.  It is most uncomely to fear that , which is both common and certain : death , of all afflictions is most common . For from other afflictions it is possible some might be free : but from Death can no man be delivered , and GOD of purpose hath made that most common which is most grievous , that thereby he might abate of the vigour , and terror of it . It is monstrous foolishness to strive in vain to avoid that which never man could scape . And to teach men their unavoidable mortality , the Lord clothed our first Parents with the skins of dead beasts , and feeds us with dead flesh : that as often as we eat of slain beasts , we might remember our own end : & shall we be ever learning , and never come to the knowledge of this truth ? Is this such a lesson as cannot be learned ? shall we be so stupid , as daily to pass by the graves of the dead , and hear their knells , and yet be untaught and unarmed ? 

15.  Lastly , shall we be afraid of such an enemy as hath been overcome hand to hand , & beaten by Christ , and thousands of the Saints ? especially if we consider the assurance we have of victory . In this combat every Christian may triumph before the victory , 1.  Cor. 15. 55.  

And thus much of the two first points . 

CHAP. FOUR  

Showing that a Christian is many ways happy in death . 

NOW I come to the third point , which is the main thing to be attended ; and that is the means how we may be cured of the fear of Death : and in this we had need all to attend with great carefulness . The disease is stubborn , and men are sluggish , and extremely loath to be at the trouble of the cure , and Satan by all means would keep us from remembering our later end ; and the world affords daily distractions to pluck us away from the school of Christ herein , and our own hearts are deceitful , and our natures apt to be weary of the doctrine , before we put in practice any of the directions ; and we are apt to a thousand conceits , that it is either impossible , or unnecessary to attend this doctrine , or the like . Yea , it may be , it will far with many of us , as it doth with those that are troubled with the raging pain of the teeth , their pain will cease , when the Barber comes to pull out the tooth : so it may be you may find this deceit in your own hearts , that you will not feel the fear of Death , till the discourse of the medicine be over , and so let it be as water spilt on the ground . But let us all awake , and in the power and strength of Christ , that died to deliver us from the fear of death , let us all lay the plasters close to the sore , and keep them at it , till they be thoroughly whole . 

There be two ways then of curing this fear of Death : 1.  The one is by contemplation : 2.  The other is by practice . There be some things if we did choose them out sound to think of them , would heal us wonderfully . 

There be some things also to be done by us , to make the cure perfect . If contemplation be not available , than practice will without fail finish the cure . 

The contemplations are of two sorts : 1.  For either they are such meditations , as breed desire of Death by way of motive : 2.  Or they are such , as remove the objections , which cause in man's mind the fear of Death . For the first , there be two things , which if they be sound thought on , will work a strange alteration in our hearts . 1.  The one is the happiness we have by Death . 2.  The other , is the miseries we are in by Life . 

Can any man be afraid to be happy ? If our heads & hearts were filled with arguments , that show us our happiness by Death , we would not be so senseless as to tremble at the thought of dying . 

Our happiness in Death may be set out in many particulars , & illustrated by many similitudes , full of life and virtue , to heal this disease of fear . 

1.  Death makes an end of all the tempests & continual storms , with which our life is tossed . It is the Haven and Port of rest : and are we so mad , as to desire the continuance of such dangerous tempests , rather than to be in the haven whither our journey tends ? 

2.  Death is a sleep . For so the dead are said to be asleep , 1.  Thes. 4. 14.  Look what a bed of rest & sleep is to the weary labourer , such is Death to the diligent Christian. In death they rest in their beds from the hard labours of this life , esay 37. 2.  Reu. 14. 13.  And was ever the weary labourer afraid of the time , when he must lie down , and take his rest ? 

3.  The day of Death , is the day of receiving wages , wherein God pays to every godly man his penny . And doth not the hireling long for the time , wherein he shall receive wages for his work ? job. 7. 2.  And the rather should we long for this time , because we shall receive wages infinitely above our work , such wages as was never given by man , nor can be , if all this visible world were given us.  

4.  In death the servant comes to his freedom , & the heir is at his full age and it is such a liberty as i● glorious : never such a freedom in the world , Rom. 8. 21.  Shall the heir desire to be still under age , and so still under Tutors and Governors ? or shall the servant fear the day of his freedom ? 

5.  In death , the banished return , and the Pilgrims enter into their Father's house . In this life we are exiled men , banished from Paradise , and Pilgrims & Strangers in a far Country , absent from God & heaven . In death we are received to Paradise , and settled at home in those everlasting habitations in our Father's house , Luke 17.  john 14. 2.  Heb. 13. 11.  And can we be so senseless as to be afraid of this ? 

6.  Death is our birthday ; we say falsely , when we call Death the last day . For it is indeed the beginning of an everlasting day : and is there any greevance in that ? 

7.  Death is the funeral of our vices , and the resurrection of our graces . Death was the daughter of Sin , and in death shall that be fulfilled : The daughter shall destroy the mother . We shall never more be infected with sin , nor troubled with ill natures , nor be terrified for offending . Death shall deliver us perfectly whole of all our diseases , that were impossible to be cured in this life , and so shall there be at that day a glorious resurrection of graces : Our gifts shall shine , as the Stars in the Firmament ; And can we be so sottish as still to be afraid of Death ? 

8.  In death the soul is delivered out of prison : For the body in this life is but a loathsome , and dark prison of restraint . I say , the soul is restrained , as it were , in a prison , while it is in the body , because it cannot be free to the exercise of itself , either in natural , or supernatural things : For the body so rules by senses , and is so fiercely carried by appetites , that the soul is compelled to give way to the satisfying of the body , and cannot freely follow the light either of Nature or Religion : The truth , as the Apostle saith , is withheld , or shut up , through unrighteousness , Rom. 1. 18.  I say , it is a loathsome prison , because the soul is annoyed with so many loathsome smells of sin , and filthiness , which by the body are committed . And it is a dark prison ; For the soul looking through the body , can see but by little holes , or small casements . The body shuts up the light of the soul , as a dark Cloud doth hide the light of the Sun ; or as the interposition of the earth doth make it night : Now death doth nothing , but as it were a strong wind dissolve this Cloud , that the Sun may shine clearly , and pulls down the walls of the prison , that the soul may come into the open light . 

9  The liberty of the soul in death may be set out by another similitude . The world is the Sea : our lives are like so many Galleys at Sea , tossed with continual Tides , or Storms : our bodies are Galleyslaves , put to hard service by the great Turk the devil , who tyrannically , and by usurpation , doth forcibly command hard things . Now the soul within , like the heart of some ingenuous Galleyslave , may be free , so as to loathe that servitude , and inwardly detest that tyrant ; but yet so long as it is tied to the body , it cannot get away . Now death comes like an unresistable Giant , and carries the Galleys to the shore , and dissolves them , and let's the prisoners free : And shall this glorious liberty of the soul be a matter of terror unto us ? Had we rather be in captivity still ? 

10.  In this life we are clothed with rotten , ragged , foul garments : Now the Apostle shows , that death doth nothing else but pull off those ragged garments , and cloth us with the glorious robes of salvation ; more rich than the robes of the greatest Monarch , 2.  Cor. Chap. 5.  Vers. 2 , 3.  It is true , that the godly have some kind of desire to be clothed upon : They would have those new garments , without pulling off their old ; But that is not decent : for a Prince to wear ( without ) gorgeous attire , and ( underneath ) base rags . To desire to go to heaven , and not to die , is to desire to put on our new clotheses without putting off our old : and is it any grievance to shifted us by laying aside our old clothes , to put on such rich garments ? We are just like such slothful persons , that love well to have good clotheses , and clean linen : but they are so sluggish , they are loath to put off their old clothes , or foul linen . 

11.  In the same place the Apostle compares our bodies to an old mud-walled house , and to a rotten Tent : and our estate in heaven to a most glorious and Princely Palace , made by the most curious Workman that ever was ; and it is such a building too , as will never be out of repair . Now for a godly man to die , is but to remove from a rotten old house , ready to fall on his head , to a sumptuous Palace , 2.  Cor. 5. 1.  Doth that Landlord do his Tenant wrong , or offer him hard measure , that will have him out of his base Cottage , & bestow upon him his own Mansion house ? no other thing doth God to us , when by Death he removes us out of this earthly Tabernacle of our bodies , to settle us in those everlasting habitations , even into that building made without hands , in heaven , joh. 14. 2.  Luk. 17.  

12.  A man , that had never seen the experience of it , perhaps would have thought , that the seed cast into the ground had been spoilt , because it would rot there : but Nature having showed the return of that grain with advantage , a man can easily be cured of that folly : The Husbandman is never so simple , as to pity himself , or his seed ; he says not , Alas , is it not pity to throw away and mar this good seed ? Why brethren ; what are our bodies , but like the best grain ? The bodies of the Saints are God's choicest corn . And what doth Death more unto God's Grain , than cast it into the earth ? Do we not believe , our bodies shall rise like the grain , better than ever they were sowed ? and are we still afraid ? 

Paul saith , he would be dissolved , that he might be with Christ , Phil. 1. 21.  In which words he imports two things in death . First , that there is a dissolution of the soul from the body : and secondly , that there is a conjunction of the soul with Christ. Now which is better for us , to have the body , or to have Christ ? The same Apostle saith elsewhere , that they are confident in this , they had rather be absent from the body , and so to be present with the Lord : then to be present with the body , and absent from the Lord : 2.  Cor. 5. 7 , 8.  

Now the true reason why men fear death , is , because they look upon the dissolution only , and not upon the conjunction with Christ.  

14.  In the 1.  Cor. 9 24. our life is compared to a race , and eternal life to a rich prize not corruptible , but an incorruptible Crown : Now death is the end of the race , and to die is but to come to the goal , or race end . Was ever runner so foolish , as to be sorry , that with victory he was near the end of the race ? And are we afraid of death , that shall end the toil , and sweat , and danger of the running ; and give us with endless applause so glorious a recompense of reward ? 

15.  In the Ceremonial Law , there was a year they called the year of jubilee ; and this was accounted an acceptable year , because every man that had lost , or sold his Lands , upon the blowing of a Trumpet returned , and had possession of all again ; and so was recovered out of the extremities in which he lived before . In this life we are like the poor men of Israel , that have lost our inheritance , and live in a manner and condition every way straightened : now Death is our jubilee , and when the Trumpet of death blows , we all , that die , return , and enjoy a better estate , than ever we sold , or lost : Shall the jubilee be called an acceptable time ? And shall not our jubilee be acceptable to us ? esay 61. 2.  

16.  Death is the day of our Coronation ; we are heirs apparent to the Crown in this life : yea , we are King's Elect , but cannot be crowned , till death , 2.  Tim. 4. 8.  And shall not that make us love the appearing of Christ ? Is a King afraid of the day of his Coronation ? 

To conclude this first part of Contemplation : If we did seriously set before our eyes the glory to come ; could our eyes be so dazzled , as not to see , and admire , and haste to it ? Ask Paul , that was in heaven , what he saw ; and he will tell you , Things that cannot he uttered : Happiness beyond all language of mortal man If there were as much faith on earth , as there is glory in heaven : o ! how would our hearts be on fire with fervent desires after it ! But even this faith is extremely wanting : It is our unbelief that undoes us , and fills us with these servile and sottish fears . 

And thus of the meditations , taken from the happiness we enjoy by death : which should make us conclude with Solomon , That the day of Death is better , than the day when one is born . 

CHAP. v.  

Showing the miseries of life in wicked men . 

NOW it follows , that I should break open the miseries of life ; the consideration whereof should abate in us this wretched love of life . 

The miseries of life may be two ways considered ; for they are of two sorts : First , either such miseries , as load the life of Nature : secondly , or such miseries , as do molest the very life of Grace . 

The miseries , that accompany the natural life of man , while he remains in the state of Nature only , who can recount ? I will give but a brief touch of some heads of them . 

First , think of thy sins : and so three dreadful things may amaze thy thoughts : For first , thou art guilty of Adam's sin ; For by that man sin came in upon all men , even the guilt of his sin : Rom. 5. 12.  Secondly , thy nature is altogether vile , and abominable from thy birth , thou wast conceived in sin , Psal. 51. 4.  And this stain and leprosy hangs on fast upon thy nature , and cannot be cured , but by the blood of Christ only , Heb. 12. 1.  And this is seated in all the faculties of thy soul : For in thy mind there is ignorance , and impotency to receive knowledge ; and a natural approving of evil and error , rather than the truth and sound doctrine . Those ways seem good in thine eyes , which tend unto death : 1.  Cor. 2. 14.  Rom. 8. 7. 2.  Cor. 3. 5.  Prou. 14. 12.  And this thou mayst perceive by this , that thou art not able to think a good thought , but canst go free for days and weeks , without any holy cogitation ; and besides , thy mind is infinitely prone to swarms of evil thoughts : Gen. 6. 5.  

Again , if thou behold thy conscience , it is impure , polluted , without light , or life , or glory in thee , shut up in a dungeon , excusing thee in many faults , and accusing thee for things are not faults , but in thy conceit : and when it doth accuse thee for sin , it rageth & falleth mad with unbrideled fury and terrors , keeping no bounds of hope or mercy . 

Further , if thou observe thy affections , they are altogether impotent in that which is good , there is no lust in thee after that which is good , & yet they are all out of order , and prone to continual rebellion against God , ready to be fired by all the enticements of the world , or the Devil : Phil. 2. 13.  Gala. 5. 24.  Thirdly , unto these , add thy innumerable actual sins , which are more than the hairs of thy head , multiplied daily in thought , affection , word , & deed , the least of them deserving hell fire for ever , thy sins of Infancy , youth , old-age , sins of omission and commission : sins in prosperity and adversity ; sins at home & abroad ; sins of infirmity & presumption . If David looking upon his sins , could say , They have so compassed me , and taken such hold of me , that I am not able to look up ? O then , if thou hadst sight , and sense ! how mightst thou much more cry out of the intolerable burden of them ; and the rather , if thou observe , that many of thy corruptions reign tyrannically , & have subdued thy life to their vassalage , so as thou art in continual slavery to them . 

Thus is thy life infested with these unspeakable inordinations : and thus of the first part of thy infelicity in life . 

Secondly , if thou observe , but how God hath avenged himself upon them , & what yet remaineth unto thee , how can thy heart sustain itself ? For , 

1.  thou art a banished man , exiled from Paradise , and made to live without hope to return thither : The best part of the earth thou shalt never enjoy . 

2.  The earth is cursed to thee , and it may be a woeful spectacle to see all the creatures subject to vanity , and smitten with the strokes of God for thy sin , and groaning daily round about thee . 

3.  Look upon thy most miserable soul ; for there thy mind and conscience live shut up with darkness and horror . The Devils have within thee strong holds , and live entrenched in thy thoughts , Eph. 4. 17. 2.  Cor. 10. 5.  Thy heart is spiritually dead , and like a stone within thee , Eph. 2. 1.  Ezech. 36. 27.  

4.  Thy body is wretched through deformities , and infirmities , diversely noisome to thee with pains that grieve thee , either in respect of labour , or diseases , unto which thou art so prone ; & there is no part or joint of thee , but is liable to many kinds of diseases , Deut. 28. 21 , 22.  Gen. 3. 19  And of the labours of thy life , which is but the least part of thy bodily miseries , Solomon saith , All things are full of labour , who can utter it ? And for that reason , life is but a vanity and vexation , Eccl. 1. 18.  

5.  If thou look upon thy outward estate in the world , with what fearful frights may thy heart be gripped ? If thou consider 

1.  The common , or general , or public plagues with which God fights against the world , as wars , famines , earthquakes , pestilence , and yearly diseases , inundations of waters , and infinite such like . 

2.  The particular crosses , with which he vexeth thee in particular , either with losses of thy estate , or the troubles of thy family , Deut. 28. 15 , 16 , etc.  

3.  The preterition of God , restraining many good things from thee , so as thou wantest many of those blessings of all sorts , which yet God doth bestow upon others , Esa. 59 1 , 2.  jere. 5. 25.  

4.  The cursing of thy blessings , when God blasts the gifts of thy mind , that thou canst not use them for any contentment of thy life , or makes thy prosperity to be the occasion of thy ruin , Mala. 2. 3.  Eccles. 5. 13.  This is a sore evil . 

Lastly , consider yet further what may fall upon thee , in respect of which thou art in daily danger . There are seas of wrath , which hang over thy head , john 3. 36. and God may plague thee with the terrors of conscience , like Cain , Gene. 4. 14.  Or with a reprobate sense , or the spirit of slumber , joh. 12. 4.  Rom. 11. 8. strong illusions , 2 Thes. 2. 11. or such other like dreadful spiritual judgements : Besides many other fearful judgements , which thy heart is not able to conceive of , as painful diseases in the body , or an utter ruin in thy estate , or good name : but above all other things , the remembrance of the fearful judgement of Christ , & the everlasting pains of Hell , with a miserable death , should compel thee to cry out , OH men , and brethren ! what shall I do to be saved , and get out of this estate ? 

But because it is my purpose here chiefly to persuade with godly men , & not with natural men , and because death itself is no ease unto such men , that live in their sins without repentance , who have reason to loath life , and yet no cause to love death , I pass from them , & come to the life of godly men , and say , they have great reason to loath life , & desire the day of death . 

CHAP. VI  

Showing the miseries of godly men in life . 

NOW the miseries of the godly man's life are of two sorts : first , for either he may consider what he wants : secondly , or what he hath in life , for which he should be weary of it . 

I will give but a touch of the first . Consider of it : in this life there are six things , among the rest , we want , and can never attain , while we live here . 

The first , is the glorious presence of God , while the body is present , the Lord is absent , 2.  Cor. 5. 8.  And is not this enough to make us loath life ? Shall we more esteem this wretched Carcase , than our glorious God : whose only presence in glory shall fill us with eternal delight ? OH the Vision of God If we had but once seen God face to face , we would abhor that absence that should hinder the fruition of such unspeakable beauties , as would enamour the most secure heart to an unquenchable love . 

The second thing we want in life , is the sweet fellowship with our best friends : A fellowship matchless ; if we either consider the perfection of the creatures , whose communion we shall enjoy ; or the perfect manner of enjoying it : Who would be withheld from the Congregation of the firstborn , from the society with innumerable Angels , and the Spirits of just men ? Alas ! the most of us have not so much , as one entire and perfect friend in all the world , and yet we make such friends , as we have , the ground of a great part of the contentment of our lives : Who could live here , if he were not beloved ? Oh! what can an earthly friendship be unto that in heaven : when so many thousand Angels , and Saints shall be glad of us , and entertain us with unwearied delight ? If we had but the eyes of faith to consider of this , we would think every hour a year , till we were with them ? 

Thirdly , in this world we want the perfection of our own Natures : we are but maimed and deformed creatures here ; we shall never have the sound understanding of men in us , till we be in heaven : our holiness of nature and gifts will never be consummate , till we be dead . 

Fourthly , in this world we want liberty : Our glorious liberty will not be had here : A thing , which the Spirits of the best men have , with much sighing , longed after : Rom. 8. 21. 22.  OH who would live in a prison , a dungeon , rather than a Palace of royal freedom ? It hath been implyedly showed before , that we are many ways in bondage here . 

Fiftly , we shall ever want here fullness of contentment . If a man live many years , so that the days of his years be many , if his soul be not filled with good , Solomon saith , an untimely birth is better than he . And it is certain , if a man live a thousand years twice told , he shall never see solid good to fill his hart , his appetite will never be filled , Eccles. 6. 3 , 6 , 7.  There is nothing in this life can give a man solid , and durable contentment : but a man finds by experience , vanity , and vexation of spirit , in what he admires orloves most : and shall we be so sottish as to forget those rivers of pleasures that are at God's right hand ? Psal. 6. ult.  

6.  The sixth thing we want in this world , is our crown , and the immortal and incorruptible inheritance , bought for us with the blood of Christ : and shall not our hearts burn within us in longing after possession ? Can we desire still to live in wants , & to be under age ? What shall move us , if such an incomparable crown cannot move us ? We that sweated with so much sore labour for the possession of some small portion of the earth : shall we , I say , be so sluggish , as not to desire , that this kingdom , which our Father hath given us , might come quickly upon us ? or are we so transported with spiritual madness , as to be afraid to pass through the gate of death , to attain such a life ? What Prince would live uncrowned , if he could help it , and might possess it without wrong or danger ? and what great heir would be grieved at the tidings , that all his Lands were fallen unto him ? 

CHAP. VII . 

The miseries of a Christian in respect of God in this life . 

Thus , of what he wants in this life . Secondly , he ought to be as much troubled to think what he hath , and cannot avoid while he lives : and thus his life is distressed , and made unlovely , either if he respect God , or the evil Angels , or the world , or himself . 

For first , if he respect God , there are two things should mar the taste of life , and make it out of liking . The first is the danger of displeasing of God : who would live to offend God ? or grieve his Spirit ? or any way to make him angry ? Though this reason will move little in the hearts of wicked men ; Yet it is of singular force in the heart of an humble Christian , who as he accounts Gods loving kindness better than life : so finds nothing more bitter , then that he should displease God : that God ( I say ) who is so great in Majesty , and hath showed himself so abundant in mercy to him . It would lie as a heavy load upon our hearts , to think of the displeasing of our best friend ; specially if he were a great person , or a Prince . How much more should we desire to be rid of that condition , wherein we may displease our good God ; and to be there , where we are sure never to anger him more ? The second thing , that should make us look with less affection upon life , is , that God doth continually cross us in the things of this life : The Lord doth of purpose watch us , that when he sees us settle any contentment in life , he drops in some thing , that makes all extremely bitter : And those corrections of God should be the more noted , if we consider but diverse aggravations about them , as 

1.  That God will correct every son , whom he loveth , none can escape , Heb. 12. 4.  

2.  That a man is usually most opposed & crossed in that he loves best . 

3.  That a man shall ever want , what he wishes , even in such things , as other men do not want . There is a secret vexation cleaves unto man's estate , that their hearts run upon such things which cannot be had , but in the Callings of other men : The Countryman praiseth the Citizen's life ; and the Citizen is full of the praises of the Country : And so is there in all men a liking of the Callings of other men , with a dislike of their own , Eccles. 6.  

4.  That there is no discharge in that war , but that a man must every day look for crosses . Every day hath his grief , Eccles. 8. 8.  Luk. 9 24.  Math. 6. ult.  

5.  That God will not let us know the times of our corrections , but executeth them according to the unchangeable purpose of his own counsel : so as they come upon us , as a snare upon a Bird. For this reason Solomon saith : That the misery of man is great upon him , because there is a time for every purpose , which cannot be avoided , nor can man know beforehand that , which shall be ; for who can tell him , when it shall be ? Eccl. 8. 6 , 7 , 8.  & 9 12.  

6.  That no man knoweth either love , or hatred , by all that is before him : A godly man can have no such blessings outwardly , but a wicked man may have them in as great abundance , as he : nor doth there any misery fall upon the wicked in outward crosses , but the like may befall the godly . All things come alike to all : there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked : to the clean , and unclean , to him that sweareth , & to him that feareth an oath , as is the good , so is the sinner . This , saith Solomon , is an evil among all things , that are done under the Sun , that there is one event unto all , Eccle. 9 1 , 2 , 3.  

7.  This bitterness is increased , because GOD will not dispose of things according to the means , or likelihoods of man's estate . The race is not to the swift , nor the battle to the strong , nor yet bread to the wise , nor yet riches to men of understanding , nor yet favour to men of skill , but time and chance happeneth to them all , Eccles. 9 11.  

8.  That besides the present miseries , there are many miseries to come , so as it is an argument to prove the happiness of the dead , that they are taken away from the miseries to come , esay 57 1 , 2. which should likewise move us to love life the less , because we know not , what fearful alterations may come , either in our outward estate , or in matters of Religion . What case were we in , if war should come upon us , with all the desolations & terrors that accompany it ? What if the Pestilence should come again , or we be left in the hands of the violent ? or God fight against our estates by fire , or inundations , or the like ? Who can tell what fearful alterations may be in Religion ? And is it not best to be in heaven , and then are we safe ? Besides , the miseries may fall upon our own bodies , or our children , or friends , etc.  And these things should abate the love of life , as we respect God.  

CHAP. VIII . 

The misery of life in respect of evil Angels . 

NOW secondly , let us turn our eyes to the evil Angels , & then these things may affright us.  

First , that they are every where up and down the world , in the Earth , Aire , Seas ; no place free . Those fiery Serpents are every where in the wilderness of the world . We lead our lives here in the midst of innumerable dragons , yea they are in the most heavenly places in this life : The Church is not free from them . A man can stand no where before the Lord , but one Devil or other is at his right hand , Ephe. 2. 2.  & 6. 13.  Zach. 3. 1.  job 1  

And sure , it should make us like the place the worse where such foul spirits are : the earth is a kind of Hell in that very respect . 

2.  Secondly , it should more trouble us , that we must of necessity enter into the conflict with these Devils , and their temptations , and to be buffeted and gored by them . 

A man that knew he must go into the field to answer a challenge , will be at no great rest in himself . But alas ! it is more easy a thousand fold to wrestle with flesh and blood , then with these Principalities and Powers , and Spiritual wickednesses , & great Rulers of the world , Ephe. 6. 13.  

3.  Besides , it adds unto the distress of life , to consider of the subtlety , and cruelty of these Devils , who are therefore like the crooked Serpent , and Leutathan , and Dragons , and roaring Lions , seeking whom they may devour . Though these things will little move the hearts of wicked men , yet unto the godly mind , the temptations of life are a grievous burden . Thus much of evil Angels . 

CHAP. IX . 

The misery of life in respect of the world . 

3.  Thirdly , consider but what the World is , in which thou livest ; and that either in the apparent miseries of this world , or in the vexations , that accompany the best things the world hath to offer or give thee . First , for the apparent miseries ; 

1.  It is tightly like a wilderness , no man but for innumerable wants , lives as in a Desert here . 

2.  It is a true Egypt to the godly , it continually imposeth hard tasks , and servile conditions . Life can never be free from grievous burdens , and inexorable molestations . 

3.  This world is verily like Sodom , full of general and unspeakable filthiness : all the world lieth in wickedness , scarce one Lot to be found in a whole City , or Parish . If God would seek but five righteous men , that are truly or absolutely godly , they are not to be found in the most assemblies in the world , nay in the Church too . 

4.  Yet more ; this world is a very Pesthouse , spiritually considered . Every man that a godly man comes near , hath a mischievous plague-sore running upon him ; yea the godly themselves are not without the disease : so as there is a necessity as it were , to infect , or be infected still in all places , or companies . Oh! who would love to live in a Pesthouse , that may dwell in a place for ever free from all infection ? 

5.  Yet more , this world , why , it is a very Golgotha , a place of dead men , we live amongst the graves : Almost all we see , or have to deal with , are but men truly dead . Alas ! what should we reckon of the life of men's carcases , when their souls are dead ? and both soul and body sentenced to eternal death ? Almost all that we meet with , are malefactors , under sentence , ready to be carried to execution , the wrath of God hanging over their heads , and unquenchable fire kindled against them ; & shall we be so besotted , as to love the dead more them the living ? or the society of vile and miserable malefactors in a prison , rather than the fellowship of the glorious Princes of God , in their Palace of endless and matchless bliss ? 

6.  Sixtly , why should we love the world that hates us , and casts us off , as men dead out of mind ? Are we not crucified to the world ? Gala. 6. 14. and do not wicked men hate us , and envy us , and speak all manner of evil sayings of us , because we follow good ? The World loves her own , but us it cannot love , because we are not of this world . Can darkness love light ? or the sons of Belial oar for the sons of God ? In this world we shall have trouble ; and if we found not peace in Christ , we were of all men most miserable , joh. 15. 19  Ecclos . 4. 4.  joh. 17. 14. 2.  Cor. 6. 17.  joh. 16. 33.  And if they hate us for well-dooing , how will they triumph if our foot do but slip ? We should desire death , even to be delivered from the fear of giving occasion to the World to triumph , or blaspheme in respect of us. Yea , so extreme is the hatred of the World , that a just man may perish in his righteousness , when a wicked man prolongs his days in his wickedness , Eccl. 17. 16. and 8. 14.  

7.  Do we fall into any special misery in this world ? Why , behold the tears of the oppressed , & there is none to comfort them . We are either not pitied , or not regarded : or the compassion of the world is like the morning dew , it is gone as a tale that is told , our misery will last , but there will soon be none to comfort us. Miserable comforters are the most that can be had in this world ; and for this reason Solomon praised the dead , that are already dead , above the living , that are yet alive , Eccles. 4. 1 , 2.  

8.  There is usually no Christian , but in this world he hath some special misery upon him , either poverty , or debt , or disease in his body , or the like , etc.  

9  We daily suffer the loss of our friends , that were the companions of our life , and the causes of contentment to us. Now who would tarry behind them , or esteem of this world , when they are gone from us ? 

And thus much of the apparent miseries of this world . 

CHAP. X.  

The vanities of the seeming felicities of the world . 

NOW it followeth , that I should entreat of the vanities , that cleave to the seeming felicities of the world : and prove , that there is no reason to be in love with life for any respect of them . 

The best things the world can make show of , are Honours , Credit , Lands , Houses , riches , Pleasures , Birth , Beauty , Friends , Wit , Children , Acquaintance , and the like . Now there be many things , which apparently prove , there can be no sound contentment , or felicity in these : For , 

1.  All things be full of labour , who can utter it ? Ecclesiastic . 18.  Men must gain the blessings of the earth with the swear of their brows ; there is seldom any outward blessing , but it is attained with much difficulty , pains , or danger , or care , or grievance some way . 

2.  How small a portion in these things can the most men attain ? If the whole world were possess said , it would not make a man happy ; much less those small parcels of the world , which the most men can attain : Eccl. 1. 3.  

3.  It is manifest , men cannot agree about the chief good in these things . Life is therefore apparently vain in respect of these things , because there are almost infinite projects , and variety of opinions : And in all these successions of ages , no experience can make men agree to resolve : Which of these things have felicity in them ? Who knows what is good for a man in this life , all the days of his vain life , which he spendeth as a shadow , Eccle. 6. 12.  

4.  In all these things here is nothing new , but it hath been the same , or the like to it . Now things that are common , are out of request , Eccl. 1. 9 10.  & 3. 15.  

5.  The world passeth away , and the lusts thereof : the eye is not satisfied with seeing , nor the ear with hearing . If a man live many days , his soul is not filled with good ; the desire after these things will vanish ; men cannot love them still : Our life is spent in wishing for the future , and bewailing of the past ; a loathing of what we have tasted ; and a longing for that we have not tasted : which , were it had ▪ would never more satisfy us , then that which we have had . Hence it is , that men weary themselves in seeking variety of earthly things , and yet cannot be contented . The vexation , that cleaves unto them still , breeds loathing ; We are like men , that are Sea ▪ sick , that shift from room to room , and from place to place , thinking to find ease ; never considering , that so long as the same Seas swell , and Winds blow , and Humours are stirred , alteration of place will not profit : So it is with us ; so long as we carry with us a nature so full of ill Humours , and that the pleasures of the world have so much vanity in them , no change of place , or delights can satisfy us : Seeing there are many things that increase vanity , what is man the better ? Eccl. 6. 13.  

6.  How can these earthly things satisfy , when the nature of them is so vile and vain ? They are but blasts ; a very shadow , which is some thing in appearance , but offer to lay hold upon it , thou graspest nothing . Man walketh in a vain shadow , and disquieteth himself in vain . He that loveth silver , shall not be satisfied with silver , Eccl. 〈◊〉 . 9  Psal. 39  

7.  Besides : There is a snare in all these earthly things , they are like pitch to defile a man ; there is ever one temptation or other lodged under them : and the fruition of them , and desire after the , breeds many no isome lusts in the soul , 1.  Tim. 6. 9  

8.  These outward things are also all uncertain , and transitory : riches have wings , and will suddenly fly away ; and Fame is but a blast : and the glory of man is but as the flower of the field , which is to day , and to morrow withereth : The fashion of this world passeth away : And at the last day , they shall all be burned and consumed in the fire : I mean these senseless things , we now set our hearts upon , esay 40. 6. 1.  Cor. 7. 31.  

9  There is no support in these things ; in the evil day they cannot help us , when the hour of temptation comes upon us.  

10.  A man may damn his own soul by too much liking of these things , the abuse of them may witness against men in the day of Christ : jam. 5. 1.  & Philip. 3. 18.  

11.  In these things there is one condition to all ; as it falleth to the wise man , so doth it to the fool , Eccl. 2. 14.  

12.  All things are subject to God's unavoidable disposing : Let man get what he can , yet God will have the disposing of it ; and whatsoever God shall do , it shall abide : To it can no man add , and from it can no man diminish , Eccl. 3. 1.  

13.  A man may have all abundance of these things , and yet not have a heart to use them : Evil is so set in the hearts of the sons of men , and such madness cleaves unto them here , that they cannot take the contentment of the things they have ; and so they be worse than an untimely fruit , Eccl. 6. 1 , 7.  & 9 3.  

14.  Every day hath his evil ; and afflictions are so mingled with these outward things , that their taste is daily marred with bitterness , which is cast into them ; no day without his grief : and usually the crosses of life are more , than the pleasures of living ; so as they that rejoice , aught to be as though they rejoiced not . 

15.  Lastly , If all these considerations may not suffice , then remember , that thou art mortal ; thy life is short , it passeth as a dream , it is but as a span long thy days are few and evil ; all these things are ged with a necessity of dying : Life was given thee with a condition of dying , Gen. 47. 9  job. 14. 1. thy life passeth like the wind : job 7. 7.  Yea , our days consume like smoke , Psalm . 102. 3.  All flesh is grass , esay 40. 6.  And hence arise many considerations deduced from this head of our mortality : For 

1.  All these things are but the necessaries of thy Inn : thou art a stranger , and a pilgrim , and canst enjoy them , but as a passenger , thou canst carry nothing out of this world , but in all points , as thou cam'st into the world , so must thou go hence , Eccl. 5. 13 , 14 , 15.  

2.  The time , place , and manner of thy death is uncertain , there is no time nor place , but man may die in it ; the Court , the Church , the Camp : yea the very womb is not excepted . There is but one way to come into the world , but there are a thousand ways to go out ; and therefore the possession of all things is wonderful uncertain . 

3.  When thou diest , all will be forgotten , there is no more remembrance of former things , nor shall there be any remembrance of things which are to come , with those that shall come after , Eccl. 1. 11.  That which was , in the days to come , shall be forgotten , 1.  Chr. 2. 16.  Yea , a man shall be forgotten in the City where he hath done right , Eccles. 8. 10.  For this very reason , Solomon hated life , Eccles. 2. 17.  

4.  When thou diest , thou shalt die either without issue , or leave children behind thee . If thou die without issue , how hast thou been infatuated in seeking these outward things with so much care and toil , and couldst never say to thine own soul , For whom do I travel , & defraud myself of pleasure ? thou gatherest these things , and knowest not who shall enjoy them , Eccles. 4. 8.  If thou die and leave issue , thou mayst be frighted and amazed with one of these things . For either thou mayst be despised while thou livest , of those for whom thou endurest sore travail , so as they that shall come after thee , do not rejoice in thee , Eccles. 4. 15 , 16.  Or else thou mayst leave the fruit of thy labours to a fool , or a wicked wretch . For who knoweth , whether he that shall rule over thy labours , shall be a wise man , or a fool ? This very consideration made Solomon hate all his labour , which he had taken under the Sun ; and he went about to make his heart despair of all his labours , that he should use all his wisdom and knowledge for attaining of great things , and yet might be in danger to leave all for a portion to him , that hath not laboured in wisdom : and all this is vexation of spirit , Eccles. a. 18. to 24.  

Or else , thou mayst beget children , & thy riches perish before thy death , & then there is nothing in thine hand to leave them , Eccles. 5. 14.  

CHAP. XI . 

The miseries of life in respect of ourselves . 

Thus have we cause to be weary of life in respect of GOD , the evil Angels , and the World. Now , if there were none of these to molest us , yet man hath enough in himself to mar the liking of this present life . For 

1 The remainders of corruption of nature still lie like a poison , a leprosy , a pestilence in thee , thou art under cure indeed , but thou art not sound from thy sore : thou art Lazarus still . This very consideration made Paul weary of his life , when he cried out , OH wretched man that I am , who shall deliver me from this body of death ! Rom. 7.  And if in this respect we be not of Paul's mind , it is because we want of Paul's goodness & grace . And this corruption of nature is the more grievous , if we consider either the generality of the spreading the infection , or the incurablenes of it , or the ill effects of it . 

1.  For the first , this is a Leprosy that spreads all over . There is no sound part in us , our minds , our memories , our wills , and affections ; yea , our very consciences are still impure within us , there is no good nature in us in any one faculty of our souls , but there is a miserable mixture of vile infection . 

2.  Secondly , this is the worse , because this is incurable . There lieth upon us a very necessity of sinning , we cannot but offend . Of the flesh it was well said , I can neither live with thee , nor without thee . The flesh is an inseparable ill companion of our lives , we can go no whether to avoid it , etc.  

Thirdly , if we consider but some of the effects of this corruption in us , as 

1.  The civil war it causeth in our souls , there is no business can be dispatched , that concerns our happiness , without a mutiny in our own hearts . The flesh is a domestical Rebel , that daily lusts against the Spirit , as the Spirit hath reason to lust against the flesh , Gal. 5. 17.  

2.  Secondly , the insufficiency it breeds in us for our callings . The greatest Apostle must in this respect cryout , Who is sufficient for these things ? Though Gods work be all fair work , yet we see , that every man is extremely burdened with the defects , and mistake , and insufficiencies , which befall him in his course of life . 

3.  It works a perpetual madness in the heart of a man , in some respects worse than that of some lunatics : For they are mad at some times of the year , only , or chiefly ; but man is seldom , or never free from this inward madness of heart . Solomon saith , The heart of the sons of men is full of evil , and madness is in their hearts while they live , and after that , they go to the dead . Now this madness appears in this , that men can never bring their hearts to a settled contentment in the things they enjoy , but Death comes upon them , before they know how to improve the joy of their hearts in the blessings they enjoy , whether Temporal or Spiritual . This vile corruption of nature diffuseth gall into althat a man possesseth ; so as it marreth the taste of every thing . 

4.  It fills our hearts and lives with innumerable evils ; it engenders , & breeds infinitely , swarms of evil thoughts , and desires , and abundance of sins in men's lives and conversations , so as godly David cries out ; Innumerable evils have compassed me about , and I am not able to look up . They were more than the hairs of his head , therefore his heart failed him , Ps. 40. 12.  

5.  It is continually mad to betray us to Satan and the world , in all the occasions of our life . 

6.  It will play the Tyrant , if it get any head , and lead us 〈◊〉 , and give wretched Laws to the members : yea , every sin , which is the brat bred of this corruption , is like a fury to fright and amaze us : there is a very race of deuis' br●● in us , when Satan and the Flesh engender together in us.  

2.  And as we are thus miserable in respect of the remainders of corruption , so are we in respect of the remainders of the punishment of sin upon our spirits : Our hearts were never fully free , since the first transgression , our minds are yet full of darkness ; that even godly men do seriously cry out , They are but as beasts ; they have not the understanding of men in them : And in many passages of life they carry themselves like beasts , Prou. 3. 3  Ps. 139.  Eccl. 3. 18.  The joys of God's presence are for the greatest part kept from us : our consciences are still but in a kind of prison : when they go to the seat of judgement to give sentence in any cause , they come forth with fetters upon their legs , as prisoners themselves ; besides the many personal scourges light upon our souls in this life . 

3.  Lastly , the very condition of our bodies should not be over-pleasing to us : our deformities , and infirmities , and the danger of further diseases , should tyre us out , and make us accounted it no lovely thing to be present in the body , while we are absent from the LORD . And thus of the miseries of our lives also . Now it remains , that I should proceed to the second sort of contemplations , that is , those that are removals : namely such meditations , as take off the objections , which are in the hearts of men . 

CHAP. XII . 

Comforts against the Pain of death . 

There are in the minds of all men certain Objections , which if they could be removed , this fear of Death would be stocked up by the very roots . I will instance in some of the chief of them ; and set down the answers to them 

1.  Ob. Some men say they should not be afraid of death , considering the gain of it , & the happiness after death , but that they are afraid of the pain of dying : It is the difficulty of the passage trouble's them . 

Sol. For answer hereunto diverse things would be considered of , to show men the folly of this fear . 

First , thou lik'st not death , because of the pain of it . Why , there is pain in the curing of a wound , yet men will endure it . And shall death do so great a cure , as to make thee whole of all thy wounds and diseases , and art thou so loath to come to the cure . 

Secondly , There is difficulty in getting into a Haven . Hadst thou rather be in the Tempest still , then put into the Haven ? 

Thirdly , thou likest not Death , thou sayest , for the pain of it : Why then likest thou life , which puts thee to worse pain ? Men object not at the pains of life , which they endure without death . There is almost no man , but he hath endured worse pains in life , than he can endure in death , and yet we are content to love life still : Yea , such is our folly , that whereas in some pains of life we call for death to come to our succours : yet when we are well again , we love life , and loath Death . 

Fourthly , we are manifestly mistaken concerning death : For the last gasp is not death . To live , is to die : For how much we live , so much we die ; every step of life is a step of death . He that hath lived half his days , is dead the half of himself : Death gets first our infancy , than our youth , and so forward : All that thou hast lived , is dead . 

Fifthly , it is further evident , that in death there is no pain ; it is our life , that goeth out with pain : We deal herein , as if a man after sickness , should accuse his health of the last pains . What is it to be dead , but not to be in the world ? and is it any pain to be out of the world ? Were we in any pain before we were born ? Why then accuse we death , for the pains our life gives us at the parting ? Is not sleep a resemblance of Death ? 

Sixthly , if our coming into the world be with tears : Is it any wonder , if our going out be so too ? 

Seventhly : Besides , it is evident that we make the passage more difficult , by bringing unto death a troubled and irresolute mind : It is long of ourselves there is terror in parting . 

Eighthly , Consider yet more , the Humours of the most men ! Men will suffer infinite pains for a small living , or preferment here in this world : Yea , we see soldiers for a small price will put themselves into unspeakable dangers , and that many times at the pleasures of others that command them , without certain hope of advantage to themselnes . Will men kill themselves for things of no value ; and yet be afraid of a little pain to be endured , when such a glorious estate is immediately to be enjoyed in heaven ? 

Ninthly , Let not men pretend the pains of death , that is but a fig leaf to cover their little faith : For they will languish of the Gout , or Stone , a long time , rather than die one sweet death with the easiest conditions possible . 

Tenthly , if none of these will persuade , yet attend , I will show thee a Mystery : Fear not the pains of death : For first , Death is terrible , when it is inflicted by the Law ; but it is easy , when it is inflicted by the Gospel : The curse is taken off from thee , thou art not under the Law , but under Grace : And besides , for this cause did Christ die a terrible and a cursed death , that every death might be blessed to us. And further : God that hath greatly loved thee in life , will not neglect thee in death . Precious in the sight of the LORD , is the death of his Saints . What shall I say against the terror of death , but this Text of the Apostle ? Thanks be to God that hath given us victory through jesus Christ. He hath pulled the sting out of death : OH Death , where is thy sting ? 1.  Cor. 15. 55.  

Lastly , thou hast the Spirit of Christ in thee , which will succour and strengthen , and ease thee , and abide with thee all the time of the combat . Why should we doubt of it , but that the godly die more easily than the wicked ? Neither may we guess at their pain , but the pangs upon the body : for the body may be in grievous pangs , when the man feels nothing , and the soul is at sweet ease in preparing itself to come immediately to the sight of God.  

CHAP. XIII . 

Comforts against the loss of the body in death . 

2.  Ob. O ! but in death a man is destroyed , he loseth his body , and it must be rotten in the earth . 

Sol. 1.  It hath been showed before , that the separation of the soul from God , is properly death , but the separation of the soul from the body , is but the shadow of death , & we have no reason to be afraid of a shadow . 

2.  The body is not the man , the man remains still , though he be without the body . Abraham , Isaac , and jacab , are proved to be living still by our Saviour Christ , though their bodies were consumed in the earth , and GOD was their God still . It is true , Death seizeth on the body , but a Christian , at the most , suffers , but aliquid mortis , a little of death . 

Death is like a Serpent ; the Serpent must eat dust : now death therefore can feed upon no more , but our dust , which is the body , it cannot touch the soul : whereas wicked men suffer the whole power of death , because it seizeth both upon body and soul too , and in their case only it is true , that death destroys a man  

3.  Grant that we loose the body in death , yet that ought not to be terrible : for what the body is , it hath been before showed . It is but a prison to the soul , an old rotten house , or a ragged garment . It is but as the bark of a tree , or the shell , or such like ; now what great loss can there be in any of these ? 

4.  This separation is but for a time neither ; we do not for ever lose the body , we shall have our bodies again , they are kept safe for us till the day of Christ. Our graves are Gods chests , & he makes a precious account of the bodies of his Saints , they shall be raised up again at the last day : GOD will give a charge to the earth to bring forth her dead , & make a true account to him , Reve. 20.  And God hath given us the assurance of this , not only in his Word by promising it , but in his Son , whom he hath raised from the dead . If any say , What is that to us , that Christ's body is raised ? I answer , It is a full assurance of the safety , and of the resurrection of our bodies . For Christ is our head . Now cast a man into a River , though all the body be under water , yet the man is safe , if the head be above water . For the head will bring out all the body after it . So it is in the body of Christ , though all we sink in the river of death , yet our Head is risen , and is above water , and therefore the whole body is safe . 

5.  It should yet more satisfy us , if we thoroughly consider , that we shall have our bodies again much better than now they are . Those vile bodies we lay down in death , shall be restored again unto us glorious bodies , like the body of Christ now glorified , Phil. 3. 21.  And therefore death loseth by taking away our bodies ; we have a great victory over death . The graveis but a Furnace to refine them , they shall come out again immortal and incorruptible . 

CHAP. XIIII . 

The desire of long life confuted . 

3.  Ob. O ! but if I might live long , I would desire no more , if I might not die till I were fifty , or threescore years old , I should be contented to die then . 

Sol. There are many things may show the vanity & folly of men , in this desire of long life : For 

1.  If thou art willing to die at any time , why not now ? Death will be the same to thee then , it is now . 

2.  Is any man angry & grieved when he is at sea in a tempest , because he shall be so quickly carried into the Haven ? Is he displeased with the wind , that will soon set him safe in the harbour ? If thou believe , that death will end all thy miseries , why art thou careful to defer the time ? 

3.  Till thy debt be paid time will not ease thee , thy care will continue , and therefore thou wert as good pay at the first , if thou be sure it must be paid at all . 

4.  In this world there is neither young , nor old : When thou hast lived to that age thou desirest , thy time past will be as nothing . thou wilt still expect that , which is to come , thou wilt be as ready to demand longer respite then , as now . 

5.  What wouldst thou tarry here so long for ? There will be nothing new , but what thou hast tasted : and often drinking will not quench thy thirst , thou hast an incurable Dropsy in thy heart , and those earthly things have no ability to fill thy heart with good , or satisfy thee . 

6.  Wouldst not thou judge him a Sot , that mourns because he was not alive a hundred years ago ? And thou art no better : thou mournest , because thou canst not live a hundred years here . 

7.  thou hast no power of the morrow , to make it happy to thee . If thou die young , thou art like one that hath lost a Dye , with which he might as well have lost , as won . 

8.  Consider the proportion of time thou desirest to thyself , reckon what will be spent in sleep , care , disgrace , sickness , trouble , weariness , emptiness , fear ; and unto all this add sin : and then think , how small a portion is left of this time , & how small good it will do thee . What can that advantage thee with such mixtures of evil ? It is certain , to live long , is but to be long troubled , and to die quickly , is quickly to be at rest . 

9  Lastly , if there were nothing else to be said , yet this may suffice , that there is no comparison between time and eternity . What is that space of time to eternity ? If thou love life , why dost thou not love eternal life ? as was said before . 

CHAP. xv.  

Of them that would live to do good . 

4.  Ob. BUT I would live long to do good , and benefit others , and to do God service , & to benefit others by mine example . 

Sol. 1.  Search thine own heart : it may be , this pretence of doing good to others , is pleaded only , because thou wouldst further thine own good : thou wouldst not seek the public , but to find thine own particular . 

2.  God , that set you to do his work , knows , how long it is fit for thee to be at the same : he knows , how to make use of the labours of his workmen . He will not call thee from thy work , till he be provided to dispatch his business without thee . 

3.  It may be , if thou be long at thy work , thou wouldst mar all ; thy last works would not be so good as thy first ; it is best to give over , while thou dost well , etc.  

4.  If God will pay thee as much for half a day , as for the whole : art thou not so much the more to praise him ? 

5.  It is true , that the best comfort of our life here , is in a religious conversation : but thy Religion is not hindered by going to heaven , but perfected : There is no comparison between thy goodness on earth , and that in heaven : For though thou mayst do much good here ; yet it is certain , thou dost much evil here too . 

6.  Whereas thou persuadest thyself , that by example thou mayst mend others , thou art much mistaken : A thousand men may sooner catch the plague in an infected Town , than one be healed . It is but to tempt God to desire continuamce● in this infectious world , longer than our time ; for the best way is to get far from the contagion . If diverse fresh waters fall into the Sea ; what doth that to take away the saltness of the Sea ? no more can two or three Lots reform a world of Sodomites . 

CHAP. XVI . 

Why men may not make away themselves , to be rid of the miseries of life . 

5.  Ob. BUT than it seems by this , that it were a man's best course to cast away life , seeing so much evil is in life , and so much good to be had in death . 

Sol. 1.  I think the most of us may be trusted for that danger . For though the soul aspire to the good to come , yet the body tends unto the earth , & like a heavy clog weighs men downwards . 

2.  That is not the course , we must cast the world out of our hearts , not cast ourselves out of the world . It is both unseemly , and extremely unlawful . It is unseemly ; for it is true , we ought willingly to depart out of this world , but it is monstrous base , like cowards to run away out of the battle ▪ thou art God's soldier , and appointed to thy standing , and it is a miserable shame to run out of thy place . When Christ , the great Captain sounds a retreat , then is it honourable for thee to give place . Besides , thou art God's tenant , and dost hold thy life as a Tenant at will : the Landlord may take it from thee , but thou canst not without disgrace surrender at thy pleasure ; and it is extreme slothfulness to hate life , only for the toils that are in it . 2.  And as it is unseemly , so it is unlawful , yea damnable . It is unlawful : for the soldier that runs away from his Captain , offends highly : so doth the Christian that makes away himself : and therefore , the commandment is not only , thou shalt not kill other men , but generally , thou shalt not kill , meaning , neither thyself , nor other men . Besides , we have no example in Scripture of any that did so , but such as were notorious wicked men , as Saul , Achitophel , judas , and the like . Yea , it is damnable : for he that leaveth his work before God calls him , loseth it , & besides , incurs eternal death . As the soldier that runneth away , dieth for it when he is taken : so the Christian that murdereth himself , perishes ; I say , that murdereth himself , being himself . 

CHAP. XVII . 

Why we should not be troubled to part with our friends . 

6.  Ob. Might some other say , I could more willingly die , but me thinks it is grievous unto me to part with friends , & acquaintance , I cannot willingly go from my kindred , and my familiars , life is sweet in respect of their presence , and love , and society . 

Sol. It is true , that unto some minds this is the greatest contentment of life of any thing , but yet many things must be considered : For 

First , amongst a hundred men , scarce one can by good reason pled that , I mean , cannot say , that he hath so much as one sound friend in the whole world , worthy to be reckoned , as the stay of his life . 

2.  Those , that can pled felicity in their friends ; yet what is it ? one pleasing dream hath more in it , than a month's contentment which can be reaped from thy friends . Alas ! it is not the thousand part of thy life , which is satisfied with delight from them . 

3.  thou seest thy friends drop away from thee from day to day ; for either they die , or they are so far removed from thee , that they are as it were dead to thee ; & sith they are gone , who would not long to go after them ? 

4.  The friends that are left , are not sure to thee : men are mutable , as well as mortal ; they may turn to be thy foes , that now are dearest unto thee : or if they fall not into terms of flat enmity , they may grow full , and weary of thee , and so , careless of thee . 

5.  If none of these would satisfy thee , yet what are thy friends on earth , to thy friends thou shalt find in heaven ? This is an answer beyond all exception . 

6.  Lastly , by death thou dost not lose thy friends neither , for thou shalt find them , and enjoy them in another world to all eternity ; and therefore thou hast no reason for thy friend's sake to be loath to die . 

7.  Ob. But might some one say , All my grief is to part with my wife & children , and to leave them , especially in an unsettled estate . 

Sol. 1.  Hast thou forgotten the consolation that saith , God will be a father to the fatherless , and a judge , and a Protector of the widow's cause ? He will relieve both the fatherless and the widow , as many Scriptures do assure us , Psal. 146. 9  & 68 6.  Prou. 15. 25.  

2.  thou leavest them but for a time ; God will restore them to thee again in a better world . 

3.  thou 'gainst the presence of God , and his eternal conjunction , who will be more to thee , than many thousand wives , or children could be . He can be hurt by the loss of no company , that findeth God in heaven . 

CHAP. XVIII . 

Why we should not be sorry to leave the pleasures of life . 

8.  Ob. BUT might some other say , My heart is sorely vexed , because in death I must part with the pleasures of life . 

Sol. There are many things might quiet men's minds in respect of this objection : For thy pleasures are either sinful pleasures , or lawful pleasures : If they be sinful , thou showest thy hatred of God by loving them , and heapest up wrath upon thine own soul , by living in them . But say , thy pleasures be lawful in themselves : yet consider , 

1.  That the pains of thy life are , and will be greater both for number and continuance , than thy pleasures can be : no pleasure at once , ever lasted so long , as the fit of an Ague . 

2.  thou forgettest , what end they may have : For thy pleasures may go out with gall . For either shame , or loss , or evil sickness may fall upon thee : or if not , yet thine own heart will loathe them ; as they are vanity , so they will prove vexation of spirit : thou wilt be extremely tired with them . 

3.  thou art far from giving thy life for Christ , that wilt not forgo the superfluity of life for him . 

4.  That in thy delights thou showest the greatest weakness , so as thou mayst say of Laughter , thou art mad , Eccl. 2. 2.  

5.  That death doth not spoil thee of pleasures : For it bringeth thee to the pleasures , that are at God's right hand for evermore , Psal. 16. ult.  

CHAP. XIX . 

Why we should not be loath to leave the honours of the world . 

9  Ob. IF any other object , the lothnes to leave his honours , or high place in the world : I may answer diverse things . 

Sol. 1.  Why shouldst thou be so in love with the honours of this world , if thou but consider how small thy preferment is , or can be ? The whole earth is , but as the full point or centre , in comparison with the circumference of the whole world besides . Now in true judgement , it is almost impossible to discern , how a man should rise higher in a Centre . If thou hadst all the earth , thou wert no more exalted , then to the possession of a full point : a little spot in comparison , and therefore how extremely vain is thy nature , to be affected with the possession of less , than the thousand thousand part of a little spot or point ? 

2.  Consider seriously the thraldom , which thy preferment brings thee unto : thou canst not live free , but still thou art fettered with the cares , and fears , and griefs , that attend thy greatness . There is little difference between thee and a prisoner ; save that the prisoner hath his fetters of iron , and thine are of gold ; and that his fetters bind his body , and thine thy mind : He wears his fetters on his legs , and thou thine on thine head ; and in this thou art one way less contented , than some prisoners : for they can sing for joy of heart , when thou art dejected with the cares and griefs of thy mind . If thou hast a Crown , it were but a Crown of thorns , in respect of the cares it would put thee to , etc.  

3.  Say thou shouldst get never so high , thou canst not protect thyself from the miseries of thy condition , nor preserve thyself in any certainty from the loss of all thou enjoyest . If thou wert as high as the top of the Alps , thou canst not get such a place , but the clouds , winds , storms , & terrible lightnings may find thee out , so as thou wouldst accounted the lower ground to be the safer place . thou standest as a man on the top of a pinnacle , thou canst not know , how soon thou mayst tumble down , and that fearfully . 

4.  If thou shouldst be sure to enjoy thy greatness of place in the world : yet thou art not sure to preserve thine honour : For either it may be blemished with unjust aspersions , or else some fault of thy own may mar all thy praises : For as a dead fly may mat a whole box of ointment : so may one sin , thy glory , Eccl. 10. 1.  

5.  thou losest not honour by dying : for there are Crowns of glory in heaven , such as shall never wither , nor be corrupted ; such as can never be held with care , or envy , nor lost with infamy . 

CHAP. xx.  

Why it should not trouble us to part with riches . 

10.  Ob. IF thou be infected with the love of riches , and that thou art loath to die , because thou wouldst not be taken from thy estate , and outward possessions ; then attend unto these considerations . 

Sol. 1.  thou camest naked into the world ; and why should it grieve thee to go naked out of the world ? 

2.  thou art but a steward of what thou possessest : and therefore why should it grieve thee to leave , what thou hast employed , to the disposing of thy master ? 

3.  thou hast tried by experience , and found hitherto , that contentment of heart is not found , or had by abundance of outward things . If thou hadst all the Pearls of the East , and wert Master of all the mines of the West , yet will not thy heart be filled with good : by heaping up of riches , thou dost but heap up unquietness . 

4.  riches have wings , thou mayst live to lose all by fire , or water , or thiefs , or suretyship , or injustice , or unthrifty children , or the like . 

5.  They are riches of iniquity . There is a snare in riches , and nets in possessions , thy gold and silver is limed , or poisoned . It is wonderful hard , and in respect of men , impossible for thee to be a rich man , but thou wilt be a sinful man , especially if thy heart be grown to love money , and to haste to be rich . 

6.  thou must leave them once , and therefore why not now ? thou canst not enjoy them ever , & therefore why shouldst thou trouble thy heart about them ? 

7.  By death thou makest exchange of them for better riches , & shalt be possessed of a more enduring substance . thou shalt enjoy the unsearchable riches of Christ , thou canst never be fully rich , till thou get to heaven . 

11.  Ob. Might some one say , I should not fear death , were it not , that I know not , what kind of death I shall die : I may die suddenly , or by the hands of the violent , or without the presence , or assistance of my friends , or the like . 

Sol. sith we must die , it is the less matter what kind of death we die ; we should not so much look how we die , as whither we shall go when we are dead . 

2.  Christ died a cursed death , that so every death might be blessed to us. For he that lives holily , cannot die miserably . He is blessed that dieth in the Lord , what kind of death soever it be . 

CHAP. XXI . 

Showing the cure of this fear of death by practice . 

Hitherto of the way of curing this fear of death by meditation . It remains now , that I proceed to show how the cure is to be finished , and perfected by practice . For there are divers things to be heeded by us in our daily conversation , which serve exceedingly for the extinguishing of this fear , without which the cure will hardly ever be sound wrought for continuance . 

1.  The first thing we must frame our lives to for this purpose , is the contempt of the world : we must strive earnestly with our own hearts , to forgo the love of worldly things . It is an easy thing to be willing to die , when our hearts are cleansed of the love of this world . We must leave the world , before the world leave us , and learn that lesson heartily , To use the world , as if we used it not . Neither ought this to seem too hard a precept . For they that strive for mastery , abstain from all things , when it is but to obtain a corruptible crown : how much more should we be willing to deny the delights of this world , and strive with our natures herein , seeing it is to obtain an incorruptible crown ? 1.  Cor. 9 24.  

We must learn of Moses , who brought himself to it willingly , to forsake the pleasures of Egypt , and to choose rather to suffer affliction with God's people , then to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter , Heb. 11. 26.  

And to this end we should first restrain all needless cares , & business of this world , and study so to be quiet , as to meddle with our own business , & to abridge them into as narrow a scantling , as our callings will permit . Secondly , we should avoid , as much as may be , the society with the favourites and minions of the world , I mean such persons , as admire nothing but worldly things , and know no other happiness them in this life : That speak only of this world , and commend nothing , but what tends to the praise of worldly things , and so to the enticing of our hearts after the world . And withal , we should sort ourselves with such Christians , as practise this contempt of the world as well as praise it , and can by their discourse , make us more in love with heaven . 3.  Thirdly , we should daily observe , to what things in the world our hearts most run , and strive with GOD by prayer , to get down the too much liking , and desire after these things . 4.  Fourthly , we should daily be pondering on these meditations , that show us the vanity of the world , and the vileness of the things thereof . Thus of the first medicine . 

2.  Secondly , we must in our practice , sound mortify our beloved sins : our sins must die , before we die , or else it will not be well with us. The sting of death is sin , and when we have pulled out the sting , we need not fear to entertain the Serpent into our bosom . It is the love of some sin , & delight in it , that makes a man afraid to die , or it is the remembrance of some foul evil past , which accuseth the hearts of men : and therefore men must make sure their repentance , and judge themselves for their sins , and then they need not fear Gods condemning of them . If any ask me , how they may know when they have attained to this rule , I answer , When they have so long confessed their sins in secret to God , that now they can truly say , there is no sin they know by themselves , but they are as desirous to have GOD give them strength to leave it , as they would have God to show them grace to forgive it . He hath sound repent of all sin , that desire's from his heart to live in no sin . And unto this rule I must add the care of an upright & unrebukeable conversation . It is a marvellous encouragement to die with peace , when a man can live without offence , and can justly pled his integrity of conversation , as Samuel did , 1.  Sam. 12. 3. and Paul , Act. 26. 26 , 27. and 2.  Cor. 1. 12.  

3.  Thirdly , assurance is an admirable medicine to kill this fear ; & to speak distinctly , we should get the assurance first of God's favour , and our own calling and election . For hereby an entrance will be ministered into the heavenly kingdom , and therefore have I handled this doctrine of the Christians assurance , before I meddled with this point of the fear of death . Simeon can die willingly , when his eyes have seen his salvation . Fear of death is always joined with a weak faith , and the full assurance of faith , doth marvellously establish the heart against these fears , and breeds a certain desire of the coming of Christ. Paul can be confident when he is able to say , I know whom I have believed , and that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him , 2.  Tim. 1. 12.  

Besides , we should labour to get a particular knowledge and assurance of our happiness in death , and of our salvation . We should study to this end , the Arguments that shows our felicity in death : And to this purpose it is of excellent use to receive the Sacraments often : For Christ by his Will bequeathed Heaven to us , joh. 17. and by the death of the Testator this Will is of force , and is further daily sealed unto us , as internally by the Spirit , so externally by the Sacraments . 

Now if we get our Charter sealed and confirmed to us , how can we be afraid of the time of possession ? He is fearless of death , that can say with the Apostle ; Whether I live or die , I am the Lords , Rom. 14. 8.  

4.  That charge given to Hezekiah , concerning the setting of his house in order , esay 38. is of singular use for this Cure : Men should with sound advice settle their outward estates , and dispose of their worldly affairs , and according to their means provide for their wife , and children . A great part of the fear and trouble of men's hearts is over . , when their Wills are discreetly made : but men are loath to die , so long as their outward estates are unsettled , and undisposed . It is a most preposterous course for men to leave the making of their Wills to their sickness ; For besides their disabilities of memories or understanding , which may befall them , the trouble of it breeds unrest to their minds , and besides , they live all the time in neglect of their duty of preparation for death . 

5.  We may much help ourselves by making us friends with the riches of iniquity : we should learn that of the unjust Steward , as our Saviour Christ showeth , since we shall be put out of the Stewardship , we should so dispose of them while we have them , that when we die , they may receive us into everlasting habitations , Luke 16.  An unprofitable life is attended with a servile fear of death . 

6.  It would master this fear , but to force ourselves to a frequent meditation of death : To learn to die daily , will lessen , yea , remove the fear of dying : O this remembering of our latter end , and learning to number our days is an admirable rule of practices : It is the forgetfulness of death , that makes life sinful , & death terrible , Deut. 32. 19  Psal. 90. 12.  Lam. 1. 9  And we should begin this exercise of meditation betimes ; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth , Eccl. 12. 1.  This is that is called for , when our Saviour Christ requires us , and all men , so to watch : and herein lay the praise of the five wise Virgins , Math. 25. 3.  Thus job will wait , till the time of his change come , job 10. 14.  And of purpose hath the Lord left the last day uncertain , that we might every day prepare . It were an admirable method , if we could make every day a life to begin and end , as the day begins , and ends . 

7.  Lastly , because yet we may find this fear cumbersome , and our natures extremely deceitful : there is one thing left , which can never fail to prevail as far as is fit for us ; and that is hearty prayer to God for this very thing . Thus David prays , Psal. 39 4. and Moses , Psal. 90. 12. and Simeon , Luk. 2. 32.  And in as much as Christ died for this end , to deliver us from this fear , we may sue out the privilege , and by prayer strive with God to get it framed in us : It is a suit God will not deny them , that ask in the name of Christ , because it is a thing that Christ especially aimed at in his own death . 

To conclude then : we have proved , that it is possible to be had , and most uncomely to want it ; and likewise the way hath been showed , how both by meditation & practice , this Cure may be effected : If then it be not wrought in any of us ; we may here find out the cause in ourselves : For if we would hereby be sound advised and ruled , we might attain to it all the days of our life , to sing with the Saints that triumphant song , mentioned both in the Old and New Testament : O death , where is thy sting ? O hell , where is thy victory ? Death is swallowed up into victory : so as we are now the conquerors through him that loved us , and gave himself to death for us : even jesus Christ the righteous : To whom with the Father , and the Holy Ghost be all praise in the Churches , throughout all ages for ever . 

Amen . 

FINIS . 





The drift of the whole Treatise . The profit of following these directions  The parts of the Treatise . 1  2  3  Eight Arguments to prove we may be helped against the fear of death . Fifteen Reasons why it is an uncomely thing to be afraid to die . An exhortation to attend upon the means of cure . Two ways of curing the fear of death . The ways of curing this fear by contemplation . The happiness of a Christian in death showed 17. ways . The dissolution of the body , is the absolution of the soul . Eccles. 7 1  The miseries of life two ways considered . The miseries of a natural life showed three ways . Three dreadful considerations about sin . Six things every godly man wants , while he lives here in this world . Life bitter in respect of God diverse ways . Eight aggravations of the miseries of life , in respect of the corrections of God.  The world full of devils . Our conflict with devils . 9  Apparent miseries of life in this world . In this world the dead bury the dead . What the seeming felicities of the world are . Fifteen Arguments to prove the vanity of the best worldly things . The amity of the world , is the enmity with God.  All subject to vanity or violence , Mat. 6. 19 , 20.  They may be lost at the very seat of judgement , Eccl. 3. 16 , 18.  & 4. 1 , 2  Our mortality aggravated by 4. considerations . The causes in ourselves why we should not be in love with life . 4.  Effects of corruption of nature in us.  Ten reasons to show the folly of men in pre tending the fear of the pain of death . 9  Arguments to show the vanity of men , in desiring to live long . Six reasons against their pretence that would live long to do good , as they say . Against self murder . 6.  Reasons about parting with our friends in death . Five Arguments against the pleasures of life . Five observations about the honours of this world . Seven mother ●ue to leave the love of riches . 7.  Things that cure the fear of death in practice . 