HEROD THE GREAT . 

A TRAGEDY . 

Written by the Right Honourable the EARL of ORRERY . 

LONDON , Printed by T. Warren for F. Saunders at the Blue-anchor in the New-exchange ; T. Bennet at the Half-moon , and I Knapton at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard , 1694.  

PROLOGUE TO HEROD the GREAT . 

HOW various are the Humours of this Age ! 
Sermons at first were followed , than the Stage ; 
But that they neither are frequented now , 
Is a variety we owe to you : 
One would have thought Extremes which were so vast , 
As pleased the Soul and Sense , might longer last . 
Your Fathers other methods did pursue , 
Yet some Fops swear they were as wise as you : 
They left not Stage nor Pulpit in the lurch ; 
Weekdays they went to Plays , Sundays to Church : 
And judged the Muse's gracious did appear , 
Presenting them one new Play every Year . 
But without daily new ones you are cloyed , 
And slight Plays seem as Mistresses enjoyed . 
For we must say — we 'll give the Devil his due , 
In Wit , as Love , you daily gape for new . 
Rare Scenes like Operas , nay She-actors too , 
Though they lesle often Act with us , than you ; 
Whereby — will none here blush when it is said , 
Some with great Bellies virgin 's parts have played ? 
Yet a good Play once acted , you 're so nice , 
you 'll go to Church as soon as see it twice . 
'sdeath , Gentlemen , this usage we 'll not bear , 
You are not better than your Fathers were ; 
And if we are not as well used by you , 
we 'll shut up House , nay worse , our Women too . 
then with Street Cruzors you must have to do , 
Amongst which , you 'll sometimes board a Fireship too . 
When thus in your Chief Pleasures you are crossed , 
you 'll value us , like Health , most when 't is lost . 
Dramatis Personae . 

Herod , The King.  
Antipater , His Son by a former Wife . 
Pheroras , Herod ' s Brother . 
Sohemus , Formerly in Love with Solome . 
Phaltiel , Friends to Antipater . Samias , Haziel , Pollio , 
Abner , Confident to Herod . 
Annanecles , The Highpriest . 
Asdrubal , Captain of the Arabian Guards . 
WOMEN . 

Mariamna , The Queen . 
Solome , Sister to Herod , in Love with Sohemus , but Married to Cossobanes . 
Tamer , and Women to the Queen . Dina , 
Mariana , Confident to the Queen . 
Merab , Woman to Solome . 
The Ghosts of Hircanus , and Aristobulus , Pages , Priests , Guards , Gentlemen , and Attendants . 

Herod the Great . 

The First ACT.  

The first Scene is an Obscure Grotta . 

Phaltiel and Samias enter hastily , Antipater comes out to meet them . Phalt.   Through all jerusalem they have spread the News , 
Which is received in Raptured by the Jews , 
That Faithless People in their looks display , 
How much their hearts longed for this fatal Day . 


Sam.   When Herod to the Isle of Rhodes did go ; 
We all foresaw 't would prove his Overthrow . 
Caesar the Friend of Anthony must hate , 
And make Revenge an Interest of State.  


Phalt.   How natural was it for a Prince to frown , 
When but by doing it , he gained a Crown ? 


Ant.   But Honour should have made Octavius Just , 
Seizing my Father , he deceived his Trust.  


Sam.   Caesar will judge that Imputation weak , 
Since Herod his Safe-conduct did not seek ▪ 


Ant.   Yet all the World must this black deed upbraid , 
The noblest trusts are without Bargain made ; 
The height of Honour Herod's Ruin was , 
Trusting his Virtue , he contemned his pass . 
[ To them Hazael hastily . 

Haz.   The Sanhedrim are now resolved to meet , 
To lay the Crown at Mariamne's Feet : 
For she , in highest Virtue first does shine , 
And is the last of the Asmone Line . 
Sir , You should instantly ourselves declare , 
E'er they , beyond Retreat , engage are . 
[ To them Pollio hastily . 

Poll.   Ten of the Priests are from the Temple come , 
Who told the People in the Hippodrome , 
That as last night , their Sacred Watch they kept , 
They heard in Tombs , where Kings , and High-priests slept , 
Noises , much like to dying Warriors Groans : 
then saw great drop , spring from those polished Stones ; 
Which seemed to weep , that so much precious Dust , 
E'er the last day , was Ravished from their Trust.  


Phalt.   OH Heavens what may this Prodigy portend . 


Poll.   Restrain your Wonder till you hear the End : 
The Grief , which did those Tears from Marble draw , 
So Powerful was , it did the Marble thaw . 
then from the gaping Tombs there did appear ! 
All those who Israel's Sacred Crown did wear : 
From Saul till fatal Zedechiah's days , 
The bad Kings Crowned with Flames ; the Good with Bays . 
Every one smote his Breast , and shaken his Head , 
The trembling Priests with fear were almost dead . 


Sam.   Sure dismal Changes in this Place must fall , 
Since Heaven out of their Graves thedead does Call.  


Poll.   But that which most of all increased their fears , 
Were direful Noises which did wound their Ears . 
then Troops of Furies did the Priest surround , 
And danced with Impious Feet on Sacred ground . 
Each Fiend in Course the Dances leading takes , 
And when they changed , all cracked their Whips of Snakes . 
The Priests were then yielding to their despair , 
When all the Furies did resolve to Air ; 
At which the Temples vast Foundation shaken , 
And three times , Woe , by all the Ghosts was spoken ; 
The Tombs did then with haste their Dead enclose , 
When strait Aurora pale , and trembling rose , 
As if she seemed concerned and in a fright , 
At the dire Visions of the vanished Night : 
Nor has the Temple only haunted been , 
Strange sights have too been in the Palace seen ; 
But yet the Queen her Courage has not lost , 
Though her slain Brother , and Hircanus' Ghost , 
Have to th' Arabian Guards appeared to Night . 
Nor does it Mariam seem to fright ; 
Though both the Ghosts did bid them tell their Queen 
In the black Hall , this Night they should be seen : 
For she , to evidence she knows no fear , 
Boldly declared , she would expect them there . 


Ant.   These are strange things ! But th' event must tell , 
If these Presages come from Heaven , or Hell. 
lest in that Dread these Visions have begun , 
The giddy People to extremes should run ; 
You to the Hippodrome again must go , 
And let me hourly , all that passes , know . 
Phaltiel and Samias here with me shall stay , 


Haz.   You must resolve , and act without delay . 


Poll.   Good Fortune rarely visits him who mourns ; 
But when she does , if slighted , never returns . 
[ Pollio and Hazael go out . 

Phalt.   Sir , you must now your Father's Army lead , 
And by their Swords the Crown fix on your Head.  


Ant.   OH no , my Phaltiel ! why should I pursue 
Gaining that Crown , which to the Queen is due : 
'T were Sin if I her double Right withstood , 
't is Hers by merit , and 't is Hers by Blood.  


Phalt.   Since you Her Right above your own prefer , 
First take the Crown , and then present it Herald  


Ant.   Giving a Crown which I that way shall win , 
To pay a Duty , I must act a Sin ; 
But if the Crown I from her Love receive , 
To the great Gift , 't will double Lustre give . 


Sam.   OH , Sir , that guilty hope you should suppress , 
The Queen can never make your happiness : 
Her Virtue should in you all thoughts remove , 
E'er to possess her by Incestnous Love : 
And 't would eclipse the Glories of your Life , 
Should you attempt to wed your Father's Wife . 


Ant.   My Father's Wife ! Witness ye Powers above , 
She was first mine , by Sacred Vows , and Love. 
But as the Priest our willing hands did tie , 
Herod from me forced her by Tyranny ; 
For which my Sword I did against him draw , 
He broke Our Match , and then I broke his Law.  


Phal .  no one can say but he in that did ill , 
Yet , Sir , Forget not , he 's your Father still . 


Sam.   And to that Sacred Name a Debt is due . 


Ant.   And to offended Love there is so too . 
All that I owed , he to himself did pay , 
That Life he gave , he more than took away . 
These guilty Tears which from my Eyes would flow , 
Too little Love , and too good nature show . 
[ Wiping his Eyes . 

Phalt.   Blame not that Piety which makes you mourn ; 
Consider , Sir , your Father may return . 


Ant.   That thought in your belief should find no room , 
A Prince's Prison's Prologue to his Tomb. 
The Folly equal to the guilt would be , 
First to Restrain , then set a Monarch free . 
He never can again his freedom win . 


Sam.   Grant it , yet Incest is a Crying Sin. 
Methinks that word alone should make you start . 


Ant.   Incest , most think , is but a term of Art 
A name with which thepriests keep Fools in awe , 
For no such thing is found in Nature's Law. 
He must himself , and not his Fortune blame , 
Who from his Joys is frighted by a Name . 


Phal .  What we have said we wish we could unsay , 
Since it augments the Storm it should allay . 


Sam.   But in a calmer hour we hope 't will move . 


Ant.   You speak your Friendship , and I speak my Love. 
Yet I conjure you leave me for some time , 
Else you will both participate my Crime : 
For I am now into a Chaos hurled , 
Darker than that , which first involved the World.  


Phalt.   to Sam.  His Passion thus opposed does higher grow . 


Sam.   May Heaven that Quiet which you want bestow . 
[ Phalt. and Sam. go out . 

Ant.   Before she knows I live , 't is fit I see 
If she preserves her Constancy to me : 
But if my feigned Death made her prove untrue , 
What Herod thinks is done , my hand shall do . 
[ Ant. goes out . 

The Scene is a Magnificent Apartment . 

Enter Solome , who is met by Merab . Merchant   Madam , the Prince Sohemus now is come . 


Solo.   Call him , and when he enters , leave the room . 
[ Merab goes out . 

Solo.   How should I , without blushes , on him look , 
Whom while we loved , so meanly I forsaken . 
[ Merab introduces Sohemus , and then goes out again . Sohemus , does it not your Soul surprise , 
That Solome is without weeping Eyes . 
When Herod now is Dead ; a Loss so great , 
That all our Glories , in his fall , are set . 


Sohe .  Madam , th' Assaults of Fate , though ne'er so rude , 
Have still been Conquered by your Fortitude . 


Solo.   This Conquest you ascribe to a wrong Cause , 
't is Love alone , which to my grief gives Laws . 
Nothing can now my Inclinations cross , 
This Joy does more than recompense that loss . 
For I can now do your brave Passion right , 
Our hearts which Power divorced , Love shall unite . 


Sohe .  I am amazed to hear such words as these ; 
Madam , have you forgot Cossabanes ; 
To whom by Sacred Marriage you are tied , 
And how you did my grief for him deride ; 
A grief , which I one day could not have born , 
And which my Death had cured , had not your scorn . 


Solo.   Though I was forced by Herod's stern Command , 
To give the abhorred Cossabanes my hand . 
Yet 't was above his Tyranny , and Art , 
To make me from Sohemus give my heart . 
Your doubts of me on a false ground are built , 
You should not call my punishment my guilt . 


Sohe .  Ah to that Punishment you seemed inclined . 


Solo.   I seemed more faulty , but to be more kind . 
For had you by my words or Actions , seen 
How firm for you my Passion still has been ; 
Your Love , or your Revenge , had made you run 
To those extremes , I found it wise to eat : 
With Joy I did submit to be his Wife , 
Since I had no way else to save your Life . 


Sohe .  could you think fit to me your Love to give , 
Yet hope I could the loss of it outlive ? 


Solo.   In that fierce Storm we then did both endure , 
A seeming scorn could only be your Cure.  


Sohe .  The Power of Love for me you never knew , 
Since while you loved , you seemed to scorn me too . 
Darkness , and light may both together reign , 
As well as perfect Love , and such disdain . 
Though a Just Person may a Sin commit , 
Yet his Soul trembles , while he 's acting it : 
But when your Vows to me you did decline , 
Nothing but Joy in your fair Eyes did shine . 


Solo.   Though for your sake I did that guilty deed , 
Yet while my Face did smile , my Heart did bleed : 
I did , to break that match , all I could do , 
Both with Cossabanes , and Herod too : 
But when all failed to which I had recourse , 
I from my heart , that Brother did divorce ; 
And on his Ruin ever since was bend , 
In hope of this blessed time , Heaven now has sent . 


Sohe .  These are strange Secrets which you now declare . 


Solo.   Listen , and I will tell you stranger far : 
'T was I made Herod to Octavius go , 
And made Pheroras wait upon him too ; 
That Caesar having both , might more incline 
To cut off the Male Race of all Our Line . 
'T was I made Herod to all else unjust , 
And leave his haughty Wife to your sole trust ; 
With Orders , if he Caesar did not win , 
You instantly should put to Death his Queen . 


Sohe .  He told me none but I those Orders knew . 


Solo.   You see he told you then , what was not true . 


Sohe .  But to what end did you those Crimes pursue . 


Solo.   For my great End ; That of obtaining you . 


Sohe .  Madam , against the Power of Heaven you strive . 


Solo.   how 's that ? 


Sohe .  Is not Cossabanes alive ? 


Solo.   't is Man , not God , makes Marriages by force ; 
Therefore this day I sent him a Divorce . 


Sohe .  That right is only by our Sex enjoyed . 


Solo.   That Usurpation I for you destroyed . 
't is just , where two under one Contract are , 
That they alike , the privilege should share . 
Affection only ties true Wedlock Bands , 
Where hearts divide , in vain Priests join the hands : 
He now in his Arabia does reside , 
Where I have sent him leave to choose a Bride . 
Now if you act your Prince's last Command , 
Nothing between us , and our Joys doth stand : 
For when the Queen you have of Life bereft , 
I only of both Royal Lines am left : 
then will a Crown which my free Love bestows , 
[ Sohemus starts and trembles . Make some Atonement for my breach of Vows . 
Why do you start , and such disturbance show ? 


Sohe .  't is at the Mischiefs you would make me do . 


Solo.   To a true Subject than can any thing 
Look like a Crime , when 't is to obey his King ? 


Sohe .  Those who by Power alone have Sceptres swayed , 
Aught not when Dead , to have their wills obeyed : 
Only to Lawful Kings that duty 's shown . 


Solo.   then do it for my sake ; or , for your own . 
I would have done it ere I spoke of it , 
But that to me it did appear unfit ; 
That I for you should every guilt contract , 
And leave you for my sake , not One to Act. 
Too much it did like to Engrossing look , 
But finding now how highly I mistake ; 
Admit me to this Queen , and you shall see , 
I dare do more for you than you for me . 


Sohe .  Who let's you act the Sin he can withstand , 
Does himself act it by another's hand . 


Solo.   Will you not then let me a Crime commit , 
Of which you are to have the benefit . 


Sohe .  OH , Madam ; were you now what once you were — 


Solo.   What Herod forced me to , I will repair . 


Sohe .  But O — 


Solo.   But what ? Speak without more delay , 
I 'm armed against whatever you dare say . 


Sohe .  But wrongs which Honour , and which Love endure 
From those who did them , can admit no Cure.  


Solo.   Ungrateful Man ! Have I in vain for you 
Ruined my King , my Fame , and Brothers too . 
Through all your Vails I see what you would hide , 
I could not else thus rudely be denied . 


Sohe .  Madam , but hear me out — 


Solo.   I 'll hear no more . 
't is Mariamne's Beauties you adore : 
What you would not confess , your blushes do ; 
I feared the Change , and now I find it true . 
no other Passion could so powerful be , 
As thus to make you scorn a Crown and Me. 
Begun ; and to your Cost you soon shall prove , 
A Woman's hatred does transcend her Love.  
[ They go out several ways . 

The Scene changes to a spacious Room all black . 

Antipater muffled up with a Cloak , and a Page with a Flambeau . Page .  't is in this Room the Queen will watch to night . 


Ant.   Where I may see , and yet be out of sight . 


Page .  There you may all things see , and not be seen : 
But should this be discovered to the Queen ; 
I shall , past hope of Pardon , be undone . 


Ant.   Fear not , there 's your Reward ; and now begun . 
[ He flings him a Purse , which the Page takes and goes out . Love only could this strange Design inspire . 
[ A noise within . What noise is that ? — The Queen ! He looks I must retire . 
[ He conceals himself . The Queen and Mariana they bolt the door after them . 

Mar.   Why to these Horrors , Madam , will you run . 


Queen .  't is brave to seek , what 't is in vain to eat . 
One of the Noblest Joys that is above , 
Is there to meet those whom we here did love . 
Since Fate to grant that Blessing does delay , 
I would possess what here of it I may . 


Mar.   Should the best Friend of mine that 's dead appear , 
I should be soon as dead as he with fear . 


Queen .  Poor Mariana ; this too much doth show 
Thy Soul the Charms of Love did never know . 
Hadst thou been ever warmed with that blessed Fire , 
What makes thy fear , would then be thy desire . 


Mar.   Sure you at Herod's Ghost would startled be . 


Queen .  His Ghost ! — 't is all of him I long to see : 
But since Hircanus and my Brother have 
The Privilege to wander from the Grave ; 
And pay their Visits where they 're justliest due , 
Why may not Antipater do it too . 
For if Departed Souls about them bear 
Those Virtuous Loves , which did inflame them here ; 
no place to him , a place of Joy can be , 
Where he is banished from attending me . 


Mar.   But durst you look on Antipater's Ghost ? 


Queen .  durst I ? You know that I disdain to boast ; 
But though he were in that dark place of pain 
Which Priests do preach of , and which Poets feign : 
Yet there , were I but sure with him to stay , 
I would — I would do more than I will say . 


Mar.   But an Infernal shape like his may seem . 


Queen .  Nothing Infernal can resemble him . 
[ A great flash of fire . 

Mar.   Bless me ; what means this sudden flash of light ? 
My trembling Knees do one another smite ; 
My Hair does stare , I scarce can draw my Breath , 
And a Cold seizes me like that of Death . 
[ A second flash of fire . 

Queen .  Guard me , ye blessed Angels , for I find 
My timorous flesh strives to infect my Mind : 
In Fears Men Sin , I scorn to be involved , 
What is it can resist a Soul resolved ? 
While terror does the mortal part invade , 
To the Immortal , it should Courage add . 
Why Mariana dost thou tremble so ? 
Canst thou be Innocent , and fearful too ? 


Mar.   I dare not stay more Prodigies to see , 
Impute this Rudeness to my fear , not me . 
[ Mariana goes out trembling , and shuts the door after her . [ A third , and greater flash of fire . [ Hircanus' Ghost rises , dressed in the High-priest's Habit.  

Queen .  ha ? 't is Hircanus Spirit does appear , 
But why should I my Mother's Father fear . 
See how he shakes his Head , and seems to groan ; 
O , since 't was Herod that Usurped your Throne , 
Why do you not , him , or his Ghost pursue , 
Rather than me , who still does weep for you . 
[ Another flash of fire . [ Aristobulus' Ghost rises in the like Habit.  more Horrors yet ? 't is Aristobulus . 
What makes you , my dear Brother , haunt me thus ? 
Is it because that I was Herod's Queen , 
And that by him , you both have murdered been . 
'T was by Hircanus , and by your Command , 
That to the Tyrant I did give my hand ; 
But when to that dire deed I did consent , 
Of both your Murders , he was Innocent . 
[ The two Ghosts shake their heads . then I perceive you judge that I did ill , 
Not to kill him , who both of you did kill . 
But Heaven does know , I feared to do amiss , 
And by a Sin of mine to punish his . 


Arist. Ghost .  You little know the blessed place where we are , 
Who think , Revenge can find admittance there : 
Nothing so Hellish up to Heaven can fly , 
Passions in Bodies live ; and with them die . 


Hir. Ghost .  no , Mariam , we both now appear , 
To tell you , that your hour of Death is near ; 
And then from Death , you must to Judgement come , 
To hear from Justice self , your endless doom ; 
Before that Bar Actions are truly weighed , 
The Kings , and Slaves , are in one Balance laid : 
Mitres , and Crowns , which here the World adore , 
If ill employed , are weights to sink us more . 
life 's but a Race , the longest quickly ends ; 
Yet on it , our Eternity depends . 


Arist. Ghost .  ETERNITY ; That word so much does weigh , 
As if it were pronounced but once a day ; 
With the Belief , and Reverence that is fit 
For Worldly trifles , who durst hazard it ? 
Since but one Moment of those Joys w' are in , 
Does far transcend the longest Charms of Sin.  


Hir. Ghost .  Farewell ; Remember your last hour is near . 
[ The Ghosts descend . 

Queen .  Only the unprepared should dying fear . 
Blessed , and Kind Ghosts , who Heaven awhile could miss , 
To teach me here the Glorious Way to Bliss . 
[ Antip. within the Scene says . 

Ant.   The queen 's great Soul is a Reproach to me ; 
She speaks with those I trembled but to see : 
Now that the Ghosts are vanished , I 'll appear . 
[ He makes a noise . 

Queen .  more Ghosts ; or am I cheated by my Ear ? 
[ Antipater appears . ha ? 't is Antipater's dear Ghost I see ; 
In Death as Life he is still kind to me . 
Stay , stay , you blessed Spirit ; for I know , 
Assuming of that shape , you must be so ▪ 
Come you to tell me of my dying too ? 
no news , unwelcome is that 's brought by you . 
Or comest thou to accuse me that did wed ▪ 
The bloody Tyrant , who cut off thy Head ? 
Ah Generous Prince , it was to save your Life 
That I did yield to be the Monster's Wife . 
My kindness only made me seem untrue , 
And for your sake , I became false to you . 


Ant.   Madam — I am not Dead — 


Queen .  Not Dead ? — OH why ! 
Do you alas the fatal truth deny ? 
But know , ( for I now see what you would do ) 
I dread not Death when I may go with you . 
This unkind Doubt of me does make me fear , 
Lovers in the other World love lesle than here . 


Ant.   By your fair Eyes , the Oath I value most , 
I am Antipater , and not his Ghost : 
And , if , of what I swear you doubtful stand , 
Allow me to confirm it on your hand . 


Queen .  Take it — but wonder not I tremble so , 
that 's sit , whether you are a Ghost or no.  
[ Antipater knelt , kisses her hand in such transports , that she endeavours to withdraw it ; but he still holds it . 

Ant.   Why to this : Joy would you a period give . 


Queen .  I would not know by guilty proofs you live . 
[ She withdraws her hand . I am convinced that you no Spirit are , 
But how you scaped , I beg you will declare . 
[ He rises . 

Ant.   To tell that story I too dearly pay , 
Yet since it is your will , I must obey . 
When Herod's Guards did my Revenge prevent , 
To Massada I was close Prisoner sent . 
The Generous Samias , to whose Friendly Care 
The Orders for my Death , entrusted were , 
Beheaded a young Slave of his by night , 
And to his Body , paid my Funeral right ; 
Which made all Palestine , and Herod too , 
Think he had done the Sin he bid him do . 
Thus Heaven preserved whom Herod meant to kill , 
By which I now have privilege to kneel . 
[ He knelt . And beg thus at your Feet that you will give 
That Joy , which if denied , I dare not live . 


Queen .  Rise , Generous Prince — Ah what is 't you implore . 


Ant.   That Blessing now you could not grant before . 


Queen .  Into the blackest Incest I shall run , 
If I should wed the Father , than the Son.  


Ant.   True Love mistaken Scruples should despise , 
The hand of Death cancels all human ties . 
Dare you not end what Love made you begin ? 


Queen .  Prince ; I for you dare dy , but dare not Sin.  


Ant.   By such false Maxims be not kept in awe . 


Queen .  But Incest is forbid , by Heaven's great Law.  


Ant.   If Incest , Madam , be the Sin you fear , 
I of that Incest the whole Gild will bear . 
My Love were neither generous nor true , 
Would I not act one Crime to purchase you . 


Queen .  Ah do not ask what Heaven bids me deny . 


Ant.   then give me leave , here , at your Feet to die . 
[ Ant. offers to draw his Sword.  

Queen .  Hold , Generous Prince , I might as soon agree 
To Sin for you , as let you die for me : 
But if you think your Cure in Death to find , 
Be not so Cruel to leave me behind : 
Do not refuse what now I press you to ; 
Or live with me , or let me die with you . 


Ant.   Alas when of your dying I but hear , 
All my despair I yield up to my fear . 
[ A great knocking at the door . 

Tamar within . ]  OH Madam , Madam . 


Queen .  that 's Tamar's Voice , Retire awhile , I know 
Something Important brings her hither now . 
[ Ant. retires within the Scene . [ The Queen let's in Tamar . 

Tamar .  Madam , I hope this Rudeness you 'll excuse , 
Since 't is to bring you most surprising News . 
Herod , whom we believed till now , was dead , 
From his Restraint is by Octavius freed ; 
And Caesar on him has confirmed the Crown , 
And what 's as strange , Herod is now in Town . 
He feared some Insurrection from the Jews , 
And therefore brought of his Success the News . 
The Sanhedrim to his great Fortune bend , 
And through the Streets they all on him attend . 


Queen .  Never a greater Change was wrought by Fate . 
[ To them Dina hastily . 

Din.   Madam , the King is at the Palace Gate . 


Queen .  Will my Misfortunes never have an End ? 
In my Apartment all of you attend . 
[ Dina and Tamar go out . Antipater comes out . 

Queen .  You hear the News of this prodigious turn . 


Ant.   Yes , Madam ; but what News should make me mourn ? 
For I have nothing now to hope or dread , 
Herod's alike to me , alive or dead : 
Yet my Complaints my Duty shall subdue , 
Since I can now complain of none but you . 


Queen .  Do not complain of her whose only fault 
Is that she love's you much more than she ought . 
After these guilty words I dare not stay , 
Shame now , like Herod , hurries me away . 
[ Mariam goes out . 

Ant.   Prodigious Fate ! what is 't thou dost mean ? 
How in an instant hast thou changed the Scene : 
But thou hast Joyful hours as well as sad , 
The good I 'll court , and I 'll outbrave the bad . 
[ Antip. goes out at the door he entered . 

ACT II  

The Scene opens . 

The Temple appears , and Herod seated on a Throne within it . On his right hand Annanelus the Highpriest stands dressed in all his Pontifical Habits : On his left hand Pheroras , Abner , Phaltiel , Samias , Asdrubal , with all the Courtiers and the Guards . The Singing Priests are all in their white Robes , with wreaths of Laurel on their Heads ; after some time of silence , the chief Singer lists up his right hand , and then the whole Choir of Priests sing the following Song . SONG . 

Those Clouds which dare the Sun obscure , 
But a short time endure ; 
And when he breaks what did his Light confine , 
His Beams with brighter Lustre shine . 
So Herod's Danger which we did deplore , 
Serves but to raise his Glories more ; 
He now appears to his glad Subjects sights , 
Like cheerful Mornings after stormy nights . 
In sign that we this blessing prize , 
We offer up whole Herds in Sacrifice : 
And flaming Incense on our Altars burn , 
To celebrate Our King's return : 
Since to this Temple he new Life does give , 
His Fame shall in his Piety still live . 
[ Flames are seen behind the Theatre in the Temple . This Song is to be sung twice by the whole Choir of Priests ; at the first ending of the Song Herod descends from the Throne , walks out over the Theatre , attended by all , having a Canopy of State carried over him by four . By that time the Priests have ended the Song the second time , the last of the Procession are to be gotten off the Theatre , and then the Scene of the Temple is to be closed by the Scene of Herod's Apartment . Enter Herod , Pheroras , Abner , Phaltiel , Samias , Asdrubal , and the Arabian Guards . Pher.   The Sanhedrim are at your Palace Gate , 
And beg admittance . 


Herald   No. There let them wait . 
By Fear , not Love , they now are hither drawn , 
Base Spirits ; when insulting fails , they fawn . 
When they but dreamt Fortune had cast me down , 
They did consult how to bestow my Crown . 
Since they 'll not tell on whom that guilt does fall ; 
Rather than punish none , I 'll punish all . 
Justice must not be mocked . 


Pher.   But Justice then 
Should not designedly punish guiltless Men. 
Because to you the faulty are not known , 
you 'll punish All , rather than punish none . 


Herald   Since all were present at the black Debate , 
't is they the Guiltless must discriminate . 
My Resolution is on Justice built ; 
Who in this Case conceals , does share the guilt . 
Pheroras , take my Guards , and carry all 
The Sanhedrim into the Judgment-hall , 
There torture them , till you from some have got , 
Who first proposed , and then approved the Plot.  


Phalt.   The Jews will rise in Tumults through despair . 


Herald   Tumults the Frenzies of the People are . 
And who in Frenzies strive must be withstood , 
Such fits are quickly cured by letting Blood.  


Sam.   't is hard with a whole Nation to dispute . 


Herald   But harder when Kings are not Absolute . 
He of a Throne should be unworthy held , 
Who to his will makes not his Subjects yield . 
Who to obtain that end his Life does give , 
Does die more glorious than he else can live . 
Brother you seem as if you were afraid : 
Go you ; and see these Orders now obeyed . 
[ To Phalt. Sam. and Asdr.  

Pher.   Sir , I will never give you cause to say , 
That what you Order , I dare not obey . 
Come all with me — 
[ Pher. Phalt. Sam. and Guards go out . 

Herald   Abner , to thee alone 
My Counterfeited Passion I made known ; 
But now I fear 't is Mariana's due , 
That false Love made to her must change to true ; 
Love by her Eyes , that Fiction would upbraid , 
And burns me in those Flames with which I played . 


Abn.   Sir , since the Queen some coldness did express , 
While she unrivalled did your heart possess . 
May it not , Sir , provoke her to despair , 
Seeing another in that Glory ▪ share . 


Herald   Perhaps it may — Perhaps too — It may not , 
Few Women are by reason lost or got : 
Since to the Love I paid her she 'd not bend , 
I tried a different way to reach my end . 
Yet Abner , I must say , to be possessed 
As much of hers as she is of my Breast ; 
And to enjoy that Monarchy alone , 
I would despise the Universal Throne . 
Though I her Coyness , and her Pride abhor , 
Yet her triumphant Beauties I adore . 
oft I resolve her coldness to resent , 
But I as often that Resolve repent . 
How was it Mariana did receive 
Those Jewels which to her I bid you give . 


Abn.   As soon as the vast present she had seen , 
She said , I had mistake her for the Queen ; 
But when to her I solemnly did swear , 
That they by you presented were to her ; 
She trembled instantly , then blushing said , 
They were too mighty Presents for a Maid ; 
And begged me I would make you her Excuse , 
Since 't was her Virtue did those gifts refuse : 
then from the Chamber she in haste did go . 


Herald   She had good Cause , the Offering was too low . 
'T was fit so great a Beauty should decline 
A present made by any hand but mine . 
OH Love ; where didst thou get the Power or Art , 
Thus to erect two Thrones within one heart : 
That Empire must be stormy , and decay , 
In which at once two different Powers bear sway . 
My Queen's aspiring Soul does daily rise , 
Her Mind is as Imperious as her Eyes . 
While Mariana with as Conquering Charms , 
By her humility my heart disarms ; 
Thus to subdue me Opposites agree , 
Yet both produce the same effects in me . 
Let the Queen know I 'm to the Garden gone , 
And tell her , I expect her there alone . 
[ Herod and Abner go out several ways . 

The Scene the private Gallery of Herod's Palace . 

Sohemus meets Mariana . Sohe .  OH Sister , I am now for ever lost , 
My flattering hopes by my ill Stars are crossed : 
The Queen to my Address does cruel prove , 
My Services she takes , but sleights my Love. 
While Solome her former flame renews , 
And with such guilty Love my Love pursues ; 
That I perceive 't is the Decree of Fate , 
I must be ruined by her Love or hate . 


Mar.   If you but for the Queen can Love admit , 
Solome must be paid with Counterfeit ; 
Else all your hopes of Life will be but Dreams , 
Her Soul no Passion knows but in extremes . 


Sohe .  Sister , you know my Heart could never brook 
Whatever did but like dissembling look . 


Mar.   Dissembling must to you uneasy be , 
And to persuade you to it , is to me ; 
But since on you depends all I hold dear , 
My Virtue now indulges to my fear . 
When in this Love you did at first engage , 
The sad effects of it I did presage ; 
Now my Prophetic fears I find are true , 
— But may it not be yet suppressed by you . 


Sohe .  OH 't is in vain me to that change to move , 
Who once loved well can never cease to Love.  


Mar.   then you at first loved Solome but ill , 
Or by that Rule you ought to love her still ; 
And if for her a Passion you did feign , 
For both Our Sakes dissemble it again . 


Sohe .  Though once her Beauties gave my Heart the Law. 
Yet her Change froze more than her Eyes can thaw . 
And you as well may raise the dead again , 
As Love which has been murdered by disdain : 
Solome ordered me to meet her here — 
Sister , retire , yonder she does appear . 


Mar.   OH ere I go , let me this promise win , 
That you 'll not think what saves us both a Sin. 
This on my Knees I would of you implore . 
[ Mar. says the last Verse as she is going out . 

Sohe .  I 'll do what Honour bids me , and no more . 
Enter Solome . 

Solo.   Though the last usage I endured from you , 
Made me resolve your Ruin to pursue ; 
And by the Power which I with Herod have , 
I with one word can send you to your Grave : 
Yet Love has purchased for you a Reprieve , 
And makes me this last meeting to you give . 
You know the trust which he on you did lay , 
And Love , I know , made you that trust betray : 
Herod , as Lawful King , you would not own , 
Either of these , by me , to him made known ; 
Would raise his Anger , and Revenge so high , 
As nothing but your Death could satisfy . 


Sohe .  Madam , you need not to your Brother sue 
To take a Life that is abhorred by you . 
From me your Will shall no resistance meet , 
I freely lay it , Madam , at your Feet . 


Solo.   Your Life , Sohemus , would my Blessing prove , 
If you would reassume — your — former — Love.  
[ She puts her hand before her face . 

Sohe .  Why would you have that Passion live again , 
Which when you could reward , you did disdain : 
In pity , Madam , do not press me more , 
To suffer Shipwreck twice upon one Shore . 


Solo.   I told you Herod forced me to that Crime . 


Sohe .  Force which once awed you , may a second time . 


Solo.   But to repeat a Sin few dare consent , 
Of which they once did really repent . 


Sohe .  Herod I know will make you soon repent 
Of that Divorce you to your Husband sent . 


Solo.   Brother , and King , Husband of best degree , 
Are empty Names to one that love's like me . 
Do but declare that I possess your Heart , 
then all the rest trust to my care and Art : 
Those who oppose me I 'll to Death pursue , 
And in vast Crimes show as vast Love for you . 


Sohe .  So much your Servant I resolve to be , 
That you shall never act a Crime for me . 


Solo.   Perfidious Man ; since you my Love disdain , 
I 'll tear you hence , where you too long did reign : 
All those Objections you to me did move , 
Were now I see to triumph o'er my Love ; 
And when all Obstacles I would subdue , 
I find my greatest , nay my Only — You.  


Sohe .  Were I as proud , or false , as now you say , 
I might with ease you by your Love betray : 
But by my Faithfulness I make you eat 
Crimes , which would make you hate yourself when done : 
Ah Madam , 't is severe to use me thus , 
We give not Laws to Love , but Love to us : 
could we at will quench or revive ●is Flame , 
you 'd kill that Love which now you blush to name . 
If what I say cannot your wrath assuage , 
Here , in my Blood , be pleased to drown your Rage . 
[ Opening his Arms.  If over Love I could the Victor prove , 
To whom I give my Life , I 'd give my Love.  


Solo.   Too deep a wound thy bold contempt affords , 
E'er to be healed by Fawn and by words . 
Since thou with scorn my proffered Love dost brand , 
'T were too great Death to perish by my hand . 
[ Striking her Breast . Thus — with one blow Love's Image I deface , 
Revenge , do thou ascend , and take the place . 
In thy black Empire few successless prove , 
Whose Hearts are filled with Rage , as once with Love.  
[ Solome goes out . 

Sohe .  I see her fury cannot be withstood , 
She will allay this tempest in my Blood : 
Yet to my Death 't is nobler to submit , 
Than to Contract a guilt which merit's it . 
[ Sohemus goes out . 

The Scene the first obscure Grotta . 

Enter Antipater , Pollio . Ant.   Dissuade me not , by all my hopes I swear , 
Nothing shall hinder me to wait on her . 


Poll.   Your Life in doing it will hazard run . 


Ant.   'T will run more hazard if it be not done : 
For Life on no account to me is dear , 
But only as it does belong to her . 


Poll.   Loose not that Life which for her sake you prise . 


Ant.   Ah 't is not Life while banished from her Eyes . 
To them Phaltiel and Samias . 

Phalt.   Sir , from the Judgment-hall we now are come , 
Where forty noble Jews received their doom : 
th' Arabians putting many to the Rack , 
Which in the Plot did not at all partake . 
The rest urged by a Virtue most sublime , 
The guiltless cleared , and did confess their Crime : 
But those which were absolved did boldly say , 
they 'd rather perish than be saved that way . 


Sam.   Never did men so generously contend , 
Each would have lost his Life to save his Friend . 


Ant.   My Father's Crown and Life in danger lies , 
Attempted thus by them who Death despise . 


Sam.   He that in this great Action led the way , 
Was Abner's Father , aged Barzillai : 
All hoped the favour Herod shows the Son , 
Would for the Father a Reprieve have wone : 
But as we came out of the Hippodrome , 
The Orders that he first should die were come . 


Ant.   What is this Abner , for whose sake you thought 
My Father might from his revenge be brought ? 
Since my disgrace he did to favour climb . 


Phalt.   To draw him , Sir , at length , requires much time . 
He is , to give his Character in short , 
In War most fierce , most humble in the Court 
Who merit's favour , yet obtains it not , 
In him unasked an Advocate has got . 
Respect for him he in all hearts has bred , 
Because it is not sought , but merited . 
Malice does fear such Virtue to pursue , 
Which makes him favoured without Envy too . 
Enter Hazael hastily , who takes Antip. aside . 

Haz.   Tamar , your Trust did with such Joy receive , 
And in such Raptures learned you were alive : 
That in disguise as you desired , she 's gone 
To Nathan's Tomb , to meet you there alone . 
Your stay with her she begs may be so short , 
As none may mind her absence from the Court : 
Where over her there are suspicious Eyes . 


Ant.   My Joys from this blessed meeting take their Rise ▪ 
My generous Friends , excuse me for one hour , 
I 'm drawn from hence by Love's Resistless Power . 
Mean while , disperse yourselves in several ways , 
For this rough Justice must a Tempest raise : 
And drive into despair the furious Jews , 
What ere you learn , let me soon hear the News . 
[ Ant. and Haz. go out hastily . 

Phalt.   I 'll try to stay him . 


Sam.   Do not , 't is in vain . 
Reason and Love never together reign . 
[ Sam. Phalt. and Poll. go out . 

The Scene is the Palace-garden . 

Enter Herod and the Queen . Herald   't is to Agrippa , Madam , that I owe 
At once my Liberty , and Kingdom too . 
With such success he did my Cause debate , 
As he did alter what was thought my Fate . 


Queen .  Does it not meanly in a Monarch show , 
Both those to a Proud Roman King to owe. 
But to his Subject thus in Debt to run , 
Is what I should elect by Death to eat . 


Herald   Freedom you seem , and Empire to abhor . 


Queen .  no ; I love both , but I love Glory more . 
For those who do not Glory more esteem 
Than Life and Empire , cannot merit them . 


Herald   You my Return so coldly entertain , 
As if some other in your heart did reign . 


Queen .  I for your absence had no cause to mourn , 
Nor can I joyful be for your Return . 
Neither in me had reason to prevail , 
Since I but change my Jailor , not my Jail . 
Your part Sohemus acted , you being gone ; 
And now you are returned you act your own . 


Herald   While Rules of Honour you on me obtrude , 
You quite forget your Debts of gratitude . 
'T was I that raised you to my Bed and Crown , 
When all your House were by their Fate cast down . 


Queen .  You made them Victims to your Pride and Hate , 
And then ascribe their Ruins to their Fate . 
With them I rather would have lost my Life , 
Than be Condemned to live their Murderers Wife . 


Herald   Madam , there are affronts which press so near , 
That 't is beyond the strength of Love to bear . 


Queen .  And there be Loves which so offensive are , 
That to be hated were more pleasant far . 


Herald   Take heed , your Death may end so bold a strife . 


Queen .  You should not threaten me with Death but Life . 


Herald   O Cursed Herod to give all thy heart 
To her who is unworthy of a part . 


Queen .  't is hard to credit I have all your heart , 
Sure — Mariana — does possess a part . 
Love that divided is must quickly fall . 


Herald   then Mariana shall possess it all . 
Unworthy 't is of Monarches , nay of Men , 
To pay their Loves where they 're not loved again . 
He merit's scorn who tamely scorn endures , 
Yes , I 'll recall my heart as you do yours . 


Queen .  The losing such a heart should I take ill , 
Which you can give and take when ere you william 
Pray teach me too how I should grieve for it , 
— Yet such a Passion is for her most fit ; 
Whose Family you for her sake thought good 
To waft to Heaven through a Sea of blood : 
Of this new Love let this new proof appear , 
By the like passage pray , Sir , send me there . 
The greatness of your Love will more be seen 
In making me your Martyr than your Queen . 


Herald   Spite of affronts so sensible and high , 
Yet for your Beauty's sake you shall not die ; 
Since while you scorn me I my wrath subdue , 
Judge how I 'd love you , would you love me too . 


Queen .  Love you ? Methinks at those two words alone , 
I hear the Ghosts of all th' Asmoneans groan . 
Should I once more that guilty motion hear , 
Out of their bloody Urns they 'd all appear : 
And could I grant that Love which now you crave , 
they 'd fright me with their looks into my Grave . 


Herald   As well your weakness as your hate I see , 
Can you fear Ghosts , and not fear angering me ? 
The dead ne'er to the living durst appear , 
Ghosts are but shadows painted by our fear . 
But were your House revived , did they all reign , 
My looks would fright them into Ghosts again . 
Looks , which if you your Crimes do not redeem , 
Shall act on you what I but talked of them . 


Queen .  Your trembling Limbs could not your weight sustain , 
If once you saw me head that Ghastly Train : 
The sight would make the Crown upon your brow 
Totter as much as Usurpation now . 
If you doubt this , let me to them be sent , 
Heavens , how I long to try th' Experiment . 


Herald   Imperious Woman , by thy Pride and hate , 
thou hast at length hurled on thyself thy Fate . 
Were I as timorous as thy weak Sex , 
Mendoza thy Contempt more than thy Ghost would vex . 
Ho , who waits there ? 
Enter Gentleman . Go instantly , and call 
Some of the Arabian Guards , and Asdrubal . 
[ Exit Gentleman . Since thou so longest in hope to frighten me 
To be a Ghost , that Ghost thou now shalt be : 
In my Apartment thou thy Life shalt lose , 
And I that place before all others choose : 
That if thy Ghost to me itself dare show , 
The trembling shape shall not have far to go . 


Queen .  Though all the Asmoneans died by your Command , 
Yet let your Wife , pray , die by your own hand . 
You should in Justice some distinction place 
In murth'ring her , and others of her Race . 
I do not beg you would delay my Fate , 
But that yourself would shed the blood you hate . 
Since I the Title of your Queen possessed , 
Do not deny my first and last request . 
Here — let your Sword your own Revenge pursue , 
[ Opening her Arms.  And pierce that Heart , your feigned Love could not do . 


Herald   Feigned Love ! Witness ye Sacred Powers above , 
What she calls feigned , till now was Real Love. 
A Love which here did with such Empire Reign , 
As nothing could have quenched but her disdain : 
Ah what to prove it could I more have done , 
[ Enter Asdr. and the Arabian Guards hastily . Than for thy sake to kill my only Son. 
Seize on the Queen , and let her then be led 
To my Apartment , there to lose her Head.  


Asdr.   The Queen , Sir ? 


Herald   Yes , the Queen ; Didst thou not hear , 
Or is that Question asked me by thy fear ? 


Asdr.   How should I touch the Partner of your Bed ? 


Herald   Her Death delayed , shall forfeit thy own Head.  


Asdr.   Madam , Thus at your Feet myself I lay , 
To beg your Pardon , that I dare obey . 


Queen .  You have it , Sir , why should you troubled be , 
At once obeying him , You pleasure me . 
[ Asdrubal takes the Queen by the Hand to lead her out . 

Herald   Now let her to her Death be said away . 


Queen .  't is your first Order , I with Joy obey . 
[ Asdrubal leading her out , but still looks back toward Herod . 

Herald   Heavens ; with what Tortures is my Bosom torn , 
I neither can Revenge , nor bear her scorn . 
My Soul was racked till I her Death decreed , 
And now the Doom is given , my Heart doth bleed . 
[ When Asdrubal has almost led the Queen off the Theatre , Herod goes hastily , and taking her from him , says . How dar'st thou on my Queen thus lay thy hands ? 


Asdr.   The Sin I do , is , Sir , by your Commands . 


Herald   To wait on Kings thy Judgement is too weak , 
thou know'st not when , Justice , or Rage does speak . 
If Passion hurls us out of Reason's way , 
't is the best Duty then , to Disobey . 


Queen .  If you Reprieve me from the wished for Blow , 
you 'll grieve at it ever long , as I shall now . 


Herald   Your Hate , and your Disdain , I will outbrave , 
Love has reversed the Doom which Anger gave . 
You with the Guards have leave now to retire , 
[ Asdrubal and the Guards go out . 

Queen .  Death is denied , because I Death desire . 


Herald   Madam , retire , and do not by your stay , 
Augment that Storm which Love strives to allay . 


Queen .  Heaven knows I go from hence with greater grief 
Condemned to Live , than now to lose my Life . 
[ The Queen goes out . 

Herald   How great a Soul does this Asmonean show , 
Her generous Heart will rather break , than bow . 
While I , who have Battles and Kingdoms wone , 
Yield to her Pride , and blush for it when done . 
[ Herod walks in deep melancholy about the Stage . Enter Solome , who having considered a while Herod's disorders , says . 

Solo.   What fitter time to tell it him than now , 
When Grief and Rage sit mingled on his Brow. 
All Passions must in him at once combine , 
To make him act those mischiefs I design , 
I met the Queen as she from hence did go , 
[ To Herod . She scarce would look on me — 


Herald   It may be so — 


Solo.   Your Sister with respect should treated be 


Herald   Respect for you ? Why she hath none for me . 


Solo.   How can one Woman's Pride keep you in awe , 
Whose word alone gives to two Kingdoms Law.  


Herald   Ah , 't is by much an easier task to guide 
Two mighty Kingdoms , than one Woman's Pride . 


Solo.   Your Fame is lost if awed thus by your Wife , 
You ought to take away her Pride or Life . 


Herald   To one who begs , I death to her would give , 
't is the worst Punishment to let her live . 


Solo.   If Death she does desire , why should she strive 
For that from you she to herself can give . 


Herald   Perhaps she would have me her-murth'rer prove . 


Solo.   Life , Sir , is sweet , to one that is in Love.  


Herald   In Love ? 


Solo.   Yes , Sir , in Love , I say . 


Herald   With who ? 
Hold — I would think your malice speaks , not You.  


Solo.   no , 't is my Love , and Duty , makes me tell 
A Truth , which 't were a Sin should I conceal : 
Nor could they both more generously appear 
Than now in telling , what you dare not hear . 


Herald   no more — Why should I let into my Breast , 
What would for ever rob me of my Rest ! 
[ Aside . A thousand horrors in that narrow Room 
Have found their Cradle , and may find their Tomb. 
This fatal Subject do not then pursue , 
[ To Solo.  But pity both your King and Brother too : 
Who to the other Torments of his Life , 
Knows he should hate , but cannot hate his Wife . 
[ They both go out . 

ACT III  

The Scene opens , Herod appears asleep under a Magnificent Pavilion . Hircanus and Aristobulus' Ghosts enter , attended by several other Ghosts , in white , having great stains of blood over all their Garments . They dance Antic Dances , with black javelins in their hands . The Dances ended they fall all in into one Rank , and march up to Herod , brandishing the Points of their Weapons towards him . Herod wakes of a sudden , starts up , and draws his Sword , at which all the Ghosts vanish . He stairs about him a while , and then says : Herald   Vanished ! — Well have they managed their Escapes , 
They owe their Safeties to their airy shapes : 
Their flesh did with such fear their Souls subdue , 
That after Death , their Ghosts turned Cowards too . 
Poor senseless Devils ! that could themselves persuade 
To frighten him , by whom they Ghosts were made . 
I blush that I the honour did afford , 
Of scaring them , by drawing of my Sword.  
[ Herod puts up his Sword.  Who waits without ? 
[ A Gentleman comes in . 

Gent.   Your Brother , Sir , has been 
Above an hour attending . 


Herald   Call him in . 
[ The Gentleman goes out . That Brother is my Brother but in name , 
He does by Honesty aspire at Fame . 
By Virtue's Charms , to Glory he pretends , 
And scruples by bold Crimes to reach great ends . 
[ Pheroras comes in . 

Pher.   Sir , by those Spies which are employed by me 
To watch the Jews , I find they all agree : 
And to your Palace Gates great numbers crowd , 
And without fear , their Anger tell aloud . 


Herald   Those who by talk do give their anger vent , 
To great and bold Revenges are not bend ; 
I 'd more suspect them if they did not so . 


Pher.   Yet winds will murmur ere the storm does blow . 
In Policy when you strict Justice do 
Seem to lament , at what they force you to . 
This may the Jews from their despair withhold . 


Herald   A King who fears does make his Subjects bold . 
Monarches by solid Rules should Vassals steer , 
Dissembling is too near allied to fear . 
Who to please Subjects some degrees shall fall , 
Does give them hopes he may descend from all . 
Do not a talking Conquered People fear , 
They cannot raise such Storms as I feel here . 
[ Putting his hand on his Breast . 

Pher.   I cannot guests from whence this Storm should rise , 
Since you have vanquished all your Enemies . 
Winning Agrippa , you Octavius win . 


Herald   The worst of Storms are those which are within . 
OH Heavens , 
If to wear Crowns to which I was not born 
Is Sin — Why do you thus my Head adorn ? 
But if in that I did your will pursue , 
Why do you punish what you made més do ? 


Pher.   How should I see till you unseal my Eyes , 
Whence this Internal Tempest , Sir , does rise . 


Herald   My Sister in her Rage such things expressed , 
As ever since have stolen away my rest : 
The fatal words through my Ears pierced my Heart , 
And are above the Cure of Time or Art  


Pher.   't is strange her talk takes such deep root in you . 


Herald   I dare not think her words are false or true . 


Pher.   Can you but in suspense such Torments find . 


Herald   Suspense , 't is the worst torture of the Mind . 
Our Reason and our Valour it controls , 
't is in one word , the Chaos of our Souls . 
From one Resolve I to another run , 
I know not what to meet , or what to eat . 


Pher.   then , Sir , to my suspense pray give an end , 
Trust with your Griefs , your Brother , and your Friend . 


Herald   Solome in her truth , or by her Art , 
Would make me think — Another has her Heart ? 


Pher.   What Her do you mean ? 


Herald   What Her else can it be , 
But my Proud Queen which could so torture me ? 
If to my Love another she prefers , 
I 'll tear out both her Lover's Heart and Hers. 
then I 'll in Flames reduce them both to Dust , 
Flames , which shall be as burning as their Lust : 
And when those Thrones of Love to Ashes turn , 
I 'll mix their guilty Ashes in one Urn : 
There we shall see what Charming Fires are bred 
In Hearts united , when those Hearts are dead . 
This brother 's an Experiment may be , 
Worthy an Injured King's Philosophy . 


Pher.   Give not your Anger , Sir , such guilty vent , 
A Sin you Fancy , than a Punishment . 
Is this the weight which made your Soul to bow . 


Herald   You talk as if a heavier I could know . 


Pher.   If Virtue did not the Queen's Actions guide , 
Her Honour would be guarded by her Pride . 


Herald   Honour o'er Love , rarely the Field does win , 
When Pride does keep the Gate , Love will get in . 


Pher.   But Love an Entrance always is denied 
Where Woman's Virtue heightened is to Pride . 


Herald   To such extremes it is unsafe to trust , 
Where Virtue turns to Pride , Love may to Lust. 
Sin will from Sin but too ill guarded be , 
Nor durst my Sister trifle thus with me . 


Pher.   Believe me , Sir , Our Sister has mistake , 
She has not proved it on the Queen , but look 
Falshood and Lust which so deformed appear , 
durst not approach , much lesle reside in Herald 
In her , where Virtue to such height does rise , 
It shines both in her Actions and her Eyes . 
[ Solome comes into them . 

Herald   Sister — I to Pheroras did declare , 
That you , of the Queen's Virtue , Jealous are . 
If aught but Truth leads you to what you do , 
The Death I meant for her , shall fall on you . 
Methinks at this your Colour comes and goes , 
Does it your Anger , or your Gild disclose . 


Solo.   't is a just Anger does my Face infect , 
O Heavens ! Can Herod Solome suspect ? 
And can he of that Friendship have a doubt , 
Which all the actions of her Life make out ? 
Dismiss Pheroras , and you soon shall see 
With what Injustice you suspected me . 


Herald   Brother , leave Solome with me alone . 


Pher.   Since you Command me , Sir , I must be gone . 
[ Pher. goes out . 

Solo.   Before the fatal Secret I declare , 
Which will with Horror bristle every Hair ; 
And make you summon all your Fortitude , 
To help you to support a shock so rude . 
Tell me without Reserve — Have you not seen , 
Since your Return , a Coldness in the Queen , 
Greater by much than you observed before ? 


Herald   May be I have — Proceed — but ask no more . 


Solo.   What did you think in her this Change had wrought ? 


Herald   Tell what you know , and ask not what I thought . 


Solo.   then know — yet stay — for I begin to fear 
Truths against Her would but offend your Ear.  


Herald   Play not thus with my Anger — 't is not good , 
The Storm you raised , must be suppressed by Blood. 
It wounds my Soul as long as it endures , 
't is the Queen's Death shall end it — or else — Yours . 


Solo.   Alas , I would not live one moment more , 
If , Sir , my Death your Honour could restore . 


Herald   My Honour — Speak — I 'm racked by this delay . 


Solome .  'T will rack you worse to hear what I can say . 


Herald   Rack me then higher yet , if it can be , 
That I may others Rack as you do me . 
Tell me , o tell me , of that Man the Name , 
Who durst presume to rob me of my Fame . 
He might all other Crimes have safer done , 
Than only to have wished for but this One.  


Solo.   Sohemus is the Person who I dread 
Has more than offered to have wronged your Bed : 
For when alas we of your Death did hear , 
( The thought of which makes me yet shake with fear ) 
And that I pressed him those commands to Obey , 
Which you on him for the Queen's Death did lay . 
He said , forbid it Heaven that I the Sin should do , 
Which words he spoke blushing and trembling too : 
By which it was too evidently seen , 
He had a guilty Passion for the Queen ; 
For whom so warmly he did then appear , 
That he told me you an Usurper were . 


Herald   At this I feel such Rage as Man never knew , 
Which seems to tell me , what you speak is true . 


Solo.   Your Orders which to him entrusted were 
For the Queen's Death , he did to her declare . 


Herald   I thought my Uncle's Death enough had been 
To fright all else from acting of his Sin. 
— Have you a proof of this , the Charge is high ? 


Solo.   Ask him yourself , if he the truth deny , 
It shall be proved by those you cannot doubt . 


Herald   't is only Love could rack that secret out . 


Solo.   Admire not if those Charms which Conquered you , 
Had the like Power to Conquer others too . 


Herald   My fury in untrodden Paths shall walk , 
But why do I misspend my time in talk . 
If he confess , or faintly but deny , 
By my own hand , the Queen and He shall die , 


Solo.   Ah for the Queen , Sir , give me leave to sue . 


Herald   Of all the World 't is most unfit in you . 


Solo.   Perhaps she did not of his Love admit . 


Herald   She is too guilty in Concealing it . 
To me immediately Sohemus send , 
And at my Chamber let some Guards attend . 


Solo.   From this design I would your wrath dissuade . 


Herald   My anger cannot be by talk allayed . 
[ Herod goes out . 

Solo.   My fierce Revenge has now begun her flight , 
To hurl my Rival into endless night ; 
And her proud Servant to his Cost shall prove , 
there 's no Revenge like that of slighted Love.  
[ Solome goes out . 

The Scene is the Obscure Grotta . 

Enter Antipater and Hazael . Ant.   Yes , I met Tamar there . 


Haz.   And did you find 
Her Friendship firm in all you have designed . 


Ant.   Yes , yes , this night I to the Queen shall go , 
And there , whate'er my Fate is , I shall know . 


Haz.   I hope you have her leave to wait on her . 


Ant.   She must not know of it till I am there : 
Since to such Rules of Honour she is tied , 
That to ask leave were but to be denied . 
[ To them Phaltiel and Samias . 

Sam.   O , Sir , from whence we came such grief we saw , 
As far transcends the skill of Art to draw . 
Observing as we passed along the street , 
At Abner's Palace Gate much People meet : 
We through it at length did make our way , 
Where on a Hearse his Headless Father jay. 
About it stood his Friends and Kindred all , 
Whose griefs did more than fill the spacious Hall ; 
And seemed to put a Voice into the Stones , 
By making them to Echo back their Groans . 


Phal .  But all their Sorrows scarce deserved that name , 
Compared to Abner's when he thither came ; 
At his dead Father's Feet himself he threw , 
Where for a while he lay as Speechless too . 
Nothing in all his griefs did mean appear , 
He neither breathed one sigh , nor shed one Tear ; 
But did convince all who were in the Room , 
That Grief is still when it is highest dumb ; 
His Eyes did on the pale Corpse so fixed stay , 
As if through them he 'd look his Life away . 


Sam.   At last to Heaven he such a look did throw , 
As threatened more than all his words could do . 


Phal .  A look , which Herod , if he had been there , 
could not have seen but must have shaken with fear . 


Sam.   Your Father who for Abner then did send , 
To this great Scene of Sorrow gave an end . 
He at the Message cheerfully did rise , 
And such Contentment sparkled in his Eyes ; 
As if by it he to the World would say , 
I go to meet the Fate of Barzillai . 


Ant.   I almost envy Abner , I confess , 
Who did his grief so generously express . 


Phalt.   Not knowing why Herod for Abner sent , 
And thinking you would long for the event ; 
Pollio , who we in a disguise met there , 
We sent to learn it , and then meet us here . 


Ant.   I for the News impatient am , and wait , 
[ Pollio comes in ▪ But he is come already — Pray relate 
What 't is my Father hath with Abner done . 


Poll.   When he came in , the King sat on his Throne ; 
Environed by his Court , and Guards , and all 
That Curiosity did thither call . 
To whom the noble Youth did boldly say , 
Sir , though you sent for me from Barzillai , 
Yet I with Joy to wait on you am come , 
That I from you too may receive my doom . 
For sure I 'm Summoned for no other Cause , 
Yes — to excuse the Justice of the Laws . 
Herod at length did with a sigh reply , 
't is they that took your Father's Life ; not I 
Any lesle Crime than what my Crown would take , 
I would have Pardoned for my Abner's sake ; 
But he who into that great Sin could run , 
Cannot deserve the Tears of such a Son. 
Too many for him are already spilt . 
But Worth to cherish , while I punish guilt ; 
Thy Father's , and the forfeitures of those 
Who for their Crimes with him their heads did lose , 
With Iewry's Government to thee I give . 
Abner with sighs did the great gifts receive : 
And Herod then made him the Throne ascend , 
Where he embraced him , and did call him Friend . 


Ant.   This Action his past Fame for ever wounds , 
He in it for his Father's Blood compounds . 
All the great things which by him have been done , 
Cannot wash off the meanness of this One.  


Poll.   But , Sir , as through the Palace Court I passed , 
I saw the Guards run to their Arms in haste ; 
And though I asked the Cause I could not know , 
Something Important Herod means to do . 
For Courtiers run about from place to place , 
And much of Fear is seen in every Face . 


Ant.   What do you think the Cause of this may be ? 


Phalt.   We are as Ignorant of that as he . 


Sam.   But such Alarms from nothing cannot grow , 
't is therefore fit we to the Court should go , 
And learn from whence this trouble does begin . 


Ant.   Till your Return , I 'll stay for you within . 
[ They go out several ways . 

The Scene the Queen's Lodgings . 

Enter the Queen and Mariana . Mar.   't is from Pheroras I attend you now , 
Who has commanded me to let you know , 
That you over yourself should watchful be , 
For Solome who is your Enemy , 
Does your Dishonour with much art pursue , 
And fills the King with Jealousies of you . 


Queen .  I am indebted to Pheroras Care , 
Did he name nothing in particular . 


Mar.   no ; for when he but spoke in your Defence , 
Herod in Anger did command him thence . 
What is it , Madam , that provokes her thus ? 


Queen .  Her nature makes her still malicious . 
Besides , her Brother's Will she aims to sway , 
And thinks that I sometimes obstruct her way . 
Another Cause may have her hate begot , 
Yet since 't is but my thought , I name it not . 
[ Tamar comes in hastily . 

Tam. to Mar.   My haste has made me almost out of breath , 
Herod , I fear , designs your Brother's Death ; 
And all the Guards are running to their Arms , 
As they are used to do in fierce Alarms . 
While Herod in Impatience till he comes , 
Walks stern and silent in his private Rooms . 


Mar.   Pardon those fears which in my Face you see , 
That Brother is more than the World to me . 
Pardon me too if I go seek him now , 
And , Madam , if I humbly beg of you , 
That you Pheroras warmly will engage , 
To use his Power to lessen Herod's rage . 
My brother 's guiltless , Madam , but you know , 
The King thinks no one , who he hate's , is so . 


Queen .  May Heaven direct you in the Happiest way , 
While , I , what you desire of me , obey . 
[ They go out several ways . 

The Scene Herod's Apartment . 

Herod with Asdrubal , and some of the Guards , comes from within the Scene on the Theatre , at the same time Sohemus , by another of the Theatre Doors , enters on it . Sohe .  The Princess , Sir , bade me here wait on you . 


Herald   Now Guards perform that which I bade you do . 
[ The Guards immediately seize on Sohemus , and disarm him . 

Herald   Thy guilt , without my telling , let's thee know , 
For what Crime 't is , that I have used thee so . 


Sohe .  Though I must judge your usage , Sir , severe , 
Yet I with Joy would this Oppression bear , 
Were I the only guiltless you pursue . 


Herald   That name of all belongs the least to you . 
To thee , whose Lust has to my Queen confessed , 
That Secret I entrusted to , thy Breast : 
Which She of all the World should not have known , 
Traitor ; in vain thou wilt thy Gild disown . 
My Sister who revealed will prove thy Sin. 
Heaven's ! How I feared that it had been the Queen . 
[ Sohe . aside lifting up his Hands and Eyes . 

Herald   His lifting up to Heaven his Hands and Eyes , 
Does Evidence his Crime , by his Surprise . 
This Storm which thou hast raised , dost thou not dread ? 
Look on me — Look — Have I not stared thee dead ? 


Sohe .  Looks cannot make one of my Courage fall . 


Herald   What my Looks cannot do , my Dagger shall . 
[ Herod stabs Sohemus thrice , who falls . 

Sohe .  By my Compliance I thy Throne have built , 
My death 's the Justice due to that base guilt ; 
Which by my Hand I had atoned on thee , 
Had not thy bloody hand prevented me . 
Thunder , the Sword of Heaven , does sure design 
That Death for thee which it denied to mine . 
Tyrant ; receive this Truth from my last Breath , 
If Man has an Existence after Death ; 
My Ghost shall haunt thhee out in every place , 
My gaping Wounds shall stare thee in the Face ; 
Till thou thy Life a burden shalt esteem , 
Great as thy Subjects found — it was — to them . 
[ Sohemus dies . 

Herald   Would every Foe of mine all hope had lost , 
But that of frighting of me with his Ghost . 
Guards , to his Grave bear that perfidious Man , 
There let him tell my Secrets — if he can . 
[ They all go out , the Guards bearing of Sohemus' Body . 

ACT IU.  

The Scene the Queen's Bedchamber . 

The Queen Seated , Tamar and Dina stand on each hand of her . Tam.   'T Was Mariana's sad and fatal Chance , 
To meet the Body as they bore it thence : 
As soon as she beheld her Brother dead , 
From her fair Face the bright Vermilion fled ; 
And in an instant in her Charming Eyes , 
We saw a Cloud blacker than Night arise : 
Her Limbs seemed by their trembling to declare , 
Her Sorrow was too great a weight to bear . 
then on his bloody Corpse herself she threw , 
Whilst from her Breast extorted Curses flew . 


Din.   She his pale Cheeks a thousand times did kiss , 
Till her red Lips infected were with his : 
And to the Wound which through his Breast had made 
A passage to his Heart , her Heart she laid ; 
In hope , which was the end she did pursue , 
By the like Sympathy , 't would kill her too . 
then with a look in which Death Printed was , 
Through her cold Lips these moving words did pass : 
Herod , Thy Steel my Friendships' Truth has Crowned , 
Since to kill both , thou didst but give one Wound : 
then in a Groan she gave her Sorrows vent , 
A Groan so vast , her Breath at once it spent ; 
Which to her Soul to Heaven a passage gave , 
The only brighter dwelling it could have . 


Din.   To such a Death our stock of Tears was due , 
And Sorrow after so contagious grew ; 
As those who bore them to one Grave to rest , 
Seemed by their Looks of more than Life divest . 


Queen .  She in that Fate which you deplore is blessed , 
Her storms of Life are past , and she at Rest ; 
And to her Death this envied Praise is due , 
She taught such Friendship as the World never knew . 
Yet for my Loss in her these Tears I owe , 
And truer Tears no Friend did ever bestow . 
[ The Queen weeps . Leave me ; for my Disorders such are grown , 
As I am only fit to be alone . 
[ Tamar and Dina go out . [ The Queen having mused a while , Antip. discovers himself , the Queen starts , steps back , and stands amazed . 

Queen .  Ha! Antipater . 


Ant.   Yes , Madam , it is he . 


Queen .  At such a guilty hour to visit me ! 
Prince , 't is your first offence , but 't is too vast — 


Ant.   I come to beg that it may be my last . 
Since without seeing you I cannot live , 
And since that leave your Virtue will not give ; 
Thus prostrate , Madam , at your Feet I lie , 
[ Kneeling . And humbly beg , you 'll give me leave to die . 


Queen .  What brought you hither , and who hid you there ? 


Ant.   The highest Love , and most undone Despair . 


Queen .  Ah Prince ! What is it that you now have done ? 


Ant.   That which I had , nor Power , nor Will to eat : 
But as I paid what to my Flame is due ; 
So , Madam , I will be as just to you . 
Justice would lose her Name could she deny , 
That who offends you , merit's not to die . 
And since my Love into this Crime has run , 
This hand shall punish what my Love has done . 
[ He rises , draws his Sword , turns the Hilt to the ground , and when he is going to cast himself upon the Point , she snatches up the Sword by the Hilt.  

Queen .  O Heavens ! What was it that you meant to do ? 


Ant.   To end my Torments , and be just to you . 


Queen .  Though I your guilty visit much deplore , 
To kill yourself , I should lament much more . 


Ant.   You cannot to my Death such Sorrows give 
As I shall feel , if doomed by you to live . 


Queen .  How ill those words do with your Love agree , 
Is Life a Curse , while you can live with me ? 
O Antipater , this is too severe , 
I have my share in all those griefs you bear . 
And nothing can , alas ! my Sorrows heal , 
Unless kind Heaven would Iudah's Laws repeal . 
Which were a Sin to wish , or to implore . 


Ant.   then , Madam , let 's resolve to live no more : 
If th' other Life be what is taught us here , 
Such Loves as ours must needs be happy there . 


Queen .  Those who the Blessings of that Life would win , 
Must not leave this by any Act of Sin. 
Did not the dread of that our Journey stay , 
I would not hinder you , but lead the way . 
[ Tamar comes in hastily . 

Tam.   Madam , forgive the rudeness of my fear . 
— O Heavens ! — the Prince — alas ! how came he here ? 
Herod with Abner through the Gallery comes , 
And all his Guards have seized the Passage-rooms : 
Sure he has learned Antipater's here . 
[ Ant. draws his Sword.  

Ant.   Now , Madam , Fate does on my side appear , 
For Herod , or else you , and I , must fall , 
Our Safeties for my ready Arm do call . 
And to that Sword no Sin ascribed can be , 
Who takes his Life , that first took you from me . 
he 'll think you guilty if he escape the blow . 


Queen .  I 'd rather be thought guilty than be so . 


Ant.   Presumptions on his side will seem too strong . 


Queen .  't is Juster yet to bear than do the wrong . 


Tam.   Madam , You should resolve , the king 's at hand . 


Queen .  Right , Right ; Prince 't is my positive Command , 
That you on your Revenge now think no more , 
But hide yourself where you were hid before . 


Ant.   hide ? and when you into great Danger go . 


Queen .  I run more Danger if you do not so . 


Ant.   Madam , he comes all Night with you to stay . 


Queen .  My Usage soon shall hasten him away . 


Ant.   Can the worst Usage which you have designed , 
Drive him from all the Joys of Womankind ? 


Queen .  Will you then ruin me by your delay ? 


Ant.   Ah , Since you will Command , I must obey . 
[ Antip. conceals himself behind the Queen's Bed.  

Queen .  Tamar retire , but keep within my Call , 
[ Tamar goes out . What Sins of mine can make such Curses fall ? 
[ Herod comes in in his Nightgown , Abner with a Light before him . 

Herald   Since I have sent Sohemus to his Tomb , 
Madam , I now am come to sill his Room . 
Whoever offends me , I 'll my Victim make . 


Queen .  You might have spared him for his Sister's Sake . 
Her you Adored , your Pity ought to move . 


Herald   Revenge a nobler Passion is than Love. 
You seem unmoved that I his Blood have spilt . 


Queen .  no , I am moved ; but 't is at your new guilt . 


Herald   Madam , What you call guilt , I Justice call , 
His Crime deserved he by my hand should fall . 


Queen .  What Provocation could he cast on you , 
To make you both Condemn and kill him too ? 


Herald   Sure you would have me think you do not know . 


Queen .  I 'm not concerned whether you do or no.  


Herald   You ought to know the Crimes you made him act , 
Your fatal Beauties did his Death contract : 
Those Secrets I committed to his Trust , 
His Love revealed to you , or else his Lust. 
Abner , retire here , I will stay this Night . 
[ Abner aside . 

Abn.   Just heaven assist me as my Cause is right . 


Herald   Or else your Lover's Death you so resent , 
As you for it on me your Spleen would vent . 
[ Abner having locked the door , draws his Sword , and advances towards Herod . 

Abn.   Tyrant , prepare thy s●●● , for thou shalt die . 
[ Herod starts and turns about towards him . My Father's Blood for my Revenge doth cry . 


Herald   Treason — My Guards — Must I his Victim fall ? 


Abn.   Thy Guards , by my Command , are out of call . 
no Human Power shall hinder me to pay 
The Righteous Debt I owe to Barzillai . 


Herald   He was a Traitor , and was false to me . 


Abn.   he 's more a Traitor that is true to thee . 
To Thee , who hast done Crimes t' usurp a Throne , 
Which till thou taughtst them , were to Man unknown . 
To Thee , who all thy bloody ends to gain , 
Hast broke all Bonds both Sacred and Profane : 
That Head thou mad'st thy Murdering Axe invade , 
Old Age to all but thee had Reverend made . 
His Restless Ghost bids me revenge the Crime , 
And right at once the injured World and him . 


Herald   Never did Man into like madness run , 
To kill the Father , and then trust the Son ! 
This to my Cost should let all Monarches see , 
That they by halves must never Bloody be . 


Abn.   Since the short time I gave thee to repent 
Of thy old Sins , in teaching new is spent ; 
To cut thee off no longer I 'll defer , 
The Ghost of Barzillai thus greets you , Sir.  
[ Abner offering to make a thrust at Herod , the Queen interposes . 

Queen .  I 'll now forget , since he assaults his Life , 
All wrongs , and but remember I 'm his Wife . 
You through my Heart your way to his must force . 


Abn.   Ah let not Innocence stop Justice Course . 
He killed my Father , he Usurped your Throne ; 
Your Wrongs I come to punish , and my Own. 
He owes to both of us his hated Life . 


Queen .  But I owe him the duty of a Wife . 
You of a Subject ; Abner , then repent , 
King's faults we should not punish , but lament . 
In this brave Act I will your Pattern be . 


Herald   O Heavens ! then she 's in earnest kind to me . 
OH happy danger which to light has brought 
A Truth , which I would by my Death have bought : 
Desist , young Man , and I 'll thy Pardon give ; 
I owe thee now , what makes me wish to live . 


Abn.   Hadst thou no Crime but this , yet thou from me 
Dost merit Death , thinking so mean I 'd be , 
Accept a Pardon from a Tyrant's breath , 
Now when I 'm to revenge a Father's Death . 
Heaven would not me , if I did thee , forgive . 


Queen .  Hold — I command you , Abner , let him live . 
You to your Queen should your Obedience yield . 


Abn.   Ah! You are not my Queen till he is killed : 
You but a Subject are while he does Reign ; 
While you are so , I your Commands disdain . 
But when my Sword our Debts to him has paid , 
Whatever you command shall be obeyed . 


Queen .  Can you then think 'cause he usurped my due , 
That I have therefore lost my Right o'er you . 
This misbelief involves you in his Crime , 
you 'll act yourself , what you 'd revenge on him . 


Herald   If in my hand he but a Sword did see , 
Your Mediations soon should needless be . 
That Death he means for me on him I 'd fling , 
no Subject can in Fight resist his King.  


Abn.   Tyrant , not King ; know , guilt is such a Charm , 
As would a stronger hand than thine disarm . 


Herald   'T were brave wouldst thou but try what thou dost say . 


Abn.   I would , if 't would not my Revenge delay . 


Queen .  Since my Command so useless now appears , 
I 'll try if I can move you by my Tears . 
[ The Queen weeps . 

Abn.   Ah would the Ghosts of all your Murdered Line , 
Stalked in your Sight as Barzillai's in mine . 
The Ghastly Visions could not be withstood , 
You weep but Tears of Water , they of Blood.  


Herald   To lose my Life more sit for me appears , 
Than to preserve it , Madam , by your Tears . 
[ Putting away the Queen . Such precious Showers a Traitor should not have , 
Reserve them , Madam , to adorn my Grave . 
I would with Pleasure have my Life resigned , 
But to have thought you , what I find you , kind . 
Now nothing grieves me in my Fate but this , 
That it is sent by hands so vile as his . 


Abn.   Since by my hand to die does grieve thee so , 
The knowing it shall hasten on the blow . 
[ Herod the second time holds the Queen from him with one hand , and puts by Abner's thrust with the other , yet still she interposes herself . [ Antip. while this is doing looks from behind the Bed , as Tamar looks in at the door . 

Tam.   The Queen's high Virtue does my Soul amaze , 
Since she 's in Danger , I the Court will raise . 
[ She runs out . 

Ant.   How Love and Duty does my Breast divide . 


Abn.   Heaven to thy Heart at last my hand will guide . 
[ Abner making a furious thrust at Herod , the Queen puts it by , and he wounds her in the Arm , at which he stops and says . O Madam , Pardon th' unintended Gild . 


Queen .  I will , if nothing but my Blood be spilt . 


Herald   How dar'st thou think that Heaven thy hand would steer , 
Since Sacrilegiously it wounded her . 


Abn.   Against my will Heaven did this Crime decree , 
To punish her so long defending Thee . 
I 'll kill him yet though th' Altar he embraced . 


Queen .  And I 'll defend him while my Life does last . 
[ Antip. runs from behind the Bed , draws his Sword , and advancing says : 

Ant.   To save her I her Orders disobey , 
[ Abner renews his Assault , the Queen and Herod put by his thrust . Hold , Abner , Hold , and turn thy Sword this way : 
Since the Queen's Sacred Blood by thee is spilt , 
Not to Revenge it were as black a Gild . 


Abn.   Ha! Antipater ; how am I amazed , 
Hell has the dead to help the Tyrant raised . 


Ant.   no , 't is by Heaven that I preserved have been , 
That in thy Blood , I might revenge the Queen . 
Yet I must grieve I can but strike thee dead , 
For all the Tears , and Blood , thou mad'st her shed . 
[ Herod gazes at Antip. and looks like a man astonished . 

Abn.   Sure Antipater once his Head had lost , 
Herod has conjured , and has raised his Ghost . 


Ant.   That I 'm no Ghost thy Death shall soon make known . 


Abn.   Art thou no Ghost ? Why then I 'll make thee one . 
That which the Tyrant to my House has done , 
Calls me to kill thefather and the Son.  
[ They fight , Abner falls , mortally wounded . 

Ant.   That Death which thou deserv'dst thou now hast got . 


Abn.   I merit it , because I killed him not . 
th' Attempt was noble , though it did not thrive , 
't is well — I do not — the disgrace — outlive . 
[ He dies . 

Antipater to the Queen .  Accept this little Service I have done , 
And let me now proceed as I begun , 
A thousand Storms the Tyrant's brows display , 
Which his Death only , Madam , can allay . 


Queen .  Prince , you were ordered , where you were , to stay . 


Ant.   Your danger , Madam , made me disobey . 


Queen .  How many ills on your Discovery wait ? 


Ant.   By acting his let us prevent our Fate . 
't is Heaven has sent us this propitious time . 


Queen .  I will not own Our Safeties to a Crime . 
His Kindness I command you to implore , 
If this you Disobey , never see me more . 


Ant.   Madam , I 'm All Obedience , you shall see , 
When to obey is but to ruin me . 
[ Antipater Bows to Herod , and lays his Sword at his Feet . 

Herald   Is this a Dream which does my Eyes abuse , 
If they see right , would I had lost their use : 
How is my Reason by my Passions tossed , 
Tell me ; Art thou my Son — or else — his Ghost ? 
[ Enter hastily Solome , Pheroras , Phaltiel , Tamar , Asdrubal , and some of the Guards , All the men with their Swords drawn , who seeing Abner dead , and Antipater alive , stand on a sudden as People astonished . 

Ant.   I am that Son you thought was in his Grave , 
Rescued by Heaven that I your Life might save . 


Herald   Who from my Doom did save thy guilty Head ? 
And who concealed thee now behind her Bed ? 
All thy Dissembling's vain ; — It was — my Wife . 


Ant.   'T was your good Genius to preserve your Life . 


Herald   To find thee here , and to be saved by thee , 
Makes Life a worse Doom than Death could be . 
[ Herod muses awhile . [ The Queen speaks to Tamar privately . 

Queen .  Run , run , seek Samias out and bid him fly , 
Till we have learned the Prince's Destiny . 


Tam.   Permit me first , Madam , to dress your Wound . 


Queen .  't is but a scratch , and 't is already bound . 
[ Tamar goes out . 

Herod .  Never was Man with such misfortune Crossed , 
[ Lifting up his hands . I am preserved to see my Honour Lost. 
Fool that I was to think that Son , that Wife , 
For any other end , would save my Life . 


Ant.   Whoever a doubt of the Queen's Virtue shows , 
Sins worse in that , than he can think she does . 
Is this all the Return to her you give , 
Who made you by her Blood and Kindness live ? 
Can you suspect who did so much for you , 
To her own Fame , and yours , can prove untrue ? 


Queen .  Ah Prince , why do you thus misspend your Breath , 
't is a much milder Fate to suffer Death : 
Than live to see him our bright Virtue's blot , 
Since Merit cannot change him , words will not . 
In his ungrateful guilt still let him lie , 
But let us in our Innocency die . 


Pher.   How can you think , Sir , that your Son and Wife , 
Had they your Honour wronged , would save your Life ? 
And that their Innocence might more be shown , 
They for your Safety did expose their own . 


Solo.   Brother , 't were sit you these great Doubts would clear , 
What brought him hither , who concealed him here ? 
But 't is the Queen must Answer them , not you . 


Queen .  She does despise your Arts and Malice too . 


Solo.   Madam , I wish your Actions may not show , 
That you as much despise your Honour too . 


Ant.   Kill her for what she said , or else kill me , 
For tamely hearing such a Blasphemy . 


Herald   What does my Wife but touch , I find wounds you . 


Ant.   She had been mine , had you not taken my due ; 
Which I 'd Revenge , but that the Queen does tie 
My Arm ; and therefore I but seek to die . 
[ Herod snatches up the Sword which Antipater had laid at his Feet . 

Herald   OH Heavens , what is it that I live to hear ? 
th' affront I merit , if th' affront I bear : 
Thy Death is from my hand too justly due , 
Both for thy old Offences and thy new . 
[ He runs at Antipater , who opens his Arms to receive the thrust , Pheroras seizes on Herod's hand , and at the same time the Queen offers to interpose . 

Pher.   OH hold ; though I condemn what he has done , 
Yet let not , Sir , your Passion kill your Son. 
The Justice of your Laws that Right will do , 
Which all will blame , if 't is imposed by you . 


Herald   Justice and Laws — they 're too Pedantic things , 
To act the vengeance of offended Kings . 
Since thou my hand in paying mine has stayed , 
Guards , let him be to Massada conveyed . 
On your Lives instantly convey him hence , 
Justice , and Laws , in time , may bring him thence . 
[ Pheroras delivers himself up to the Guards . 

Pher.   To Prison , nay to Death , I 'll rather go , 
Than see those Crimes , which here you mean to do . 


Herald   Away with him . 
[ Pher. and some of the Guards go out . [ Ant. knelt , opening his Arms.  

Ant.   Now act what you designed , 
't is in that only , I shall think you kind . 


Herald   Dost thou first wrong me , then outbrave me so ? 
[ Herod runs at Ant. The Queen puts herself between Herod and Antipater . 

Queen .  If you will kill him , you shall kill me too . 


Herald   ha ; will She of her Crimes convince me more ? 


Queen .  Honour does now , what Duty did before . 


Herald   That Fire of Lust which in their Bosoms burns , 
Makes them each others Champion , now , by turns . 
I am convinced of what I did but doubt , 
My Infamy so grossly they make out ; 
That a swift Death my Justice does esteem 
Too great a Mercy , to be showed to them . 
thou , Asdrubal , here with the Queen shalt stay ; 
If she escape , thy Life for it shall pay . 


Phaltiel ;  that traitor 's Son to David's Tower 
With Guards convey , where you are Governor . 
I 'll have him Chained , and in the Dungeon too . 
[ Phaltiel seizes on Ant.  

Phalt.   What you have ordered I 'll exactly do . 


Ant.   't is time to die , when you 'll my Jailor be . 


Phalt. whispers to Antip.   I play this part , to save both you , and me . 


Antip. whispers to Phalt.   no more — admire not , I suspected thee . 
For the Queen's Sufferings have distracted me . 
[ Phalt. leads out Ant. with some of the Guards , when he comes to the door , he turns about , and bowing to the Queen says : 

Ant.   Madam , until we meet in Heaven , Farewell . 
[ The Queen bows to him and weeps . 

Herald   You never shall meet again , unless in Hell. 
ye Sacred Powers above whom I adore , 
[ Lifting up his Eyes and Hands . This only Blessing I from you implore ; 
Teach me on them so well myself to right , 
That to express Revenge in all its height ; 
Men shall , in future times , need but to say , 
That it has been performed , in Herod's way . 
[ They all go out , Asdrubal leading the Queen within the Scenes . 

ACT v.  

The Scene Solome's Apartment . 

Enter Solome and Asdrubal . Solo.   Though you Cossabanes' Subject are , 
Yet I of you have taken the greatest Care , 
And to my Favour only , 't is you owe 
Tho●e high Employments , you are raised to now . 


Asdr.   Nothing with greater Joy I can admit , 
Than owning of the Debt , but paying it . 


Solo.   I 'll try you then — Know Herod does repent , 
That he to Massada Pheroras sent : 
That Brother still has my designs withstood . 
His Puling Vitrue does disgrace our Blood. 
If he return , his Interest such will grow , 
That all my Plots , now ripe , he will overthrow . 
To hinder this is only in your Power , 
For you of Massada are Governor . 


Asdr.   But Madam , if the King sends a Command 
To free him , who those Orders dare withstand ? 


Solo.   Those Orders while I can , I will delay , 
But — In obeying you may disobey . 


Asdr.   I understand you not . 


Solo.   Do you not think 
That a few subtle drops , mixed in his drink , 
May in a Moment send Pheroras where 
He aims to be — and — where I wish he were . 
Such Death as this , would make all Israel say , 
'T was his grief only took his Life away . 
Methinks at this you should not scrupulous be , 
Betwixt Statesmen , 't is a common Courtesy . 


Asdr.   Sins by their Commonness the worse are made . 


Solo.   You , who I need to my Revenge persuade , 
Are too unfit my deep designs to wed , 
But on your Life keep Secret all I said . 
Be gone — 
[ Asdr. offers to go out . 

Asdr.   If I refuse to do the Crime , 
she 'll by some others Poison me and him . 
[ He returns . But on his Death doth your designs depend ? 


Solo.   Without it all my hopes are at an end . 


Asdr.   then , Madam , there 's no duty you shall know 
Greater than that which to your will I owe.  


Solo.   When this deed is performed , every degree 
That I ascend , you shall ascend with me . 
Consider too were but Pheroras gone , 
There is between the Crown , and me , but One 
Who while he life's my Councils still will sway , 
And when he 's dead — But I too much do say . 
— It must be done with Secrecy and speed . 


Asdr.   You may already reckon he is dead . 
[ Herod comes in . 

Solo.   Retire ; for Herod comes to visit me , 
[ Asdr. goes out . What strange Disorders in his looks I see . 


Herald   Ah would my Stars had then my Death designed , 
When I so easily believed her kind . 
By her appearing in my Life's defence , 
I had gone happy , though deluded hence . 
For such a Death , though scarce a worse could be , 
Were better than that Life reserved for me . 
Alas , Herod's Ambition was not Great , 
That would have died content , though by a Cheat. 
OH Solome — 


Solo.   What , Sir , distracts you now . 


Herald   Those Loads I bear , would make even Atlas' bow . 
What I , and all my Court , nay Guards have seen , 
Makes me resolve to kill my Son and Queen : 
But then when I reflect on what was done , 
To save my Life , both by my Queen and Son : 
Which if of my disgrace they guilty were , 
Was what they ought to end , and not to spare : 
When too they might my Death to Abner owe , 
It so distracts me , that I do not know 
Which of the Sins I greater should esteem , 
Or that of kill , or not kill them . 
Some Power , which Justice knows , instruct me now , 
What I am not , or what I am to do . 


Solo.   You wonder why they of your Life took Care , 
But I admire , why the Queen hid him there : 
Her Love to him you once did so much dread , 
As you Decreed , that he should lose his Head. 
Think you by chance he to her Bed did stray , 
Or came he there , but to talk time away ? 
Did he at all in your Defence appear , 
Till Abner's Sword , by Chance , had wounded her : 
But then with Rage he on the Traitor flew , 
Which proves it was to rescue her , not you . 
That he your danger saw , you cannot doubt , 
But till her danger called he stirred not out . 


Herald   I like these Observations well — Proceed , 
My Justice has that traitor 's Death decreed : 
Ah for the Queen would you the like could find , 
't is she alone which now distracts my Mind . 
It was her Kindness sure made her appear 
In my defence . 


Solo.   no , 't was her Interest , Sir. 
She feared that thousands would revenge her Sin , 
If in her Chamber you had murdered been : 
For no one could , though Abner did the Crime , 
He being killed , attribute it to him : 
But had the truth itself been brought to light , 
Her hiding there , that guilty hour of night , 
Him , who for Loving her , to Death you sent , 
Would make all judge she was not Innocent ; 
Which shows her Safety only made her do 
What you but dreamed her Kindness led her too . 


Herald   Speak on — Speak on — 't is Music to my Ears , 
My mist of Doubts thy Conquering Reason clears . 


Solo.   Nor could they scape the Vengeance of their Sin , 
Though by your Death your Son our King had been . 
Since had that Sacred Title awed them all , 
Yet I , on both , would have revenged your Fall. 
Brother — there 's no such despicable thing 
In all the World , as a tame Cuckold King.  
[ Herod starts . Yet your ill Fate in that has all outdone , 
For you alas are made one , by your Son : 
If you can live under that Infamy , 
then Pardon both — if not — than both must die . 
't is but their Crime if they your Honour blot , 
But it is yours , if you Revenge it not . 


Herald   I will no longer then thus trifling stand , 
This Night the Queen shall die — and by my hand : 
Since she has been the Partner of my Bed , 
't is only I that ought to strike her dead . 
OH Heavens forgive my Criminal Debate , 
[ Lifting up his Hands and Eyes . Her Doom is Sealed , past the Reverse of Fate . 
That Traitor Samias from the Court is fled , 
But I 'll at leisure take his guilty head . 


Solo.   Since you are forced your Son and Wife to kill , 
You ought no more of your own Blood to spill . 
Your Pardon for Pheroras , Sir , I crave , 
Grief else , I fear , will send him to his Grave ; 
And when he has been Prisoner one day more , 
Be pleased his freedom to him to restore . 
he 'll tread no more in such a dangerous path . 


Herald   He is too mean an Object for my wrath ; 
And does on whining Virtue set such price , 
As makes it much more troublesome than Vice. 
Let all my Guards in Arms ever Midnight be , 
't is the last hour the Queen shall ever see : 
Those Stains which on my Honour she does lay , 
Shall then , in her own blood , be washed away . 
[ They go out severally . 

The Scene the Tower of David . 

Enter Antip. Phalt. Sam. Pollio , and Hazael . Sam.   Discovering of yourself has ruined all . 


Ant.   Talk not of that which now is past recall . 


Phalt.   What you resolve must be immediately , 
Since Herod doubts not whether you should die ; 
But studies for that Death may be to you 
Most full of pain , and Ignominy too . 


Ant.   The Queen herself to such strict Virtue ties , 
That 't is from thence my greatest troubles rise . 
[ Phaltiel's Page comes in hastily . 

Page to Phal .  A Lady that is Veiled and in a Mask , 
With pressingness to speak with you does ask : 
Her business , Sir , admits not of delay . 


Ant. to Phalt.   See who she is , and hear what she will say . 
[ Phalt. and the Page go out . 

Haz.   Such Labyrinths involve you , that I doubt 
't is only Miracles can bring you out . 


Ant.   So bright and great her Virtues still appear , 
That we may hope for Miracles for her . 
However our Duties let us not decline , 
And trust the Issue to the Powers Divine . 
[ Phaltiel comes in hastily , lending Tamar , who takes off her Mask , and turns up her Veil . 

Tam.   O if to save the Queen be in your Power , 
You ought not to delay it , Sir , one hour . 
From Herod's Palace I in haste am come , 
His Guards begin to seize on every Room : 
And one of them did tell me in a fright , 
That Herod means to kill the Queen this Night ; 
They all hang down their Heads , and sigh and weep , 
And ever she 's dead her Funeral Rites they keep : 
While she ( had she the means ) does scorn to fly , 
And full of Joy , as Innocence , would die . 


Ant.   OH Friends ; hearing what Tamar tells us now , 
Can you refuse to join in this just Vow , 
That whosoever the Queen's Murderer is , 
I 'll lose my Life , or give an end to his : 
We must to Arms , my Friends , the furious Jews 
Will join with us , hearing the fatal news . 
then let us Storm the Court immediately ; 
Thus , we shall save the Queen , or bravely die . 


Poll.   Consider , Sir , the queen 's in Herod's Power , 
This will but hasten on her fatal hour ; 
For if Success should on our side appear , 
You cannot doubt but he will murder her . 


Ant.   He dare not if our Arms Victorious grow . 


Phal .  What wickedness is that he dare not do . 
I thought you better understood the Man , 
he 'll with his ruin ruin All he can . 


Poll.   This way with too much Reason , Sir , I fear , 
you 'll lose yourself instead of saving her . 


Ant.   O Friend , to lose myself if she be lost , 
Is of all Blessings what I covet most . 
If we prevent it not , the Queen must die , 
This way may save her , and this way I 'll try . 
[ Ant. offers to go out . 

Tam.   Stay , Sir ; I call to my Remembrance now , 
What in this strait may be of use to you . 
The Queen now-lies where Alexandra lay , 
Who from that Chamber made a Vaulted way , 
Through which she might pass to the Garden-house : 
She did this when she feared Antigonus . 
Herod himself does not this Passage know , 
Safely that way you to the Queen may go . 
Whence you as safely may convey her too , 
If you can win her to escape with you : 
For at the Garden-house no Guards I saw . 


Phalt.   There , without noise , I may some Soldiers draw : 
That if the Queen you from the Palace get , 
We safely by their help may here retreat . 


Sam.   This , Sir , is the most hopeful way I see . 


Ant.   Samias , it does appear the same to me . 
For by it either I shall rescue her , 
Or else die fight with her Murderer . 


Sam.   Mean while I 'll try the chiefest Jews to win . 


Tam.   O how I fear the Scruples of the Queen . 


Phalt.   Since Herod has resolved the Queen to kill , 
You ought to save her , Sir , against her william 
Once you to do it disobedient grew . 


Ant.   Heaven knows naught else could make me do it now . 
Come , let 's away the time too fast does slide . 


Tam.   follow me , Sir , for I must be your Guide . 
[ They all go out . 

The Scene Herod's Apartment . 

Enter Asdrubal and an Officer of the Guards , as passing over the Stage . Offic.   As through the Streets I passed the news was spread , 
That Prince Pheroras struck with Grief was dead . 
The People did his Death with horror bear . 


Asdr.   I doubt of greater Deaths we soon shall hear . 
Carry that News to Solome from me , 
Let all while I am absent watchful be . 
[ They go out several ways . 

The Scene is the Queen's Chamber , with a small Throne in it . 

The Queen appears asleep on her Bed , Herod comes in with a Taper in one hand , and a drawn Dagger in the other , as soon as he enters , he stops on a sudden . Herald   What horror 's this which does my heart overcome , 
As soon as I but enter in this Room : 
I who in Breaches Stormed have often stood , 
And flaming Cities quenched with human Blood : 
Nay swom to Usurp a Throne through Royal Gore , 
Yet never felt what trembling was before . 
[ He advances towards the Queen's Bed , and when he sees her sleeping says : Can guilt so calmly sleep when Death is near , 
While I , who but Revenge it , shake for fear . 
What art thou Whispers , While she sleeps 't is best , 
To send her Soul to its Eternal Rest ? 
lest her bright Eyes which have such Power to Charm , 
Were they awake , might my fierce hand disarm . 
Whate'er thou art dar'st whisper to me so , 
Be gone — Else — If I can — I 'll kill the too . 
For thou wouldst rob me by such guilty fears , 
Of what in my Revenge most great appears . 
Yes — I will wake her ever I give the blow , 
That She , and I , and the whole World may know ; 
While all her Beauties in full Lustre shone , 
To my wronged Honour , I have Justice done . 
But though this brave Revenge I will enjoy , 
Yet I must sigh , for what I will destroy . 
[ Herod sighs , the Queen wakes . 

Queen .  who 's that who waked me with a sigh ? 


Herald   't is I — 
But 't is to make thee sleep Eternally . 
[ The Queen sits up . 

Queen .  ha , in his hand an unsheathed Dagger too ! 


Herald   Thy guilt does make thee such amazement show . 


Queen .  If an amazement on my Face does seize , 
't is that my Tyrant comes to give me ease : 
Naught from thy bloody hand could welcome be , 
Unless as now , when it brings Death to me . 


Herald   Were 't thou not ripe for what I now will do , 
thou couldst not merit Death , and wish it too : 
But thy dire guilt all others has outdone , 
For thou hast wrong d my Bed , and by my Son.  


Queen .  I wrong thy Bed ! I scorn to undeceive 
Him , who of me dare such vile Crimes believe . 
[ The Queen lies down again . 

Herald   Thus of that scorn I my revenge begin , 
And thus pursue it . 
[ He stabs the Queen twice . 

Queen .  Heaven forgive his Sin. 
O let my Guiltless Blood thy Rage atone , 
And turn thy heart — from murdering — of — thy — Son.  
[ The Queen dies . 

Herald   Unheard of Crime ! She begs with her last Breath , 
That her Adulterer may not suffer Death . 
But he shall die ; and in those Tortures too , 
Which to his Crimes , and her last Prayers are due . 
[ Herod a while gazeth steadfastly on the Queen . Thus Night's dark Veils the Face of Heaven overspread , 
When to th' other World the Sun is fled ; 
no King's Revenge like mine the Glory had , 
To make at once so many Beauties fade . 
[ A door opens under the Theatre , Antip. comes up out of it , muffled up in a Cloak , at first looking towards the Pit.  

Ant.   Sure all the Ominous Screech-owl's , and the Toads , 
Have in this horrid Vault fixed their abodes : 
Under my Feet these croaked at every pace , 
And those were still a fluttring in my Face . 
Through Death's obscurest Regions I have passed , 
But — I am come to Paradise at last . 
[ He looks after down into the Vault . 

Herald   Whose Voice is that ? — A Man — and muffled too , 
And comes to her through ways I never knew . 
I 'll undiscovered learn what brings him here . 
[ Herod conceals himself behind the Scene , puts down the Taper by the Queens Bed.  

Ant. to Tam.   in the Vault . Since I am within Call you should not fear . 


Tam.   Yet , Sir , to your Return a short space give , 
For here , methinks , I 'm buried , while I live . 
[ Antip. advances softly towards the Queen , and flings off his Cloak . 

Ant.   How quietly she sleeps — she does not know , 
How near she is to Herod's guilty blow . 
Yes — I must wake her ; for by time I 'm pressed , 
[ He lists up his Hands and Eyes . Sure I was born still to disturb her Rest. 
Madam , to save you , I from Heaven am sent . 
How sound they sleep , whose Lives are Innocent . 
Madam — 't is Antipater that does speak . 
[ Herod looking out of the Scene . My Son ? How did he from his Prison break ? 
[ Antip. starts up , and going to the Bedside says : 

Ant.   Either my trembling sight abuses me , 
Or else — OH Heavens , why must I live to see 
What more than I million of die dread , 
In Streams of her own Blood , the Queen lies dead ! 
Though fate to lose her Life , this Trick has shown , 
I come not yet too late , to end my own . 
[ He draws his Sword , and offers to kill himself . Yet hold — for while her Murderer does live , 
I must to my own self grant a Reprieve , 
Till I have killed him , though he Herod be ; 
For this dire Crime none durst perform but Herald 
thou injured Ghost , who ought to hover here , 
[ Lifting up his Hands and Eyes . Till I have Sacrificed thy Murderer ; 
Listen to this Irrevocable Vow ; 
My Tyrant Father I 'll to Death pursue . 
Through all his Guards I will a passage make , 
And by the loss of mine , his Life I 'll take . 
[ Herod comes in with his Sword drawn . 

Herald   Traitor , such horrid Gild thou dost commit , 
That none but I to punish it an fit . 


Ant.   To mention horrid Gild dost thou not dread , 
Being within the prospect of that Bed ? 
[ Pointing towards the Queen . Heaven may to thee perhaps some mercy show , 
For offering up thyself , her Victim now . 


Herald   This Hand which on my Wife has Justice done , 
Shall do the like now , on a Rebel Son. 
Yes ; thou shalt feel , that 't is a fatal thing , 
To dare offend thy Father and thy King.  


Ant.   Those Sacred names were Cancelled both by thee , 
That moment thou didst force the Queen from me . 
But were 't thou Mankind's Father , and their King , 
Yet kill thee is but too mean a thing 
To Expiate thy Sin in murdering Herald  


Herald   't is greater Sin , my Vengeance to defer . 
[ Herod runs at Antip. and Antip. at him . They run each other through , Herod falls . 

Herald   't is Chance alone which the whole World does guide , 
Or now Success had waited on my side : 
Nor could I else have thus been strucken dead , 
And by a Traitor which defiled my Bed.  


Ant.   Defiled thy Bed ? — By all that is divine , 
A brighter Virtue never yet did shine , 
Than that with which Heaven thy great Queen did bless . 
To raise thy horror , I this truth confess . 
[ Ant. reels , then falls at the feet of the Queen's Bed.  

Herald   My Joy it raises , for I make thee die , 
And make thee do it , telling of a Lye. 
My Destiny had been tyrannical , 
Had I not ever my Death , beheld thy Fall. 
But now I care not what becomes of me , 
Since with my hand — I have killed — Her — and thee . 
[ Herod dies . [ Tamar rises out of the Vault . 

Tam.   What noise was this , Ha! — the Prince murdered lies , 
— And the Queen too — Weep out yourselves , my Eyes ; 
Though for that Loss the payment is too low . 


Ant.   I amar , raise all the Court , and let them know , 
The Queen has by the Tyrant murdered been , 
And I too meanly did revenge the Sin , 
By only making of the Monster fall : 
then carry these Commands to Asdrubal , 
That he from Massada Pheroras bring , 
And now it is his Right , Proclaim him King.  
[ Tamar runs out crying Murder , Treason , Treason , Murder . 

Ant.   I feel a Coldness like the hand of Death , 
Which by degrees does steal away my Breath : 
Against the wished Assault I will not strive , 
Since all is done for which I 'd wish to live : 
These double Blessings in my Fate I meet , 
To kill her Murderer — then — die , — at — her — Feet . 
[ Ant. dies . [ Asdrubal with several Gentlemen , and the Guards , come running in at one side of the Theatre ; Dina , and some of the Queen's Women , come running in at the other , who all stand amazed , lifting up their Hands and Eyes . 

Asdr.   OH Dismal Night , the dismal'st ever has been . 


Dina.   't is here my grief should first of all begin . 
[ Running to the Queen , and kneeling by her . Ah who can doubt Virtue is Crowned above , 
Since Men to hers did still so Cruel prove . 
[ They all sigh and weep . Enter Solome and Tamar . 

Solo.   there 's none which has such Cause to mourn as I , 
But 't is below true grief to sigh and Cry ; 
And too much Sorrow ought not to be given , 
To what appears is the Decree of Heaven : 
Bear the dead Bodies from the Gazer's sights , 
Till all is ready for the Funeral Rites . 
[ Some of the Gentlemen take up Herod's Body , others Antipater's , and carry them off . [ Tamar , Dina , Merab , and some of the Women , draw the Curtains before the Queens Bed. While this is doing , Solome says to herself . Fortune above my Hopes has smiled on me , 
Where I but begged two Deaths , she gave me three . 
[ Solome takes Asdrubal aside . If to your Promise you have faithful been , 
't is I who an , by right of Blood , your Queen : 
When I , by you , am Seated in the Throne , 
Ask whatsoever you will , and 't is your own . 


Asdr.   Sure , Madam , you must know your Brother's dead , 
The news of it through all the Court is spread . 


Solo.   Why do you not your duty then begin , 
And make all others own me for their Queen ? 


Asdr.   This Throne which the late Queen was used to fill , 
Madam , ascend , you 'll not become it Ill. 
Fair Mariam in it still did sit , 
When Foreign Embassies she did admit . 
Take it as earnest of a greater far , 
And while your Right to these you do declare , 
All the Arabian Guards in Arms I 'll draw , 
The stronger to the weaker gives the Law. 
You must expect a Storm from David's Tower , 
While it remains in the fierce Phaltiel's Power . 
[ He leads Solome to the Throne . While she is going to it , she says : 

Solo.   Fate never did to one a Throne assign , 
Who did ascend it in such griefs as mine . 
[ Asdr. as soon as She is seated bows humbly to her , so do all the rest , Asdr. goes out . 

Solo.   Since the Male Race of all the Royal Line 
Is now extinct , the Crown by Right is mine : 
That I should Reign , Heaven does concerned appear , 
Taking so many Lives , to place me here : 
Owing this Blessing to Celestial aid , 
With Fear and Reverence I must be Obeyed . 
I will with Glory fill great Herod's Room . 
[ Asdrubal introduces Pheroras hastily , attended by all the Guards . 

Pher.   Descend , vile Woman , and receive thy Doom . 
Though in such Sins thou hast consumed thy time , 
As there 's no Judgement equal to thy Crime . 
Solome starting up . Are these the Guards which he went out to call ? 
My Crimes I 'll expiate by a glorious fall . 


Pher.   To thy wronged Lord , to send thee , I design ; 
And if his Justice does agree with mine , 
In wild Arabian Deserts thou shalt be 
Confined , until Death's hand doth set thee free : 
May'st thou a Life of Sorrow there begin , 
And be as great in Penitence as Sin. 
Seize on her , Guards , and let her be by you 
Led to endure what 's lesle than is her due . 
By Poison too , thou didst design my fall , 
But I am saved by Heaven and Asdrubal . 


Solo.   I laugh at all you dare design , or do , 
For though by Men betrayed and Fortune too : 
And though to live in Thrones my Stars deny , 
Yet spite of all I in a Throne will die . 
[ She stabs and kills herself . 

Pher.   Her thirst of human Blood so great was grown , 
Rather than shed no more , she shed her own : 
She never showed Mercy , or did Mercy crave , 
For her birth 's sake , yet , bear her to her Grave . 
Phaltiel and Samias when they see I 'm King , 
I know their Fort they 'll to Obedience bring . 
't is , Sir , but part of what I owe , I pay , 
[ To Asdrubal . Making you Ruler of Samaria . 
[ Asdrubal bows . Though many Precious Lives at once are lost , 
Yet Mariamne's Death afflicts me most : 
Her Beauties , and her Virtues were so great , 
As for her loss , grief cannot pay the Debt . 
A Loss so vast , that Mourning is due 
Not only from the Jews , but Nature too . 
The Curtain falls . 

THE EPILOGUE . 

OUR Poet wishes , as I heard him say , 
That all your Critics would condemn his Play ; 
Since if for him that kindness you will do , 
he 'll leave off Writing , and turn Critic too : 
he 'll find it then a thing of more delight , 
To damn a hundred Plays , than one to write . 
Into your mode he 'll quickly too have got , 
Of finding fault where there is cause or not ; 
Nay be more pleased at all your Plays to hiss , 
Than but to Night to have your Claps at this . 
He knows , as well as you , 't is easier far , 
To be the judge than Prisoner at the Bar.  
he 's yet good-natured , for he never was known 
To hiss at Plays , though worse than are his own : 
Troth , urge him not , for sweetest Wines , you know , 
Ill used , to sharpest Vinegar will grow : 
And there 's no Tyrant's Rage so fiercely burns , 
As a hissed poet 's , when he Critic turns . 
then to this Play let your Applause be shown , 
If not for justice sake , yet for your own . 
FINIS . 

