Sapientia justificata , or , a vindication of the fifth chapter to the Romans : 

And therein of the glory of the divine attributes , and that in the question or case of original sin , against any way of erroneous understanding it , whether old or new . 

More especially an answer to dr. Jeremy Tailor's deus justificatus , 

By John Gaul , minister of great Staughton in the county of Huntingdon . 

London , printed for n. Paris and tho. Dring , and are to be sold at the George in little Britain , and at the George in Fleetstreet , near St. Dunstan's church . 1657.  

Dicitis nos asserendo peccatum original• — deum crimine iniquitatis arguere — nos ergo dicimus , nec iniquus est deus cum peccatis sive originalibus sive propriis digna retribuit , magisque aut iniquus , aut infirmus ostenditur , si jugum grave super filios adam à die ( Sicut scriptum est ) nativitatis eorum , usque in diem sepulturae in matre omnium ; sub quo jugo imago eju atteritur , aut ipse ( Nullo originali vel pro prio precedente peccato ) aut quilibet aliu ipso imponit invito . — deus autem justus s• tanta parvulis mala ( Quanta nunc dicere non sufficio ) nihil peccati trahentibus irrogerat , magis appareret injustus . 

aug• cont. Julian : Pelagian . lib. x.  

To his much honoured and most worthy friend John Baldwin esquire . 

noble Sir , 

How oft , how much in our serious discourses upon more than one of this author's works , have we honoured him for his learning ; affected him for his piety ; admired him for his industry ; applauded him for his eloquence ; and condoling him , pitied his sufferings , among many other godly and learned men his like ? and thereupon it was that we studiously laboured , not so much to reconcile within ourselves many a particular phrase and passage ( Dispersed here and there ) seeming not only to be borrowed from , but as bordering too much upon the expressions , if not opinions of the inorthodox ; but rather to salve them up to others understandings , who began to take more scandal at them , than we ourselves did ; and this we endeavoured in a candid interpretation of his intention , as one who meant only to make use of the adversary's manner of speaking to no other purpose , but to cause ( I say not his , but ) their forms and affectations to speak ( As near as possibly could be ) to the tenor of the orthodox truth and faith in general , and to that of the church of England in more especial . 

But truly , Sir , this little piece of his , which you were lately pleased to send me ; puts me utterly to a loss ; and sets me so quite beyond the seeking for an excuse ; that it forces me altogether to fall upon a dissent . I could heartily have wished , that instead of answering his friends ( Learned friends ) objection , he would rather have sat down by their advice ; for were the thing that he principally aims at , true , yet was it not so necessary to be brought to light , especially not under the notion of a charge or challenge ; for he May well assure himself all the reform divines ( Men orthodox and moderate , both for doctrine and discipline ) cannot chose but take themselves strike at through the Presbyterians sides : and therefore , notwithstanding he entitles it ( deus justificatus ) against them only , yet i am much afraid he will not therein prove homo justificandus , neither in their judgement , nor of many others , and they his friends and fellow workers , and fellow-sufferers too , whether more or less made known unto him . 

And now ( Judicious Sir ) though your own judgement ( Both in divinity , and for other good learning ) be such as come short to few of your quality ; and so well known ( As i need not speak ) to the gentlemen of your country and others ; yet forasmuch as i am your minister , i know you expect my mind ; for therefore i received it at your hand . And verily i shall ( By God's grace ) dissemble it neither with him , nor you ; yet i would have both him and you think , i dare not presume to propound any thing here upon my own mind alone , but as i am enabled to go along with the scriptures and the church of God . Because it is a hard matter in ( Such a hard point as this of original sin ) for a man to go alone , and not to err . Nevertheless i know ( Through the gift of God ) a man May be enabled and enlarged to speak newer and clearer ; but than he must be sure that his ground for the point be old , and good ; for it is a fanaticism for any man to conceit that God concealed such a main principle of his truth from his whole church , till now that he revealed it to himself alone . 

A vindication of the fifth chapter to the Romans . 

First let me begin with his title and his scope , & compare them both together , that so we May see how answerable they are each to other ; for let me tell you , Sir , ( And you shall observe it in all the ridiculous , senseless , fanatical factious , heretical and blasphemous pamphlets of these our evil days ) that fair titles are taken up only to palliate false and foul intents , neither is there any shorter or surer way of refuting an error , than in searching directly how all the intended scribbling agrees little or nothing with the pretended superscription . For let truths be spoken , yet they are not so there , unless they be according to the main purpose to which they are entitled . This author's title or superscription is ( deus justificatus ) now i pray God it prove so the whole work throughout ; for i greatly suspect that the main intention of this discourse will but work to frustrate the title that is given to it , because i perceive his principal scope and conclusion is , to make original sin to be a sin so called by a metonymy only , for he very often denies it to be a sin , properly , really , formally , and inherently , and contends mainly to have it no more but a metonymical imputation to certain purposes , which are very involved words , and are so studiously covert , as if he were afraid or ashamed to speak plainly outright . But this is as much as to say , that where original sin is called sin , it is not so literally and properly , but only is called so ( By a figurative form of locution ) by a metonymy of the cause for the effect , namely , sin put only for the punishment of sin , and the imputation of this sin by God , is no more , but the infliction of the punishment ; and this punishment is with limitation to certain purposes , and those purposes are no further , but to temporal misery and death . Gather all these together , and you shall so come to plain speaking , viz. that original sin is no such thing , but hath only the name or appellation of sin in a translated sense , but directly it is either no sin , or another's , and not ours . And therefore the divine imputation is not of the guilt and corruption to us , but all is an infliction only of the punishment and suffering on us , yet so as that it is confined to a temporal death : if this be not the summary drift , let the whole book speak , but if this make to the title , now give me leave to speak . How invective is this vindicator of the divine attributes against the Sublapsarians , and yet , ( This I 'll say for them ) they do not , they dare not include any under the severe decree of the divine justice , till they have considered all as born under the lapse and guilt , and defection and infection of original sin ; whereas he himself will not have original sin so much as properly so called , neither will he have any to be so considered unde• the lapse as really under the guilt or fault ; yet notwithstanding he will have the divine imputation or decree to descend even upon all , for matter of temporal infliction , now judge whether of these two sentences or executions can more prejudice or impeach the divine attributes of justice , wisdom , goodness , &c. viz. that of God's imputing the whole and utter punishment unto some , together with the real imputation of the sin , or that of God's imputing but part of the punishment , even unto all ; and that without any real imputaon of the sin at all ? Certainly the divine justice is made to labour more under this charge for punishing all ( Though but temporally ) where he takes none to be faulty ; than it can under that for punishing but some ( Although eternally ) where it finds all guilty . Thus forcing at his own aim , and yet , forgetting the mark prefixed , he miserably impingings upon the same rock himself , which he would insimulate others for to dash upon . 

Would he verily and indeed have vindicated the glory of the divine attributes in the question of original sin , he should not have proposed to do it only against the Presbyterian way of understanding it , ( Who had they no more disturbed the wholesome discipline of the church of England , than they have of late directly publicly , and with one consent ) opposed her in her sound doctrine , she had never been thus widowed to such disorder and distress , but Might have sat still a Queen of reform churches , flourishing in her peace and truth : neither will they all yield , that their way of understanding it should ever be pointed out for a way a part , or singular from the church of England , and other reform churches , but he should rather have taken such a kind of vindication in hand against the Pelagian , the Manichaean , the Samosatenean , the Socinian , the Pontifician , the Pighian , the Flaccian , the Arminian , the Supralapsarian ; yea the Judaical , the philosophical , the scholastical , the synergistical , and the Anabaptistical way of understanding it ; all which heretics and sectaries have here ( Would a man go about to make an exact catalogue or computation ) in more than sixteen times sixteen famous ( That is infamous ) questions , opinions , errors , trenched too palpably and grossly upon the glory of the divine attributes indeed . As , be pleased to take here a taste . What but their own way of understanding it caused the Jews to run into some error about original sin ? as that some are born in sin , and others not ; again , that some are wholly so born , and others but in part , else how is it they say , thou wast altogether born in sin ? ioh. 9 34. objecting this scornfully to another in an exemption of and difference to themselves ? and again , that a typical , a legal or an external covenant was sufficient to free them from it , without the truth of Christ , and his gospel of grace , otherwise , why said they within themselves , we have Abraham to our father ? mat. 3. 9 and boasted before others , we be Abraham's seed , we be not born of fornication . ioh. 8. 33 , 41. and why doth Christ ( In convincing them ) bring them to the original of sin ? ye are of your father the devil , and the lusts of your father ye will do , for he was a murderer from the beginning , &c. v. 44. if original sin was not here intended ? What but their way of understanding it induced the heathen philosophers , some to extol nature as a noble mother , and simply virtuous , some to depress her as an obscure stepdame , and absolutely vicious : some to lament at the immerited evils of birth ; some to laugh that it should be thought a man could be born with any vice or crime about him ? for this was part of that which unto the Greeks seemed foolishness , 1 Corinth . 1. 23.  That one should be saved by another man's merits , that one should be just with another man's righteousness , that one should suffer and satisfy for another man's offences , and that one should be accounted wicked for another man's sins ; and in very deed , the Greeks seeking after wisdom , or men curiously philosophising and labouring in the objections and answers of natural reason , hath been the main thing that hath invented and maintained all the opinions and errors about original sin ; neither in truth is this natural reasoning of men any other than every man's own way of understanding it . But let us go on to take further notice of what notorious errors ( Or heresies rather ) that have been not only broached but stiffly maintained thereby ( scilicet ) that original sin , name , and thing , is nothing . That no sin from Adam passes upon men either at their conception , or at their birth , neither so much as imputed to posterity , that Adam's sin hurt none but himself , and that infants are born in the same state Adam was in before his prevarication . That no man is liable to damnation because of Adam's sin . That Adam's sin passes no other way upon his posterity but by example or imitation only : that original sin is not remitted to infants by baptism , because there is no such thing in them ; so the Pelagians , and Coelestians . that sins ( Both original and actual ) were create by an evil principle , that is an evil God . That no sin is caused by free will , but by the evil principle aforesaid , that sin is the very nature and substance of man . That some were so born in sin that Christ could not save them ; so the manichees . that original sin is in no sort to be ascribed unto man , but either to God , or else to the devil ; so the Hermogenians , and Valentinians . that original sin is the least of all sins : that it is in the body , and not in the soul , or that it is in the inferior faculties of the soul only , and not in the superior . That original sin is called sin equivocally , abusively , figuratively , or by a metonymy , either as the cause of sin , or as caused by sin . That after baptism it is no real viciosity , but only a penalty . That the whole , and all of it , is not only not imputed , and remitted , but quite taken away and blotted out by baptism . That concupiscence remaining in the regenerate is no sin . That there is no law against the loss of original righteousness . That notwithstanding the worst of original sin , there will remain in us much both moral , civil , pious , and spiritual good . That it is only a guilt binding over to punishment , but no fault of sin properly defiling , so the pontificians , and especially their scholastics . that it is neither defection , depravation , corruption , nor truly and properly a sin , but only an affliction or punishment descending upon posterity through the guilt of Adam's transgression , like as to be born a slave or a bastard is his shame only , and not his sin . That nothing was born in us , and with us which was not good , and the very work of God . That Adam's disobedience was in no wise ours , neither were we therefore in any wise obnoxious to eternal death ; so the Pighians and the Catharinians . that we become infected by original sin , not by way of generation or propagation , but only by way of imitation and outward occasion . That the death of the body is the sequel of nature , and no punishment for sin whether original or actual ; so the Socinians and Racovians . that original sin is not a vicious accident or adjunct , but is become our very nature , essence , and substance ; the very heart , and flesh , and body , and soul ; so the Flaccians , and substantialists . that a man's mere pure naturals ( Notwithstanding the fall ) are good and perfect . That original sin is but like a little spot upon the skin , or light wound , for all which there remain still in a man his natural capacities , dispositions , powers , and forces to good . That men from their mother's womb , are as fully endowed with liberty and freewill , as Adam was before his fall . that original sin to a man's freewill , is but like garlic to a loadstone , easily wiped off , and so it falls to work as fresh as at the first . That the adamical will , or will from Adam's fall , hath itself not merely passive in the act of conversion ; but is thereunto actively cooperating together with God ; so the Erasmians , the sunergicts , and Arminians . that original sin was but St.  Augustins' dream and puppet . that infants under the new testament are not born in original sin . That there 's no necessity to baptize infants , with respect to any benefit they thus can have against it . That original sin and all other is to be remedied only by revelations and raptures of the spirit , without any use either of word or sacraments ; so the Swenckfeldians , the enthousiasts , Anabaptists , fanatics , and Familists . that original sin is not properly a sin , but a disease , or a condition , or else figurative form of speaking ( viz. by a metonymy ) May be so called ; so zwinglius , and some of the Zwinglians . that God reprobates , God damns men absolutely because it is his will and pleasure , without any respect or condition whether of original or actual sin ; so the Supralapsarians . thus you see , Sir , what a crowd of errors have obtruded only through men's leaning to their own understandings , amongst which , more than once , this author May find his own , which to me ( At first view ) seems so like to diverse of the aforesaid errors , that taken up in strict syllables , i begin to suspect it would not only appear so , but appear so , and much more . But i look not upon him in a likeness to them , but in some unlikeness to the holy scriptures , and the church of England , taking his way of understanding it to be another , both to what the first teaches to understand , and in what the last would be understood . And let him not think i speak this as one that would revile him , but as one that ( According to his understanding ) must dissent from him , using my liberty ( Which i wish May be mutual ) but keeping my charity nevertheless ; my understanding i do faithfully , and in all humility submit to those two witnesses , neither will i oppose him in any thing but what i receive from them ( They that will undertake him in other passages , that fall not directly within this compass , let them do it as they shall find themselves concerned in it , or called to it . ) This i take to be the safest way to begin , and ( If he will keep his own word ) the readiest way to make an end . For taking the 5 chapter to the Romans to be objected against him ; if it be so ( Says he ) i have done , if it be not so ( Say i ) i have nothing to do . Let me be believed both by him and you in this : i have looked again and again upon his paraphrase with a single eye , only to find out truth , and proper truth , if there explained , hoping he will do likewise with this exposition , when it shall come to his sight ; in which ( I make his own words mine ) if i use any violence i can easily be reproved . 

For the scripture . 

rom. 5. 12.  

wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world , and death by sin , and so death passed upon all men , for that all have sinned . 

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , wherefore , therefore , for this cause ] i begin with the search and examination of the letter , for it is the grammatical sifting , that must render the plain construction , and then the rhetorical glossing May come in to adorn with a certain circumlocution ; and therefore a broad paraphrase if it be not unsuitable , yet it is untimely , when it shall presume in place , before a narrower exposition have done its part . for this cause , so i am bold to render it , because i find it mostly so rendered in this epistle to the Romans , chap. 1. 26. and 13. 6. and 15. 9 which very inference serves to show plainly the principal reason or cause why it pleased God to permit the entrance and passage of original sin , viz. for this cause , even for the reconciliation and atonements sake immediately before spoken of , verse : 10. and 11.  Therefore God suffered this sin to enter into the world , the enmity , or heinous aversion , the wrath or dreadful desert of original sin can never be more truly and fully considered and measured than in and by Christ's death and satisfaction , which who so contends to lessen either for fault or gild , such endeavours to extenuate the virtue and merits of Christ's reconciling and atoning . God's great end in the fall was to manifest and magnify the infinite perfection of his own son ; who then would not labour earnestly , that wisdom Might principally , be justified in the point ? Doth not God herein commend his love towards us , vers. 8.  How then can we imagine there should be the least prejudice upon the divine attributes in such an ordination or permission , upon such a motive or intention ? But was this inferential motive heedlessly escaped or not rather purposely pretermitted to usurp a more uncontrolled licence in the wanton dalliances of words , that i May not call them petulancies of profanation ? it is no reputation to a physician to say he hath cured us of an evil which we never had , and shall we accuse the father of mercies to have wounded us for no other reason , but that his son May have the honour to have cured us ? I understand not that ; he that makes a necessity that he May find a remedy , is like , &c.  The sufficiency and excellency of our saviour ( In this case ) is a thing that both he and we all are bound to understand and seriously believe , and not only that , but God's ordination and dispensation to such an end , as the manifestation of his honour and glory : but why such playing with a thing so sacred ? As here 's nothing to provoke his spleen to indignation , from an horrible decree of absolute necessitating and damning ; so neither can i see any thing that should move it to laughter or levity ; the apostle himself defines what affection it is that should hence be raised , we joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ , ver. 11. and well we May , since the sufferance or entrance of sin is here referred to the gracious purpose of reconciling , atoning , and saving . is this the way of vindicating the glory of the divine attributes , to make no more but a light jest at Christ's honour in this kind ? still i say wisdom is justified of all her children , luk. 7. 34 , 39 this he himself spoke when men imputed to him a carnal dispensation with our actual sins ; and so much May we say when any man will deprive him of that honour is due unto him from his spiritual dispensation in our originals . Neither let him say to us , that the honour of our blessed saviour does no way depend upon our imaginations , and weak propositions , we will say so too , and peradventure Might say so more justly against him ; only we let him know right inferences are no imaginations , neither are strong deductions weak propositions . And if what i have drawn hence be not directly from the text , let him but be pleased to take the illative along with him , and then infer what he can otherwise , or to the contrary . I confess i would not in any wise have this illation thought redundant , for that were to make the scripture either impure and corrupt , or or else idle and superfluous ; yet should i not have excepted at all , if any ( Following my Siriack transletion ) had omitted it upon this consideration ; that it is a hard matter ( Especially in a comparison betwixt Adam and Christ ) to define a cause , or give a reason for original sins entrance into the world , or descent upon posterity . But then this should be observed withal , if such a thing be hardly rendered , it should not be rashly enquired into , because our inquisitiveness ( In this case ) tends more to the dishonour , than all our resolution can to the honour of the divine attributes . 

as by one man ] whom we May ( Not amiss ) understand in an unity of name , order , person , nature , sex , action , and type . 1.  Of name , Adam , which appellation comprehends also both the person , the sex , and the kind . 2.  Of order , sc. the first man Adam . 1 cor. 15. 45. and so the very Hebraism , or graecism ( Of the Cardinal for the ordinal ) would give it if need were . 3.  Of person , sc. in the individual , in number singularly and precisely taken , and so original sin properly derived from the prime , and not from the proximate parents , or according to their pluralities , 4.  Of sex , the male and not the female , who though she was first in the transgression , yet some will have him to be solely understood in this propagation . But , for my part , i confess i can see no cause for such an exception , but that they May be understood one flesh , one in the image , one in the prevarication , and so one in the propagation . 5.  Of nature , as one not only in individuo but in specie , one comprehending and representing the whole root and stock and seed and generation , and nature and condition of mankind , so Adam is taken for the whole species of men , and the beast singularly for the whole species of beasts . 6.  Of act , namely , one in the disobedience or offence . for it was not the simple or mere nature that was the means of such a derivation , but the offending and disobedient nature , by which ( Causally and instrumentally ) this privation and depravatiou , this stain and guilt descended upon all ; yea not only the offence of one , but one offence ; for it was his first act that was imputed to us , and none of the rest . 7.  Of type , for Adam is here said to be the figure or type of Christ , under this notion ( of one ) as much as in any thing else , he whole comparison throughout . 

sin ] no great matter how many and various soever be the acceptions of sin in the scriptures , since in this place it is defined by the apostle to be sin in the singular , and not said plurally sins , as if he would precisely determine it of that one root of sin , distinct from those many following fruits . Yea , it May be thus rendered the sin , very emphatically , and is understood by almost all ( From ancient to modern ) for no other but original sin simply so accepted , as the only sin which came by one man singularly , and entered into all the world universally , whereas actual sins are by many men , neither enter they into all the world in general , but rather into these and those particulars therein ; yea it is sin simply , absolutely , properly , formally : for ( As himself grants ) this sin had its beginning by the disobedience of Adam , and disobedience is a transgression of a law , and that 's the very formality of sin ; and that law was the law of the image , or of perfect nature . Now see Sir i beseech you ! what is here ( But in the least show ) whereby to collect this sin to be metonymically so called ? or what kind of metonymy would he have it ? is it a metonymy of the cause put for the effect ? So it seems he would have it , because it is the effect of one sin : surely that one sin was a proper and real cause ; how strange is it then , that it should beget an effect like to it in no thing , but in a tropical or tralatitious , an equivocal and abusive name ? if by the cause for the effect be meant sin but for the punishment , how contrary is that to St.  Paul's express words . sin entered into the world , and death by sin , so far is he from confounding them , that in most express manner he distinguishes between them , both in name and signification ; for should his words be made to signify thus , death , ( That is the punishment ) entered by sin ( That is the punishment ) death the punishment of the punishment , i beseech you what sense were this ? yet we grant ( Though it is not so to be argued from the word in this place ) original sin is both a sin and a punishment too : a sin , from the human injustice perverting , a punishment , from the divine justice deserting : or will he have it a metonymy of the effect put for the cause ? for so his other words intimate , because it is the cause of many sins , and those many sins , ( Without doubt ) he means properly so called ; then seems it so much the more strange , and almost prodigious , that so many real effects should proceed from a poorly equivocal and transnominated cause . rhetoricians observe that such kind of metonymies are usual in external causes and effects only : that an internal cause then should be put for an external effect must needs be most unusual . 

entered into the world . ] We May understand this entrance of sin in divers senses , and that very orthodoxally . 1.  Sin was not in the beginning : for it had no being before the entering , and therefore was no eternal evil principle , but only the issue of some inordinate and irregular act. 2.  it entered not as a creature or substance that had some existence in itself , but as a vicious accident that could not subsist without a subject , in which it must inhere : and therefore though it entered into our nature and substance , yet our nature and substance it was not . 3.  it entered not of itself , but by means , by one man , by a second cause . Therefore ( Himself grants ) sin had its beginning , and thence let the fault and guilt be fetched causally , what need is there to seek further than the beginning ? why then is there such prying into the first cause ? such disputing , such labouring to entitle hereunto his decreeing , his ordaining , and permitting , disposing , dispensing , &c.  For so indeed the most we do is bus to disparage and dishonour him in his glorious titles and attribute . It is enough for us to believe him to be just , wise , good , &c. in all things , because he cannot possibly be otherwise , although in some dispensations it is not possible for us to comprehend him . 4 : if entered into , lo ! the apostle speaks plainly of an ingression , not as of an accession of a thing inward , and not outward only , doubtless than it must needs be something inherent and not imputed only . 5.  it entered into the world {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} it came into , even the reduplicated preposition is a note of more intimate and peculiar manner of introduction , namely by way of generation and propagation , not by temptation nor by imitation ; not by temptation , for so it came from the devil to Eve ; not by imitation , for so it came from Eve to Adam ; but by propagation , for so it came from Adam to us all . had it been otherwise than so , sin could not ( In any adaptness or propriety ) have been said to have entered into the world ; but the world must then have caused it , and called it , and sought it , and brought it , and taught it to itself . 

and death by sin ] that is to say , by the same sin which came into the world by one man , namely the original : so than death it is , that cannot be denied : but now men must be judges , and take upon them to determine what kind of death , albeit the apostle speak it never so indefinitely . he must mean temporal death , says he ; well and thus he May infer it , because St. Paul speaks of such a death as entered into this world , and that 's but temporal : but than he ought to observe withal , that St. Paul speaks here , not only of death's first entrance , but of deaths through passage ; now such a passage is out of the world , and beyond it , and so must be eternal . But he objects , eternal death did not pass upon all men . that 's easy to be answered from some of his own words . The sentence did , though the execution did not ; in the one was the divine justice to be magnified , and his mercy in the other . Thus the divine attributes know how to save , and to exalt themselves on either side : if men would not seek to make them seem to clash , by humbling those high things to their low and weak apprehensions . 

and so death passed upon all men ] sc. death entered by sin ; and so ( By sin ) death passed : so that ( Whether we consider the terminus a quo , or ad quem ) we May directly hence collect , that death ( Even the corporal as well as the eternal ) was not the sequel or necessity of nature , but even the penalty and wages of sin , because death is a separation quite contrary to the natural union , especially to that of nature in her integrity and original perfection . But say that ( Because of a composition , and that of contrary elements ) there Might be nevertheless some kind of mutation , migration , melioration ; yet this was far from separation , dissolution , confusion , and that dolorous and ignominious , execrable and damnable . This makes me i cannot so well brook or digest those passages of his . his sin left him to his nature , — we returned to the state of mere nature — of our prime creation — thrust back to the form of nature — was remanded to his mortal natural state , — means he to a corrupt state of nature ? that was not the former , or from the prime creation ; or means he by the form of nature that of nature's first forming ? why that was after the divine image and similitude ; or means he by mere nature those they call pure naturals ? which indeed are nothing , because nature cannot be so abstractly considered , but either in the state of integrity , or in the state of corruption , a third state ( Before , between , of after those two ) never was , and therefore is not to be imagined . Ever since the fall , and original sin we aptly conceive that there is a difference still to be made betwixt the substance of nature , and the corruption of nature : but that this nature and this corruption was ever separated in any ( Christ only excepted ) we believe not , or that there shall be a state of pure naturals again till the resurrection of the dead . We all know and believe Adam by his disobedience defected and fell from what he was before , sc. from the image and original righteousness , but that by his sin he fell into a nature or state which he had before , or without original righteousness , that we understand not , not yet of any remanding , obtruding or returning thither . Indeed we read , God said , dust thou art , and to dust thou shalt return , gen. 3. 19 but that noted only some materials in part , but no certain state , neither had that dust returned to the dust , but that the image and righteousness was forfeited and lost . For we see it was so not by a natural propensity , so much as by a provoked commination . Besides this , methinks he says something to oppose himself in this part , when he says , our nature is of God's making , and consequently is good , — or nature is almost the same , &c. — what good ? and yet punished ? nay and we remanded to it for a punishment ? What almost the same in goodness ? and yet nothing the same in immortality and the blessing ? Thus here again God's justice is brought upon the stage ; nay and upon the rack too , especially by our scanning betwixt the two terms of death entering by one man , and death passing upon all men . — for we cry , why the punishment , and how , of all , for one , & so forth ? Mean while it is not considered by us ( Nay not believed ) how we were all in the lump & loins of that one , which remains hereafter to be demonstrated , only thus much is now to be said , that while the divine attributes are pretended for , saved harmless by us , either we ourselves do it , or else give occasion for others to quarrel at them . 

for that all have sinned ] this clause thus translated was greedily snatched at of old , to extenuate and excuse the severity of death's universal passing ; and not only so , but to alter and divert the cause and guilt , from the original sin to the actual . For this cause the ancients did either reject this translation , or did not so well accept it : but i am to speak of this our paraphrast , whose words ( By reason of this translation ) are imposing on the apostle , if he means eternal death , he must not mean that it came for Adam's sin , but in as much as all men have sinned , that is , upon all those upon whom eternal death did come , it came because they also have sinned ; and again in passing on us , for that all have sinned , that is , the sin was reckoned to all , not to make them guilty like Adam , but Adam's sin pased upon all imprinting this real calamity on us all ; but yet death descended also upon Adam's posterity for their own sins , for since all did sin all should die . his ( also ) once and again seems to admit of original sin for her share in this reckoning ; but his ( in asmuch ) quite thrusts it out , & brings in actual sin in its stead ; actual sin i say is obtruded and original sin excluded ; at least for propriety , for guilt , for imputation , for likeness , for equality : yet i shall not therefore reject this translation , because i see our church hath accepted it , and shall hope to make it stand good in this sense , for that all have sinned , that is , sinned originally although not actually , sinned naturally in Adam's sin , although as yet not personally , or in their own , and am confident he is not ignorant i can find abettors for this exposition amongst the reform and orthodox expositors far before him : but , Sir , if you will be pleased to look upon the margin ( Which i suppose he winked at ) know it is pointed at by our church as a note of equal indifferency and authority , and there you find in whom all have sinned , this speaks plainly of sinning not actually in ourselves , but originally in Adam ; and this translation is every whit as much , and rather more congruous to the original text : for my part i rather embrace this latter translation , with most translators or interpreters old or late . And with them conceive it to be the safer , as not giving such way to the errors of the Pelagians old or new : nay i hold it to be the sounder , and more consonant to the very letter ; for why should ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) be translated so flatly in the neuter gender , when 't is found so emphatically in the masculine ? being it May with so close and so apt concotd be referred to the one man spoken of before ; for construe it in the masculine , and the relative fairly agrees with the proximate and eminent antecedent ; but take it in the neuter , and then the relative is without any antecedent at all , or else must be turned into some obscurer and less significant part of speech . Erasmus ( Who labours like a critic to draw it this other way ) would not allow of St.  Augustine's referring it to sin ; because of the different gender , though he confesses it to be the same in sense to say , in which man , or in which sin . As for Erasmus , ( Whom all have occasion to honour , from the cradle to the crown of learning ) him this author recommends to us more precisely to be reckoned amongst the greatest and the best expositors of scripture that any age since the apostles , and their immediate successors hath brought forth ; ( As for the learned Grotius , whom he reckons with him , i only say thus much ; as he was a most eminent adversary to the Socinian , so he was sometimes a not approved advocate of the Arminian , both which are reproved for their opinions about original sin ) but on God's name let him add all he can to Erasmus , yet i would not have him detract any thing from St. Augustin ( Which thing was sometime charged upon Erasmus himself ) both are to be mentioned with honour as the worthies of their ages . and therefore all he hath said ( Had it been more ) should have past for me without exception , had he spoken it at another time , and upon another place : for upon on this place ( He cannot but know ) that Erasmus hath not only been suspected but taxed ( Even by learned men of his own time and religion ) for more than i now think fit to express : only as to the clause , nay and whole verse in hand Erasmus is much contending for a tropology ( And peradventure hence it was that he hinted his metonymy ) but for all his rhetoric he turns grammarian , and plays the critic betwixt , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} and will hardly be persuaded of {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} for {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} in the dative case , yet at length acknowledges , because the use of Greek prepositions are so various , i dare not affirm that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} is nowhere joined with a dative case , where one thing is declared to be in another , like as the tree is in the seed . a most apt similitude to illustrate our being in Adam , and our sinning in him too . Were it not for this his confession , places of such construction were easy to be produced , but i spare them , as likewise his propter unum , his pervasit , his quatenus peccavimus , which also Might be of a facile connivance , were it not in case of dangerous consequence and contention ; besides my task is to pursue , not his but this author's paraphrase . 

verse 13.  

for until the law sin was in the world , but sin is not imputed where there is no law . 

for until the law sin was in the world ] that is , from the beginning , of the world , all that time which went before , until that very period wherein the law was externally promulgated : sin was nevertheless ( Even all that while ) in the world : for the apostle so speaks now , with intent to occur to a certain objection , ( An objection not so much of men's marvel or scruple , but rather of their petulancy and cavillation ) an objection that indeed hath been always but too much inculcated by the adversaries of original sin : thus , where there is no law , there is no transgression : but there is no law given against original sin . ergo . this is it which the apostle here prevents , by saying . sin was in the world during all that space of time which went before the giving or promulging of the law of Moses , notwithstanding it was not a sin without a law , but so it was by virtue of the law of nature ; the rule of original righteousness , the dictates of right reason , the eternal moral law ; the law written in men's hearts , before it was written in tables of stone : for original sin was not so much forbidden , convinced , condemned by the promulgated law that followed it , and was directed chiefly to persons and actions : as by the internal law of the image which went before it , with a perpetual obligation of integrity to the whole nature ; of such a law speaks the apostle in this epistle , when the gentiles which have not the law do by nature the things contained in the law , these having not the law , are a law unto themselves , which show the work of the law written in their hearts , their conscience also bearing witness , and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another . rom. 2. 14 , 15.  And this certainly was law sufficient both to convince men of this sin , and condemn them for it . Say the law of nature be greatly obscured , and the conscience thereupon blinded ; yet for all that it is usually making this argument , upon any pecrancy : something now is which ought not to be , and therefore by consequence , something is not which ought to be , and thus by the exorbitances grows conscious of the defects , and this collection is enough for conviction of the want of natural goodness , and that is a divine apprehension of the loss of original righteousness , wherefore then speaks he thus ? nature alone gives rules , but does not bind to penalties ; — if by nature alone he means fallen , corrupted nature , now in her defections , she gives neither rules , nor binds to penalties ; but only lies bound both to rules and to penalties . But to speak of nature in her integrity and perfection , she doth them both directly , for she were not perfect without a rule , neither were her rule perfect without a penalty upon the violation of it ; his other words ( In my judgement ) as they are little to the apostles meaning , so they are less to common truth , death ( He says ) d•d presently descend upon all mankind even before a law was given them , with an appendent penalty , viz. with the express intermination of death ; was not that law expressed enough ? in that day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die . gen. 2. 17 , I need not ask him whether this law did concern the man alone ? for he confesses it did presently descend upon all mankind ; but what ? death without a law ? and a law without a penalty ? He that contended so before to vindicate God's attributes in regard of a sentence without execution , how will he extricate himself from impinging thereupon , in talking thus of an execution without a sentence ? certainly the divine attributes are much more out of question , in pronouncing utterly upon all , and yet sparing some , than in executing upon all ( Although but in the least degree ) having not yet denounced against any . As for his next words , let him look well to what he says , it is impossible they should pass even moderate men without a censure , or some scanning at the least ; with him , ( That is with Adam ) God being angry ( Was he provoked against the person only , and not against the whole nature ) was pleased to curse ( Was not that pleasure in a manner absolute , that had no more but an improper respect to curse all for the sin of one ? ) to curse him also in his posterity ( Nay was it not rather to curse his posterity in him ? for he but little felt his curse in them , but they were long to feel their curse in him ? ) and leave them also in their mere natural condition ( Was this natural condition any kind of state before the fall ? then could it not be cursed or miserable ; was it that after the fall ? then was it not mere or pure natural , but altogether depraved and corrupted ) but God was pleased to leave them : ( So then God's great and easily justifiable action , was the good pleasure of his desertion , wisely , justly to leave them destitute of the forfeited image , and to let them alone to themselves in that corrupt condition to which they betrayed : ) but he says more , to which yet they disposed themselves . to what ? to their mere natural condition , to which God cursed them , in which he left them . But how disposed themselves hereunto ? I hope he will not say 't was any personal disposition of ours , for that goes far beyond all that hath been said of our natural inclination ; but if he intend it only of our actual and following sins , they did not dispose us to our fallen estate , and corrupt natural condition ; but only confirm us in it ; what can be spoken more against order than that following actions should dispose to a foregoing condition ? we use to say , the first person corrupted our nature ; but in all else it is the nature that corrupts the persons ; personal sins are no whit disposing to the nature , but aggravating to the person only : original sin , though it do not act alike in all , yet it is but one and alike in all , be the personal actions more or less . He concludes , yet for the anger which God had against mankind he left that death which he threatened to Adam expressly by implication to fall upon his posterity . now i demand but this , was the anger of God with Adam , and against mankind , the same ? well than it had the same provocation : nay , but he will have this last to be upon our own evil commissions and deserts ; then i must demand again why was that death the same ? is it righteous that should be the same penalty , and not the same provocation ? But he left it to fall by implication , that 's an implicated word , and May imply error , as well as truth : if he implies our original defection , that 's a truth ; but if our actual commissions only , that 's the error : but i will take ( By implication ) as he here contradistinguishes it to expressively threatened , and so it draws near , nay comes home to the truth of my text : that before Moses law sin was in the world , even original sin , and the sin of the first parent , and that by a law of its own , which law though it was expressively threatened but to Adam only , yet by implication ( Of sin and corruption in the whole nature ) the punishment ( Through that implying law ) justly fell upon the whole posterity . 

but sin is not imputed where there is no law . ] In these words St.  Paul's intention is not so much to prove the being of sin , from the being of a law ; but rather the being of a law , from the being of a sin : and therefore he thus argues , sin was in the world before the promulgation of Moses law : but that could not be unless there was a law to convince it so to be . ergo a law there was . And again sin is not imputed when there is no law ; but it was imputed . ergo there was a law . And this is the more certain and infallible way of arguing , because the being of a law does not necessarily , and always argue the being of a sin , but the being of a sin does necessarily and always argue the being of a law ; for a law May be a law , though no sin be yet committed : but a sin is no sin till the law be imposed ; now the law was always , as being the eternal law , and eternally existing in the divine mind , yea , and more or less imprinted in the minds and consciences of men from the beginning . The law therefore being before the sin , there was no time of the world after sin , wherein sin was not imputed . But much ado is here made by the means of distinguishing or diversifying questions , viz. whether this imputing of sin be by God , or by men ? whether it be of original sin , or of actual ? whether it be by the eternal and natural , or by the written and published law ; whether it be of the fault and corruption , or of the guilt and punishment , whether it be to penalty temporal or eternal ? whether this imputation be of our own sins or another's ? Whether this imputation be distinguished or divided from inherence ? Thus we trouble ourselves and one another , and the truth betwixt us with many a fallacy of division ; whereas much error were to be avoided by taking both together in a conjoined sense , and the truth were easily determined in all those questions , or in most part of any of the questions ; by accepting both parts indifferently , even the one as well as the other . As to speak only to this author's words or divided propositions : the apostle ( He saith ) speaketh here of sin imputed ; therefore not of sin inherent . not so by his leave , for the apostle speaks not here of any distinction at all , betwixt imputed and inherent sin ; but of sin indefinitely and universally , and that imputed only by a law ; now the law properly imputes sin , be it never so properly inherent , as in actual sins , though they be inherent ; yet the law properly does but impute them : so in original sin , the law does impute it , yet so as it is inherent . So that in one or other the sin is nevertheless inherent for being imputed ; nor imputed for being inherent : and if imputed to such purposes as he here speaks of , viz. to temporal death : then it is neither a sin properly , nor yet imputable so eternal ; so far as is or can be employed by the apostles words . yes , yes , the contrary to all his in every purpose is not only employed , but apparent from the apostles words . For the apostle speaks of death indefinitely ( Without any limitation to these or those purposes ) and that 's an universal implying all kinds of death : besides death here by Adam must so be taken as proportionably extending to the-life by Christ ; otherwise wrong is done to the whole comparison , and consequently to all our saviour's attributes ; now the life we are here said to gain by the excellency of Christ , is not only a corporal life , opposite to a temporal death , but a justification of life , opposite to a spiritual death , and a reigning in life , opposite to an eternal death : whensoever another man's sin is imputed to his relative , therefore , because it is another's , and imputed , it can go no further , but to effect certain evils to afflict the relative , but to punish the cause , not formally to denominate the descendant or relative to be a sinner ; so he saith again , to which thus much is to be said ; that what perhaps May be congruously spoken betwixt one particular man and another , is very inconsutile to be said betwixt Adam and all mankind . Betwixt man and man , we know the descendants of traitors and vassals , in relation to their progenitors offences , are punished , though they were not formally the offenders : and therefore such words May say something , in respect of proximate parents , and of relatives yet living , upon whom their condition May reflect , and to whom their example May be useful ; but in relation betwixt the prime parent and us his descendants , they say nothing at all ; for he was not punished for our sins , but we for his ; neither was he punished in our punishment , but we in his ; neither was his simply another man's sin , but ours also ; neither was it imputed only , but inherent also ; neither were we relatives only , but accessories only ; neither were we descendants only , but participants ( All this is to be understood of the common nature , union , and representation ) and therefore here was enough to denominate us formally to be sinners . But i cannot but wonder at such a restrictive largeness in the saying , another man's sin imputed , therefore because it is another's and imputed . for the sin or the crime to be imputed , therefore because it is imputed , and for the evil or punishment to be inflicted for another man's sin therefore , because it is another's ; this is horrid to think of even in men , what is it then to urge in such a case as this , where it cannot but reflect even upon God himself ? But ( About this imputation ) he yet urges , nor reason , nor scriptures , nor religion does enforce , and no divine attribute does permit that we should say that God did so impute Adam's sin to his posterity , that he did really esteem them to be guilty of Adam's sin , equally culpable , equally hateful : though this latter part be said but by few ; yet this scripture in hand enforces us to say , that God did really esteem them to be guilty of Adam's sin [ in whom all have sinned ] that is , really sinned , and by whose disobedience they were made sinners , sc. really so made ; if he did so only impute , as not really and verily esteem guilty ; what kind of imputation ( I pray ) was that ? imaginative , opinionative , suspicious , pretensive , presumptive conjectural , fantastical , equivocal , abusive , or , ( As are his own words ) figurative , metonymical , collateral , indirect ? this we are sure no reason , no scripture , no religion , no divine attribute will permit to say so ; but because he will have us say equally culpable , equally hateful , &c. we will say it in the most convenient sense , we May be equally culpable in our common nature , equally hateful in our natural sin , the same malice of our nature , the same action of our nature , as much guilty as he , according to that universal nature wherein he comprised and represented us all ; and so much , he is not unknowing all religions ( Primitive and latter , Protestant and Papists ) have said , not without reason and scripture , nor is any attribute of God to be objected there against . But to suppose that we have sinned ( Take us truly as in our nature , union , mass , root , stock , &c. ) less than he , or that God imputed this sin less to us than to him ; this ( Say we ) is but supposition , and that is far from probation ; and therefore we would fain learn that analogy of faith , those words of scripture , that proportion , and notice of the divine attributes , that would enforce us to suppose so much . But i return to the apostles supposition , who here supposes that there was no time of the world since the first man's fall , wherein there was not a law , and sin and the imputation : how is it then that he says of mankind ? they did do actions unnatural and vile enough , but yet these sins were not yet so imputed — were they indeed unnatural and vile , and yet not so imputed ? upon what ground then does he censure them for such ? that cannot be but a calumnious aspersion , that prae-occupates the law , and precedes the divine imputation ; let him say how were they unnatural ? but because done against the law of nature ; and why vile enough ? but because that pure and perfect law was sufficient so to convince them : original sin could never have been called so , but that there was a law of original righteousness , that went before it ; how then can actual sins be said to forego a law ? for they did do actions , personal , actual sins , even these done , and yet not imputed ? Oh , what an imputation were this to the eternal law , the law of nature , of right reason , and true conscience ? But will this salve it to say , they were not yet so imputed ? that will not do it ; if he so means that nothing was imputed from the first upon their original account , to the eternal and internal ; but afterwards , upon the external publication of the law of Moses , these things were imputed to them upon their personal account ; nor will that do it , if he pretends these things were not imputed even unto death : for it is out of question , that Moses law ( As to the morality of it ) added no new virtue , goodness , truth , obligation , imputation or penalty , which was not in force before from the eternal and internal law of God and nature , of which Moses law was no more but the external publication ; but to speak of actual sins being in men , and yet not imputed by God , and of original sin deputed to deadly punishment , and yet not imputed by a law , i say , to speak to such purposes , is such an imputation to the divine attributes , as i need not now to say . 

verse 14.  

nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression , who is the figure of him that is to come . 

nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses ] but for all that the law of Moses was not yet given or promulgated to a peculiar persons ; death notwithstanding reigned throughout the whole world : for all that time ( Comprehensively and inclusively ) from Adam his fall , his deprivation of the image , and depravation of nature ; till Moses his publication of the law written in tables of stone ; and so during that whole economy or dispensation , even until Christ and the gospel of his grace ; by whom alone all that believe are justified from all things ( Both sin and death ) from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses . and therefore till then ( Terminally and exclusively ) death reigned , and sin likewise ; because the dominion and tyranny of these two always go together ; now after the duration , the main thing remarkable is the domination or deaths reigning , which cannot exactly be , but as she is understood in her whole law and power , and in their full latitude or extent ; sc. in the forcible denunciation , and infliction of death temporal , spiritual , and eternael ; for where she is so restrained as to go no farther than the corporal only , so far is she then from any thing like to reigning , that she is now , as it were , swallowed up in victory ; but take her in her utmost tyranny , and she reigned from Adam to Moses , that is , for original , as well as for actual sin : for consider her subjects , and her power and authority was , 

even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression , that is over infants , whose reason and discretion , will , and affections , had not yet made them ripe enough for action and imitation ; and therefore they had not sinned actually , or in their own persons , but originally , or in their first parents joyous . Adam's similitude , likeness , or image , in which he begat his posterity ( gen. 5. 3.  ) was that of original sin , because it was contradistinct to that image , likeness , or similitude in which God had made him , ( gen. 1 , 26 , 27. ) which was that of original righteousness . and to sin after the similitude of Adam's transgression , is , to imitate him , follow him , make him our example , and ourselves altogether like him ; and therefore not to have sinned after that similitude , is , not to have done so . Now then to construe it ( With this author ) of sinning not so grievously , or of sinning less than he did , is to make it come little near to , nay , make it fall very much short of sinning after the similitude of his transgression , or according to the proportion of his prevarication ; to sin less , is , not to sin according to the aequallity : but a man May sin less by much , and yet sin after the similitude nevertheless : he that ere this started this very notion ( non peccaverunt ad illius similitudinem ; hoc est non tam capitaliter — non perinde graviter peccaverunt arque ille ) applies it rather ( As others besides him do ) to the gentiles than to the patriarchs , ( And indeed in such a construction , the gentiles should sin less than the patriarchs , as not having the law , or the like means they had ) but if the same man had been taken up , or followed in his other suggestion ( regnavit mors in simitudine ) the reigning of death had so been made as vain a semblance , and as light a shadow , as some would make that of original sin . But they who suggest that this sinning after the similitude , is neither to be understood of sinning after an internal principle ; nor yet after an external example ; but only upon and after the direct expression , and express direction of a precept ; these ( Ere they are a ware ) do take from the actual and add to the original ; while they thus exempt all before the written law , as likewise all heathens , to this day , from sinning after Adam's similitude , or rather do thus deny to most men sin both original and actual ; but though we May make Adam a sin similitude to ourselves in matters past ; yet it hath pleased God to propose him , as a comfortable type for the future . 

who is the figure of him that was to come ] behold ! here 's a typical promise , sufficient to satisfy all querulous complaining , and to prevent all quarrelous charging God foolishly , in calling any of his articles to question in the case , since Adam , who received God's similitude , not for himself alone , but for all his posterity after him , had now forfeited the same both for himself and them all , and had now begotten them in his own similitude of prevarication and defection ; and in that very similitude they were now found , and so left ; left ( And that justly ) to the tyranny of sin and death , yea even those , who had not as yet ( According to all actual circumstances ) sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression ; nevertheless they were yet in the estate of natural corruption , and by that nature , worthily born children of wrath ; but what if they had already sinned after that similitude , and had now made him their example to sin , and to die by ? yet hath God ( Of his good pleasure ) made him the type or figure of Christ , intimating that they who are elected by him , and believe in him , shall not die by the one , in whom they sinned ; but shall live by the other , in whom they believed ; for as the first man Adam , was the head and principle of nature to us , and after that of sin , so is this second man Adam ( Christ the Lord ) the principle and head of grace to us ; and after that of glory . Behold then ( Each one ) the goodness and severity of God ; on them which fell severity ; but towards thee goodness if thou continue in his goodness : and thus indeed are the divine attributes to be magnified by us on either part . 

verse 15.  

but not as the offence so also is the free gift : for if through the offence of one many be dead , much more the grace of God , and the gift by grace , which is by one man Jesus Christ , hath abounded unto many . 

but not as the offence so also is the free gift ] the comparison is now not interrupted , but pursued with a correction ; for he confesses that in the analogy there lies a great deal of disparity . There May be a {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , or some resemblance between the persons ; as each of them being the first , the author , the head , the root , the foundation , the representative of his kind but there is a {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , an utter difference of the things ; as betwixt sin and grace , death and life : and therefore though there May be comparing of the persons , with an infinite preferring on the one part ; yet there can be no conferring of the things , but with an utter differing , both for account , and effect ; because there May be some typical proportion betwixt Adam and Christ , with the due honour reserved to the great reconciler ; but betwixt the offence of one , and the free gift of the other , remains an utter disproportion , never to be reconciled : for the one both is from , and is the image of the earthly , the other is from , and is the image of the heavenly ; the one is naturally transmitted , the other supernaturally conferred ; the one from freewill , the other from free grace ; the one tending to death , but the other to everlasting life . 

for if through the offence of one many be dead , &c. ] In this part of the collation , this is one main instance of prelation from the disparity of power and effect , as if he had thus said , suppose the worst that followed original sin , that innate offence ; yet forasmuch as the remedy propounded so far exceeded the propagated malady , what cause is here to complain or challenge any of the divine attributes ? since wisdom herein manifests and magnifies herself so excellently , so exceedingly , ( Both for substance and measure ) why should not her children herein seek to justify her herein above all ? what if it was through the offence of one , aught that to offend ? were we not one nature , one species of men , both he and we ? In the participation of that species , all men were to be reckoned as one man , the sundry persons of men being to that one man , but as the several members are to the same body : moreover this May be enough to satisfy all minds , and stop all mouths ; the grace of God , and the gift of grace , ( Both his liberal favour , and our competent measure ) is also by one man Jesus Christ : and why then should we set ourselves to wrangle so , with God , with ourselves , and one another , because of the justice and severity which descends to us but duly from the one in one way ; and not rather rest ourselves contented , and greatly rejoice , for the grace and mercy that most freely and superabundantly proceeds towards us from that one man Jesus Christ another way ? Oh! what peevish things we are ! to vex ourselves in thinking , how we were made subject to the punishment on the one hand ; when we Might sweetly satisfy ourselves , in believing how we are made capable of the exceeding recompense of reward on the other . And grant again by the first one , and through his one way many be dead , understand it withal emphatically spoken {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; the many , that is all ; for it is not many comparatively , but absolutely ; not so spoken as to except some , but to intimate all ; all ( I say ) collectively , and inclusively , and not so sparingly or seemingly ( As he speaks ) even as it were all , Enoch also ( Contrary to his mind ) not excepted : how much less those few more , of whom peradventure mention is not made ? The first is a fond conceit , but the next a vainer crotchet : for take many ( As he would ) in the restrained way , and dead , but for corporally so ; yet even Enoch was among that many , & so is dead ; for it is not his peculiar and abstruse way of dying that can hinder to say truly he is dead ; for heb. 11. 7. though he was translated by an extraordinary power , that he should not see death , after the common way ; yet for the verity and reality of death , it was said of him together with the rest ; these all died , vers. 13.  But taking it ( According to the apostle ) in the largest sense . I must say more , all are dead , namely , though not effectually , yet virtually ; though not naturally , yet deservedly ; according to a just sentence , though not according to the fearful execution ; but notwithstanding all this , and all that can be said of the offences worst , and death's utmost ; how would it appease our consciences , and comfort our spirits ( Even in all wherein the divine majesty has been pleased to reveal , either himself , or ourselves to us ) to conceive rightly , and heartily consider the grace of God , which is to be understood his good will and pleasure , free goodness , everlasting love , exceeding favour , with all his beloved sons merits , and holy spirits efficacies , and the gift by grace , sc. our measures of sanctification , with the duties required , the comforts promised , and the benefits received ? And all this by one man Jesus Christ , sc. by his life and actions ; by his death and passion ; by his merits and mediation alone . To whom we had no natural , or necessary relation ( As we had unto the other ) but as he was made man , and so freely and graciously gave himself to us , and for us . And thus the grace of God hath much more abounded in pardoning all kinds and measures of sin , and in preventing the same , as concerning punishment : but the free gift hath abounded also , we being made both more holy and more happy in Christ than in Adam , we were made corrupt , and miserable , yea and this abounded unto many , that is all again , and that in sufficiency , though not in effect , else the excess here spoken of should fall short ; inasmuch as sin and death passed upon all . 

verse 16.  

and not as it was by one that sinned , so is the gift ; for the judgement was by one to condemnation , but the free gift is of many offences unto justification . 

and not as it was by one that sinned , so is the gift ] it is partly a repetition of the first words in the former verse ; only there was the disparity and excess betwixt the sin and the grace ; here betwixt the gift , and the person sinning : there it was said to be more plentifully abounding , here more powerfully effecting ; there by what authors , here to what ends ; there the free gift was opposed to the sin , but here to the judgement . 

for the judgement was by one to condemnation ] by the judgement we understand not only the decree on God's part , but also the desert on our own ; in as much as the word in scripture notes both the act and the power of judgement , as likewise the cause and thing judged : and if we did but truly consider this , than durst we not be so bold in questioning the divine attributes , in regard we are taught to apprehend it as a thing not only of his severity , but of our own impiety also : so by condemnation we understand both the sentence and execution ; the threatening against , as well as the inflicting on ; likewise we take the ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) in the neuter ; as we do the ( {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) in the masculine ; yea and from the diverse preposition , we note some distinction , namely of the matter and subject , as well as of the cause and instrument : and thereupon we do not confound them ( As he doth ) by one man sinning one sin ; but somewhat more distinctly , by one sinning , or that sinned , we understand the act with relation to Adam's person ; but by the one sin we understand the thing itself with relation to our whole nature , even original sin itself , to note that one sin ( Original sin ) in us , is under the same judgement unto condemnation , as was that one sinning in Adam ; and that in the very act of his sinning , we sinned ( As he seems to grant ) ve•y much : and moreover to that , sinned ( Which he grants not ) as bad as he & that not only because of the likeness of nature , and of sin ( As he says ) but because of the very identity and sameness thereof , in the main substance , though not according to every circumstance ; for we descendants from Adam , were perfectly like him in nature , his own real , natural production , and so we sinned , as himself says well ; and now if he himself thinks there is so great a parity of reason that the evil ( He means this judgement unto condemnation ) should descend upon us ; then in all reason he ought to yield not only a likeness , but also a parity of sin . Yet whereas he says , the evil was threatened to Adam , and not to his children : then was it not judgement unto condemnation , for judgement implies the sentence and commination , as condemnation does the execution , or effect . But what ? not threatened , and yet descending ? will the Lord strike before he warns ? I say no more , but ( For God's sake ) what kind of vindication call you that ? to urge the evil or punishment so oft , and admit so little of the fault or sin , is ( I think verily ) the wrong way to a vindication of the divine attributes . 

but the free gift is , of many offences unto justification ] to prevent all our murmuring and censuring , that judgement should be to condemnation by one man or person , the apostle bids us construe him rightly , and says he means it by one sin or offence ; for we shall never think God's ways equal in this case , till we can look upon it with a right eye , not only as the sin of one man , and so the sin of another ; but as one sin of all men , and so our own : but the sin of one , and one sin , if this satisfy not ; yet this makes amends for all abundantly ; that the free gift is of many offeuces unto justification . for mark how it answers to every opposite , the free gift to the offence , many to one , and justification to condemnation . the first shows how benignly , the next , how bountifully , the last how beneficially the recompense is vouchsafed ; as it is the free gift to the offence ; so it signs grace in us not to be natural , as the sin is . As it is many to one ; so it betokens a liberal condonation of many actuals , as well as that one original . As it is justification against condemnation ; so it signifies a making holy as well as happy , against both the sin and the punishment . Since than what God in Christ hath here done , is to justify ; let God in Christ be justified by all , and in all . 

verse 14.  

for if by one man's offence death reigned by one , much more they who receive abundance of grace , and of the gift of righteousness , shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ . 

for if by one man's offence death reigned by one ] it is of no small note , that a mutual construction is here to be made of one man's offence , and one offence : the diverse reading shows a coincidence ; and however the repetition seems as the note upon their narrow conjunction ; nothing has done more prejudice to the truth of this point , and to the divine attributes , as they are therein concerned , than a dividing , separating , or over-severe and too nice distinguishing between the one man , and the one offence ; for though the natural corruption May be distinguished from the personal act ; according to some circumstances , yet in substance they are to be considered as one , and the same , because it was ( For the main substance ) the same sin that Adam committed , that entered into the world by him ; and well Might the same sin pass from the whole , or head , into all the parts , & members ; though not in the particular act , yet in the universal guilt ; so that in his very sin we Might ( Not amiss ) be said to sin originally , although not actually . The apostle more than once expressly intimates it to be translated indifferently , either the sin and offence of one man , or one sin and offence . we should do well therefore to accept it so equally , as he hath been pleased to express it : but we look askew upon it , in the personal act only ; as that one man's sin , and no more ; and so we ascribe and impute all to him most presumptuously ; and seek in like manner to shake it off from ourselves . Strange it is ! we dare not deny that God imputes it to us ; and yet we dare be bold to impute it solely to him . For so the paraphrast seems to do : the sin of Adam alone , whereas ( In truth ) we ought humbly to conceive , and consider it as one sin , both in him , and us ; one sin in our nature , one sin in our kind : and so coming to be but one sin even in the persons of us all . They that go the first way , are quite out of the way to vindicate the divine attributes ; for how is it possible to make it another's sin alone , and not our own in any proper respect , and yet not give occasion to murmurers and repiners at the imputation , to any purpose whatsoever . Whereas if instead of imposing it altogether upon another , we would be convinced and content to take what is our own , unto ourselves , that heavy yoke which is upon the sons of Adam , from the day that they go out of their mother's womb , till the day that they return to the mother of all things , would not be so grievous , or so unequal to their apprehensions ; but they would soon be convinced to lay their hands upon their mouths ; yea would be content to say every man for himself , this is my yoke ( The image of the earthy ) and i will bear it ; i will bear the indignation of the Lord , because i have sinned against him ; which is never to be brought to pass if we once go about to unyoke ourselves of the sin : but whether we will do so or no , God will be true when all men are found liars ; his ways will be proved equal , when our ways are reproved for unequal ; and wisdom will be justified and cleared , when she is judged , though no flesh living can be justified in her sight . The very punishment and infliction from God , is sufficient to argue the sin and guilt in us : for death reigned by one , not only by one man , in the masculine ( As he spoke immediately before ) but by one in the neuter , one sin ; for death could never so have reigned by the one man , had it not been by the one sin : yet see how he would labour to bring the original punishment on our heads , that will not admit us to bring the original sin so much as upon our shoulders : for so he supposes it : if the sin of Adam alone could bring death upon the world , who by imitation of his transgression , on the stock of their own natural choice did sin , against God , though not after the similitude of Adam's transgression . how says he ? no sin but in imitation ? no punishment but for imitation ? he knows full well whose exploded heresy that was , and therefore shall do very well to renounce both name and thing at once . But how agree his own words to themselves ? sinning by imitation , and yet not after the similitude of Adam's transgression ? ( Which cannot genuinely , no nor conveniently be interpreted but of sinning actually , and by imitation ; yea let it be understood of sinning less than he did , yet so it is by imitation . ) Again , sinning on the stock of their own natural choice , and yet , not sinning after the similitude of Adam's transgression ? Why how sinned Adam but out of the stock of his own natural choice ? And how sinned we in him , but out of the stock of his natural choice ? for indeed he was our natural stock , and we were the branches thereof : and it was he that received the whole stock of nature's choice , liberty , free will , and consent for himself , and likewise for us all ; and out of this stock of natural choice and liberty it was , that we sinned not only by him , but in him , and with him ; wherefore i heartily wish him to be wary how he exempts sinning after the similitude of Adam's transgression , and sinning on the stock of our own natural choice , each from other , lest he imp•ir that stock , and overthrow that rock of liberty , and free will , which ( Against both Supralapsarians , and Sublapsarians ) he laboured ere while so earnestly to establish , and so prove to strike upon them , and himself , and the divine attributes , all at once . But ( To remedy all this ) here it is not only by one man , who had his personal choice , but by one sin , wherein was our natural choice ; and therefore let us go on to see what the apostle infers , and prefers in such a case . 

— how much more they which receive abundance of grace , and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one Josus Christ ] sc. though death reigned much both by one man , and by one sin ; yet by one Christ they shall reign much more . But than they must be duly qualified , for it is they which receive , and that argues no capacity , no ability in them , notwithstanding the blemish of orginal sin , for thereby they were under death's reign , which was spiritual and not corporal only ; and held under the power , and utter slavery of sin as well as death ; rather it convinces them of their privation and impotence , as not having but as they receive ; Yet notwithstanding such emptiness and unaptness , being prepared and embled by Christ's abundance , they must receive ( That is rightly apply ) grace , sc. the grace of justification by faith , and likewise the gift of righteousness , sc. the sanctification of the spirit to holy walking : and both these they shall have , both in their kinds and measures , sc. abundance , namely , for sufficiency , but not to supererogation : and so they shall reign in life ; sc. from vassals under sin and death , become freemen , nay Kings in life , both of grace and glory . And all this not of themselves , nor for any worthiness of their own , but by the sole merits and mediation of one Jesus Christ , who is God all-sufficient , and besides whom there is no saviour . all these excellencies of remedy put together , serve but to set forth the destituteness and desperateness of the disease . 

verse 18.  

therefore , as by the offence of one judgement came upon all men , to condemnation ; even so by the righteousness , of one , the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life . 

therefore as by the offence of one man judgement came upon all men , &c. ] This 18 verse , by the illative , seems ( To me ) rather to refer to the 16 verse than to any of the rest , and May thence more expressly and peculiarly be supplied . Howbeit the comparison was there with more precise respect to the things ; hu• here to the persons . therefore then ( The illative is a reduplicate , and concludes so much the stronger ) as by the offence of one man , or by one offence ( Whether the primordial act of his person , or the original stain of our nature ) judgement ( Of the divine decree , so wise , so just ) came upon all men ( All common men , and born after the ordinary way of nature , not the blessed virgin , none but Christ himself excepted ) unto condemnation ( At least from his sentence , and according to our desert ) even so by the righteousness ( Of his person , natures , offices ) the free gift ( Of grace and salvation ; came upon all men ( Sufficiently , yea , and effectually too upon all the faithful , for he is the saviour of all men , especially of those that believe ) unto justification of life , sc. that life which only the justified , or which by justification only , all men attain unto . And here i have only those words of his to except against : the proportion and comparison lies in the main emanation of death , from one , and life from the other . that certainly it does not , if we look at the comparison no further than as it lies in the present verse ; for here the main proportion and comparison is betwixt the offence of one and the righteousness of one , both here and throughout the whole comparison sin and grace , the offence and the free-gift , these are the main opposites ; as being the principal causes : the other two death and life are but secondarily set opposite , as being but the consequents or effects : and this i note that Christ's excellency Might appear much more in remedying the cause , than in removing the effect only . 

verse 19  

for as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners : so by the obedience of one , shall many be made righteous . 

for as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners ] here concludes the comparison betwixt Adam and Christ ; and he says well , this is the sum of all ; for 't is the principal scope of the holy ghost , to prefer Christ making righteous , to Adam making sinners . And therefore he saith yet better , we are made much more righteous by Christ , than we were sinners by Adam ; and yet best of all , the graces we derive from Christ shall be more and mightier than the corruption and declination by Adom ; because the excess and excellency of Christ appeareth much more in taking away the sin and corruption , than in a delivering from the misery and mortality of original sin ; and therefore the apostle ( In this case and comparison ) concludes it for his greatest glory in making sinners righteous ; above that of making the miserable happy , or bringing those that were subject to death , to reign in life , saying thus , as the sum of all , as by one man's disobedience ( Adam's prime and personal act , with all the affections and circumstances ) many , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} the many ( That is all ; for none that ordinarily proceeded out of his loins are to be excepted ) were made sinners ( From and in that very act , not only imputed and accounted , but constituted , and really so effected ) and so the very word is used both by St. Paul in this place , and by St. Peter , 2 pet. 1. 8. and by St. James , iam. 4. 4. to signify the very being of the thing , and not the bare reckoning only : and we May take his own construction of the word , put into the order of sinners ; but than we understand it of the human and natural order , as by generation and propagation , and the like , but not of the divine and eternal order , as made such by God's appointment . it stranges me still , that he who even now was so vehemently invective against both Supralapsarians , and Sublapsarians , upon the account of the horrible and necessitating decree , in this case of original sin , as reproving their supposition , if it be by the decree of God by his choice and constitution , that it should be so , &c. — and again , — if God May ordain men to hell for Adam's sin , which is derived to them by God's only constitution , &c. — and now for all that that himself is here , saying , many were constituted or put into the order of sinners ; they were made such by God's appointment ; to speak altogether so like them : is this the way ( I pray you ) to vindicate the divine attributes against them ? nor will such an exception salve it at all , to say , not that God could be the author of a sin to any ; but that he appointed the evil , which is the consequent of sin to be upon their heads who descended from the sinner : for though sin and the sinner May be put for the punishment and the punished in some other places of scripture , yet can neither be so understood or accepted in this to the Romans ; because the sin and the punishment both are here noted again and again in their proper , plain , and distinct expressions and comparisons . Neither is there truth ( Much less safety to the divine attributes ) to speak in such a sense , as , that God appointed ( By his decree ) the evil ( Of punishment and misery ) which is the consequent of sin , ( Another's , and not their own ) to be upon their heads ( Outwardly and temporally , though the pravity was never in their hearts ) who descended from the sinner ( And yet descended not sinners themselves ) for thus ( Though he labours not to speak out ) a man of any strict observation , or narrow search , must needs accept him , and the rather , because of former passages to this purpose not a few ; besides what necessity is there to wrap in here the divine constituting ( Either for sin or suffering ) where the human constituting is so evident , so sufficient ? It is but asking by whom or by what were many made sinners ? and the answer is here already made to our hands , by one man's disobedience , to bid us satisfy all our curiosity in that ; and to seek no further for a constituting cause ; nor indeed will the whole analogy endure it ; for the total comparison is not betwixt God and Christ , but betwixt Christ and Adam ; neither is all this excess , or excellence of state ( Wherein Christ constituted us , above that wherein Adam destituted us ) spoken with any respect to God ; but in a direct and complete respect to Adam only . 

so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous ] by the obedience ( Both active and passive ) of one ( Lord Jesus Christ , who alone is sufficient to satisfy for all sins original and actual ) shall many , even all the elect , all that believe ) be made righteous , made ( As himself says well ) and constituted righteous : and we hope he means really righteous ( By the spirits imparting as well as Christ's imputing ) else where were all this contrariety of the comparison ? For what excess or excellency were it , to make a thing really righteous , if it was not really sinful and corrupt before ? and righteous , that is , not only happy , but holy withal ; and therefore the sinners must needs be understood , not only as miserable and afflicted , but as declined and corrupted ; and so signifying , we join with him ( As we have already approved him ) in what he says to the end of the paraphrase ; nevertheless we May not do so as touching the consequents or antecedents thereof ; therefore . 

1.  As to the antecedents . 

His position which he intimates in opposition to the objection is , that to deny original sin to be a sin properly , and inherently , is not expressly against the words of St. Paul in the 5 chapter to the Romans . and for this he hath these sayings ; ( For as for reasons , he hath more reason than to call them so ) 1.  He supposes , the words are capable of interpretation , otherwise than is vulgarly pretended . now i suppose that the interpretation of the primitive churches , councils , fathers , Papists , Protestant's , Lutherans , Calvinists , ( And the most learned and moderate of them ) is of other account with him , than either as vulgar , or as pretended . Yea a reason ( Or the mayor of it ) is propounded by him . for any interpretation that does violence to right reason , to religion , to holiness of life , and the divine attributes of God , is therefore to be rejected , and another chosen . true ! but than it remains on his part to be proved , that such an interpretation ( As is contrary to his understandiug ) does so in all , or in some one of them at least : and withal , that an interpretation of his own understanding be not such in all or any one of them . 2.  sin in the scripture is taken for the punishment ; what then ? it is not so here , nor in more than hundred of places besides . For as life and death go all along the antithesis throughout for the express reward and punishment , so do sin and righteousness , the offence and the free gift distinctly , as the vile anomy or obliquity ; or as the holy virtue or efficacy . 3.  The word condemnation is by the apnstle himself limited to signify temporal death ; no such matter by his favour , for most certain it is condemnation is here opposed by him , to the justification of life ; and that signifies life , both spiritual and eternal ; and to take away the extent on either part , is rather to make the apostle limit the excess on the best part . he must mean temporal death , for eternal death did not pass upon all men . yes , that it did even pass upon all men , from the just sentence ; though ( As he knows who said ) it did not invade all men , to an uttermost execution . and if he means eternal death , he must not mean that it came from Adam's sin , but in as much as all have sinned , &c. well corrected of himself , but ill restrained by him . Yea , indeed but he must ; and very well he May ; not only , in as much as , but in whom all have sinned : even originally , in his loins ; although not actually in themselves . If all have sinned in him , an eternal death is little enough : but if not , even a temporal death is too much . 4.  the apostle here speaks of sin imputed , therefore not of sin inherent ; why not one as well as the other ? imputed and inherent , though they May be of some diverse consideration , yet are they not of such contrariety , that they May consist together , and that in every kind of sin . As actual sin is inherent , and yet nevertheless is imputed ; so original sin May be imputed , and yet inherent nevertheless ; will the imputation , which is in respect of a law , take away the inhesion of the fact or crime , which is with respect to the person ? Neither doth the apostle speak here directly of sin imputed but of sin not imputed . and he knows that hath been construed by many , for man's not so reputing it , ( Through want of knowledge , or conscience of a law ) although it was never so much inherent . 5.  the apostle says , by the disobedience of one man many were made sinnere : so that it appears , that in this we have no sin of our own ; neither is it at all our own formally & inherently . whatsoever the appearance May be to us ; yet this is of no consequence from the words : because Adam is here often called one , and one man ; not so much to distinguish , or to divide him from us ; but to compare and parallel him with Christ : and though it be called one man's disobedience , in regard of the individual , and circumstantial act ; yet in regard of the specifical act of the common nature , the common union , comprehension , representation , it was indeed all our act . for so all have sinned and are made sinners , sc. inherently . The formality of sin ( Whether original or actual ) is anomy and obliquity to the law of God , and so it is imputed ; but with all it is ataxy and deformity of our nature , and so it is inherent ; neither was Adam's sin efficiently his persons only , but his natures also , and so it was ours . And for original sin Adam's person was but the external efficient ; but the internal efficient was that law of corrupted nature , whereby a corrupt thing deserted , did beget a corrupt thing like itself , so that , that which is born of flesh , is flesh : but for him to make it effectively ours as to some purposes of imputation . alas ! this is to bring God into the business ; whose wisdom and justice ( No doubt ) was efficient to some sad effects of punishment ; but then to say , that it could not be a sin in us formally : and notwithstanding the divine justice both imputing and effecting such fearful purposes , as the dreadful and direful effects of Adam's and our original sin , oh , divine attributes ! what 's now become of your vinditation ? i have heard of deputation to punishment , but not of imputation without the crime or fault . And if it be so that the sin run in no sense be properly ours ; how stands this with the divine justice , that the punishment should be ours in any sense whatsoever ? since even we ourselves ( Such is our natural and human justice ) kill or destroy not poisonous serpents , noisome vermin , savage beasts , ravenous birds ; or pestilent weeds ; but for some natural vitiosity , seminally , innately , hereditarily , intrinsically , inherently , formally and properly in them . 6.  To his sixth saying i have spoken before particularly , and say now moreover in sum , that it is not our punishment that can redound to Adam , but the guilt of his sin rather that redounds upon us . That in actual , external , and particular sins , it May be just to afflict the relatives ; not only to punish the cause , but ( For terrors sake ) to prevent the example ; but in this original , internal , natural , and universal sin , it cannot be for terror or prevention to any ; since all are guilty , all are punished : that in our relation to Adam , we are not only descendants from him in our persons , but participants with him in our natures , and so May be formally denominated sinners as well as he : and if there be no more contradiction in it , than for every man to say thus , if i am formally by him a sinner , than i did really do his action : that May be easily said , and not so easy to be contradicted . For what hinders but that a man May say , nay , that he ought to say ; i did really do his action , though not in the personal and external circumstance , yet in the natural and internal substance of doing , i did really do his action in his loins , and as a member of of the whole body of nature ; now if the member of a man's body May formally be denominated sinful from the sin of the whole man : why then May not every man be so denominated here , being an included member of the whole body of mankind ? 7.  He says , there is nothing in the design or purpose of the apostle , that can or aught to enforce any other thing , than what ? than that we sinned less than Adam , and therefore sinned not in him , and that God imputed this sin less to us , than to him . i confess i can see no such purpose in the apostle , and doubtless his design ( Throughout the whole contraposition ) is not to lessen our sin to Adam's ; but to lessen both Adam's sin , and the sin of us all , to Christ's righteousness ; yea and to lessen the death which both he and we deserved , to the life that Christ had merited for us ; and so indeed , to heighten his acts and attributes in all . But thus he argues , if we have sinned less , than we did not sin in him . to which it May be thus answered , the hand sins less than the mind , did it not therefore sin in the body ? but we see no reason why we should not still say ; we sinned in him ( Naturally though not personally ) and as much as he , neither do we look that our sin in him , should by him be lessened to us , but by Christ only , both to him , and to us all . 

2.  Now for the consequents of this paraphrase . 

the consequent of this discourse ( He says ) must needs be this at least . if it be consequent to his discourse so : but it stands us in hand to examine , whether it be consequent to the apostles words : but since he will needs impose them on us as consequences , he will not be angry if i take them up as inconsequences : for whether so or so , i refer them , Sir , both to yours , and every able and indifferent man's judgement ( Conseq. ) that it is impossible that the greatest part of mankind , should be left in the eterternal bonds of hell by Adam . inconsequ . nothing is impossible with God , nothing is impossible that is justly done , and past ; we say , not only the greatest part , but the whole race of mankind was so left ; and yet all that aggravates it not to an impossibility . For why should it be thought an impossibility , that all by Adam should be left in the eternal bonds of hell ; since all in Adam had a possibility to be brought to the eternal throne of heaven ? ( conseq. ) for then quite contrary to the discourse of the apostle , there had been abundance of sin , but a scarcity of grace ; and the excess had been on the part of Adam , not on the part of Christ . ( Inconseq . ) The abundance , or excess , which the apostle here contends for , is not with respect to numbers or to multitudes of persons , on either part , but in regard to grace abounding sin , and life excelling death , and Christ's merits infinitely exceeding both Adam's and our own deserts . ( Conseq. ) so that the Presbyterian way is perfectly condemned by this discourse of the apostle . ( Inconseq . ) Though he tell them never so often , yet they will hardly believe him on his own word , till he can convince them from the apostles words perfectly and indeed . ( Conseq. ) nay , and yet more particularly convince them , when their way of understanding in this point , is singular from the church of England , or other reform churches suffrage ; the other m•re gentle way , which affirms that we were sentenced in Adam to eternal death , though the execution is taken off by Christ , is also no way countenanced by any thing in this chapter ; ( Inconseq . ) No ? these words ( death passed , death reigned , the judgement was to condemnation ) these ( I say ) countenance and confirm the sentence . Again ( the free gift came to justification of life , they shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ ) these countenance and confirm the taking off the execution ; were it not thus both for the sentence and for the execution , where then were all those excesses on Christ's part ? what excess were it to make those righteous , that were not made sinners before ? what excess were it to justify those to eternal life ; that were never condemned to eternal death ? let him look to it , either Christ must be preferred in these acts and excesses , or else his attributes are but impaired . ( Conseq. ) that the judgement which came from Adam's sin , unto the condemnation of the world , was nothing but temporal death , is here affirmed . ( In conseq . so far is it from being affirmed that upon right deduction , it is more than once denied . For it was death entering by sin , and that was something more than temporal death ; it was death reigning , and that was something more than death temporal ; it was death opposed to the justification of life , and that must be something more than temporal death ; it was death opposed to reigning in life , and therefore must needs be more than temporal death . ( Conseq. ) it is in no sense imaginable , that the death which here St. Paul says passed upon all men , and which reigned from Adam to Moses , should be eternal death . ( inconseq . ) will he allow no man a sensible imagination , besides his own understanding ? or rather a sensible understanding besides his own imagination ? death passed upon all men , that is eternal death passed upon all men , according to the justice of the sentence , and their due desert , there 's one sense . That death which reigned from Adam to Moses , was eternal death ; for if you take the time of deaths reigning to be betwixt them two , terminally and exclusively , than was it not so much as a temporal death passing upon all men ; but death reigns not but from an eternal law , and in and to eternity . there 's another sense , yea death reigned from Adam to Moses , and so onward until Christ , and would have reigned eternally over all men , had not Christ taken it off . there 's another sense . ( conseq. ) the apostle speaks of that death which was threatened to Adam . ( inconseq . ) rather of the death which was threatened to the world in Adam , but take it as directed to Adam's person , dying thou shalt die , gen. 2. 17.  The sacred idiom serves to note the continuity , as well as the certainty of death : and that was an intimation of the eternity . ( Conseq. ) the apostle means such a death which was afterwards threatened in Moses law . ( Inconseq . ) well , but who takes a temporal death only ? nay , who takes not an eternal death chiefly to be threatened upon the breach of the moral law ? ( Conseq. ) and such a death which fell even upon the most righteous of Adam's posterity . ( Inconseq . ) True it fell upon them in part , not that the other part was not due unto them , but that it was taken off by Christ . ( Conseq. ) upon the most righteous of Adam's posterity , who did not sin after the similitude of Adam's transgression . ( Inconseq . ) Such righteous ones of all his posterity were never yet known . Abel , Seth , and Methusalem were certainly none such ; for they and their like ( Even all the holy patriarchs ) were sinners , as well by imitation , as by propagation ; and sinned as well actually as originally . To say that those holy men sin not after the similitude of Adam's transgression , in that they sinned less , alas ! that 's but poor ; for so even wicked men are said , not to sin after the similitude of one another . ( Conseq. ) because in proportion to the evil , so was the imputation of the sin , it follows , that Adam's sin is ours metonimycally and improperly . ( Inconseq . ) here 's nothing at all which follows aright : for even the first part of his argument is preposterous : by evil he intends punishment , and then the consequence is quite contrary , because the sin was not imputed in proportion to the punishment ; but indeed the punishment was deputed in proportion to the sin . And therefore it must follow ( By reason of contraries ) that Adam's sin was not tropically and tralatitiously , but even literally and properly ours . But consider what he says in effect ; that God did measure the sin according to the punishment . Now good Lord ! how can the divine attributes stand safe to such a saying ? for what justice is that , that regulates or proportions the sin by the punishment , and not the punishment by the sin ? In the imputation of God or men , who makes the sin to follow the punishment , and not rather the punishment to follow the sin ? But say his rule stood upon some right foot ; yet how follows his argument from it ? The sin was imputed in proportion to the punishment ; but the punishment was proper and real , not figurative and equivocal ; and therefore so must the sin be too : else who can tell what 's become of all this proportion ? ( Conseq. ) God was not finally angry with us , nor had so much as any designs of eternal displeasure upon that account . ( Inconseq . ) The way to vindicate God's attributes , is , not to pry into them too curiously ; nor to determine upon them too peremptorily : nor to aggravate them too severely , nor to extenuate them too indulgently , but to believe them and justify them , and magnify them , so as they are revealed . God indeed was not finally angry with us ( His elect ) neither upon our original , nor upon our actual account : and why ? because his wrath was so appeased by Christ , satisfaction . But was he not therefore so at the sin simply and absolutely considered ? if he had no design of eternal displeasure , upon that account , than he sent Christ to die in vain . For Christ died to prevent , not the temporal , but the eternal death ; nor was that to redeem us from the mortality and condition of our nature ( For he suffered it himself , and left us to follow him in a conformity ) but from the depravation and damnation of it . ( Conseq. ) this anger went no further than the evils of this life ; and therefore the imputation was not of a proper guilt ; for that Might justly have past beyond our grave , if the same had past beyond a metonymy or a juridical external imputation . ( Inconseq . ) Oh rare consequent ! the punishment was but temporally inflicted , and therefore the sin was not properly imputed . As if temporal punishments ( Whether from God , or men ) were the arguments of improper sins only . But oh wonderful virtue of a bare trope , or figurative locution ! to qualify such a pravity , extenuate such a provocation , divert such a desert , yea to regulate such a justice , or to restrain and limit such a power . If his metonymical imputation be the same with juridical and external , then ( Methinks ) this proportion should be observed in the proceeding , that as the sin is imputed but only as it were in some shadow or resemblance of words ; so should the punishment be inflicted , and not in any deed or substance . For he that is found guilty , but only in an imaginary idea or picture , ought not to be executed , but only in conceit , or as it were in effigy . but i am forbidden to smile , since it is a matter of sighing , in regard the divine attributes are so strike at : for what provocation can there be for God's universal and continual anger ( For such it is against the fall and original sin ) without an , mputation of a proper and participating guilt ? where the sin is properly imputed , there ( He grants ) the punishment May justly go beyond our graves , that is even to hell . but if there be no such imputation , no such propriety , no such participation ; i can see no cause why those evils should pass so far as this present life . Eternal death is little enough , if sin be properly and particularly imputed : but if it be not so , i cannot see but that even a temporal death to all mankind , must be too much . ( Conseq. ) that as no man ever imposed penance for it ( For original sin ) so God himself in nature , did never for it afflict or affright the conscience . ( Inconseq . ) By penance surely he understands not private repentance , but public discipline , or that of the churches imposing ; say it were so , the church's power is to impose the penance for public , notorious , scandalous and exemplary crimes and offences : it cannot take cognisance ( As no external law or administration can ) of an inward , secret , unsearchable , ( Though worthily suspected ) sin , such as the original is . Besides , whose should be the authority in such a cause or case , where all are concluded , and confessed guilty alike ? As for the other part , i ask of him , did not God himself afflict and affright Adam's conscience for it , when he was forced to say ; i heard thy voice in the garden , and i was afraid , because i was naked , and i hide myself . Gen. 3. 10.  And we all feel and must confess , this afflicting this affrighting was not of his person only , but in his and our nature also ; as woeful experience convinces us all to this very day . ( Conseq. ) and why , the conscience shall be for ever at so much peace for this sin , that a man shall never give one groan for his share of guilt in Adam's sin , unless some or other scars him with an impertinent proposition . ( Inconseq . ) What the conscience shall be for ever , is hard for him to say ; and for what it hath been hitherto , he knows a conscience is not always to be argued for pure and free , because it is quiet and still . But what says he to David ? did not he groan for it in that penitential of his ? behold i was shapen in iniquity , and in sin hath my mother conceived me , psalm 51. 5.  And to St. Paul , is this no groaning , ? oh wretched man that i am , who shall deliver me from the body of this death ? rom. 7. 24.  Nay shall we not believe what he but lately said of himself ? for my part i cannot but confess that to be which i feel and groan under , and by which all the world is miserable . let him look to his conscience , and see how his words agree first and last ; i hope he will not now say it was some impertinent proposition that scared him thereunto . ( conseq. ) why the conscience should not naturally be afflicted for it , nor so much as naturally know it , i confess i cannot yet make any reasonable conjecture , save this only ; that it is not properly a sin , but only metonymically and improperly . ( Inconseq . ) Such a conjecture is not reasonable ; for if to deny a sin to be such , were sufficient , because the conscience naturally smiles not for it , nor yet convinces of it : so many actual sins Might easily come to be denied . A strange conjecture for a figurative appellation to save a conscience . I know the conscience can syllogize , but i never knew that she could ever so rhetoricate with herself : such a conjecture is so far from being worth the sole preferring , that it 's not worth the naming , where better reasons are brought forth . As namely , that original sin herself has blinded and bedulled the conscience , as touching the true and full apprehension of herself , and of original sin . That the law and light of nature is exceedingly obscured to all consciences since the fall that most men's consciences are insensible even of their actual and sensual sins ; how much more than of the original and invisible ? That men have pulled and seared both their own , and others consciences , as touching the true sense of original sin , by daily hatching and broaching such heresies and errors about it : no marvel then that men are here so insensible ; we see it May easily come to pass through natural ignorance and ill habits , without this diminishing glass of a metonymical spectacle . ( Conseq. ) there are some whole churches which think themselves so little concerned in the matter of original sin , that they have not a word of it in all their theologue . ( Inconseq . ) That they have not a word of it , their theologue is defective to them , that they think themselves not concerned in it , they are defective to their theology . i could tell him of some churches that in their theology make no mention of the decalogue ; do they therefore think themselves but little concerned in it ? again some churches think themselves so much concerned in original sin , that they believe souls , as well as bodies , to be propagated from Adam . i spoke this of the Ethiopians and the Russians , no church but is bound to have such a body of divinity as May comprehend the whole principles of faith and religion ; yea , and to unfold them , and confess them so far as they are revealed in the word of God ; but what is it to object some obscure and confused churches , to the Catholic universal , & to the most orderly and eminent churches of the world ? ( Conseq. ) the height of this imagination hath wrought so high in the church of Rome , that when they would do great honour to the virgin Mary , they were pleased to allow unto her an immaculate conception , without any original sin . ( Inconseq . ) So far as the church of Rome seemed to join with the primitive churches in the point of original sin , so far also have the reform churches joined with them , as namely , that original sin is , that it is properly and inherently a sin . That it descendeth by natural propagation , not by imitation . That it hath in both a stain and guilt . That it subjected to misery and death in all senses and significations : that we are redeemed therefrom by the merits of Christ : these are heights indeed , but not heights of imagination , but sound doctrine . And these she pretended to hold forth against all those who affirmed , that Adam lost original righteousness only for himself , and not for us his posterity : and that by Adam's disobedience sin descended not upon mankind , but only a bodily death or punishment . Indeed here she hath also some heights of imagination , as , that original sin is not only remitted by baptism , but utterly abolished and quite taken away . That the concupiscence remaining in the regenerate , is no sin . That original sin is only in the inferior , and not in the superior faculties . That the blessed virgin was conceived and born free from original sin , yea , and many more heights of imagination they have much disputed on among their scholastics , so that they owe their errors , not to the simple profession of original sin , but to their subtle disputation about it . As for their opinion of the blessed virgins immaculate conception , it arose from no other height , but that o• their own superstition , which is too notorious , in all they can feign or imagin• for her , say of her , or do to her . But i pray God this low imagination , o• slender and slight conceit of a metonymical , juridical , external collateral , nay , equivocal , abusive , fantastical imputation , serve not to be get a conceit or presumption of an immaculate conception in us all . I have read of one that would needs deny the immortality of the soul , with intent to disprove the popish purgatory ; but there are other ways to refute this error of the immaculate conception , than by abating the truth or utmost truth of original sin . 

one thing more ( He saith ) i am to observe before i leave considering the word of the apostle . this one thing is not so much a consequent of what he would say for himself , as an argument against all such as would argue against him . The ground betwixt both is laid in these last words of the apostle , as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners , so by the obedience of one , shall many be made righteous . some ( Saith he ) from hence suppose they argue strongly to the overthrow of all that i have said , thus , as by Christ we are made really righteous , so by Adam we are made really sinners . this we acknowledge not only to be our argument , but our way of augmentation ; and if this standing good be sufficient to overthrow all that he hath said , than it is easy to be observed to what purpose he hath spoken all this while , but to this he hath spoken in his addresses , and to them we can say nothing till we see them . but besides ( Saith he ) i have something very material to reply to the form of the argument , which is a very trick and fallacy . strong reason May be spoken very often without a formal syllogism ; and where the matter cannot be denied to be true and good , 't is but a kind of sophistical fallacy to stand too pedantically upon the form . — but to argue from hence , ( as by Christ we are made really righteous , so by Adam we are made really sinners ) is ( Saith he ) to invert the purpose of the apostle . the reciprocation or conversion of propositions is no inversion of their purpose , where they May truly predicate either way . Neither is the inverting of words in their order , always a perverting of them in their intent . but the apostle argues from the less to the greater . indeed the apostle in his comparison proceeds after such a manner , as from Adam to Christ , from sin to grace , from death to life : now comparates ( janus-like ) look {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , forward and backward , and May argue mutually from one to another , nay they must do it , else could they not be comparates ; now though the apostle argue from the less to the greater , by way of amplification : yet he forbids not to argue from the greater to the less , for matter of reality , and that is all our argument . but we ( Saith he ) make it conclude affirmatively from the greater to the less , in matter of power . will he allow us to do it negatively ? why that will serve our turn sufficiently . Thus , as Christ's righteousness was not imputed only : so neither was Adam's sin ; or thus , as our righteousness by Christ was not a metonymical righteousness ; so our sin by Adam was not a metonymical sin . But ( By his leave ) we May take liberty to argue affirmatively , as before , & yet offend against no logical law , or canon of comparates , nay and the consequence shall be of great force , even affirmatively , as thus . As Christ did and suffered his father's will ; so ought we to do and suffer the same . As God charged his angels with folly , how much more May he us mortal men ? and from the apostle in this place . As the life was a real life , so the death was a real death : as the grace was real grace , so the sin was real sin . But he now assumes the trick or fallacy himself , taxing us for concluding affirmatively from the greater to the less in matter of power ( As what a man can do , a child can do ; what God is able to do , &c. the devil is able to do , &c. ) Whereas our manner of arguing is not in matter of power and prevalency ; but for matter of being , and reality . Now betwixt the greater and the less , though there May be a disproportionate action , yet there must be some proportionate being . and what is affirmed of the greater , May likewise be affirmed of the lesser , and that in the same kind and manner , although not according to the same measure or degree ; yea very opposites and and disparates if they come to be compared , are accepted as opposite and different only in their proper forms and adjuncts , but alike , and agreeing in their common attributes , according to which they are compared ; and without which there could be no ground for comparison . And where there is no ground for collation ; there can be no cause for prelation ; as here in the apostles worlds ; take away the reality of sin , and the proper being of the offence , and in such a comparison , with what excess , or excellency , can the grace , the free-gift , justification , and the righteousness of Christ be preferred thereunto ? there 's nothing now remaining , but to put it into an hypothetical syllogism , and so to leave it concluding without all fallacy , according to his own condition , viz. if we be made really righteous by Christ , than we were made really sinners by Adam : but we are made really righteous by Christ , ergo 

And thus ( Worthy Sir ) though i cannot presume myself to be one of those wise persons he speaks of ; yet this i presume , that i am not unwarily persuaded by this way of arguing ; neither can i ( Out of my simplicity ) observe that it is this way , but rather his own whole way of arguing that appears unconcluding . but let it be with your own judgement how we either of us appear to you , from what we have said . 

2.  For the church . 

To this objection , that his doctrine is against the 9th . article in the church of England . he saith , i have already answered it in some additional papers , which are already published . i would i Might have had the opportunity to have seen them , supposing they May contain some kind of apology , which Might have saved me the labour of an additional in this latter part . But for what i here see he must give me leave for to speak , as that he May see , that ( In judgement , though not in charity ) we are two. . His zeal for the church of England , seems to be such and so much , that he is protesting before hand , against all that shall but seem to suspect it . But he is indigning him in especial that shall take upon him to tax him for it , in the least degree . I hope this will not overprovoke his patience , only to entreat him ; first to reconcile his own understanding to his subscription ; and then , his own words , to the words of the article . 

( first ) a faithful subscription of a dutiful son of the church , is to submit his understanding , and consent simply unto her suffrage . And to underwrite ( With hand and heart ) her articles and canons , accepted in their plain literal sense ; and not to bring to them , nor yet reserve from them , any other understanding or intention of his own . Laws ( We say ) are to be interpreted and accepted , according to the mind of the lawgivers ; and a promissory oath ought to be performed , according to the intention of him to whom the promise is made . Now for him to say , i have oftentimes subscribed that article , and , i am ready a thousand times to subscribe that article , and yet to say again : i do not understand the words of that article , as most men do , but i understand them , as they can be true , and as they can very fairly signify , and as they agree with the word of God , and right reason , what kind of subscription call you this ? with such a liberty or reservation a man Might have ( Without all scruple ) taken the protestation , the covenant , the engagement , or an oath of abjuration . but whom means he by those most men ? certainly not the adversaries of the church , who refuse to subscribe them : but the sons of the church , his brethren , who have subscribed them as well as he . The adversaries , though they consent ( For the most part ) to the doctrine , yet they refuse to subscribe the article , merely because it is our churches . but as it is the churches , so , we that are sons and brethren , do ( With one understanding ) simply subscribe it , nor do we make our own conditions , by way of exception ; but we take them all in an undoubted concession . For we also understand the words of the article , as they can be true , and as they can fairly signify , and that is even in their literal and grammatical sense . And likewise as they agree with the word of God and right reason , for so we suppose them in the sense aforesaid . And although we confess , with him , that the church used an incomparable wisdom and temper in composing her articles , both with respect to new-reformists and Non-conformists too , notwithstanding we believe her prudence and piety was such , that she intended not so to secure the outward peace of the church against either , as that the truth of it ( In either part ) Might be prejudiced thereby , much less that she contrived any thing in such a charitable latitude , as to give licence to any , for passing the rectitude , and arctitude of verity , or that any one should presume upon his private and dissentaneous opinion , notwithstanding her public and unanimous judgement . It was discovered by some of themselves , that when the council of Trent completed her canons of original sin , and many particulars of them appearing so consonant to the scriptures , and to orthodox antiquity ; yet they studied to compile the whole with such artifice , as that notwithstanding they Might leave to their own scholastics a liberty of disputing and opining what they pleased : but i trust the like shall never be said of the church of England , either as touching this , or any other of her articles ; and for my part , i conceive it to be a truer part of a son of the church , rather to restrain his sense , to her words , than to strain or enlarge her words , to his own sense . 

( secondly , ) as concerning this article of original birth , or sin , or birth-sin , in as much as he says , if i had cause to dissent from it , i would certainly do it in those just measures which my duty on the one side , and the interest of truth on the other would require of me . hereupon i am very willing to believe him on his own word , as liking exceeding well of his ingenious confession : i have no cause to disagree , and not much misliking his resolution , i will not suffer myself to be supposed to be of a differing judgement from my dear mother , which is the best church of the world . wherefore i shall do no more ( Which is the least that can be done in an appearing difference ) but set down the words of the article , and then his own words in the antithesis , and so leave it to himself ( According to his own promised temper and measure ) to reconcile them . Neither will i so much as once imagine , that he hath less zeal for our church than myself , that so i May spare him the labour of a fruitless vow ; in being all his life confuting me . let him but show how his own sayings are conformable , or not repugnant to what the article saith ( Which to me and many others seem so contrary ) and we two have done , nay are ( As we were ) in faith and love of Christians , one . But if he go otherwise to work , i must take the confidence to tell him ; he May be all his life confuting , and not confute . 

Article . 

— original sin standeth not in the following of Adam , as the Pelagians do vainly talk . 

Antithesis . 

All actual sins do not proceed from this sin of Adam , pag. 47. — liberty and not Adam's sin is the cause of all our actual , pag. 49. — from the first Adam nothing descended to us — but an evil example , page . 80. not direct sins to us in their natural abode , — but principles of sin to us in their emanation , pag. 81. who by imitation of his transgression on the stock of their own natural choice , did sin against God . 

Article . 

but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam . 

Antithesis . 

The guilt of this sin being imputed , the same is conveyed to all their posterity by ordinary generation — this heap of errors pag. 29 , 30. — naturally it cannot be , pag. 32. — not that we bring it upon our shoulders into the world with us , pag. 78. — if God hath given us a nature by derivation which is wholly corrupted , &c. pag. 96. — that Adam's sin is ours metonymically and imprope•rly , pag. 127.  

Article . 

— whereby man is very far gone from original righteousness ; and is of his own nature inclined to evil , so that the flesh lusteth always , contrary to the spirit . 

Antithesis . 

The evil did so descend upon us , that we were left in powers and capacities to serve and glorify God , pag. 16. — that by this sin our first parents fell from their original righteousness , &c. this heap of errors , &c. pag. 29 , 30.  I can by no means approve that by this we are disabled and made opposite to all good , and wholly inclined to all evil , pag. 39 — his nature was not spoilt by that sin , he was not wholly inclined to all evil , pag. 40 , 46 , 47.  

Article . 

and therefore in every person born into this world it deserveth God's wrath , and damnation . 

Antithesis . 

Original sin doth — in its own nature bring guilt upon the sinner , whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God , &c. — this heap of errors , pag. 30.  It cannot be just for God to damn us , for being in a state of calamity , to which state we entered no way but by his constitution and decree pag. 38. — if it be intolerable to damn children for the sin of Adam , than it is intolerable to say it is damnable , pag. 59 — is it against God's goodness that infants should be damned for original sin ? &c. pag. 67. — it is against God's justice to damn us for the fault of another , pag. 63.  Children born in Christ , and not in Adam , &c. pag. 74. — born beloved , and quitted from wrath , &c. pag. 75. — born in the accounts of the divine favour , pag. 77. — if God decrees us to be born sinners , &c. if God does damn any for that , &c. pag. 94. — if God does cast infants into hell for the sin of others , &c. pag. 96. — it is impossible that the greatest part of mankind should be left in the eternal bonds of hell , by Adam , pag. 125. — the judgement which for Adam's sin came into the condemnation of the world , was nothing but temporal death . pag. 126.  

Article . 

and this infection of nature doth remain , yea in them that are regenerated , whereby the lust of the flesh , &c.  

Antithesis . 

The corruption of nature remains in the regenerate , &c. this heap of errors , pag. 29 , 30. — i can by no means approve that our natural corruption in the regenerate still remains , and is still properly a sin . Pag. 39 — that our natural corruption in the regenerate still remains , and is still a sin , and properly a sin , i have ( I confess ) heartily opposed it , &c. pag. 49. 52.  

Article . 

and although there is no condemnation for them that believe , and are baptised ; yet the apostle doth confess , that concupiscence and lust , hath of itself the nature of sin . 

Antithesis : 

This will follow , that Adam's sin hath done some mischief that the grace of Christ can never cure , though it be pardoned and mortified , yet still remains , and is still a sin , is perfect nonsense , pag. 51. — we are rescued from Adam before we were born , else Adam's sin prevailed really in some periods , and by some effects for which God in Christ had provided no remedy , pag. 74. — it is a sin metonymically , and just so in baptism it is taken away , pag. 103.  

qui ecclesiae renititur , et restitit ; in ecclesiàse esse confidit ? 

cyprian de simp. . Praelat . 

Sir , 

Be pleased to know that all the errors which have been about original sin , have risen chiefly through want of a perfect definition , or complete description of it , some ( And they not the least heretics ) have contended against all definition ; others have been so various in defining , and so incomplete in describing , that they have administered but matter unto more contention . I am persuaded that out of this place in the 5 to the Romans ; a perfect definition , or very complete description Might be made , and that such as Might comprehend both the name and nature , and subject and derivation , and cause and effects , and remedy ; my short time , and shorter abilities will not now suffer me to venture upon it . I have done my task ; and ( I hope in some part ) answered my title , and your expectation , such as i cou•d , or could so suddenly make it . I send it humbly to your hands , and through them ( If you think meet ) to the world . All that i will now say of this author is this , that he hath erred learnedly , far unlike the many senseless and scurrilous heretics and schismatics of this our exulcerated age . And i hope his own learning will let him see his error . Otherwise , he must think others are not so unlearned , as for him to impose upon them . Rather than so , i could most heartily wish one more learned in the truth than myself May yet more particularly undertake him . To you , Sir , i need say nothing , you are known . And for myself i need say as little to you ; you know , 

Sir , your minister friend , and servant , John Gaul . 

Finis . 

















































































