AN ITALIANS dead body , Stuck with English Flowers . Elegies , On the death of Sir Oratio Pallavicino . 

LONDON Printee by Thomas Creed , for Andrew Wise , and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard . 1600.  

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and virtuous , his singular good Lady , the Lady Pallavicino . Theophilus' Field , her devote servant , dedicateth these mourning weeds . 

Right virtuous , and fair Lady , may it please 
Your fair , now slubbred eyes , with weeping long , 
To take a truce with tears , that whilst you cease 
To mourn , with which you do your beauty wrong , 
There may be time for me , for to express 
My loss , which by your loss is comfortless , 
Some comfort may from hence to you arise , 
( If it be comfort not to weep alone ) 
O give me leave to speak , that which mine eyes 
Have written in tears , with which my heart doth groan 
To be delivered . Lo this child of grief 
Seeks unto you as Nurse for some relief : 
Be a dry Nurse to it , let it not draw 
From nipples of your eyes one precious tear , 
You need not give it suck , for it can chaw , 
And what it chaws , his stomach well will bear : 
Uphold it not with helping it to moon , 
't is big enough , and now can go alone . 
This Infant new born of my moister brain , 
I clothed in black , exposing it to view 
Of many witnesses , some of their train 
Not well trained up , but of the ruder crew 
Disrobed it , robbed me , without privilege 
To touch a holy thing is sacrilege . 
no less was this , nay more ( oh foul disgrace ) 
They did not only touch , but took away 
A holy Poem from a holy place 
Upon a birth , and on a burial day 
A mourning , weeping birth day to my verse , 
A day of burial to Horatio's hearse . 
Hence you profane , what had you there to do ? 
Lady my babe was on your altar placed , 
Sacred , devote , and consecrate to you 
By your eyes gracious aspect to be graced , 
They were Church robbers who did dare to spoil 
The holy labours of an others toil : 
After long search and much enquiry made , 
The lost child by his mother found again , 
Who travailing a new on childbed laid , 
Seeks unto you as Nurse to ease her pain , 
After your clouds of grief be over blown , 
Desire's you to adopt him for your own : 
His father would be yours , ( for yours he was ) 
Whilst he belonged to your deceased mate 
no patron of his poems now he has , 
And therefore doth them to you dedicate : 
Love them for his sake , from whose sorrowed death 
Half dead for sorrow , they have borrowed breath . 
An Italians dead body , stuck with English Flowers . 

The Herald's office , I 'll assume to me , 
Forward my Muse , chief mourner thou shalt be : 
Impute it not to pride I for most go , 
't is a poor pride , to be the chief in woe . 


Upon the death of the Right Worshipful Knight , his very honourable Patron , Sir Horatio Pallavicino . Verses thrust out by force when tears fell , and followed of their own accord . 

Nay spare not Envy , malice spit thy gall , 
Say what you can 'gainst my Horatio , 
'Gainst my Maecenas : be not partial , 
Virtue , nor dead , nor living , wants a foe . 
Him living , 'gainst you both I have defended , 
He dead , in spite of spite shall be commended : 
Envy lays hand on mouth , nay shear thy teeth , 
OH art thou toothless ? she points to the grave , 
And saith she is buried with him . Dead ▪ and seethe ▪ 
She winks . Nay that is not that we would have . 
There needs no winking where there is no error : 
Look on this sight , thy sight confounding mirror . 
Put on thy spectacles and thoroughly view , 
We crave no favour : still she will be blind , 
Because that virtue shall not have her dew , 
She can no fault , she will naught praise-worth find . 
I could saith she , say then and say but sooth , 
Envy still hath , though she doth hide her tooth : 
I for Horatio held my hand at bar , 
Of what small blemish canst thou him indite ? 
I have withdrawn my action , dead men are 
Dead to the law , who bites that cannot bite ? 
A dog . 
Such is that many headed Cerberus ▪ 
The common people , whom Horatio fed : 
Yet could not stop their mouths . Now woe to us 
They cry , and to our starvelings . He is dead 
Who when with hunger we were all nigh dead , 
Refreshed and revived us with bread . 
And yet ( o how far envy carrieth men ? ) 
He carried and transported , stop tongue there , 
Recant a lie , thy words call back again . 
He did transport corn . When ? when corn was dear ? 
whither ? to heaven : even corn of life the staff , 
Which when God winnowed , he found no chaff : 
And for he found no chaff , he stored it up 
In his own garner . 
Livor post fata quiescit 
Virtutem incolumem odimus 
Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi . 
Theophil . Feild . 

Upon the same . 

Patron's and Poets have been always scant , 
Is now there number then increased ▪ no ▪ 
Shall dead Augustus then a Virgil want ▪ 
O for a Horace for Horatio , 
Horatio , Maecaenas call him rather , 
Or if ye will , the Muses foster father . 
Rhymesters , enough , enough can make a song , 
A Ballot , or such like , and thereunto 
Annex a woeful tune : they do thee wrong 
Apollo , and thy true born sons undo . 
For why are Poets clogged with poverty ▪ 
Because these bastards embase poesy . 
Augustus nor Maecaenas ne'er till now 
Were missed and wished till Horatio died , 
In him they died both : the laurel bough 
Did wither , as his body putrifide . 
Hence neither Horace , nor a Maro lives , 
Since Poets are their Patron's relatives . 
Deceased Augustus lives by lively verse 
Of Maro , Maro lived by his purse : 
Horace reviveth his Maecaenas hearse , 
Whose bounty had been erst his Muse's Nurse . 
Life given for living , and bread given for breath , 
Virgil gives most , he gives life after death . 
How can you spend your treasure better than 
then treasuring up eternal memory ? 
( You muckwormes of the world , the scorn of men ) 
This gift is in the gift of poetry . 
My Patron was a pattern for you all , 
Whose fames life is his body's funeral . 
Virgil and Horace , I envy you not 
For having so great Patrons as you had : 
In poetry you had a greater lot , 
Augustus for bad ware so much ne'er bad , 
Near gave so much . He gave to Publius 
A Baker's dole , a box to Chaerilus . 
Bread , bare allowance for life's sustenance , 
Dry morsel beggars alms ( necessity 
Did ask no more ) more royal maintenance 
Gave my Augustus . Superfluity 
So thinks the base clown , what 's given to us 
I mean to Scholars , is superfluous . 
I Chaerilus , or Poet worse than he , 
Had royal Phillips for my quarters pay : 
Virgil and Horace did deserve their fee , 
To give them , is to sell , not give away . 
no gift ( to sell for gain ) but greediness , 
The less my worth , the more my worthiness . 
I Chaerilus , do pity Chaerilus , 
no verse did sound ill to Augustus' ear , 
But Charilus his ear must straight untruss 
Like school boy , and his fists correction bear . 
Are not such Patrons rife ? say Satirist 
Who bear in open hand bread , a stone in fist . 
Maro be silent in thy Patron's praise , 
Let Chaerilus Augustus dead fame rear , 
Commend him for his fist , thy Muse upraise : 
As high , as he is arm : a box on the ear , 
A pox upon his hand , much kinder they , 
Who with a flea in ear do send away : 
It bites not half so much , who looks for more 
Than flap with Foxetaile ? nay 't is well if so 
We scape : yet make a cross upon his door , 
Near beg more there : OH my Horatio ! 
My patron when I view these Carls in gross , 
Thy death presents to me a greater loss : 
I was a dear , dear plot of ground to thee , 
I was waste ground , till in a barren field 
Made fruitful by thy liberality : 
You sowed and planted , yet I ne'er did yield 
Better than flowers : in them thou lookest delight 
Living , with them thy deads' corpse shall be dight . 
Six winters did thy bounty rain on me : 
Six summers with thy Sunbeams oversplead , 
So many summers brought not into thee 
One harvest : I still green , thou withered 
Before my fruit be ripe , for I could pay 
Tithe of thy April shewres , in flowers of May. 
Would thou hadst lived till Pan the shepherd's god 
Had entertained me into his rout , 
I might have charmed men's ears with Aaron's rod , 
Shimey his railing tongue have pulled out . 
Give virtue her due praise : which never lives , 
Till death to envy , death and honour gives . 
Would thou hadst lived till then , and then thy field , 
For all thy cost and labour would have paid 
Some better use , now only it doth yield 
Ten in the hundred , being overlaide 
With too much seed . If tears were spent and all , 
My Landlord might have lost his principal : 
But I am rich in tears , o that they could 
Suppling thy withered roots , reduce thy spring , 
My earth should turn to water , and I would 
Weep Oceans : when I could no longer wring 
One poor tears sap from fountain of my eyes , 
My heart should be thy tomb , I here he lies . 
Namque prius timidi pascenter in aethere Cerui 
Et freta destituent nudos in littore pisces , 
Ante perratis amborum finibus exul , 
Aut Ararim Parthus bibet , aut Germania Tigrim 
Quam nostro illius labatur pectore vultus . 
Upon the same . 

Death went a roving for to find a mark , 
His day is night , his white is black and dark : 
At last by chance a pair of Doves he spied , 
Who had three lovely Pigeons by their side . 
Five lovely birds in all , all full of life , 
Too fair a booty for so foul a thief : 
His arrow to his bowstring he did fit , 
And so the biggest and the fairest hit 
But in the foot , who could not run away , 
The other fled , so he seized on his prey : 
And well they did to fly , for sure he meant 
T' have killed them all , but missing his intent , 
He doth excuse his fact , and saith that he 
Meant to kill none , but scare the younger three . 
How comes it then , this fair Dove lost her mate ? 
He killed him sure for love and not for hate : 
For Death indeed with Cupid's arrows dight , 
Sought the love shaft , on deadly shaft did light . 
Why shot he not at her ? He oft did try , 
She was too glorious object for his eye : 
Had he killed both , I would have surely thought , 
That Venus for her chariot had them bought . 
Yet see not how of price they could agree , 
Since the two Doves could no way valued be . 
Why killed he not the young ones ? O quoth he , 
They smil ▪ d upon me , ' thad been cruelty . 
Besides ripe fruit ▪ fed soul make death best cheer , 
As yet young Pigens out of season were : 
't is well thou slew'st not them , for on their death , 
Did hang a fivefold thread of vital breath . 
't is well thou slew'st not her ▪ for had she died , 
None but death should have been his second bride : 
And mother to his young ones . So in this 
Death hath been merciful , our comfort is 
He lives , and still shall live in his , whom we 
Murdered by deaths dead hand suppose to be . 
And yet then so lives better , for indeed 
The cause why this my Dove to heaven did speed , 
Was this : jove's Eagle was in some disgrace : 
This Dove made Eagle does supply his place . 
The same . 

An other . 

Dead doubtless death thinks Sir Horatio is , 
But death , deceived , he took his marks amiss : 
Two young Horatios he hath left behind , 
The lively Image of the father's mind . 
In them Horatio lives in spite of death , 
And shall so long as they on earth draw breath . 
Good luck it was : doubtless had death them seen , 
These two fine boys now living had not been . 
Your Ladyship he saw : but thought you might 
Be killed with grief for your deceased Knight . 
Deceive wise Lady his expectation , 
In making moan and lamentation . 
Cheer up your heart : yet look still as you cried , 
And see your pretty sweetings be not spied . 
The same . 

An other . 

Once Sir Horatio from the Pope did steal , 
He stole away into our Commonweal : 
But well and wisely from hence he stole , 
Where still he lived in peril of his soul . 
But ill thou didst to steal the second time 
Away from us , that was no venial crime : 
True it was mortal : death was is in the fault , 
That stole him hence : for some looked on & saw 't , 
Who did their part in making hue and cry , 
Which forced the thief the while forgo his booty : 
Yet afterwards he spied his time and sped , 
Do what they could that stood then by his bed . 
I rather think he got himself away , 
At least consented to his dying day : 
Nor can I justly blame him for his deed , 
What brought him hither made him hence to speed , 
His soul's estate , which was not at the best , 
Until it came to everlasting rest . 
The same . 

An other . 

If when the party hath penance done , 
And in a white sheet stood his time , 
For him that law and penalty will shun , 
It is not good once ●o object the crime . 
Deserve not they be taught to rule their tongue , 
That now he lies leapt in his winding-sheet , 
Stick not to do that noble Knight such wrong , 
In saying still ( their dove will with them meet . ) 
He robbed the Pope , did other things beside , 
Wherein he was the while he lived belied . 
The same . 

Another . 

A wand'ring Knight was Sir Horatio , 
In this , the low , and other Country's mother : 
He lived and died a stranger with us here , 
Why name I where ? that 's neither here nor there . 
All men on earth they run a stranger's race , 
Pass on along and have no biding place . 
wherefore Horatio died not for age , 
He died , because our life 's a Pilgrimage . 
The same . 

An English man Italianate , 
Becomes a devil incarnate : 
But an Italian Anglyfide , 
Becomes a Saint Angelifide . 
Ed. Malfort ▪ Pemb ▪ Hall.  

To the right virtuous ▪ his much honoured Lady , the Lady Pallavicino . 

Thus have I clothed my child the second time , 
Because I had no flowers , in mourning weed : 
Both fields and flowers , and weeds are passed their prime , 
Do on them all a charitable deed . 
It lieth in the flags exposed , rejected , 
Unless by your fair hand it be protected . 
Like Pharo's daughter take it into grace , 
Though meanly born , yet brought up by your hand ▪ 
It may in time aspire to higher place , 
And effect wonders by enchanting wand . 
It hath already turned earth to water , 
It may dry up your sea of tears hereafter . 
This colour suiting to the time I choose , 
Hoping it might be precious in your eyes ▪ 
This black , those fair , and that it would expose 
By foul your fairness , as two contraries 
( Let them be white and black ) together placed , 
Are by their opposition jointly graced . 
My book 's a perfect mourner , see it wears 
Your livery , and mourneth for your Lord 
His patron , drops of Ink in steed of tears 
Have blubbered his leaves . His strings accord 
Unto the mourner's fashion , all in all , 
It goes as they went to the funeral . 
In this respect you ought to welcome it , 
That it will be copartner of your grief : 
Nor suffer you alone lamenting sit , 
But mourning with you , give some relief . 
'T will tell you , he you mourn for is not dead , 
But from this country to a better fled . 
My child I called it for his infancy , 
Because it cannot tell his tale of woe 
As it conceives : but only yet can cry , 
And sound the name of dead Horatio . 
When it grows troublesome , do you but will it 
It soon will cease , cease crying and you still it . 
It only yet can cry , but when 't is grown 
Able to tell his mind in better words : 
If you mean while vouchsafe it for to own , 
It then shall give you what his skill affords . 
then shall you gather for these weeds I yield , 
A Coal-wort at the hardest in your field . 
Your Ladyship's bounden in all duty and service . Theophilus' Field . 

Horatio's departed , so men do say : 
Great pity he could here no longer stay . 
Say he 's departed , say not he 's dead : 
Nor as of others , let of him be said . 
He was not quelled , nor conquered of death : 
But him did combat while he was in breath . 
His breath him failing , cause he would not fire , 
He challenged death ; and for he has his rite , 
His body challendged : as a challenge glove 
He gave his body : plighting faith to prove , 
Death in a deadly combat and affray , 
When the last sound shall call all men away . 
Till than his soul , above , doth heavenly pleasures gain , 
then will his body win from death , for aye to reign . 
T. S. Pemb.  

Horatio's departed , so I heard them say : 
Pity he could here no longer stay . 
Say he 's departed say not he is dead : 
But from one place unto an other sped . 
Say not of him that he is dead and gone , 
Say only he is gone . With company or alone ? 
His wife and children he hath left behind , 
Though to have born him company was their mind . 
But thus he thought : a long dead way and ill 
For them poor souls to go , it would them kill . 
Alter Idem . 

Another . 

Who says Horatio died in his bed 
He lies : he died like a dubbed head , 
He died I say like knighthood in the field , 
Encountering death , which forced him not to yield . 
I saw the fight : the knight ne'er shrunk for death , 
But stoutly stood to 't while he was in breath : 
When breathe him failed , his foe him did confounded , 
With deadly blow he felled him to the ground . 
A coward's part . Might he have taken his wind 
The knight had lived , yea killed I bear the mind : 
Who dying mindful of his honour , grasped 
And held his arms ( men dying use hold fast ) 
Nor did his foe out of the field them carry , 
You saw the Herald did them with him bury . 
The same . 

Another . 

A Knight of late death challened into field , 
To fight a combat at sword and shield : 
The Knight him answered as did become , 
And when they met as I have heard by some , 
He felly fought , and stood to 't to the death , 
He tried it out till he was out of breath . 
A noble knight , death did him valiant find , 
And had the worst while he might fetch his wind . 
Pity our life 's no better than a blast , 
And bravest mind should so be spent at last : 
When breathe him failed , that day was at an end , 
He ceased hi● sword against his foe to bend : 
And giving death the glory of that fray , 
Dared him to try ▪ t again another day : 
Withal ▪ his corpse his challenge for to prove , 
He cast in steed of gauntlet or of glove , 
And swore by th' honour of his head he would , 
Again recover what was cast on mould . 
Death took up one , and undertook the other , 
And bids him point both place and places brother : 
He points the Churchyard , and the latter day , 
When sound of Trump shall battle bid array . 
The same . 

What is (null) thus many eyes one object have ? 
And all are bent to yond new made grave . 
OH 't is on yonder Corpse their eyes are fixed , 
It sor to see , thus people here are mixed . 
And as the twinkling diamonds of heaven , 
When all things are of Phoebus' light bereven , 
B● spread the heavens appearing to our sight , 
And lend the earth their little borrowed light : 
So they all deeming this thrice worthy Knight , 
Worthy more days , his day now turned to night ▪ 
Endeavour to illustrate with their light , 
In spite of cloudy death to make him bright : 
They do not look upon the fatal bear 
As most of them afore accustomed were . 
His body having lost his soul and breath , 
They says become a soul unto the earth : 
His Coffin is a Coffer as they say , 
Wherein this wary world thought good to lay 
This precious jewel brought from farther parts , 
An ornament to Scholars and the Arts.  
T. S. Pemb.  

Horatio's Coffin no more it call , 
Death's Coffin call 't , if ye call 't at all : 
Wherein he hath laid up a precious Pearl , 
A Noble man , though neither Lord nor Earl . 
Muse you on earth death would not let him tarry , 
Men in the earth their Treasure use to bury . 
Alter Idem . 

The conquest of two Traitors , Envy and Death , by the worthy Knight , Sir Horatio Pallavicino . 

Envy and Death conspired both together , 
'Gainst Sir Horatio , two lean-faced fiends , 
Which ever haunt the best , birds of one feather , 
Void of all love , that pray upon their friends . 
Both qualified alike , both treacherous , 
Envy is deadly , death is envious . 
th' one to the body mortal wounds doth give ▪ 
The other doth impeach a man's good name : 
th' one pines , the other lives by them that live , 
Yet fretteth at the livings living fame . 
th' one is ( like Sagittarius ) with shafts dight , 
th' other ( like Scorpio's venomed teeth ) doth bite . 
This the conspiracy was which they wrought , 
That Envy for his life 's uncertain lease 
Should wrack his fame , whose overthrow she sought ▪ 
When death should warning give , then to surcease ▪ 
Death vowed not to hasten till that hour , 
When Envy on his name should have no power ▪ 
Envy who never looked with cheerful eye , 
Was glad at this , wishing no longer date 
Her malice all-bewitching force to try , 
And exercise her inward-boyling hate . 
Thinking that sooner heat would fire fail , 
then any thing her force abate or quail . 
Eftsoones she as impatient of delay , 
With tooth and nail endeavoured to outrace 
His rising fame ; taking the cause away , 
Virtue I mean , and good deeds which win grace . 
Which buildeth up more high admired fame , 
then the Pyramids sky ▪ climbing frame . 
At first an ill opinion she raised , 
( O how much first opinions prevail ! ) 
She rend her hair when once she heard him praised , 
And for ones praise , she made a thousand rail . 
He stole from Rome , he for no goodness fled , 
Cozened the Pope , transported England's bread . 
These falsly-bred and misconceived tails , 
Feeble at first , grew too headstrong at length : 
And flew about more swift than ships full sails , 
And by their farther flying got more strength . 
Thus Envy had his name in credit placed , 
With others helping mouths well nigh defaced ▪ 
But his true virtue's beams obscured before , 
In spite of Envy's teeth at last appeared : 
And could not be by Envy hidden more , 
But his decayed fame again upreared . 
This sight astonished Envy , like that head 
Of Gorgon , caused men down to fall stone-dead . 
Who to herself reviuing came again , 
And seeing his good deeds the more increased , 
( The more his goods deeds , the more Envy's pain ) 
could not suppress them , yet she would not rest 
But sought always to hinder his intent , 
Hindering his fame , hindering the good he meant . 
At last she said , sithence I spent my power 
And can prevail no more , ere all his fame 
He do again recover in happy hour , 
Or altogether clear his blemished name , 
Death ( that I cannot ) shorten thou his days , 
Lest he in time exceed his former praise . 
Short after , came th' appointed hour by death , 
When Envy no more bitter gall could spit : 
Till than he granted Sir Horatio breath , 
Till than he vowed his body not to hit . 
then death approaching near , saw Envy stand 
Stopping his silent mouth with open hand . 
Has Envy parbrackt all her poison than 
( Quoth Death ) and cast her tongues three-forked sting ? 
Upon no object can Detraction scan ? 
Can Slander no more loathsome venom fling ? 
Envy replied , what I can does in vain , 
Yet see , by me inflicted scars remain . 
then o , then quickly cut him off in time , 
E'er he can heal scars unto his name : 
Nor let his fame flourish again in prime , 
Since I have laboured long to stain the same . 
Still while we talk , his good name doth increase , 
And though I cease , his good deeds never cease . 
Death envious himself , by Envy moved 
Soon condescends , not brooking living name : 
And on his Envy's object his force proved , 
Thinking t' have also nipped his rising fame . 
Death is deceived ; his rising fame not dies , 
As he to heaven his rising fame shall rise . 
P. P. P.  

Come doleful Muse 
My soul infuse 
With that death-sounding strain : 
Which Orpheus played 
When he assayed 
To win his spouse again . 
Or let me sing 
Tuned to that string 
Which mournfully he struck 
When hellish jove 
Recalled his love , 
As he on her did look . 
With Cypress bow 
Engirt thy brow , 
thou queen of angry mood ▪ 
That with thy quill 
Dost volumes fill 
Of murders , death , and blood ▪ 
thou troop divine 
Of virgins nine , 
Which sing on Parnasse hill : 
If Castaly 
With drought be dry , 
With tears the fountain fill . 
Fallen is your star , 
Surpassing far 
That glorious lamp of light , 
Whose golden ray 
Makes brightsome day , 
Whose frown makes dusky night . 
Where shall ye find 
Maecenas kind , 
To cure poor Horace woe ? 
Horace must want , 
( sith such be scant 
As was Horatio . ) 
This Phaenix-dove 
Religion's love 
Made fly from Italy : 
And did install 
By Latium's fall , 
Alba in Albany . 
( As Troy being won , 
Fair Venus' son 
In spite of destiny , 
With danger brought 
( Through danger sought ) 
Ilium to Italy . 
then silent spirit 
Unto thy merit 
Give leave this dirge to sing : 
Whose worthy name , 
Outstrips bright fame , 
And tires her flitting wing . 
Since Caesar died 
In height of pride , 
Whom guilty hands did wound : 
A fairer flower 
In Latium's bower 
then thee was never found . 
Since Venus' son 
Did Carthage shun 
Bend to the Rutiles land 
A worthier knight 
Did never pight 
His tent on foreign sand ▪ 
sith then by thee 
Fair Brittany 
The name of Rome shall have : 
She gives thee room 
Within her womb , 
And makes her breast thy grave . 
Thee Italy 
Did once deny , 
Albion a friend doth moan 
Now not with men 
A Citizen 
Installed in heaven's throne . 
Han. Pemb.  

Certain verses written and sent in way of comfort ▪ to her Ladyship . 

IF those salt showers that your sad eyes have shed 
Have quenched the flame your grief hath kindled . 
Madam my words shall not be spent in vain , 
To serve for wind to chase that mournful rain . 
Thus far your loss hath striven with your grief , 
Whether each piteous eye should deem the chief . 
whiles both your grief doth make your loss the more , 
And your great loss doth cause you grieve so sore . 
Both grief and loss do willing partners find , 
In every eye , and every feeling mind . 
So have I seen the silly Turtle Dove , 
The pattern of your grief and chaster love , 
Sitting upon a bared bough alone : 
Her dearest mates untimely loss bemoan . 
whiles she denies all cares of due repast , 
And mourning thus , her weary days doth waste . 
Thus nature's self doth teach us to lament , 
And reasons light our sorrows doth augment . 
Yet reason can itself this lesson teach , 
Our reason should surpass their senses reach . 
Reason our sense , and Grace should reason sway , 
That sense and reason both might Grace obey . 
Those silly birds whom nature hope denies , 
May die for grief because their fellow dies . 
But on this hope our drooping hart should rest , 
That maugre death their parted souls are blessed . 
That their swift course , that Goal doth sooner gain , 
Whereto ere long , our slow steps shall attain . 
Some few short years your following race shall spend , 
then shall you both meet in a happy end . 
But you mean while all in a stranger coast , 
Are left alone , as one whose guide is lost . 
Madam what ere your grieved thought applies , 
We are all Pilgrims to our commons skies . 
And who is nearest to this home of clay 
May find the worse speed and further way . 
And as I guess , unless our Artists fain , 
England is nearer heaven of the twain . 
There is your home , where now your Knight doth bide , 
Resting by many a Saint and Angel's side . 
Walk on in Grace , and grieve yourself no more , 
That your so loved mate is gone before . 
Io. Hall. Imman . Coll.  

An Epitaph . 

Some leave their home for private discontent , 
Some forced by compulsed banishment . 
Some for an itching lust of novel fight , 
Some one for gain , some other for delight . 
Thus whilst some force , some other hope bereaves , 
Some leave their country , some their country leaves . 
But thee no grief , force , lust , gain or delight , 
Exiled from thy home ( thrice worthy Knight ) 
Save that grief , force , that gain , delight alone , 
Which was thy good , and true religion . 
Io. Hall. idem . Imman . Col.  

You Nymphs that in the meadows keep , 
And midst the smiling Daisies sleep , 
Your Odours pour 
On this dead flower : 
Whose loss doth make Aurora weep . 
A flower he was , then crown his tomb 
With flowers sprung from his mother's womb . 
But if the modest Roses want , 
Or maiden Lilies waxed scant : 
Watch where Horatia weeps her showers ▪ 
And you shall find a bed of flowers . 
Like as of Helen's tears once came , 
The herb which Emila we name . 
A flower he was , and as a flower he died , 
But now to stars as fairer flowers is hied : 
There to behold the chief rose of the field , 
The fairest Lily that the valleys yield . 
Sweet flower of peace , & love both red & white , 
That God and man together doth unite . 
R. S. Coll. johan.  

Two Countries do contend for me , 
Fair Albion , and Italy : 
To both I owe myself at once , 
There was I born , here lie my bones . 
There did I rise , here do I fall : 
That gave me birth , this burial . 
That was my cradle , this my grave , 
There had I life , here death I have . 
But that gave life which now is run , 
This life which never shall be done . 
R. F. Pemb ▪ H.  

Admired Maro let me use thy name , 
To prove Aeneas to Italia came : 
Italian Knight , if I should dare define 
That thou art come of this Aeneas line , 
How ere perhaps some Critic will say no , 
Yet will thy life and likeness prove 't is so . 
And yet me thinks Ulysses though a Greek , 
Was like Horatio too , since both did seek 
A tongue of eloquence , so by a chaste wise 
Each of them had three children in his life . 
And now to travel is Horatio gone , 
Leaving his Penelope to mourn alone . 
Now doth she tell herself , how he doth live , 
And to her thread of life , that doth length give : 
Now doth she think he 's dead , and 'gins lament , 
And wish her thread of life were also spent , 
Thus like Penelope's lingering web of pain , 
She weaves her life , and it unweaves again . 
But it may be when twenty years are past , 
That thy Ulysseses will return at last : 
A ye if he were on earth : but he 's too wise . 
For earth to leave the heaven's fair Paradise . 
R. Sen. Coll. john . 

See here lie Myrmidons , more hard than steel , 
That no remorse , nor woe could ever feel , 
This dear dear tomb that doth Horatio keep , 
And learn of this moist marble how to weep . 
Idem . 

The Elements that when he was a live , 
Conspired in one to give Horatio breath : 
Are since he died divided and do strive 
Which shall be kindest to him after death . 
The earth doth promise gently to enfold 
His tender body in her cold embrace : 
And for he softly trod commands the mould , 
Softly to he upon his lovely face . 
The water for his sake to tears will turn , 
And drown all eyes in never ceasing woe , 
That where Horatio they gi'en to mourn , 
Whole streams may from the swelling circles flow ▪ 
The air will through his lightsome Regions sound , 
In doubled echoes great Horatio's fame : 
That through the world no Kingdom may be found , 
Whose utmost shore have not received the same . 
The fire no more will burn his Pictures frame , 
But gliding from his native seat above , 
Will henceforth use the virtue of his flame , 
In kindling hearts with dead Horatio's love . 
N. F. Reg. Coll.  

England lament , thus of thy neighbours checked , 
A stranger came thy fruitful womb to cherish , 
But him thou sufferest without due respect , 
Ungratefully within thy womb to perish . 
For such a one within thee is enshrined , 
As of thy own scarce one is left behind . 
S. H.  

The fates are Queens , they cannot be controlled , 
This object proves it , who can it deny ? 
Their law is ostracism amongst young and old , 
They expulse the best , for still the best doth die . 
But A eacus is just what ere betides , 
At Pluto's Court I 'll sue these homicides . 
I Cecil . S. johns' Coll.  

To the suruiving Lady of the deceased Knight . 

Waste Venus ? no. The fates have stolen your love , 
O cutthroat queans , ( I hope they hear me not ) 
This year forsooth they spun tissue for love 
To gain a thread , they 'll spoil a true-love knot . 
Let not his absence ( Lady ) be your doom , 
Phoebe shines most , when Phoebus is from home . 
Idem ▪ 

Noctuluctus , or his Night-mourning . 

1 

Rich tapird-sanctuarie of the blessed , 
Palace of Ruth , made all of tears and rest ; 
Day of deep Students ▪ dead Night , nurse of death , 
Who breathless seed'st on nothing but our breath , 
To thy deep shades , and desolatione , 
I consecreate my dying living moan . 
2 

You dreadful Furies ▪ visions of the night , 
With ghastly howling , all approach my sight : 
And palish Ghosts , with sable Tapers stand , 
To lend sad lights to my more sadder hand . 
Foxes come bark , and Night-ravens belch in groans , 
And Screetch-owles hollow times confusiones . 
3 

Or I will furnish up a Funeral bed , 
Strewed with the bones and reli●queses of the dead : 
Redoubling Echoes shall like passing bells , 
Chiming the dismal accent ▪ of their knells , 
Revive the dead , or make the living die , 
In Ruth , and terror of death's torturie . 
4 

Here lives imprisoned sorrow , clothed in black , 
A doleful hearse , fit for a dead man's back : 
Nature's fair red , clad in pale sheets of Ruth , 
Expressing in dumb show , a serious truth . 
A Funeral solemnised in sad cheer , 
Where eyes be mourners , and where legs the beer . 
5 

But ah my Muse , my Muse can but lament , 
With hair disheveled , words , and tears half spent , 
This dead quick-spirit , wits strange Chameleon , 
Which any author's colour could put on , 
And not in one sole tongue his thoughts dissunder . 
But like to Scaliger our age's wonder , 
The learneds Sun , wrapped in whose admiration , 
The rarest wits are fired in every Nation , 
6 

Whose happy wit with gracious judgement joined , 
could give a passport unto words new coined : 
In his own shop , who could adopt the strange : 
Engraft the wild , enrich with mutual change 
His powerful stile ▪ yet sanz respect of sweets , 
Death folded up his earth in earthen sheets . 
7 

OH had I eyes to weep griefs greatest excess , 
Or words expressing more than words express , 
Each line should be a History of woe , 
And every accent as a dead man's throe . 
8 

But tears shall serve for Ink , for paper stones , 
Eyes pens , for letters drops , for subject moans , 
For Epitaph these Threnes . Entombed here lies , 
( In grave of memory digged with weeding eyes ) 
Wits strange Chameleon , dead quick-sprited Roman , 
Most like himself , else almost like to no man : 
Arts various-varnish , enriched so with th' Italian , 
French , Latin , Spanish , Dutch , and Nubian 
That Rome , Rhine , Rhone , Greece , Spain , & Italy 
May all pled right in his Nativity . 
9 

ye living spirits then , if any live , 
Whom like extremes , do like affections give , 
eat , eat this cruel light , and end your thrall , 
In these soft shades of sable Funeral . 
Omnis ut umbra . Io : May : 

An other . 

Muse's loss lamenting treasure , 
Destinies crosse-tormenting pleasure , 
Wisdom wailing , honour crying , 
Virtue weeping ▪ judgement dying . 
Altogether all betoken , 
Griefes-griefe , not without grief spoken . 
Learning's Legend , Physics Phusicke , 
Sense of Science , Muse's music , 
Pandora's Dowry , Grace's Glory , 
Sad Melpomines sad Story . 
write in tears ▪ and in tears read , 
Nature's grace , Horatio dead . 
Dead not dead in heaven he reins ▪ 
Dying life such living gains : 
Living-dying was his state , 
Now dying living spite of Fate 
Raised from earth to heaven , where living , 
lives consent , consent life-giving . 
Though body's life here dead do lie , 
Life of his soul lives never to die . 
The same . 

Idem Lectori In Funera Pallavicinaea . 

Aspice quot vates Pallavicinaea crearint 
Funera , quos nunquam vates potuêre Magistri 
Reddere ; noctem unam magnos fecisse Poetas 
Fama est , extempso velut olim Perseus inter 
Enituit summos vates , Helicone relicto . 
Tu modo ( si quis aves ) fueris cona●ine tanto 
Versifices inter ▪ si non potes esse Poeta . 
Eia age sis , delubra Deum , delubra Dearum 
Sedulus implora , totumque Helicona duobus 
Haustibus epotans , ingentem imitare furorem , 
Atque altum quiddam spira , dignumque cothurno : 
Ad fingendum audax : sic nostri ex tempore facti 
Grandiloqui vates , sic tu , plaudente popello , 
( Si nihil est aliud ) dic occubuisse Mineruae 
Aonidumque decus , dic interijsse decorem 
Pol Latij ▪ et qui omnes paenè praedatus Honours 
Dic obijsse diem , dic invida Fata , colosque 
Detestare nigras , nentesque ex ordine Parca's 
Exagita diris , Musasque & Apollina , quoquo 
Versu itera , atque illas vitam attribuisse perennem 
Defuncto exclama , mortem nos vivere ▪ vitam 
Illum perpetuam ▪ vatesque videbere tandem 
( Dum nulla occurret melior , via trita terenda'st . ) 
Idem Pictoribus , ●que Poëtis . 

Siuspiam vapulet Priscianus ( Bone ) 
Scia● ( Lector ) vapular● a Typographo . 
Si verbum , syllaba , vel desit litera , 
Ve● punctum , scias , culpa est Typographi . 
Est primum tempus parce , nunquam prius , 
Latinas literas impressit hic Typographus : 
Si non parces , nunquam imprimet imposterum . 
Io : May : Ce● potius alter Idem , Ignotus . 

FINIS . 

