AN ELEGANT AND LIVELY DESCRIPTION OF Spiritual Life and Death . 

DELIVERED In diverse Sermons in Lincolns-inn , November the 9 th' , M.DC XXIII . upon john , 5.25 . 

BY John Preston then Bachelor of Divinity , and Chaplain in Ordinary to the Prince his Highness . 

Ignatius Epistola 15. ad Romanos . Mors est vita sine Christo.  

LONDON . Printed by Tho : Cotes , for MICHAEL SPARK , at the blue Bible in Greene-arbor . 1632.  

AN Elegant and lively description , of Spiritual DEATH and LIFE . 

JOHN 5.25 . 

Verily , verily , I say unto you , that the hour is coming and now is , when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God , and they that hear shall live . 



THE Occasion of these words was this : when as Christ had affirmed to the jews , That God was his Father , and the jews went about to kill him for it : He proves what he had said by this argument : He that is able to give life to the dead is God , or the Son of God ; But I am able to give life to the dead ; ( The hour is coming and now is , when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God , and those that hear it shall live ; ) Therefore I am the Son of God. In brief , these words show Christ's Divinity by the effects of it , that he can quicken the dead . 

In these words we may consider these parts . 

First , the subject on which Christ doth exercise his Divinity , and that is , on dead men ; The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God , and shall live . Secondly , the instrument by which he doth it , and that is , by his word ; which is not meant only the bare preaching and hearing of the word barely ; but such an inward , commanding , powerful , operative word , that makes men do that which is commanded them : Such a word was spoken to Lazarus being dead , Lazarus come forth ; and he did it . This word commands men , and makes them to obey it . 

Thirdly , the time when he will exercise his divinity ; the hour is coming and now is , that is , the time shall come when as it shall be abundantly revealed , the fruit of the Gospel shall appear more plentifully and fully hereafter , but yet it is now beginning to appear ; there is now some small fruit of it . Lastly , it is affirmed with an asseveration or oath ; Verily , Verily , I say unto you : And these are the parts of this Text.  

Out of these words I purpose to show you these three things . 

First , what the estate of all men is out of Christ.  

Secondly , what we gain by Christ.  

Thirdly , what we must do for Christ.  

First , we will show you what your estate is out of Christ , for this will make you to prise him more . And the point for this is , 

That every man out of Christ is in a state of death or a dead man ; that is , All men however they are born living , yet they are still dead men : without the living Spirit the root is dead . Hence are these places of Scripture , Gen. 2.17 . The day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt die the death . Math. 8.22 . Let the dead bury their dead . Ephes. 2.1 . You hath he quickened , who were dead in trespasses and sins . Ephe. 5.14 . Awake thou that sleepest , stand up from the dead , and Christ shall give thee light . The meaning is , that all men are spiritually dead . This will be of some moment , to show you that you are dead without Christ. Ye accounted it a ghastly sight to see many dead men lie together , it affects you much : but to see a multitude of dead men walk and stand before us , that affects us not . The natural death is but a picture or shadow of death , but this spiritual death , is death indeed : As it is said spiritually of Christ's flesh , john 6.55 . That it i● meat indeed . Now that you may know what this death is , I will show you , 

First , of all , what death is . 

Secondly , how many kinds of death there are . 

Thirdly , the symptoms and signs of this death . 

Fourthly , the degrees of this death . 

For the first ; what this death is ; it consists in two things . First , in death there is a privation of life : then a man is dead , when as the Soul is separated from the Body : so a man is spiritually dead , when as the soul is separated from the quickening Spirit of Grace , and righteousness : This is all our cases , In us there dwells no good , there is no Spirit of life within us : the Soul is so out of order , that the spirit is weary of it and forsakes it . When the Body grows distempered and unfit for the Soul to use it , than the Soul leaves it . Even as when the instrument is quite out of tune , a man lays it aside ; whiles it is in tune he plays on it : So a man dwells in a house as long as it is habitable and fit to dwell in , but when it becomes unhabitable he departs : so , as long as the body is a fit organ for the soul , it keeps it ; when it becomes unfit , it leaves it . Even so the holy Ghost life's in the Soul of man , as long as it is in good temper , but being distempered by sin , the holy Ghost removes . You may see it in Adam : as soon as he eat of the forbidden fruit , the holy Ghost left him , and he lost his Original righteousness . 

Secondly , in this death as there is a privation , so there is also a positive evil quality in the soul , whereby it is not only void of goodness , but made ill . In the natural death when as a man dies , there is another form left in the body ; so in this spiritual death , there is an evil habit , left in the souls of men : This you may see Heb. 9.14 . where the works you do before regeneration , are called , Dead works : there would be a contradiction in calling them dead Works , if there were not another positive evil form in man , beside the absence of the quickening Spirit , which form is called Flesh in the Scriptures . 

But it may be objected , that sin is a mere privation of good , that it is a Nonens ; therefore flesh cannot be said to be an operative quality and form of sin . 

To this I answer , that though all sin be a mere privation , yet it is in an operative subject , and thence it comes to pass that sin is fruitful in evil works : as for example : take an horse and put out his eyes , as long as he stands still there is no error : but if he begins to run once , he runs amiss , and the longer he runs , the further he is out of the way wherein he should go , and all this because he wants his eyes , which should direct him : So it is with sin , though it in its self be but a mere privation , yet it is seated in the soul , which is always active : Anima nunquam otiosa ; The goodness that should enlighten us is taken away , and there is a positive evil quality put into it , that leads us on to evil . 

Consider farther whence this death proceeds ; the original of it , is the understanding & mind of man , which is primum vivens , et ultimum moriens . That which life's first and dies first . The cause of life is the understanding enlightened to see the truth ; when the affections are right , and the understanding is strait , than we live ; when it is darkened all goes out of order . john 1.4 . speaking of Christ , it is said , that in him was life , and the life was the light of men : he was life because he was light , he did inliven men , because he did enlighten them : therefore Ephe. 5.4 . Awake thou that sleepest , stand up from the dead , and Christ shall give thee light : because light is the beginning of spiritual life , james 1.18 . Therefore it is said , Of his own will begot he them , by the word of truth : that is , the word rectifies the understanding and opinion , which is the first thing in this spiritual birth . Ephe. 4.22.24 . Put off the old man which is corrupt , according to the deceitful lusts thereof ; and put on the new man , which after God is created in holiness , and perfect righteousness . The old man is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts : that which is here called deceitful lusts , etc. in the original , signifies , lusts proceeding from error , and holiness proceeding from truth ; lust proceeds from error , in mistaking things ; for lust is nothing else but affection misplaced , proceeding from error . That holiness in which God delighteth , in which his Image consists , comes from truth . When Adam was alive , he judged aright , than the wheel and affections of his soul were right : Being dead by reason of his fall , he lost his sight , he saw no beauty in the ways of God ; and this is the case of all unregenerate men : but when the Spirit rectifies the judgement , convinceth them of sin and righteousness , than they begin to revive . To be dead is to have the understanding darkened , the judgement erroneous : to be alive is to have the understanding enlightened , and the judgement rectified ; And thus much for the first , what this death is . 

We come now to the kinds of death , which are three . 

First , there is a death of guiltiness : one that is guilty of any offence that is death by the Law , is said to be but a dead man So every one by nature is a dead man , bound over to death though he be not executed . 

Secondly , there is a death in sin that is opposite to the life of sanctification , Ephe. 2.1 . you hath he quickened , who were dead in trespasses and sins : & there is a death for sin that is contrary to the life of Glory . 

Thirdly , there is a death that is opposite to the life of joy : in hell there is a life , man is not quite extinguished , but yet men in hell are said to be dead , because they have no joy . This death consists in the separating of God from the soul ; when God is separated from the soul , than man dies this death of sorrow . God joins himself to the souls of good and bad : to those who are not sanctified , he joins himself in a common manner , and thence it is , they have common joy , common comfort , common civility ; to the godly he joins himself in an extraordinary manner , by which they have extraordinary joy : now when God is separated from the soul , then comes a perfect death ; see it in the separation of God from Christ's humanity . God withdrawing himself from him but for a time , he cryeth out , My God my God , why hast thou forsaken me ; As God withdraws himself more or less , so is our joy , our sorrow more or less . Thus much for the kinds of this death . 

We come now to the Symptoms or signs of this death , and they are four . 

The first is this ; men are said to be dead when they understand nothing , when as there is no reason extant in them , when they see no more than dead men . The life is naught else but the soul acted : then a man is said to live when the understanding part is acted : man is spiritually dead when as his understanding is darkened , when as he sees or understands nothing of God's ways , because they are spiritual , and he carnal . 

But it may be objected : men do understand things belonging to faith and repentance , carnal men not yet sanctified have some understanding of these . 

I answer , that they may understand the materials belonging to Godliness as well as others , but yet they relish them not , they see them not with a spiritual eye . Tit. 1.16 . They are to every good work reprobate ; they cannot judge aright of any good works , as to like , approve and love them , to see a beauty in them as they are good : Rom. 8.7 . the wisdom of the flesh is enmity with God , for it is not subject to the law of God , the Greek word is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the meaning is not that they understand it nor , but they like it not , they relish it not , they taste it not ; they think of God's ways , that they are but folly , 1 Cor. 2.14 . They are at enmity with them , they count them dross . 

The second symptom of death is , want of motion : where there is no motion , there is death . All men naturally want this motion , they cannot judge or do any thing by nature : they may do opus operatum , but they cannot do it in a holy manner ; their prayers , their hearing , receiving of the Sacrament , and the like , are dead works , without faith the principal of life ; however they may be fair in other men's eyes . 

The third sign of a natural death is sencelesnesse ; so men are spiritually dead , when they are not affected with God's judgements , when they have hard hearts which cannot repent , Rom. 2.5 . when they have hearts as hard as a stone , Ezek. 36.26 . yet they may be affected with them , as natural men apprehend evil , not from a quickening Spirit , but from a self love . 

Lastly , in a natural death , there is a loss of that vigour and beauty in the face and countenance which is in living men : So in men that are spiritually dead , there is no beauty , no vigour , they have death in their faces : they may have painted beauty , which may be like the living , ( as he said : pictum putavi esse verum , et verum putavi esse pictum : ) they may be much alike , yet they have not that liveliness and beauty as living men have ; God's beauty ( the beauty of holiness ) is not found in them . 

But it may be objected , they have many excellencies in them , they know much , they excel in moral virtues . 

I answer , they may have excellencies , as a dead man may have jewels and Chains about him , yet they are dead : they have them , but yet they are as jewels of Gold in a Swine's snout ; they are as Swine , their good things make them not men , they are beautiful yet they are but dead men ; as the evil works of good men make them not bad men : so the good works of evil men , make them not good . Thus much for the signs of this Death . 

We come now to the degrees of this death , in all these deaths there are degrees : First in the death of guilt , if you have had more means , the guilt is greater , if you make no use of them . The Gentiles they shall only be condemned for breaking the Law of nature , because they knew no other Law ; The jews they shall be condemned for sinning against the Law of nature , and the Law of Moses , they had a double Law , and shall be condemned for the breach of it ; Christians having a treble Law , the Gospel , the Law of nature , the moral Law , shall be condemned for all three ; and among all Christians , such as have had more means , and better education , the greater shall their punishment be . 

Secondly , in the death opposite to the life of sanctification , there are degrees . Now ye must know that there are no degrees in the privative part of death , but they are only in the positive . The lowest step in this second death is to have enmity to the ways of God , being fighters against God ; enemies to the Saints ; this is the lowest step . The second degree is , when as men are not so active that way , but yet are dead in pleasures , Ambition , covetousness , & the like . There is a generation of men which trouble not themselves to oppose God & the Saints , but give themselves to pleasures , and like those Widows , 1 Tim. 5.6 . are dead in pleasures , while they are alive . The last step in this death , is the death of Civility . Civil men come nearer the Saints of God than others , they come within a step or two of heaven , and yet are shut out ; they are not far from the kingdom of Heaven , as Christ said to the young man ; yet they miss of it as well as others . 

Thirdly , for the death that is opposite to the life of joy , the degrees of it are more sensible : Some have legal terrors , the beginnings of eternal death ; others have peace of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost , the beginning of eternal life . And thus much for the degrees of these deaths . 

Now hearing that all are dead in trespasses and sins , ye may object ; If we are dead , why do you preach unto us ? If we be dead , we understand not , we move not , we are not capable of what you say . 

To this I answer , First , there is a great difference between this spiritual death , and natural death . 

For first , those who are naturally dead , understand nothing at all ; but in those who are spiritually dead , there is a life of understanding , by which they themselves may know that they are dead ; men who are naturally dead , cannot know they are dead . 

Secondly , those who are spiritually dead , may understand the ways of life : though they relish them not , yet they may hear and receive them , which those who are naturally dead cannot do . 

Thirdly , those who are spiritually dead , may come to the means , to the pool in w c the Spirit breathes the breath of life ; whereas naturally dead men cannot come to the means of life . 

Secondly I answer , that though ye are dead , yet hearing may breed life , the word can do it . There was an end why Christ spoke to Lazarus that was dead , Lazarus come forth , because his word wrought life ; therefore though ye are dead , yet because the word can work life in you , our preaching is not in vain . 

Lastly , this death is a voluntary death . Men who are naturally dead cannot put life into themselves ; no more can those who are spiritually dead when they have made themselves dead . Men die this death in a free manner ; I cannot better express it , than by this similitude . A man that is about to commit the act of murder or treason , his friends persuade him not to do it , for if he doth , he is but a dead man , yet notwithstanding he will do it ; we say of such a one that he is a dead man willingly . So we tell men , if they do thus and thus , that they go down to the Chambers of death , yet they will do it ; Hence is that Ezek. 18.31 . Why will ye die , OH ye house of Israel ? implying that this spiritual death in sin , is a voluntary death . 

But ye will object , Men are not quite dead , there are some relics of God's Image still left in them ; how are they then dead ? 

To this I answer , that there is a double Image of God ; first a natural , standing in the natural frame of the soul , as to be immortal ; immaterial ; So there is understanding , will and reason , and some sparks of life left in us , as the remainder of a stately building that is ruinated : but yet there are no sparks of the living Image left in us , the spiritual Image of God consisting in holiness and true righteousness , remains not ; The Papists indeed deny it , but how will they answer the rule of the Fathers : that Supernaturalia dona sunt penitus ablata , naturalia quassata ; that supernatural gifts are utterly taken away , no sparks of them remain . 

But it will be objected , that though men by nature have nothing left , yet there is now an universal ability and grace , an universal sufficiency given unto them . 

To this I answer , that that which they call universal grace , is the same thing that nature is , but they put another term upon it ; it is found in nature , and is common wherever it is , therefore it cannot be grace . For in grace there is always something that is peculiar . 

Secondly , if there should be an universal grace , the Saints would be no more beholding to God , than other men ; if God give all alike to all , it should not be God , but themselves that put the difference . 

Thirdly , if there were that general sufficiency , it would take away all election : there might then be prescience , but no election , no predestination to death or life . 

Fourthly , if there were a general grace , what is the reason that Paul made it such matter of difficulty to answer that question of election , Rom. 9  If Aristotle and other heathen , if every one have such a general sufficiency , Paul would not have made such a scrupulous answer , and have cried out of the depth . 

Thirdly , there is not that universal ability , because that which is born of the flesh is flesh , and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit ; we are born of the flesh and cannot therefore have this spiritual sufficiency . 

But yet there are some spiritual gifts in men . 

I answer , that we cannot have these spiritual gifts if we are not born of the Spirit ; that which is born of the flesh is flesh . Not Bellarmine himself , nor no man else will say that all are born of the Spirit , john 15.2 . Every branch in me not bearing fruit , he taketh away , and it is cast out , and withered ; that is , as the branch not being in the root , bringeth forth no fruit , so men as long as they are not engrafted into Christ , bring forth no buds , no fruit ; they may hear the word , but they cannot make use of it , they cannot do it without the Spirit , and that is free : it breatheth where it listeth ; compare john 3.8 . the Spirit breatheth where it listeth , with john 6.44 . no man can come unto me unless the Father draw him ; draw him , that is , not as a sheep is lead with a bough ; for Christ doth not say , no man will come , but , no man can come except the Father draw him ; compel him as it were by force , not persuade him by entreaties : that is , unless he changes , and taketh away his wolvish william  

But it will be objected , that God draws every man  

I answer , that the context concludes against this . For Christ doth bring this in , to show the reason , why many did not receive his Doctrine ; and he concludes with this , that men therefore do not receive it , because God doth not draw them : None can come unto me except my Father draw them . 

I will answer one objection more and so conclude : If we are dead , to what end is the law given , why are we commanded to do thus and thus , if we be dead ? 

To this I answer , that the Law is given to this end , to show us our weakness , and to lead us unto Christ : it is not given us to keep exactly , for that is impossible : it was impossible to keep it through the weakness of the flesh , Rom. 8.3 . the Law was therefore given that we might know our weakness , not that we should keep it , but that Christ's righteousness might be fulfilled in us by faith , Gal. 3.24 . the Law is our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ , that we might be justified through faith ; That is , the end of the Law.  

But it will be objected : that in as much as we are commanded to do things impossible , man's nature is destroyed , for man is a free creature . Secondly , the command implies an absurdity , and impossibility , to bid a man do that which he cannot do ; to bid a man that is in a deep Well , bound hand and foot , to come out himself is foolish ; ye may blame him for falling in , it is absurd to bid him come out . 

To this I answer , that there is a difference between the external binding , and the bonds wherewith a man is fettered by sin ; There is an external impediment , which a man cannot remove when he is fettered in the Well ; but there is no external impediment , when as men are bound in the chains of sin . When we command you to do thus and thus , all the business is with the will , we rather say men will not , than they cannot come ; There is liberty when as a man hath eligibile or non eligibile ; when he hath a thing in his own choice , when there is no impediment , when he may argue both ways : If a man out of the perverseness of his nature doth it not , it is not compulsory , but free ; a beasts action is free because he cannot reason on both sides , but man when he considers arguments on both sides , when he can say , do not do such a thing , but do such a thing ; when he can conceive arguments , on both sides , he is free , there is no such external impediment in him , as to bid one in darkness , to do a thing of the light , or one bound hand and foot in a pit , to come out ; since the chief impediment here , is in the depraved wills of men , which God doth rectify and change by his grace & Spirit , through the use of means . 

If then every man out of Christ be in an estate of death , let every man examine himself , and consider whether he be a dead man or no ; this is the great quere or question in this mutability and incertainety of things . Let us make the life to come sure ; our life is uncertain here ; but have we this spiritual life , are we living men ? then we are happy : but are we dead ? then he that is not partaker of the first resurrection , shall not be partaker of the second . It is too late to begin to live , when we are dying ; certainly natural death is a time of spending , not of getting or enquiring after life : If ye defer this search while ye are in health , when ye lie on your death's bed , when you shall see heaven and hell immediately presented unto you , this question will hold you solicitous , and then you shall see that this spiritual life , is the life indeed . The time of this natural life , is not long ; the Candle burns not long if it burn out ; yet it is oftener blown out , than burned out ; men oftener fall down than come down from the tree of life : this Tabernacle is often thrown down before it falls down , therefore in this short life make yourselves sure of eternal life . 

Now there are two things which hinder this search and inquiry after spiritual life . 

The first is a false opinion ; men think themselves in the ways of life , being in the ways of death ; they think there is a greater latitude in the Gospel than there is . 

The second is ▪ men are not at leisure ; there are million of businesses in their heads , so that they cannot harken to the whisper of conscience ; they have no spare time to be wise unto salvation ; It will be our wisdom therefore to consider our end , Deut. 32.29 . To help you therefore in this Quere , whether you are dead or alive ? Consider first , if ever you have been dead . Secondly , if ye have been dead , whether ye are made alive . 

First I say , consider whether ye have been dead or no ; I mean , whether sin hath been made alive in you , that you might die . Rom. 7.9 , 10.  I was alive without the Law once , but when the Commandment came , sin revived , and I died ; that is , the Commandment awakens my sins , and they being alive I died ; sin when it affrights not a man's conscience , than he is dead ; when it wounds the conscience , than he is alive . 

The Law being brought to the soul by the Spirit , ye see the rectitude of the Commandment , and your own obliquity and crookedness ; sin is alive and ye die . Peter preaching to the jews , Act. 2. recites to them their sins in crucifying the Lord of glory , which sin was made alive , and pricked them at their hearts . Sin was dead in David , till Nathan and the Law came unto him , afterwards he lived and was humbled ; Luke 5.  Peter seeing Christ's divinity by the draught of fishes , cries out , Departed from me Lord , for I am a sinful man ; he had sins in him before , but they were dead ; then they were made alive . Paul , he had sins that were dead in him , but when the outward light which was but a type of his light within , did shine about him , than he dies , and his sins were made alive : So Joseph's brethren had sins , but they were not made alive till they were put in prison , than their sin in selling their brother joseph lived , and they died . Hath sin ever been alive in you by the commandment to slay you ? that is , hath it bred such an apprehension in you , as of death ; ( not a sigh or two for a day ( that is no slaying of you , but ye must apprehend sin as death , as one that is to be executed , forthwith apprehends death , so must you apprehend sin ) than it is a sign , that there is life within you . 

Secondly , are ye made alive again ? Is there such a change in you as if ye were other creatures , as if ye lived an other life ? Where this life is , it works an alteration and a change , gives us another being , makes us to be no more the same men ; whoever is in Christ is , a new creature , it works a general change from death to life ; it makes all our actions to be rigorous , like the actions of living men , Old ●hingss pass away , all things become new , it makes men lead a new life : If old acquaintance ●nd lusts would draw us away , we answer ●hat we are dead , that we live no more to these , ●hat now we have not our own wills : Christ ●ives' in us and works in us , Gal. 2.20 . It is not that live , but Christ life's in me . The same mind ●ill be in us that was in Christ jesus , Phil. 2.5 . ●ow if ye desire to know whether Christ live ●n you or no , or whether you are in an estate ●f death ; you must see whether you have these too things which are in every one in whom ●hrist liveth : first see whether you live to him : ●e died that we should not live to ourselves , but him alone . In moral things the end and principle are all one . Before Christ lived in you , 〈◊〉 you did was from yourselves , ye were your twne principle and end : but Christ living in ●●u , there is another end ; ye eye Christ , ye ●●oke to him , all that ye do is done in sincerity , it is done for him and from him . 

But how can Christ be the end of our callings , eating drinking , and recreations ? 

I answer , that of every action Christ must be ●●e end , ye must do as a man in a journey ; ●●ough every 〈◊〉 treales he thinks not of 〈◊〉 journeys end ▪ yet the general aim of 〈…〉 must be for that ●nd , and that causeth every step : so in all ye do , the general end must be Christ.  

Secondly if Christ live in you , your hear● cleave to him , as to the Principle of life , the child to the dug , or the element to its nat●rall place . What ever our life is , we cleave it . Some place their life in their credit , take ●way it , and they die : others in riches ; take ●way them , and they perish . What ever is yo●● god , if it be taken away , you perish . Therefore john . 6.68 . when Christ demands of the twel●● whether they would likewise go away ; Pet●● makes this answer , Lord , whither shall we g●● thou hast the words of eternal life . 

Thirdly , ye may know , what life ye live , the food that feeds it . Oil feeds the Lamp fuel the fire : If your life be fed with the dutil of obedience , than ye live . If ye keep 〈◊〉 Commandments , ye shall live in them , sai●● Christ : you shall live in them as in your proper element , as the Fish in the water ; eve●● motion out of it , is to death : There are tw● sorts of men to whom this trial doth belong . 

The first are those , who have a name they l●●● and yet are dead , like the Church of Sardis . R●●● 3.1 . 

The second to whom this belongeth , are th●● who are dead indeed . 

The first of these , are like the Angel's t●●● take bodies , and do actions ; they are not t●●● living men , though they appear to be . Now the signs that Characterise these dead men from those that are truly living , are five , taken from the signs of the feigned life , in the Spirits that have true bodies but only in appearing , whereby they are distinguished from bodies that truly live . 

First , Angels that take Assumed bodies , eat and drink , and are not nourished : as the Angels that came to Lot , and Abraham , and had created bodies : So these dead men do all the actions that living men do ; they hear , they pray , they read , but they turn it not into flesh and blood , because there is no life in them : they are not the stronger for hearing , or any thing they do ; they thrive not , as those that have the Boulimia , they eat and drink not , because there is an Atrophy in their bodies . We preach to men , yet they are the same this year they were the last : they have a name to live and yet they live not , they turn not the means to flesh and nourishment ; it is a sign of a living man that he grows . That which is said of a good will , that it makes use of every thing , may be said of grace ; It turns all the passages of God's providence into nourishment ; storms as well as fair gales , help a living man to the haven ; Affliction , prosperity , all put him on and help him forward . Take one not having this life , do what ye will , he thrives not ; as an unthrift , put him to what trade ye will , he thrives not , he is still on the losing hand ; so these men , prosperity , adversity , help them not : put any thing to a dead man to do , he doth it not ; so these men , the Word and Sacrament helps them not , because they are dead . 

Secondly , the motions of the Spirits that take Assumed bodies , is not from any inward principal , not from the motion of life within : so the actions of men that are not alive , are not from the principles of life , they are not vital motions , but as in other actions , the Wheels go as long as the spring is up that moves them , so the actions of men that are dead , as long as the springs are up & the influence continues , they move . When they are sick and apprehend death , than they will do many things ; but these being gone their goodness is ended : whilst they deeply apprehend some accident , they will be good , that being gone and forgotten , their goodness ends : Many whiles they have good acquaintance , and are in good company , will be good , but when they are gone , their goodness ceaseth . These men have golden outsides , they seem to have the King's stamp upon their actions , yet they are but counterfeit ; they pay God in counterfeit Coin , not in currant money ; their actions have a form of religion , but yet the power is wanting ; all they do is but a mere formality ; their Prayers , their Sabath keeping are but in show , those actions and duties that have most power and life in them , they do least of all relish , they taste them not because they have no life in them . In general , all the actions that men wanting life do , they are but dead works , they may be deceived with them for a time , but when death comes , they shall find them to be but dead . Remigius a judge of Laurence tells this story , that the Devil in those parts did use to give money to Witches , which did appear to be good coin , seemed to be currant money at first ; but being laid up a while , it than appeared to be nothing but dried leaves : so the Devil deceives men now , he makes them to do outward actions , which have a fair show , but when they need them , they them appear as they are , to be nothing but dead leaves , because the Principle of life is wanting . 

A third property of Assumed bodies is this , that they are taken up only for a time , and then are laid down again , as the Spirits that take them listed ; so in these men which seem to live , there is an inconstancy and mutability in their lives , they lay down their religion as occasion serves . If that they did was done in respect to God , it would be always the same , the company and occasions would not alter it ; but because it is not done in respect to God , therefore as their company and occasions are mutable , so is their religion . They are as inconstant as Clouds without rain , that are quickly scattered ; like wand'ring Stars , or like the morning dew , that is soon dried up . The Saints have an inequality in their lives , yet they never die again ; they may be sickly , but these men are twice dead , Trees plucked up by the roots , that never grow again : The Saints may be as sheep soiled with a fall , but they can never become Wolves again , but these men they turn Wolves again , so did Pharaoh and Saul . The Saints have their Turbida intervalla , their ebbing and flowing , their full and their wain ; but yet all these cloudings do but obscure their graces , not extinguish them : the darkness of the night extinguisheth not the light of the Stars , but covers it ; so do these cloudings but only cover the graces of the Saints . All the goodness of other men that seem to live , are but Lucida intervalla , they are good but by fits , when as those that live are bad but by fits , Nullum fictum est diuturnum , their goodness is but counterfeit , therefore it lasts not , it holds not out . 

Another distinguisher of those walking Ghosts from living , is this : the actions they do , they do them not as living men do , they make apparitions only and vanish . Those men that have nothing but civility , it quickly vanisheth , they are like the Church of Sardis , Reve. 3.1 . that had a name she lived , and yet wa● dead : Their works are not perfect throughout , they were but linsey-wolsey , they were not thorough paced in the ways of God , but shuffel ; they grasp at both , & comprehend neither ; they do many things , but not all . As the young man that came to Christ , Christ looked on him , and loved him ; what distinguished him ? One thing was wanting , his works were not perfect , his heart was set upon his wealth , he would do any thing else , his heart was not weaned or divorced from it . Saul had a name to live , but yet his works were not perfect , when Samuel came not , than he was discovered , that was but his trial , he would not rest in God. Herod did many things , yet he was not perfect , he would not leave his incest ; so all that have but a form of religion they are Wolves though they have a sheepish outside , they are not perfect , ye shall know them by their works . 

But what works are those that we cannot see them do ? 

I answer , they may be exact in the first , yet fail in the second Table , and those that practise the duties of the 2 Table , fail in the duties of the first . If men be exact in the duties of both Tables , their religion is pure and undefiled , jam. 1.27 . If they fail in the duties of one table , to make their religion pure , is to mend in the other . These civil men wrong no man , yet they content themselves with a bare formality ; this is not pure religion : we say this is a pure religion , if ye be fervent in prayer , and content not yourselves with formality of Religion without the power . 

Lastly , these walking Ghosts , do but show themselves to men , they company not with them ; ye see them and hear no more of them . ye shall know living men , by their companying and loving of the Saints ; as sheep and Doves they are never out of company , and keep no other company but their own . Ye shall find in others those differences . 

First , either they delight not in all the Saints ; We must love all the Saints , this particle all , is put in all Paul's Epistles ; these love not all the Saints . 

Secondly , if they love all the Saints , yet they love not the Saints only , ye must love none but the Saints . If ye love the Saints because they are Saints , than those who are not Saints , ye do not love ; that is , ye love none , with the love of friendship , and intimate familiarity but the Saints ; yet love them with a love of pity , and we all fail in this love . 

Thirdly , they do not love those that excel in virtue . If your hearts be not right , ye dislike all those that go beyond you in holiness , and practise . 

Lastly , though they make a show , they love them , yet they do not show the effects of their loves to them . And thus much for the helps and discovery of the first sort of men , that have a name they live , and yet are dead . 

The second sort of men to whom this use is directed , are those who are quite dead ; ye shall know them by these marks or Symptoms . 

First , ye shall find coldness in them ; in death there is no heat : so their prayers and performances are cold , they are dead , wanting fervency . 

But the Saints want heat as well as others , they also are cold . 

I answer , though sometimes they want it , yet they are quickly made hot again , because there is life in them ; as Charcoal is quickly kindled , because it hath been in the fire ; so the Saints are soon kindled , because they had fire in them before . Others are as green wood , or rather as matter that is not Combustible , as the Adamant , that will not be made hot with fire ; living men , admonitions and the fire of good company will heat again , so will it not the others . 

Secondly , ye shall know them by their stiffness and hardness . It is a sign of death to be inflectible : Wicked men are as hard as flint to God's commands , but as soft as wax to that which humours them . Are ye tractable ? do you delight in your own ways , and yet continue the same men , keep the same company ? Do ye abide still in the same place , or go on in the same tract ? then ye are dead : In many things you may be tractable , but the main is , whether ye are flexible in those things that are connaturall unto you : these deal with us as johanan did with jeremiah , jer. 42. he said he would go down into Egypt , he would do any thing , that God should bid him , whether it were good or bad ; but when jeremy had told them that they must not go down into Egypt , than they say that he spoke false , God did not send him : If Gods will had suited with his , he would have done what he would have had him to do : your trial is when you must offer up your Isaac , when you must part with those things that are most sweetest unto you . 

Thirdly , dead men are senseless , like Idols that the Psalmist speaks of : they have eyes and see not , ears and hear not , mouths and speak not , feet and walk not , they have senses to discern , but there is yet an inward eye , they want ; they see no beauty in the ways of God ; therefore they think there is no such matter , because they have eyes & see it not , they have mouths and taste it not , they relish it not , they smell no sweet savour , from the graces of the Saints , when as the graces of the Saints have a sweet savour , like an ointment poured out , Cant. 1.2 . So for feeling , they feel not , they are not sensible of the judgements or threatenings ; the Law nor the Gospel move them not , they have hard and insensible hearts ; the more insensible they are , it is a sign , they are ever dead : the more sensible we are of the threatenings or promises , the more life is in us . 

Lastly , dead men are speechless ; there is no breath in them . Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh . The dry and empty channel drives not the Mill , but a full stream sets it on work . If the heart be full of life , the tongue is full of good speeches . prov. 10.  The words of the righteous are as fined silver , because there is a treasure within them ; but the words of the wicked are nothing worth , because their hearts are evil . As it is said of evil men , that their tongues are set on fire of hell ; so the tongues of the righteous are set on fire by heaven . esay . 19.18 . they speak the language of Canaan . In hypocrites there is loquacity as blazing meteors , and in Saints there is sometimes an indisposition by reason of some sins , which make them like to springs which are dammed up with stones and mud . Yet judge not of them by such fits , but take them as they are in their ordinary course ; the mouth speaketh out of the abundance of the heart . Every man is delighted in some genius operations , in things that are suitable to him ; if there be abundance of life , abundance of grace within a man , he delights to speak of it : as all men are severally disposed , such are their speeches . Now all these are privative signs of death ; I will add one more that is positive . 

Fiftly , look what life a man life's , he draws to him the things that nourish it , and expelleth that which hinders it . If a man be alive to sin , he draws that which is sinful , but holiness and the means of grace , he expels as contrary to him : What doth satisfy his lusts , that he doth ; he may do good for a time , but he is quickly sick of it . 

But I do much good , I abstain from much evil , may some say . 

To this I answer , that if one member lives , it is a sign that the whole body life's ; so if one mortal sin live in you , it is a sign you are dead . Truth of grace cannot stand with one mortal sin unrepented , unsubdued : one disease kills a man as well as an hundred ; so one living lust kills you : Doth any lust live and reign in them , it kills them . 

But what is it to live and to reign ? 

I answer , when a man ceaseth to maintain war with his lust , and resists it not ; when a man lays down the weapons , when he seeth his lust is natural to him , and therefore yields unto it , than sin reigns in him . There is no man that life's the life of grace , but he hath this property , that he strives against all sin to the utmost , not in show , but in sincerity ; he strives against the occasions of sin though they foil him ; he still maintains war against them , and so they live , and reign not in him . 

2 If every man out of Christ be in an estate of death , let us not defer repentance , but do it whilst we may . Repentance makes a dead man to be a living man : What is it that makes you defer repentance ? ye think ye can change your courses , & sorrow when you list , therefore ye defer it . If men be dead , and repentance puts as it were a new soul into them , makes them to pass from death to life , then is it not so easy a thing . Suppose ye had Ezekiahs' warning , is it in your power to make yourselves live ? no , it is beyond your power ; God only can do it . Every man lies before God , as that clod of earth , out of which Adam was made . God must breathe life into him , else he continues dead . God doth not breathe life into all , He quickens whom he william It is your wisdom therefore to wait on him in his Ordinances : if you have good motions begun in you , press them forward , they are offsprings of life . Think seriously , am I dead , or alive ? If dead , why then say , it 's not in my power to quicken me , its only in God to do it , and he doth this , but in few , those whom he quickeneth are but as Grapes after the Vintage , or as the Olives after the beating ; how then shall I be in the number ? Give your selves no rest ; know that it is God that breatheth , and then depend on him . Make that use of the doctrine of election , with care and more solicitude to look to yourselves . Phil. 2.  God works both the will and the deed of his good pleasure , work out therefore your salvation with fear and Trembling . If repentance be a passage from death to life , if it be such a change , then labour for to get it . The Spirit doth not always strive with men ; ye are not always the same , ye will stick in the sand , grow worse and worse , if ye grow not better and better . no more power have you to change yourselves , than the Blackamoor hath to change his skin , or the Leopard his spots ; the time will come , when you shall say as Spira did : OH how do I desire faith , would God I had but one drop of it ; and for aught we know he had it not . 

Thirdly , learn hence to judge of natural men ; for all the excellency they have , yet they are but dead men ; If a man be dead , we do not regard his beauty , all excellencies in natural men , are but dead . It is a hindrance in the ways of God , to over-valew outward excellencies , and to despise others that want these trappingss : let us say for all these excellencies , yet he is but a dead man , we know none after the flesh any more , 2.  Cor. 5.16 . Again for your delight in them , know that this death doth differ from natural death ; for these dead men are active , & ready to corrupt others , they have an influence , that doth dead those , who are conversant with them , sin communicates as well as grace . Nothing so great a quench-cole , as the company of bad men : there is an operative virtue in them to quench men's zeal , as the dropping of water will quench the fire , though they cannot wholly extinguish it being once kindled . 

Fourthly , if all out of Christ are dead , learn to judge of the Ordinances of God , and the means of salvation , let us not undervalue nor overvalue them ; the Ordinances cannot bring life , not the Word , nor Sacraments ; If ye are sick and send for the Minister , he cannot quicken you ; the Ordinance is but a creature , and cannot give life . If we speak to the ear , and Christ speak not to the heart , it is nothing : Let your eyes be fixed on Christ , beseech him to put life into you , pray to God for a blessing : the Ordinances are but dead Trunks , as Pens without Ink , Conduit pipes without water . Learn then that God doth convey life by the Ordinances , that they themselves cannot give life , therefore do not overvalew them . Yet know withal , that God doth work but by his Ordinances ; the Spirit breathes not in Taverns nor Playhouses , but in the Church assemblies . Act. 10. while Peter was preaching to Cornelius , and his family , the Spirit fell upon them : so the Spirit fell on others by laying the Apostles hands on them , the Ordinances are the Vehiculum of the Spirit ; give what is just to them , and no more ; give them neither too little nor too much . Neglect not the Sacrament , ye know not what ye do when ye neglect it ; ye think that ye eat and drink your own damnation , if ye receive it unreverently ; Absence from it is a sin as well as the remiss and negligent receiving of it . Sickness and death ye fear , why then do you neglect the Sacrament , why do you receive it unworthily ? Whence are those Epidemical diseases amongst us ? the cause of them is from hence , that ye neglect the Sacrament , that ye receive it unworthily . 1.  Cor. 11.30 . For this cause many are weak and sick among you , and many sleep : Consider the danger of neglecting the Sacrament , he that came not to the Passeover , must be cut off from the children of Israel ; the same Equity remains still in the Sacrament ; the cause of that was , because he was to come up with the rest , to remember the death of the first born of Egypt , and the redemption from their bondage , he being passed over thereby : It is now the same sin to neglect the Sacrament , the Equity still remains . Are ye to strong in faith as ye need it not ? To be absent from the word , ye think it a sin : so is it to be absent from the Sacrament ; nothing can excuse you . If a master bid his servant do a thing , and he goes and is drunken , so that he cannot do it , will it excuse him ? If you have made yourselves unfit to receive the Sacrament by committing any gross sins ; the unfitnesse will not excuse you . If a man hath occasion to ride a journey , if he miss one day , he will take the next : so ye if ye miss the Sacrament once , be sure to take it the next time : It is divided here , that so if ye miss once , ye may receive it the next time ; take heed therefore how ye neglect it . The end of the Sacrament is to worship God , to set forth Christ's death , it is the chiefest part of God's worship ; therefore give it the chiefest respect . Now from hence see the necessity of this life of grace : how can ye come to the Sacrament , if ye are dead men ? Labour therefore for this life of grace . And thus much for the first point , that all men out of Christ are in a state of death . 

We come now to the second , and that is this , 

That all in Christ , are in a state of life . Our scope is , to show you what you are out of Christ , and what benefits ye receive by being in Christ ; we cannot go throughout all particulars , but we will take the greatest , life and death ; the one the greatest good , the other the greatest evil . All in Christ are living men ; this is the great benefit , because death is the greatest evil : therefore by the rule of contraries , life must be the greatest good . Farther , men prise nothing so much as life ; this experience showeth , and Satan himself could tell , that skin for skin , and all that a man hath , he will give for his life , job. 1.  Beyond experience , God himself threatens death to Adam , as the greatest evil ; The day that thou eatest of it , thou shalt die the death , Gen. 3.  Now all that live this life are living men , and have all things pertaining to life , 2.  Pet. 1.2 . they have all that pertains to life and godliness , that is , all things necessary for the nourishment and cherishing of them , life were else unhappy ; take beasts and plants , they having all belonging to their life , are happy , and they are said to live : take any natural life , when as a man hath food , and raiment , and recreation , he is said to live . A man life's when he hath life , and all that appertains unto it . I will divide this Doctrine into two parts , and I will show you two things . 

First , that there is such a life as this . 

Secondly , what this life is . 

First , that there is such a life , as this ; It is needful to show you , that there is such a life , because it is a hidden life . God hides these spiritual things , as he hid Christ under a Carpenter's son : so he hides the glorious mysteries of the Sacrament , under the base elements of Bread and Wine ; he hides the wisdom of God , under the foolishness of preaching , he hides those whom the world is not worthy of , under sheep's Skins , and Goat's Skins , Heb. 11.  Col. 3.3 . Our lives are hid with Christ in God.  

But from whom is this hidden ? 

I answer , that it is hidden from natural men as Colours from a blind man ; they are there , and he sees them not . 

But with what is this hidden ? 

I answer , that it is hidden : First , with this natural life , we see it not because we have this life ; it is hid , as the Sapritius in the root , or water in the spring . 

Secondly , it is hidden with a base outside , 2.  Cor. 6.  The Saints are as poor , as despised , as having nothing ; Christ had a base outside ( there was no form or beauty in him that we should desire him : ) and so have the Saints being conformable to him ; they are like other men for their outsides . 

Thirdly , it is hidden with misreports ; thus Christ himself was hidden ; he was counted a wine-bibber , a friend of Publicans and sinners ; one casting out devils by Belzebub : and therefore he became a stumbling block unto many . The Saints are likewise misrepresented , they are evil spoken of , they are presented to men's understanding otherwise than they are . There are a generation of men , that pervert the straight ways of God , Act. 13.10 . that is , they make them seem crooked : though they are strait , notwithstanding , they pervert them , as a crooked , as a false glass , doth pervert a face that is beautiful , representing it in another shape ; or as a stick that is half in the water , and half out , seems to be crooked , yet it is strait in itself . 

But in what is it hidden ? 

I answer , that it is hidden in Christ , as in the fountain , as in the heart and soul , as in the subject wherein it dwells . Men what ever they profess , believe not this , because it is a hidden life ; what course then shall we take to make you believe it ? The Scriptures you will not deny , yet you will be as hard to believe them , as you will be to believe there is such a life ; We will therefore say something , without the Scriptures , to persuade you that there is such a life as this . 

First , there is a life of the soul that it life's ; as the Angels they move , act , and understand ; though they eat not ; there is therefore a life , besides this common life . 

Secondly , consider the matter of the soul , than ye shall see , that the soul life's such a life , as Angels do ; The souls of good men , lead such a life as good Angels do ; the souls of bad men , such a life as bad Angels . The life of beasts depends on the compacture , and Temperature of the substance , as the Harmony doth upon the true extent of every string . With the soul of man it is otherwise ; the soul life's first , and then causeth the body to live ; it is otherwise in beasts , their souls and bodies live together . Besides it is certain , that the soul shall live , when as the body is laid aside ; than it life's another life from the body : therefore it life's another life in the body . The higher faculties of the soul , the Understanding and Will , are not placed and seated in the body , as other faculties are : the visive faculty must have an eye to see , the hearing faculty must have an ear to hear , and so the rest of the faculties must have their organs ; but the Understanding hath no such organ , it only useth those things that are presented to it by the fancy . Our sight , feeling , and hearing , perish , when their organs perish ; but the superior faculties of the soul , wear not away , but the elder the body is , the younger they are . The soul life's now in the object , now in the subject : it life's in the things it is occupied about ; as the Angels are said to be , where they work , because they have no bodies as we have , to make them be locally there : so the soul it also lives , where it is occupied ; as if it be occupied about heavenly things , than we are said , to have our conversation in heaven . Take the understanding and faculties of reason , they sway not men , but the Ideas , truths and opinions that dwell in this understanding , sway men : There are three lives in man , there is the life of plants , of Beasts or sense , and the life of reason ; I may add a fourth , and that is this spiritual life , which is an higher life of the soul ; Where there is an evil life , there is death , but where there is a good life , there is this spiritual life : See it in the effects , for these are but speculations . 

First , ye see by experience , that there is a generation of men , that live not a common life , delight not in vain pleasures , sports and honours , ( there is no life without some delights : ) their delights and life is not in outward things abroad ; they have a retired and inward life at home . 

Secondly , there are no Acts , but for some end , there are men who make not themselves their end ; if they did , they might then take other courses , going with the stream . If then they make not themselves their end , than they make God their end , they live not to themselves , but to the Lord , 1.  Thessalo . 3.8 . 

Thirdly , they care not what they loose to get advantage to God ; they are content to be despised , contemned to suffer Torments , imprisonments and death ; they are content to do that which is the ruin of their lives , which they would not do , had they not a more special life within them . 2 Cor. 4.11 . We which live are always given up to death for jesus sake , that the life also of jesus , might be made manifest in our mortal flesh : That is , for this cause God suffered his Children , to be in danger , that men might know , that they live an other life , and have other comforts : this appears by their readiness to be exposed to death ; all which shows , that there are some that lead an other life . 

But it will be objected , that the superstitious , and those of another religion , will suffer death as well as the Saints : and moral philosophers are retired as well as the Saints : and those who have but common graces , live this life as well as the Saints : therefore these experiences prove not the point sufficiently . 

I answer , that it is true , that superstition doth work much like religion , moral virtue doth many things , like true holiness ; and Common grace , doth much like true grace ; yet it is no good Argument to say , that because a dreaming man dreams that he sees , therefore a living man that doth see , doth but as he . A picture is like a living man , yet it follows not that a living man is dead , because the picture is dead ; it is no Argument to say , that because moral virtue , doth many things like true holiness , therefore true holiness doth them not : They may be like in many things , yet not in all things ; the cause of all deceit is , because we cannot discern of things alike , therefore I will show you how these differ . 

First , superstition makes men suffer much , as well as true religion , yet they do it out of a false opinion , the other from faith : the one do it being helped by the holy Ghost , the other have a supernatural help from Satan that extendeth nature beyond his spear ; the one doth it from grace , the other from delusion : the outward acts are alike , but the inward principles differ . 

Secondly , moral virtue and Christian holiness differ in working , the last is done of a sudden . A man is made a living man suddenly ; though there are some previous dispositions , yet the soul is suddenly infused ; after this manner the Saints pass from death to life . Others have their actions by frequent acts and education , they are moulded to it by little and little . 

Thirdly , in moral men the change is never general , there is no new birth in them ; but in the Saints , all things are new . 

Fourthly , morality doth never change nature , but grace doth : the most wild man in a country , the unlikeliest man of all others , religion makes him a Lamb of a Lion , though it were unprobable . 

Fiftly , what did moral men ? they went by diverse ways , to the same centre ; themselves were their end ; Epicures thought one way the best , the Stoics another ; but the Saints seek a happiness , in denying themselves , which helps to perfect them . 

Lastly , common and true grace , have many things alike , yet they differ in this ; true grace doth things as a man doth natural living actions ; as a man eats and drinks with willingness and propenseness , connaturally , and readily ; so doth not the other . Those who have only common grace , do all from respects and by-ends , their holiness is but by flashes and fits , it continues not ; they are like violent motions , quick in the beginning , and slower in the end ; the higher they go the weaker they are ; But the motions and actions of the godly , are as a stone falling downward , which moves faster , and faster , till it falls to the Centre , where it would be . 

Now we have done all this , there is not yet sufficient said , to make it sufficiently appear , that there is such a life of grace ; these and an hundred other Arguments and reasons , will not make natural men believe , that many men live other lives than they . But when they see the life of holiness' blaze in their eyes , they say it is but guilded over , it is but hypocrisy . These reasons may prepare and confirm , but they cannot persuade ; we must therefore believe that there is such a life . john 3  Christ treats of this , that there is such a life ; he tells Nicodemus , that he must live it , and be born again ; He wonders at it , how it can be ; Christ therefore concludes in the 12. verse : If I have told you earthly things and ye believe not , how shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things ? that is , it must be believed , that there is such a life : sense believes it not , yet it is easier to believe it , because it is wrought on earth ; other things are harder than this to believe , because they are wrought in heaven ; though this be wrought on earth , yet it is hard to believe , and must be believed . And thus much for the first part of the doctrine ; that there is such a life . 

For the second , what this life is ; ye may know one Contrary by another ; we have showed already what death , that is contrary to it , is , by which ye may partly perceive , what this life is ; yet we will give you some other signs how to know it . This life is a real life , as real as the other ; though this life doth not consist in eating and drinking , as the other doth ; it is a life of faith , it is not seen , yet it is as real as the common life , as it appears by comparing it with the common life . 

First , in this common life of nature there must be temper of body , disposition of instruments : so in this life of grace , there is a frame of heart , and a composition of soul , on which it doth depend ; there are humours and ingredients of this life , and they are the things ye know : there is a reality in this life as well as in the natural life . 

Secondly , as the natural life hath a temper of body , hath diverse mixtures , so it abhors things that are hurtful to it , and desires things that cherish it : so in this life of grace , there is an appetite ; those that live , they are carried to the things that help them , they do hunger after the word , and that that builds them up ; they abhor sin and lust that would destroy them . 

Thirdly , as in the natural life , so in this , there is a taste , and palate , that helps this appetite . Rom. 12.2 . Be ye changed by the renewing of your mind , that ye may prove what is that good , and perfect , and acceptable will of God ; that is , that ye may be able to discern of it , as the touchstone discerns of Gold , or the taste and palate of meats . 

Fourthly , as in the other life there is hunger and thirst , so is there in this ; men are sensible of pains , and refresh , they are sensible of sin , judgement and threatenings , which others are not , being hard and dead . 

Fiftly , as the other life is fed with food , so is this : the food which a man eats is not presently turned into flesh and blood that nourisheth ; but there is a nutritive faculty , that nourisheth and turns all we eat into nourishment : So the Saints , they turn all the passages of God's providence into nourishment ; they assimilate , and turn all things to a good use , there is a living and vital faculty , in them that sets them forward . Ephe 4.16 . They being knit to Christ , according to the effectual power , working in every part increase , and edify themselves in love . 

Lastly , as this common life hath beside other things that maintain it , some other endowments to help it out , as company , recreation , riches , and the like : so hath this spiritual life , it hath riches , and friends , it hath its heritage , company , habitation , ( God is our habitation from everlasting ) with the same reality , though not with the same visibility , and so exposed to sense as the other . The cause of this life is the holy Ghost who is to the soul , as the soul is to the body ; he is the cause of it : the end of all of it , is the Lord ; all is done to God ; no other life is so , this life is of God , through God , and for God : when you find such a reality in your actions tending to God , when he is your aim , than ye live this life . 

If this be the condition of all that are in Christ , to live and be quickened , see what is expected from you to whom this talon is committed , every excellency is a talon , it must not lie dead , but be improved for our master's use : the sin is great if ye do it not : the neglect being of a greater thing , the sin is greater . God sets a proportionable account on his benefits , and expects a severe account from us , if we use them not . Be exhorted then to live this life : some live much in a short time ; Some never live this life ; one man may live more in one day , than another man in a hundred : for to live is nothing , but to be stirring and doing . 1 Tim. 5.6 . those who live in pleasures are dead whilst they live ; so he that is occupied about riches or honours , is dead : all that time that men are occupied about riches , and their estates , about credit , honours , and the like , making them their end ; that is , a time of death : ye have lived no longer than ye have acted duties of new obedience . If you summon up your lives according to this computation , to how short a reckoning will they come ? A wise man speaks more in a few words , than a fool doth in a multitude : one piece of Gold hath more worth than a hundred pieces of Brass ; as we say of an empty oration , that there is a flood of words , but a drop of water ; so if you consider your lives , and see how long ye have lived in death bungling out the time , you will see that ye have lived but little in a long time , therefore now be doing something ; redeem the time ; be busy in doing or receiving good , be still devising to do something for God , and to put it in execution : spend your fat and sweetness for God and man ; wear out , not rust out ; flame out , not smother out ; burn out , be not blown out . So did Christ , so did Moses , so did Paul , making the Gospel to abound from jerusalem to Illyricum : so did David , the text saith , that he served his time ; he did not idle it out , that is , he lived not as his own master , but he did do it all to God , as to a master : All the worthies of the Church have lived thus : and not only they , but poor Christians they are still doing , they serve God and men , they are useful , these are the men that live . Those who spend their time in sports , in gaming , in business , in serving wealth and honour , those who spend their time in moral discourses , in histories , in hearing and telling of news , as the Athenians did : these are dead they do not live : as we say of Trees , that if they bring not forth fruit , they are dead ; whatever men do if they bring not forth fruit they are dead , if they glorify not God , they are dead . See what a price is in your hands , see what ye have done , and mend whiles ye may ; bestow not your price amiss . There are many Talents , yet none like this of life : take therefore the exhortation , Gal. 6. while ye have time do good : life is but an acting , ye than live when ye are doing good : see how many men fall from the Tree of life , as leaves in Autumn ; the candle of the life is quickly blown out : have therefore a better life in store , be not always beginning , always building , never inhabiting , always beginning , never finishing ; Stultitia semper incipit vivere : folly always begins to live , men are always beginning , and never go on . 1 Pet. 4.3 . Think it sufficient that you have walked formerly , as ye have done ; the time which remains , let us reckon it precious , and bestow it to better purpose . 

If every one in Christ , be in an happy estate of life ; then let men from hence know their state and condition , often reflect on their privileges , behaving themselves as men prising them , bestowing their time as well as may be ; let as few riwlets run out of this stream as you can . We pray , that we may do Gods will on earth , as perfect as the Angels do it in heaven ; we should therefore practise this as we pray for : their life is without interruption , they are in communion with God ; let us then b● doing , having our thoughts above , let us still be doing , let not cares and business call us off ; but let us comfort ourselves in God , acting that which is for his glory : prise this life , esteem it much , know what ye have by Christ , and consider the excellency of this life . That ye may know the excellency of this life , consider it comparatively with this other life , that we live : It hath three properties wherein it differs from , and excels this common life which we all live . 

First , it is an eternal life , joh 6.  Your fathers did eat manna and died , but he that eateth of this bread , shall die no more , but he shall live for ever : that is , this is the advantage that ye have , by the life that I shall give you : those that did eat Manna , the food of Angels , died , and john 4. those that drink of this water shall thirst again ; that is , those that live another life than this , shall die and thirst ; but those that live this life , never die . To live this life is when the soul life's in the object ; there is a living in the subject , yet this spiritual life is when the soul life's in the object , when as it is set on God. Take men that live other lives , ye shall see that their lives are short ; A man living in honour , that being the thing he mind's and intends , it is in potestate honorantis , there is no constancy in it , it is brickle . If a man life's in wealth , sets his mind on it : Why riches take their wings and fly away , Pro. 23. and then their life is ended . So if a man life's in pleasures and music , they pass away , and then he is dead ; those who live in these things suffer many sicknesses and many deaths , as his heart is more intent upon them . But may we may not mind them ? Yes , as if we minded them not , as a man may hear a tale , and have his mind elsewhere , or as a man that baits at an Inn , his mind is somewhere else ; If ye mind them , ye die in them ; he that mind's the best things , there is no change in them . God is always the same ; so his favour and love is constant ; see therefore that ye prise them . As a long time that is infinitely long , exceeds one that is a span long in quantity , so doth this life exceed the natural life , in perpetuity , and excels all other lives in excellency . 

Secondly , this life is a life indeed ; as that that feeds it is meat indeed ; the other is not so : see all the comforts of this life , they are not so indeed ; take wealth , pleasures , honours and the like ; wealth is but a false treasure : Luk. 16.11 . it is called the unrighteous mammon , the false treasure : ( Falsus Hector non est Hector : ) in comparison of the true treasure it is nothing . Therefore Solomon , Pro. 23.5 . speaking of riches saith ; wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not ? these riches are nothing : So for honours , all praise among men is nothing , it is but vain glory , and vain because it is empty and hath nothing in it : so the pleasures of this life are but sad pleasures , the heart is sad at the bottom : the comforts of this life , and only these are comforts indeed : the actions of this life , are actions indeed . In eating and drinking there is sweetness , but when we feed on the promises by faith , than we taste sweetness indeed in them . One that is weary , being refreshed with sleep finds sweetness and ease ; but it is another refreshing , that these find who have been weary and heavy laden with sin , and are now refreshed , this brings comfort to the soul . So to think of houses , wife , children , and lands ; to consider all the actions that we have done under the Sun , and all that we have passed thorough , is pleasant : but to think of the privileges we have in Christ , that we are heirs of Heaven , Sons of God , this is comfort indeed : especially to think of the good works we have done ; what good prayers we have made , what good duties we have performed , these are actions indeed , and bring comfort indeed . All the actions of this life are actions indeed , this life is a life indeed ; in death you shall find it so , that Christ's body and blood are meat and drink indeed ; that remission of sins , peace of conscience , are comforts indeed , peace indeed ; they are such though now ye think not so ; ye shall then know , that this life is a life indeed . 

Thirdly , this life of grace is a prevailing life , swallowing up the other , 2 Cor. 4.4 . the Apostle desired death : not to be unclothed , but to be clothed upon , that mortality might be swallowed up of life ; that is , desiring death , I do not desire to be deprived of the comforts of this life ; then I were unwise : I would not put off my clothes , but to be clothed with a better suit ; I desire a life to swallow up this life ; not as a Gulf swallows that which is cast into it , or as fire swallows up the wood , by consuming it , but a life that swallows it up , as perfection swallows up imperfection , as the perfecting of a picture swallows up the rude draught , as perfect skill swallows up bungling , or as a manhood swallows up childhood , not extinguishing it , but drowning it that it is not seen . The life of grace being perfect , swallows up imperfection ; he that life's this life of grace , hath the imperfections of this life swallowed up : For example ; before we live this life , we magnify riches honours , and Gugaes' ; but the life of grace coming , we have other kinds of comforts then : as a man that is to be made a Prince , contemns the things he before admired . The weaknesses we are subject to , are swallowed up in this life : all sickness and trouble are swallowed up in this : so are weaknesses , and imperfections . This should teach us to set a high prize upon this life of grace ; that we die no more if we live it ; that it is a life indeed , that it swallows up this other life , compare it with other lives , it far excels them . 

Secondly , this life of grace must needs be more excellent than the common life , because it makes a man a better man , much better than he was , this puts man into a better condition : elevates him , puts him into a condition equal to the Angels , and beyond in some respects . That ye may understand this , ye must know that every thing is made better , by mingling it with things that are better than itself , as Silver mixed with Gold , Water with Wine , are made better : There are two things required to make a thing better . First , that that thing with which it is mixed , be of a better nature than the thing itself . Secondly , that there be a good union . Nothing puts so high a degree of excellency into us as this , that we are united unto God ; this unity to God is the chiefest good . Secondly , this union betwixt God and us is a perfect union . There are many unions ; as first there is a relative union , such as is between man & wife . Secondly there are artificial & natural unions , as when two pieces of boards are put together , so that one touch the other : so when grain , and grain of another sort are mixed together ; there is a nearer union than this , when as water and water are mixed together : nearer than this , is the union that is between the soul and the body . Such a union as this , is there between us and Christ : we are in him , as the branches in the vine , we are knit to him , this puts us into an higher degree of excellency : silver mixed with gold is better ; yet if we could take the spirits out of gold , & make silver take the nature and quality of it ; it would be much better . We put on the spirit and quality of Christ , when as we live this life . Lusts which are most contrary to this life , puts us below men , makes us worse than Beasts ; this life puts us beyond men , and makes us equal with Angels . All men desire some excellency which is done by adding something to them ; some desire wealth , some learning , some honour . Consider then if ye live this life ye go beyond all others : nothing beyond God's Image ; nothing better to be united to than God : let this set the life of grace at a high rate in your affections ; men do it not , & therefore they despise religion in its self , & in those in whom it appears . 

Thirdly , ye have this advantage in this life of grace , it adds liberty to you , it makes you to do those things that otherwise ye could not do : it makes ye to pray , to repent , to believe , and to do those things without which there is no salvation : Look on Christ , there are but few that can do this : there are few that can delight in God , relish the word in its purity , take pleasure in the company of the Saints : comfort themselves in the Lord their God ; this life gives liberty , which is an addition of some perfection : it makes us to do things , that we could not do before , and to do them in another manner . A man having gotten an Art , hath liberty to do those things which before he could not : as one that hath gotten the Art of logic or geometry can do that which before he could not do : as one in health hath liberty to do that which he could not do being sick : water being hot , hath liberty to heat , which it could not before : There is no liberty to do holy actions , but this liberty of the life of grace : the Spirit of life adds liberty to do the actions of life . 2 Cor. 3.17 . where the Spirit of God is , there is liberty , to do things which before we could not do ; as one having an Art can do things that he could not do before : This , though you prize it not , while your mountain is strong , yet the time will come when ye will need liberty to pray , repent , and trust in God ; and than ye will find the pretiousnesse of it : this than sets a price upon this life of Grace , and should make you to desire it . 

Thirdly , if it be a happy condition , and that be the privilege of those who are in Christ , that there is such a life for them ; let this teach men to seek it , to live this life of grace , to get it if they have it not : to confirm it if they have it ; to abstain from lust , the sickness of the soul , and the means to quench this life : take heed of estranging yourselves from God , who is the principle of this life : take heed of dejections of mind , the cloudings that damp this life . This life is to be active , to act much in the ways of God ; when a man is cheerful and vigorous he life's a life of nature ; so in this life of grace , he that hath a quick and nimble sense , and is forward and busy in good works , life's most ; hath most life : he that rejoiceth most in God , hath most comforts , hath most life ; Take heed of the contraries . Idleness , sencelesnesse , and barrenness are contrary to life , take heed of them : take heed of sadness that rusts the wheels of the soul , whereas joy doth oil them . Do all to further this life : avoid all that hinders it . Labour now to be translated from death to life : that which hinders us , is , that we think we are in a state of life , when we are not . Now ye may know whether ye are alive or no , by seeing whether ye are dead or no : But because ye may be certain whether ye are alive or not ; I will give you some positive signs of life to know it . 

First , ye are translated from death to life , ye are living men if ye love the brethren , 1 joh. 3.14 . If a man be a living man , he life's in another element than he did before ; Every living man converseth with those of the same kind , as every creature doth ; Sheep with Sheep , Lions with Lions , Doves with Doves ; so living men will converse with living men . Not loving the brethren , we are in a state of death : every creature must have an element to live in ; a new life must have a new element : evil men out of their companies , are as Fish out of the water : every life hath a taste & appetite , a new life hath a new taste and judgement , Pro. 29.27 . an unjust man is an abomination . to the just : & he that is upright in the way , is an abomination to the wicked : that is , one hate's the things that the other love's : he that is alive , the things which before he loved , he now hate's : he abhors the things , that evil men delight in . That which is a dog's meat , is a sheep's poison , as the proverb it : so that which wicked men delight in , is as odious as poison to the just . To judge this life by ; see what your company and delights are , nothing can be less dissembled than company . In his company man doth speak out of the abundance of the heart , he than betrays himself what he is : there is no dead man , nor living man but he is inward with the like : no sign so much pointed at in the Scripture , as this , ye are translated from death to life , if ye love the brethren , 1 joh. 3.14 . and joh. 13.35 . By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples , if ye love one another : this rule will not deceive you . 

Secondly , ye may know whether ye live this life , if ye contend for it : that life which a man life's , for it he will contend ; he will let any thing go rather than it . If ye live this life of grace , ye will maintain it : and ye can do no otherwise . 1 john 3.9 . He that is born of God cannot sin : to be born of God , is to lead a new life ; he that life's a new life , admits not the things which tend to the destruction of it : Compare this with the 1.  Pet. 2.11 . abstain from fleshly lusts , which fight against the soul : he that is born of God sins not ; that is , he yields not to sin with his good will , but struggles against it ; as one in health strives against sickness ; resistes the disease , and maintains a war against it . 

But yet the best are foiled . 

't is true , yet they strive , they never yield ; they maintain a war : and this they do not only by discourse , but there is a natural instinct that puts them forward : they may be cast back , yet they return again : they may have a sickness , that takes away sense ▪ they may swoon and be astonished for a time , yet after they contend for life : every evil man contends for his life : he leads his life in some lust , from which if he be drawn he returns again : as a thing that is lifted from the earth , will fall down to it again : he reckons the ways of God hard , and opposite to him : the wisdom of the Spirit is enmity to the flesh : neither can it be subject to the Law of God , Rom. 8. it cannot but resists it . Every creature labour's to maintain its being : so evil men continuing in sin , strive naturally against all that would bring them out of this life of sin : so the Saints they live a life of grace , and labour to maintain it . john 6.68 . Christ ask his Disciples whether they also would go away ? Peter made this answer , Lord whither shall we go , thou hast the words of eternal life ; that is , whiles we conceive thee to be the principle and fountain of this life , we cannot depart from thee . The Saints will let go friends and life , and all for this life . Count therefore of others and judge of yourselves , by contesting for this life : strive to maintain it , let all go rather than it . 

Thirdly , ye may know whether ye have this life in you or not , by the fruits of it , as the tree is known by its fruits . If the word turn the stock into its own nature , ye know it by the fruits . Gal. 5.25 . If ye live in the Spirit ye will also walk in the Spirit ; that is , if ye profess yourselves holy men , show it by walking in the Spirit : holy men will be doing that which is good . This is the surest trial , our works will not deceive us : other things which consist in imagination may . 1 joh. 3.10 . In this the children of God are manifest and the children of the Devil : who doth not righteousness is not of God , he that is of God doth not unrighteousness . Consider then what your walk and your actions are , and by them ye shall know this life . 

But how shall we know whether we walk in the Spirit or no ? 

I answer first , that there are many by-walkes , and if ye walk but in one of them , ye walk in the flesh , and not in the Spirit . jam. 1.26 . If any man seem to be religious , and bridleth not his tongue , but deceives his own heart , this man's religion is vain : that is , he that makes this sin his trade , and walks ordinarily in it , his religion is vain . Secondly , ye may know it by the guide's ye follow . Evil men they follow three guides . Ephe. 2.3 . they follow first the world , secondly , the Devil , thirdly , the flesh . Holy men have three contrary guides , first , the renewed part within ; secondly , the holy Ghost ; thirdly , the course of the Saints . Go ye the broad way ? oportet Sanctos vadere per diverticula , the Saints do not so : follow ye the stream ? fulfil ye the will of the flesh , or of the Spirit , what are your actions ? Ephe. 4.17 . I charge you that you hence forth walk not as the Gentiles do in the vanity of their minds : that is , holy men may have vanity in their minds , yet they walk not in it as others do : evil men may have holy thoughts ; yet they walk in the vanity of their minds ; and albeit that evil men walk not in all the ways of sin , yet they are dead : there is but one way to hit the mark , but there are a thousand byways : a holy man may stumble in the ways of God , and have some foils , but he leads not his life in sin , he strives against it : he that leads his life in any known sin , not resisting it , and will do it , and not cross himself in it , is dead ; his religion is vain . 

But what actions are there , that holy men do , but that wicked men and others do them ? 

I answer , that there is no good actions we do but they may be dead works : as men may pray , keep the Sabbaths , and yet they may be but dead works : they may do them for a show , yet they are dead . A shadow hath all the liniaments of a body , yet it wants life ; so the works of hypocrites , they want life , consider therefore , whether your works are living works ; you may know it by these three signs . 

First , if they proceed from the fountain of life , they are not dead works : compare Gal. 5.6 . In Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing , nor uncircumcision , but faith which worketh by love , with Gal. 6.15 . In Christ jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing , neither uncircumcision , but a new creature : all not proceeding from a new heart , and from faith which worketh by love , is nothing : this is the root of all , when all our actions come from faith , which works by love : else , though they are never so precious , they are but dead works . It is no matter whether ye pray or not , whether ye receive the Sacrament , keep the Sabbaths or not , they help not a jot unless they come from the principle of life , a new creature . 

Secondly , consider the manner of their working : they will be done with quickness and vivacity : Men do them as living actions , with all propenseness and readiness ; with much connaturalnesse , with much fervency and zeal ; when they are done in a perfunctory manner , they are dead works . 

Thirdly , ye may know them by their end ; look ye to Christ ? do ye all in sincerity to him or no , or to yourselves ? if ye do , than they are gracious works , and proceed from grace ; they are living actions , and not dead : they issue from a right principle aiming at God , and not at yourselves . Hosea . 10.1 . Israel is an empty vine , he bringeth forth fruit to himself . If you bring forth ●ruitss to yourselves and not to God , ye are but empty Vines , God accepts you not . 

Fourthly , this life is discovered by your behaviour to the means of life , when they are brought unto you : when there is no sound or no voice , there is no distinction 'twixt a deaf , and a hearing man : so where there is no light , there is no difference 'twixt a seeing man , & a blind : but the light differs them . So when as the light of the Gospel shines , than men are tried : In times of ignorance , God regards not men so much , but now in time of the Gospel , see if it be powerful , and whether you set yourselves about holy duties . Matth. 3.10 . Now is the Axe laid to the root of the tree : that is , since johns' coming there is a distinguishment 'twixt living and dead trees : A tree is not discovered to be dead , till it whither ; no man will cut down a tree in winter , because he knows not then whether it be dead or no ; the Spring distinguisheth the dead and living trees , in the winter they are all alike . The Spring is the powerful preaching of the word ; if men spring not then , if they come not in , they are dead . Those whose education hath been good ; those who live under a powerful Ministry , now is the Axe laid to the root of the tree with them ; it is a sign they are dead , if they profit not by it . 

Fiftly , ye may know whether ye have this life by the food it is fed with ; several lives are fed with several food . Now the food of this new life of grace is double , first , the word , secondly , good works . First , the word , 1 Pet. 2.25 . As new born babes , desire the sincere milk of the word that ye may grow thereby , if so be that you have tasted that the Lord is gracious : that is , if ye are alive as you profess yourselves to be , you shall know it by your behaviour to that which doth nourish your life . First ye will long after the word , as the child doth after the Teat . If the child be hungry , neither apples , nor rattles , nor any thing else can quiet him but the Teat : So nothing can quiet these but the word . Others may have excuses ; they will have none ; Either they will live where the word is , or they will bring it home to them ; they will bring themselves to it , or it to them . Secondly , they desire the sincere milk of the word ; many things may be mingled with the word , that do please the wit , yet those who live the life of grace , desire the sincere word , the pure word , without any mixture . Thirdly , they desire it , that they may grow thereby : many desire it to know it only : if ye desire it as new born babes , it will make you better & better ; many hear , but as men having an Atrophy in their bodies , they grow not , no fruit comes thereby . Fourthly , they taste a sweetness in the word above others : the second ground received the word with joy ; and Herod heard john Baptist with gladness ; but where there is true grace , they go farther : they delight in the word , it is sweeter to them than the honey : few can say so in good earnest , that the pure word is sweeter to them than Honeysuckle or the Honey Combe . job he esteemed the word more than his appointed food , job. 23.12 . The second food of this life is good works . joh. 4.32.33.34 . is the place out of which I collect this , where Christ being asked of his Disciples to eat : said that he had other meat that they knew not of ; then said they , hath any man brought him aught to eat ? He saith unto them , My meat is to do the will of him that sent me , and to finish his work . Do you good works with such a desire as men eat and drink ? do you hunger and thirst after them , desiring for to do them ? then ye are alive . Hypocrites may do much , but it is not their meat and drink to do it ; examine therefore yourselves by these signs , whether you are alive or dead . This is the preaching of the law , to show you the narrow differences of life and death . The first step to life is to know , that ye are in a state of death : the Law must go before the Gospel , john Baptest before Christ : ye must be brought to their case in the 2 Act. 37. who were pricked at the hearts , ye must be brought unto the case of the jailor , and of Paul : to the case of the Prodigal , that you may know your estate : than ye come home . Our end is to preach life and comfort to you , not damnation . Rom. 15.4 . All Scripture is written for our comfort : now there are many things in the Scripture that tend to discomfort and terrors , yet their end is comfort : as Physic is sharp for the time , yet the end is health . We desire not to exclude any , but to bring you in whilst you have time : the market is then hard to make , when ye lie on your death beds , labour to know it in time : your death is a time of spending not of getting ; it was too late for the foolish Virgins to buy oil , when they were to attend the bridegroom . We desire not to affright you with false fears , but to admonish you , that you be not deceived . I find this sentence , Be not deceived , prefixed before many places of Scripture , where God's judgement are denounced , as 1 Cor. 6.9 . Be not deceived , neither fornicators , Idolaters , Adulterers , etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God ; and Eph. 5.6 . Be not deceived with vain words , for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience ; to show , that men are apt to deceive themselves , in such cases as these , thinking themselves to be in better estate than they are . Consider your sins and apply them . Consider your particular sins , actio est singularium . Consider your particular sins , your particular actions , these will work upon you . This course Peter took with the jews , Act. 2. ye have crucified the Lord of life ; so Christ told Paul , that he was a persecutor , Act. 9 so john 4. he told the woman of Samaria her particular sins : he that she now lived with , was not her husband ; so God told Adam , thou hast eaten of the forbidden fruit , Gen. 3.  If ye have committed any gross sins , as drunkenness , covetousness pride , ambition , and the like , consider them . Consider your other sins , minoris infamiae , not minoris culpae ; as neglecting of holy duties , mispending the time , gaming , overly performing of holy duties , unprofitable hearing , keeping of bad company , profaning of the Sabbath , and the like . Consider then the terrors of God and hell , know with what a God you have to deal , and what a burden sin is , if God charge those on the consciences ye cannot bear them . I desire not by this to burden you , but to unburthen you of your corruptions . Now seeing this life is so excellent , I will add certain motives to make you to desire it . 

First , it is a happy life ; and it must needs be so , because it is the life of God and Angels : it is that life which we shall live hereafter ; ye may live this natural life , and want happiness . This life of grace and the life of glory differ only in degrees , they differ not in kind ; the competent judges of this are the Saints , who have tried both . Heb. 11.15.16 . If they had been mindful of that country from which they came , they had liberty to have returned , but now they desire a better country , that is , an heavenly . In a Herd of Swine , if some stray away from the rest , and return not again , it is a sign they have found a better pasture : so when men leave their companions , and return no more , it is a sign , they have found some better things . Conceive not then of this life as many do ; to be only a privation , or a melancholy thing , nothing but a mere mortification ; this is a life , it hath its comforts , eating , recreations , and delights ; ye lose not your pleasures if ye live it , but change them for advantage : he that leads this life , dies as the corn doth ; from a seed it grows up into many stalks , he gains by this bargain . Christ doth make an hard bargain with none , he that deals with him , gains a hundred fold . If ye part with wealth , ye have spiritual treasures for it : if you part with your pleasures , ye have joy in the holy Ghost : have ye crosses , ye are sanctified in that which is better ; lose ye this life , ye have eternal life . 

Secondly , this life of grace hath that which every man seeks , it hath much pleasure . prov. 3.17 . All her ways are ways of pleasure ▪ Those that walk in the ways of God are full of pleasure ; this life brings a double pleasure , first , the reward of it , second , the comfort in performing the actions of it . Every good work as the Hebrew proverb is , hath meat in its mouth ; the living of this life , hath a reward sufficient in its self , as appears by this . All pleasures follow some actions , and therefore men desire life , because it is a continuance of action : so men delight in new things because as long as they are new , the intention remains . The actions of this life are full of change ; those actions that are perfect , there is pleasure following them , as beauty follows a good constitution , or as flame the fire . The actions of this life are perfect actions , the perfectest actions have the most perfect delight : the actions of this life are most perfect actions , therefore they have most perfect delight , because they are the actions of the best faculty , about the best object . All actions have the denomination of their perfection from their objects : these are actions of the soul , they are occupied about God , therefore they are the best and highest actions . He that life's about the best object , greatest content doth follow : he that life's this life , life's about the best object ; therefore all the ways of it , are ways of pleasure . There is more comfort and more Assiduity of consolation in this life , then in any other life . In other lives , every one according to his humour hath his delights , but yet they are not permanent , because he delighteth in transitory things ; but he that life's the life of grace , delights in things that are truly delightful at all times : other delights are but delights at some times , in some places , they are not always so : but he that life's the life of grace , pitcheth on those that are always so . prov. 14.15 . A good conscience is a continual feast . Other comforts may fail ; a man may fall into affliction ; riches and pleasures may be taken away , than the days are evil ; but a good conscience is a continual feast , that is , be his case what it will , his comfort is never interrupted . All other comforts are about sense , or things of this life , which are subject to alteration ; but this life and the comforts of it , admit no change . A man being sick , he cannot do actions of health , they are restrained : so one in prison is not at liberty to do what he would ; but the actions of this life are assiduous , they cannot be interrupted : ye may pray continually , rejoice evermore , ye may always have communion with God.  

Thirdly , this life is a life that is least indigent of all others : it needeth least . Take a man that leads any other life , he needs many things Luk , 10.41.42 . this is shadowed in that of Martha , and Mary : Martha busies herself about many things , she wanted many ; but Mary had one thing that was profitable for all things , removes all evils , brings all happiness , and that is Godliness which is profitable for all things , 1 Tim. 4.8 . 

Fourthly , the comforts of this life are pure comforts , Psal. 18.26 . I walk purely with those that walk purely . This is not only to be understood of the consolations of grace , but also of common blessings , being the fruits of this life : there is no sorrow with them , there is a pure comfort without any mixture of sorrow . God giving these blessings in mercy , they are free from mixture of discomfort ; but being not the fruits of this life of grace , being reached by sin and sinful means , or God giving them in his providence , not in his mercy , there is sorrow in them : ye may have riches , honours , friends , and all outward things , and yet they are not pure blessings , because God's blessings is not mingled with them . 

Lastly , it is a life most capacious of comforts : ye may give all the faculties of the soul comfort . Every creature according as his life is , feels more or less comfort . Plants as they feel no hurt , so they feel no sweetness : beasts that have a sensible soul , feel more evil and good : a man that life's a natural life , not knowing the life of grace , is sensible of more good and evil , than sensible beasts ; he apprehends Heaven and Hell : but a man that life's the life of grace , is more capacious of comfort : here you may suffer your faculties to run out to the utmost . If ye desire wealth or pleasures , your affections must not run out , ye must hold them in ; else they drawn you into perdition , & pierce you thorough with many sorrows . If ye affect heavenly Treasures , if ye affect praise with God , ye may be as covetous of them as you william  

Thirdly , let this move you to seek this life of grace , because it is the most excellent thing of all others . All other things are subordinate to it ; the utmost end is still most excellent : the end of war is for peace , therefore peace is better than it ; ye plough for harvest , therefore harvest is best : the end of all actions is for this life of grace . Why labour ye for food , but to maintain life ? why live ye but to serve your souls ? Prudence is a steward to this holy life : as the steward provides for the family , that the master be not troubled with those meaner things ; so prudence is a steward , that the soul may be occupied about things that are agreeable to it ; that it may have its conversation in heaven , and with God. Pervert this order , it destroys the creature . Beasts living the life of sense , it doth perfect them , for that is their utmost end : man having reason , living as a beast , destroys himself , because that is not his end ; he that perfects himself as a beast , destroys himself as a man : perfectio mentis est perfectio honinis . Let this stir us up , to live this life : it is the utmost end of all . To be Lawyers , Physicians , and other callings , help us in the living of this life , yet they are subordinate to it : drown not yourselves in subordinate things ; if ye do it , it is your destruction : therefore pitch on the principal . 

Fourthly , that which is best in the end , ( I take end now in an other sense ) is to be chosen above all things else : that is well which ends well . In this life of grace , ye have this advantage which ye have no where else . Eccles. 7.4 . The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning , that is , this life disposeth us to think of death the end of all , which to do is wisdom . Deut. 32.29 . OH that they were wise , then would they consider their latter end . In other things the beginning is good , the end is bitter ; but the actions of the life of grace are sweet , ye fare the better for them , the very remembrance of them is sweet , and the reward of them comes not long after : All other things are called perishing meats , john 6.27 . there is a parable in it : that is , they are as perishing meats , that are sweet in the palate , yet they pass away ; but this endures unto eternal life , it continues . The worst thing in this life ye never repent of : as it is said of sorrow for sins ; that it is sorrow never to be repent of : but the best things that ye do in the other life , ye repent of . All other things that ye do they may be sweet for the present ; yet as it is said of drunkenness , prov. 23.32 . so may it be said of them , that they by't like a Serpent , and sting like an Adder , though they seem sweet . The strange woman is sweet : yet prov. 5.4 . her end is bitter as wormwood , sharp as a two-edged sword ; goods evil gotten are sweet for the present , yet their mouths shall be filled with gravel , that got them . But on the other side , the end of all the actions of this life is good : as it is said of job , that his latter end was more than his beginning , job 42.12 . Psal. 37.37 . Mark the perfect man and behold the upright , for the end of that man is peace . If a man being to die , and having ended his days , should put all his honours , wealth , and pleasures into one balance , and all his good works , all his faithful prayers , all the actions of the life of grace into another , he would find them to be best . The bad man doth as the Silkworm doth , winding up himself into his ill works , he perishes ; the other winding up himself in his gracious actions , enters into salvation . 

Fiftly , choose this life before all others , because God is pleased with it , it being like himself ; as the creature is pleased with that which is like it . God is a Spirit , and will be worshipped in Spirit and truth ; he is a living God , and doth delight in a living man : we ourselves delight not in dead men , no more doth God : therefore Rom. 12.1 . we are exhorted to give up our souls and bodies a living sacrifice to God. God regards not dead bodies ; be ye living sacrifices , which is the act of your will , acting the duties of this life . This is called walking with God ; which is to be in his presence , to go his way , and to maintain communion with him : this is when as men do , audire et reddere voces : when there is natural delight : when as they are in presence one with another ; and therefore walking with God , and pleasing of God , are used promiscuously for one and the same thing : For , Heb. 11.5 . it is said of Enoch , that he walked with God , and Gen. 5.22 . It is said , that he pleased God.  

But you will say , what benefit is this ? 

I answer , that it is great . God disposeth of all things in the world ; is it not wisdom then to have him your friend ? Gen. 28.9 . jacob being to take his journey , Isaac said unto him , God all-sufficient be with thee . God is all-sufficient ; if ye have him , ye have all : In the creature there is no such thing , there is nothing but vanity in them , they are but as candles , as Stars to the Sun . God is all-sufficient : all the happiness of the creature , makes not men happy : All men seek happiness , yet they never find it , without having God : All happiness is in God's favour ; In outward happiness you must have other compounded things : Christ rebuked them that counted her happy in the creatures , saying ; Blessed is the womb that bore thee , and the Paps that gave thee suck ; no saith Christ , these will not make a man happy ; but blessed are they which hear the word of God , and keep it ; having God ye have all things , God disposeth all things , and giveth the comfortable fruition of them . Ye may have all outward things and yet want comfort , God's curse makes all miserable , though ye have all that the creature affords ; therefore give yourselves no rest , till ye have got this life , without which he delights not in you . 

Adam losing God's Image was not happy , because God was gone from him ; yet he had all the creatures which he had before . This life of grace brings us to that state , that Adam was in at first ; this restors us to it ; seek not then your happiness where it is not to be found . We all do as the Prodigal did , we get our portion into our own hands , and go from our Father's house , and seek for our happiness elsewhere ; but ye shall find at last , that all else is but husks : thus the Saints have found it . This life of grace gives rest to the soul , all else in the creature is but vanity and vexation of spirit . Vanity is nothing else , but an insufficiency in the creature to give that content that we looked for in it : as when we look for water in an empty well , seek for that in the creature that is not in it ; we see its vanity in the absence of the good we looked for , and presence of the evil we looked not for . In God ye find rest and tranquillity , such a tranquillity as in the Sea , when it is without waves ; as is in the upper region of the air , where no tempests are . Look on the lives of men , who are taken up with trifles when they are young , when they come to a riper age , greater things move them , when men are wiser , they feel the apprehension of higher things ; when ye lift up yourselves and keep them on the wing , ye are freed from troubles and cares . Paul had a greater measure of this life than other men , his Epistles do transcribere animam , transcribe as it were his soul , declare it , he was full of constancy and comfort : the more constantly we live this life , the greater gainers we are . 

Lastly , till ye live this life , ye have no assurance that ye are in the number of the elect . Repentance puts a new life into men ; till ye find this in you , ye know not whether God is yours , and ye know not whether God will work it in you ; This should make us tremble and fear , and never to leave till we had it . This life is a fruit of election ; we know not whether we are in Jacob's or Esau his case , till we know we have it : make haste therefore to get it . It lies not in your power ; The Spirit breatheth when and where it listeth ; you may fear that God will not give it you , if you spend your life in vanity . Take one that neglects you all the time that he is able to do you service ; if he seeks unto you in his extremity for his own ends , what answer do you give him , but this : Seeing he hath neglected you when he was able to do you service , you may justly refuse him now , he is able to do you none ? So if ye neglect God whilst ye are able for to serve him , and seek to him in your extremity , take heed that ye receive not that answer from him , as the Israelites did in their extremity , Go to your Idols , and let them help you : nay , he forbids jeremiah to pray for them . Consider this , and make haste to live this life of grace ; ye cannot get it of yourselves , God must put it into you . 

Now if these motives move you to seek this life , and after examination of yourselves , ye find it not to be in you , then use these means to get it . 

The first means to get and maintain this life , which is all one , ( for that which begets it doth likewise nourish it ) is knowledge : abound in knowledge , get much light ; this life consists in light , when a man judgeth aright . The understanding enlightened is the primum vivens , the first living part : and therefore ye shall find , that life and light are put one for the other , Ephese . 4.14 . Stand up from the dead , and Christ shall give you light : and joh. 1.4 . Christ was that light , and that light was the life of men , this life stands in enlightening the mind : add to this light , ye add to life . The reason why men are dead , is , because there is a darkness in their souls , they see not the ways of God : therefore they act not , they step not forward , because they are in the dark : All shining is from light , as ye increase light , so ye increase life . Ephe. 4.18 . it is said of the Gentiles , that they were strangers from the life of God , through the ignorance that is in them . The knowledge of God , brings men nearer to the life of God. Ephe. 4.24 . holiness is said to proceed from truth , the words are ; put on the new man , which after God is created in righteousness and holiness , which proceeds from truth . 

But you will object , that there are many who abound in knowledge , who have l●fe little enough : that ignorant men live this life most : that none live it less , than those that know most . 

To this I answer , that there is a double knowledge : First , there is a mere enlightening and informing knowledge : Secondly , there is an operative knowledge : ye may have enough of the first , and be never the near : but it is the lest that helps and gets this life : and this knowledge is the gift of the sanctifying Spirit , this is the operation of God : we do but inform and teach men , we cannot make them do any thing : we cannot make them practise . God's teaching makes this knowledge operative ; persuades every way , works every way . Secondly , there is a knowledge in the habit , and a knowledge in the act , which produceth actions : these are set down obscurely . In the 2 Pet. 1.12.13 ▪ the Apostle there saith , that he would not be negligent to put them always in remembrance of those things , though they knew them , and were established in the present truth : yea I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle , to stir you up by putting you in remembrance : Peter did not write unto them that they might know those things habitually ; for so they knew them before ; but that they might know them actively , and might presently act them : for that end he wrote . The first knowledge is as sparks raked up in ashes , the other as sparks blown up : the first is as the sap in the root ; the later like the sap that fills the branches with leaves and fruit : the first is a general knowledge gotten by contemplation ; the last is a practical and active knowledge , a knowledge to practise . The Scripture exhorts to do things y 't intent this knowledge . Deut. 4.1 . & Deu. 6 the Israelites were exhorted to hear and know the statutes of the Lord , that they might do them ; to speak of God's word and works , which acts their knowledge , puts them in remembrance of God's mercies , and stirs up their minds . josh. 1.8 . he is commanded to read the Law , and meditate in it day and night ; not to know it , for at that time , there was little written ; but he was to read it , that he might do it . 

But if we do this so much , it will hinder and interrupt our businesses , so that we shall fail of our enterprises . 

To this I answer ; that this will not hinder them , but they shall be done the better , as oiling of the wheels makes them go the better . Psal. 1.2 . he is said to be blessed , that doth meditate in the Law of God day and night : Your knowledge being brought to action helps you much ; often hearing of the word , which puts you in remembrance , adds to your life , though it hinders you in other things . Those who have not the word to hear , live not under preaching Ministers , who will not be at the cost to get them , or live where they are not , are much to blame , and live not this life . Simon Magus sinned , in thinking that the holy Ghost might be bought with money ; do not they also sin , who do less than he ? that will not give money for to have the Gospel brought unto them . There is the like fault , when as men may have the word , and come not to it . If they come to it , though it addeth not to their knowledge , yet it helpeth their acting and life . Those who neglect the constant reading of the word , who are not constant in private prayer , those who neglect the speaking and talking of good things , they neglect this life . That Arabian proverb , Shut up the five windows , that the house may be full of light ; will be of good use here : that is , the five senses being shut up , the fuller of light shall we be : the not stopping up of them , makes men ignorant , cares and businesses possessing men's minds , there is no room left for better things . Let your minds be still plodding on that which may further you in grace and truth . It is ignorance that makes men , strangers from the life of God , Ephe. 4.18 . and this is not an ignorance that proceedeth from want of knowledge , but from the badness of your hearts ; hard hearts makes men ignorant : why do men hear and yet are ignorant , but because their hearts are hardened ? they regard not the word , and so they grow not in knowledge . 

The second means to get this life is to be much in doing : be much in doing , in acting the duties of new obedience ; the more ye are occupied the more ye live : else deadness doth possess you : be still praying and meditating , those revive you : those are the coals that keep the heart warm ; this life like water is apt to grow cold . 

But I must be full of life ere I can do actions . 

I answer that one begets the other : action begets life , and life begets action ; as health produceth exercise , and exercise procureth health . 

But I am indisposed and unfit for such actions . 

I answer , that if ye are indisposed , the more need you had to be doing , else you are more unexcusable ; the way to get heat is to be acting : as motion doth bring life to a benumbed member , so doth it to the soul : be awaked , be stirring , this will revive you again , Christian's hearts are awaked when as they themselves sleep ; if they stir them up , there will be more life in them , Rom. 2.13 . They beginning to languish , their medicine is to rise up and be doing . Gal. 5.16 . Walk in the spirit ; those who have the Spirit stand not still , as one that cannot stir : this acting helps the Spirit ; first by enlarging and intending life . Secondly , by preventing that which increaseth death : the more we walk in the ways of life , the more we prevent the way that leads to the Chambers of death : Be doing , if not one thing yet another . In the step out of your callings , be doing , reading and praying ; Conferring and talking of good things . the neglect of this is the cause why there are so many dwarves in grace . Men content themselves with morning and evening duties , and it is well if they do them ; but do you the actions of life more constantly and abundantly . It is the corruption of our nature that we are not doing : life is maintained by the actions of life ; habits are maintained by actions that are suitable to them ; We live in the commandments by well doing , as the creature doth by food : Good actions maintain life , it receives strength from well-doing : set yourselves to pray , do holy duties , still pray , do more and more ; the more ye do , the more life increaseth . 

The third means to get this life is to get faith . Faith helps this life ; it is a life of faith , and it makes us to live this life by three ways , 

First , it gives a reality to the privileges of life : makes you see they are so indeed : therefore ye act , ye believe that God is such a God , that ye have such privileges , that ye are heirs of all things . If ye think that God is such a one as he is , in wisdom , power , and mercy , ye intent them and live the life of grace : If ye doubt and question with Atheists , if these be dreams , than ye intent them not . He that believes saith , let me have God sure : the other saith , let me have that I touch and feel ; but the imaginary things resting in faith and hope I care not for : the more ye believe these things , the more ye are occupied about them . 

Secondly , faith draws you on to action : this life is the acting of the duties of new obedience . Faith and a persuasion further other things : as if one be persuaded that such a thing will hurt him , it produceth an action of the will , abstinence : if a man be persuaded that he shall die without the Physician , he sends for him . So in all other actions , persuasion is that which sets a man on work . So in spiritual actions , if we are persuaded that such a sin committed will not make our bodies sick but our souls , we will not do it ; if we are persuaded our souls shall far the better if we do such a thing , this makes us to do it : being persuaded we shall have a recompense of reward , it produceth action , and the more action the more life . 

Thirdly , faith doth it by fitting us for Christ , from whom our life comes : 1 joh. 5.12 . he that hath the Son hath life . First , the Son of God infuseth life into him to whom he is conjoined ; the conjunction betwixt Christ and us is but relative : and between the king and the subject ; when the subjects resolve to take such an one for their king , they are conjoined to him ; so when a woman resolves to take such a man for her husband , she is conjoined to him . The action of taking Christ , is to take him as a Lord , to serve him , as a Saviour , to have all comfort by him : he that hath the Son in the relative union , shall have him in the real union : the Son will quicken you , as the soul doth the body . A Chrian hath the life of the Son of God. Gal. 2.21 . I live , yet not I , but Christ life's in me : all that I do , Christ doth it in me : all that the body doth , the soul doth it : the body life's not , but the soul life's in it . After that manner Christ life's in us : not a good thought or affection , not any resolution or motion of the soul , but comes for Christ : being united to Christ by faith he life's in us . joh. 6.33 . he that eats my flesh , and drinks my blood shall live . As flesh gives life to the body , so the Son gives it to the soul : To eat the flesh of Christ , is to prise him , to desire and long after him , which is after the spirit of bondage , to eat him , is to take him , to come to him , to have him your God : In these stands the eating of Christ. First , in prising of him exceedingly ; to part with any thing for him ; to take his Cross with all losses . Secondly , to eat him is to believe him , to be yours and you his : this eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ , expresseth our relative union with him , and then follows our real union : the Spirit immediately gives this : he that doth the first , shall have the second . 

But how shall we do to believe this ? 

I answer , ye see the old Adam communicated corruption to all his posterity , because they were born of him ; so these who are born of the new Adam , that is , these who take him and believe in him , have grace communicated to them by him : this new birth makes you as capable of Christ , as the other doth of the first Adam : why then shall not the second Adam communicate grace as well as the other doth corruption ? The philosophers were all deceived in this point , from whence corruption should come , but we know that it came from Adam ; and so doth grace come from Christ. To get this life , let us seek it in him , let us believe more , let us be humbled more , repent more , and take Christ more : take him on any condition , prise him , set him at the highest rate , hold him fast . As in the actions of marriage , those who are to marry will not part upon any condition ; they take one another for richer , for poorer , for better for worse : after this manner must we take Christ , the more ye take Christ thus , the more ye have the Son , and so ye live more the life of grace . All grant that this life comes by the Spirit ; and there is no way to get the Spirit but by the Son . Ye must first eat ere ye can be nourished ; ye must fix your eyes on his passion , as the wife doth fix her eyes on her husband : ye must seek this life from the Spirit ultimately , but ye must first have the Son , and then ye have life : He must have the Son that will have this life ; he must be ingraffed into Christ as the branches are into the root : get Christ , and then this life shall abound in you . 

The fourth means to get and increase this life , is communion of Saints . The mouth of the righteous is a well spring of life , prov. 10.20 . they put life into those that have it not , and increase it in those in whom it is , Ephe. 4.24 . their speeches minister grace to the hearers ; they edify them : hearing of the word of life , and talking of the fountain of life , puts life into men . The health of the body doth not communicate itself to others ; it is otherwise in the life of the soul ; the life of it makes others to live more : as Iron sharpens Iron , so one holy man doth another . See it by the contrary . In evil men who are dead there is an aptness to dead others , their words are as continual droppings to put out this life ; their tongues are set on fire of hell , jame. 2.6 . The tongue of good men is a coal fetched from the Altar , they have fire within them . When two lie together they keep one another warm ; there is action and redaction ; this is powerful means to get and increase this life . The tongue of the righteous if full of life , it is powerful to make men live . Gal. 2.14 . Paul speaking to Peter , saith , why compellest thou the Gentiles to live after the manner of the jews ? he used not outward compulsion , his example and life was a compulsion . The company which we keep , compel us to do as they do : evil company they are the Devil's snares , they do as brambles keep us in , and fetter us : the suitableness of evil companions draws out our secret corruption : He that resolves to live this life , must resolve to withdraw himself from evil company , who are a strong temptation unto evil . 

There is a difference between leading ourselves into temptation , and being led into it : when you lead yourselves into temptation , ( as you do when as you rush into evil company ) you are out of the pale of God's protection : If ye touch pitch ye cannot but be defiled with it , wherefore make your company good : this is an effectual and powerful means to beget this life in you , Saul being among the Prophets , changes his spirit , and became a Prophet : one that goeth fast , makes those that go with him to mend their pace . Act. 11.23.33 . it is said of Barnabas , being a good man and full of the holy Ghost , and of faith , that he added much people unto the Lord Which manner of speaking shows that the speeches of those who are full of faith , help to breed faith : that if men be full of the Spirit , they quicken the Spirit . Evil company deads' men : they are the trunks through which the Devil speaks : and this deading is done in an insensible manner , and then most of all where it is least perceived . Evil company poisons men ; a man turning his opinion which company can do , is most of all poisoned , when as he thinks that he hath least hurt . 

The last means to get and increase this life , is that which is mentioned in the text ; and that is , the hearing of the voice of the Son of God : this will beget and increase this life : that is , if when we speak to your ears , he speak to your hearts , than ye live . Ye have two teachers , the one is he that speaks to you , the other is Christ. Heb. 8.11 . They shall no more teach one another , for they shall all be taught of God. There are two shepherd's , the one is he that feeds you , the other is the great shepherd of the sheep : there are two great voices , the one speaking outwardly to the ear , the other when as Christ speaks effectually to the heart . 

When Christ speaks inwardly to the heart , than men live and not before . This is such a speech as Christ spoke to Lazarus , Lazarus come forth , and he came : his speaking puts life into us . Now what is this inward speaking of life to the heart ? It is nothing else but to persuade fully , and every way to convince us , that it is best to take Christ , to set to an holy course , to lead a new life . There is a speaking that comes near this life , and is not it : that is , when as men hear and understand the way , and apprehend the things of God , but practise them not . Here is a proximity to this life , yet it is not this life . Let a man come so near as that he thinks he acts it , yet he is dead if he act it not : when he acts it , than he is made a living man ; and then he thinks and believes , that the ways of sin are evil , and that they are evil to him . When God doth convince us that such a thing is evil , and that it is evil to us , than we live and not before . A man having a business to do , if all be done but one thing , this one thing crosseth all the rest ; but that being done our business is brought to pass : so in this life , a man having many offers of grace which do not fully persuade him , this is not enough , if Gods help be absent : but when once he speaks , he doth fully convince and persuade us , and makes us to continue . As Satan hahaving leave , never gives over vexing man ; so the Spirit keeps us in good things ; where there is this life , there the Spirit dwells . 

But after what manner is this effectual persuasion done ? 

I answer , when as God gives an ear , and speaks a voice for it to hear : he that hath an ear to hear saith Christ , let him hear . We then hear , when as there is a disposition wrought within us : when as we preach , there are many that have hard hearts and nothing for to soften them ; therefore the words falls from them as rain from a stone : but if there be a man that God will choose , he fits his heart , and so he is persuaded . This is called the opening of the understanding , Luke . 24.45 . he opened their understanding , that they might understand the Scriptures : when we speak to men , we sow as it were upon fallow ground which will bear no Corn unless God plow it . Those that saw the miracles of the Loaves , esteemed them not , because their hearts were hardened . Ephe. 4.18 . They are alienated from the life of God , thorough the ignorance that is in them , because of the blindness of their hearts , that is , they are not sensible of sin , and death , the word or the threatenings : when God takes away this hardness they are fit to hearken ; then comes light the beginning of life , which is the informing of the understanding , to judge righteous judgement . Those who have the life of Christ , if he speaks , it quickens them . It is the inward voice that quickens : seek therefore to God earnestly , that Christ would speak to your hearts : ye hear and are not quickened , because he speaks not . And thus much for this second point : that all in Christ are in a state of life . 

We come now to the third point , that may be noted out of these words , and it is this . 

That the voice of the Son of God , is the only means to translate men from death to life . Men before are dead ; Christ by his voice makes them living men . This voice is the only means , there is no voice but this that is able for to do it : that 's the scope of this Text. This proposition may be resolved into two parts . First , nothing else is able . Secondly , this is able for to do it . As it is said of faith , that it justifies , and nothing else but it can justify : so may it be said of this voice , that nothing else can translate men from death to life , and this can do it . To translate from death to life is nothing else but effectually to persuade and change the heart : now nothing else can thus persuade and alter the heart , but this voice of the Son of God. God himself frames the heart ; it is as a curious framed lock ; none can pick it , but he that knows the turning of it . God only fits the persuasions and turnings : men's persuasions are as one that will unlock a lock with a wrong key . God only can persuade japheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem , I cannot do it . esay 57.19 . I create the fruit of the lips ; that is , I make them to bring comfort . I create the fruit of the lips for peace by my power . That this is so you may see by diverse reasons . 

First , that it is so , see it by this ; we speaking to y e quickest , often times they believe not , but the others do : the same sometimes believe , sometimes not . If man were the sole cause , the word would have the same effect at all times . 

Secondly , this is life , and God only gives life : it is as the breathing of life into a clod of earth . It requires an almighty power to work this in those that believe , Eph. 1.19.20 . The same power that raised up Christ from the dead , raised us up : it is an almighty action to give this life . 

Thirdly , if it were not proper to Christ and his voice to translate men from death to life , he should lose his chiefest sovereignty : he quickens whom he will : he hath compassion on whom he will have compassion ▪ If men could translate men from death to life , than it would not be proper to God to do it . 

Lastly , as nothing else can do it , so the voice of the Son of God is able for to do it . At the first creation all was made by the voice of God ; he saith , Let there be light , and there was light : let him say to any man follow me , and he doth it . Matth. 9.9 . he saith to the Publican sitting at the receipt of Custom , follow me ; and he left all , and rose up and followed him . Christ speaking to his ear and heart , made him to follow him ; his speech was like the speech of Elias to Elisha , he followed him and could not choose but do it : Christ speaking we cannot but follow him . 

But what is this voice of the Son of God that translateth men from death to life ? 

I answer , it is nothing else but an inward work of the Spirit , by which he persuades men effectually to turn from darkness to light , and from the power of Satan to God. It must be understood of the effectual working of the Spirit , because who ever doth hear it life's : this voice reneweth and changes men , translating them from death to life . Now this effectual speaking consists in two things . First , in propounding the object , the truth to the heart . Secondly , in the persuasion of the truth . 

First , the Gospel must be laid open to the heart , all things necessary to salvation must be manifested to it ▪ than there must be light in the heart to apprehend these reasons which are propounded . The Scripture propounds things by authority : then the holy Ghost doth kindle light , to apprehend them which another doth not . Mark how Moses' beginning his book saith , that in the beginning it was thus , and thus God did ; he doth not persuade them by arguments to believe it : so john begins his Gospel without persuasions , In the beginning was the word , etc. so the Apostles commission was , Go and preach that Christ is Come ; he that believed shall be saved , he that believes not , shall be damned : The word of itself is sufficient authority : when the Gospel itself is thus propounded , than the holy Ghost kindles light . And therefore this life begins when as the Gospel is propounded , and light kindled ; then this life is wrought . Now there are three degrees of working this light by the Spirit . 

First , there is a stirring up of men , to attend to the voice of Christ : many there are that hear , yet attend not . Act. 16.14 . The holy Ghost opened the heart of Lydia , to attend unto Paul's preaching . We sow on fallow ground till the Spirit opens the heart to attend to the things that are spoken . 

The second work of the Spirit is to convince and persuade effectually and fully . joh. 16.8 . The Spirit shall convince the world of sin : that it , it shall convince and persuade thoroughly : none can do this but the Spirit . It doth also farther persuade men , that it is good for them to be convinced , and this is when the knowledge is full ; when as all the corners of the heart are answered , and the mind resolves to practice : Hypocrites and civil men are persuaded , yet not fully ; therefore they never practise ; if that one objection of the heart be unanswered , ye never came to practise . 

The last work of the Spirit is to keep this voice on the heart , that it vanish not . james 1.21 . The engrafted word is that which is made able to save our souls , and none else . Men may attend for a flash , but the Spirit must engraft the Word into the heart ; which as a sprig engrafted , grows bigger and bigger , and hath fruit from the sap : other men having truths not fastened on them , they grow weaker and weaker . 

To understand fully what this voice of the Son of God is ; ye must know that there is a double voice . First , an outward voice of the word which all hear . Secondly , an inward voice of the Spirit . This I collect out of esay 6.9 . Go to that people and tell them , hear ye indeed but not understand ; see ye indeed , but not perceive , that is , they shall have an outward hearing , an outward knowledge , but not an inward . There is a common knowledge which all these have , who live in the Church : and there is a knowledge that is only proper to the Saints which saves them . The differences 'twixt these two knowledges ; that of hypocrites , of them in sixth of the Hebrews ; 'twixt common knowledge , and effectual knowledge that is wrought in the hearts of the elect , are these . 

First , common knowledge is confused and general ; this is distinct , inward and particular : that is , the voice of the Son of God , speaking in the Ministry to all , may breed a knowledge of truths in men ; yet they apply them not to their hearts , and the turnings of them , Heb. 4.11 . The Word is sharper than a two edged Sword , discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart , piercing even to the deviding asunder the soul and spirit , and of joints and marrow : that is , that word of God that is lively indeed ; that voice of God that is effectual to salvation , it is sharp , it strikes not in general , but enters the inward parts . A staff cannot enter the flesh , it may bruise it ; but the voice of Christ enters like a two edged Sword , discerneth 'twixt moral virtues , and supernatural things wrought by the Spirit ; it distinguisheth exactly 'twixt the rectitude and obliquity of men's hearts : this is proper only to the saving knowledge of the Word . As nothing is hid from God , but it is naked to his sight ; so it is to his word : See if the word be distinct to you , else you know nothing . A man never knows any thing , till he knows the Elements , parts and grounds of it : the voice of the Son of God only makes you know things thus particularly . So in other things ye know not till you know particulars . Aristotle saith , a man is not a Physician , that knows things in general , in the gross , but he that knows them in particular . This is not to be a Physician , to know that such dry meats are good for a moist stomach , unless he also know dry meats and the Symptoms of a moist stomach : so it is in the knowledge of the Word . To know what regeneration is , is not enough , except ye know the parts , the kinds and signs of it . To know that none are translated from death to life , that love not the brethren , is not enough , except ye know the brethren and love them . To know , that he that is in Christ hath crucified the flesh , with the affections and lusts of it , is nothing , except ye know that ye yourselves have crucified it . This particular knowledge is it that makes manifest to a man the secrets of his own heart , 1 Cor. 14.25 . that is , the voice of the Son of God , discerneth the secrets of the heart , to know things particularly that are in it . The sheep distinguish the voice of the shepherd , from the voice of a stranger : when men come to hear , they hear the voice and distinguish not the sound , because they want this particular knowledge . 

Secondly , this hearing of the voice of the Son of God works a quick sense , in the hearts of those that hear it , that the outward voice doth not : and this follows the former . Let knowledge be particular , it works quick sense . Heb. 4.11 . it is called lively in operation : now life consists in quickness , and motion ; the voice of Christ speaking effectually breeds quickness . Sola individua agunt et sentiunt , A knife in general cuts nothing , the particular knife cuts . To know in general you are sinners , have corrupt natures , offend in many things , works nothing ; it is the reflection on the particular lives that works , this makes men tremble . Act. 2.  Peter having told the jews that they had crucified Christ , that pricked them at the heart . As of sins ▪ so is it of comforts , particular comforts work . If one can say , I am thus and thus , then comfort follows : so particular threatenings make men sensible . When God said to Adam , Hast thou not eaten of the tree whereof I said thou shouldst not eat ? this made him fear . The word doth breed a quick sense : they who have not this true voice sounding to them , esay 6.9 . in hearing they do not hear , and seeing they do not see ; their hearts are fat , their ears heavy , and their eyes shut . Rom. 11.8 . God hath given them the spirit of slumber ; that is , when as men hear this voice in a common manner , they are as a man in a slumber : it stirs them not : their hearts are fat ; that is , they are senseless : for fat is without sense . The property of them that hear in an ineffectual manner is this ; they have a spirit of slumber , they are as one hearing a tale , when as his mind is other where . If the things propounded were natural , they would hear them well enough ; but they are spiritual , therefore they are dull of hearing them . 

Thirdly , which followeth the second , those that hear the voice of the Son of God , have experimental knowledge , the other is but speculative . 1.  Cor. 2.6.9 . We preach wisdom to those that are perfect : such wisdom , as eye hath not seen , ear hath not heard , neither hath it entered into the heart of man ; but God reveileth it to us by his Spirit : that is , the chiefest in knowledge , have not seen with their eyes , or heard with their ears ; but those that hear the voice of the Son of God , have an experimental knowledge which others have not . This experimental & saving knowledge hath trial 1 joh. 2.13 . I write unto you fathers , because you have known him that was from the beginning : expound this with the 33. of Ezekiell , 33.  When this cometh to pass , then shall ye know that a Prophet hath been amongst you : that is , when I shall do this , they shall know experimentally that there was a Prophet amongst them . 1 joh. 5.49 . we know that we are of God ; that is , we know it experimentally ; they can say of this , as it is said in the 1 of joh. 1.1 . That which we have heard , that which we have seen with our eyes , that which we have looked upon , and our hands have handled of the words of life , declare we unto you . David takes it as peculiar to himself , Psal. 9.10 . They that know thy name will trust in thee , for thou Lord hast not forsaken them that seek thee : that is , they that experimentally know thee will trust in thee , for thou never faylest them that trust thee : they know it by experience . 1 Pet. 2.3 . Desire the sincere milk of the word that you may grow thereby , if ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious . We find in the Saints a longing after God ; they desire him , which others do not : thus did David : moreover they have assurance of salvation , which others have not ; and this assurance comes from hence : optima demonstratio est a sensibus ; the best demonstration is from sense ; as he that feels the fire hot knows it best ; tasting breeds longing ; assurance from experience breeds certainty . 

Fourthly , effectual knowledge that is bred by the voice of the Son of God , makes men approve and justify the ways of God , makes them to relish them : this follows the other ; when men have tried them they approve them , joh. 6.63 . The Spirit quickens , the word profiteth nothing ; the words then that I speak , they are Spirit and life . Christ having spoken , that his body was meat indeed ; many were offended at it : then he said , The Spirit doth quicken , that is , ye accept not my words , because ye have not the Spirit , ye have but flesh , that is a common knowledge ; my words are spiritual , and you are carnal , therefore they do not relish you . These words are otherwise interpreted by some : that is , these materials profit nothing without the Spirit ; but the other is undoubtedly the meaning , for so it is through the Scripture : the Spirit profits , that is , saving knowledge wrought by the Spirit : men not having it , do not approve it . It cannot be otherwise ; where the voice of Christ doth sound effectually , there they justify this : Wisdom is justified of her children , Luk. 7.35 . Rom. 10.15 . How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace ? that is , they see such beauty in the ways of God , that they are beautiful to them , they are vile to others . The Scripture often toucheth this , that when as there is but a common knowledge , men relish not the word , Rom. 8. they taste not the word : the spiritual part of the word crossing them , is bitter to them . 2 Cor. 2.15 . The word is compared to a sweet savour ; to many it is not so , to some it is the savour of death to death : it is a savour diffused through the house , they abhor it , and being guilty of death it leads them to death : In others it is the savour of life ; that is , they smell a sweetness in it , it brings them to life , to heaven ; the word being powerfully taught , there comes a savour : some smell sweetness in it , others otherwise . Luk. 2.35 . When Christ shall come , the hearts of many shall be opened , to approve or disapprove him : therefore he is the fall and rising of many : so when he came , some said he was a good man , others that he was a devil : some said that the Apostles were good , some that they were bad : See how ye approve the word in its self , and as it is expressed in men's lives . 

Fiftly , if it be a right knowledge , it breeds holy affections ; the other doth not : this follows the other . If men justify the Word , than they affect it . it 's a general rule , that all full persuasions draw on affections : let it be but a persuasion in habit , it stirs as the habit is . 1 Thes. 1.6 . My word was to you not in word but in power , because it did work in you joy in the holy Ghost . jer. 23.29 . comparing the word of true and false Prophets together ; My word is as fire , saith God , and as the hammer that breaketh the stone : it is the powerful word of it stirs your affections . Luke the last , Christ speaking to the Disciples that went with him to Emmaus , their hearts burned within them : they were full of holy affections . Consider if ye have those holy affections . Holy affections in the Scripture are ascribed to this knowledge : every where , where men hear , they know aright , Psal. 112.1 . Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord , that delighteth greatly in his commandments , Psal. 1.2 . Blessed are they that delight in the Law of the Lord : See whether there be holy affections in you : Felix did tremble at the Word ; so the second ground received the Word with joy , but not with holy joy . 

But how shall we distinguish them ? 

I answer , that if your joy be holy joy , afflictions will not put it out : if your joy be carnal joy , persecution puts it out : but joy in the holy Ghost is not put out by the contrary . 

Sixtly , that knowledge which is lively brings forth action ; it is powerful in men's actions , it is active and mighty in operation . Heb. 4.  It works in men's hearts and lives mightily , to overcome all contraries , Esa. 6.10 . Make the heart of this people fat , make their ears heavy , and shut their eyes , lest they see with their eyes , and hear with their ears , and understand with their hearts , and convert , and be healed ; that is , Let them have such a common knowledge as civil men and hypocrites have , and no more ; lest seeing aright , they understand with their hearts and be converted , and they be healed . Seeing with their eyes , is meant seeing with this knowledge , which if they see with , their hearts will be wrought on : their hearts being wrought on , they are converted , than they are healed . This follows on the other . Let the affections be stirred , they are the immediate principles of action ; what one affects he doth ; these are tied all on one string : flashy affections , flashy actions . joh. 6.45 . They shall all be taught of God , ; every man therefore that hath heard and learned of the Father , cometh to me : that is , every one that heareth this true voice of the Son of God , comes to me , that is , they breed actions whereby they come to me . See if your knowledge be operative . jam. 1.22 . distinguishing of hearers , he saith , Be not hearers but doers ; if ye find not this change , Christ hath not spoken to you . 

But in the Saints are many defects in their actions , ergo actions follow not hearing and knowledge . 

To this I answer , that as their actions are weak and faint , so their knowledge is weak Heb. 12.5 . they often forget and must be put in mind . 2 Pet. 1.13 they must be stirred up by putting them in remembrance of those things which they have forgotten . Secondly , this fail is from some doubt within , from some shaking : when as you see a defect in actions , or affections , it is because you want this convincing knowledge . The way to stir up affection and action , is the Word , which increaseth this operative knowledge . 

If it be so , that the voice of the Son of God is the only means to translate men from death to life , let us examine ourselves , whether we have heard the voice of the Son of God , or no ? If we have not , then let us know our cases , and be humbled : they that have not heard it are dead . Consider it is your distinct knowledge , not a knowledge in gross or general , that inlivens you . Know ye the passages and working of regeneration and repentance ? find ye the Word as fire , and as a hammer ? the Word is in its nature , and will be found so of them that receive it aright . Have ye an experimental knowledge ? approve ye God's Image , his ways in the Word , or in the lives of the Saints ? do ye justify wisdom ? are your hearts opened At the hearing of the Word ? do ye like it ? At Christ's coming many hearts were opened , because than his Word came , and it opened many men's hearts , showed them what they were . How do ye affect the Word , and Image of God in the lives of the Saints ? how do ye find holy affections in them ? blessedness goeth always with them . Affections are always a sign of this , have ye received the Word with them ? have ye sorrowed for your sins ? do you delight in God ? this will beget holy affections which will last ; afflictions put them not out , holy joy is not damped with afflictions , carnal joy is . What are your lives and actions ? If ye seeing others holy , ye cannot do as they do , this voice hath not spoken to you . All that hear Christ's voice will come and be doing . jam. 1.22 , if doing , be joined with hearing , if ye are doers as well as hearers , this voice hath spoken to you ; if your practice be not joined , ye are deceived . If ye find upon examination that ye have not done it : remember that Christ's sheep hear his voice ; ye may therefore fear ye be lost sheep if ye hear it not . He that hath an ear hears the Gospel ; If it be hidden , it is hidden to those that perish : where men live in ignorance and hear not , God regards not it so much : that 's not the time of trial : have ye the Word as wheat with chaff , it trieth not ; but the Word coming with authority , and not as the Scribes ; when Christ's voice sounds in the Word , see how ye are affected : if ye hear not ye are dead . Cant. 2.  Christ's coming is compared to a Spring time , wherein the flowers appear on the earth , and the birds begin to sing , and the trees put out their green fruit : that is , when Christ makes himself known , it is Spring time : do you spring when the Word comes , when the messages of salvation are made known unto you ? if not , ye are dead . Our end in speaking this is not to trouble you , but to bring you to salvation . I will therefore show you what keeps men off from hearing Christ's voice , that knowing the impediments ye may remove them . The impediments are seven . 

The first , is selfe-wisedome ; this is a great impediment from hearing the voice of the Son of God : selfe-conceitednesse hinders men much , because it breeds a despising of the ways of God. 1 Cor. 2.4 . The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God , for they are foolishness with him : therefore 1 Cor. 3.18 . if any man seem to be wise in the world , let him become a fool that he may be wise : that is , let him lay aside that wisdom which begetteth pride in our hearts . Michals disposition is in every one of us more or less , she despised David : so men chalk out a way to themselves , in which they will go , they will seek their own ways , and will not be subject to the Law of God. Rom. 8.7 . The carnal mind is enmity with God , for it is not subject to the Law of God , neither indeed can it be . 2 Cor. 10.5 . speaking of imaginations , saith , that men with them build up themselves against God , and will not alter their courses . The greatest opposition is in men's minds : take a man that hath a true opinion , it is easy to remove his lusts , but false judgements are as bulwarks against God's wisdom . Men will do thus and thus because they think their state is good . The Scribes and Pharisees came not to Christ , Luk. 15.1 . but Publicans and sinners came : so it is with men now , do we lay open their sins unto them , yet they will not be persuaded : men will be righteous of themselves , and will not be persuaded that Christ must be made unto them righteousness , and redemption , and wisdom . This opinion of ourselves is a great impediment , this contemns the way of God , and fashions out our own ways ; this contenting of ourselves with our present estate makes men err : therefore Psal. 119.21 . Cursed are the proud that are always erring from thy Law : Sel●e conceit makes men err , 

The second impediment is custom : men have been used to such ways , and will not alter them . joh 4.12 . the woman of Samaria was much held off with this argument . Christ coming to teach her the doctrine of salvation ; Art thou greater , said she , than our father jacob that gave us this Well ? This opinion that our fathers have gone this way , and it is transmitted to us , hinders men much ; men cannot endure newness . Lot is taxed for this by the Sodomites , Gen. 19.9 . This fellow came in to sojorne here , and will he now be a judge ? so Act. 17.  Paul preaching at Athens , the Athenians asked , What new doctrine is this that thou preachest ? men being accustomed to a way , it wins their opinion ; men having once judged , are loath to judge again : custom wins their affection . Change is troublesome : men having gone long in a course they will still plod on in the same tract . Custom of our fathers , or country or place where we are , our own custom makes us loath to forsake it . 

Thirdly , Similitude is a great hindrance . Exod. 7.22 . Pharaohs heart was hardened because the Magicians did the same miracles , that Moses and Aaron did ; So similitude hinders men from embracing the ways of Christ , and God. Men seeing Papists austerity like our mortification , their sufferings like true martyrdom , they are persuaded of their ways , as we are of ours : so for civility , when as men see it so like religion , as a spark is like the fire , they embrace it : All deceit is from similitude , false wares having the same die that true hath , deceive the buyers : so falling stars are like other stars . When we see some men that profess religion to be false hearted , we think all are so : wherefore Phil. 1.10 . The Apostles prays , that they might abound in all knowledge and judgement to discern of things that differ : this proximity makes us deceived . 

Fourthly , false experiments hinder us much ; some experiments of the works of God , that should draw us nearer to him , if we make false use of them , make us farther from him ; As if God afflict and restore again , or keep us from affliction , our hearts are hardened . Exod. 8.15 . when as the Frogs were removed , Pharaoh his heart was hardened : rest made him harden his heart : so many times it makes men slight the word , and afflictions which God lays on them . We may see this in Soldiers and Mariners ; none more ready to contemn dangers than they , because they have often escaped ; they delude the works of God that should draw them to salvation . Roots will make the weeds grow again , not being taken heed of : The long suffering of God should draw us to repentance , but it doth not so : 2 Pet. 3.3 . In the last time shall come mockers , walking after their own lusts , and saying , where is the promise of his coming ? for all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation ; that is , men shall feel nothing , apprehend nothing ; judgements being believed they second the Word , being eluded , they hinder us and it . 

The fifth impediment is ignorance ; men know not the ways of God , therefore they do not embrace them . joh. 4.10 . If thou hadst known the gift of God , and who it is that speaketh to thee , thou wouldst have asked of him . There is enough in religion to make men love it , if they knew it : there is virtue in it , there is beauty and profit in it . Esa. 57  There is a peace in it ; all the ways of it are ways of pleasantness : there is honour in it ; old age is honourable with righteousness . But men's hearts are full of darkness ; they see not , neither do they understand it . 2 Pet. 2.12 . They speak evil of the things they know not ; it 's true they know the things , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , they know them not experimentally and really , and that deceives them , 1 Cor. 8.2 . If any man think he knoweth any thing , he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know . One may know all things , and yet know nothing , as he should : Ignorance deceives many , it makes them to measure religion by a false rule , and common opinion . Acts 24.14 . it is called heresy ; when ye judge of it by external shows , all baseness is outwardly in religion , it is like a costly thing covered with straw : Christ was hid under a Carpenter's Son ; preaching under the name of foolishness : so our ignorance in attributing things to false causes keeps us off . If the Gospel be hid , it is hidden to those that perish ; there is a double ignorance ; privative , and positive ; that is it , by which the God of this world blinds men , breeding a false persuasion of good , and a good persuasion of evil . 

The sixth impediment is in-consideration : men do not consider the things they might know : if men would deduce one thing from another , and do that they know , they might be brought to God. Deut. 29.2.3 . ye have seen , saith Moses , all that the Lord did before your eyes , in the Land of Egypt , upon Pharaoh and his servants ; ye have seen those great signs and miracles which he did , yet the Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive , and eyes to see , and ears to hear until this day : that is , ye have not profited because ye have not considered . We think if that we had lived then , we had believed , yet we see how few of them did believe : we believe the Scriptures , yet what inconsequency is there in men's lives , because we do not consider things . Consideration helps to perfect men's actions ; it is a circular line ; one part helps the other . If we look back and examine our actions , it helps ; want of it hinders . What is repentance , but consideration ? jer. 8.6 . no man repent him of his wickedness , saying , what have I done ? want of this keeps men from salvation . 2 Chron. 6.37 . If they bethink themselves in the Land whither they are carried away , and turn and pray unto me , in their captivity , saying , We have sinned , we have done amiss , and dealt wickedly ; then I will hear . So jer. 8.6 . God hearkened whether any would say , What have I done ? men go on and consider not . Hosea 4.11 . Whoredom , and new wine , steal away their hearts ; that is , it makes them not to consider . Mark. 6.52 . They considered not the loaves , therefore their hearts were hardened : they were fearful in the ship , because they considered not the miracle of the loaves . 

The seventh impediment , is a certain stiffness and obfirmation of mind , whereby a man is settled to continue in such a course that is pleasant to him , and all that cross him in it are enemies to him . Rom. 8. the flesh is not subject to the Spirit , it crosseth it : one reckons not a man his enemy unless he cross him . It must be so ; every creature as long as it hath a being , opposeth that which is contrary to it : so every man that delights himself in such or such a lust , will not be circumcised , cleansed and washed from it , he will not have Christ reign over him ; he will have his elbow room . Those men that are not translated from death to life , they count the ways of God either vanity or folly , and will not submit unto them , nor yet hear Christ voice . 

Now the means , the helps , and ways to break through these impediments , and to receive the Word with profit , are these . 

First , to hear profitably , that the voice of the Son of God be not a common voice , but peculiar , take that rule which is set down , Luk. 8.18 . Take heed how you hear . Christ gave that admonition to his hearers , and I give it to you : look to yourselves , take heed how ye come to hear the Word ; do it diligently : the reason of this is added in the same verse : for unto him that hath shall be given , & from him that hath not , shall be taken away even that which he seemed to have : that is , if ye hear and get a little knowledge , ye shall have more : he that yieldeth some fruits , shall bring forth more : he that doth some things , shall do more , God will bless you . But from him that hath not , shall be taken even that which he seemed to have : that is , your hearts shall be hardened , and that common knowledge which you have shall be taken away . joh. 15.2 . Every branch that beareth not fruit God cuts down . God looks into a Congregation to see who doth make conscience of hearing ; those that do , he purgeth ; but those that profit not , he curseth : he takes not away their lives , but their graces , makes them wither in the inward man , and so he comes to death . Luk. 19 he that had ten Talents , he that had most , had more given him : To practise a little is the way to get more . The Talon is taken from him , who did not use it , and given to him , that had most Talents . There are two rewards for him that useth the Talon well . First , he shall have more . Secondly , he shall be ruler over ten Cities ; he shall have comfort here , and hereafter : he shall have more comfort and grace . See how he dealt with Nathaniel , john 1.50 . Because he confessed Christ to be the Son of God , and believed because Christ saw him under the Figtree , which was but a small thing ; Christ tells him that he shall see greater things than these . joh. 7.17 . If any man will do his will , he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God : that is , if ye practise according to your knowledge , you shall know more , it shall be confirmed to you . Let men know and not practice , than Rom. 1.21.21 . Because when they knew God , they glorify him not as God , neither are thankful , therefore God gives them up to uncleanness , thorough the lusts of their own hearts , to dishonour their own bodies between themselves , and to worship Idols ; as he dealt with the Gentiles . So in the 2 Thessa. 2.9 . Because they received not the love of the truth ; because they heard much , and did not embrace it , God gave them up to strong delusions to believe lies . See it by experience : when as men play with their knowledge , God gives them up to heresies . The Spirit of God will not strive long with them . God hath commanded us , not to cast Pearls before Swine ; and will he himself do it ? Consider what ye do in every doctrine of salvation , that is preached to you ; ye either relish it , or not ; ye obey it , or disobey it ; ye taste it , or disrelish it : If ye taste it not , it is a savour of death unto death ; that is , it brings death and leads to hell : if ye savour it aright , it brings to heaven . There is no true doctrine , but the not obeying of it bringeth something to your damnation . When the savour of Christ's knowledge is made manifest , nor receiving it , ye reject it , and it brings a curse . Heb. 6.7.8 . The earth which drinketh in the rain which cometh oft upon it , and brings forth herbs meet for him by whom it is dressed , receives a blesssing of God ; but that which bringeth forth thorns and briers is rejected , and is nigh unto cursing , whose end is to be burned : that is , the word is as rain , it makes herbs and weeds to grow : if herbs grow , God doth prospero it more : if it falls upon rocks it withers more and more ; God doth curse it . It is not in the knowledge of divinity as in other sciences : in them ye may neglect a year or two , and get it again ; but it is not so in this ; ye will not be able to return again , ye are near a curse , ye cannot redeem it . See what follows in the neglecting of the Word , in the 2 Chron. 36.15.16 . God sent his messengers rising up early , etc. because he had compassion on his people , and on his dwelling place . But they mocked the messengers of God , and despised his Word , and misused his Prophets , until the wrath of the Lord rose up against his people , till there was no remedy . Grace may stand with infirmities before they are revealed , but being reveiled the light discerneth them . If men refuse , God endures it not . Act. 17.30 . The times of that ignorance God regarded not , but now take heed , the Gospel being reveiled ; God will bear no longer . Before john Baptist came , the Axe was not laid to the root of the tree ; but as soon as he came , it was ; because then the Gospel was made known ; he revealed the truth . When the truth is once revealed , if men do not then receive it , God endures it not . Heb. 3.13 . To day if ye will hear my voice , harden not your hearts . God will not stay longer than this day . There is a day , ( when it is we cannot prescribe ) after which God will not offer grace : but commonly we see that men being of the age of discretion , & having the way showed , if they neglect it then , they commonly perish . God hath a secret time , The jews had their day ; but because they accounted themselves unworthy of everlasting life , Paul did turn from them to the Gentiles , Act. 13.46 . Saul had his day , he had common gifts and profited not , therefore God forsook him . So Israel had their day , but when they neglected it , God bids jeremiah not to pray for them . Consider what you have heard of the Sacrament , that ye may not absent yourselves from it , in the places wherein you are , without weighty affairs , which will excuse you before God : so for the Sabbath ; you know it should be kept ; because it is holy ; and if it be holy I would ask you this question ; whether it be holy in whole , or in part ? If all of it be holy , it is not arbitrary , it must be sequestered from common uses . The vessels of the Sanctuary are said to be holy , because they were not used but about holy things : so the Temple is holy , because it is a place set apart for God's service : so time is holy , when it is bestowed on holy things , holy thoughts , holy duties ; consider that it is holy , and that every part thereof is holy ; and then deny if you can , that it is not to be sanctified . Some men spend their time in idleness and gaming ; most in drunkenness and disorder , and not as they should . Ye have heard of mortification ; ye have heard the doctrine of changing from death to life ; apply them , and take heed how you hear ; ye that heard it negligently shall grow worse and worse . 

The second means to hear profitably , is that which is set down in the 1 Thess. 2.13 . that is , to receive the Word , not as the word of man ; but as the Word of God. This makes the word of Christ effectual , to hear it as the Word of God : that is , consider whose word it is . Consider the ground of it , that it proceeds from God who is present , God is there and we speak in his stead : God spoke to the Israelits in Mount Sinai , and would have continued for any thing we know , yet the people desired that Moses should speak unto them . We beseech you in the stead of Christ , to be reconciled unto God. This is of much moment , to hear it as God's Word : moral truths may build you up in moral virtues , and may be profitable to that purpose ; but they will not breed spiritual life ; that the Word only doth , being received as the Word of God. john 6.65 . when as Christ demanded of the twelve , whether they also would go away ? Peter made this answer ; Lord , whither shall we go ? thou hast the words of eternal life . A man is not a living man , but by conjunction betwixt God and the soul : God is to the soul , as the soul is to the body , he puts life into it , and is conjoined to it by his word when it is thus received . 

The Word coming as from God , we do that which is commanded us , because God will have us do it : and then we do it simply and sincerely , so that God accepts it ; We receive it as the word of God , it breeds life within us : when we receive it with faith , with full Assurance , than it comes from God , than it comes in power and in the holy Ghost , and makes us become followers of Christ , 1 Thess. 1.5 . when we receive the Word of God , it works effectually in us . 1 Thess. 2.13 . when we receive it as from God with full assurance , it begetteth life in us . To live is to have sense and motion , to be acting : the receiving of the word with full assurance , makes us active ; the believing of it sets men on work 2 Chron. 25.5.6 . 10.  When as Amasiah believed that God would not be with him unless he sent away the Israelites , than he sent them away and not before . Caleb and josuah did believe , therefore they followed God constantly . Abraham offered up his son Isaac , because he believed God , that he could give him another son , or raise him out of ashes again . Let a man be persuaded that such a thing will hurt him , or that such a thing will do him good , he doth the one and leaves the other . Receive therefore the Word with full assurance , consider what is delivered , if it be the Word or no ; consider that it which ye hear , is either the Word or not the Word , it belongs to me or not . Men take things overly , and are not rooted and grounded in faith , and that makes them hear unprofitably . See then if your particular actions agree with the Word , so ye shall be rooted in faith ; this makes the Word a Word of life . 

The third rule and means to hear with profit , is that which is set down of the fourth ground , in the parable of the seed in the eight of Luke , the 15. verse , that is , to receive the Word with honest and good hearts ; having heard the Word to keep it , and to bring forth fruit with patience . Hear the Word with honest hearts ; this is done when as a man is resolved to practise whatsoever God will reveal ; when he hath no reservations or exceptions to himself ; when he is resolved to practise what he hears with an humble heart : being humbled we will do this , and not before . The fourth ground was humbled ; men will not hear this because they are proud : now pride is an evil disposition in the creature , whereby it exalts its self above its measure : There is this fault in men , they will pick and choose in the ways of God. The last ground will only part with all for Christ. Act. 9  When as Paul was humbled , he then cried out , Lord what wilt thou have me to do ? I will do or suffer any thing for thee , and he was as good as his word . So Act. 2.32 . the jews being humbled cried out , Men and brethren what shall we do ? we will do any thing to be saved . So Act. 16.30 . The jailor being humbled , demanded of Paul what he should do to be saved ; when as a man is thus disposed , God will teach him , Psal. 25.  God teacheth the humble his ways : man himself will do so ; if he see one willing to learn , he will teach him : The secrets of the Lord are revealed to those that fear fear● him ; to those that stand in awe of him , and dare do nothing against him : he reveals his peculiar truths in a peculiar manner to men , those things that are effectual to their salvation : bring therefore humble hearts , ready to obey . 

But you will say ; we do obey and practise what we do hear . 

I answer , that ye may be deceived as they in the fifth of Deut. they said they would obey , but God saw that there was another heart in them than what they said : therefore God said ; OH that there were such an heart in them , that they would fear me , and keep my commandments always , that it might go well with them and their children for ever . So johanan and the other Captains , jer. 42.20 . desire's jeremia , to go to God , to know his will , and they would do whatsoever he should say , whether it were good or evil . But jeremiah tells them that they did but dissemble in their hearts ; he knew they would not do it . Look to this in the acts and the effects : what have you done when the Word crosseth you in your aims , estates , names , friends ? if you have disobeyed it , than Eze. 14.4 . the word is made a stumbling block , and your iniquities before your face , and the Lord will answer you according to the multitude of your Idols . God will answer such men according to their coming , as they come with false hearts , they shall be dealt withal accordingly . Come then with hearts resolved to practise whatsoever is spoken , and desire God to make it effectual to savation . 

The fourth means to hear the Word , and the voice of Christ profitably , is to lay up what you hear : let it abide with you and continue with you . This rule is prescribed by Christ himself . joh. 15.7 . If ye abide in me , and my words abide in you , ye shall ask what ye will , and it shall be done unto you : When ye attend to the Word , if ye are affected with it but for the time , it is nothing ; except it continue with you it will not profit you ; you must do as Mary did ; she laid up all the sayings that she heard of Christ , and pondered them in her heart , Luke 2.51 . The Disciples often questioned of Christ , which proves , that they pondered his words in their hearts : So the nobles of Berea , they searched the Scripture : so jacob he noted the saying of joseph and laid it up : ye do not hear thus if you do but lend your ears for the time , if ye work it not upon your affections , ye profit not . The reason why there is so much preaching , and so little profit , is for want of this . There are two kinds of ill hearers : the first are such as hear as Swine , and trample all they hear under feet ; the second , such as hear as Dogs , snarling at the doctrine : if ye offend in either of these , ye hear amiss . Of all the four grounds that was worst which received not the Word . When men hear the Word there is more than a natural forgetfulness in them , the Devil helps it . jam. 1.23.29 . He that hears the Word , and recals it not , or practiseth it not , is like one that beholdeth his face in a glass , for he beholdeth himself and goeth away , and strait way forgetteth what manner of man he was : ye must recall it before ye can practise it , else ye will be like to those that behold their face in a glass , and wipe not away their spots . 

Be not therefore forgetful hearers : and for this , first recall and repeat what ye have heard when ye are gone : Secondly , practise it afterwards ; there is a blessing promised to mindful hearers , there is a curse denounced against those that are forgetful . joh. 13.15 . If ye know these things , happy are ye if you do them : but there is a curse for you if you do not profit ; God will make you to hear and will not give you his Spirit . Regard to prise the word if ye will not be forgetful . Rom. 1.28 . those that did not like to retain God in their knowledge , those that did hear the Word and not regard it , God gave them up to a reprobate sense , to an Injudiciousnesse , to do those things that were not convenient , not being able to profit by it . The ancient Fathers much professed the repetition of Sermons , and one of them used this similitude : A man that comes into a pleasant garden , he will not content himself with the present sent only , but he will carry some of the flowers home with him ; So in a cold day , a man will not be content to heat himself at another man's fire , but he will carry some fire home with him to keep him hot at home . So do ye when ye come to hear the Word ; carry home some flowers of it with you , carry some fire home with you , to heat and warm your hearts . God regards not flashes and moods , and such negligence in performing of holy duties as will not warm their hearts . Men are like a Sieve in the water : it is full whiles it is in the water , but being taken out of it , it hath nothing ; it is not the hearing of the Word of God , or the doing of it negligently that will profit , if ye hear it only pro forma , and negligently : it doth then no good , but it brings God's curse upon you . God's curse is on many , they grow not in knowledge or grace for want of diligence ; wherefore in the 2 Pet. 3.17 . the Apostle bids us beware lest being led away with the error of the wicked , we fall from our own steadfastness : to prevent this , grow in grace , and for this purpose grow in knowledge , for than ye grow in grace . 

The fifth means to hear profitably , is to prise the Word and the voice of Christ speaking to the heart : pray earnestly for it that ye may seek it earnestly at God's hands , beseech him to speak to your hearts : your hearing is nothing without this : it is the great shepherd of the flock that must feed you . It is his Spirit that must teach you . Therefore when as you come to hear , pray earnestly to God to speak unto you by his Spirit . It is the Spirit that quickeneth , joh. 6.63 . the Word is spiritual , and we are carnal ; therefore we must pray for the Spirit to help us for to hear : the Spirit is not bestowed without prayer . Acts 1.14.15 . God promised to give his Spirit to his Apostles , yet they continued long in prayers ere he gave it them . Luk. 11.13 . God gives not his Spirit but to such as ask it , to such as continue praying , ask and knocking . David prays to God , to open his eyes that he might see the wonders of his Law : Men may hear the Word , yet God opens not their eyes without seeking to him . God speaks unto you by his Ministers . Paul and Apollo's are yours ; we are the Ministers of God for your sakes ▪ for your service : if God open the door of utterance , it is not for our sakes but yours , that you might seek the W●ord at our mouths and believe . Acts 14.1 . a 〈◊〉 company of jews and Gentiles believed by h●●●ing the Word preached , and receiving of it . The world receives not the Spirit , because they seek it not , john 14.17 . We in preaching , can do nothing ; it is the Spirit that must do it . 2 Cor. 3.18 . we can show you the Image of God , but it is nothing to you if ye be not transformed into the same image from glory to glory : and it is the Spirit that must thus transform you . Conclude therefore with God in prayer , let not him deny you ; one word from him is more than a thousand from us . God fastening his Word upon your hearts it changes you ; without him we preach in vain . 

The sixth means to hear profitably , is to come with vacuity of mind , free from all things that hinder ; else we sow but amongst thorns , jer. 4.4 . we speak to men prepossessed : the seed falls on fallow ground ; we speak to men , whose hearts are full of lust , they have a noise of business within them ; and so they hear us not , because their hearts are fore possessed . The arrow's head being in the wound , it is in vain to lay plasters upon it : therefore jam. 1.24 . when as we came to hear the Word , we are commanded , to lay aside all superfluity of naughtiness , and to receive with meekness , the engrafted word which is able to save our souls . Do in hearing the Word as men do in grafting ; cut off all superfluous branches ; come with empty minds ; attend to the matters of grace . Men who have full stomaches God feeds not ; He feeds the hungry , others are sent empty away , they are always hearing but never profiting . I should speak now to Ministers and people : to Ministers , that they speak in the voice of Christ , that , they speak as he did ; not in wisdom of words , but in the evidence of the Spirit ; To the people ; that they must hear them by whom Christ speaks : those who have livings to bestow , aught to bestow them on such as speak the words of Christ ; they that want his voice ought to procure such . Now if ye will not be at cost for a good Minister , it is a sign you lo●e your profit above Christ. Those that dwell where Christ's voice is not , let them remove for they sit in darkness and in the shadow of death , esay 9.2 . If your dwelling be pleasant , if you have bitter waters or no waters at all , you will remove : Have not your dwellings then where the water of life is not . If the voice of Christ be the only means to beget life , let men come to it . It is a great fault , men come not to this voice : he tha● came not to the Sacrament , must be cut off : What shall be done to him that comes not to the Word ? Want of the Word preached is a great misery ; therefore David complaineth much of his case , when he was not able to come to the Word . OH that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech , and to have my habitation amongst the tents of Keder . The daily sacrifice being taken away , it was the greatest desolation that could be ; and can men live there with comfort where the Word is wanting ? Is it a duty to come to hear the Word , or it is Arbitrary , to come or not to come ? if it be arbitrary , than ye perform but a will-worship , when ye hear it ; if a duty , than ye must hear it constantly , and inquire where it is to be had . 

But you have excuses . 

To this I answer , see how ye can excuse yourselves to God : How angry was Christ with those that came not to the marriage ? that is principally meant of coming to hear the Gospel . It is a despising of God and his ordinances not to come ; it is a contempt which brings forth a curse , which brings a judgement that is like the sin . Those that despise you , despise me , saith Christ ; the word is the power of God to salvation : there is no salvation without faith , and there is no faith but by hearing . Faith comes by hearing : He that hears not you , hears not me , saith Christ. Therefore if you hear not this voice of the Son of God , take heed lest he hear not you at last . 

FINIS . 





Doct 1.  Ob.  Answ.  The kinds of Spiritual death . The Symptoms of true death . Ob.  Answ.  Ob.  Answ.  The degrees of Spiritual death . Object . Answ. 1.  Answ. 2.  Ob.  Ans.  Ob.  Ans.  Ob.  Answ.  Ob.  Ans.  Ob.  An.  Ob.  Answ.  Use 1  Quest.  Answ.  The characters of those that are spiritually dead . Quest.  Ans.  The marks and signs of those who are spiritually dead . Object . Answ.  Objest . Answ.  Object . Ans.  Use 2.  Use 3  Use 4.   The Sacrament is administered twice every Term , and sometimes thrice . Doct 2.  Quest.  Ans.  Quest.  Answ.  esay 53.  Quest.  Answ.  Object . Ans.  Use . Use 2.  Quest.  Answer . Use 3  Signs of spiritual life . Object . Answ.  Object . Answ.  Object . Answ.  Object . Answ.  Luke 15.13 . to 20.  john 3.7.8 . The means to get this spiritual life . Object . Answ.  Object . Answ.  Object . Answ.  Object . 3.  Answ.  Object . 1 Cor. 15 , 45. to 50.  joh. 1.16.17 . john 15.1 , 2 , 3 , 4.  1 Sam. 10.10 , 11 , 12.  Heb. 13.20 . joh 11.43.44 . Quest.  Answ.  Matth. 11.15 . Doct 3.  Gen. 9.27 . Reasons of the point . joh. 5.21 . Rom. 9.15 . Gen. 1.3 . 1 King. 19 : 19.20 . Quest.  Ans.  Gen. 1.1 . joh. 1.1 . Mark. 16.15.16 . Gen. 5.24 . joh. 10. ●  Gen. 3.  Object . Answ.  Object . Answ.  Use 1  john 10.3.4 . 2 Cor. 4.3.4 . Act. 17.30 . The means how to hear profitably . Object . Answ.  Ob.  A●ss . 