A sermon preached at the funeral of m. Christopher Love , in St. Laurence church , August , 25. 1651.  

By Thomas Manton , minister of the gospel at Stoak-newington near London . 

Isaiah 517.  

the righteous perisheth , and no man layeth it to heart , and merciful men are taken away , none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come . 

London : printed by i b. 1651.  

To the reader . 

Courteous reader , 

Thou hast here presented to thy view a short , but yet a sweet sermon ; in it is comprehended among other things , the right way of dying well . If ever you would die comfortably , you must first live holily , get an assurance that your sins are pardoned , that God is reconciled unto you through Jesus Christ , that so you May be persuaded by the holy spirit of God , as soon as ever you go out of this world , you shall then be received into an eternal . Reader , if this sermon May prove for thy spiritual advantage , for the mortifying of sin , and the renewing of grace in thy heart , bless God for it . Thou Mayest be confident it shall be the daily prayer of him that is thy friend in the Lord , 

D. r.  

A sermon preached at the funeral of m. Christopher Love in St. Laurence church , August 25. 1651.  

1 cor. 15. 57  

but thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ . 

The words in themselves needs no explication ; they are the triumphing song of s. Paul , partly directed to the enemies themselves , and partly to the giver of victory , thanks be to God , that gives us victory through Jesus Christ . 

1.  It is sin that is the sting of death , when the conscience is awakened , and all disguises are taken away , than sin will be sin indeed . 

2.  In regard of the obligation , the law binds us over unto death . 

3.  Sin aggravated labours to strengthen sin , and sets them all in order in their proper colours before our face . But now the great question will be , what shall we do that we May come out of this horror and terror ? The apostle tells us , Christ hath given us victory in Christ's victory ; he hath overcome the law , death , and hell ; he foiled death in his own person , when he was upon the cross ; he left death in the grave , when he himself arose again ; he hath given us victory through Jesus Christ ; and yet all Christ's work was not done upon the cross , there is much to be done in our hearts , the god of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly , rom 16. 20. he will make you fellow-conquerors with his son Jesus Christ ; Christ hath got a victory for us , and he will get also a victory in us . From the words observe this doctrine : 

that Christ's victory over death May serve for the incomparable comfort of all true believers . death is either temporal or eternal ; now wicked men are subject unto both ; the wicked man's temporal death it makes way for his eternal ; the taking them away out of this life , is but the bringing them into eternal woe and misery . 

For the opening of the point , he would 1. show how Christ delivereth us from death . 

2.  How far he hath delivered us from death . 

For the first , that Christ hath delivered us from death , heb. 2. 14.  By death he destroyed him that had the power of death : if you consider Christ's death by way of merit , or if you consider him as a conqueror , by his death he destroyed death , he grappled and overcome death . 

Whether you look upon it as the act of a redeemer in dying for our sins , Christ died in our room , or in our stead , he died that the creature Might be spared , iob. 33. 19  Deliver him from going down into the pit , for i have found a ransom ; the sinner must die , or else the surety must die ; by Christ's death the wrath of God is expiated , the law of God is satisfied , the justice of God fulfilled , and the jaws of death are broken . 

2.  Look upon it as the act of a conqueror , and so Christ hath foiled death in his own person ; for Christ is called the first fruits of them that sleep in the Lord Jesus Christ , 1 cor. 15. 20. yea , he is called the firstborn of the dead ; death is Satan's last beast of prey , and Christ hath grappled this beast . 1.  Be pleased to consider , the quality of the grave is quite altered to wicked men ; it is the King of terror ; but to every believer it is a bed of ease , isai. 57 2.  The righteous are taken from the evil to come , and rest in their beds . 

2.  The second question is , how far he hath delivered us from death ; i Might answer , that it is sufficient the second death hath no power over us ; there is no condemnation unto them that are in Christ Jesus , rom. 8. 1.  But this is not all , the very nature and habit of death is changed ; death is not a destruction , but a deliverance ; we are apt to have wrong thoughts of death , death is to us a blessing , it is one of Christ's legacies bequeathed to his church ; while death was in the devil's hand , it was our enemy ; but now it is in Christ's hand , it is our friend ; it is now but our passage into the land of Canaan , our entrance into the heavenly Jerusalem : a wicked man's death is his executioner , but to the godly ; it doth but fever us from our friends upon earth , and then we are united unto Jesus Christ our head ; now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace , wicked men are taken away . this night shall thy soul be taken away , Luke 12. 20.  Now what hope can a wicked man have when God takes away his soul ? the godly man resigns up his soul unto Jesus Christ . The believer dyeth not because he must die , but because he would die : the funerals of the godly are but the funerals of their sins ; it is not the man that dyeth , but his misery and his sins that dyeth . When God justifieth a sinner , he takes away the condemning power of sin ; when he sanctifieth , he takes away the reigning power of sin ; but when he takes him away by death unto himself , he takes away the very being of sin : death is our cure , sin brings in death , and death by way of revenge destroyeth sin . 2.  By death there is way made for a present union of the soul with Jesus Christ ; i desire to be dissolved , and to be with Christ , saith St. Paul ; it is better the soul should be separated from the body , then to be absent from Christ , we have an union here , but whether is it better to be present with your friends , or present with Jesus Christ ? the soul goeth away to God that gave it , immediately as soon as ever the body is destroyed ; the body came from Adam , and must be purified in the grave , but the soul is a supernatural light and flieth to God again . 

3.  The body that seemeth most to suffer , hath great advantage . A shed is taken down to raise up a better structure ; it is sowed a natural body , but it is raised a spiritual body ; here it is not capable of high enjoyments , it is humbled by diseases ; it is sowed a corruptible body , but it shall be raised an incorruptible body , 1 Corinth . 15. 54.  

The next degree is , how far Christ hath conquered death , the hurt of death is taken away . Death May kill you , but it cannot hurt you ; it cannot have any power over your better part , Jesus Christ is your head in the grave ; ye are raised by the spirit of holiness , rom. 8. 11.  The holy-ghost can never leave his temple ; you belong to Christ in the grave . 

1.  Oh consider what ground of comfort we have against the mortality of the body : Christ hath united body and soul , Christ's mystical body shall not want the least member or joint . 

2.  God is in covenant with your body and soul , God is the god of your flesh , though it remain with the dust of the wicked . 

3.  Christ hath purchased your body and soul , 1 Corinth . 6. 20.  Yea are bought with a price , therefore glorify Christ in your bodies ; Christ will not loose one whit of his purchase : therefore here is your comfort against the mortality of the body ; God will call the grave to an account , what is become of my Abraham ? my Isaac ? and my Jacob ? the grave shall give up their dead , when Christ's commands it : the grave is but a chest ( And with reference be it spoken ) Christ wares the keys at his own girdle ; God hath a special care of your dust , when your friends and neighbours have left you in the grave , yet Christ hath not left you there . 

4.  We are eased from the terror and horror of death . Now death is terrible , as it is a natural evil , a dissolution of the soul from the body . Death is the King of terrors , moral philosophy could never find any remedy against the fear of death . But God by his holy spirit , he fills the soul with a hope of a better life , by which it is strenthened against the fear of death ; nature May shrink when we see the pail horse approaching , yet we way rejoice in this it is but to carry us home to our father's house , and who would be afraid to be happy ? Let them be afraid to die , which are loath to go to Christ . St. Stephen saw the heavens opened for him , when he was stoned to death , at the very hour of their departure they are exempted from fear and terror , by reason of that comfortable persuasion , which they have in their breast , that their sins are pardoned through the blood of Jesus Christ ; that God is reconciled unto their souls , that as soon as they go out of this miserable would , they shall be received into eternal glory : the sting of death is sin , the day of death is a black and gloomy day to wicked men ; wicked men they drop like rotten apples into that lake that burns with fire and brimstone for evermore ; wicked men have many accusations laid to their charge , many sins that fly in their face , which most commonly perplex a dying soul ; but godly men are freed from all this : this made Luther cry out percule domine percule , peccata remissa sunt , strike Lord strike , my sins are pardoned : so May every true believer say , Lord do what thou wilt with me , my sins are forgiven . 

5.  Christ hath utterly abolished death , 1 cor , 5. 16.  Then death shall be utterly abolished to the elect , the dominion and power of death is overcome , but for the wicked they must be kept under a dying , and yet under a living death , death shall be no more unto God's persons , they May then triumphantly say , oh death , where is thy sting ? 

Thus much for the doctrinal part of the text : there remains nothing but the useful application unto our souls . 

use . first let this serve for terror to wicked men , Jesus Christ hath conquered death only for his elect : for the present wicked men's condition is sad , in death it is worse , and in hell it is worst of all . 

1.  For the present their condition must needs be sad ; they cannot so much as think of death or hell without a great deal of terror and fear : it is like the hand writing against Belshazer upon the wall , it will mar all their jovial company , but with the righteous death makes way for their eternal happiness , though i walk in the vale and shadow of death , saith David , yet will i fear none ill . it is a sad walk to walk at death's right hand . 

2.  In death it will be worse , the nearer you come to your everlasting estate , the more your conscience will be troubled , and your sins will fly in your face : every man doth not die thus sensible , some there are that sacrifice their bodies with great courage , but mark this in them all , they oftentimes die anxious of their spiritual condition : a wicked man is like one that leaps over a great gulf in the dark , but usually their death is full of terror . Oh consider what a sad case you will be in , when your sins shall stare you in the face , your conscience accuse you , the law bind you over to hell , hell open her mouth for you , and heaven be shut up against you ; how will you be able to appear before the judgement seat ? what a hideous cry will it be to hear the sinner curse his body , and his body to curse his soul , because he did not make sure of heaven . It is quite contrary when the godly man dyeth , he takes fare leave of his flesh , flesh farewell , and rest in hope , God will not suffer his holy one to see corruption . 

3.  In hell it will be worst of all , envy will be a part of your sorrow , as well as despair , when you shall see the godly in heaven , whom you have scorned , despised , and thought not worthy to love among you , when yourselves shall be tormented in hell fire with the devil and his angels for ever , there is a special conviction upon the damned soul in hell . 

Here you would not live , and their you shall not die : oh miserable will be your condition ! when conscience , that worm that never dyeth , shall gnaw your soul to all eternity . You are now fallen into the hands of a living God , who liveth for ever to see vengeance executed upon his enemies . 

The second use is to labour to get an interest . 

1.  In Jesus Christ , and first you must take care to get your sins pardoned ; all the power of the devil and death , depends upon this particular , you can never have any true or real solid comfort , when you come to die , unless you are assured that your sins are pardoned , unless that you are confidently assured by the spirit of God , that when you go out of this life , you shall be received into a better . There are two pits which God hath digged , that are deep enough to bury your sins in that they shall never beable to hint you , vid. the ocean of divine mercy , and the grave of Jesus Christ , see your sins buried in one of those graves , and then be sure they shall never trouble your soul again . It is the great fault of Christians , that when they come to die , they come altogether naked : it is an ill favoured thing to see a man stark naked ; Christians should come clothed with the white robes of Christ's righteousness , for the grave hath no power over them . 

2.  Strive for an assurance of God's love ; mine eyes have seen thy salvation , therefore now let thy servant depart in peace ; now let me die saith old Jacob , when he had seen his son Joseph ; when you have seen Jesus Christ , when you can say experimentally he is my portion ; then you May bid welcome to any death : death never comes untimely to such a man , though he May be cut off by some sudden stroke , if he hath an interest in Jesus Christ . A sinner though he live to be an old man , yet he is accursed . 

3.  Mortify corruption : he dyeth well that mortifieth corruption first ; see your sins dead before you come to die : either sin must die , or we must die , what should an unmortified man do with heaven ? that would be no place for his abode , because there are no carnal bestial delights there ; when wicked men go howling to hell , then Might God say , go see whether your vain delights can save you . 

4.  There must be a holy life and conversation . Men live as though they never thought to die , and then they die as if they never thought to live ; they that are not ashamed to live are not afraid to die . We have a singular instance of this in our deceased brother , Balaam would fain die the death of the righteous , but he would not live the life of the righteous : if we are careful to observe these directions , than our last hour will be our best hour . 

the third use is to improve the comfort of Christ's victory , 

1.  Improve it for your friends , that are departed in the Lord : why should we weep in the day of their preferment ? Christians in the primitive times , at the solemnising of their friends funerals , had wont to light Tapar , sing psalms , and rejoice in the Lord ( But May some say ) Sir do you not read , when Stephen was stoned to death , that certain devout men carried him , and made great lamentation for him , acts 8. 2.  But for answer to this , mourn for your friends deceased , but not distractedly mourn for them as those that know they shall meet their friends in glory : when you weep for your friends it should be like rain upon earth , when the sun shines . 

2.  Improve it for yourselves , and that in your life time . 

1.  In your resolutions , that you May be willing to die : we are apt to linger and linger , and fain we would live a little longer ; but alas what Prince would be willing to be uncrowned : this argueth a great deal of carnality . Christians are begotten to a lively hope . 

2.  Improve it in your death against the fear of death : death itself startles the creature . When once you come to heaven , death shall molest you no more , believers , when they come to heaven , shall have the same welcome that Jesus Christ had , the angels shall carry your soul into Abraham's bosom , luk. 16. 22 , there shall a train of angels carry your soul into eternal glory . 

Lastly , bless your redeemer , that hath freed you from the fear of death . Jesus Christ hath given himself a ransom for thy soul ; he hath satisfied divine vengeance for thy sins : many men give their lives to death for their Prince ; but here is a Prince , that gives his life for his persons . 

It remains that we speak a little concerning this our deceased brother : i Might speak much concerning those ravishing comforts , that he had in his soul : what a rare assurance he had of heaven , as a pattern most worthy of your imitation . He was a man eminent in grace , a man of a singular life and conversation . When he was to die , he professed high thoughts of his congregation ; therefore i pray do not frustrate his expectations ; when he looks to find you among the sheep , the Lord grant you be not found among the goats ; do not think that now he is gone , his truths are gone too ? for God will require them at your hands . God takes an exact account , how long a minister hath been in such a place , what good a persons hath got under his ministry : the Lord grant that you May now reap the fruit of all his labours . I Might speak much more , but i will forbear . 

The Lord bless what you have heard , and give you understanding in all things . 

Finis . 

August 30 , 1651.  

Imprimatur 

John Downame . 







