THE PILGRIM AND EREMITE , In form of a Dialogue , 

By Master Alexander Craig , 

Imprinted in ABERDENE , By EDWARD RABAN , for David Melvill . 1631.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE , WYSE , AND Virtuously disposed Gentleman , WILLIAM FORBES of TOLQUHON . 

RIGHT HONOURABLE , 

Having collected the dispersed , and long neglected Papers , of this subsequent Poesy , the Posthumes of a worthy Pen , for preserving them from perishing , for the Perfections of the Departed , maker of immortal memory ; who was one of the Faithful , affectionate , ( and reaffected ) Favourers of the honourable House of BAMFE , whereunto Yourself , and Yours , by a faithful Affection , and affectionate Affinity , are unseparably tied . And also , Sir , for the singular and ever bound duty , whereunto by many Obliedgements ; and unspeakable Respects , I ever acknowledge myself to be unterminably tied , to love , serve , and honour , You and Yours , and to do all that my possibility can perform , to the eternity of Your Name , House , and Honour . Herefore , Sir , I have taken the boldness , after the Author's expiring , to publish , and present , his Papers to Your Honour's Hands , to pass under the Patrociny and Protection of Your honourable Name . Receive , therefore , Sir , this fatherless Orphan , under the Shield and Shadow of Your powerful protection , & courteous acceptation : and as he presenteth to Your view a wand'ring Pilgrim , and a retired Eremite , both Despisers of the fleeting Pleasures , and flitting Richeses of this wretched World , whereupon most wretchedly so many do dote : So , Sir , let the same call us to mind , what we are here , and what we should aim to be hereafter ; that as we are Pilgrims on earth , we may be Citizens in Heaven ; this being our way , but Above , our native Country ; here our travel , there our rest ; here our race , there our prize ; here our fight , there our triumph ; here our seedtime , there our harvest ; and as wand'ring Pilgrimis here our Inns only , from whence we must remove , but there our home , and mansion place , wherein we must remain . In this estate then , Sir , let worldly things be but our Viaticum , which we should use , as if we used them not : and let us neither be cloyed with their love , nor clogged with their cares ; but seek those things that are above , & to temper the edge of our eager distractions , about many things with Martha , let us with Marie consider that one thing which is necessary ; and requite , in some measure , that love which CHRIST JESUS hath carried and kithed towards us ; not as this poor Eremite was with disdain of her whom he affected , but with mutual tender affection , and a Christian care to keep His Commandments ; whereby we shall gain to ourselves , more than the greatest Conquerors , or busiest Worldlings , could ever acquire ; even a glorious Kingdom , and a Crown incorruptible . To the advancement whereof , Sir , both of you and yours , after many and happy days here , as my earnest Petition to GOD shall be ; so in all other things I have vowed to remain 

Your Honours , in all serviceable and obsequious duty , ROBERT SKENE . 

THE PILGRIM AND EREMITE , 

In form of a Dialogue . 

When pale Lady LUNA , with her lent light , 
Through the dawning of the Day was driven to depa●● 
And the clear crystal Sky vanished the Night , 
And the red morning rose from the right airt ; 
Long ere the fond Child , with Whip in his hand , 
From his slight sleep awoke , to lighten the Land ; 
'twixt the Night and the Day , 
In my sleep as I lay , 
Amid my Dream this fray 
And fairly I found : 
Apparelled as a Pilgryme , with Staff in mine hand , 
Forth the day as I went , undriven 'bout a guide , 
Me thought in a laigh Lay , a clear Stream , a Strand , 
A broad Bush of Birke trees , by a Brook side : 
And hoping some Eremite made there repair , 
As fast as my feet might , forward I fare . 
Through a Wood as I sought , 
To a Bush was I brought , 
Which Nature herself wrought , 
Withouten airts lare . 
Through the Wood as I went , half will of wain , 
A Cell to my sharp slght can shortly appear : 
A quiet and a cold Cave , a Cabin of stone , 
I drew me darne to the door , some din to hear . 
And as I lent to my Lugier , this well I heard , 
How long shall I lonthed live ? I love 'bout reward . 
And when I knew by the din , 
Some wight was therein , 
To wax bold I begin , 
And no peril spared . 
As I went through the floor of that cold Cave , 
I well espied in the bark where the noise sounded , 
An hoarse hoary Eremite , grieved and grave , 
Whose boiling Breast naught but black ba●le abounded , 
Whose colour , countenance , and pale deadly hue , 
His whole hidden Harms there and griefs forth show : 
Whose tumbling tears 'bout cease , 
Like floods flowed over his face ; 
With many long loud alas , 
And sad sighs anew . 
Yet stoutly he start by , and stared in my face , 
And craved how I there came ? or who was my guide ? 
By Fortune , quoth I , thus fell the case , 
Through the wild way as I went I wandered aside , 
And by a private plain path I came to this Wood , 
Wherein I wist well some Eremite was hid . 
But since I am here brought , 
If that I offended aught , 
By the Blood that me bought , 
I 'll obey as ye bid . 
A Pilgryme , quoth he , you seem by your weed , 
And a strayed stranger , if I right weine : 
But since you are here come , so GOD mote me speed , 
thou art welcome to such as you have here seen : 
But yet of my treatment I trow ye shall tire , 
For neither have I Meat , Drink , good Bed , nor Fire . 
On raw Roots is my Food , 
I drink of the fresh Flood ; 
On Fog and green Grass good , 
All night lies my lyre . 
then held I the Eremite with fair words anew , 
And for his frank offering great thanks I him gave : 
And when I well tried that his tale was all true , 
The cause of his coming there shortly I crave , 
The cause of my coming here , Pilgryme , quoth he , 
And with that the salt tears fell in his eye : 
Alas it 's for the love of ane , 
For whose sake thus I am slain : 
A Martyr here I remain 
By fatal decree , 
In faith , friend , quoth I then , I saw by thy song , 
When at the cold Cave door darned I stood : 
Some Saint of the She sex had wrought thee all this wrong ; 
And thou hadst long lived in love , and yet vnloved : 
And of the long letter this last line I heard , 
How long shall I loathed live ? I love 'bout Reward . 
Whereby I well knew , 
That thy Dame was untrue ; 
Thy pale and wan how 
Forth show thou wasst snated . 
Alas ! quod the Eremite , I lived once to love ; 
But now drowned in Despare , I see my death diest : 
Though both Will and Wit would , I may not remove , 
I lie in the links of Love fettered so fast : 
And all my Care-séeming-swéets , are so mixed with Sowrs , 
That each moment almost appeareth ten hours . 
Thus live I here alone , 
In this cold Cave of stone , 
As next neighbour unto none , 
But Trees , Fowls , and Flowers . 
And thus in my dark Den I mind to remain , 
As bound Bead-man to Her that works all my woe ; 
Till Death with his Dart come put me from pain : 
Else Atropus cutting quite the Thread in two , 
And on the green growing Bark of each blooming Tree . 
This Diton endorsed shall well written be : 
In sorrow and sight slain , 
For Her here I remain , 
Who likes of another ane , 
Much more than of me . 
Fond Eremite , quoth I then , thy love would appear 
Too high to been placed above thy degree : 
And thy fond foolish hope , frozen with fear , 
And Fortune , thy Old Friend , thy New Enemy . 
For she whom thou best lovest , as thyself says , 
As reasonless , and ruethlasse , respects thee nowayes . 
Thy syle is her sight ; 
Thy duill , her delight ; 
And thy pain to despite , 
She pleasantly plays . 
Whereby it well seems , thy labour is lost , 
And unto thy grave thou it go , ere thou get her . 
Mad man ! why mak'st thou thine enemy thy hospe ? 
Die not a fool , man ; for God's sake forget her . 
For , put case , in hope to obtain thy desires , 
thou die here for want of Bed , Food , and Fires : 
then who shall be seen , 
To louk thy dead Eine ? 
And entomb thee , I weine , 
As custom requires ? 
Leave , then , thy Heremitage , and this cold Cave , 
And live no more in love , since thou art not loved : 
But follow me , and take part as I have : 
Company and counsel may do thee some good . 
For Don-diëgo had died in Desert , 
Wert not Rodorico did him there convert . 
Thus , it may fall so , 
That I thy Rodorico , 
May find ease to thy woe , 
And heal thy hurt Heart . 
Speak , Pilgrim , quoth he , of things that may be , 
Or that hath appearance , to take some effect : 
For , such is my faintness , I want force to flee , 
Love , Fortune , Death , have given such a check . 
Betwixt Wit and Will there is great debate ; 
The one with the other stryving for the state . 
Flee Love , quoth my Wit. 
Stay , says my Will yet . 
So I bide ; so I flit . 
So I love : so I hate . 
But where thou wouldst seem to salve all my sore , 
And by thy straight statutes to stay all my sturt , 
Meddle with that matter , good Pilgrim , no more , 
Since all mine health hangs on her that me hurt . 
The Coal● that me burns to the bone , will I blow , 
Though Liver , Lungs , and Lights , fly up in a low , 
Since she doth decree it , 
That I die , so be it ; 
I long till I see it . 
Let Death bend his Bow.  
Uayne wretch , quoth I then , cast off thy vowed Weed● , 
And wander no more in this wild Wilderness : 
It may be thy Mistress , that dear Dame , be dead , 
For whose sweet sake daily that diest in distress : 
Perchance before that thou her again see , 
By vote of the Wan-weird● , that buried she b●● . 
Or put case , thy Dame dear , 
Hath chosen a new Fere , 
thou wouldst despare to see her . 
That so lightlies thee . 
Or contrarywyse , good Eremite , suppone 
Thy Mistress this moment hath good mind of thee ; 
And for thy long absence maketh great moan , 
And from her heart wishes her leile love to see : 
Saying in herself , Would God I wist where 
My poor pined Patient doth make his repair . 
Witted I well , so I thryve , 
That he were yet alyve , 
I should be no wights wyve 
For ten years , and maire . 
Conceit with thyself , good Eremite , I pray , 
If thy Dame be dead , thou wéep'st but in vain . 
thou art a stark Stock , here still for to stay , 
And mourn for the loss that mends not thy moan . 
For if she some other respect more than thee , 
What grace canst thou get , in duill here to die : 
Or wouldst thou thy truth , 
Should reap reward of ruth ? 
Why slipst thou so with sleuth , 
The thing that may be ? 
Good Pilgrim , said he then , of these two I see , 
As you seem to conclude , the one must be true : 
She loathes , or she loves : a mids may not be , 
As to my pains I may prove by signs anew . 
For my beloved Love , my dear dainty Dame , 
Despiseth those Elements which spell my poor Name . 
Uuoe is me , if I mint , 
To forge Floods from the Flint , 
My true travel shall be tint , 
Such Friendship to frame . 
But you would say , that Death , drierie Death ! 
Perhaps , hath abrogate my dear Dames days : 
To look for a long life then must I be loath , 
Whom each froward frown else of Fortune affrays . 
And since alike for her love I have ta'en such pain , 
I care not a cuit for her sake to be slain . 
I shall not seem for to shrink , 
Of Death , for hey death , to drink ; 
Whose sweet Eyes , with a wink , 
May revive me again . 
Let this then applease thee , good Pilgrim , I pray , 
That no presence , absence , no distance of place ; 
no fond toys , no new frays ; no time , no delay ; 
no bad chance , no new change , nor contrary case ; 
no , not the fierce flames that Fortune can spit , 
Shall make my firm fixed saith or fancy to flit . 
Yea , let her fleet , let her flow ; 
Let her do what she dow , 
To gar my grief ay grow , 
I shall be true yet . 
Good Eremite , for truth told I oft times have heard , 
The leilest in love , cometh ay the worst speed : 
And he that deserves well to reap best reward , 
For firm saith and friendship , shall find naught but feide . 
Take tent to the tales told of true Troyall Knight , 
And he that hanged himself , if I read right . 
Yea , though thy suit thou obtain , 
With one word tint again : 
Short pleasure , long pain , 
With duile day and night . 
But since thou delightest to live still in love , 
Advyse thee on this well , Be never too true . 
Though thou swear and say thy mind shall not move , 
For Orphus , take Protus , to change ay thy hue . 
Was not great jove turned in a Shower , in a Fire , 
In a Swan , in a Bull , t' obtain his desire ? 
For he that loves lighliest , 
Be sure he shall speed best : 
And he that loves without rest , 
Shall surely get ill hire . 
wherefore , in love if that thou wouldst come speed , 
thou must flee faith , be facile , false , untrue . 
E'er thou prevail right , so far as I reide , 
There must be a sympathy 'twixt her and you . 
For I demand , How can right Concord be , 
While you are true , and she both false and slay ? 
She likes well another sho , 
then choose new , and change too : 
And if you well do , 
Be as false as she . 
Alas ! quod the Eremite , too late I spy the right , 
And wronged with woe , still wrongly I frame . 
I know that in love , my Lady proves but light : 
And if that I were wise , I would do the same . 
But faith and her remembrance martyrs me maire , 
Than did her presence perfect me , when I was there . 
For whiles grieved , I greet ; 
Whiles I mourn , till we meet : 
And some times my poor spirit 
dies , drowned in despare : 
And whiles in a rage I reckon with my cell , 
And to and from dispute , to dash my desire : 
Half dead in Desert , here why should I dwell , 
And pine with pain , wanting Bed , Food , and Fire ? 
Why do I lose youth's prime , without all gain ? 
Or why mourn I for her that keeps Disdain ? 
And when that I conclude , 
To burn Habit and Hood , 
Yet do I not dde it , 
My Vow is so vain . 
Cursed be that fond Vow , that ever it was made : 
Cursed be the first cause of my hidden pain : 
And cursed be false Fortune , that holds me at feid : 
And cursed be the blind Boy , that breeds all my bane : 
Cursed be the first hour , the time , and the place , 
That fettered my fond Heart in her fair Face . 
Cursed be my wicked will : 
Nuyte spoiling me of Skill , 
And took me captive , till , 
That Groom void of grace . 
Unsayde be that bad word , That Groom void of grace , 
What but her good graces can grieve me so much ? 
For I may will say , if Pity had place , 
Of all that on mould moves , there is none such , 
Oh! had the times passed in Prayer been spent , 
That ruth to my ruethlesse Love had been sent . 
And Cupid , I call on 〈…〉 : 
thou hearest , and canst not see : 
Have pity on poor me , 
And grant mine intent . 
Dame Nature , saith the wise Clerk Empedocles , 
Bestows , good Heremits , her gifts here and there , 
As she well pleaseth , the best is but Claise : 
Each man must be content , he gets no maire . 
For faith doth not affect thy Mistress fair , 
But Beauty , which doth bring thee to despair . 
Of pity since no part 
Is hid in her hard heart , 
Yet let not the black dart 
Of duile thee devour . 
And deaf not the good Gods , with thy vain Suit : 
What they have once done , they will not undo . 
love 's like a trim Tree , which beareth no Fruit , 
But green leaves , and blossoms , and flowrisheth too : 
oft gladning the Gardener , in hope of good gain ; 
Yet reaps he in Harvest no Fruit for his pain . 
Right so her fair face , 
With gifts of sweet grace , 
Tint travel , alas , 
Bont fruit makes thee fain . 
then suit , serve , pray , praise , or do what you can : 
Lo , here I foretell thee , thy labour is lost . 
For by the great griefs thou thol'st now and than , 
To haste thine own death , thou runnest the Post . 
Though surges of sorrow full swift thee assails , 
Thy lawtie in love , 'bout luck , naught avayles . 
Though thou beat the Bush well , 
Yet thy foe , without fail , 
Hints the Prey by the tail , 
And proudly prevayles , 
So by your sweet self I press now to speak , 
Whom by the god of Love I pray , and beseike , 
Forget the same of your force , 
On your Man have remorse ; 
lest Death him and you divorce , 
For he is sore sick . 
Or if a poor man's Plaint may pierce through your Ears ? 
If Love any Lordship in your Breast may brook ; 
Have pity on his Passions , and salt tragic Tears ; 
Who Liberty , and Life both , hath lost with a Look . 
His Help must be had from Hands that him hurt : 
For stern must he stay still , till you stay his stutt . 
then , choose one of these twa , 
Your sworn Slave for to slay , 
Or revert all his wae , 
Whom your Beauty hurt . 
And then , with a fell Frown , which had a full force 
To overrule the whole World , with Eterne Might . 
Whereby it well seemed she had no remorse 
Upon the poor Patient , pined in such plight . 
Faith , Pilgrim , quoth she's , thou ravest in a rage , 
That seekest by my shame his sick sore to suage . 
For , in a word to conclude , 
I can do him no good ; 
He is reaved , by the Rood , 
Of all his won Wage . 
Though sometime the day drew , I dare not deny , 
That he in mine Heart had the most supreme place : 
And so , till the fond Fates his wealth did envye , 
I still , with courtesy , considered his case . 
And trust me , Pilgrim , his Passions , and Pain , 
Meant as near mine Heart , as ever did mine awne . 
Though his case now seem strange , 
I will not myself cleange : 
His bad chance , and my change , 
Hath bred all his pain . 
And as for my Love , who lies without release , 
Associate for my sake , with many sad Song ; 
So am I paid in mine hand , with as careful case , 
For he whom I best love , hath wrought me great wrong . 
And like as for his love , he reaps but disdain , 
The Love whom I like best , loathes me again . 
And as he lives all alone , 
With many great grievous groan , 
So to myself I bemoan , 
My hid piercing pain . 
I flee to be followed , and following , am fled : 
I love , and am loathed , and loath to be loved . 
here 's a strange stratagem , that my veil bred : 
I frieze in the hot Flame , and fry in the Flood . 
I lack whom I best love , and choked am with store : 
Yea , have so much , that my mind can crave no more . 
Thus go thy ways , whence thou came , 
And show thy sick Friend , his Dame 
Remains yet the self same , 
That she was before . 
I will work thee no wrong , that no ways hast wit ▪ 
But through the Fields on thy Feet friendly dost fate , 
To seek to thy sick man some Salve for his syte , 
And to cure by thy Craft his cursed kindled Care : 
thou shalt walk on thy way , and stay on the Street , 
And carry him shortly his answer in Writ . 
And when she the Door bard , 
I stood still yet unskard ; 
And through a hole I heard 
This talk of the Sweet . 
Poliphila , before She written her Answer , disputeth with her own Desires , as followeth : 

How hard it is , none knows , so well as I ▪ 
Unto a doleful , and divided Mind , 
To make a well-joind Answer , and Reply , 
When all the chief and noblest parts are pinned . 
then , Shall I be to Cruelty inclined ? 
Or pity him that prays , and pleads for Peace ▪ 
If this or that I stick in contrare case ? 
I love the Love that lightlies me again ; 
And lightly him that loves me as his life : 
Yea , for my love with slavery is slain . 
His lyfe's the Thread , my cruelties the Knife . 
How shall I rid this strange and fatal strife ? 
Yet best it were , to look , before I lope : 
And not to quite Assurance true , for Hope . 
OH my divided Soul ! what shall I do ? 
Whereon shall now my Resolution rest ? 
Which is the best Advice to yield unto ? 
Of two Extremes , how shall I choose the best ? 
Come , Pithiane Prince : I pray , and I protest : 
Assist me now , and make no more delay ; 
But guide me well , in this my wilsome way . 
then , Eremite , that dost in Desert dwell , 
And buyst my love , with dear and great expense ; 
With Toil , and Torments , tedious for to tell ; 
Be blithe , and let thy wont Harms go hence : 
thou must not die , while I may make defence . 
Put then a point and period to thy pain : 
Thy long-sought Love and Lady shall be thine . 
Yet will I write disdainfullie to thee : 
Thy loving Lines must have a cold Reply . 
I will not seem too credulous to be , 
With hasty Faith , to trust , before I try . 
But I avow , I shall not sleep , nor lie 
In any Bed , till I behold thy Face , 
And boldly him whom I should brook , embrace . 
Go , lovelesse Lines , unto my Lover true . 
Stay yet , lest ye procure his farther pain . 
God grant nothing but Good hereof ensue . 
Yet stay , for why ? Ye will be quite mista'en . 
Go yet : but yet ye shall not go alane : 
Myself will follow , with convenient haste . 
God grant my Uoyage be not waird in waste . 
Thus endeth her Disputation . 

And so , in a short space , that sweet seemly Saint , 
Presents me ▪ her Pilgrim , a baile-bearing Bill : 
And as in the wild way she weind I should want , 
My Bag , and my Bottle , she plenisht at william 
A King from her Finger full fair did she take : 
And gave me , and prayed me , good News to bring back . 
And , having no more to say , 
But loath I should long stay , 
She weeping went away ▪ 
And not a word spoke . 
then , when the black Night her sad Mantle show , 
Ill Successor , degenerate from the Day , 
With the third Foot in hand , I through the thrang threw . 
Though clad with the dark Clouds , I went on my way . 
And loath to detain the Lecture too long , 
I came to my sick Friend ; and this was his Song ▪ 
But , when I knew his voice , 
I kept myself full close , 
To hear the Lays of his loss , 
The wild woods among . 
The Eremite his Complaint . 

SO many things before have perfect Poets penned , For to express their piercing pains , and cause their Cares be kende ▪ 

That naught is left , alas , for most unhappy me , 
In Skies above , on earth beneath , nor in the glassy Sea. 
no Metaphoricke Phrase , no high Invention brave : 
no Allegory sweet Conceit , no Theme sublime and grave : 
But all things else are said , which I can write or say : 
Thus in effect I wot not how my wracks for to bewray . 
And nothing doth aggrege my gripping grief so much , 
As that my skill should be so small , my sorrows should be such . 
Yet all those Poets brave , which were , or yet shall be , 
could I but utter , as I feel , might all give place to me . 
And thou whose mirth was least , whose comfort was dismayed ▪ 
Whose hope was vain , whose faith was scorn , whose truth was betrayed : 
thou didst declare thy duile , in brave and dainty die : 
thou wast unhappy then , I grant , but now unhappy I  
Thy Poems did present upon thy pleasant Page , 
More Sorrows than thou ever felt into thy cunning age . 
With costly Nurix rare , Sid●niane Wares divine , 
thou litst thy Lines , which makes thy Moans miraculously to shine . 
My Pains , like Tagus' Sands , no numbers can bewray : 
Or like Aurora's tears , which she for Memnon sheeds each day . 
As Stars in frosty Sky can not be told which shines ; 
So many heaps of harms my hart without compassion pin's , 
Yea , would I press to tell the torments that I feel , 
With travel tint then might I turn Irions fatal wheel . 
And to disgorge these griefs which make me sigh and sob , 
Were for to weve a new Penelopeian web . 
My Eyes like Fountains might in bloody Furnace fry , 
Or like the Lydian Tubs , whose doom is never to be dry . 
My hot and smoothred sighs , no levill course can take : 
But restless round about my heart esphearicke motion make . 
My Thoughts are now of Bliss like ruin Ilium bare : 
My shape , a reconfused mass , which flowrisht once so fair . 
My Ship , which sometimes sailed in drain of hope aright . 
On Rocks full cold is rend , in black and stormy night . 
And I , forsaken Soul , a lyfelesse lump of Lead , 
'twixt wind and wave am cast , whereas no strength can stand in stead . 
My Uentring was my Wrack ; my high Desire , my Fall : 
Which made the Naufrage of my Hurt , my Hope , my Hap , and all . 
Alas , alas , that I impossiblie did press , 
Above my Fortunes for to fly , so far to my disgrace . 
Disgraced with Loss , with Shame , with Wrack , and endless Wrong : 
These are the doleful Ditties now , and subjects of my Song . 
Yet dare I not , alas , though I have cause , complain : 
Which makes me sigh , and sob , and thus for love am slain . 
But since it is my weird , to fall , to wail , to weep ; 
then by my loss let others learn a lower course to keep . 
Thus endeth the Eremite his Complaint . 

And when I saw that his Song received a full end , 
I showed myself shortly , and kindly did kythe . 
And when that sore sick man his true Bearer kende , 
And saw the Face of his Friend , God knows he was blithe . 
then showed I the black Bill , subscryved with his Name , 
Well written with the hand of his own dear Dame.  
And then , with a glad cheer , 
When Hope had ceased Fear , 
He read , that I might hear , 
The Will of the same . 
Her Answer , to the Eremite . 

Thy loving Lines I rashly did receive , 
Wherein thy Truth , thy State , thy Wrack , I see : 
But at mine hands no succour shalt thou have : 
Though Friend to me , I shall be Foe to thee . 
And since thy death doth on my doom depend , 
Live loathed , or die disgraced , and so I end . 
Thus she shortly concludes . 

And when he read these bad and noisome News , 
Which did refresh his Woes , his Hurtes , and Harms : 
whiles red , whiles pale , he changed many hues , 
And fell down , in dead-thraw , betwixt my weak Arms . 
And when with my salt Tears I bathed his pale Face , 
His Spirits , and his Breath , came to their own place . 
He cried then , OH Death , stay 
Thy date , for this half day ; 
That I in writ may bewray 
My high great Disgrace . 
The Eremite his Testament . 

But now , and not till now , my Swan-lyke Song I sing ; 
And with each word my dying Eyes the bloody Tears forth bring . 
Not that I loathe , alas , or shrink for to be slain : 
For , what can be so sweet as death , which puts an end to pain ? 
My death shall be the Cause , thy Honour and Renown 
Shall lose the conquered Diadem of Fame's immortal Crown . 
Yet since it is thy Doom , that in disgrace I die , 
Or loathed live , the choice is hard whereas no mids may be . 
And yet of Evils twane , the best must ay be ta'en : 
So that I rather choose to die , than live in endless pain . 
Long have I looked for joy , whence floods of sorrow spring : 
The end whereof , alas , must be my latest Will to sing . 
My Tones , are careful Cries ; my Words are Plaints , alas : 
Sad Sorrow must the Singer be , since Pity hath no place . 
My Pains are like a Point , amid a Circle set : 
Still in such nearness to myself , that no relief can get . 
How can I hope for help , since Heavens do me despise ? 
And all the gods above are deadened , with my Complaints and Cries . 
Earth's burden am I thus , whose sighs infect the Air , 
With poisoned breath , proceeding from an heart consumed with Care. 
For lo , the faithless Fates unto this state me calls : 
By which the stately Stars themselves misfortune tholes . 
What rests then but Death ? since Death must be the last , 
To put a period to my pain , for pleasures hope is past . 
Yet A attest the gods , since first our love began ▪ 
I have been the lielest ay , and most affected man 
I loaded thee , alas , thy Soliphermis sworn : 
OH Poliphila false ! my lawtie is forlorn . 
My love , woe 's me , therefore , still thy disdain hath been : 
The most Extremes that ever were , or shall again be seen . 
thou first betrayed mine Heart , than falsified thy Faith : 
And where thou promised Life , by Love , thou hast decreed my Death . 
When that thy Cruelties I call before , and to 
The Eyes of my Remembrance , I doubt what I shall do . 
whiles do I wish to live , not to envye thy love : 
But that I might behold my wrack , revenged from Above . 
Or that such wrongs as mine , if such , or worse , might be , 
Might make me smile at thy Mishaps , as thou hast done at me . 
Or then that sometime thou , like that Minoniane Dame , 
Mightst love , and loathed be , and suffer such like shame . 
Or that the fatal Spark , whereon thy Loins might lout , 
And mounting much , might make thee plead , for Peace thy time about . 
Yet , whiles again I think , might I my wish obtain , 
I could not but be kind to thee , for kindness that hath been . 
Thus what I would , I wish : but wot not what I would . 
'twixt Heat and Cold I frieze , I fry , and fearful am , and bold . 
Yea , though I be dismayed , such is my flaming Fire , 
That Neptune's Kingdom could not quench the Coals of my Desire . 
Yet whiles I read the Schrole of Torments which I thole , 
Where no Mischance is mixed to fill a grieved Martyrs Roll. 
And when I look the Lives , wherein thy Hellish Doom , 
By thy Chyrographie sent , That Death should me consume , 
Thus I resolve at ones , for to obey thy will , 
Although my Life the Ransom be , thy Fury to fulfil . 
Since Contraries , we see , are by Contraries cured : 
then , welcome , Death , to cut the Thread , which hath so long endured . 
For why ? my Prayers are but Curses late and air : 
And I beseech the gods by night , to see the Day no maire . 
My wishes are , that Hills and Rocks should on me fall , 
To end my endless breath , my life , my love , and all . 
Yet all those wishes are but types , that I must die , 
Which revelations all at once , shall now accomplished be . 
then lovelesse dame , adieu , whom I have held so dear : 
And welcome , Death , to cut the Thread , which holds my life in weire . 
And , Pilgryme , thou who tookest thy way in many airts , 
For me prepare a burial Bed , for Bones , when Breath departs . 
Yet recommend mine Heart , unto my sometime-sweet ; 
Who shall , when I am dead and gone , for Grace and Guerdon greet . 
And let that place be named , Strophonius Cave of care : 
Where naught but woeful wand'ring ●ight● , undone w●●… duill , repair . 
And let this Caberne cold , wherein I dwelled , to die , 
For Misers , and unhappy men , a matchless Manston be . 
Let him whose erring steps should guide him here to plain , 
Take pains to recollect my rolls , & scattered Skrolls again . 
That these my Wail now , and Sorrow's Children may 
Extolled in after coming times , endure , and lief for ay . 
And that the wand'ring eyes , which read my sorrowing songs . 
When I am dead , may say , that she causeless hath wrought such wrongs . 
The Mountains high , whose points do pierce the azure Aire ; 
Whose echoes loud my Commerades make comfort to my Care : 
Still mote your heights arise , with stately tops and stay , 
To match the Alps , that ye may be as famous , fair as they , 
Ye Ualleyes lovely low , with sweet and level lines , 
Where Nature's workmanship and pride in Flora's Mantle shines : 
Green mot ye grow for ay , and that ne spaits of rain , 
no Snowy showers , no parching Sun , your stately broydering stain . 
And thou , OH blessed Brook , which didst accept my Tears ; 
And harbered them within thy heart , so many loathsome years ▪ 
Unto the Ocean great , most swiftly mote ye slide , 
To pay thy debts , 'bout stop or stay of contrare stream or tide . 
Ye whistling winds , likewise , which swiftly did receive , 
My Cogiate Sighs , and bury them within your Bosom brave . 
Do thus much once for me ; Take one Sighs to my Dame : 
And whispering sweetly , show that Saint , thus have I sent the same . 
And if she do refuse , which out of doubt I dread , 
The news of no , shall be a Sput , to haste me to my dead . 
Ye brave and statslie Trees , which circumcituate here , 
Still bloom , and blossom , with the change of yearly changing cheer . 
Though I did ryve your Kyndes , & broke your tender Barks , 
By painting Polyphilaes' name to your immortal marks : 
Agrieve not with your wounds , for I dare well avow , 
That I more cruelly have rend my tender Heart , than you . 
But last , and by the laive , thou Holline , grave and green , 
Wherein my Mistress name , and mine , most livelie may be seen , 
I consecreate to thee my Corpse , when I am gone , 
That by my loss I may enlarge thy thorny leaves eachone . 
And when I shall consume , and rot about thy root , 
then shall thy Boughs and Branches bloom , and bear a fairer Fruit : 
And as thou tak'st increase , so shall Her Name , and mine , 
Unto thy praise , my loss , her shame , in seemly sort ay shine . 
Ye savage Citizens , which in this Forest be , 
That did exchange your Cruelties , in Courtesies to me : 
Well not ye be , poor Beasts , and that no shots of Lead , 
no life-bereaving Bow , nor Bolt , procure nor haste your dead . 
And thou sweet piping Pan , ye Fawns , and Satyrs rare , 
Which were amid my matchless moans , Companions of my care : 
ye Nymphs of Hills & Dales , of Woods ; of Uailes , of Floods ; 
I bid you all , alas , Goodnight , and so my Muse concludes . 
For now the Harbinger of Death , must life and love bereave . 
My Heart is faint , and lo , my Soul begins to take her leave . 
And so at point of Death , whose wished approach I feel , 
To end my life , I write this last Ill-faring word , Farewell . 
So endeth the Testament of Stophonius . 

Thus the poor Eremite in midst of his pain , 
began to repeat his fair Mistress speech ; 
Down betwixt mine Arms fell , in dead thraw again ▪ 
When no Leid for his life , me thought , could be Leach . 
His Cognate Corpse as Clay were , like the Lead : 
Yea , healthless and helpless , were Heart , Hand , and Head : 
I began to bewail , 
And eke for to rail , 
On her whose faith did fail . 
In such time of need . 
Yet in the midst of my moans , down lighted that Dame , 
Companied with none , but her Palfrey and Page : 
And when she saw her liele Love lie dead ere she came , 
Her fair Face and rich Robes , she rend in great rage . 
And ●●atlingss she fell upon his faint Face , 
And great Seas of salt Tears she spent in short space . 
And seeing her Sweet slain , 
no remead did remain : 
She thus began to plain , 
Her bad careful case . 
Polyphila her Complaint , and Testament . 

OH endless Night of noise , which hath no Morrow ! 
OH lowering Heavens , which harms still have threat ! 
O'er mantling me with sable Clouds of Sorrow ! 
Uuhereas no Star doth shine early nor late . 
Although I ship from Craig , to seek my Mate , 
And from a glorious Garland to my Crown , 
I find by death my dainty Rose dung down . 
Ye swelling Seas , with weltering Uuaves that roll . 
To resolute the weatherbeaten Shore : 
They ebb , they flow , and changing , Courses tholl , 
And dare transcende their bounded banks no more . 
But I , alas , whom Duill doth still devour , 
I find no entermissions to my Moans , 
But ere and late lament my grievous Groans . 
How can my woeful Heart , and weeping Eyes , 
Behold the dearest of my life bereft ? 
How can my mind admit the least surmyze , 
Of any Hope , that hath but Horror left ? 
My Pilot now , by North , nor yet by East , 
Espies no Calms , but Mercie-wanting Storms ; 
Pretending Death , in black and ugly Forms . 
I grovelinges on the Ocean of my pride , 
Did misregard each true and loving Suit . 
So mante sued for favour on each side , 
Which made my Seed to yield much barren Fruit . 
Though I bewail , as now , it brings no buite . 
Sighs , Tears , and Uowes , and all are waird in vain : 
Since nothing can redeem thy life again . 
Ay me , alas ! Alas , and waile-away ! 
Dear Heert , poor Heart ; what rests for thy behoof ? 
Since I procured thy death , by my delay , 
And did mistrust my true and constant Love : 
Now shall my death , thy present death approve . 
Though whilst thou lived , to love thee I was loath ; 
Yet I am thine beyond the date of death . 
then let me die , and bid Delight adieu ; 
Since my delight is with thee dead and gone . 
The coming Age shall say , thy Thisu● true , 
Was constant still , and loved but thee alone . 
We both shall lie under one Marble stone . 
One Grave in end , shall end our fatal grief ; 
Which yields me now , in point of death , relief . 
Since yesterday may not be brought again , 
And Wrongs may be repent , not recalled : 
I will no more in veigh on Death in vain . 
But make all Woman's cowrage to be bold : 
And in the Time's to come , it shall be told ; 
Though thou till death didst serve and honour me , 
I after death have sought , and followed thee , 
And , Pilgrim's , now , I pray , and I protest , 
Before I end this last exequall Act , 
Let me be bold to make this small Request ; 
That for thy umwhile Friend's some pains thou take : 
First , In this place , a private Grave gar make ; 
And let us lie interred conjunctlie there , 
Where naught but Fawns , and Satyrs make repair ; 
Next , When thou com'st into my native Land , 
Wherein my Love , and lovelesse I was born ; 
If any of our Tragic death demand , 
With Pity speak , I pray , and not with Scorn . 
This Practics rars , which seldom was before , 
Which when my dear and loving Friends shall hear , 
My Tragic ends will cost them many a Tear . 
Thus endeth her Complaint . 

And so when that rare Pearl departed out of pain , 
Upon the cold dead Corpse of her leile Love , 
Unto my else hurt Heart did heap Harms again , 
And laid new weight on my braced Breast above . 
To see him and her gasp , still no wrisht my care . 
I wist not whom to help , him , or her there . 
While I stood in this doubt , 
The Eremite looked out , 
And gave a faint shout , 
'twixt hope , and despare . 
This is the World's most wondrous worthy Might , 
Most matchless of all , that may on mould move . 
Hallowed be the Heavens , that showed me this sight . 
And lent me this light , to look on my leile love . 
Now am I glad , and vngrieved , to Grave though I go : 
Thy travel and toil doth reward well my woe . 
For wilt thou believe me , 
My Maker mischieve me , 
If thou canst agrieve me , 
I still love thee so . 
I come , quoth the Clear then , to cure all thy care , 
Though the Faites had forsworn to fang thee my Feire . 
Be biythe then , my dear heart , and mourns thou no maire , 
For Peace , saith the Proverb , puts end to all weire . 
Go leave then thy Hermitage , and thy cold Cave , 
Where Wolf , Lion , wild Bear , thy blood still do crave , 
And with the good God's grace , 
thou shalt in a short space , 
For all thy loss stnde release , 
And first Health receive . 
then franklie the Frieke fury , with her help and mine , 
And to her Palfrey he passed , although with great pain : 
And took on that sweet Saint , that meek gem divine ; 
That miracle which gods made , as next unto naine . 
then blythlie the Bairue blended , and hide hasty Hame , 
Through shéene Shawes , & donke Dailes , with his dear Dame.  
And so with Adieu dry , 
Through the Wood could they hie , 
As we twinned , they and I , 
I work of my Dream . 
here endeth the fatality of the loyal Lover Soliphereus , and of his sweet Lady Polyphila . 

The Poëme . 

AS perfect Poets eye-tymes have ta'en pain , 
And searched the Secrets of each high Engyne , 
By base and lowly Subjects to exclaim , 
High Mysteries , both moral and divine : 
Even so into this worthless Work of mine , 
Which at Friends bidding boldly I set forth ; 
Some things may seem obscure , though little worth . 
For as the Eremite leaves his dearest Dame , 
And takes delight in cold Desert to dwell : 
Syn● of his Lot , and of himself , thinks shame , 
And still despairs , and still doth loathe him sell : 
So wretched man , exchanging Heaven with Hell , 
Forgetting GOD , in Darkness doth remain , 
And still despairs , to get Reliefs again . 
And as the painful Pilgryme , now and than , 
With Arguments , and pithy reasons strong , 
Would fain reduce the Eremite , if he can , 
And make him to behold his woeful wrong : 
And as the Woods , and savage Beasts among , 
So with him bides , and recomforts his Care : 
Sign holds him up , from dying in Despare . 
And as in end , he moves him for to write ; 
Sign shows his Suits unto his Mistress Eyes : 
Wherein , ye see , she took no small delyte , 
Because in him some sign of Truth she stes . 
She cures his Cares , and all his sick Disease : 
Yea , heals his hurt , and heartlie by the hand , 
She homeward leads him , to her native land  
So sinful man , first by the help of Faith , 
Despiseth Sin , reputes , and sore doth pray , 
That GOD in Mercy would avert His wrath , 
And make His bred displeasure to decay . 
And when the sick converted would away , 
From worldly ease , with haste he maketh speed : 
then comes the LORD , to help His own at need . 
He cures our cares , He helps us to be hail : 
He makes our sorry Souls for to rejoice . 
If we in Him confyde . He will not fail , 
To free us from the force of all our Foes . 
And at the last , with great disgrace of those , 
That loving LORD , shall take us by the Hand , 
And with Him leads us , to the HOME LAND . 
FINIS . 

Orpheus' Fiddle . 







 or , without   For bout , understand without  