THE LIFE OF FAITH IN DEATH . Exemplified in the living Speeches of Dying Christians . 

By SAMVEL WARD Preacher of Ipswich . 

LONDON , Printed by Augustine Mathewes for john Marriot and john Grismand , and are to be sold at their Shops in Saint Dunston's Church yard , and in Paul's Alley at the Sign of the Gun . 1622.  

TO HIS DEAR AND LOVING MOTHER . 

I Honour Augustine much for honouring his Mother so much after her death , whose name and example had otherwise lyen in obscurity . But I like better , and wish rather to follow the piety of Nazianzen , who gave himself to the performance of all Christian Offices to his loving Mother . God hath so blessed the former part of your life above the lot of most women , with two such able guides , as have so stored you with Spiritual and Temporal furniture , that you need not the aid of any your Children . Nevertheless , Grace and Nature will be ascending and expressing themselves , though in weak services . REUBEN when he found but a few Flowers , must bring them to his Mother LEAH . ESAV when he takes Uenison , gratifies his aged Father withal . SAMPSON finds home by the way and presents of it to his parents . here is a Posy gathered out of old and new Gardens ; this savoury meat hath God brought to hand , here is sweet out of the strong . Let your soul eat and bless . The use and fruit of them I wish to every believer , especially in age and sickness : but the handsel and honour of them ( if any be ) to yourself , whom the Law of God and Nature binds me to honour above others . Long may you live to bless your Children with your daily Prayers , especially your sons in that work which needs much watering . Yet every good Christian in years cannot but desire to be forewarned against death approaching , and that is the aim of these endeavours . God prospero and bless them as the former : and send me my part in the benefit of these ( as he hath done of them ) in the time of use . 

Your Son in all duty , desirous of the birthright of your love and blessing . SA : WARD . 

THE LIFE OF FAITH IN DEATH . 

That which hath been already spoken of the Life of Faith , is to the natural man above all Faith. And yet if that be all it can do , then is all little better than nothing . Say it could fill the mind of man with all content , satiate his life with all delight , and sweeten the bitterness of all afflictions , yet if for all this , there lurk in his breast a secret and slavish fear of Death , the least piece of this leaven but in a corner of the peck , is enough to sour the whole lump of his joys : the least dram of this Coloquintida will mar the relish of all his sweets : and make him cry out , There is death in the pot . And , O Death , how bitter is thy mention and memory ? 

Ask Nature , and call to Philosophy , and see if they can afford any aid ▪ must they not confess themselves here quite posed and plunged ? hath not death set & foiled their whole army : for poverty , shame ; and sickness , and other such petty Crosses , some poor cures , and lame shifts have they found out : but when death comes all their courage hath failed , and all their rules have left them in dark and desperate uncertainties . It is possible for Pharaoh with much a do to stand out the storms of Hail , the swarm of Flies and Lice : but when once the cry of Death is in the houses , then is there no way but yielding : his Enchanters and Mountebancks could abide the cry of Frogs and other such vermin ; but this Basilisk affrights them . Only Faith takes it by the tail , handles it , and turns it into an harmless wand , yea into a rod budding with glory and immortality . 

Quartane agues are not so much the shame of Physic , as Death is of all natural skill and valour . Death is Faith's evil . Faith only professeth this Cure , undertaketh and performeth it with the least touch of Christ's hand : and that as familiarly as the richest Balm doth the least cut of the finger . Faith turneth fears into hopes , sigh and groan , into wish and longings , shaking and trembling into leaping and clapping of hands . 

Alas , all troubles are but as Pigmies to this Giant , who defies all the host of Infidels : holds them in bondage all the days of their lives : and makes their whole life no better than a living Death and dying life . Only Faith encounters this Giant , singles him out for her chief prize , and grapples with him not as a match , but as with a vanquished underling : insulting over him as much as he doth over the sons of unbelief : sets her foot upon the neck of this King of fears , and so easily becomes Conqueror and Emperor of all petty fears , which are therefore only fearful , because they rend to Death ; the last , the worst , the end and sum of all feared evils . Here , and here only is the incomparable crown of Faith : here only doth she evidently and eminently honour her followers , and difference them from all others with a noble livery of true magnanimity and alacrity . 

It is true , if we had windows into the breasts of men , a difference one might see in the inward bearing of adversity : but for the face and outside , both may seem alike hardy , both may seem alike resolute : But when it comes to the point of Death , than the speech , the behaviour , the countenance , palpably distinguish the dull patience perforce of the worldling from the cheerful welcome of the Christian. Let Death put on her mildest vizards , come in the habit of the greatest sickness , to the stoutest Champion on his own Down bed , yet shall his heart tremble and his countenance wax pale . Let her dress herself like the cruelest Fury : Come with all her racks , fires , strappadoes , wild beasts , all her exquisite tortures : Faith will set a woman , or a child to make sport with her , to dare and to tire her , and her tormentors . 

Alas what do they tell us of their Socrates , their Cato , their Seneca , and a few such thin examples which a breath will rehearse , a few lines contain their poor ragged handful , to our Legions , whose names or number one may as soon reckon as the sand of the Sea shore : there 's a few choice men of heroical spirits trained up either in arts or arms : Our of the weakest sexes and sorts , only strong in the Faith : there 's either out of windy vainglory childishly reckoning of a short death and a long fame , or out of blockish ignorance venturing upon Death as Children and mad men upon dangers without fear or wit : Ours out of mature deliberation and firm belief in Christ : who hath drunk out of Death's bitter Cup an eternal health to all mankind , taken the gall and poison out of it , and made it a wholesome potion of immortality . Faith here proclaims her challenge and bids nature or art out of all their Soldiers or Scholars produce any one , who having free option to live or die , and that upon equal terms have embraced Death : Whereas infinite of hers have been offered life with promotions , and yet would not be delivered expecting a better resurrection . 

If any shall challenge these for Thrasonical flourishes , or Carpet vaunts , I appeal and call to witness not the Cloud now , but the whole sky of witnesses , such I mean as have died either in the Lord , or for the Lord , who in the very point and Article of Death have lived , and expressed lively testimonies of this their life , partly in their incredible sufferings , partly in their admirable sayings . For their Acts and Monuments if they had all been penned , all the world would not have contained their Histories : the very sums would swell to large Volumes . The valour of the Patients , the savageness of the Persecutors , striving together , till both exceeding nature and belief , bred wonder and astonishment in beholders and Readers . Christians have showed as glorious power in the faith of Martyrdom as in the faith of Miracles . As for their last Speeches , and Apothegms , pity it is no better mark hath been taken , and memory preserved of them . The choice and the prime I have culled out of ancient Stories , and latter Martyrologies , English , Dutch , and French. The profit and pleasure hath paid me for the labour of collecting , and the like gain ( I hope ) shall quit the cost of thy reading . Sweetly & briefly they comprise and couch in them the foundation , the marrow of large & manifold precepts , prescribed by the learned Divines for preparation against Death . The Art of dying well is easier learned by examples then by directions . These chalk the way more plainly , these encourage more heartily , these persuade more powerfully , these chide unbelief with more authority : if some work not , others may : some will affect some , some another . Read them over to a sick or to a dying Christian , if they quicken not , if they comfort not , it is because there is no life of Faith in them : if there be the least spark , these will kindle it , cherish and maintain it in the door , in the valley , in the thought , in the act of Death . 

The Living Speeches of Dying Christians . 

PART . 1.  

Old Simeons' Swan's Song , Lord let thy servant depart in peace , etc.  

The good Thief , the first Confessor . Lord remember me when thou comest into thy Kingdom . 

Steven the first Martyr , Lord jesus receive my Spirit , forgive them etc.  

Peter the Apostle : None but Christ , Nothing but Christ.  

Andrew the Apostle : Welcome O Christ longed and looked for . I am the Scholar of him that did hang on thee , long have I coveted to embrace thee , in whom I am that I am . 

Polycarpus to the Proconsul , urging him to deny Christ , I have served him 86 years , and he hath not once hurt me , and shall I now deny him ? 

When he should have been tied to the stake , he required to stand untied , saying : Let me alone ( I pray you ) for he that gave me strength to come to this fire , will also give me patience to abide in the same without your tying . 

Ignatius , I am the Wheat or Grain to be ground with the teeth of Beasts , that I may be pure Bread for my Master's tooth ; Let Fire , Racks , Pulleys , yea and all the Torments of Hell come on me , so I may win Christ.  

Lucius' to Vrbicius , a corrupt judge threaning death ; I thank you with all my heart , that free me and release me from wicked Governors , and send me to my good God and loving Father , etc.  

Pothnius' Bishop of Lions to the Precedent ask him in the midst of torments what that Christ was , answered , If thou wert worthy , thou shouldst know . 

Cyprian , God Almighty be blessed for this Gaol delivery . 

Ambrose to his Friends about him , I have not so lived , that I am ashamed to live longer , nor yet fear I Death , because I have a good Lord  

And the same to Calligon , Valentinians Eunuch threatening death , Well do you that which becomes an Eunuch , I will suffer that which becomes a Bishop . 

Augustine , Boughs fall off Trees , and Stones out of Buildings , and why should it seem strange that mortal men die ? 

Theodosius , I thank God more for that I have been a member of Christ , than an Emperor of the world . 

Hilarion , Soul , get thee out , thou hast seventie years served Christ , and art thou now loath to die , or afraid of Death ? 

Vincentius , Rage , and do the worst that the spirit of malignity can set thee on work to do . thou shalt see God's Spirit strengthen the Tormented more than the Devil can do the Tormentor . 

jubentius and Maximinus , We are ready to lay off the last Garment the Flesh.  

Attalus answered to every question , I am a Christian : being fired in an Iron Chain , Behold , o you Romen , this is to eat man's flesh , which you falsely object to us Christians . 

Basill to Valens his Viceroy , offering him respite , no , I shall be the same to morrow ; I have nothing to lose but a few Books , and my body is now so crazy , that one blow will end my torment . 

Gordius , To the Tyrant offering him promotion ; Have you any thing equal , or more worthy than the Kingdom of Heaven ? 

Babilas dying in Prison , willed his Chains should be buried with him ; Now ( saith he ) will God wipe away all tears , and now I shall walk with God in the land of the Living . 

Barlaam , holding his hand in the flame over the Altar , sung that of the Psalmist : thou teachest my hands to war , and my fingers to fight . 

julitta : We Women received not only flesh from men , but are bone of bone , and therefore aught to be as strong and constant as men in Christ's cause . 

Amachus , Turn the other side also , Lest raw flesh offend . The like Laurence . 

Symeones , Thus to die a Christian , is to live , yea the chief good and best end of a man  

Marcus' of Arethuse , hung up in a basket , anointed with honey , and so exposed to the stinging of Wasps , and Bees , to his persecutors that stood and beheld him ; How am I advanced , despising you that are below on earth . 

Pusices to Ananias an old man trembling at Martyrdom : Shut thine eyes but a while , and thou shalt see God's light . 

Bernard , Fence the heel void of Merit , with Prayer , that the Serpent may not find where to fasten his teeth . 

The second part . 

EDWARD the 6.  King of England , Bring me into thy Kingdom , free this Kingdom from Antichrist , and keep thine Elect in it . 

Cranmer Archbishop : Thrusting his hand into the fire : thou unworthy hand ( saith he ) shalt first burn , I will be revenged of thee for subscribing for fear of Death to that damned scroll . 

Latimer Bishop : To one that tempted him to recant , and would not tell him his name : Well ( saith he ) Christ hath named thee in that saying , Get thee behind me Satan ; And being urged to abjure , I will ( saith he ) good people , I once said in a Sermon in King Edward's time confidently , that Antichrist was for ever expelled England , but God hath showed me it was but carnal confidence . 

To Bishop Ridley , going before him to the Stake : Have after as fast as I can follow : we shall light such a candle by God's grace in England this day , as I trust shall never he put out again . 

To whom Bishop Ridley : Be of good heart Brother , for God will either assuage the fury of the flame , or else strengthen us to abide it . 

Bishop Hooper ; to one that tendered a Pardon upon recantation ; If you love my Soul away with it , if you love my Soul away with it : one of the Commissioners prayed him to consider that life is sweet , and death is bitter ; True ( saith he ) but the death to come is more bitter , and the life to come more sweet ; O Lord Christ I am hell , thou art Heaven , draw me to thee of thy mercy . 

john Rogers , to one that told him he would change his note at the fire ; If I should trust in myself , I should so do , but I have determined to die , and God is able to enable me . 

Being awakened , and bidden to make haste to Execution , then ( saith he ) shall I not need to tie my points . 

john Philpot , I will pay my vows in thee OH Smithfield . 

Thomas Bilney : I know by sense and Philosophy , that fire is hot and burning painful , but by faith I know it shall only waste the stubble of my body , and purge my spirit of it corruption . 

Glover to Augustine Brenner : He is come , He is come , meaning the Comforter God's Spirit . 

john Bradford : embracing the Reeds and Faggots said ; Straight is the way , and narrow is the gate , and few that find it . And speaking to his fellow Martyr : Be of good comfort Brother , for we shall have a merry Supper with the Lord this night ; if there be any way to heaven on Horseback , or in fiery Chariots , this is it . 

Laurence Saunders : I was in prison till I got into prison , and now ( says he kissing the Stake ) welcome the Cross of Christ , welcome everlasting life : my Saviour began to me in a bitter Cup , and shall I not pledge him ? 

john Lambert : None but Christ , none but Christ.  

Baynam , Behold you Papists that look for miracles , I feel no more pain in the fire , then if I were in a bed of Down , it is as sweet to me as a bed of Roses . 

Hugh Laverocke comforting john A Price his fellow-martyr , said unto him : Be of good comfort my Brother , for my Lord of London is our good Physician , he will cure thee of all thy blindness , and me of my lameness this day . 

William Hunter to his Mother , For a momentany pain I shall have a crown of life , & may not you be glad of that ? To whom she answered , I count myself happy that bore such a Champion for Christ : and thee as well bestowed as any child that ever I bore . 

Adam Damlip to his fellow-prisoners , wondering at his cheerful Supping and behaviour after the message of his execution : Why ( quoth he ) think you I have been so long in the Marshallsea , and have not learned to die ? And when they told him his quarters should be hanged up ; then ( said he ) shall I need take no thought for burial . 

Priest's wife to one offering her money , I am now going to a Country where money bears no Mastery : when sentence was read ; Now have I gotten that which many a day I have sought for . 

Kirby to Master Wingfield pitying him : Be at my burning , and you shall see , and say , there is a Soldier of Christ : I know fire , water , and sword are in his hands , that will not suffer them to separate me from him . 

Doctor Taylor ; I shall this day deceive the worms in Hadley Church yard , and fetching a leap or two when he came within two miles of Hadley , Now ( saith he ) lack I but two Styles , and I am even at my Father's house . 

Walter Mill urged to recant at the Stake ; I am no chaff , but corn , I will abide Wind and Flail , by God's grace . 

Bishop Farrar , to a Knight's Son bemoaning his death : If you see me stir in the fire , trust not my doctrine ; And so he stood holding up his stumps , till one Gravel struck him down with a staff . 

Rawlings to the Bishops : Rawlings you left me , Rawlings you find me , and so by God's grace I will die . 

john Ardley , If every hair of my head were a man , it should suffer death in the Faith I now stand in . The like Agges Stanley , and William Sparrow . 

Thomas Hawkes , being desired to give a sign , whether the fire was tolerable to be born , promised it to his friends : and after all expectation was past , he lift up his hands half burned , and being on a light fire , with great rejoicing , striketh them three times together . 

Laurence Guest to his wife meeting him with seven children on her hand : Be not a block to me in the way , now I am in a good course , and near the mark . 

The Lady jane Grey requested by the Lieutenant of the Tower to write her Symbol in his book before her beheading , wrote this , Let the glassy condition of this life never deceive thee , There is a time to be born , a time to die ; But the day of death is better than the day of Birth . 

Alice Driver , when the chain was about her neck : here is a goodly Necker chief , God be blessed for it . 

john Noyes kissing the stake : Blessed be the time that ever I was born for this day . To his fellow Martyrs ; We shall not lose our lives in this Fire , but change them for a better , and for coals have pearls , etc.  

julius' Palmer : To them that have the mind linked to the body , as a thieves foot to a pair of stocks , it is hard to die indeed ; but if one be able to separate soul and body , then by the help of God's spirit it is no more mastery for such a one , then for me to drink this Cup.  

Elizabeth Folkes , embracing the Stake ; Farewell all the world , Farewell Faith , Farewell Hope , and welcome Love.  

Roger Bernard , being threatened whipping , stocking , burning ; answered , I am no better than my master Christ , and the Prophets , which your Fathers served after such sort , and I for his name's sake am content to suffer the like at your hands : so immediately he was condemned , and carried to the fire . 

Thomas Sampal , offered a pardon in the midst of the fire : O now I am thus far on my journey , hinder me not to finish my race . 

Latimer Bishop , when they were about to set fire to him , and Bishop Ridley , with an amiable countenance , said these words : God is faithful which doth not suffer us to be tempted above our strength . 

Bishop Ridley to Mistress Irishman the Keeper's wife , and other friends at Supper , I pray you be at my Wedding tomorrow , ( at which words they weeping ) I perceive you are not so much my friends as I took you to be . 

Tankerfield , when he had put one Leg into the fire . The Flesh shrinks and says , thou fool , wilt thou burn and needest not ? The spirit says , Hell fire is sharper , and wilt thou adventure that ? The flesh says , wilt thou leave thy Friends ? The Spirit answers , Christ and his Saint's society is better . The flesh says , wilt thou shorten thy life ? The Spirit says , it 's nothing to an eternal life . 

joyce Lewis , When I behold the ouglesome face of Death , I am afraid , but when I consider Christ's amiable Countenance , I take heart again . 

The third part . 

JOHN HUS to a Countryman that threw a Faggot at his head : O holy Simplicity , God send thee better light . You roast the Goose now , but a Swan shall come after me , and he shall escape your Fire ; Hus a Goose in the Bohemian language , and Luther a Swan . 

Hierom of Prague , Make the fire in my sight , for if I had feared it , I had never come hither : while it was making , he sung two Psalms . 

Anonymus on his deathbed , Now Phlegm do thy duty , and stop thou my vital Artery . Now Death do me that friendly office to rid me of pain , and hasten me to happiness : To a Friend of his that willed him to have his thoughts on heaven : I am there already . 

Claudius' Monerius being cavilled at by the Friars for eating a breakfast before his execution . This I do that the flesh may answer the readiness of the Spirit . 

Michaela Caignoela , a noble Matron , seeing her judges look out of the windows , said to her fellow-martyrs : These stay to suffer the torment of their Consciences , and are reserved to judgement , but we are going to glory and happiness . And to certain poor women weeping , and crying , O Madam , we shall never now have more Alms , Yes hold you ( saith she ) yet once more ; and plucked off her Slippers , and such other of her apparel , as she could with modesty spare from the fire . 

james Delos , to Monks that called him proud Heretic ; Alas , here I get nothing but shame , I expect indeed preferment hereafter . 

Madam la Glee , to one Chavique , that upbraided her for denying the Faith ; Your cursed faith is not worthy the name of Faith ; she put on her Bracelets , For I go ( said she ) to my Spouse . 

Marlorat to friends that called him deceiver ; If I have seduced any , God hath seduced me , who cannot lie . 

Castilia Rupea , Though you throw my body down of this steep hill , yet will my soul mount upwards again ; your blasphemies more offend my mind , than your torments do my body . 

Christopher Marshal of Antwerp , I was from eternal a sheep destined to the slaughter , and now I go to the shambles , Gold must be tried in the fire . 

Vidus Bressius , If God's Spirit saith true , I shall strait rest from my labours , my soul is even taking her wings to sly to her resting place . 

The Duke of Wittenberg and Luneburgh , Many have been mine errors and defects in Government , Lord pardon and cover all in Christ.  

Picus Mirandula , If Christ's Death and our own were ever in eye , how could we sin ? Death is welcome , not as an end of trouble , but of sin . 

Martin Luther , Thee O Christ have I taught , thee have I trusted , thee have I loved , into thy hands I commend my spirit . 

OH ecolampadius to one ask if the light offended him not , I have light enough here , laying his hand on his breast ; And to the Ministers about him , Let the light of your lives shine as well as your Doctrine . 

Francisco Varlute , Paul and Peter were more honourable members of Christ than I , but I am a member ; they had more store of grace than I , but I have my measure , and therefore sure of my glory . 

Peter Berger , I see the Heaven's open to receive my Spirit ; And beholding the multitude at the stake , Great is the Harvest , Lord send Labourers . 

john Mallot a Soldier ; Often have we hazarded our lives for the Emperor Charles the fifth , and shall we now shrink to die for the King of Kings ? Let us follow our Captain . 

john Fillula to his fellows : By these Ladders we ascend the heavens , now begin we to trample under seet , Sin , the World , the Flesh , and the Devil . 

Thomas Calberg , to the Friars , willing him to repent at the last hour : I believe that I am one of those Workmen in Christ's Vineyard , and shall presently receive my penny . 

Robert Ogners , Son to his Father and Mother at the stake with him : Behold million of Angels about us , and the Heaven's open to receive us. To a Friar that railed , Thy cursings are Blessings : And to a Noble man that offered him Life and Promotion : Do you think me such a fool , that I would change eternal things for temporary : To the people , We suffer as Christians , not as thieves or Murderers . 

Constantine being carried with other Martyrs in a Dungcart to the place of Execution : Well ( saith he ) yet are we a precious odour , and sweet savour to God in Christ.  

Fran : Sanromanus a Spaniard : Work your pleasures on my body , which you have in Chains your Captive : but my soul is even already in heaven through Faith and Hope , and upon that Caesar himself hath no power . 

joan the Marshal's wife of France to her Husband at the Stake with her : Be of good cheer , our Wedding was but a shadow , an earnest and Contract of that solemn and blessed Marriage , which the Lamb will now consummate . 

Anne Audebert of Orleans : Blessed be God for this wedding girdle ( meaning the Chain ) My first Marriage was on the Lord's day , and now my second to my Spouse and Lord CHRIST shall be on the same . 

john Bruger , to a Friar offering him a wooden cross at the Stake : no ( saith he ) I have another true Cross imposed by Christ on me , which now I will take up : I worship not the work of man's hands , but the Son of God , I am content with him for my only Advocate . 

Martin Hyperius , O what a difference there is betwixt this and eternal fire ! who would eat this to leap into that ? 

Augustine of Hannovia to a Noble man , persuading him to have a care of his soul ; So I will ( saith he ) for I presently will lay down my body to save my Conscience whole . 

Faninus an Italian kissed the Apparitor that brought him word of his Execution ; To one reminding him of his Children ; I have left them to an Able and Faithful Guardian : To his friends weeping , That is well done , that you weep for joy with me : And to one objecting Christ's agony and sadness to his cheerfulness : Yea ( saith he ) Christ was sad , that I might be merry ; He had my sins , and I have his merit and righteousness : And to the Friars offering him a wooden Crucifix , Christ needs not the help of this piece to imprint him in my mind and heart , where he hath his habitation . 

George Carpenter , All Bavaria is not so dear to me as my wife and children , yet for Christ's sake I will forsake them cheerfully . 

Adam Wallacke , a Scot , to a tempting Friar , If an Angel should say that which thou dost , I would not listen to him : is the Fire ready ? I am ready ; Let no man be offended , no Disciple is greater than his Master . 

john Burgon to his judges ask him , if he would appeal to the high Court : Is it not enough that your hands are polluted with our Blood , but you will make more guilty of it ? 

Frederick Anvil of Bearne , to the Friars that willed him to call on the Virgin Mary ; three times repeated , thine OH Lord is the Kingdom , thine is the power and glory for ever and ever ; Let 's fight , Let 's fight . Avaunt Satan , Avaunt . 

Godfrey Varal of Piedmont ; Hangman do thine office , my death will be fruitful to myself and others . 

Halewine of Antwerp , and Harman of Amsterdam , to the Markgrave of Antwerp , offering mitigation of Torments upon abjuration , We are resolved these Momentany afflictions are not worthy that exceeding weight of glory that shall be revealed . Peter and Nicholas Thiesse● brethren , used the like speech . 

Anna's Burgius in the midst of his torments : Lord forsake me not , lest I forsake thee . 

Peter Clerk with the root of high Tongue plucked out , pronounced audibly ( to show that none ever wanted a tongue to praise God ) Blessed be the name of God , as of old Romanus the Martyr , mentioned in Prudentius . 

Godfrey de Hammele , to one that called him Heretic , no heretic but an unprofitable servant , yet willing to die for his Lord , and reckoning this death no death but a life . 

Bucer , no man by talk shall withdraw my mind from Christ crucified , from heaven , & my speedy departure , upon which my soul is fixed . When one advised him to arm himself against Satan's temptations ; He hath nothing to do with me : God forbid but now my soul should be sure of sweet consolation . 

Tremelius , a Christian jew , Let Christ live , and Barrabas perish . 

Ferdinand Emperor : If mine Ancestors and Predecessors had not died , how should I have been Emperor ? I must that others may succeed me . 

Frederick the third Elect. Palat. to his friends about him , wishing him recovery , I have lived enough to you , let me now live to myself , and with my Lord Christ.  

Leonard Caesar : O Lord do thou suffer with me , Lord support me and save me . 

Windelmuta , to one that told her she had not yet tasted how bitter Death was : no ( said she ) neither ever shall I , for so much hath Christ promised to all that keep his word , neither will I forsake him for sweet life , or bitter death . 

Henry Voes , If I had ten heads , they should all off for Christ. God forbid I should rejoice in any thing save in his Crosse.  

The Minister of Brisgo , This skin which scarce cleaves to my bones , I must shortly have laid off by necessity , how much more willingly now for my Saviour Christ.  

Adolphus Clarebachius : I believe there is not a merrier heart in the world at this instant , then mine is : Behold , you shall see me die by that Faith I have lived . 

Alexander Cane : when a fool's Cap was put on his head : Can I have a greater Honour done me , then to be served as my Lord CHRIST before Herod ? Lord , seeing my Persecutors have no mercy , have thou mercy on me , and receive my soul . 

Almondus a Via , My body dies , my Spirit lives . God's Kingdom abides ever . God hath now given me the accomplishment of all my desires . 

Giles Tilman , urged to know what he believed of Purgatory . Purgatory and Hell I leave to you , but my Hope is directly to go into Paradise : Neither fear I this great pile of Wood , whereof some might have been spared to warm the poor , but will pass through it purged for my Saviour . 

Peter Bruse : I thank God , my broken leg suffered me not to fly this Martyrdom . 

Marion the wife of Adrian , seeing the Coffin hooped with Iron , wherein she was to be buried alive . Have you provided this Pasty-crust to bake my flesh in . 

Lewis Paschalis : it 's a small matter to die once for Christ , if it might be , I could wish I might die a thousand deaths for him . 

john Buisson : I shall now have a double Gaol delivery ; one out of my sinful flesh , another from the loathsome Dungeon I have long lyen in . 

Hugh Stallour to john Pike his fellow Martyr ; Yet a little while , and we shall see one another before the Throne , and face of God.  

Levine de Blehere , To his friends that offered to rescue him by tumult : Hinder not the Magistrates work , nor my happiness : Father , thou soresawest this Sacrifice from eternal : now accept of it , I pray thee . 

Christopher Fabrianus : First bitter , then sweet ; first battle , the victory when I am dead ; every drop of my blood shall preach Christ , and set forth his praise . 

Francisce Soet : You deprive me of this life , and promote me to a better , which is , as if you should rob me of Counters , and furnish me with Gold.  

Guy de Bres : The ringing of my Chain have been sweet Music in mine ears : my Prison an excellent School , wherein God's spirit hath been my Teacher : all my former Discourses were as a blind man's of colours , in comparison of my present feeling . O what a precious Comforter is a good Conscience . 

Dionysius Peloquine , To the Inquisitor telling him , his life was now in his own hands . then said he , It were in an ill keeping . Christ's School hath taught me to save it by losing it , and not by the gain of a few days , or years , to lose Eternity . 

Lewis Marsake Knight , seeing his other brethren go with Halters about their necks , which they offered not him because of his dignity ; Why I pray you ( quoth he ) deny me not the Badge and ornament of so excellent an order , is not my cause the same with theirs ? which obtaining , he marched valiantly to the Stake with them . 

Simon Laloeus to one Silvester his Executioner ; Never saw I man in all my life whose coming was more welcome to me then thine . So cheerful was his death , that Sylvester amazed at it , left his office , became a Convert and a Christian himself , went to Geneva for further instruction in the Gospel . 

Kilian a Dutch Schoolmaster , to such as asked him if he loved not his wife and children , Yes ( said he ) if all the world were gold , and were mine to dispose of , I would give it to live with them , though it were but in prison ; yet my soul and Christ are dearer to me then all . 

Giles Verdict : Out of my Ashes shall rise innumerable Christians , which Prophecy , God so verified by the effect , that it grew a byword after his death , That his ashes flew abroad all the Country . 

Anthony Verdict brother to the former , condemned to be eaten with Beasts , to prevent the like Proverb : said to his Father , O Father , how hath God enabled you , to have two Sons honoured with Martyrdom . 

john Barbevill , to Friars that called him ignorant Ass : Well , admit I were so , yet shall my Blood witness against such Balaams' as you be . 

Francisce Coluer , to his two Sons massacred together with himself : Sheep we are for the slaughter ; this is no new thing , let us follow million of Martyrs through temporal death , to eternal life . 

By all these which are but an handful of Christ's Camp Royal , it sufficiently appears they had their Faith fresh and lively in the face of this grand enemy , and by Virtue of their Faith , their Spirits , Wits , and Tongues , untroubled , undismayed ; insomuch that an ancient witness of the Christian Bishops , that they did more ambitiously desire the glory of Martyrdom , than others did Praelacies and Preferments . And a late mortal enemy of theirs , bade a vengeance on them , for he thought they took delight in burning . What then shall we gain by them ? I remember Master Rough a Minister , coming from the burning of one Austo , in Smithfield , being asked by Master Farrar of Halifax , where he had been , made answer , There where I would not but have been , for one of my eyes , and would you know where ? Forsooth I have been to learn the way : which soon after he made good , by following him in the same place , in the same kind of death . Now if one Precedent made him so good a Scholar : What dullards and non-proficients are we ? if such a cloud of examples work not in us a cheerful ability to expect and encounter the same adversary , so often foiled before our eyes . Yet lest any should complain , that examples without Rules , are but a dumb and lame help : I will annexe unto them a pair of Funeral Sermons , opening a couple of Seals revealed to john in his second vision : The first , affording us sundry Meditations of Death and Hell ; The second , of Heaven , & the happiness of such as die in the Lord , and rest under the Altar . 

The use of them I chiefly dedicated and commend to old sick persons , such especially , as die of lingering diseases , affording them leisure to peruse such themes , though I forbid none , but to all I say , Come and see . 

THE LIFE OF FAITH in DEATH . 

REVEL . 6. 7. 8.  

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Come and see . 

And behold a pale horse , and his name that sat on him was Death , and Hell followed after him , and power was given unto them , etc.  



Come and see . Were it some stately , some pleasing , yea or but some vain sight such as Mordecay riding on the king's Horse in pomp with the Royal Furniture : or but a company of Players , riding through a Market , A Drum , a Trumpet , or the least call would serve the turn , to draw us out to the sight : But these being serious , yea to nature somewhat hideous and odious Voices , like unto Thunders , are given to the beasts to call beholders . The Crier in the Wilderness is willed to cry this Theme aloud in the deaf ears of men . A Boanerges with all the vehemency and contention of his voice and affections , will be too little , unless God boar the ears , open the eyes , and persuade the hearts of men to Come and see . Yet is it but our folly to be so shy of this sight , for though it be sad , yet is it of all the sights under the Sun the most necessary , the most profitable ; Though we turn away our faces and close our eyes , yet see it we must , and see it we shall , never the less , never the sooner , never the later . Nay , the truth is , see it we never shall , but with closed eyes . thou tender faint-hearted man or woman that art so loath to meet with a Corpse or Beer , to see a skull , or any thing that mind's thee of Death , shalt thou by this means protract or escape thy Death ? no , let me tell thee praevision is the best prevention , and praemonition the best praemunition . That which is commonly received of the Basilisk , is here no conceited Story , but a serious truth . He that sees it before he be seen of it , may avoid the deadly poison of it . He that sees it before it comes , shall not see it when it comes . He that mannageth an horse at an armed stake , fits him to rush into the main Battle without fear . And wouldst thou with joseph of Arimathaea , walk every day a turn or two with Death in thy Garden , and well foreacquaint thyself therewithal , thou shouldst have , if not Enochs , yet every true believers Privilege , not to see Death , not to taste of Death , viz. in that ugly form , distasteful manner , which other the sons of Adam do , who because they will not see the face of it , must feel the sting of it . To die well and cheerfully , is too busy a work to be well done ex tempore . The Foundation of Death must be laid in life . He that means , and desires to die well , must die daily . He that would end his days well , must spend them well , the one will help the other . The thoughts of thy end as the train of the Fowl and Rudder of a Ship will guide thy life , and a good Life will lead thee to a peaceable end , that thou shalt neither shame or fear to die . In a word , Plato's Philosophy in this , is true Divinity : that the best mean , and whole sum of a wise man's life , is the Commentation of Death , not every fleet and flitting flash , but frequent and fixed contemplations . Death is the knownest and unknownest thing in the world : that of which men have the most thoughts and fewest Meditations . Be therefore persuaded to Come and see : that is , come that thou mayest see . Come from other objects , infinite and vain spectacles , with which the eye is never glutted . Draw near and close to this that thou mayest see it thoroughly . Wipe off the Clay , spital , and Scales of thine eyes , that thou mayest clearly behold the nature , quality , and consequents of Death . no mortal wight but hath some blushes of mortality , such as go and come , but if they would suffer them to lodge in their minds , they must needs stir some affection , and leave some impression in the memory , and produce some effects in their lives . Socrates had a gift that he could fasten his eyes many hours on one object without change or weariness : Half so stayed a thought of one's mortality , might bring a man to immortality . It is not beauty seen , but looked on that wounds . I meet with a Story of one that gave a young Prodigal a Ring with a Death's head , with this condition , that he should one hour daily for seven days together look and think upon it : which bred a strange alteration in his life , like that of Thesposius in Plutarch , or that more remarkable , of Waldus the rich Merchant in Lions , who seeing one drop down dead in the streets before him , went home , repent , changed his life , studied the Scripture , and became a worthy Preacher , Father , and Founder of the Christians called Waldenses , or poor men of Lions . In Conference and Confessions many one hath acknowledged to myself the like : some that by dangerous sickness of their own , others that by fear of infection in times of the Plague , and general Visitation , others by the death of friends , as by shafts that have fallen near them , have been awakened , affrighted , and occasioned to think deeply on their ends , to provide against their ends , to attend the Word , which hath proved the mean of their conversion and salvation . And this I think should be enough to persuade young and old , one and other to Come and see . 

But what now are we come out to see ? 

Behold , First the Seal opened . 

Secondly , the Horse issuing out . 

Thirdly , the Colour of the Horse . 

Fourthly , the Rider and his Followers . Death and Hell.  

This horse is under seal . Seals we use commonly to confirm and conceal , to make things sure and to keep things secret . And thus death as all God's judgements are said to be sealed . job. 35. and that with a firmer seal than of the Medes and Persians : In which sense this Horse Zach. 4. issueth from between two brazen mountains , that is God's inevitable , unalterable Decree : he rusheth not out , rangeth not abroad at the will of man or Satan , at hap or by blind Destiny , but at the pleasure and by the appointment of the great Master of these God's horses , jesus Christ , one of whose chief royalties is to keep the lock and key of Death and Hell , Revel . 1. else would he be ever trampling under feet the sons of men . Look how naturally , and continually the Sea would overwhelm the whole Earth , if the waves were not bounded by providence : So would this horse overcome the Inhabitants of it , were he not tied short , and restrained by his , and our Lord You see him here limited to the fourth part of the Earth , else had not one been left alive : For all are sentenced , and have deserved to die , and its favour that all die not . In a word , men die not by chance , course of Nature , influence of Stars , but then , and therefore because it is appointed . A million of Aethiopians perish in one day , in one battle , 2.  Corinth . 14. not because all were born under one aspect of Planets , but because such a slaughter was sealed of God. And though there be one way in , and twenty out of the world , yet all falls out as God determines and disposeth . That Christian which believes this , though he may desire David's Arithmetic to number his days aright , that is , to know the brevity of them : yet will he never study the black and senseless Art of calculating his birth and death . None but fools are curious and inquisitive to know that , which is under God's privy Signet . We are all as Soldiers sent to Sea with Commission under seal , not to be opened till we come to such and such a point . To guess and conclude , we shall die at such an age , in such a Climaterical year , what is it but to make a league with Death , not unlike to that frenzy Merchant that would make and strike up matches of hundred and thousands with parties absent as if they were present . A fond itching humour , and such as would for the most part ( what ever we think ) do us hurt rather than good , if the day and hour were far off , it would breed security : if near hand horror . Sicknesses are sufficient summons and warnings . Mark such as sentenced by judges and Physicians foreknow their death , yet without special grace fore-fit themselves never the more carefully . Some deaths indeed ( as some Clocks give warning before they strike ) which symptoms and signs infallible : and so extraordinarily God gives to some Moses and Hezekiahs' a presage , and hearts to prepare : but general God hath seen this the best for us , that it should be for the general most certain , for the particular most uncertain , to him sealed , to us concealed : of which he would have us make these uses . 

First , for our bodily health not to be too careful , nor too careless : with all our Physical diet and miserable anxiety , we cannot add one cubite to the length of our days , or measure of our health . We are all sealed up no otherwise then the measure of our wealth , of our crosses and blessings , for the having or avoiding of which : the means we must use without carking care , or cowardly fear , cheerfully relying on Christ , the Lord Keeper of the Seal , not wittingly and desperately preventing that sealed date by surfeits of toil or pleasure , by wilful neglect of diet , contempt of Physic , by grief or by melancholy : nay , not by haste to glory with Cleombrotus the Heathen , or with hasty selfe-murthering Christians , such as Augustine's times were full off : but with job patiently all the days of our life , during the term of our sealed lease , till the very day and date expire , and appointed time of dismission , and dissolution come . 

And secondly for our soul's provision , not to do as most that have set days of truce and peace , and in which they hang up their Armour a rusting , and their Beakons unwatched : but as people that live in perpetual hazard of war , have all things in a daily readiness for service at half an hour's warning , upon the least Alarm : Who would live one hour in infidelity or irrepentance , lest in that he be taken napping as the foolish Virgins , and that rich fool that reckoned of many years , and had not one night to continue . Grant it were enough to repent and believe the last day of life , yet how can a man be sure to do that , unless he do it every day : considering that every day may for aught he knows , be the last . The seal may be opened in a day and hour one lest thinks of it , as it is to most that die . 

Lastly , when ever this Horse comes to fetch away us , or any of ours children or friends : A believer stamps not , and rages not , as mad Marshal Birom : murmurs not , repincs not as the wild Irish men without hope : expostulates not with Destiny , as Alexander for his Hephestion : but with Aaron , lays his hand on his heart and mouth for his sons sudden Death , knowing what God hath sealed , shall be and must be . If the Dreams of a blind fatal necessity could quiet Heathens , how much more should a Christian be cheerful at the disposal of a wise and loving keeper of the Seal . A minute sooner or later it shall not be , than he hath foreseen and foresealed for thy especial good , who hath times , and seasons , and seals in his ordination . Worthy was the speech and resolution of an understanding Divine . If Christ hath the key and seal of Death , than a fig for Death . This though it be an ordinary notion , yet well digested , it is a singular stay to a believer . 

The Seal being thus opened , Come and see the Creature that issue's forth . Behold an Horse , a fierce a strong , a warlike , a speedy Creature so described by God himself , job 39  

Look therefore how easily jehu stamped jezabell into pieces : and Tamburlaine his Troops of Horse the Turkish Footmen , or as the sturdy Steed dashes out the little Whappets brains , so easily doth Death with the least kick and spurn of his Heel the haylest Complexion , the stoutest Constitution , triumphing like an Emperor over all sorts of people , treading in the necks of Kings and Princes , as josua over them in Cane insulting in the terms of Rabshakeh , Where is Hamath ? the Kings of Arphad , juah , and Sepharuaim ? Elam , Meshech , and Tubal , whose fear was upon the living , are they not descended into the grave ? made their beds in the slimy valley , and laid their Swords under their heads ? Where is Goliath with his brazen Boots ? Hath wisdom delivered , Strength rescued , or wealth ransomed any out of my fingers ? For all their Confidence , have they not gone to the King of Fear ? How can it be otherwise , seeing Death comes as an armed Horseman , upon naked Footmen : no encountering , no resistance , no running away , no evasion by flight . This winged Pegasus , posts and speeds after men , easily gives them Law , fetches them up again , gallops and swallows the ground he goes , sets out after every man as soon as he comes into the world , and plays with him , as the Cat with the Mouse , as the Grey hound with the Badger , sometimes he follows fair and a far off , lingers aloof and out of sight : anon he spurs after , and by and by is at the heels in some sickness , and then it may be gives us some breath again , but in the end overtakes us , and is upon us with a jerk , as the snare over the Fish , or the Fowl . Absolom could not outride him : Pharaohs Chariot wheels fell off in this chase . jonathan and Saul , swift as the Eagles , strong as the Lion , yet how were they slain with the mighty ? What then is the course the Christian takes ? He neither foolishly thinks to resist , or escape , nor yet cowardly swoons , or cravenly yields : but as a valiant Footman that espies an Horseman pursue him in a Champion , stays not till he come upon him , but addresseth himself for the encounter : so does a Christian in his best health and prosperity , put on his armour , get him the Helmet of Salvation , the Shield of Faith , and learneth the use of them betimes , before he be unapt to it in sickness or age As the Parthians teach their very Children to handle the Bow , the Scythians the Dart , the germans the Spear : and so it comes to pass , that believers are not surprised , as worldlings often are , with milk but in their breasts , without Oil in their Lamps , & all in vain then fond cry out to this Horseman to stay his stroke . As the rich Fool Gregory relates of , who entreated Death to stay till the next morning , Truce but till to morrow , and I will be ready for thee . A Christian wisely considereth , that he hath no morrow , and therefore while it is called to day , is ready for this Horse , who never sets any certain day of his coming . 

Behold also the colour of this Horse 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the colour of the withering leaf , pale and wan : Symbolising and noting the effect he hath first upon the living , whom he appals , as he did Baltashar , whom all his Concubines and Courtiers could not cheer , nor all his wine in the bowls of the Temple fetch colour into his countenance . See we not often Prisoners at the Bar won away , and die as white as a cloth at the Sentence of death pronounced on them . Many gulls and gallants we may hear sometimes flight off Death with a jest , when they think it out of hearing , and some wish it and call for it , as Gaal for Abimelech , but when it comes in good earnest , they are not able to look it in the face , with the blood in their cheeks . Some foolishly set a face on the matter , on their deathbeds , lest neighbours should censure when they are gone for Cowards : hypocritically painting their faces as jezabel did , affronting jehu out of the window , God knows with a cold heart , & if her paint had been off , a pale face should one have seen underneth it . Whereas Christians having a good measure of faith to warm them at the hart , change not their countenance nor have their colour any whit abated , but as is recorded of Mistress joyce Lewis at the stake , and sundry other Christians , even of the fearfullest by nature and sex , looked as fresh and cheerly at the hour of death , as at their marriage . 

A second effect of this pale horse is after death , bereaving the bodies of all blood and colour , making them liveless & wan carcases , and so lays them a rotting and mouldering among the worms their sisters , till the fashion of them be utterly altered , the beauty consumed , and shape turned into rottenness . O how grievous is this to such Absaloms' , jezabels , and Rosamonds , have set much by their painted sheaths and pampered Carcases , whose belly is their God , and yet their end must be corruption . Dust they were , and to dust they must return . Favour is deceitful , and beauty is vanity , when the pale Horse comes , there is no remedy . Here only Faith hath an Antidote comforting herself with these sayings : This base and vile body of mine must be thus served , that it may be transfigured and made conformable to the glorious Standart Christ's body , more glorious than the Sun in his brightest hue . It must thus be sown in pale ignomy , that it may rise in glorious beauty . What if I loose a little Vermillion red mixture of Flame and Sanguine , shall I not recover a radiant resplendent lustre ? Can the Alchemist with his Art , cause a dry withered flower to show itself again for a space , in it natural verdant shape and colour : and cannot God that made me first of Clay , and that Clay of nothing , reduce and refine the same after it hath been in the Earth ? as the Chynois do the materials of their curious dishes for many scores of years , that when it is thoroughly deficate , their posterity may temper and frame some vessel of excellent service withal . Certainly my Redeemer lives , and with these eyes I shall see him , as he is most admirable to behold , and myself like unto him in my degree . Ten thousand times more comely , then is here possibly for to imagine , the most personable Creature that ever the Sun saw : when the body shall be enriched with those excellent Dowries of Impassibilitie , Claritie , Subtlety , Agility . 

O , but here 's yet a more fearful Spectacle behind , than all that hath yet come in sight . Hell , even Hell itself in the worst sense , not the grave of the body , but of the soul . For john sees here principally the judgement of the wicked , that were slain for the contempt of the Gospel , by the pale Horse , for not yielding to the White and his crowned Rider . And their woeful state is here opposed to the happy condition of the Martyrs under the Altar . 

Well then , behold also , even Hell the Page and follower of Death , attending him where ever he goes among the wicked sort . Whence it is that they are so often coupled in this Book , Death and Hell. Look as the Foxes wait upon Lions , Carrion Crows upon armies , Gaolers or Sergeants for a prey : so diligently does the devil on death for a booty . no fowler does more cunningly stalk behind the Horse , or creep behind brakes and hedges , to get his aim at the shy Fowls . no Sergeant hides his Maze , no Angler his hook more warily : knowing that else Hell should never swallow so many . 

Alack , alack , we silly Fish see one another caught , and jerked out of the Pond , but see not the fire and Frying pan into which they come . In this consists the Devil's chiefest policy , and our grossest simplicity , and even this is the cause of our sottish and foolish living and dying . 

O that my head were a Fountain of tears , to weep for , and bewail the stupidity , yea the desperate madness of infinite sorts of people that rush upon Death , and chop into Hell blindling . How brutish and beastly are the preaemises and conclusion of the Epicure and his brood , Let us eat and drink ▪ for to morrow we shall die ? Who knows whether the soul of the beast descend , and man's ascend , who ever saw the one go downward and the other upward , and then what matter if the life of the one differ not from the other ? What need a man care whether he be a Sadduces Swine , an Epicures Horse , or himself ? The one many times hath less care , and more pleasure than the other , if Death be the last line , the full point , and final cessation of the Creature . These ●ruitss thank Philosophy that 〈◊〉 taught them not to fear any such Hobgoblins spirits , or old Wines tales , as Hell. But such Philosophy Socrates , Plato , and the wiser sort even of the Heathen have hissed out of Schools as belluine . Yea , the most savage and unlittered peoplè , the less soiled with Art , the more confidently do they out of Nature's instinct , and divine impression , conclude of an eternal place of well and ill being after death for the souls of men . But these Monsters wilfully shut their eyes , deface and obliterate these stamps , and principles of nature , and so dance hoodwink into perdition . Miserable it is to see how boldly and blindly they think and venture on Death : Theramenes , he writes Books in praise of Death , as the end of all calamities . Augustus , he dies in a jest , calling for a Plaudite . Tiberius●n ●n dissimulation . Diogenes hearing Antisthenes' cry out in his pains , Who shall ease me ? offers him a knife to dispatch himself withal . Caninus called to execution , bids his Fellow remember he had the best of the Game . The Earl of Kildare seeing his Writ of Death brought in when he was at shovelboard , throws his cast , with this in his mouth : Whatsoever that is , this is for a huddle . Little list would these blind bayards have for such idle mirth , if their eyes were opened to see this follower of Death . How pitiful is the frenzy of those brave Spirits , as they deem and term themselves ( as much as they scorn pity ) our Duelists I mean , who as if they never had heard of Hell , are as Prodigal of their lives , as Cocks or Dogs are of theirs , pouring them out upon every drunken quarrel . I pity not the loss or miss of such , good for little but to se● in the front of a Battle , or t● stop breaches and Canons withal : but I pity the loss of their souls , who serve themselves , as the jesuit in Lancashire , followed by one that found his Glove , with a desire to restore it to him : but pursued inwardly with a guilty conscience , leaps over an Hedge , plunges into a Marlepit behind it , unseen and unthought of , wherein he was drowned . I marvel not , that they fear not a Rapier , or Pistol , Who would not choose it before a lingering and painful sickness ? Were it not for the afterclaps of Death ? no Coward need fear the encounter of it alone in a single combat . But Death hath a Second , a Page ten times more dreadful than himself , with whom we have to begin , when we have done with Death , which is but the beginning of sorrows . Death is pale , but his follower is a black Fellow , a terrible monster never enough feared . In which respect , how lamentable also is the blindness of all selfe-murderers , who make Death the remedy of every grief , and cure of every violent passion : If they find themselves inwardly vexed , or perplexed in Conscience , they seek Death as a present ease ; not considering how they leap out of the smoke into the flame , out of the flame into the fire , out of a curable momentany disturbance , into an endless inrecoverable woe , ( without the extraordinary mercy of God ) to which usually the Devil speeds them , that he might get them into his clutches , and so pass out of doubt , all means of prevention and evasion by Faith and Repentance . 

O senseless Achitophel , how did thy wisdom fail and befool thee , when thou settest thine house in order , and disposest of thy goods , forgettest thy soul , hangest thyself , which durst thou , or wouldst thou have done , had but one believing thought of an eternal fire come into thy head ? How blockish is the manner of dying of many a Naball , who strucken with the fear of Death and Hell , become as insensate as stocks and stones , have no mind nor power to think of one thing or other : Cannot abide to hear any mention of the danger of that which they fear , whose senses the Devil bewitches and benumms , lest they should see and avoid : such was Lewes the eleventh , who straightly charged his Servants , that when they saw him sick , they should never once dare to name that bitter word Death in his ears . So do Cowards and Cravens shut their eyes , and choose rather to feel blows , then to see and shun them . Little better is the common course that most people take . Scared some are with a confused , and preposterous fear of Death , and flashes of Hell in their Consciences , and yet take no course to get pardon and Faith in CHRIST : but either taking it to be some melancholy humour , send for merry companions to drive it away : or being given up to hardness of heart and impenitency , wilfully shake off all thoughts of repentance , shut their eyes and ears against all good advice , and desperately put all at adventures , and chop into the jaws of that roaring Lyon. Some of them ridiculously fearing Death , they know not why , more for the pangs of it ( which often are less than of the Toothache ) then for the Hell following : like fools that fear the thunder Crack , and not the Bolt ; the Report of the Piece , and not the Bullet ; the Sergeants arrest , and not the Gaolers Imprisonment : Labour to escape Death which they cannot , and Hell which they might . Others of them scared with some terrible apparitions , affrighted , as Cardinal Crescentius a little before his death , with a black Dog in his Chamber . A Presage and Praeludium of Hell approaching : they cry out they are damned , the Devil , the Devil , do they not see him , etc.  And so Spira-like , desperately and disconsolately depart in hellish horror . Other of them a little wiser , and yet little the better for it , admit a cold thought or two , and it may be a little parley about the matter , but when they have fetched a sigh or put all upon a Lord have mercy on them : trust it shall go as well with them as with others , even as God will have it : and think they do much if they send to a Minister to pray with them or for them : never giving all diligence to make their salvation sure , and to escape so great a condemnation . 

O if we could consider how fearfully such find themselves deluded , when their souls awake , worse than jonas in the ▪ Tempest , even in a gulf of fire and brimstone . How would it awaken and arouse us to foresee Death and Hell in their shapes , and to fore-appoint ourselves throughly , not against the first Death which we cannot , but against the second we may , if we get our part in the first resurrection . 

This Text , me thinks speaks to every sick man bound on his bed with the Cords of Death , as Dalilath to Samson : up and arise , for the Philistines are at hand : Death is at the door , and behind the door , the Fiend's weight to fetch away thy soul . Bellarmine is of opinion , that one glimpse of Hell were enough to make a man not only turn Christian and sober , but Anchorite and Monk , to live after the strictest rule that can be . I am of belief , that God's spirit cooperating a thorough meditation of it , might be a mean to keep one from it . For a man to wish to have a sight of it , or that one might come thence & make report of the untolerable and unutterable pains of it is superfluous , superstitious : & if it should be granted , yet being not God's ordinance and allowance , it might go without his blessing , and do one no good . Thy best course is well to ponder what we that are Gods Ministers report of it , out of Moses , the Prophets , Christ , and the Apostles descriptions . And if God mean thee any good , our warning may do thee some good . Popish writers are too bold in making Maps of Heaven and Hell , as if they had surveyed them and their regions , and inhabitants : but most I think are one the other hand to brief and summarie in their meditations and writings . To paint it in it own native colours is impossible , or by any contemplation to comprehend the horror of it . Shadows and parables the Scripture useth , by which thou mayest and oughtest to help thy conjectures , and to work on thy affections withal , after this or the like manner . 

here God hath allowed thee on his earth a pleasant habitation , commodiously situate in a good Air , richly decked with furniture , compassed with delightful Gardens , Orchards and Fields , where thou hast liberty to walk and ride at thy pleasure : How would it trouble thee to think of being laid up all thy life in some straight and loathsome prison , by this consideration how ill thou wilt brook to be cast into a doleful disconsolate Dungeon , to lie in utter darkness , blackness of darkness in eternal chains , in little ease for ever . 

here a great part of thy contentment , is to live among good Neighbours , with a loving wife , with cheerful companions : and loath thou art at any time to be long in the house of mourning , to be among melancholy malcontented , complaining feeble or brawling people in Hospitals , or Bridwels , or Bedlams . How will then thine ears endure to be tired with continual howling , screeching and gnashing of teeth , to live among Dogs , Enchanters , unclean Birds , reprobate Spirits , worse than so many Toads , Tigers , or Serpents . 

Here if thy Father should in displeasure bid get thee out of sight , or thy Prince banish thee his court and presence , as David did Absalon , for some offence , thou wouldst take it heavily : how shall thine ears tingle to hear God say , departed out of my presence , Go thou cursed into the lake prepared for the Devil and his Angels . 

Here thou shrinkest to think of the gout , colic , stone , or strangurian , shiverest to hear of the strappado , the rack , or the Lawn , how then wilt thou bear universal tortures in all the parts of thy body , exquisite anguish and pains , such as of which the pangs of childbirth , burnings of material fire and brim stone , gnawing of chestwormes ; drinks of Gall and Wormwood are but shadows ; and to which they are all but sports and flea-bite , even to the torments thy body shall suffer for it sins against the Creator . 

But hast thou ever here in this world tasted of a troubled spirit , of the grief and fears of a wounded Conscience possessed with bitter things : strucken and pierced with the venom of God's arrows , fears of the Almighty : by these thou mayst make the best guess how it will far with thy soul when God shall pour all the vials of his wrath into a vessel of his fury , and vex the soul in his sore displeasure , scourge thee with the rods of scorpions , make thee drunk with the gall of Asps and Cockatrices , make thy mind heavy unto the death , holding it ever in those Agonies , which made his own Son sweat cloddes of water and blood . O how fearful a thing is it to fall into the hands of God , who is a consuming fire . Think of it whiles there is hope , you that forget God , Heaven , and Hell , lest you come there where there is no redemption , no hope of ease or end , which is that that makes Hell , Hell indeed : For if all these pains might have an end , were it after million and million of years , as many as there be sands in the Sea shore , yet mightest thou nourish some miserable comfort of a release in the long run : But this night hath no day , this Ague no intermission , his death no death to end it withal . 

Here thou wouldst be loath to lie on the Rack from morning to night , to be wroung with the Colic for a few days or hours , to be haunted with a Quartan from Michael to Easter : O then add eternity to insupportable torments , and let thine ears tingle , and thine hart melt to think of it . Were it not for hope in small pressures , we say heart would burst : O than this word ever and ever , if thou couldst duly believe and consider it , how would it break that hard heart of thine , which knows not how to repent , nor cares to prevent the wrath to come . 

What thinkest thou , are these things tales and fables , is Hell but a name and word , a scarbug for to keep fools in awe ? Hath not God , thinkest thou , a day of reckoning , a prison and power to punish Rebels and Traitors , or are not his punishments like to his justice , infinite and eternal ? Know these things to be as true as God is truth , save that they are short of the truth itself . Why dost thou not then take thy soul apart , and ruminate of these things by thyself , judging thyself here , that thou mayst not be condemned in the world to come . Art thou afraid of a melancholy fit , and fearest thou not this gulf , and whirlpool , and sorrow ? Art thou not loath to be tormented before thy time , and fearest not to be tormented time without end . I wonder how the souls of wicked men and unbelievers go not out of their bodies , as the Devils out of demoniaks , rending , raging , tearing and foaming . I wonder how any can die in their wits , that die not in the faith of our Lord Christ. Verily if these things move thee not , thou art in a worse plight than Foelix and Baltashar ; yea , the very Devils themselves , who believe them ; yea , quake and tremble to think of them . How fain would I snatch thy soul out of this fire ? Undoubtedly know , that if this warning do thee no good , it is because thou art of old , justly ordained to perish in thy impenetency , and to be a firebrand in these everlasting flames . Now on the contrary , if thou be'st a vessel of mercy and honour , it will do thee no hurt , but drive thee to Christ , in whom there is no condemnation : who only is perfectly able to save and deliver thee out of this Lake . If thou be est already in him , it will cause thee to rejoice in thy Lord and Saviour , who hath delivered thee from the fear of two such enemies that now thou mayst with the Ostrich in job despise the horse and his rider , and triumph by Faith over Hell and Death : OH Death where is thy sting ! O Hell where is thy victory ! Death is to men as he comes attended : To Dives he comes followed with Devils , to carry his soul to Hell : To Lazarus with troops of Angels to convey him to Abraham's bosom . So that we may in earnest say , that Death is the Atheists fear , and the Christians desire . Diogenes could jestingly call it , The Rich man's enemy , and the Poor man's friend . This , this is that which makes death so easy , so familiar and dreadless to a believer ; he sees Death indeed , but Death is not Death without Hell follow him : and Hell he sees not , but only as escaped and vanquished , and therefore is said not to see Death . Now ( says the believer ) comes death and the Prince of this world with him , but he hath no part in me : all the bitterness and tears of death lie in the fear of Hell , which , thanks be to Christ hath nothing to do with me , nor I with it , and therefore I taste not of death : now comes God's Sergeant pale death , whom I know I cannot avoid : but this I know , he comes not to arrest me to carry me to prison , but only to invite me to a feast , attend and convey me thither . Let such fear him as are in debt and danger , mine are all discharged and canceled : he comes with his horse to take up me behind him , and to fetch me to my father's joys , to a Paradise as full of pleasures , as he carries the wicked to a prison full of pains . Pharaohs Baker and Butler were sent for out of prison , the one to promotion , the other to execution : he that had the ill Dream , expected the Messenger with horror , the other longed for him with comfort . The latter is my case , therefore though I be reasonably well in this world , as a child at board , yet home is home , therefore will I wait till this pale horse comes , and bid him heartily welcome : and with him the Angels of my Father , who have a charge to lay my body in a bed of rest , and to bestow my soul under the Altar , as it follows in the next seal , which is so pleasing a vision , that we need no voice or preface , such as we had in the former , inviting us to Come and see : the very excellency of the object itself is of force enough to draw , and hold the eyes of our minds unto it . 

The second Sermon . 

VERSE 9  

And when he had opened the first Seal , I saw under the Altar the Souls , etc.  

When Death hath been viewed in the palest , and Hell in the blackest colours that may be , yet if we have Faith enough to see Souls in their White robes under the Altar ▪ there is comfort enough against the horror of both ; enough to enable the believer to despise and trample over them ●ooth . In the opening of this fifth Seal , I hope to find more solid Antidotes , more lively Cordials , against the fear of Death , then in all the dead and dry precepts of Bellarmine's doting Art of dying . For this part of the vision was showed john of purpose to sweeten the harshness of the former : that his spirit grieved and amazed with the sight of the calamities and mortality under the persecuting Butchers , rather than Emperors , might yet be relieved and refreshed with a sight of the blessed estate of such as died either in , or for the Lord  

Wherein was proposed to his sight , and to our consideration these severals . First , the immortal subsistence of souls after their separation from the body . Secondly , their sure and secure condition under the Altar . Thirdly , their dignity and felicity clothed with white robes . Fourthly , their complete happiness at the last day , when the number of their brethren shall be accomplished . 

Of all these , Christ meant john should take notice , and all believers by his testimony to their full consolation . 

First , john being in the spirit could see spirits , men indeed clad in flesh , can hardly imagine how a soul can have existence out of the flesh . eagle can see that which Owls cannot : so is that visible and credible to a spiritual man , which to a natural is invisible , incredible . And yet even natures dim eyes have been clear enough to see this truth . Nature I say , pure and mere nature , not only the Platonists and other learned ones , who resolutely concluded it , and aptly resembled it , to the distinct being of the waggoner after the breaking of the Coach : the swimming out of the Mariner in the wreak of the ship , the creeping of the snail out of the shell , the worm out of the case : not unto the learned Grecians , and civilised Romans : But even the rudest Scythians and unlettered Savages ; yea , though there be many Languages , and sundry Dialects in the world , yet is , and hath this ever been the common voice of them all , That souls die not with the body . And however the body's resurrection hath to them been a Problem and Paradox , yet is the soul's eternity an inbred instinct sucked from nature's breast ; or rather an indelible principle stamped in the souls of men by the finger of God. And indeed , to right reason , what difficulty or absurdity is there in it . What let's me to conceive a being of it in the Air , in the Heaven , or in any other place as well as in the compass of my body , is not one substance as capable of it as another ? Can it live in the one , and not in another ? 

Hath it not , even whiles it is in the body , thoughts , motives , passions by itself , of it own different from the body , many cross and contrary to the disposition of the body , cheerful ones when that is in pain or melancholy : Choleric ones when that is phlegmatic . Doth it wait upon the body for joy , sorrow , anger , and the like ? doth it not more often begin unto it ? Not to speak of Martyrs innumerable , who have been exceedingly pleasant in the midst of torments , as if they had been spirits without flesh . How many ancient stories and daily examples have we of cheerful minds in distempered , pained , languishing dying bodies ? Reason will then conclude , that the Soul may well be , and be sensible after death without the body , which even in the body can be well , when that is ill , cheerly when that is hurt , or sick , grieved and troubled when that is in perfect temper and health . And on the contrary , small reason have we to think it sleeps out of the body , which never slumbers in the body , or that it is seized by death out of the body , which never was overcome by sleep , which is but death's Image , and younger brother in the body , but ever was working and discoursing in the deepest and deadest sleeps of the body . 

Besides , is it likely God would enrich it with such noble and divine dowries to be salt only to the body , to exhale with it as Bruits do . The admirable invention of Arts , Letters , Engines , the strange fore-casts , prospects and presages of the understanding part , the infinite lodgings , the firm reteinings of the memory , do they not argue an immortality : Do men engrave curiously in Snow , Ice , or transient stuff ? 

What means the great anxiety of men about their suruiving name , if the mind perished with the body , if Death were the cessation of the man , and destruction of the whole substance . What should nature care for an eyrie accident without a subject , whereof no part of him should be sensible . 

What means the very fear of Death , if that were the end of all fears , and cares , and sorrows , if nothing remained sensible , and capable of any thing to be feared . 

Lastly , the fresh vigour , the unimpayred ability , that nimble agility of the mind in sickness ; yea , many times the freer use of the faculties of it in the confines , yea , in the act and Article of Death , then in former health , do they not tell the body , the soul means not to fall with the carcase ( which hath the name of falling ) lies not a dying with it , but errects itself , means only to leave it as an Inhabitant doth a ruinous House , or as a Musician lays down a Lute whose strings are broken , a Carpenter a worn instrument unfit any longer for service and employment : and as a Guest makes haste out of his Inn , to his long home and place of abode . 

loath I am to mingle Philosophical Cordials with Divine , as water with wine , lest my Consolations should be flash and dilute : yet , even these and such like arguments have taught all Philosophy ( the brutish school of the Epicure excepted ) to see and acknowledge that the soul is not a vapour , but a spirit , not an accident , but a substance , and elder and more excellent sister to the body immixed and separable ; a guest that dies not with it , but diverts out of it , intending to revisit and reunite it again unto it ▪ self . But Divinity certainly knows all this to be most certain that it is a particle of divine breath , inbreathed into the red loom at the first , not arising out of it , but infused from heaven into it , and therefore may as well exist without the clay after it , as it did before it : and when the dust returns to the dust , heaven goes to heaven , both to their originals , the soul first , because first and principal in every action , the body after as an accessary and second , and so the day of death to the body , is the birth day of eternity to the soul . 

This undying , and everliving condition of the soul , thoroughly rolled in the mind , firmly embraced , and undoubtedly apprehended by Faith , works admirable effects as in life , so in the approach of death . Seneca that saw it but through Clouds , crannies and crevices with yfs , and and's , yet professeth that when he thought but a little of it , and some pleasant dreams of it , he loathed himself and all his trifling gratnes . But most divinely , and resolvedly ▪ julius Palmer : He that hath his soul linked and tied to the body , as a thief's feet to a Clog with guyves and fetters , no marvel he knows not how to die , is loath to endure a Division : but he that useth , and can by Faith separate the spirit from the body , to him it is to drink this : and with that drinks off a Cup of Wine in his hand , and within a while after , as cheerfully drinks of Death's cup in the sight of the same Witnesses . Even Socrates himself sweetened his Cup of poison , with this discourse of the soul's immortality , to the amazement of the beholders . Such Souls indeed as place all their felicity to be in a full fed , and well complexioned body , and to partake of the senses corporeal delights , hath not accustomed itself to it own retired delights of obstracted meditations , knows not how to be merry without a playfellow , no marvel though it be as loath to part with the body , as a crooked deformed body to part with rich robes and gorgeous apparel , which were it only ornaments . But such noble and regenerate spirits as know their own Dowries , have enured themselves to sublimate contemplations , and to have their conversation in Heaven , whiles they were in the body : such I say , though they do not Cynically revile the body as a Clog , a prison , a lump of mire , etc. but know it to be the Temple of the Holy Ghost , yet are they willing , yea and sigh to be unclothed , to sow it a while in the earth , being a dark and thick lantern , hindering the clear sight of it , till they may reassume it clarified , a spiritual , an Angelified body made apt and obsequious to all divine services , to Celestial Offices without weariness , intermission , and such like vanity , which here it is subject unto : as willing as David to lay aside Saul's cumbersome Armour , and to betake him to such as he could better wield and command at pleasure . 

This is the first and lowest help Faith hath to comfort the soul withal in the approach of Death ; when the strong men buckle , the Keepers of the house fail , they wax dim that look out at the windows , when the whole outward man decays : that the inner man ages not , faints not , languisheth not , but rather lists up the head , is more fresh then formerly , and excepts to be unburdened , and to be at liberty , freed from Corporeal tedious unpleasing works of sleeping , eating , drinking , and other meaner drudgery , that it may once come to higher and more spiritual employments better suiting with it native condition : even as the Lion longeth to be out of the grate , and the Eagle out of the cage , that they may have their free scope and fuller liberty . 

Under the Altar . 

Now if this much revived john ( as no doubt it did ) to see the Souls continuance after Death , how much more to see their safety and rest under the Altar : that is under Christ's protection & custody , under the shadow of his wings . Who makes them grateful to his Father , covers them from his wrath , safeguards them from all molestation , procures them absolute quiet and security . The phrase alluding to the Altar in the Tabernacle , which gave the Offerings grace and acceptation : and partly to the safety of such as fled from the Avenger to the Altar . Christ is our Altar , and all the Souls of such as die in his Faith , are as Stephan bequeathed to him : he presents them to his Father , shelters them from accusation and condemnation , gathers them as the Hen her Chickens under his wings , being fully able to keep what is committed to him from all disquiet . He that could keep the three young men in the Furnace with whom he walked , yea their very garments from the violence of fire : The Israelites and their apparel in the wilderness : jonas in the Whale's belly : how much more easily now he sits at the hand of his Father in Majesty and Glory , can he defend saved and glorified souls from all external and Internal Annoyance , and settle them in absolute peace with him in his Paradise , according to his frequent promise to such as overcome , they shall sit with me upon thrones . 

And long white Robes were given unto every one . 

If john had seen souls at rest , though in poor and mean condition , yet were a corner of an house with peace to be preferred to a wide Palace with disquiet : A poor diet with green Herbs with quiet , to a feast with stalled oxen , and crammed fowls , sauced with bitter contention . But behold , he sees not naked , beggarly , ragged souls , but adorned with white Robes ; that is , endowed now , and glorified with perfect righteousness , purity , clarity , digtie , and festivitie : of all which white apparel hath ever been an Emblem and Symbol in Divine and Human Heraldry , a clothing of Princes in their great solemnities of Coronation , triumphs and ovations , says Eusebius : so was Herod arrayed in cloth of silver , with which the Sun beams meeting , made such a glister , as amazed the people that styled him a God : so says Tertullian , were they wont to dignify Servants at their Manumissions with white Apparel , in token of their new liberty and preferment . At feasts great persons were wont to change their guests ordinary clothes with a white Synthesis , a colour fit to express alacrity . Christians , the whole Easter week wore white apparel . All the graces the souls had here in this their infancy of Regeneration , were but stained and polluted clouts : their knowledge dark and obscured with ignorance , their memories clouded with oblivion , their wills and affections tempested with mutinies and perturbations , their habits of holiness and charity , sullied with defects and infirmities , their delights dusk and particoloured & spotted with mixture of sorrow : all their apparel black & sad russet at the least ; but there purer than the Crystal , whiter than the Snow , or than Fuller's earth is able to make them . The Lillies , and Solomon in all their Royalty not like unto the meanest of them . Call us no more Marah , may they say , but Naomi . For fullness of beauty is conferred upon them , God becoming fullness of claritie and light unto the understanding , without error or darkness , continuation of Eternity to the memory without forgetfulness , multitude of Peace to the Will and Affections without disturbance or disorder : the superior part of the Soul , pleasing itself in the blessed vision of God , and the inferior satiate with the fruition of rivers of pleasures , & variety of monthly fruits . All this joy increased by the aemenity and magnificence of the place being God's Palace , built and prepared for eternity , for the honour of his Majesty , and habitation of his Saints , all shining like precious jasper : enchanted by the full choir of Angels and communion of holy men , excellent when they were on earth , now perfected in their virtues , and freed from frailties , never mourning , but ever singing and lauding their Creator with Alleluiahs' without defatigation or satiety : all this made up and consummate by the addition not of a number of years , but of eternity uncountable , unalterable : incomprehensible . What are the chief miseries of this life , but the sordid apparel of the Soul , the black thoughts , the speckled fantasies , dark oblivion , royled , soiled affections , all the habit of it squalid , jagged , and tattered . Now then was joseph loath to change his prison-ragges , or Hester her old and mean clothes with stately and royal array ? promise a Child a new Satin suit , and see whether he will not long for it , and call for it ; see whether he will cry when you bid him lay off his Russets ? Whence is it then that men die so dully , so unwillingly , so heavily ? or whence can it be , but because they do not lively and certainly believe , and expect these white Robes for their souls . When the beauty of a man's mind is here obfuscate and defaced with melancholy Tentations , and opake Imaginations , with yellow choler , with pallid fear , with ruddy shame , with sable despair ; o what would he give for a candid calm , and serene state of his mind ? and when again it pleaseth God to afford him sunshine holidays of joy and tranquillity , wherein his mind is clad , and decked with golden , silver , and precious ornaments of peace , meekness , temperance , patience , O what an Heaven would he think he had here on earth , if all his days were but such days ! whereas this a Christian may well assure himself of , that what ever grace doth here prepare and begin , there glory will absolve & perpetuate for matter of sanctity , purity , & alacrity of the mind , typified in these white robes : yea further for matter of dignity and triumph , which then shall be most complete , where they shall see Christ at that day come in the glory of the Father with million of his Angels descending & bringing down his heavenly jerusalem , meeting them half way in the clouds , and there avenging them of their enemies , sitting with them as assessors upon thrones , to judge the Angels , & the world of wicked ones , & such as have insulted over them on the earth , in which they shall then without any malignity of envy , anger , or appetite of revenge , take amirable and unspeakable content and comfort , yea reck on it as the accomplishment of their inchoate glory , for which they are here said to long for , & groan under the Altar , till the number of all their brethren being consummate , God shall openly acquit & applaud them , condemn and confound their opposites . These , these are the only , stately , and Kingly dignities : the meditations whereof are onlyable to beget and foster true heroical & Christian resolutions against the fear of Death and Hell , otherwise unuanquished . To conclude then , to the man that would both in health and sickness nourish ever in his breast undaunted and more than conquering thoughts of these two enemies , instead of Bellarmine's many frivolous and tedious rules : I prescribe but these two practices of Faith. The first is to work in his mind a settled and undoubted certainty : and the second a lively and frequent representation of them . 

Were heaven nothing else but an haven of rest , we know how welcome the one is to a Sea-sick weatherbeaten traveller , and may by that guess how desirable the other should be to a soul that long hath been tossed in the waves of this world , sick of own sinful imaginations , & tired with external tentations . The happiest soul that ever hath sailed over this Euripus , in the best ship , in the healthfullest body that ever was , never had so calm a passage , but that it hath had cause enough often to wish itself on shore . What with self groaning fantasies , and injected temptations , how little respite or rest is here to be found ? Is there any Palace or Tower here so high or strong , that can keep diseases from the body : how much less cares , sorrows , fears , and Satan's assaults from the Soul ? Were there but such an Island , as some have dreamt of here on earth , that might free our bodies or minds from disquiet , but for the space of the moment of this life , how would people covet to dwell in it ? In the times of the late wars in Netherlands , how did the Boars forsake their Farms , and fly into walled Cities for security from dangers ? What violence then should our heavenly jerusalem suffer of our wishes and desires ? were it but for the sweet and amiable name of peace whereof it is denominated , having indeed the God of Peace for the King and Keeper of it : Walls many Cubits high , into which no Zenacherib can shoot an arrow , nor the Dragon Beast , nor the false Prophet to seduce or to accuse : strong gates and bars excluding all enemies and annoyances , and so affording perfect tranquillity to all the Inhabitants , out of which they insult ten times more saferly , than the jebusites over the blind and lame , over the pale horse and his riders , Death and Hell. Consider and compare a little the simplicity of the worldling with the wisdom of the Christian , the happy stability of the one , with the woeful uncertainty of the other at the time of their departure . Even Foxes and Hares , and other such vermin fore-acquaint themselves with Muses , Thickes and Burroes , into which when they are chased and hunted , they may repair for safety : but these fools while they live in health and prosperity , never think of the evil day , and when away they see they must go , how unshystable are they ? Some of the meaner sort , they take care for their winding-sheet : or if richer , for a marble or painted sepulchre , which yet cannot preserve their bodies or names from putrefaction : the superstitious sort to be buried in a Friars Cowle , or under an Altar of stone : the desperater sort , wishing the Mountains might cover them from the wrath of the Lamb . An harbour or receptacle for their souls they never think of ; whence it is that they are as loath to have them turned out of their bodies , as Hagar and Ishmael to be out of doors , and exposed to misery and dangers ; or rather as Cain , to be cast as a Vagabond out of God's presence , fearing lest every one that met him next , should cut his throat for a cursed Caitiff . And indeed what else can they look for , but instantly to be devoured of the roaring Lion , that waits at the door of Death , to fetch away their souls into the place where there is no night nor day . Only the wise belever , he hath provided a Sanctuary , or City of refuge against time of danger , hath learned wisdom of the Coneys , who though a little nation , yet wise and forecasting , have their refuge in the Rocks . Christ is the believers Rock , and his strong Tower , his Altar , and therefore he fears not what Death can do unto him . Christ hath assured him on his word , that he shall have all , tears wiped away , and the Spirit secured him that he shall rest from his labours . In which regard he is so far from lingering and hankering after a continuance in this Baca of tears , this wilderness of fears , that he studies rather to enter into this rest , Cries out with David , Woe is me that I dwell in , Meshek and Kedar , when I think of peace , there is war at hand : With jeremy , Woe is me that I dwell with a contentious people . With Elias , I am weary of my life , an end good Lord Or with blessed Simeon , Now Lord let thy servant depart in peace , into that land of peace ; here I have seen that there is no peace to be had : all here is vanity & vexation of spirit . For a minute of peace , months of vanity , for a dram of honey , pounds of aloes and gall . Souls here find no resting place for the soles of their feet , till they come to the mount Ararat , whither their works follow them , where their sorrows leave them . And so conclude with Vidus Bressius , O that my soul had I the wings of the Dove to fly and make haste to that mountain of God , and hill of tranquillity and eternity . Thus th' one dies howling , the other singing , because the one knows he changes for the better , the other for the worse : the one takes Death for a gulf of sorrow , the other for a port of liberty and ease : the one because he is stripped for a scourging ; the other because he lays off his clothes to go to bed after his toil . 

If Queen Elizabeth whiles she was a prisoner in her sister's days could have been fully assured , and had clearly foreseen her own long ; glorious , and prosperous reign ensuing , would she have wished herself a Milkmaid for the present ? no , it had been impossible . All our fears & doubts arise from infidelity and the uncertainty , or else from the deadness and dulness of our hopes . To put life into which , there can be no better , no other help , than first to ground and root our Faith in Christ through the word and spirit : And then of ten to be setting before our eyes a state & condition happy above all that Cities , Kingdoms , Crowns , Pearls , and jewels , Marriages , Feasts , and all other Metaphors and Parables of Scripture do but shadow out unto us. Which supereminent and super abundant felicity , Paul that had been an eye witness , not able to describe , much less to amplify , sums it up , An exceeding exceeding eternal weight of Glory . 

A superlative transcendent phrase such as is not to be found in all the Rhetoric of the Heathens , because they never wrote of such a Theme , nor with such a Spirit . If any of us had but half the strength of Paul's Faith , or life of his hope , or cheerful fore-imaginations , which he had of this felicity , woe could not but have the same desires , and longings for our dissolution and fruition of them . If we thoroughly believed and remembered this to be the state of ourselves and dead friends , would we ▪ or could we so fear for ourselves , or mourn for them in Blacks , whiles they are in whites , as jacob for joseph , thinking him devoured by some evil beast , when he was Lording it in Egypt . no verily , but think of it , and look for it we would with the same affections that Children do for their plays , Prentices their freedom , Spouses their marriage , Labourers their wages , Husbandmen their Harvest , Heirs their Inheritance , Princes their Kingdoms . Amongst many thousands , I choose to instance and end with Monicah and Augustine's examples ▪ the mother using this speech to her son ; All that I have desired to live to see , is that which I now see : thee my son a Christian. And now what do I any longer in this base and impure world ? And he of his mother : What cause have I to mourn for a mother , of whose happiness I may be so well assured . 

When I awake , I shall be satisfied . 

write , OH Christ , these Meditations in our hearts , imprint these Patterns so fast in our memories , that we may all the days of our lives have frequent fore-thoughts of our appointed change , chiefly in that last and solemn day of our death , when the Prince of this world will be busy , and we shall be weak , let thy Comforter then bring them to mind , that by faith we may overcome , and having the Ark of thy Covenant in eye , cheerfully pass through the waters of jordan , and so take possession of that land which flows with all variety of delights , without either end or satiety : even so Come Lord jesus , come quickly . 

FINIS . 





Dr. Tailor . Tho. Hawkes . Beza . Perbins' . Hall. Byfield . 

2.  Kings 19 15.  Ezek. 32.  