PAUL'S DESIRE OF Dissolution , AND DEATH'S ADVANTAGE . 

A SERMON PREACHED at the Funeral of that right virtuous and religious Gentlewoman M rs Rebekka Crisp , together with the Testimony then given unto her . 

By T. G. B. of D.  

LONDON , Printed by Edward Griffin for William Bladen , and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Bible , near the great North door of Paul's . 1620.  

TO MY LOVING UNCLE M r NICOLAS CRISP , AND TO MY KIND COUSINS M rs Rebekka Stroud , M rs Anne Skelton , M rs Ester Whitaker his Daughters , with the rest of that Family ; happy imitation of the holy deceased both in Life , and in Death . 

MY right dear , and deservedly beloved Allies ; finding among my loose papers the notes of that Sermon that I made at the enterrement of that blessed Saint , lately wife to the one , and mother to the rest of you , collected and transscribed not long after at the request of some of you for your own private use and benefit : I thought it would not be amiss to make it more public ; ( the rather for that diverse seemed to desire it ) and to add unto it the testimony then truly and upon good ground given unto her : partly for the propagating and perpetuating of the memory of so worthy a servant of God , and partly also and more principally for the enciting and egging on of others , of that Sex especially , to the imitation of her . Good Examples ( as the Heathen man observeth ) are of great force ; and are therefore ( not without cause ) so frequently propounded in God's word . They prevail oft more than precepts . Precepts show us what we should do : Examples go further , and show us how we may do it ; and that the things enjoined us may be done of us , because they have been done by others like ourselves before us : and so they take away that objection of impossibility , as if that were required of us , that could not be done , or that none before us ever did . Again , as Examples in general are useful ; so Examples of this Sex are in some respect of the twain the more needful . That Popish conceit sticketh still in the minds of many ; that knowledge and booke-learning is for great Clarks only ; mean men , and women much more then , have no need of it , neither indeed can attain unto it . Yet God telleth us that they must all know him from the highest to the lowest , whom he showeth mercy unto in the remission of their sins . And surely , if to know God in Christ be life eternal ; then to be ignorant of him , cannot be , or bring but eternal destruction . Besides that Christianity maketh no distinction of Sex. The same common salvation is propounded to both Sexes : the same means of attaining it are likewise common to either . no salvation to man or woman but by Christ : no interest in Christ but by Faith , exacted therefore of either : and no Faith without knowledge , the main groundwork of Faith. Now as there is a necessity of knowledge , faith , fear of God , and other spiritual graces in either , so there is no impossibility of attaining them , and some good measure of them , unto either . Examples of the weaker Sex apparently proving this , are in that regard the more effectual ; for that , as they shame men , if they come short of such , so they give women encouragement to contend , and good hope to attain unto , what they see others of their Sex have before them by like contending attained . But domestical examples are of all other the most powerful . And therefore whatsoever effect this shall have with others , it ought in special manner to prevail with you , who had so special interest in her , whose memory is so sacred with all those that here knew her , and who were continual eye-witnesses of those her gracious parts and godly courses , which most others had in part only by hearsay . And doubtless that is the greatest honour we can do to our religious Ancestors deceased , if we endeavour so to resemble them in goodies and godliness , that by our religious courses and carriage we may be known to have come of them , and they may seem to survive in us. The manner of her end , so sweet , so cheerful , so comfortable , should the rather incite you hereunto , that , if you desire to find that comfort then that she did , and to give that comfort to others , that you had then in her , you take that course that you saw she did , lay a sure foundation in life for comfort in death , and be continually building upon it when it is once surely laid . Now that this weak work may a little at least further you therein , he vouchsafe to grant , whose power appears in our weakness , and who by weak means is able to effect weighty matters : To his blessing , I commend both you and it , and so rest 

Your loving Cousin Thomas : Gataker . 

THE TESTIMONY Given to M rs REBEKKA CRISP at her Burial . 

THE Bodies of God's Sants as well as their Souls are members of Christ's body , and Temples of God's Spirit : and are therefore in decent and honest manner to be laid up in the womb of our common Mother the Earth . The performance of this last office to our right dear and deservedly respected Christian Sister , M rs Rebekka Crisp , hath occasioned this Assembly . Concerning whose religious course of life and conversation , together with the Conclusion thereof suitable and correspondent to the same , much might be said , and much be spoken , yea so much , that it might to strangers seem either mere formality or plain flattery , yet by those that thoroughly knew her , would not only be acknowledge for truth , but to come far short of that that 〈…〉 But neither 〈…〉 my wont , 〈…〉 I , 〈…〉 long in this kind : 〈◊〉 rather , for that many take therein too much liberty , and this exercise being intended more for the instruction of the living then for the commendation of the dead . 

That which I shall speak of her , to the glory of God's grace in her , and the provoking of others to the imitation of her , shall be in few words , and referred to two heads , her Piety , and her Patience . 

For the former : it had pleased God to grace her with a measure more than ordinary of spiritual grace , and of such graces as are not so ordinarily incident to that 〈…〉 of 〈◊〉 , and soundness of judgements . Which 〈◊〉 accordingly applied and employed , ( part●y by constant frequenting of the public Ministry , while God gave leave and liberty , and p●●tly : 〈◊〉 both then and during the times of 〈…〉 meditation and private conference with such as reforted unto her , and might that way further her , * to the searching out of the good and holy and acceptable will of God. In this hind she was a great Questionist ▪ and ( as those religious Roman Ladies were sometime to 〈◊〉 ) a whetstone to myself , and I doubt not but the like also to others , by her studious enquiry occasioning the mo●e diligent search , and the more exact discovery of many particulars : In regards whereof I may well , and do freely and sincerely confess , that , so oft as I resorted unto her , I did tam proficere quam prodesse , as well benefit by her , as benefit her . 

Neither were these her Questions , as with many , tending to idle speculation ; mere curiosities , or vain niceties , like a game at Chess ; rather quirks of wit , fit for disputation in schools , then rules of use for direction of life ; but of such points as bent and aimed at the practice of piety , the trial of faith , and sound sanctification : That wherein she principally desired and endeavoured to profit ; and so profited , that I may truly say of her , that she had not an outward show and semblance of godliness , or a verbal discourse of it , ( the common fault of too many professors among us ) but the very power and efficacy of it in extraordinary manner and measure both imprinted in her heart , and expressed in her life : She had learned , dicta in facta vertere , to turn words into works ; and as to treasure up with Mary what she heard and learned in her heart , so to work it into the affection , and to bring it forth into action , to affect it with her heart , and to effect it in her life . 

This , among other things , her sincere piety , appeared in her singular Patience . And it is Patience indeed , that putteth Piety to the proof . God had trained her up a long time in the school of affliction ; and she was therein a good proficient : her afflictions being unto her , as the waters to Noah's Ark , a means to carry up her thoughts and desires higher to heaven-ward . It pleased God to bruise her with pains and weakness , and even to grind to po●●der her vigour with continuance of affliction . Which yet she ever sustained with great willingness ofminde , having oft in her mouth that worthy speech of David , Behold , here I am , let him do with me what he will ; and desiring ever , as she protested oft in the midst of her pains , not so much the removal of the cross , which she esteemed but light , as patience to bear it , and grace to make use of it : complaining of nothing so much in her afflictions , as that by means of them she was disabled to the performance of such duties as she desired with her Family , and restrained in the intention of her spiritual meditation ; if in any thing impatient , impatient of ●ought that hindered that way . 

Neither was this her patience such as proceeded either from some senselesnes and stupidity , or from some kind of immanitie and inhumanity , as in some ; ( for she was a woman made of meekness and lowliness , of mind , as of a tender constitution herself naturally , and therefore soon sensible of pain and grief , so full of bowels of mercy and tender compassion towards others , and free from all austerity and harshness of spira ) but from an apprehension of God's hand in those things that befell her and a concoience of submitting her will to his pleasure whose wholly she acknowledged herself to be , and was content therefore wholly to be disposed of by him . 

But because perseverance , as Bernard saith , is all in all ; and is that that carrieth away the crown or the garland from all : As the rest of her life had been , so her latter end was not unlike ; full of piety and patience , of alacrity and cheerfulness , wholly taken up with holy and heavenly meditation , and longing exceedingly for the time of her dissolution . God showed in her to all that were about her , that it is not in vain sincerely to serve him ; and that a constant course of a religious life will minister abundance of sweet comfort in death . 

About the beginning of her last sickness , she sent for me to her , whom ( though the meanest of many that resorted unto her ) in regard of some bond of alliance she desired to be , and made account she might be boldest withal ; and before some few of her familiar friends , made a worthy and pithy confession and profession of her Faith , too long to relate ; laid open the grounds and notes of her assurance fetched forth of God's word , of God's love unto her , and of her own unto God ; requesting either to be better informed , if in aught she were mistaken , or to have further confirmed by pregnant proofs out of God's book , what she rightly apprehended . And this was the work that by her good will she then desired to be continually taken up with ; forgetting her pains and weakness when she was about it , and neglecting her natural rest to attend it . So that she might well say to God with David , O how love I thy law ? it is my continual meditation . And with job , I have preferred the words of thy mouth , not only before my most desired food , but before my most needful and natural rest . Yea so eager was she upon these things , that I was enforced oft to persuade her to forbear , considering her great weakness , and to intermit the intention of her meditation , by giving some way to rest and repose . And here I cannot pass by one speech used by her upou such an occasion , which the rather I relate , to provoke others by her example not to neglect the means of mercy and grace that God vouchsafeth them now , while they may follow them . After long discourse to and from , perceiving , as I thought , her eyes to wax heavy , and her spirits fainty , and well knowing what need she had of some refreshing , I advised her to compose herself unto rest , which her long want of it required , and her eyes seemed to incline unto , that it was best to take it while she might , lest she should after , want it when she would . Her answer was that this was her best rest , & that which she found best refreshing & sweetest repose in ; and that , said she , which you say of the one , may I much better say of the other : if to give way to rest I forbear those means of comfort that God by your presence now affordeth me , I may hereafter want them when I would , and shall need them . 

Some conflicts she had the day before her departure ; but such , through God's goodness , as lasted not long , and ended in that comfort , that continued with her to her end : which was so quiet and peaceable . that her departure was scarce sensible to those that were nearest about her . 

I will add but a word , and that I speak unfeignedly : I know God's hand is not straitened , neither is his grace scanted : yet , considering mine own observation & experience , but small , I confess ; as I have not hitherto in all points met with her match , so I wish rather than hope to light oft on her like . 

But let us leave her with the Lord in happiness , in heaven : and apply ourselves unto that , that more principally concerneth us , attending to such instructions as shall ( by God's assistance ) be delivered , not altogether unagreable to the present occasion , out of that portion of Scripture , which I have chosen to entreat of , concerning 

PAUL'S DESIRE OF DISSOLUTION , AND DEATH'S ADVANTAGE the ground of that his DESIRE . 

PHILIPP . cap. 1. vers . 23.  

Desiring to be dissolved , and to be with Christ ; which is by much more the better . 

THE Apostle Paul was in a great strait , when he wrote this Epistle ; in doubt , it seemeth , whether he should rather desire life or death : affected as a loving and loyal wife , saith one , whose husband in a far country advanced to great honour , writeth to her to come to him , but to leave her children behind her , as dear to her as herself ; and in that regard distracted , on the one side desirous to enjoy her husband , and on the other side loath to leave her children behind her , especially yet unable to help themselves ; and in that regard content yet to defer her own honour and joy in her husband , till she see them better able to shifted for themselves : Or , as a beggar-woman , saith Bernard , who coming to a rich man's door with a child on her hand , is offered to come in and warm her and dine well , so she leave her child , because it is unquiet , without ; whose bowels earning with natural affection toward the fruit of her womb , make her willing rather to accept of a small pittance without doors with her child , then to dine largely and liberally without it , within . In like manner fared it with the blessed Apostle at this present . He desired to be with Christ his husband , his head in happiness , in heaven . But the Philippians his little ones , whom he had newly bred , and not thoroughly yet nursed up , they hung on his hands , and had need still of his help : whom being loath therefore to leave , he was content for their gain to defer his own good , and to continue yet some longer time in this mortal and miserable life , for the helping of them forward on the way to eternal life . 

And this his distraction and doubtfulness of resolution he propoundeth in the former verse , and in the former part of this verse : whereunto are annexed such motives as endeavoured to draw his desires either way ; his own felicity on the one side , which made him rather desire death ; their necessity on the other side , that moved him rather to accept of then to affect life , to endure it than to desire it . So that the hastening of his own eternal good on the one side , and the furthering of their spiritual gain on the other side ; wrought between them a great distraction in him . Yet so , that the things themselves , Life and Death , simply considered ; if he should respect , and as he respected his own good and gain in either , his desire was rather to dissolution and departure by decease , that he might be with Christ . Whereof a reason is also rendered , because that simply considered , or in respect of himself , was without all question or comparison , the far greater good of the twain . 

Now the main point that hence we observe then is this , that a Christian man may lawfully and justly desire death . 

Which point so conceived , divideth itself into two branches , both of them arising necessarily from the words of my text . 

The one concerning the lawfulness or warrantablenesse . 

The other concerning the equity or reasonableness of this desire . 

For the former , that a Christian man may lawfully desire death in some kind and in some case , ( as did Elias , and Simeon upon sight of our Saviour ) is apparent , in that the Apostle not only professeth it here of himself , but writing by the Spirit of God , approveth it also , as in himself here , so in others as well as himself elsewhere . 

And it may be further confirmed unto us , if we shall consider ; 

First , that death and departure hence by death , it is propounded as a blessing , promised as a blessing , and bestowed as a blessing ; and therefore may as a blessing also lawfully be desired . 

Secondly , that our deaths-day is our doomsday : that our going to Christ , as that his coming to us . Now a Christian may love , and long after the one , and therefore may lawfully desire also the other . 

In a word , we pray or aught to pray daily , that Christ's kingdom may be fully erected in us ; that Gods will may be prefectly fulfilled of us : which can not be either of them wholly effected , but by dissolution and decease . 

But here may a question or two be moved . 

First , for what cause we may desire death : Secondly , with what caution . 

For the former , I answer ; we may desire death : First , to be freed from mortality and the miseries of this life ; that we may rest from our labours ; that mortality may be swallowed up of life ; which can not be in ordinary course but by death . 

Secondly , to be freed from spiritual evils , that will not leave us but by death . 

And lastly , in regard of those benefits , that death further bringeth with it ; that we may come home to God , and be for ever with Christ . 

To the latter question , I answer , that first this desire it must be without impatience : ( that was jonas his fault : ) we may not desire death as weary of God's work , of doing or enduring what he calleth us unto . 

Secondly , it must be with submitting of our wills to Gods will ; content to wait God's leisure , and to abide God's pleasure for death or for life . 

And thus , for these causes , with these cautions ; death may lawfully be desired . 

Now for the latter Branch , that every Christian man hath good cause & great cause to desire death ; ( besides that the Apostle as he desireth it , so he hath good ground for his desire in that kind ; ) it may further more clearly appear unto us , if we shall consider the evils that death freeth us from , together with the benefits that it bringeth us unto . 

The evils that Death freeth us from are either corporal or spiritual . 

The corporal evils may be referred to 4 heads : First , those injuries and wrongs that God's children sustain at the hands of worldly men that here oppugn and oppress them . For all that will live , godlily , while they live here , must look to suffer persecution ; and the way to God's kingdom is through many tribulations : the world hates them , because though they be in it , yet are they not of it : and this hatred will last so long as the world lasts ; so long as the one is in it , and the other of it : neither will it cease to discover itself in mischievous attempts , so oft as ability and opportunity shall meet . In regard whereof , Christian men , saith our Apostle , had they hope only in this life , were of all men the most miserable . Christian men therefore as they have no cause to love life ; so they have no need to fear death : yea as they have little cause to love this life , considering the wrongs that here daily they endure ; so they have great cause to desire death , that putteth an end to them all ; that setteth them and the wicked so far asunder , that they can not one come any more at the other , to vex or molest or annoy one the other . In respect whereof it is well said by some of the Ancients , that God's children are never better delivered , then when delivered by death : for that then they are delivered not out of one , but out of all troubles at once ; and so delivered as they need no further deliverance any more . 

Secondly , those temporal corrections and chastisements , that the corruptions of God's children by way of cure here require . For here God is oftentimes constrained to smite them with the wounds of an enemy , in sharp and severe manner , because their iniquities are many and their transgressions great and grievous ; to judge them in this world , that they may not be condemned in the next . But after this life , as there shall be no need of natural food or physic for the body ; so there shall be no need of such spiritual physic for the soul . As we shall be rid of corruption , so we shall need no more correction . As there shall be no use of preaching or sacraments , so there shall be no need of such sharp courses , as God is now fain to take with us : for all grief and pain shall be then done away ; and all tears wiped away from our eyes : we shall never fear then to taste of God's anger again ; nor ever know what his displeasure meaneth any more . 

Thirdly , all laborious and painful employments : they rest then from their labours ; which though the works themselves are not evil ; yet the pain and toil accompanying them is of the punishment of sin , and so evil in itself . Martha shall not need then to complain of Marie : nor the Prophet need by preaching to waste his lights and his life . As all misery , so all mercy and works of mercy shall then cease . As there shall be then no hunger nor thirst , nor other necessities of nature : so we shall not need there either to feed the hungry , as we did here , or to have a fellow-feeling of their hunger ; that which maketh us many times as miserable , as those themselves are to whom we show mercy . 

Fourthly , all infirmities and bodily pains and diseases . Death is the best Physician , the best physic for them : it cureth us not of one but of all , and of all at once ; not for once only , but for ever . 

And what speak I of diseases , or of other diseases ? Death cureth us even of death . 

Old age ; saith one , is a disease evil enough of itself : yea our life itself is a disease , and a deadly disease , a disease unto death : and there is no means to cure us of this disease but by death . We 〈◊〉 freed from death by death ; as by death Christ destroyed death ; while mortality is swallowed up of life , and immortality , the only true health , is achieved by death . 

The spiritual evils that death freeth us from , are also of 4. sorts . 

The first of Satan's temptations . The Christian soul , while it is in this world , is in fight ever with Satan , who is continually labouring to work our evil , and to work us unto evil : and if he can not draw us out of God's way , by beating and buffeting us to vex and annoy us , and so to make God's way as tedious and troublesome , as he can possibly , unto us . And this course he continueth with us to our life's end , raging many times most furiously when we draw nearest to our end , because he knoweth his time then is but short . But by death we prevail against him , and get full victory over him ; when he is not only so cast out of us , that he can not sway in us , as before our conversion sometime he did ; but is so shaken off from us , that he can never once return again , as with our Saviour he did sometime , to tempt us. For our souls are out of his reach , when they are taken up into heaven , whither that wicked one hath now no access . 

The second sort is of worldly provocations and evil examples . The children of God while they are in the world , can not but live among , and converse with the wicked of the world : and living among them , and conversing with them , they can not but hear their blasphemous speeches , and see their lewd courses , whereby they abuse and dishonour God : that which is a matter of no small grief and vexation to God's children ; yea so great that it maketh them oft á-weary of their lives . As indeed how can it be but a grievous heartsore to any faithful subject and well-affected to his Sovereign , to be constrained to abide in such a place , and among such people , where his Lord and master is daily railed on and reviled in his hearing , and those things done daily in his sight , that tend to the disgrace and dishonour of him , whom he deservedly most respects ? But we are freed from all these evils also , when we go out of the world . For howsoever here the grain and chaff lie together in one field ; yet there the chaff goeth one way , and the good grain another way , the tares are cast one way , and the good corn is carried another way , even into God's garner , to a place where there shall be no matter of scandal , to make them stumble and fall or to vex and grieve them any more . 

The third sort of spiritual evils is of sin and corruption ; than which nothing is more burdensome and cumbersome to a Christian soul , not so much for fear of wrath , as for desire to please God , and for grief that thereby he should show himself unkind and unthankful to him , whom he hath ever found so gracious and good to himself . And if this be so heavy to a Christian soul , that he should so displease and dishonour his heavenly father by his errors and oversights , whose honour ought to be dearer to him than all the world's wealth , yea then his own soul itself ; how is death then to be desired of him , that freeth him from this burden ; that giveth an utter ease from it , an eternal discharge of it ? For he that is dead , is freed from sin . Death , it strippeth us of our old man , our old skin , all at once , not , as sanctification doth it here , by degrees : yea it placeth us in far better estate , than our first parents were in before their fall . For they were so free from sin , that yet they might have will to sin : we shall be so freed by death from sin , that we shall never have either will or mind again thereunto . 

The fourth sort of evils spiritual is of divine desertion , whereby God in this life , though he never indeed leave his children , yet sometime seemeth to forsake them ; though he ever remember and regard them , yet sometime seemeth to forget them : he doth many times , for secret causes best known to himself , withdraw from them the sight and sense of his gracious presence and assistance , and look upon them with a frowning and a lowering countenance . Which thing how grievous and heavy it is to God's saints for the present , may appear by those mournful plaints that they pour out in such cases : even so grievous , that ( for the time ) they seem to be in the very suburbs of hell . Whereas by death they are freed from all such dreadful desertions ; being placed in such a state thereby , that as God shall never be again displeased with them , so he shall never in displeasure again turn his face away from them . 

And thus have we seen the evils of all sorts , that death is a means to free us from . 

Now in the next place , consider we the Benefits that death bringeth us unto : which may likewise be reduced to 4. heads . 

The first is the full consummation of Grace , that is here but imperfect and in part : as first fruits , but an handful to the whole crop ; as an earnest-penny given in pledge of full payment . But if the first-fruits be so precious , those small beginnings of Grace , that the true Christian , the wise merchant , would not take the world in exchange for them ; that he counteth all the wealth of this world , but as trash , as dr●sse and dongue in regard of them ; o what will the full crop be ? if the earnest-penny be so precious , what will the entire payment be ? And if we then thirst and long after growth of grace , how should we desire death that bringeth with it a full consummation of grace , that bringeth grace to it full growth ? 

The second Benefit is a perfection of glory ; such an excellency as shall make us not only gracious in ourselves , but most glorious also in the eyes of all that behold us : that which the Apostle calleth an exceeding excessive eternal weight of glory : and saith further , that all the afflictions of this life , are not worthy once to be named with that glory , that in the next life shall be manifested , not unto us only , but even in us . 

When the sun of righteousness shall shine full upon us , and shining full upon us , shall make us like unto himself ; so that we shall also shine as the sun in the kingdom of heaven . This we are not able to conceive what it is . We can guess somewhat at the former , because we have the first-fruits of it here : but this we are not able to give almost any guess at . But the Apostle Peter , in Christ's transfiguration , seeing a glimpse of it ( o it is good being here , saith he ) would fain have stayed there still . And the Apostle Paul that had seen it , could not utter what he had seen , but longed exceedingly after it , as one never well till he were there . And undoubtedly , enlarge we our minds all that may be , we shall say , when we shall come to see and enjoy it , as the Queen of the South , when she came and saw Salomon's royalty , the one half , nay the hundreth part of that we shall find there , was never either reported unto us , or conceived of us here . 

The third Benefit , is the inseparable company of Christ . They shall follow the Lamb there , whithersoever he goeth . In this world is Christ said to be with us : after this life are we said to he with him . 

Here he is said to be with us , while we sojourn from him : there are we said to go to him , and to be at his home with him . And if it be matter of much joy to have Christ with us here , what will it be to abide for ever with him there ? If Christ's presence by his spirit be so comfortable here , that it is able to cheer us up in all our greatest afflictions : what shall his glorious presence be eternally there ? 

Conceive we it by some comparisons . It were a great grace , and such as would minister much comfort to a Courtier lying sick at home of the gout , to have the Prince not only to send to him , but in person also to visit him : but much more comfort and joy would it be to him , to be able , being recovered , to repair to the Court , and there enjoy his Prince's presence , with such favours and pleasures , as that place may afford . How much more then , in this case , is it a great grace and a comfort , that God vouchsafeth to visit us here by his spirit , sometime more familiarly and feelingly , but ever so effectually , as thereby to support us even in our heaviest afflictions ? but yet how much more exceedingly shall our joy and comfort be increased , when being freed from all infirmities , we shall be taken home to him , that we may live in joy and bliss for ever with him ? As that Courtier having assurance given him of recovery by such a time , would exceedingly rejoice to think of the joy of that day , and count every day a week , if not a year , to it , wherein he should being recoured return again to the Court , and be welcomed thither in solemn manner by all his friends there , the Prince himself principally : so well may the faithful soul not a little joy to forethink with itself , what a joyful hour that shall be unto it , wherein by death parted from the body , it shall be solemnly presented before the face of Christ , and entering into the heavenly palace , shall be welcomed thither by the whole court of heaven , by all the blessed spirits that there abide . 

Again ; this life is the time of our contract with Christ after this life cometh our marriage-day . Now as a virgin espoused to one that is travailed to the East-indieses , if she do indeed faithfully and unfeignedly affect him , though she joy to read a letter , or to see some token from him , yet it is nothing in that kind that can give her contentment , but she longeth for his presence , desireth to hear of his return , and joyeth to think on that day , when meeting again they shall be so matched , as they shall never more again be so severed . So here , though the Christian soul contracted to Christ , during the time of this contract , in his absence from her , receive many favours and love-tokens from him , as are all the blessings she enjoyeth here , be they spiritual or temporal ; yet they can not all of them give full contentment unto her , but help rather to inflame her affection towards him , and make her , if she sincerely love him , as she professeth and pretendeth to do , the more earnestly and ardently to long for that day , wherein she shall come inseparably to be linked unto him , and everlastingly to enjoy his personal presence , which above all things she most desireth . 

The fourth and last , but not the least Benefit that death bringeth us unto , is immediate communion with God : when God shall be all in all and unto all : when we shall draw our delights from the fountain of all , from the wellhead : when God shall convey and minister unto us immediately by himself , whatsoever he now communicateth unto us by means . This ( though it be the greatest benefit of all , yet we can say the least of all of it . Only thus much : If the means whereby God now imparteth his mercies unto us , be so sweet to God's saints , ( the ministry of his word , his holy mysteries , and religious offices ) that they earnestly thirst after them when they want them , delight exceedingly in them when they have them , seem to be even ravished and enamoured with them , prefer the sweetness of them before the sweetest sweets , yea seem to dote so upon them , that they have never enough of them if the dim beams , I say , of God's face and favour shining through these thick clouds and veils be so comfortable to them , that they esteem all worldly joys and delights , as nothing in regard of them b : o what shall God himself be , when we shall see him fully face to face , when we shall find all together in him , draw all immediately from him , and enjoy whatsoever our heart can desire or mind imagine , yea far more than either of them can possibly now reach to , in him . 

And thus we have seen the benefit of death , both in regard of the evils from which it freeth us ; as also in regard of those good things that thereby accrue unto us : whence we may well conclude , that as God's children may lawfully desire it , so they have just cause and great cause earnestly to long after it . 

Now the Use then of this point is first to overthrow the opinion of those that think it not lawful in any case to wish or desire death , yea in regard of freedom from outward evils ; sithence it is promised , as we have showed , by God as a blessing , and as a blessing in that very kind . 

Yea but , may some say , if we may desire it , we may do it : we may then hasten our own end . 

It followeth not . A man may desire many things to be done , which yet he himself may not do . A man may desire the ministry : yet he may not make himself a minister . He may desire to have some malefactors taken away by the sword of justice : yet , being a private person , he may not do it himself . So a man may desire death , and seek it at God's hands ; but not procure it or hasten it by any means of his own . 

Secondly , it serveth to shame and condemn such as are so loath to die , that they can not endure to hear of death and dissolution : so far from desiring that which they have so great cause to desire , that they can not brook or abide any mention or motion of it , can worst of any thing away with it : in so much that some forbear the doing of some things , some matters of conveniency , yea some necessary duties , as making of their Wills , out of a frivolous and superstitious conceit , that they shall die shortly , if they do them . 

Yea many though they can not live , yet are unwilling to die . Though they live in that misery , that they can have no joy of their lives , that their life is rather a lingering death than a life , yet would they rather continue still in such miserable plight , then be content to have an end put to their intolerable torments , much more bitter than many deaths , by an easy dissolution , by a speedy dispatch . no pain , no torment , no pangs of death , can prevail so with them , as to make them willing to undergo what they can not avoid , or content to go to God.  

Now for Heathen , or such as have no hope but here , to be thus affected , were not greatly to be wondered at . But for Christians , that profess themselves to be but pilgrims and strangers here , this world a strange country to them , and heaven their own country , their home , their father's house ; for them to be so unwilling to leave this world , to depart hence , to return to their own home , as if their father's house were not an heaven but an hell , it is a foul shame , it is no small blemish to their Christian profession . 

Yea it showeth such persons to be possessed still with a great measure of hypocrisy . For what is it but hypocrisy , when our prayers and our practice concur not , when the one is directly contrary unto the other , when we are most unwilling to that , that daily we would seem to desire Or how do not our prayers and our practice the one directly cross the other , when we pray daily to have , not our will , but Gods will to be done ; and yet when it cometh to the point , that God calleth us to come to him , we hang back , and are unwilling to do what he willeth us , would rather writh Gods will to ours , than conform our will to his , would rather have our own will done against God's will to our own evil , than the will of our loving father wrought on us for our good ? How do not our tongues and our hearts apparently and exceedingly jar , when we pray daily to God , that his kingdom may come , and yet we wish and desire rather to stay here still , where Satan's throne and kingdom is ; and where we ourselves are in some degree still of thraldom , then to be translated hence unto that eternal kingdom ; where we shall be absolutely free from all spiritual servitude , and shall reign in glory for ever with Christ jesus our head ? 

And surely strange it is to see here , as one well observeth , how chose we are in this kind affected to our own courses otherwise . For the labourer hasteth to repose himself ; the mariner roweth with all might to gain his port , and is glad at the heart when he is once come within kenning of it ; the traveler is never quiet till he be at his ways end . And yet we tied in this world to a perpetual task , tossed as on the sea , with continual tempest , toiled and tired out with a tedious and cumbersome passage , can not see the end of our pains but with grief , view our port but with tears , think on our home but with horror and dread : Seem weary of our work , of our waves , and our way ; and yet when death cometh to rid us of them , to set us at an end of them , and to put us into our port , we eat it as a rock , and cannot endure the sight of it : do as little children , that go crying out of some malady all day , and at night when the medicine cometh that should heal and help them of their pain , or the Barber-surgion that should pluck out the aking-tooth , have no grief more now , but are well enough without it ; fear the means of ease more than the disease , : the medicine more than the malady itself so we fear what we should wish for , and wis what we should fear ; yea fear most and abhor what we have most cause to desire . 

O but life is sweet , will some say : and man is a creature that loveth life . 

Do we love life ? let us love true life , love eternal life , love that life that is life indeed . For this life is no life , but a death rather than life . It is no true life that yieldeth to death , that tendeth to death , that endeth in death : that is true life , that is eternal : that is true life , that cannot be dissolved by death . If we desire such life then , let us desire death : for there is no way to such life but by death 

As a Christian man therefore hath no cause to fear or abhor death , because it can neither bereave him of spiritual , nor debar him of eternal life : ( he dieth not , though he die : his death is no death : ) so he hath great cause to love and desire death , because it bringeth him to perfection of spiritual life , it placeth him in possession of eternal life . As he hath no cause to dread death , because it cannot sever him from Christ : so he hath good cause to desire death , because it bringeth him home unto Christ . And it is no death , but life , to be joined unto him ; as it is no life , but death , to be severed from him 

Use 3 Thirdly , this serveth to show the efficacy and excellency of faith : it maketh those things most cheerful , most comfortable , most desirable , that are most dreadful , & uncomfortable , and terrible in themselves : it altereth clean the nature of things : it maketh the world irksome to Paul , which all men naturally desire and delight in : it maketh death and dissolution desirable and delightsome unto him , which all men naturally abhor ; insomuch that though they be weary of life , yet they are unwilling to die ; though they have no pleasure of their life , yet loath are they to leave life , and to die once , that they may live ever . It is clean contrary with Paul His life is not dear to him : and death is desired of him : yea so much desired , that he can hardly , but for others , induce himself to live longer : it is as hard a matter to make him patient of life , as it is to make other men patient of death : it is a mastery with them to make them willing to die ; it is a mastery with him to make himself willing to live . And surely a great matter it must needs be , that maketh a man die cheerfully , not as one weary of life , but as desirous of death ; as desirous of death , as other men are of life , because in death and by death he looketh for life . 

Fourthly , this should incite us to the love and desire of that , which we have so good , so great cause to desire ; For what should we desire rather than to be at rest , at an end of all our troubles and travels ; to be freed from the burden and bondage of sin , from Satan's assaults , from the present wicked world ; to be rid of infirmity ; to be stripped of our mortality ; to be made perfectly gracious , and unspeakably glorious ; to be in joy unconceivable , and in happiness eternal ; to be present with Christ , and for ever with God ? This was the end of Christ's descending , that we might ascend : of his descending to us , that we might ascend unto him : he to misery , we to glory ; he to be crucified , we to be crowned ; he to be crucified for us , we to be crowned with him . And if he were content to do the one , how much more we the other ? If he counted it meat and drink to do that for our good , how much more should we desire to do this for our own good ? And indeed his descending cannot be beneficial unto us , unless we ascend unto him . That was the end of his descending : and that is the end of his ascending . As he descended , so he ascended that we might ascend : he went into heaven before us , to prepare a place for us , and to draw us up to him , that we might reign for ever with him . And shall we then be unwilling to follow him to our eternal glory , to our endless good ? Certainly with an evil will would we accompany him to the cross , if we be so unwilling to come after him to the crown . O let us rouse up therefore our dull and drowsy spirits ; let us sharpen and whet on our affections and desires hereunto , that we may be willing to die , that we may even desire death . For , He lives but evil , that cannot die well . And , It is one point of well-dying , to be willing to die . And no man dieth more willingly , than he that desireth death . 

Now that we may ( with this blessed servant and Apostle of Christ ) love death and desire death , let us so live as we may not fear death . For how can a man desire what he feareth ? Wouldst thou therefore have death to be not terrible and horrible , but desirable and delectable ; not lamentable , but comfortable ; not dreadful , but cheerful and delightful unto thee ? ( For it is not , neither can it so be unto all , but unto some only ; to those alone that are qualified so , as our Apostle here was . ) 

then first suffer not thy soul to be glued to this world . For it is the love of this life that maketh death bitter . Therefore are so few content to be dissolved , because they are so wedded to the world ; whereas to a mind that loatheth and misliketh the world , nothing is so welcome as death , that taketh him out of the world . 

Yea take heed that the good blessings that God here vouchsafeth thee , cleave not too close to thee . For even they are often unto us , as Absolom to David , a means privily to filch our affections from God , and to make us more unwilling to go hence unto God. Let us remember that these things , though good things , are but as rings and love-tokens that God wooeth us here withal . And as it were but an harlotry love in us , to affect the present more than the party that sendeth it ; so an absurd and a preposterous thing , that God's love-tokens sent to us , should lessen our love to him , and make us less desirous of the fruition of him . Which that therefore they may not do , we must take heed that our hearts be not set too much on them ; that we use them so that we do not abuse them ; that we be not so desirous still to retain them , that they make us more unwilling , parting with them , to depart to him that sent them , when he shall call us to come to him . Let us so possess them , that they hang loose about us : then when death cometh to strip us of them , they will go off with ease , as we slip off our garments , when we lay us down to sleep . Otherwise if they cleave to us , we shall not part but with pain ; as the shirt that sticketh fast to the ulcerous body , and pulleth skin and flesh away withal : as the tooth , that standeth fast in the head , cometh not out but with much difficulty , teareth the gum , or bringeth a piece of the jaw away with it ; when the tooth that is loose , cometh out with ease . 

Secondly , hate sin , and death will be delightful unto thee . It is the love of their corruptions , that maketh men loath to leave them , and loath to appear there , where they must be called to accounted for them . The love of sin maketh men fear death : and the hatred of sin would make men love and desire death . For he that hates sin in himself , cannot but desire to have the body of sin wholly abolished in his soul : which , because it will last with him as long as he lives , and will not be utterly abandoned till death ; therefore the more he hates it , the less he loveth life ; the more he abhorreth it , the more he desireth death . As the more impatient of sickness , so the more impatient of sin , the more desirous of death . 

Thirdly , lay a good foundation for life eternal . Labour to keep a good conscience , and the comfort of a good conscience , and death shall not be dreadful but cheerful unto thee . For the godly hath hope even in death . The worldly man hath his hope , as his happiness , in this life alone . And therefore so long as life lasteth , some sorry hope he may have But when he dieth , his hope dieth with him . And therefore justly feareth he death , that putteth a final end , as to his happiness , so to his hopes . Whereas the godly man retaineth his hopes , even when life decayeth therefore justly rifest then with him , because he approacheth then nearest to the accomplishment of them . And therefore little reason hath he to fear or abhor death , much cause to affect it , and cheerfully to expect it ? For he that is in the state of grace and life , cannot be put beside it , or deprived of it by death . And he may well cheerfully expect , and even with triumph entertain death , that is to receive and enjoy a crown of eternal life after death . That therefore we may be confident in these our desires , in coveting to remove hence , that we may go unto God ; let us study so to carry ourselves , that both staying here , and removing hence , we may be acceptable unto him . 

Labour then for this : yea labour not only for it ; but labour further , in the fourth place , to get assurance of it to thine own soul . Labour ( I say ) to get assurance of God's favour in thy life , and thou shalt not need to fear death . A man will never be afraid to go to God , if he know that in Christ he is reconciled unto God . He will never be afraid to lay down this cottage of clay , if he be assured that he hath an eternal housing , not made with hands , reserved for him in the heavens . The want of the former , of the thing itself , maketh the unfaithful fear death ; and not without cause ; because they have laid no foundation for life after death ; and therefore when they die , they die irrecoverably , they die eternally , they pass not from death to life , but from death to death , or from death to such a life , as is worse than any death , a dying life and a living death . The want of the latter , to wit , of the assurance of it , maketh even many faithful fear death ; ( though that without just cause ; ) because , though they have laid a sure foundation for life , and therefore cannot miscarry , but must needs do well in death ; yet they want the comfort of it , because they do not apprehend it , because they are not assured of it : which maketh them therefore with fear to expect death , as a sergeant that came to arrest them , and to carry them away to hell ; which , if they could consider of things aright , they had cause rather with great joy to welcome , as God's messenger , sent to convey them hence to heaven . 

Fiftly , learn to die whiles thou livest ; learn to die before death . Forecast thine end think oft on it ; fit thyself for it ; that though it come never so soon , never so suddenly , it may not surprise thee unawares , it may not find thee unfit . He can not die with alacrity , he can not in holy manner desire death , that hath not fitted himself for death , that hath not before hand seriously thought on his end , and addressed himself thereunto . Therefore men fear it , because they are not prepared for it : therefore they dread it , because it cometh ere they expected it . As thou art wont therefore ere sleep come upon thee , to compose thyself unto rest , by stripping thyself , lying down in or on thy bed , drawing the curtains about thee , closing thine eyes , acting sleep as it were , before thou sleepest : So endeavour daily , before death seize on thee , to compose and address thyself unto death , by the serious meditation of thine unavoidable end , as most certainly not far of , so uncertain how near , by labouring to work out of thy mind such secular , carnal , or satanical conceits , as may bring thee out of love with it , and by striving to bring thyself acquainted with it , yea to work thine heart to a love and a liking of it , that when it cometh , thou mayst entertain it , neither as a foe , nor as a mere stranger , but as a wont guest , as an ancient acquaintance , as a familiar friend It is a matter , as of much consequence , for the furtherance of a cheerful departure , so of great difficulty , not so soon achieved , not so easily learned , as many men imagine : yea it is that , that we may well all our life long be a learning ; since it is , or aught to be the main aim of every man's whole life , to prepare and fit him for death . 

Sixtly and lastly , when thou lookest towards death , look withal ever further than it . When thou meditatest on death , meditate withal on those benefits that shall accrue unto thee by death . O could we see them , as Paul did , when he was rapt into the third heaven : we would never be well , until we were there . Nay , could we see but some glimpse , as those three Disciples did , of that glory ; we would never lin longing till we were entered or entering into it . But this since we cannot hope for , till we come there ; let us labour with Moses the mean while , with the spiritual eye of the soul , with the eye of faith and meditation , to see him that cannot be seen ; yea to see that , that cannot be seen ; to see that with the spiritual eye , that cannot be seen with the natural eye : with our Apostle , to look not on the things that are seen , but on the things that are not seen : not consider death as it showeth itself to the eye of flesh and blood , and as it is in it own nature , as an enemy to man , as a punishment of sin ; but as it is manifested to the eye of faith out of God's word , as it is now altered and changed through God's mercy in Christ , as a great benefit , as a blessing , as the messenger of God ; as God's messenger , I say , for the good , yea for the endless good of all those that belong unto God. Open the eye of thy soul to look not upon it , but beyond it . Muse oft upon the happiness that shall ensue upon it , and cannot be attained but by it . That will make thee desire death , though not for itself , yet for it ; yea it will make thee even in love with death , if thou be'st in love with it ; since thou canst not but by death attain unto it . 

Fiftly , this helpeth to confute certain erroneous conceits . 

First , the popish opinion of Purgatory . For what cause or reason should Christian men have to desire death , if they were to go to such a place after death ? to pass not from pain to ease and rest , but from pain to pain , from lesser pains to greater pains ; to greater torments after death , than ever they did or could endure in this life : not to go unto Christ , but to go further from Christ ; not to converse with him immediately after death , but to be deprived of those means , whereby they had spiritual society with him , and did comfortably enjoy him by his spirit here upon earth . A mere dotage of man's idle brain , having no shadow of ground or warrant out of God's word , teaching the Saints of God to expect after death woe and pain and hell , where the Spirit promises nothing but life , rest , joy , and heaven . 

Secondly , it confuteth likewise another unsound assertion , to wit , of those that deny unto the souls of the Saints deceased entrance into heaven , and access unto the presence of Christ , until the last day . This erroneous conceit was of old broached by Irenaeus , and was of late again revived by Pope john 22 . But was then opposed by the most of his Cardinals , and confuted by the Divines of the University of Paris , and the Pope himself ( as some write ) constrained by Philip the Fair , than King of France , publicly to recant it ; as also Benedict 12. his next successor , solemnly condemned it . 

And it is a point indeed directly contrary to the promise of Christ , and to the Desires of the Saints . 

To the promise of Christ made to the Thief on the Cross ; This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise : which Paradise this our Apostle expoundeth to be the third Heaven , the present place of Christ's residence and abode . 

To the Desire's of God's Saints ; this our Apopostle , and others , as well here , as elsewhere , who desire to remove hence , that they may go thither to Christ . But in vain should they desire for that end to remove hence , if when hence they departed , they should not go to christ , but wait without , I wot not where , secluded from all access to him , and from the sight of him . So that of necessity either we must shut Christ himself out of heaven , or else we must admit the souls of the Saints , who by direction of the Spirit of God ( which cannot misinform them , either delude or deceive them , ) desire therefore to be dissolved , that they may go immediately to be and abide with him where he is . 

Lastly , it teacheth us not to mourn excessively for the deceased . For how can we desire to go after them , if we mourn for them , as if some evil had befallen them ? or what cause have we to bewail them , that are therefore happier than us , because they are gone thither before us , whither we must once follow them , and can never be fully happy here , until we be there with them ? Rather ; are they gone before us , that were near and dear unto us ? Let their departure from us , that were so much affected of us , be a means to draw our affections more to the place whither they are gone before us ; and to those courses , whereby we may be partakers with them , as in the grace of God here , so in glory hereafter . 

FINIS . 

Praeclarè Antiphanes apud Stobaeum tom . 2. cap. 124.  

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 


Quae Lipsius sic vertit . 

Lugere amicos mortuos minimè decet . 
Non mortui etenim sunt : sed illam ipsam viam , 
Quam mox necessum inire nobis ●mnibus , 
Illi praiverunt : & ecc● postmodùmm 
Transgressi in unum idemque diversorium 
Coniuncti agemus quicquid evi relliquum est . 






 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Aristo● . ethic . l. 10. c. 1.  Exempla maximè movent . Cic. de orat . lib. 3.  Validiora sunt exempla quam verba , & plen●us opere d●cetur quam ucce . Leo serm . de ieiun .  1.  Cor. 11. 1.  Ephes . 5. 1 , 2.  Phil. 3. 17.  Hebr. 12. 1 , 2.  & 13. 7.  jam. 5. 10.   Longum est iter per praecepta : breve & ●fficax per exempla . Sen. epist . 6.   Hoc plus valent exempla , quod fieri posse docent quod factum est . Sermo quidam vinus & efficax exemplum operis est , facilè persuadens quod intendimus , deum factibile probat esse quod s●ademus . Bern. the resurr . ser . 2.  Ex aliorum factis fieri poss● credunt , quod forte , dan putant non fieri posse , pigrescunt . Aug. epist . 134.  Adiuvari se exemplie exoptat humana infirmitas , quo facilius ipsa etiam nunc faciat , quae ali●● fecisse ante cognoscat . Saluian . ad eccles . cath . l. 3.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 jam. 5. 17.  Lege Bern. serm . de Martino .  jerem. 31. 34.   john 17. 3.   Si cognitio Dei vita aeterna , tum ignorantia Dei mors aeterna . Bern. in Cant.   Galat. 3. 28.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Basil . Sel. home . 2.   1.  Tim 2. 15.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Clem Alex. Paed●g l. 1. c. 4.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Basil .  Act. 4. 12. 1.  Cor. 11. 11.   Mark. 16. 16.  John 3. 16.   1.  Tim. 2 15.  john 11. 27. 2.  Tim. 1. 5.   Rom. 10. 14 , 17.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Clem. Alex. storm . l. 5.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Marc. de lege spir . 102.  Indiget fides cognition , sicut & cognitio indiget fide : neque enim esse potest sides sine cognition , neque est cognitio aliquid sine fide . Theodor. the cur . Graec. off . l. 1.  

 1 Cor. 6. 19   1 Cor. 6. 19   Magis vivorum solatiae , quam mortuorum subsidiae . Aug. de cura pro mort . her .  Rom. 12. 2.   Paula , Marcelia , & Eustochium . Legatur Paulae epitaph : & Hierenymi Epistola ad easdem .  Sic Hieron . ad Marcellam ; Maguis pro●●cas quaestionibus , & torpens acio ingenium , dum interr●gas , doces .  Later unculis I●ditur ; In supervacuis sub●ilit as teritur . s●hol● , no's vitae discitur . Sen. epist . 106.  Qu●scire magis i●vat quam prodest ▪ Ibid. In quibus ●ihil allied quam acumen exercetur . Ib. 109.  Quibus quisquis se tradidit , quaestiunculas quidem r●fras nectit ; cater●●● and vitam nihil proficiat Ibid. 111.  Quibus doce●●● magis disputare quam vivere . Ib. 9 5.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 2.  Tim. 3. 5.   Sen. epist .  Luk 2. 19   Gen. 17. 7.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Esai . 53. 10.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Psal . 90. 3.  Psal . 90. 3.   2.  Sam. 15. 26.   ●rudir● cupiens flagell● , non erut● do Job● Bern. in Cant. 33.   Qualu Stoicorun illa 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Asfecti● humana ( vel inhumana potius ) canine aequanimitatis stupore formata Tertuli depatient . Indolentia ista non sine magna mercede cantingit , immenitaris in , stuporis in corp . re . Grantor apud Oic . Tuscul l. 3.  Et verè Archytas in ethic . apud Stab . ton . 2. c. ●●s Ita enim ●mendandus est locus ille , qui non sine mendo in vulgat ishabetur : nec corrigunt sed corrumpunt mentem autoris , qui pro substi●u●●t : sicut & ijde●● frustra sunt , dun●lausulam novissimam sine causa solicitant .  Non et vera pa●ientia , ubi non est vera sapientla , ( ubi non est vera pietas . ) Cyprian . de patient .  Pers●uerantia sola virtutum coronatur . Bern. the temp . 114.  Sola est cui aeternitas redditur . Idem de consider . l. 5.  Non inch●antibꝰ sed perseverantibus praemium propunitur . Isidor . de sum . bon . l. 2. c 7.  Siquidem , Non perseverare cultus est mutilus . Bern. in Cant.   Superest ut laudabile principium condignum consequatur finem , & cauda hostix capiti coniungatur . Bern. ep . 24.  & 165.  Caput animalis cum cauda in sacrificijs offerendum . Leu. 3. 9 quia sine perseverantia nihil placet . Rad. Arden's in 1 a. 40 a.   Psal . 119 97.   Job . 23. 12.  

 Zanchius in Philip.   Bernard . in Cant.   1.  Cor 4 15.  Galat 4. 10.   1.  Th●ss . 2. 7.   Indalgenaun est hounestis affectibus : & interdum , etiemsi premunt caussae , spiritus in honorem suorum vel cum tormento retinendus est ; cum bono viro vivendum sit , non quamdiu iuvat , sed quamdiu oportet . Delicatus est , qui mori perseverat , qui 〈◊〉 amicos tanti putat , ut diutius in vita commoretur . Etian qui vult mori , qui cepit , ubi svorum ulilitas exigit , intermittat , & suis se commodet . Ingentis animi est aliena causa ad vitam reverti . Sen. ep . 104.  Vitam tibi ipsi si negas , multis negas . Sen. Theb.   Vise Clem. Alex. storm . l. 3.  & Ambrose bros . ep . 12. qui & idem de Acholio epist . 49. de Martino Severus epist . 3.  & Bern. de temp . 105.   vers . 22.   vers . 23.   vers . 24.   vers . 23.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Doctrine . Branches 2.  Branch 1.   1.  King. 19 4.   Luk. 2. 29.   2.  Cor 5. 8.  Reason 1.   Apoc. 14. 13.   1.  King. 14. 12 , 13.   Esai . 57 1.  Reason 2.   Luk 16. 22 , 23.  Hebr. 9 27.   Eccles . 12. 7. 2  Cor. 5. 8.   Joh. 14. 3. 2.  Thess . 1. 10.  & 2. 1 , 8.   2.  Tim. 4. 8.  Hebr. 9 28.  Reason 3.   Matth. 6. 20.  Questions 2.  Question 1   1.  King. 19 4.   Apoc. 14. 13.   2.  Cor. 5. 4.   Rom. 7. 24.   Eccles 7. 22.  Rom. 67.  Question 2.   2 Cor. ● . 8.   1.  Thess 4. 7.   Jona 4. 3.  Ridiculum est ad mortem currere taedio vitae . Epicur . apud Sen. epist . 24.  Vir. fortis ac sapiens non fugere debet è vita , sed exire . Et ante oina ille quoque visetur affectꝰ qui multos occupavit , libido moriendi . Sen . ibid.   Matth. 26. 39   2 Sam. 15. 26.  Confirmandus est anumꝰ . vel ad mortis , vel ad vitae patientiam , Sen . ep . 24.  Branch 2.   2.  Cor. 5. 8. and in this place .  ademptionem malorum , & aleptionem bonorum .  Mors nulliꝰ mali est materia , multorum finis . Sen de ben . l. 7. c. 1.  Malorum omnium remedium est . Idem quaest . nat . l. 6. c. 32.  Reason 1.  Evils  Corporal 1.   2.  Tim. 3. 12. nunquam deerit persecutio Christiano , sicut nec Christo , Si ergo pro Christo pressuram nondum pateris , vide ne piè vivere in Christo nondum ceperis . Aug. in Psal . 55.  Fidenter dico , quia minus piè vivis , si minus persecutionem pertuleris . Greg. ep . 27. l. 6.   Act. 14 23.   Joh. 15. 19   Luk 21. 12 , 16 , 17.  Troa . 29. 17.   Joh. 16. 2.  Psal . 37. 12. 14.   1.  Cor. 15. 19   Luk. 16. 26.   Aug. in Psal . 34. 17 , 19   Bern. in Psal . 91. 15 , 16.  Corporal 2.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Arist . ethic . l. 2. c. 3.   Jerem. 30. 14.   1.  Cor. 11. 32.   Esai . 35. 10.   Esai . 25. 8.  Apoc. 21. 4.  Mors omnium dolorum & solutio est , & finis ; ultra quam mala nostra non exeant . Sen. ad Marc. c. 19  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Aeschyl .  Esal . 54. 9  Corporal 3.   Apoc. 14. 13.   Gen. 3. 19   Luk. 10. 40 , 41.   Esai . 49. 4.   Ipsa cessabunt misericordiae opera , ubi nulla erit indigentiae miseria .  Apoc. 7. 16.  & 21. 4.   Ma●. 25 . 35 , 36.  Aug. the 10. chord . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Sophal .  Heb. 10. 33 , 34.  & 13. 3. mis● ricordia nonnall is quoth miserum cor faciat . Aug. contr . advers . l. g. l 1. c. 20.  & Isidor . orig . l 10.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Sophocl . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Aeschyl . Ultimus & optimꝰ medicus morborum etiam immedicabilium mo●s .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Euripid. Mors omnibus finis , multis remedium , nonnullis votum . Sen. ad Marc. c. 20.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Euripid.   Ipsa senectꝰ morbus est . Terent.   Ipsa vita morbus est . Aug de temp . 74.   Psal . 89. 48.   Hebr. 2. 14.   2.  Cor. 5. 4.   Ipsa immortalitas vera sanitas est . Aug. ibid.   Ephes . 6. 11 , 12.   1.  Petr. 5. 8.   1.  Chron. 21. 1.   2.  Cor. 1 2. 7.   Apoc. 12. 4 , 13 , 15 , 17.   Apoc. 12. 12.  Evils . Spiritual 1.   Apoc. 15. 2.  & 20. 4.  & 12. 11.   joh. 12. 31.   Eph●ss . 2. 2.   Luk. 4 13.   Apoc. 12. 5.   Apoc. 12. 9 , 10.  Spiritual 2.   1.  Cor. 5. 10.   Psal . 31. 13.  jer. 20. 10.  Esai . 36. 22.  & 37. 23 , 25.   Psal . 55. 9  & 119. 158.   Psal . 119. 136 , 158. 2.  Pet. 2. 7 , 8.   Genes . 27. 46.  Psal . 120. 5 , 6.  jerem 9 2 , 3.   1.  Cor. 5. 10.   Math. 13. 25 , 26 , 30.   Math. 13. 12.  Luk. 3. 17.   Math. 13. 30.   Math. 13. 41.   Rom. 14. 21. 1.  Cor. 8. 9   Rom. 14. 15.  Spiritual 3.   Rom. 7. 24.  1.  Cor. 8. 12.   Rom. 2. 23.  2.  Sam. 12. 14.   Math. 5. 16.  & 6. 10.  Exo. 32. 12 , 32.   Rom. 6. 7.   Ad●m acceper at posse quod vesset , 〈◊〉 velle quod posset : nos accipimus & posse quod volumus & velle quod poss●mus . ille posse non peccare ; nos non posse peccare . Aug. de corrept . & great . c. 11.  Spiritual 4.   joh. 16. 32.  Hebr. 13. 5.   Math. 26. 46.  Psal . 22. 1.   Esai . 49. 14 , 15.   Psal . 13. 1.   Psal . 6. 1 , 2 , 3. 6.  & 13. 1 , 2.  & 27. 9 , 13.  & 30. 7.  & 31. 16 , 22.  & 77. 1 , 2 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10.   Esai . 54. 7 , 8 , 9  Reason 2.  Benefit 1.   1.  Cor. 13. 9 , 11.   Rome 8. 23.   Levit. 23. 10.   Ephes . 1. 14. 2.  Cor. 1. 22.  & 5. 5.   1.  Cor. 2. 9 , 10 , 11 , 12. 1.  Pet. 1. 7. 2  Petr. 1. 4.   Math. 13. 46.   Philip. 3. 7 , 8 , 9 , 10.   Math. 5. 6.   1.  Cor. 13. 10.  Vivere volunt ut perfecti s●nt . mori u●lint , & perfecti 〈◊〉 . Aug. ●n Mat. sig . 17.   Psal . 84 11.  Benefit 2.  Rom. 2. 7 , 10.  & 5. 2.  2.  Tim. 2. 10.   2.  Cor. 4. 17.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Themist . apud St●● . c. 119.   Rom. 8. 18.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 in nobis , Beza . neque enim erimus ●tiosi spectatores , sed participes gloriae . Bern. the diverse . 1.   Malac. 4. 2.   Coloss . 3. 4.   Math. 13. 43.  1.  joh. 3. 2.  2.  Cor. 3. 18.  2.  Thess . 1. 10.   Math. 17. 4.  bonum est nobis esse hîc .  2.  Cor. 12. 4.   2.  Cor. 5. 2.   1.  King. 10. 6 , 7.  Benefit 3.   Apoc. 14. 4.   Psal . 91. 15.  Math. 28. 19   job. 14. 3.  & 12. 26.  & 17. 24.   2.  Cor. 5. 6.   2.  Cor. 5. 8.   1.  Thess . 4. 17.   joh. 14. 16 , 17 , 18.   Rom. 5. 3.  & 14 17.  Psal . 23. 4.  Philip. 4 4.  1.  Thess . 5. 16.  2.  Cor 1. 3 , 4 , 5.  Esse Christum cum Paulomagna securitas : Esse Paulum cum Christo summa felicitas . Bern. in Psal . Qui hab .  joh. 14. 23.  Apoc. 3. 20   Hebr. 12. 22 , 23 , 24.   Hosh . 2. 19 , 20 . desponsabo te mihi .  Apoc. 19 7.  & 21. 2.   Nil mihi rescribas : attamen ipse veni . Penelope Vlyssi . Ovid. ep . 1.   Luk. 19 12.   Ephes . 4. 7 , 8.   1.  Cor. 3. 21 , 22 , 23.  1.  Cor. 12. 4 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11.  Rom. 8. 32.  Benefit 4.   1 Cor. 15. 28.   Jam. 1. 17.   Psal . 36. 8 , 9  Apoc. 7. 17.   Apoc. 21 , 22 , 23.   Esai . 58.13 . Psal . 122. 1.  & 63. 3 , 4 , 5.   Psal . 42. 1 , 2 , & 63. 1 , 2.  & 119. 20.   Psal . 84 per totum . & 119. 97.  1 Petr. 2. 2 , 3.   Psal . 19 10.  & 119. 103.  job. 23. 12.   Psal . 27. 4.  & 63. 5 , 6.  & 119. 62 , 57 , 147 , 148 , 164.   Esai . 33. 14 , 15 , 16 , 27. 1.  Cor. 13. 12. 1.  joh. 3. 2.  Quis oculis glorietur , qui suspicentur diem ? quibus Sol per caliginem splendet ? licet contentus interim sat effugisse tenebras , adhuc non fruitur bon● lucis . Tunc animꝰ noster habebit quod gratuletur sibi , cum emissus his tenebris , in quibus volutatur , non tenui visu clara perspexerit , sed totum diem admiserit , & redditꝰ caelo ( Deo ) suo fuerit . 

Sen. ep . 79.  

Quid tibi videbitur divina lux , cum illam suo loco videris ? Tunc in tenebris vixisse dices , cum totam lucem totus aspexeris , quem nunc , per angustissimas oculorum vias , obscurè intueris , & tamen 〈◊〉 tam procul . ep . 102.  

 Ephes . 3. 20.  Conclusion . 2 King. 22. 20.  Esai . 57 1 , 2.  Apoc. 14. 13.  Use 1   1 King. 14. 12 , 13.  Tuscul . lib. 1.   1 Tim. 3. 1.  Qu●ntotss mperator terrae huius in peregrinis l●●is aut honoris specie aut muneris alicuius causa iubet degere ? nunquid hinc inconsulto Imperator● discedunt ? & quanto amplius est 〈◊〉 parere quam h●manis ? Ambros . de bon . mort . c. 2.   Habr . 5. 4 , 5.   Vetat ille dominans in nobis Deus iniussu hinc not suo demigrare , Ci● . Use 2.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Epictet . apud Stob. cap. 120.  Inter mortis m● tum & vitae tormenta miseri fluctuant : & vivere nolunt , & mori nesciunt . Sen. ep . 4.  Patinon vultis , exire timetis ; qui● faciam vobis ? Cyprian , the mortal .  Herodicum 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Plato apud Plut. de sera vind . Quid huius vivere est ? diu mori . Sen.  epist . 101.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Homer . Odyss . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Eurip. Iphigeneia . Debilem facito manu , Debil●m pede , coxa : Tuber adstruegibberum ; Lubricos quatedentes . Vita du●● superest , benè est . Maecenas : Qued miserrimum erat , ft incidisset , optatur ; & tanquam vita petitur , supplicij mora . Invenitur qui malit inter supplicia tabescere , & perire membratim , & toties per stillicidia amittere animam quam semel exhalare ? Invenitur , qui velit trahere animam tot tormenta tracturam ? Vsque adeò ne mori miserum est ? Est tanti , habere animam , ut agam . Sen. epist . 101.  Interdun obnixè petimus , quod oblatnm re usar . mus . Mulia videri volumus velle , sed nolumus . Saepe aliud volumus , aliud optamus . & verum ne Dijs quid●m dicimus . Sen. epist . 95. ?  Psal . 17. 14. 1.  Thess . 4. 13.   Psal . 39 12. 1.  Pet. 2. 11.   Phil. 3. 20.   Matth. 6. 10.  Meminisse debem● voluntatem not non nostram , sed Dei facere debere , secundum quod nos Deus iussit quotidiè orare . Cyprtan . de mortal .  Quam preposterum est , quamque perversum , ut cum Dei voluntatem fieri postulemus , quando evocat nos & aecersit de hoc mundo , non statim voluntatis eius imperio pareamus ? Hoc nitimur & reluctamur , & pervicacium more seruorum ad conspectum Domini , cum tristitia & maerore perducimur , non obsequio voluntatis ; & volumus ab eo praemijs caele stibb honorari , ad quem venim● inviti . Idem ib.   Matth. 6 10.   Apoc. 2. 13.   2.  Cor. 4. 4.  Joh. 12. 31.  & 16. 11.   Rom. 7. 14 , 23 , 24.   Quid rogamus & petimus ut adveniat regnum coelorum , si captivit as nos terrena delectate quid precibus frequenter iteratis rogamus & poscimus , ut acceleret dies regni , so maiora desideria , & vota potiora sunt seruire isthic diabolo , quam regnare cum Christo ? Cyprian . de mortal .  Mornay of Life and Death .  Job . 7. 1 , 2.  ad Polyb. cap. 28.  justo mors salut is portus . Ambros . de bon . mori . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Plut. the tranquil . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Sotades . In hoc tam procelloso & in oens' tempest ates exposito marl narigantibus , nullus portus nisi mortis est . Sen.   Nemo sine querela moritur : quis non recusans , quis non gemens exit ? Morney ibid. Sen. the benef . lib. 5. c. 17.  Quis non , ubi mors prope accesserit , tergiversatur , tremit , plorat ? Idem epist . 78.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Plato apolog .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Aesop . fabul .  2.  Tim. 6. 19  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . vel ut 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Eurip. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Plato Gorg.   Gen. 5. 27.  Psal . 88 48.   Hebr. 7. 16.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉  2 Cor. 5. 1 , 4.  Quod interim morimur , ad immorialitatem morte transgredimur : nec potest vita aeterna succedere , nisi hi●c contigerit excire : 〈◊〉 est exitus , sed transitus , & temporali itinere decurso ad aterna transgressus . Cytrian . de mortal .  Quid ni non timeat , qui mori sperat ? Sen. ep . 102.   Math. 22. 32.   Apoc. 20. 6.   joh. 8. 51 , 52.  & 11. 25 , 26.   1 Cor. 13. 10.   Math. 25. 46.   Rom. 8. 38 , 39   2.  Cor. 5. 8.   Non est mors sed vita , quae morientem Christo sociat : non est vita , sed mors , quae viventem Christo separate . Ambr. 1  Tim. 5. 6.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Arist . ethic . l. 3. c. 6.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Epicur . ad Menaec . apud Laert.   Galat. 6. 14.   Act. 20. 24.   2.  Cor. 5. 10.   Philip. 1. 22 , 23 , 24 Quod vivit , liberalitas est . Sen . ep .  Patienter vivit ; delectabilitur moritur . Aug. in 1.  joan . tract . 9   2.  Cor. 5. 4.   Net spe mortis patienter dolet , nec taedio doloris libenter moritur . hunc fert , illam expectat . Sen. epist . 98.  Tam turpe putat mortem fugere , quam ad mortem confugere . Ibid.   prov. 14. 32.  Use 4.   Sapientis est totum in mortem prominere , hoc velle , hoc meditari , hac sempercupidine ferri . Plato apud Sen. ad Marc. cap. 23.  Hey 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Plato Phaed.   Descendit altissimus , & suo nobis descensu sis ●uem ac sa ! ubrem dedicavit ascensum . Bern. the temp . 66.   joh. 4. 34.  Luk 12. 50.  & 22. 15.   Ascendit qui descendit . descendit , ut sanaret te : ascendit , ut levaret te . Aug. the diverse . 12.   Ephes . 4. 9 , 10.   joh. 14. 3.   joh. 12. 32.   Apoc. 20. 6.   Malè vivit , quisquis nescit bene mori . Sen. the tranquil . c. 11.   Benè mori est libenter mori . Sen. epist . 61.   1.  joh. 4. 18.   Ad refrigerium iusti vocantur , ad supplicium rapiuntur iniusti . datur mors tutela fidentibus , perfidis poena . Cyprian . de mortal . Means 1.   Vna est catena quae nos alligatos tenet , amor vitae . Sen. ep . 26.   Sic veteres inquilinos indulgentia loci & consuetudo ; etiam inter iniurias detinet , Idem ep . 70.   2.  Sam. 15. 6.   Meretricius amor plus annulum quam sponsum diligere . Aug. medit .  Psal . 62. 10.   1.  Cor. 7. 30 , 31.  Means 2.   Job . 20. 12 , 13.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Clem. ●l . storm . l. 5.   Rom. 7. 16 , 17.   Rom. 6. 6.   Eccles 7. 22.  1.  Joh. 1. 8.  1.  Knig. 8. 46.   Rom. 7. 24.  Means 3.   1.  Tim. 6. 19   2.  Cor. 1. 12.  & 5. 8 , 9   Prou. 14. 32.   Psal . 17. 14.   Dum spirat sperat . Eccles . 9 4.  Aegroto dum aina est , spes esse dicitur . Cic ad Attic. lib. 9 ep . 12.   Prou. 11.7 . & 10.18 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Theocr. idyll . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Eurip. Troad .  prov. 14. 32.  Dun expirat , sperat .  joh 5. 24.  Rom. 8. 37 , 38.   1.  Cor. 15. 55 , 57 2.  Tim. 4. 7.   2.  Tim. 4. 8.  Apoc. 2. 10.   2.  Cor. 3. 8 , 9  Means 4.   2.  Petr. 1. 10.   1.  joh. 3. 14 , 19 , 20 , 21.   2.  Cor. 5.5 .  2.  Cor. 5. 1 , 2.   Apoc. 20. 14 , 15.  & 20. 6.   Mors sine morte : mors semper vivit : semper occidit , nanquam peroccidit . Greg. mor. l. 9 c. 38.  & Beru . de consider . lib. 5.   Miser est beatitatcm qui nescit suam . Means 5.   1.  Cor. 15. 31.  Morten , dum adbnc viveres , imitatus , Ambr d : bon . mort . Egrogia res est mortem condiscere . Sen. epist . 26.   Deut. 32 19  Nulla res magis proderit , quam cogitatio mortalitatis . Sen. de●ra . l. 3. c 42.  Nullius rei melitatio tam necessaria est . L●em ep . 70.   Meditare mortem . Qui hoc d●cit , medi●ari libertalem iubet . Idem . ep . 26.   Morten nemo hilaris excipit , nisi qui se ad ill●m di● compusuerat . Sen. epist . 10.   I●●●pectata plus aggravant . no vitas adijcst calamitatibus pondus . not quisquam mor : alium non magis , qu●d etiam miratus est , doluit . Ideò nihil nobis in ; r●uisum esse debet . In 〈◊〉 p emittendus est animus . Sen. ep . 91.   Compo●e te ad diem illum . 〈◊〉 ep . 26.   Dehemus animo pr●meditari , cue d aliquand● sut●ri sum●●● , & quod , velimus nelimus , abesse longius non potest . Hieron . cpitaph Nepo● .  Effice mortem tibi cogitation familiarem , ut possis , ubi for 'rs tulerit , illi ( laetus & alacer ) obuiam exire . Sen . ep .  Magna res est , & diu discenda , cum adventat hora illa inevitabilis , aequ● animo exire . Sen. epist . 30.   Vivere totae vita discendum est ; & quod magis fortasse miraberis , tota vita discendum est mori . Sen. the brev . vitae . cap. 7.   Primus Pythagoras dixit Philosophiam esse meditationem mortis , quotidie de carcere corporis nitentem edu●er● animae libertatem . Hi●ron . c●nt . Ruffi● . Philosophian esse . Socrates apud Clem. storm . l. 5.  Plato apud Plut. de plac . philos . Hey 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Plato Phaedon . Platonis sententia est , omnem sapientum vitam meditationem esse mortis . Hieron . epit . Nep●t . Plato Philosophiam meditationem mortis esse dixit : Idem epit . Marcel . Philosophum nihil op●rtet sic agere , quam ut animum semper studeat consortio corporis separare , & ideò e●istimandum , philosophiam esse mortis affectum , ( conatum Hieron . ) consuetudinemque moriendi . Apul. de philos .  2.  Cor. 12. 4.   Matth. 17. 3.   Hebr. 11. 27.   Hebr. 11. 26.   2.  Cor. 4. 18.   Gen. 2. 17.  Rom. 5 12.  & 6. 23.   Lex est , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 poena perire . Sen. epigr. 7.  Vltimum diem , non quasi poenam , s●d naturae legem aspicis . Idem ad Helu. Mors naturae finis est , non poena . Cic. pr● Milon . & Sen. suasor . 7. imò nec finis , nec poena bonis .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Plato in Phaedon . Use 5.   Constat enim poenas Purgatorij esse atry cissimas , & eti ills nullas poenas huius vitae comparandas . Bellarm. de purge l. 2. c. 14.   2.  Tim. 4. 8.   Luk. 16. 25.   Math. 25. 23.   Luk 16. 22.  & 23. 43. 2.  Cor. 12. 2 , 4.  Apoc. 2. 10.  joh. 5. 24.  & 11. 25.  Apoc. 14. 13.  Esai . 35. 10.   In lib. 5. advers .  Guil. Ockam in oper . 93. dierum . & Adrian . in 4. didst . Valent. cap. ul● . Sed & Tertull. idem habet adv . Marc. l. 4. & in lib. de anim● prope finem .  Erasm . in prefat . ad Iren. Gillius Annal. Franc. tom . 2.  & Gag●in . l. 8.   In Extra . Bened. Deus . Vise Al●●ns . de Castr● cont . haeres . l. 3.  Beatitude . 7.  & Io. . Gerson in serm de Pasch .  Luk. 23. 43.   2.  Cor. 12. 2 , 4.   Act. 5. 21.   2.  Cor. 5. 6 , 8.   1.  Thess . 4. 13.   Premissi , non amissi : praecesserunt , non decesserunt . Aug. epist . 6.  & 120. & the diverse . 43. abijt , non obijt . Ambr. de Theodos . Quem putas perisse , pramissus est . Quid autem dementius , quam cum idem tibi iter emetiendun sit , flere cum qui antecessie ? Sen ep . 99 dimisimꝰ illos , imò consecuturi praemisimus . Idem ad Marc. c. 19  Cogitemus cito n●s ebb perventuros , quo illum per venisse moeremus . quem patamus perisse , praemissus est . Idem . ep . ● 3.  Non est lugendus qui antecedit , sed desiderandus . id quique desiderium patientia temperandum . cur enim imm●deratè feras abyss , quem mox subsequeris ? Tertul●● the patient . Non sunt lugendi fratres nostri accersione dominiea deseculo liberati , cum sciamus eos non amitii sed praemitti , recedentes praecedere : ut proficis●entes & navigantes desiderari 〈◊〉 deberi non plangi . Cyprian . de mortal . 