A DISCOURSE OF LIFE AND DEATH : WRITTEN IN French , by PHIL. MORNAY . 

Done in English by the Countess of Pembroke . 

AT LONDON , Printed by H. L. for Matthew Lownes , and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard , 1608.  

A DISCOVERSE OF LIFE AND DEATH , Written in french by PHIL. MORNAY , Sieur du Plessis Marly . 

IT seems to me strange , and a thing much to be marvelled , that the laborer to repose himself hasteneth as it were the course of the Sun : that the Mariner rows with all force t' attain the port & with a joyful cry salutes the descried land : that the traveller is never quiet nor content till he beaten the end of his voyage : and that we in the mean while tied in this world to a perpetual task , tossed with continual tempest , tired with a rough and combersom way , cannot yet see the end of our labour but with grief , nor behold our port but with tears , nor approach our home and quiet abode but with horror and trembling . This life is but a Penelope's web , wherein we are always doing & undoing : a sea open to all winds , which sometime within , sometime without never cease to torment us : a weary journey through extreme heats , & colds , over high mountains , steep rocks , & thievish deserts . And so we term it , in weaving at this web , in rowing at this oar , in passing this miserable way : yet lo when death comes to end our work , when she stretcheth out her arms to pull us into the port , when after so many dangerous passages , and loathsome lodgings she would conduct us to our true home and resting place : in stead of rejoicing at the end of our labour , of taking comfort at the sight of our land , of singing at the approach of our happy mansion , we would fain ( who would believe it ? ) retake our work in hand , we would again hoist sail to the wind , and willingly undertake our journey anew . no more , then , remember we our pains , our shipwrecks and dangers are forgotten : we fear no more the travels nor the thieves . chose , we apprehend death as an extreme pain , we doubt it as a rock , we fly it as a thief . We do as little children , who all the day complain , and when the medicine is brought them , are no longer sick : as they , who ( all the week long ) run up & down the streets with pain of the teeth , and seeing the Barber coming to pull them out , feel no more pain : as those tender and delicate bodies , who in a pricking pleurisy complain , cry out , and cannot stay for a Surgeon , and when they see him whetting his Launcet to cut the throat of the disease , pull in their arms & hide them in the bed , as if he were come to kill them . We fear more the cure then the disease , the Surgeon them the pain , the stroke them the imposthume . We have more sense of the medicines bitterness soon gone , then of a bitter languishing long continued : more feeling of death the end of our miseries , than the endless misery of our life . And whence proceedeth this folly and simplicity ? we neither know life , nor death . We fear that we ought to hope for , and wish for that we ought to fear . We call life a continual death : and death the issue of a living death , and the entrance of a never dying life . Now what good , I pray you , is there in life , that we should so much pursue it ? or what evil is there in death , that we should so much eschew it ? Nay what evil is there not in life ? and what good is there not in death ? Consider all the periods of this life . We enter it in tears , we pass it in sweat , we end it in sorrow . Great and little , rich and poor , not one in the whole world that can pled immunity from this condition . Man , in this point worse than all other creatures , is born unable to support himself ; neither receiving in his first years any pleasure , nor giving to others but annoy and displeasure , and before the age of discretion passing infinite dangers : only herein le●●● unhappy then in other ages , that he hath no sense nor apprehension of his unhappiness . Now , is there any so weak minded , that if it were granted him to live always a child , would make account of such a life ? So than it is evident , that not simply to live is a good ; but well and happily to live . But proceed . Grows he ? with him grow his travails . Scarcely is he come out of his nurse's hands , scarcely knows what it is to play , but he falleth into the subjection of some schoolmaster . I speak but of those which are best & most precisely brought up : studies he ? it is ever with repining . Plays he ? never but with fear . This whole age , while he is under the charge of another , is unto him but as a prison : he only thinks , and only aspires to that time when freed from the mastership of another , he may become master of himself ; pushing onward ( as much as in him lies ) his age with his shoulder , that soon he may enjoy his hoped liberty Inshort , he desire's nothing more them the end of this base age , and the beginning of his youth . And what else I pray you is the beginning of youth , but the death of infancy ? the beginning of manhood , but the death of youth ? the beginning of to morrow , but the death of to day ? In this sort than desire's he his death , & judgeth his life miserable : and so cannot be reputed in any happiness or contentment . Behold him now , according to his wish , at liberty : in that age , wherein Hercules had the choice , to take the way of virtue or of vice , reason or passion for his guide , and of these two must take one . His passion entertains him with'a thousand delights , prepares for him a thousand baits , presents him with a thousand worldly pleasures to surprise him : and few there are that are not beguiled . But at the reckonings end , what pleasures are they ? pleasures full of vice , which hold him still in a restless fever : pleasures subject to repentance , like sweet meats of hard digestion : pleasures bought with pain and peril , spent and passed in a moment , and followed with a long & loathsome remorse of conscience . And this is the very nature ( if they be well examined ) of all the pleasures of this world . There is in none so much sweetness , but there is more bitterness : none so pleasant to the mouth , but leaus an unsavoury after-taste and loathsome disdain : none ( which is worse ) so moderated but hath his corrosive , & caries his punishment in itself . I will not here speak of the displeasures confessed by all , as quarrels , debates , wounds , murders , banishments , sickness , peril , wherinto sometimes the incontinency , sometimes the insolency of this ill guided age conducts him . But if those that seem pleasures , be nothing else but displeasurs : if the sweetness thereof be as an infusion of wormwood ; it is plain enough what the displeasure is they feel , and how great the bitterness that they taste . Behold in sum the life of a young man , who rid of the government of his parents , abandons himself to all liberty or rather bondage of his passion : which , right like an unclean spirit possessing him , casts him now into the water , now into the fire : sometimes carries him clean over a rock , and sometime flings him headlong to the bottom . Now , if he take and follow reason for his guide , behold on the other part wonderful difficulties : he must resolve to fight in every part of the field , at every step to be in conflict , and at handstrokes ; as having his enemy in front , in flank , and on the rerewarde , never leaving to assail him . And what enemy ? all that can delight him , all that he sees near , or far off ; briefly the greatest enemy of the world , the world itself : But which is worse , a thousand treacherous and dangerous intelligences among his own forces , & his passion within himself desperate : which , in that age grown to the highest , awaits but time , hour , & occasion to surprise him & cast him into all viciousness . God only and none other can make him choose this way : God only can hold him in it to the end : God only can make him victorious in all his combats . And well we see how few they are that enter into it , and of those few how many that retire again . Follow the one way or follow the other , he must either subject himself to a tyrannical passion , or undertake a weary & continual combat , willingly cast himself to destruction , or fetter himself as it were in stocks , easily sink with the course of the water , or painfully swim against the stream . Lo here the young m , who in his youth hath drunk his full draught of the world's vain & deceivable pleasures , overtaken by them with such a dull heaviness , and astonishment , as drunkeards the morrow after a feast : either so out of taste , that he will no more ; or so glutted , that he can no more : not able without grief to speak , or think of them . Lo him that stoutly hath made resistance : he feels himself so weary , and with this continual conflict so bruised and broken , that either he is upon the point to yield himself , or content to die , and so acquit himself . And this is all the good , all the contentment of this flourishing age , by children so earnestly desired , and by old folks so heartily lamented . Now cometh that which is called perfect age ; in the which men have no other thoughts but to purchase themselves wisdom and rest . Perfect indeed ▪ but herein only perfect , that all imperfections of human nature , hidden before under the simplicity of childhood or the lightness of youth , appear at this age in their perfection , We speak of none in this place but such as are esteemed the wisest , & most happy in the conceit of the world . We played as you have seen in fear : our short pleasures were attended on with long repentance . Be hold , now present themselves to us avarice , and ambition ; promising , if we will adore them , perfect contentment of the goods and honours of this world . And surely there are none but the ture Children of the Lord , who by the fair illusions of the one or the other cast not themselves headlong from the top of the pinnacle . But in the end , what is all this contentment ? The covetous man makes a thousand voyages by sea and by land : runs a thousand fortunes : escapes a thousand shipwrecks , in perpetual fear and travel : and many times he either loseth his time , or gaineth nothing but sicknesses , gouts , & oppilations for the time to come In the purchase of this goodly repose , he bestoweth his true rest ; and , to gain wealth , loseth his life . Suppose he hath gained in good quantity : that he hath spoilt the whole East of pearls , and drawn dry all the mines of the West : will he therefore be settled in quiet ? can he say that he is content ? All charges and journeys past , by his passed pains he heapeth up but future disquietness both of mind and body ; from one travel falling into neither , never ending , but changing his miseries . He desired to have them , and now fears to lose them : he got them with burning ardour , & possesseth in trembling cold : he adventured among thieves to seek them ; & having found them , thieves & robbers on all sides , run mainly on him : he laboured to dig them out of the earth , and now is enforced to religge , and rehide them ▪ Finally , coming from all his voyages , he comes into a prison : and for an end of his bodily travels is taken with endless travels of the mind . And what , at length , hath this poor soul attained , after so many miseries ? This Devil of coverise , by his illusions , & enchantments , bears him in hand that he hath some rare and singular thing ▪ and so it fareth with him , as with those silly creatures whom , the Devil seduceth under colour of relieving their poverty , who find their hands full of leaves , supposing to find them full of crowns . He possesseth or rather is possessed by a thing , wherein is neither force nor virtue ; more unprofitable , and more base , than the least herb of the earth : Yet hath he heaped together this vile excrement , and so brurish is grown , as therewith to crown his head , which naturally he should tread under his feet . But howsoever it be , is he therewith content ? Nay ( conirariwise ) less now , then ever . We commend most , those drinks that breed an alteration , and soon extinguish thirst : and those meats , which in least quantity do longest resist hunger . Now hereof the more a man drinks , the more he is a thirst ; the more he eats , the more an hungered : It is a dropsy ( and as they term it ) the dog's hunger : sooner may he burst then be satisfied . And ( which is worse ) so strange in some is this thirst , that it maketh them dig the pits , and painfully draw the water , and after will not suffer them to drink . In the midst of a river they are dry with thirst : and on a heap of corn cry out of famine : they have goods and dare not use them : they have joys it seems , and do not enjoy them : they neither have for themselves nor for another : but of all they have , they have nothing : and yet have want of all they have not . Let us then return to that that the attaining of all these deceivable goods is nothing else but weariness of body ; & the possession for the most part , but weariness of the mind : which certainly is so much the greater , as is more sensible , more subtle , and more tender the soul than the body ▪ But the heap of all misery is , when they come to lose them ; when either shipwreck , or sacking or invasion , or fire , or such like calamities , to which these frail things are subject , doth take and carry them from them . then fall they to cry , to weep , & to torment themselves , as little children that have lost their plai-game ; which notwithstanding is nothing worth . One cannot persuade them , that mortal men have any other good in this world , but that which is mortal . They are in their own conceits not only spoilt , but altogether slayed . And , forasmuch as in these vain things they have fixed all their hopes ; having lost them , they fall into despair , out of the which commonly they cannot be withdrawn . And ( which is more ) all , that they have not gained according to the accounts they made , they esteem lost : all that , which turns them not to great and extraordinary profit , they accounted as damage : whereby we see some fall into such despair , as they cast away themselves . In short , the recompense that covetise yields those that have served it all their life , is oftentimes like that of the Devil : whereof the end is , that after a small time having gratified his Disciples , either gee gives them over to a hangman , or himself breaks their necks . I will not here discourse of the wickedness and mischiefs whereunto the covetous men subject themselves , to attain to these goods , whereby their conscience is filled with a perpetual remorse , which never leaves them in quiet : sufficeth that in this over-vehement exercise , which busieth and abuseth the greatest part of the world , the body is slain , the mind is weakened , the soul is lost without any pleasure or contentment . 

Come we to ambition , which ( by a greediness of honour ) fond holdeth occupied the greatest persons : Think we there to find more ? nay rather , less . As the one deceiveth us , giving us for all our travail , but a vile excrement of the earth : so the other repays us , but with smoke and wind ; the rewards of this being as vain , as those of that were gross . Both in the one and the other , we fall into a bottomless pit : but into this the fall by so much the more dangerous , as at the first show , the water is more pleasant and clear . Of those that give themselves to court ambition , some are great about Princes , others commanders of Armies : both sorts , according to their degree you see saluted , reverenced , and adored of those that are under them . You see them apparelled in purple , in scarlet , and in cloth of gold : it seems , at first sight , there is no contentment in the world but theirs . But men know not , how heavy an ounce of that vain honour weighs , what those reverences cost them , and how dear they pay for an ell of those rich stufs : who knew them well , would never buy them at the price . The one hath attained to this degree , after a long and painful service , hazarding his life upon every occasion , with loss oft times of a leg or an arm , and that at the pleasure of a Prince , that more regards a hundred perches of ground on his neighbour's frontiers , than the lives of a hundred thousand such as he : unfortunate , to serve who loves him not : and foolish , to think himself in honour with him , that makes so little reckoning to lose him for a thing of no worth . Others grow up by flattering a Prince , and long submitting their tongues & hands to say and do without difference whatsoever they will have them : whereunto a good mind can never command itself . They shall have endured a thousand injuries , received a thousand disgraces ; and as near as they seem about the Prince , they are nevertheless always as the Lion's keeper , who by long patience , a thousand feedinge , and a thousand clawing , hath made a fierce Lion familiar ; yet gives him never meat , but with pulling back his hand , always in fear lest he should catch him : and if once in a year he bites him , he sets it so close , that he is paid for a long time after . Such is the end of all Prince's favourites . When a Prince after song breathing hath raised a man to great height , he makes it his pastime , at what time he seems to be at the top of his travel , to cast him down at an instant : when he hath filled him with all wealth , he wrings him after as a sponge ; loving none but himself , and thinking every one made , but to serve , and please him . These blind Courtiers make themselves believe , that they have friends , and many that honour them : 〈◊〉 considering that 〈◊〉 make 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 and honour every bodi●●● so others do by them . Their superiors disdain them , & never but with scorn do so much as salute them ▪ their inferiors salute them , because they have need of them ( I mean of their fortune , of their food , of their apparel , not of their person ) : and for their equals , between whom commonly friendship consists , they envy each other , accuse each other , cross each other ; continually grieved either at their own harm , or at others good . Now , what greater hell is there , what greater torment , than envy ? which in truth is naught else but a fever Hectic of the mind : so they are utterly frustrate of all friendship , ever judged by the wisest the chief & sovereign good among men . Will you see it more clearly ? Let but Fortune turn her back , every man turns from them : let her frown , every man looks aside on them : let them once be disrobed of their triumphal garment , no body will any more know them . Again , let there be apparelled in it the most unworthy , and infamous whatsoever : even he without difficulty , by virtue of his robe , shall inherit all the honours the other had done him . In the mean time they are puffed up , and grow proud , as the Ass which carried the image of Isis was for the honours done to the Goddess , & regard not that it is the fortune they carry which is honoured , not themselves , on whom as on Asses , many times she will be carried . But you will say : At least so long as that fortune endured , they were at ease , & had their contentment ; & who hath 3. or 4. or more years of happy time , hath not been all his life unhappy . True , if this be to be at ease , continually to fear to be cast down from that degree , whereunto they are raised : and daily to desire with great travel to climb yet higher . Those ( my friend ) whom thou takest so well at their ease , because thou seest them but without , are within far otherwise . They are fair built prisons , full within of deep ditches , and dungeons : full of darkness , serpents and torments . thou supposest them lodged at large , and they think their lodgings straight . thou thinkest them very high , & they think themselves very low . Now , as sick is he , and many times more sick , who thinks himself so , than who indeed is . Suppose them to be Kings : if they think themselves slaves , they are no better : for what are we but by opinion ? You see them well followed and attended : and even those whom they have chosen for their guard , they distrust . Alone or in company ever they are in fear . Alone they look behind them : in company they have an eye on every side of them . They drink in gold and silver ; but in those , not in earth or glass , is poison prepared and drunk . They have their beds soft & well made : when they lay them to sleep you shall not hear a mouse stir in the chamber : not so much as a fly shall come near their faces . Yet nevertheless , where the country man sleeps at the fall of a great river , at the noise of a market , having no other bed but the earth , nor covering but the heavens , these in the midst of this silence and delicacy , do nothing but turn from side to side , it seems still that they hear some body , their rest itself is without rest Lastly , will you know what the diversity is between the most hardly entreated prisoners and them both are enchained , both loaden with letters , but that the one hath them of iron , the other of gold ; and that the one is tied but by the body , the other by the mind . The prisoner draws his fetters after him , the courtier wears his upon him . The prisoners mind sometimes comforts the pain of his body , and sings in the midst of his miseries : the Courtier tormented in mind , wearieth incessantly his body , & can never give it rest . And as for the contentment you imagine they have , you are there in yet more deceived . You judge and esteem them great , because they are raised high : but as fond , as who should judge a dwarf great , for being set on a Tower , or on the top of a mountain . You measure ( so good a Geometrician you are ) the image with his base , which were convenient ( to know his true height ) to be measured by itself : whereas you regard not the height of the image , but the height of the place it stands upon . You deem them great ( if in this earth there can be greatness , which in respect of the whole heavens is but a point ) : But could you enter into their minds , you would judge , that neither they are great ; true greatness consisting in contempt of those vain greatnesses , whereunto they are slaves : nor seem unto themselves so , seeing daily they are aspiring higher , and never where they would be . Some one sets down a bond in his mind ; could I attain to such a degree , lo , I were content : I would then rest myself . Hath he attained it ? he gives himself not so much as a breathing : he would yet ascend higher . That which is beneath , he count's a toy : it is in his opinion but one step . He reputes himself low , because there is some one higher , in stead of reputing himself high , because there be a million lower : & so high he climbs at last , that either his breath fails him by the way , or he slides from the top to the bottom . Or is he get up by all his travail it is but as to find himself on the top of the Alps , not above the clouds , winds and storms : but rather at the devotion of lightnings and tempests , and whatsoever else horrible , and dangerous is engendered , and conceived in the air : which most commonly taketh pleasure to thunderbolt and dash into powder that proud height of theirs . It may be herein you will agree with me , by reason of the examples wherewith both histories , & men's memories are full . But say you , such at least whom nature hath sent into the world with crowns on their heads , and sceptres in their hands : such as from their birth she hath set in that height , as they need take no pain to ascend : seem without controversy exempt from all these injuries , and by consequence may call themselves happy . It may be indeed they feel less such incommodities , having been born , bred , and brought up among them : as one born near the donwfalls of Nilus becomes deaf to the found : in prison , laments not the want of liberty : among the Cimmerians in perpetual night , wishes not for dave : on the top of the Alps , thinks not strange of the mists , the tempests , the snows , and the storms . Yet free doubtless they are not , when the lightning often blasteth a flower of their crowns , or breaks their sceptre in their hands : when a drift of snow overwhelmes them : when a mist of heaviness , and grief , continually blindeth their wit and understanding . Crowned they are indeed ; but with a crown of thorns . They bear a sceptre : but it is of a reed more than any thing in the world pliable and obedient to all winds : it being so far off that such a crown can cure the maigrims of the mind , & such a sceptre keep off and fray away the griefs and cares which hover about them ; that it is chose the crown that brings them , and the sceptre which from all parts attracts them . OH crown , said the Persian Monarch , who knew how heavy thou sittest on the head , would not vouchsafe to take thee up , though he found thee in his way . This prince it seemed gave for tune to the whole world , distributed unto men haps and mishaps at his pleasure could in show make every man content : himself in the mean while freely confessing , that in the whole world , which he held in his hand there was nothing but grief , & unhappiness And what will all the rest tell us , if they list to utter what they found ? We will not ask them who have concluded a miserable life with a dishonourable death : who have beheld their kingdoms buried before them , & have in great misery long overlived their greatness . Not of Dionyse of Sicil , more content with a handful of twigs to whip little children of Corinth in a choole , then with the sceptre , wherewith he had beaten all Sicil : nor of Sylla , who having robbed the whole State of Rome , which had before robbed the whole world , never found means of rest in himself , but by robbing himself of his own estate , with incredible hazard both of his power & authority . But demand we the opinion of king Solomon , a man endued withsingular gifts of God , rich and wealth of all things . who sought for treasure from the Isles : He will teach us by a book of purpose , that having tried all the felicities of the earth , he found nothing but vanity , travel , & vexation of spirit . Ask we the Emperor Augustus , who peaceably possessed the whole world : He will bewail his life past , and among infinite toils wish for the rest of the meanest man of the earth : accountinge that day most happy , when he might unload himself of this insupportable greatness , to live quietly among he least . Of Tiberius his successor , he will confess unto us that he holds y● Empire as a wolf by the ears , and that ( if without danger of biting he might ) he would gladly let it go , complaining on Fortune for lifting him so high , & then taking away the ladder , that he could not come down again . Of Dioclesian , a Prince of so great wisdom and virtue in the opinion of the world : he will prefer his voluntary banishment at Salona , before all the Roman Empire . Finally , the Emperor Charles the fifth , esteemed by our Age most happy that hath lived these many ages : he will curse his conquests , his victories , his triumphs : and not be ashamed to confess that far more good in comparison he hath felt in one day of his Monkish solitariness , then in all his triumphant life . Now , shall we think those happy in this imaginate greatness , who themselves think themselves unhappy ? seeking their happiness in lessening themselves , & not finding in the world one place to rest this greatness , or one bed quietly to sleep in ? Happy is he only who in mind lives contented : and he most of all unhappy , whom nothing he can have can content . then miserable Pyrrhus king of Albany , who would win all the world , to win ( as he said ) rest and went so far to seek that which was so near him . But more miserable , Alexander , that being born King of a great Realm , and Conqueror almost of the earth , sought for more worlds to satisfy his foolish ambition , with in three days content with six foot of ground . To conclude , are they born on the highest Alps ? they seek to scale heaven . Have they subdued all the Kings of the earth ? they have quarrels to pled with God , and endeavour to tread under foot his kingdom . They have no end nor limit , till God laughing at their vain purposes , when they think themselves at the last step , thunderstriketh all this presumption , breaking in shivers their sceptres in their hands , and oftentimes entrapping them in their own crowns . At a word , whatsoever happiness can be in that ambition promises , is but suffering much i'll , to get ill . Men think by daily climbing higher to pluck themselves out of this ill : and the height whereunto they so pamfully aspire , is the height of misery itself . I speak not here of the wretchedness of them , who all their life have held out their cap to receive the alms of Court fortune , and can get nothing , often with incredible hart grief , seeing some by less pains taken have riches fall into their hands : of them , who justling one another to have it , loose it , and cast it into the hands of a third : Of those , who holding it in their hands to hold it faster , have lost it through their fingers . Such by all men are esteemed unhappy , & are indeed so , because they judge themselves so . It sufficeth that all these liberalities , which the Devil casteth us as out at a window , are but baits : all these pleasures but ambushes : and that he doth but make his sport of us , who strive one with another for such things , as most unhappy is he , that hath best hap to find them . Well now , you will say , the Covetous in all his goods , hath no good : the Ambitious , at the best he can be , is but ill . But may there not be some , who supplying the place of justice , or being near about a Prince , may without following such unbridled passions , pleasantly enjoy their goods , joining honour with rest and contentment of mind ? Surely , in former ages ( there yet remaining among men some sparks of sincerity ) in some sort it might be so : but being of that composition they now are , I see not how it may be in any sort . For , deal you in affairs of estate in these times , either you shall do well , or you shall do i'll . I fill , you have God for your enemy , & your own conscience for a perpetually tormenting executioner . If well , you have men for your enemies , and of men the greatest : whose envy & malice will spy you out , & whose cruelty & tyranny will evermore threaten you . Please the people , you please a beast : & pleasing such , aught to be displeasing to yourself . Please yourself , you displease god : please him , you incur a thousand dangers in the world , with purchase of a thousand displeasures . Whereof it grows , that if you could hear the talk of the wisest and least discontent of this kind of men , whether they speak advisedly , or their words pass them by force of truth , one would gladly change garment with his tenant : another preacheth how goodly an estate it is to have nothing : a third , complaining that his brains are broken with the noise of Court or Palace , hath no other thought , but as soon as he may to retire himself thence . So that you shall not see any but is displeased with his own calling , & envieth that of another : ready nevertheless to repent him , if a man should take him at his word . None but is weary of the businesses whereunto his age is subject , & wishes not to be elder , to free himself of them : albeit otherwise he keepeth off old age , as much as in him lieth . 

What must we then do in so great a contrariety & confusion of minds ? Must we , to find true humanity , fly the society of men , & hide us in forests among wild beasts ? to avoid these unruly passions , eschew the assembly of creatures supposed reasonable ? to pluck us out of the evils of the world , sequester ourselves from the world ? could we in so doing live at rest , it were something . 

But alas ! men cannot take herein what part they would : and even they which do , find not there all the rest they sought for . Some would gladly do : but shame of the world recals them . Fools , to be ashamed of what in their hearts they condemn : & more fools , to be advised by the greatest enemy they can or aught to have . Others are born in hand that they ought to serve the public ; not marking , that who counsel them , serve only themselves : and that the more part would not much seek the public , but that they found their own particular . Some are told , that by their good example they may amend others : and consider not that a hundred sound men , even Physicians themselves , may sooner catch the plague in an infected Town , than one be healed : that it is but to to tempt God , to enter therein : that against so contagious an air there is no preseruative , but in getting far from it . Finally , that as little as the fresh waters , falling into the sea , can take from it his saltness : so little can one Lot or two , or three , reform a Court of Sodom . And as concerning the wisest , who ( no less careful for their souls , than bodies ) seek to bring them into a sound and wholesome air , far from the infection of wickedness : and who led by the hand of some Angel of God , retire themselves in season , as Lot into some little village of Segor , out of the corruption of the world , into some Country place from the infected towns , there quietly employing the time in some knowledge and serious contemplation : I willingly yield they are in a place of less danger , yet because they carry the danger in themselves , not absolutely exempt from danger . They fly the court ; & a court follows them on all sides : they endeavour to escape the world ; and the world pursues them to death . Hardly in this World can they find a place where the World finds them not : so greedily it seeks to murder them . And if by some special grace of God they seem for a while free from these dangers , they have some poverty that trouble's them , some domestical debate that torment's them , or some familiar spirit that tempts them : briefly , the world daily in some sort or other makes itself felt of them . But the worst is , when we are out of these external wars and troubles , we find great civil war within ourselves ; the flesh against the spirit , passion against reason , earth against heaven , the world within us fight for the world , evermore so lodged in the bottom of our own hearts , that on no side we can fly from it . I will say more : he makes profession to fly the world , who seeks thereby the praise of the world : he feigneth to run away , who according to the proverb ; by drawing back sets himself forward . he refuseth honours , that would thereby be prayed to take them : and hides him from men , to the end they should come to seek him . So the world often harbours in disguised attire among them that fly the world . This is an abuse . But follow we the company of men , the world hath his Court among them : seek we the Deserts , it hath there his dens & places of resort , and in the Desert itself tempteth Christ lesus . Retire we ourselves into ourselves , we find it there as unclean as any where . We cannot make the world die in us , but by dying ourselves . We are in the world , and the world in us , and to separate us from the world , we must separate us from ourselves . Now this separation is called Death . We are , we think , come out of the contagious City ▪ but we are not advised that we have sucked the bad air , that we carry the plague with us , that we so participate with it , that through rocks , through deserts , through mountains , it ever accompanieth us. Having avoided the contagion of others , yet we have it in ourselves . We have withdrawn us out of men , but not withdrawn man out of us. The tempestuous sea torment's us : we are grieved at the heart , & desirous to vomit : and to be discharged thereof , we remove out of one ship into another , from a greater to a less : we promise ourselves rest in vain : they being always the same winds that blow , the same waves that swell , the same humours that are stirred . To all , no other port , no other mean of tranquillity but only death . We were sick in a chamber near the street , or near the market : we caused ourselves to be carried into some backer closet , where the noise was not so great . But though there the noise was less : yet was the fever there never the less : and thereby lost nothing of his heat . Change bed , chamber , house , country , again and again : we shall every where find the same unrest , because every where we find ourselves : and seek not so much to be others , as to be other where's . We follow solitariness , to fly carefulness . We retire us ( so say we ) from the wicked : but carry with us our avarice , our ambition , our riotousness , all our corrupt affections : which breed in us 1000 remorses ▪ & 1000 times each day bring to our remembrance the garlic & onions of Egypt . Daily they pass the Ferry with us : so that both on this side , and beyond the water , we are in coninuall combat . Now could we cassere this company which eats and gnaws our mind , doubtless we should be at rest , not in solitariness only , but even in the thicket of men . For the life of man upon earth is but a continual warrefare . Are we delivered from external practices ? we are to take heed of internal espials . Are the greeks gone away ? we have a Sinon within , that will be trey them the place . We must ever be waking , having an eye to the watch , and weapons in our hands , if we will not every hour be surprised , and given up to the will of our enemies . And how at last can we escape ? Not by the woods , by the rivers , nor mountains : not by throwing ourselves into a press , nor by thrusting ourselves into a hole . One only mean there is , which is death : which in the end separating our spirit from our flesh , the pure and clean part of our soul from the unclean , which within us evermore bandeth itself for the world , appeaseth by this separation that , which conjoined in one & the same person could not , without utter choking of the spirit , but be in perpetual contention . 

And as touching the contentment that may be in the exercises of the wisest men in their solitariness , as reading divine or prosane books , with all other knowledges and learn : I hold well that it is indeed a far other thing , then are those mad hunt , which make savage a multitude of men possessed with these or the like diseases of the mind . Yet must they all abide the judgement pronounced by the wisest among the wise , Solomon , that all this nevertheless applied to man's natural disposition , is to him but vanity and vexation of mind . Some are ever learning to correct their speech , and never think of correcting their life . others dispure in their Logic of reason , and the Art of reason : and loose thereby many times their natural reason . One learns by Arithmetic to divide , to the smallest fractions , and hath not skill to part one shilling with his brother . Another by Geometry can measure fields , and towns , and Countries : but cannot measure himself . The Musician can accord his voices , and sounds , and times together : having nothing in his heart but discords , nor one passion in his soul in good tune . The Astrologer looks up on high , and falls in the next ditch : foreknows the future , and sorgoes the present : hath often his eye on the heavens ; his heart long before buried in the earth . The Philosopher discourseth of the nature of all other things : & knows not himself . The Historian can tell of the wars of Thebes and of Troy : but what is done in his own house can tell nothing . The Lawyer will make laws for all the world , and not one from himself . The Physician will cure others , and be blind in his own disease : find the least alteration in his pulse , and not mark the burning fevers of his mind . Lastly , the Divine will spend the greatest part of his time in disputing of faith , and cares not to hear of charity , will talk of God , & not regard to succour men . These knowledges bring on the mind an endless labour , but no contentment : for the more one knows , the more he would know . 

They pacify not the debates a man feels in himself , they cure not the diseases of his mind . They make him learned but they make not him good : cunning but not wise . I say more : The more a man knows , the more knows he that he knows not : the fuller the mind is , the emptier it finds itself : forasmuch as whatsoever a man can know of any science in this world , is but the least part of what he is ignorant : all his knowledge consisting in knowing his ignorance , all his perfection in noting his imperfections ; which who best knows and notes , is in truth among men the most wise and perfect . In short , we must conclude with Solomon , that the beginning and end of wisdom is the fear of God : that this wisdom nevertheless is taken of the world for mere folly , and persecuted by the world as a deadly enemy : and that as who feareth God , aught to fear no evil , for that all his evils are converted to his good : so neither ought he to hope for good in the world , having there the devil his professed enemy , whom the Scripture termeth Prince of the world . 

But with what exercise soever we pass the time , behold old age unwares to us comes upon us : which whether we thrust ourselves into the press of men , or hide us some where out of the way , never fails to find us out . Every man makes account in that age to rest himself of all his travails without further care , but to keep himself at ease & in health . And see contrawise in this age , there is nothing but an after taste of all the foregoing evils : and most commonly a plentiful harvest of all such vices , as in the whole course of their life hath held & possessed them . There you have the unhabilitie and weakness of infancy , and ( which is worse ) many times accompanied with authority : there you are paid for the excess & riotousness of youth , with gowtes , palsies , and such like diseases , which take from you limb after limb , with extreme pain and torment . There also you are recompensed for the travels of mind , the watchings & cares of manhood , with loss of sight , loss of hearing , and all the senses one after another , except only the sense of pain . Not one part in us but death takes engage to be assured of us , as of bad pay masters , which infinitely fear their days of payment . Nothing in us that will not by and by be dead : & nevertheless our vices yet live in us ; & not only live , but in despite of Nature daily grow young again . The covetous man hath one foot in his grave , and is yet burying his money : meaning belike to find it again another day . The ambitious in his Will ordaineth unprofitable pomps for his funerals , making his vice to live and triumph after his death . The riotous , no longer able to dance on his feet , danceth with his shoulders : all vi●eses having left him , and he not yet able to leave them . The child wishes for youth and this man laments it . The young man lives in hope of the future : and this feels the evil present , laments the false pleasures past , and sees for the time to come nothing to hope for ; more foolish than the child , in bewailing the time he cannot recall , & not remembering the evil he had therein : and more wretched than the young man , in that after a wretched life not able but wretchedly to d●● he sees on all sides b●● matter of despair . As for him , who from his youth hath undertaken to combat against the flesh , and against the World : who hath taken so great pains to mortify himself and leave the World before his time : who besides those ordinary evilles finds himself vexed with this great and incurable disease of old age , and feels notwithstanding his flesh , how weak soever , stronger oftentimes than his spirit : what good I pray can he have but only herein ; that he sees his death at hand , that he sees his combat finished that he sees himself ready to depart by death out of this loathsome prison , wherein all his life time he hath been racked and tormented ? I will not here speak of the infinite evils wherewith men in all ages are annoyed , as loss of friends and parents , banishments , exiles , disgraces , and such others , common and ordinary in the world : one complaining of losing his children , another of having them ▪ one making sorrow for his wife's death , another for his life : one finding fault , that he is too high in court another that he is not high enough . The world is so full of evils , that to write of all , would require another world as great as itself . Sufficeth , that if the most happy in men's opinions do counterpoise his haps with his mishaps , he shall judge himself unhappy : and he judge him happy , who had he been set three days in his place , would give it over to him that came next : yea , sooner than he , who shall consider , in all the goods that ever he hath had , the evils he hath endured to get them , and having them to retain and keep them ( I speak of the pleasures that may be kept , and not of those that whither in a moment ) will judge of himself , and by himself , that the keeping itself of the greatest felicity in this world , is full of unhappiness and infelicity . Conclude then , that Childhood is but a foolish simplicity ; youth a vain heat ; manhood , a painful carefulness ; and old age , a noisome languishing : that our plays are but tears , our pleasures fevers of the mind , our goods , racks , and torments , our honours heavy vanities , our rest , unreste : that passing from age to age , is but passing from evil to evil , and from the less unto the greater : & that always it is but one wave driving on another , until we be arrived at the haven of death . Conclude I say , that life is but a wishing for the future , and a bewailing of the past : a loathing of what we have tasted , and a longing for that we have not tasted : a vain memory of the state past , and a doubtful expectation of the state to come : Finally , that in all our life there is nothing certain , nothing assured , but the certainty & uncertainty of death . Behold , now comes death unto us : Behold her , whose approache we so much ●eare . We are now to consider whether she be such as we are made believe : and whether we ought so greatly to fly her , as commonly we do . We are afraid of her : but like little children , of a vizor , or of the Images of Hecate . We have her in horror ; but because we conceive her not such as she is , but ugly , terrible , and hideous : such as it pleaseth the Painters to represent unto us on a wall . We fly before her : but it is , because ( foretaken with such vain imaginations ) we give not ourselves leisure to mark her . But stay we , stand we steadfast , look we her in the face ▪ we shall find her quite other than she is painted us , and altogether of other countenance then our miserable life . Death makes an end of this life . This life is a perpetual misery and tempest : Death then is the issue of our miseries and entrance of the port where we shall ride in safety from all winds . And should we fear that which withdraweth us from misery , or which draws us into our haven ? Yea but you will say , it is a pain to die . Admit it be : so is there in curing of a wound : Such is the World , that one evil cannot be cured but by another ; to heal a contusion , must be made an incision . You will say , there is difficulty in the passage : So is there no haven , no port , whereinto the entrance is not straight and combersom . no good thing is to be bought in this World with other them the coin of labour & pain . The entrance indeed is hard , if ourselves make it hard , coming thither with a tormented spirit , a troubled mind , a wavering and irresolute thought . But bring we quietness of mind , constancy , and full resolution , we shall not find any danger or difficulty at all . Yet what is the pain that death brings us ? Nay , what can she do with those pains we feel ? We accuse her of all the evils we abide in ending our life , and consider not how many more wounds or grievous sicknesses we have endured without death : or how many more vehement pains we have suffered in this life , in the which we called even her to our succour . All the pains our life yields us , at the last hour we impute to death : not marking , that life begun and continued in all sorts of pain , must also necessarily end in pain . Not marking ( I say ) that it is the remainder of our life , not death that tormenteth us : the end of our navigation that pains us , not the haven we are to enter : which is nothing else but a safeguard against all winds . We complain of death , where we should complain of life : as if one having been long sick , and beginning to be well , should accuse his health of his last pains , and not the relics of his disease . Tell me , what is it else to be dead , but to be no more living in the world ? Absolutely and simply not to be in the World , is it any pain ? Did we then feel any pain , when as yet we were not ? Have we ever more resemblance of Death , then when we sleep ? Or ever more rest , then at that time ? Now if this be no pain , why accuse we death of the pains our life gives us at our departure ? unless also we will fond accuse the time when as yet we were not , of the pains we felt at our birth . If the coming in be with tears , is it wonder that such be the going out ? If the beginning of our being , be the beginning of our pain , is it marvel that such be the ending ? But if our not being in times past hath been without pain , & all this being chose full of pain : whom should we by reason accuse of the last pains ? the not being to come , or the remnant of this present being ? We think we die not , but when we yield up our last gasp . But if we mark well , we die every day , every hour , every moment . We apprehend death as a thing unusual to us : and yet have nothing so common in us. Our living is but continual dying : look how much we live , we die how much we increase , our life decreases . We enter not a step into life , but we enter a step into death . Who hath lived a third part of his years , hath a third part of himself dead : Who half his years , is already half dead . Of our life , all the time past is dead , the present lives and dies at once , and the future likewise shall die . The past is no more , the future is not yet , the present is , and no more is . Briefly , this whole life is but a death : it is as a candle lighted in our bodies : in one the wind makes it melt away , in another blows it clean out , many times ere it be half burned : in others it endureth to the end . Howesoever it be , look how much it shines , so much it burneth : her shining is her burning : her light is a vanishing smoke : her last fire , her last wike , and her last drop of moisture . So is it in the life of man , life and death in man is all one . If we call the last breath death , so must we all the rest : all proceeding from one place , and all in one manner . One only difference there is between this life , and that we call death : that during the one , we have always whereof to die : and after the other , there remaineth only whereof to live . In sum , even he that thinketh death simply to be the end of man , ought not to fear it : in as much as who desireth to live long , desireth to die longer : and who feareth soon to die , feareth ( to speak properly ) lest he may not longer die . 

But unto us , brought up in a more holy school , death is a far other thing : neither need we , as the Pagans' , of consolations against death : but that death serve us as a consolation against all sorts of affliction : so that we must not only strengthen ourselves , as they , not to fear it , but accustom ourselves to hope for it . For unto us it is not a departing from pain and evil , but an access unto all good : not the end of life , but the end of death , and the beginning of life . Better , saith Solomon , is the day of death , than the day of birth : and why ? because it is not to us a last day , but the dawning of an everlasting day . no more shall we have , in that glorious light , either sorrow for the past , or expectation of the future : for all shall be there present unto us , & that present shall never more pass . no more shall we pour out ourselves in vain and painful pleasures : for we shall be filled with true , and substantial pleasures . no more shall we pain ourselves in heaping together these exhalations of the earth ; for the heavens shall be ours : and this mass of earth , which ever draws us towards the earth , shall be buried in the earth . no more shall we overwearie ourselves with mounting from degree to degree , and from honour to honour : for we shall highly be raised above all heights of the world ; and , from on high , laugh at the folly of all those we once admired , who fight together for a point , & as little children for less than an apple . no more ( to be brief ) shall we have combats in ourselves : for our flesh shall be dead , and our spirit in full life : our passion buried , and our reason in perfect liberty . Our soul , delivered out of this foul and filthy prison , ( where , by long continuing , it is grown into an habit of crookedness ) shall again draw her own breath , recognize her ancient dwelling , and again remember her former glory and dignity . This flesh ( my friend ) which thou feelest , this body which thou touchest , is not man Man is from heaven : heaven is his country and his air . That he is in his body , is but by way of exile and confinement . Man indeed is soul & spirit : Man is rather of celestial and divine quality , wherein is nothing gross nor material . This body , such as now it is , is but the bark and shell of the soul : which must necessarily be broken , if we will be hatched : if we will indeed live and see the light . We have , it seems , some life , & some sense in us : but are so crooked and contracted , that we cannot so much as stretch out our wings , much less take our flight towards heaven , until we be disburdened of this earthly burden . We look , but through false spectacles : we have eyes , but over grown with pearls : we think we see , but it is in a dream , wherein we see nothing but deceit . All that we have , and all that we know , is but abuse and vanity . Death only can restore us both life and light : and we think ( so blockish we are ) that she comes to rob us of them . 

We say we are Christians : that we believe , after this mortal , a life immortal : that death is but a separation of the body and soul : and that the soul returns to her happy abode , there to joy in God , who only is all good : that at the last day it shall again take the body , which shall no more be subject to corruption . With these goodly discourses we fill all our books : and in the mean while , when it comes to the point , the very name of death as the horriblest thing in the World makes us quake and tremble . If we believe as we speak , what is that we fear ? to be happy ? to be at our ease ? to be more content in a moment , them we might be in the longest mortal life that might be ? or must not we of force confess , that we believe it but in part ? that all we have is but words ? that all our discourses , as of these hardy trencher-knights , are but vaunting and vanity ? Some you shall see , that will say : I know well that I pass out of this life into a better ; I make no doubt of it : only I fear the midway step , that I am to step over . Weak hearted creatures ! they will kill themselves , to get their miserable living : suffer infinite pains , and infinite wounds at another man's pleasure : pass infinite deaths without dying , for things of naught , for things that perish , and perchance make them perish with them . But when they have but one pace to pass to be at rest , not for a day , but for ever ; not an indifferent rest , but such as man's mind cannot comprehend : they tremble , their hearts fail them , they are afraid : and yet the ground of their harm is nothing but fear . Let them never tell me , they apprehend the pain : it is but an abuse ; a purpose to conceal the little faith they have . 

no , no , they would rather languish of the gout , the sciatica , any disease whatsoever : then die one sweet death with the least pain possible : rather pyningly die limb after limb , out-livinge as it were , all their senses , motions , and actions , then speedily die , immediately to live for ever . Let them tell me no more that they would in this world learn to live : for every one is thereunto sufficiently instructed in himself , and not one but is cunning in the trade . 

Nay rather they should learn in this World to die ; and once to die well , die daily in themselves : so prepared , as if the end of every day's work , were the end of our life . Now chose there is nothing to their ears more offensive then to hear of death . Senseless people ! we abandon our life to the ordinary hazards of war , for seven franks pay : are foremost in an assault , for a little booty : go into places whence there is no hope of returning , with danger many times both of bodies and souls . But to free us from all hazards , to win things inestimable , to enter an eternal life , we faint in the passage of one pace , wherein is no difficulty , but in opinion : yea , we so faint , that were it not of force we must pass , and that God in despite of us will do us a good turn , hardly should we find in all the World one , how unhappy or wretched soever , that would ever pass . 

Another will say , had I lived till fifty or sixty years , I should have been contented , I should not have cared to live longer : but to die so young is no reason . I should have known the world before I had left it . Simple soul ! in this world there is neither young nor old . 

The longest age in comparison of all ▪ that is past , or all that is to come , is nothing : and when thou hast lived to the age thou now desirest , all the past will be nothing : thou wilt still gape for that is to come . The past will yield thee but sorrow , the future but expectation , the present no contentment . As ready thou wilt then be to redemaund longer respite , as before . thou fliest thy creditor from month to month , and time to time , as ready to pay the last day , as the first : thou seekest but to be acquitted . 

thou hast tasted all which the world esteemeth pleasures : not one of them is new unto thee . By drinking oftener , thou shalt be never a white the more satisfied : for the body thou carriest , like the bored pail of Danaus' daughters , will never be full . thou mayst sooner wear it out , then weary thyself with using or rather abusing it . 

thou cravest long life to cast it away , to spend it on worthless delights , to misspend it on vanities . thou art covetous in desiring , and prodigal in spending ▪ Say not thou findest fault with the Court , or the Palace : but that thou desirest longer to serve the Common wealth , to serve thy Country , to serve GOD. He that set thee on work knows until what day , and what hour , thou shouldst be at it : he well knows how to direct his work . Should he leave thee there longer , perchance thou wouldst mar all . But if he will pay thee liberally for thy labour , as much for half a day's work , as for a whole : as much for having wrought till noon , as for having born all the heat of the day : art thou not so much the more to thank and praise him ? but if thou examine thine own conscience , thou lamentest not the cause of the widow , and the orphan , which thou hast left depending in judgement : not the duty of a son , of a father , or of a friend , which thou pretendest thou wouldst perform : not the ambassage for the Common wealth , which thou wert even ready to undertake : not the service thou desirest to do unto God , who knows much better how to serve himself of thee , than thou of thyself . 

It is thy houses and gardens thou lamentest , thy imperfect plots and purposes , thy life ( as thou thinkest ) imperfect : which by no days , nor years , nor ages , might be perfected : and yet thyself mightest perfect in a moment , couldst thou but think in good earnest that where it end it skills not , so that it end well . 

Now to end well this life , is only to end it willingly : following with full consent the will and direction of God , and not suffering us to be drawn by the necessity of destiny . 

To end it willingly , we must hope , and not fear death . To hope for it , we must certainly look , after this life , for a better life . To look for that , we must fear God : whom whoso well feareth , feareth indeed nothing in this world , and hopes for all things in the other . To one well resolved in these points , death can be but sweet and agreeable : knowing , that through it he is to enter into a place of all joys , 

The grief that may be therein shall be allayed with sweetness : the sufferance of ill , swallowed in the confidence of good : the sting of Death itself shall be dead , which is nothing else but Fear . Nay , I will say more , not only all the evilles conceived in death shall be to him nothing : but he shall even scorn all the mishaps men redoubt in this life , and laugh at all these terrors . 

For I pray what can he fear , whose death is his hope ? Think we to banish him his country ? He knows he hath a Country otherwhere , whence we cannot banish him : and that all these countries are but Inns , out of which he must part at the will of his host . 

To put him in prison ? a more straight prison he cannot have , than his own body , more filthy , more dark , more full of racks and torments . 

To kill him and take him out of the world ? that 's it he hopes for : that is it with all his heart he aspires unto . By fire , by sword , by famine , by sickness ? within three years , within three days , within three hours , all is one to him : all is one at what gate , or at what time he pass out of this miserable life . For his businesses are ever ended , his affairs all dispatched ; and by what way he shall go out , by the same he shall enter into a most happy and everlasting life . 

Men can threaten him but death , and death is all he promises himself : the worst they can do , is , to make him die , and that is the best he hope's for . The threaten of tyrants are to him promises , the swords of his greatest enemies drawn in his favour : for as much as he knows that threatening him death , they threaten him life : and the most mortal wounds can make him but immortal : Who fears God , fears not death : and who fears it not , fears not the worst of this life . 

By this reckoning , you will tell me , death is a thing to be wished for : and to pass from so much evil , to so much good , a man should ( it seemeth ) cast away his life . Surely , I fear not , that for any good we expect , we will hasten one step the faster : though the spirit aspire , the body ( it draws with it ) withdraws it ever sufficiently towards the earth . Yet is it not that I conclude . We must seek to mortify our flesh in us , and to cast the World out of us : but to cast ourselves out of the world is in no sort permitted us. The Christian ought willingly to depart out of this life , but not cowardly to run away . The Christian is ordained by GOD to fight therein : and cannot leave his place without incurring reproach and infamy . But if it please the grand Captain to recall him , let him take the retreat in good part , and with good will obey it . For he is not born for himself , but for God : of whom he holds his life at farm , as his tenant at will , to yield him the profits . It is in the Landlord to take it from him , not in him to surrender it , when a conceit takes him . Diest thou young ? praise God , as the Mariner ▪ that hath had a good wind , soon to bring him to the Port. Diest thou Old ? praise him likewise : for if thou hast had less wind , it may be thou hast also had less waves . But think not at thy pleasure to go faster or softer : for the wind is not in thy power ; and in stead of taking the shortest way to the Haven , thou mayest happily suffer shipwreck . God calleth home from his work , one in the morning , another at noon , and another at night . One he exerciseth till the first sweat , another he sunne-burneth , another he roasteth & drieth thoroughly . But of all his he leaves all to rest , and gives them all their hire , every one in his time . Who leaves his work before God call him , loseth it : and who importunes him before the time , loseth his reward . We must rest us in his will , who in the midst of our troubles sets us at rest . 

To end , we ought neither to hate this life for the toils therein ; for it is sloth and cowardice : nor love it for the delights ; which is folly and vanity : but serve us of it , to serve God in it , who after it shall place us in true quietness , and replenish us with pleasures which shall never more perish . Neither ought we to fly death ; for it is childish to fear it : and in flying from it , we meet it . Much less to seek it , for that is temeritie : nor every one that would die , can die . As much despair in the one , as cowardice in the other : in neither any kind of magnanimity . It is enough that we constantly and continually wait for her coming , that she may neiver find us unprovided . For as there is nothing more certain than death , so is there nothing more uncertain than the hour of death , known only , oh God , the only Author of life & death , to whom we all aught endeavour both to live & die . 

Die to live : Live to Die . 

The 13. of May , 1590.  AT WILTON . 

