IMPRIMATUR . 

GUILFORD . SILL , R. P. D. HEN. Episc . Lond. à Sac. Dom.  Feb. 23. 1676  / 7.  

A SERMON PREACHED At Alderly in the County of Gloucester , January IU 1676 / 7 : AT THE FUNERAL OF Sir MATTHEW HALE k t. Late Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of the KING'S BENCH . 

By E. G. A. M. Minister of Alderly . 

LONDON , Printed by W. G. for William Shrowsbury at the Sign of the Bible in Duke-lane . 1677.  

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Sir MATTHEW HALE k t. At Alderly , Jan. 4. 1676  / 7.  

Isa . 57.1 . 

The Righteous perishes , and no man layeth it to heart ; and merciful men are taken away , none considering , that the Righteous is taken away from the evil to come . 



IN the ninth Verse of the former Chapter the Holy Prophet threateneth a fearful Judgement that was like to fall on the Jews , he calls for the wild Beasts of the Field and the Forest to come and devour , meaning the Gentiles , which should be Executioners of the Lord's Judgements ; and because the Lord is Righteous in all his Ways , and Holy in all his Works , he shows what Causes would provoke the Lord to inflict such a heavy Judgement upon his People , as to give them up to be devoured by the Beasts of the Field and the Forest , such savage Enemies . 

The First Cause is set down at large in the rest of the Verse to the end of the Chapter : Even the Blindness , Idleness , Covetousness , and Security of their Watchmen , who should have taught the Fear of the Lord ; the neglect of their Duty being a special Occasion of the People's Sin , is alleged as the First Cause of God's Judgements threatened . 

The Second Cause was in the Common People , set down in the first Verse of this Chapter : Even their careless neglect , in not regarding nor considering the Death of the Righteous , when many of them were taken away to warn them of some strange Judgement to come ; yet they laid it not to Heart nor considered , but continued and proceeded in their Sins , drinking , and filling themselves with Wine and strong Drink , and Merriment , promising themselves happy Days , as it is the manner of the Wicked to be most secure when Judgement is nearest unto them , as we have Example in Belshazzar , Dan. 5. he was among his Concubines and his Cups , when the Hand wrote his Doom over against the Candlestick , Mene mean tekel upharsin . 

The Righteous perishes . 

These are the Words of the Holy and Evangelical Prophet , lamenting the Spiritual Security of the Jews , chiding and reproving them for their great Stupidity and Spiritual Lethargy . 

Wherein we have , First , The persons that died , who are described by two excellent Properties : 1.  Righteous before God ; 2.  Merciful towards Men. Secondly , The Manner of their Death , set forth by two Terms ; perishes , are taken away . The Sin of careless People , by two Phrases ; not laying to heart , nor considering the death of the Righteous . Fourthly , the final Cause or special End for which they die and are taken away , and that is , to prevent future Evils . 

Concerning the persons , here are two great Problems to be resolved , hard Questions . 

Quest . I How can any Man be Righteous ? The Scripture saith , There is none Righteous , no not one . 

II How do the Righteous perish ? The Lord knoweth the way of the Righteous , the way of the Ungodly shall perish . 

Answ . I There is a Legal Righteousness , so Adam was righteous in the state of Innocency , being created after God's Image : This Righteousness is forfeited and lost , so by nature all are corrupt and unrighteous : There is none Righteous . 

II There is an Evangelical Righteousness , and this is twofold . 

1.  The Righteousness of Imputation , when the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to the Believer , and received of him by Faith : Christ is made of God to be unto us Righteousness , 1 Cor. 1.  Jehova tsidkenu , Jer. 23.6 . He was made Sin for us , that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him , 2 Cor. 5. ult . As Christ was made Sin for us , not by the infusion of Sin into his Person , but by imputation of our Sins unto him : So we are made righteous before God , not by any Righteousness inherent in us , but by the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto us . 

2.  Believers are righteous by Sanctification , when by the Spirit of Christ the Mind is enlightened , the Heart is mollified , the Will is rectified , the Affections sanctified , and the whole course of their Life is reform , the habits of Grace planted in them , they are partakers of the Divine Nature ; so that as before they liked , loved , and lived in Sin , now they abhor and avoid Sin and all the occasions of it : He that doth righteousness is righteous , 1 Joh. 3.7 . This doth not make us perfectly Righteous , but imperfectly ; not before God , but before Men. Jam. 2.24 . 

3.  They that are Righteous thus by Justification and Sanctification , are also merciful , passively and actively : Passively , that is , first in nature and order , such as Gad received into Mercy and Favour ; hence they are called Vessels of Mercy prepared unto Glory , Rom. 9.23 . they are truly Righteous before God , whom he hath received into Mercy in forgiving their Sins . Rom. 4.6 , 7.  Actively , for such as show mercy unto others ; these two are always found together in the same persons , as our Saviour , Matth. 5.7 . Blessed are the merciful , for they shall receive mercy . They have obtained pardoning Mercy , and shall obtain crowning mercy : He which receives mercy of the Lord will show mercy unto Men.  

Quest . II How doth the Righteous perish ? 

Answ . Not in Soul , for that is immortal , and cannot perish by any means , but doth live out of the Body as well , or more truly than in the Body : This Solomon taught , Ecclesiast . 12.7 . The spirit returns to God that gave it ; this Saint Paul desireth , To be dissolved , and to be with Christ : Phil. 1.23 . and Lazarus enjoyed at his Death , being carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom : Luke 16. and this John saw in a Vision , Revelat. 6.9 . performed to the Saints , he saw the Souls under the Altar . Neither doth he perish in Body , for the Body of a Righteous Man hath still a Being in the sight of God , and remains a Member of Christ's Mystical Body : This Union betwixt Christ and the Faithful is not of Souls only , but also of Bodies ; the Bodies of Saints do not finally and totally perish , their Dust in the Grave is precious in God's sight , they only sleep in Jesus , and by the power of Jesus shall be raised again glorious Bodies . Phil. 3. ult . 

Nothing perishes of a Righteous Man in Death finally and totally , but Sin. They perish in appearance , according to the Opinion of the World and the Judgement of Flesh and Blood. The proper meaning of this Expression is , They die , departed hence , and are no more seen , their place knoweth them no more ; or , as the other Word is added exegetically , they are taken away or gathered to God and his Christ , to Angels and Saints . 

Observation . The Righteous and Godly Man must die as well as others , but the Death of the Righteous is not hurtful but beneficial , no loss , but great gain and advantage . 

Of this Lesson we see two Branches . 

1.  That the Righteous Man who is Evangelically Righteous , as being justified by the Righteousness of Christ , and sanctified by his Spirit , must die , and go down into the Chambers of Death and Darkness , and the House of Rottenness , as well as others . 

2.  That the Death of the Righteous is not hurtful , but beneficial ; no loss , but gain . 

Of the First ; Death is the way of all the world Josh . 23.14 . The way of all the earth , saith David , 1 King. 2.2 . It is the end of all Men , as Solomon , Eccles . 7.2 . and the Righteous must walk and pass this way , and come to this end before they come to their everlasting Home , as well as others : The wise man dyeth as well as the fool , Eccles . 2.16 . yea in this respect the condition of the Children of Men and the condition of Beasts are alike , As the one dyeth , so dieth the other . Eccles . 3.19 . no marvel if the condition of all Men be alike , High and Low , Rich and Poor , Wise and Unwise , Learned and Ignorant , Righteous Unrighteous , Godly and Profane , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Mors impudens , it fears no colours , spares neither great nor good : Abel died , whose Person and Sacrifice God accepted , as well as Cain whose Person and Sacrifice God rejected . Abraham the Father of all the Faithful , and the Friend of God , Isaac , Jacob , Joseph , all the Patriarches , Prophets , Apostles , Evangelists , and Holy Men of God paid this Tribute , and all must pay : Heb. 9.27 . Statutum est , there is the necessity ; Omnibus , there is the Universality of dying ; there is a Statute Law for both , Enacted in the Court of Heaven , which no Mortal can Repeal . As sure as we are born to live , so sure are we born to die ; Nasci & denasci ordo rerum est . I need not travel far for many more Examples or Proofs of this , only turn your Eyes to that doleful Object and sad Spectacle of Mortality under that black Veil , then conclude of this necessity : For if Art , and Learned Skill and Industry of Physic could have continued him , if Strength of Body could have preserved him , if Wisdom and rare Gifts of Mind , if Temperance in Diet , if Chasteness of Life , if a concurrence of all excellent Virtues , if Piety and the Power of Godliness , the Life of Holiness , if the Wishes of Men , yea of a whole Nation , if the Prayers and Tears of the Godly , if any thing could have prevailed for him to give him any Privilege against Death's Arrest ; blackness and darkness had not at this time covered that Earthly Tabernacle wherein lately lodged so Heavenly a Mind . 

Quest. Why should this be so , hath not Christ died for the Righteous , why then should they die ? Death is the Wages of Sin , hath not Christ suffered for all their Sins , wherefore should they die ? 

Answ . Christ by his Death and Satisfaction hath freed them from the second Death , and all the degrees of it ; as , 

1.  Spiritual Death in Sin.  

2.  The Damnation of the Soul at her sepaparation from the Body . 

3.  From the Condemnation of the whole ●…lan at the Resurrection ; Go ye cursed into everlasting fire . 

This Death Christ by his Death hath abolished , and freed the Righteous from ; but not from the first Death , which is the separation of Soul and Body : He hath only changed the nature and use of the first Death , he hath taken away the sting and venom of it , all the evil and hurt of it : Of a Punishment for Sin , he hath made it a Passage into Heaven ; of a Curse , he hath turned it into a Blessing ; it did at first deprive Men of good , but now it putteth the Righteous into the possession of all good . The Righteous must die . 

Ratio 1.  To accomplish the Decree , and to prove the truth of God , who said , In the day thou eatest thereof , morte morieris , thou shalt surely die . Gen. 2.17 . As they who are adjudged and condemned to die are dead in Law , albeit they be kept in Prison , and not presently Executed ; so our first Parents , though they did not immediately die , were subject to Death by the desert of Sin , and so in them all their Posterity . By one man sin entered into the world and death by sin ; and so death passed upon all men , for that all have sinned . Rom. 5.12 . 

Now that the Decree of God might be accomplished , and his Truth kept inviolate and stand with his Mercy , Man , yea the Righteous Man must die the first Death . 

If Man should die no manner of Death , how could the Truth of God appear ? and if that Death due to Sin had been inflicted on Man , how should the Mercy of God have been manifested ? 

This Controversy God in his wonderful Wisdom hath reconciled thus , Piat mors bona , & habet utraque quod petit ; in changing the cursed nature of Death , and making that Temporal which was Eternal , doth his Mercy appear ; and in the dissolution of Man's Body into Dust for a time , doth his Truth appear . 

Ra. 2.  Because all are Dust ; Our Bodies are Earthly Tabernacles , Houses of clay , the foundation of them in the dust : Job 4.19 . All flesh is grass , and the glory of man as the flower of the field : Isa . 40.  Great as well as mean ones , their Glory fades , they whither as the Grass , and meet all in the Dust : Our life is a vapour . Ja. 4.14 . 

The Sea never rests ; but is always ebbing or flowing , so is it with the Life of Man , it never standeth at one stay , every Day cutteth off one part of our Life , no power can make my Life so long to day as it was yesterday , we are nearer our end in the Evening than in the Morning . Job 4.20 . We are destroyed from morning to evening . Even as Rivers run into the Sea , so our Life runs into Death . This is the Reason which the Lord useth , Gen. 3.19 . Dust thou art , and into dust shalt thou return . 

Ra. 3.  Because here is no continuing City for any ; We are Strangers and Pilgrims , and are placed in the World for a season , as Men upon a Stage to act our parts , and then must be gone , to give room for others . One generation passeth away , and another generation cometh . Eccles . 1.4 . 

Ra. 4.  The Righteous are taken away because the World is not worthy of them , Heb. 11 ▪ 38.  They are the means of Blessings to the World , 1.  By their presence : 2.  By their Prayers ; they stand in the gap , they stave off Judgements from the World ; the Angel could do nothing to filthy Sodom , until Lot was gone out of it into Zoar : Gen. 19.22 . 3.  By their Examples : and 4.  By their Counsel : But the wicked World will neither follow their Example , nor take their Counsel : Therefore the Lord doth take away the Righteous in Mercy to Them , but in Judgement to the World.  

Branch 2.  The Death of the Righteous is not hurtful but beneficial , no loss , but great gain and advantage . 

This will appear , 1.  By the Phrases which the Holy Ghost useth to describe the Death of the Righteous : It is a sleeping in Jesus , 1 Thessalon . 4.  A resting in hope , Psalm 16.  A putting off an earthly tabernacle , 2 Pet. 1.14 . A falling of a corn of Wheat into the ground , that it may spring up more glorious ; a sowing in God's Acre . Joh. 12.24 . 

It is a gathering of them to their Fathers : 

1.  Of their Bodies from a place of care and labour , o● trouble and pain , to a place of easerest , and security ; They shall enter into peace , rest in their beds . Verse . 2.  

2.  Of their Souls , from the Body to God , to Abraham's Bosom ; from an Earthly Tabernacle and House of Clay , to an House not made with Hands , Eternal in the Heavens : from Men to Angels ; from Sinners to Saints perfectly righteous ; from Enemies to their best Friends ; from the Vale of the shadow of Death to the Land of the Living ; from the Church Militant to the Church Triumphant ; from Earth to Heaven , whither they are gathered , as the Apostle teacheth at large , Heb. 12.22 , 23 , 24. to Mount Zion the City of the Living God , the Heavenly Jerusalem ; to an innumerable company of Angels , to God the Judge of all , and the Spirits of just Men made perfect , to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant . 

2.  This will yet evidently appear , if we consider two things . 

1.  The Evils from which the Righteous are freed by Death . 

2.  The Good which comes unto them in Death , the Blessed Estate they shall then enter into , and so continue to all Eternity . 

For the first , they shall be freed , 1.  From all Evils , corporal and temporal , Sicknesses Diseases , Aches , Pains , Griefs , Toil , Labour Crosses and Losses , Troubles and Persecutions which God's Children , as long as they live here are subject unto . The Disciple of Christ must take up his Cross ; Through much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven . Act ▪ 14.22 . 

We must look for Afflictions so long as Life lasteth , but Death makes an end of them all : Life and Trouble are Twins which were born together : Job 5.7 . Man is born unto trouble , as the sparks fly upward ; and must die together , as John heard it by a Voice from Heaven , Revelat . 14.  Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord for they rest from their labours : All labour in their Actions , and dolour in their Passions are ended ; then shall God wipe away all tears from their eyes . Revelat. 21.4 . 

Again , they are often taken away to prevent some extraordinary Evils to come , as in the Text : So Josiah , 2 King. 22. was put in his Grave in peace , that he might not see the evil that God did bring upon his Land : So Luther was taken away not long before that miserable Calamity which the Lord brought upon Germany , for their contempt of the Gospel . Augustine died before the taking of Hippo ; Paraeus before ●he taking of Heydelberg : happy is he who dieth before his Country , i e. before the ruin and desolation of his Country . Virgil.  

Faelix Nepotianus qui haec non videt , saith Jerom of his Friend Nepotianus : Jerom lived in a calamitous time , and he counted his Friend happy , that he died before he saw those Calamities . 

2.  The Righteous , by death are freed from Spiritual Evils ; as , 

1.  From the Assaults of the Devil ; our Life here is a continual Warfare , the Church is Militant , and we must fight as the Lord's Soldiers , and that not against Flesh and Blood , for then one Man's Sword would be as long as another's , and one Man's Skin as thick as another's ; but against Principalities , Powers , Rulers of the darkness of this World , Spiritual Wickednesses , Lambs against roaring Lions , Men against Devils , and not for a Natural or Temporal , but for a Spiritual and Eternal Life ; not for an Earthly , but for a Heavenly Crown and Kingdom : And in this War there is no time of Truce , if the Devil be overcome one time , he will suddenly , and none knows how soon , give a fresh Assault , but Death ends the Battle ; not as among Earthly Warriors , when the one dieth in the Fight the other getteth the upper hand ; but in this Fight the Devil hath not the Victory by the death of the Faithful , but the Faithful at the end get a full and final Conquest , and ascend into Heaven , there to triumph ; the Devil cannot assault them there , he may compass the Earth , but he cannot enter within the Lists of Heaven , he never came thither to assault any since he was cast out ; though he tempted Adam in the Earthly Paradise , and got him to be thrust out , yet can he not tempt any in the Heavenly Paradise . 

2.  It is no small evil to the Righteous to live and converse among the Wicked , to see the Land dishonour God ; as just Lot was vexed with the filthy conversation of the Wicked , Dwelling among them , in seeing and hearing , he vexed his righteous soul from day to day at their unlawful deeds : 2 Pet. 2.7 , 8.  He which is truly grieved for Sin in himself , will be also grieved for Sin in others ; so David , Psal . 119.136 . Rivers of waters run down mine eyes , because men keep not thy law : and Psal . 120.5 . Woe is m● that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech , and in the tents of Kedar ; barbarous and profane People ▪ that did neither know God , nor fear , nor love ▪ nor serve him . Now this World is full of scandalous Sinners , that if a Man would not keep any converse with such , he must go out ●f the World , as St. Paul saith , 1 Cor. 5.10 . But Death frees the Righteous from this evil , for it taketh them out of the World , that they shall not behold either the Sins which Men commit against God , or the evils which God doth bring upon them ; yea Death doth carry them into Heaven , to the Society of the Holy Angels and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect , which sin not at all , but do the Will of God in all perfection . 

3.  Another Evil from which the Righteous are freed in Death is the practice of Sin here , as Solomon saith , There is not a just man upon earth , that doth good and sinneth not : Eccles . 7.20 . In many things we sin all . Jam. 3.2 . As the Wicked sin in all things , so the Righteous , yea all the Righteous sin in many things , and nothing is so grievous to the true Christian as Sin , it is as the Thorn , 2 Cor. 12. or barbed head of an Arrow in the tender Flesh , a Splinter under the Nail , it woundeth in the piercing in , and woundeth in the taking out ; he will cry with St. Paul , OH wretched man that I am , etc. Rom. 7.  But Death destroyeth Sin , this is a Mystery of Grace , Sin brought in Death , and Death drives out Sin : After Death the Righteous shall be perfectly sanctified , and made like the Angels to do the Will of the Lord readily , willingly , cheerfully , delightfully , and constantly . At first Death was inflicted as a punishment for Sin , but now it is used as 〈◊〉 means to stop the course of Sin : Tunc dictum est homini , morieris si peccaveris , nunc dicitur , morer● ne pecces ; then it was said to Man , If thou sin thou shalt die ; now it is said to the Righteous Man , Die that thou mayst not sin . Sin is the Mother , and Death is the Daughter , and the Daughter shall become the destroyer of her own Mother : Unto the Christian Death is a perfect mortification of all his earthly members , and the destruction of the whole Body of Sin.  

2.  The Good which Death brings to the Righteous Man is manifold ; 1.  It brings him into the presence of God , the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost ; our Father , Redeemer , and Comforter , an immediate communion and fellowship with the Sacred Trinity . 2.  The Beatifical Vision of God , To see his face , rev. 22.4 . To see him as he is , 1 Joh. 3.2 . 3.  Union with God. 4.  Fruition of God , and that for the manner , immediately , all means ceasing ; for the measure , fully , enjoy God in all , and all in God ; for time , eternally , for ever with the Lord , and reign for ever and ever ; Revelat. 22.5 . for th● place , in the third Heaven , the Heaven of Heavens , the Paradise of God , where the Throne of God and of the Lamb is ; for the company joined with us , the innumerable company of glorious Angels and blessed Saints : from this Fruition will arise endless and unspeakable Joy , and Pleasure , and Glory ; That far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory . 2 Cor. 4.17 . 

Usus 1.  In that Death cannot be avoided , we should learn to prepare and wait for it , to have our Loins girded , as the Israelites , and our Staffs in our Hands , ready to take our Journey from Egypt to Canaan : as Fowls desirous to fly , stretch out their Wings , so should we , being desirous to be with the Lord , stretch out our Affections towards Heaven . As Abraham was in the Door of his Tent when the Angel appeared unto him , and Elijah in the mouth of the Cave when the Lord appeared unto him ; so we should be ready to come out of the Cave and Tabernacle of our Body when the Lord appeareth unto us by his Messenger , Death . 

Let our Lamps be trimmed , our Lights burning , and always watching , as our Lord commands , Matth. 24.42 . Watch therefore , for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come : And holy Job practised , Job 14.  All the days of my appointed time will I wait , till my change come . 

Look to your Faith that it be unfeigned , the Faith of God's Elect ; to Conscience , that it be pure , undefiled , void of offence towards God and Man ; to Conversation , that it be such as becometh the Gospel , that is , holy , and in Heaven : a good Life will sit us for a comfortable Death , and a comfortable Death will assure us of a joyful Resurrection . 

Usus 2.  Death to the Righteous is not hurtful , therefore not to be feared ; but is beneficial , therefore to be desired : Unto the gracious Christian , whose Conscience is purged from dead Works , Death shall neither be fearful nor bitter ; Acerbitas non mortis sed culpae , The bitterness is not in Death , but in Sin : as a Serpent wanting a Sting may hiss , but cannot hurt , a Man may take it in Hand and put it in his Bosom ; so the Righteous Man may welcome and embrace Death , and be sure it will never hurt him : it is not the death of the Man , but of Sin in the Man , it is not the destruction but the absolution of the Christian ; the dissolution of the Body is the absolution of the Soul. So than not Death itself , but the Opinion of Death is terrible ; for since it translates us from this present evil Wo●●d , and Va●e of Misery and the shadow of Death , into everlasting Life into the Land of the Living , How can it be called Death , said one of the Ancients , being nomine magis quam re formidabilis , formidable rather in name than indeed ? 

The separation of the Soul from God , that is Death ; but the separation of the Soul from the Body is only the shadow of Death : Therefore such as are dead , not in Soul , but in the Flesh , are not said to be properly dead , but to be covered with the shadow of Death . The Righteous Man who is Evangelically Righteous hath no cause to fear Death , but with St. Paul , desire to be dissolved , and to be with Christ : Let him only fear Death who is unwilling to go to Christ . It is true which Solomon saith , that The day of a man's death ( that is , a Righteous Man's death ) is better than the day of his birth : Eccles . 7.3 . The day of a Godly Man's Birth is the beginning of his Misery , but the day of his Death is the end of his Misery , and an entrance into endless Glory and Bliss . 

Usus 3.  Consolation as to the Death of our Righteous Friends . It cannot be denied , but that we ought in a special manner to consider and lay to Heart the Death of our Righteous Friends that are near and dear unto us , of whom we have good grounds to be persuaded that they sleep in Jesus , and die in the Lord ; for it may be they were taken from us because we were not worthy of them , and the Mercies we received from God in and by them , and were not thankful unto God for them ; or that we gloried , were proud of them , and trusted too much in them , made Flesh our Arm. We must consider whether God hath deprived us of them as a punishment of our Sins and Unthankfulness , as the Widow of Sarepta said unto the Prophet , OH man of God art thou come to call my sins to remembrance ? 1 King. 17.18 . In this respect we have cause to mourn , and lay to Heart the Death of our Righteous Friends . 

We of this Place have cause indeed to mourn , droop , hang down our Heads like Bulrushes , to weep , yea to weep if it were possible Rivers of Tears , till we can weep no more , with David , because our Honourable dearest Lord and best Friend to all of us is not : But that this may be guided with Wisdom , and that we be not swallowed up of Sorrow , let us rightly understand where he is not : He is not in a Prison , but in a Palace of freedom and enlargement ; he is not in the Sea tossed with Waves , exposed to Storms , but arrived safely in the Haven ; he is not in Bondage of Corruption , but in the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God ; he is not in the Way and upon his Journey , travelling and toiling , but in his Country , and at home in his own Mansion , in his Father's House ; he is not in the hope of Heaven , but in the actual possession of it : And look how far Heaven doth excel the Earth ; eternal Good things , momentary and perishing Vanities ; the true Joys of the Saints of God , the false Delights of the Sons of Men : So much is his Condition better than ours is , or his was , when with us . O then ! Pereat contristatio ubi est tanta consolatio ; Forget we our Sadness in the midst of such Joys , and let these Consolations allay the bitterness of our Grief , and dry up in part the Fountain of our Tears . 

Farther consider : 

1.  His Gain : Balance that ( whereof you you have heard before ) with our Loss ; and then our Loss ( though exceeding great ) will hold no weight . 

2.  Let that Argument which prevailed with the Ephesians in the like Case sway with us , The will of the Lord be done , Acts 21.13 . Let us not make such Idols of ourselves , or our Friends , as for their Death , so comfortable and advantageous to them , to be discontented with God's appointment . 

3.  If the Heathen could say , Non amittimus , sed praemittimus , why should not Christians much more be so persuaded , and say , We do not lose our Godly Friends , but send them before us ? 

Usus 4.  Yet take this Caution , Beware of the Sin of this People reproved in the Text , in not laying to Heart the Death of this our Honourable , Dear , Religious , and Right Christian Lord ; but make we some Use of this sad dispensation of Divine Providence . 

1.  Consider it as a plain Prognostication and Warning of some Evil to come , as in the Text , The Righteous is taken away from the evil to come : a Trumpet sounded , or a Beacon set on fire to alarm and awaken us out of the sleep of Sin , to fright and fire Sinners out of their carnal security . 

We may be assured he is freed from all Evils and Miseries present , and it may be he prevented some extraordinary Judgements which remain for it . Sin is rise and ripe , hath all the Symptoms of Ripeness : 1.  It is great , knows not how to be more sinful , strikes immediately at the Glorious Face of God. 2.  Common , from the highest to the lowest . 3.  It is impudent ; Sinners of this Generation cannot blush , they declare their Sin as Sodom , they hide it not . 4.  Incorrigible ; we have been stricken , but we have not grieved ; we have been consumed , but refused to receive Correction , we have made our Faces harder than a Rock , we have refused to return . Jer. 5.3 . 

We may therefore justly fear some strange future Evils , when the Harvest is ripe the sharp Sickle will be thrust in , and the Earth will be reaped ; and when the Grapes are fully ripe , the Vine of the Earth shall be gathered and cast into the great Winepress of the Wrath of God. rev. 14.14 . 

Now God grant , that as he hath prevented such Evils by his blessed Death , so we may prevent them by our unfeigned and seasonable Repentance , and by receiving that Exhortation , Zeph. 2.1 , 2 , 3.  The decree i● big and traveleth , and will undoubtedly brin● forth , therefore gather yourselves , OH Nation , see ▪ ye the Lord , it may be ye shall be hid in the day 〈◊〉 the Lord's anger . 

2.  Remember we his eminent Virtues and holy Graces for our imitation , he hath no need of our Prayers or our Praises , his Praise is not of Men but of God : Though his God had honoured him highly in the sight of all wise , learned , good , godly , and great Men , as unto his Servant David , Made him a great name among the great men that are in the earth : 2 Sam. 7. so that he will be eminently Famous to all Posterity , as one of his Honourable brethren , a Learned Judge of the Land faith : And let me add , His Remembrance will be as The Remembrance of Josiah , like the composition of the perfume made by the art of the Apothecary , sweet as honey in all mouths , and Melodious in all Ears , as music at a banquet of wine . Ecclus. 49.1 . 

This is for our Comfort and Instruction , but adds nothing to his Happiness , which is in the highest perfection , now in the clear sight and full fruition of the chiefest good . 

If he desire's any thing , it is our Imitation ; that I am inclined to believe , that the Saints in Glory desire the Salvation of their brethren on Earth ; and consequently , that they should be followers of them in the way of Salvation . rev. 6.10 . 

then remember we , 

1.  His Humility , Meekness , and Gentleness , and Selfdenial ; in this Grace , which indeed is the grace of every Grace , he was another Moses . 

2.  His Patience under all his Crosses and Trials , whereof he had no small portion , and his long continued Affliction in this Excellent Virtue , that he was another Mirror , after holy Job . 

3.  His Temperance and Sobriety , in the midst of a sottish and swinish Generation . 

4.  His Righteousness and Justice , he was another Aristides ; to hinder him from administering of Justice impartially , to high , low , Rich , Poor , without Fear or Favour , was to stop the Sun in the Firmament , and to divert its Course . 

5.  His Piety and holy Devotion , in public , in private , in secret , he kept close and constant communion with God.  

6.  His Charity and Mercifulness to the Poor , his bowels of Compassion were largely drawn out to them . 

7.  His indefatigable Industry in all the Duties of his Calling , general and particular ; it may be Engraven upon his Tomb , Hic mortuus requiescit semel , 
Qui vivus , requievit nunquam . 
Here , being dead , he rests once ; 
Who being alive , rested never . 




These rare Virtues and precious Graces were deeply planted and habituated in his Gracious Soul , even from his Youth , for his God looked early upon him , which was his own Expression to myself with great Humility , and thankful Resignation of himself , and all that he was , and had , to his good God , from whom he acknowledged he received all . These , I say , were acted , and shined in the whole course of his Life : Let us remember them carefully , and conscionably follow him in these Holy Steps ; so shall we come to the Place and Estate wherein he is , and meet again at the Right Hand of Jesus Christ at the Resurrection of the Just , to our mutual Joy , and rejoicing both his and ours , and hear and have that joyful and blessed Doom , Come ye blessed of my Father , inherit the kingdom . — Which God of his infinite Mercy and rich Grace grant , for Jesus Christ his dear Son's sake , to whom be Glory , and Majesty , Dominion and Power , and Blessing , now and for ever . Amen . 

FINIS . 

