A guide to the godly , or , the daily meditations of return Hebdon gentleman , who for his conscience , ( Through the tyranny of the Bishops ) suffered many years imprisonment in the Kings-bench , and their remained till death . 

Being very useful for instruction of all those that desire to walk in the paths of Jesus Christ . 

Left to Mrs. Traske , who not long since for the same judgement died in the gate house , and published by a friend of hers . 

psal. 145.2 . 

Every day will i bless thee , and will praise thy name for ever . 



ier. 6.16 . 

Enquiring for that good and old way , to walk in it that they May find rest to their souls . 



Printed in the year . 1646.  

To the reader . 

Loving reader , i suppose it is desired , that something should be spoken , concerning the author of this book , in what way , and with what earnestness , it pleased God he did attain : to the truth of these mysteries in divine knowledge concerning himself ; he was a gentleman's son of fashion , in the town of Holmeshurst , in the county of Sussex ; but he being stirred up , and desirous , rather to live a retired life , with little enjoyment of this world , that he Might enjoy more of God ; desired to leave both father and mother , and means , and being afterwards a prisoner , for the commandment of God's sake , by his desiring to rest on the seventh day , according to the commandment ( Which the world calleth Saturday ) who died about 23. years since ; but he remained about eight years in prison , in which time he gave himself to continual study , in fasting and prayer , and it hath pleased God , that he diseased , hath left as a pledge to his friends , some of his labours . Therefore some who having the knowledge of him , and of his manner of life , while living , desire •o print some of his works ; for the good of all whom it shall please God to give power to seek him in truth : enquiring for that good and old way , to walk in it that they May find rest to their souls , jerem. 6. verse 16. and if this shall be received , it May be encouragement to print more . 

Farewell . 

The 6. day of the week . 

1.  The Christians that leave all mortal things to follow Christ in communion of his sufferings , are in him the salt of the earth , as Luke 14.26.33 , 34 , 35. with mat. 5.12 , 13.  they have salt and savour in themselves , when they are enabled to endure the fiery trial , Mark 90 49.50 . with 1 pet. 4.12 , 13. and in this constancy , they shall both save themselves , and all that hear them , 1 tim 4.16 . Notwithstanding as salt they spend , and consume themselves in sufferings to death that others through them May be acceptable to the spirit of God ; but if any of those which profess to suffer as Christians be unsavoury , that is , have not strength to continue constantly to death , they are worse or less profitable , than that persons which they should season ; for after they leave their testimony & sufferings , they are the most contemptible and base before God and man . 

2.  They which shine forth in the gospel of Christ to immortality , as mat. 5.14.15 . with 2 tim. 1.10 . and go unto God through the resurrection of Jesus Christ . 1 pet. 3.21 . these are those lights of the world , that out of their common estate of mortality , do shine and give light to immortality in the power and authority of Christ ; but if any that profess themselves to be such lights , and yet are under the bushel , compass , and authority of the world's authority , they are hypocrites ; for as men will not light a light to put it under darkness : so neither will the father of lights , give the world such a light , as shall be put under the authority of darkness . col. 1.12.13 . 

3.  I have considered from the temptation of our Lord Jesus , that the devil hath but two spiritual temptations ( Beside his carnal authority in men ) namely , first , to mortality , or secondly , to transgression . 

1.  His first temptation is to seek mortality at his word ; for being in such a place : as where it seemeth , there was all stones and no bread , he would have moved our Lord to save his mortal life , by a miracle ; but our Lord giveth him to understand his mind , that he was careful only to persuade the immortal life , and so turns the temptation upon the tempters pate : as if Jesus should say , if i should turn these stones into bread : so as the country were all bread , yet the bread cannot sustain man ; but that he must die for the sin of Adam : therefore is not necessary to seek the brea• of mortality ; but the bread of immortality , &c.  An• thus the devil is resisted : when a man suffers n•• his belly to be his god ; that is , when he is n•• drawn in cases of necessity , to leave the love of th•• immortal life , and in his spirit , & whole desire dot• not seek the bread of a mortal life : this temptat••• on our Lord avoided , and the angels afterward ministered unto him , mat. 4.  

2.  The devil's second temptation is to transgress the word of God in this kind , he tempted 〈◊〉 Lord twice with two several temptations , and 〈◊〉 he had tempted him with 200. they had all tende•• to this end , namely , by all means to seek if 〈◊〉 could make him guilty of sin ; for seeing by the si•• temptation , that his mind was wholly to the spiritual and immortal life in the word , and that 〈◊〉 could not get him to look on the tree of good a•• evil , he knoweth that there is no other means 〈◊〉 cut man oft from the eternal life in God ; but 〈◊〉 cutting him off from the unity and obedience which is by doing the word that came out of 〈◊〉 mouth of God : which thing when he could not 〈◊〉 but still our Lord kept himself from transgressi•• any thing that came out of the mouth of God , a•• was written , he could not be ignorant of the kno•ledge of the will and law of God : as by transgr••sing , the conscience in transgressing had been d••led , the devil had no other means of temptati••and therefore departed from our Lord . mat. 4.  Luke 4.  

4.  I consider also whereupon the assurance of a man's standing constantly consisteth , namely , in the daily growth and increase of spiritual graces in the inner man , as 2 pet. 1.8.10 . with 2 cor. 4.15.15 . For all that set their minds with Christ in heaven on immortality , will daily treasure to themselves in heaven , which with more and more draw their hearts from mortal thoughts : so as they May lay assured hold in this estate , upon eternal life , as mat 6.19 , 20. with Luke 12.21.31.33.34 . with 1 tim. 6.19 . From whence also on the other side we must note , that all that after their profession of Christ in truth , do fall away , are such as begin to be sluggish and idle in their service of God , and from that fall to mind earthly things , which if they do , it is manifest , that their light or profession of immortality , is darkness and foolishness , in seeking to be rich unto themselves in mortality : their •ight is darkness , their profession of one thing , and minding another is hypocrisy , and wickedness before God , and the deceit of men , their riches is •heir poverty , as rev. 3.17 . their heart and mind is •s far separated from God in Christ , and from hol•ing him the head , a• the heavens are from the •arth . Therefore such as by their own negligence and default , do suffer Satan to inspire them with mortality , do more and more separate from the assurance of immortality , and from Christ , till they become worldly and mortally minded , and then they have only a bare good conceit of themselves in propriety ; but in any trial they will fall away to save their souls under the authority of darkness , and for the love thereof , deny to lose their souls in the profession of Christ , yea , they will blaspheme that way of Christianity , and so become the greatest enemies of the cross of Christ , when yet with their lips they will give him a Judas kiss , and say , hail Master , and profess his word with their mouth ; but their deeds and devises are with his enemies of the power of darkness to betray him and his , phil. 3.17 , 18 , 19 with Luke 22.47 , 48 , 53.  

Sixthly . The true Christians in all their sufferings sight not for mortal salvation ; but they despise such salvation for the saviour , heb. 11.25 . with 12.2 . 

6.  John 15.1 . &c. is showed the true state of Christianity by the vine . If a man cut the vinetree , the better the branches grow . Thus the father cutting the vine , Christ in the mortal life he sprang both in the power of his immortal life , and thereby the branches bring forth fruits to him that only hath immortality , 1 tim. 6.16 . The fruitful branches that are purged by his husbandry , and chastised in love , ( As heb. 12. ) do by their sufferings bring forth more fruit to immortality : and to the divine nature of God ; but if the husband man do for some cause neglect to cut or purge the mortal parts , it is known that the branches that so run out without chastisement , do in time come to be wild , that do bring forth bitter fruit as bastards , and thereby procure to be cut of from the true vine planted to give fruits unto immortality . 

7.  According to esa. 29.21 . Compared with the prosecution now of Christians , i understand how a man is made a sinner against God , by a word , &c. ensnared thus : the Emperor is exalted for good , certain laws are set down : that if a Christian say thus or thus , he shall suffer death ; their judgement sits , the Christian is •nquired of , and examined , that by his own word spoken , he May be taken and snared in their law , and so executed as a sinner . This is direct contempt of God and Christ . This is the estate of all spiritual inquisitions of old . 

8.  The doctrine of Christ's body and blo•d , ioh. 6.53 , &c. is a hard saying to a carnal mind , but to him that knoweth to break the hardness thereof , it is spirit and life ; 63.  For as the word is made flesh like us , as ioh. 1.14 . with phil. 2.7 . to suffer death with us and for us : so we are made the word in him , to suffer with him and for his testimony ; and thus we eat his flesh , when we apply his flesh to have communion in the suffering thereof in love : and we eat the word when we have it of him and keep it ; as joh. 8.47 , 51.  And thus he is the food of immortality which nourisheth the divine nature in man , to every one to whom he is communicable both in flesh , and spirit ; for the word is now both flesh , spirit and life ; ioh. 6.54 , with 63.  Therefore it cannot be , but that the flesh of man which hath the spirit of Christ must needs be quickened , and not see death as a curse , because the word is spiritual and cannot be made void ; for according to the word , he which eateth natural bread is quickened mortally for the time of a day &c. much more shall he live to immortality , and to God that applieth to himself the body and spirit of Jesus Christ : the manifestation of which life of Christ is effectual to every true member of his body , in that such are made of God to some end in the flesh ; namely , that by the life of the flesh in Christ Jesus , which is yet of no being before God , they May confound whatsoever hath a being of the world , and in the mind or spirit , Christ is made unto them from God wisdom , righteousness , sanctification and redemption ; 1 cor. 1.24 — 28 — 30.  Whereby it is plain , that every one that in true love of God holdeth community in the flesh and sufferings of Christ , hath from God the participation of the same spirit of Christ to every use . He is chaste as he is chaste , he is righteous as he is rigteous : 1 ioh. 3.3 — 7 , with 4.2 . What such do one earth it is confirmed in heaven &c. because the same spirit of Jesus Christ which is in heaven liveth in them , and so he speaketh an doth the things on earth by the ministry of such chosen and holy vessels . ioh. 20.22.23 . matt. 18.18.2 cor. 13.3.5 . act. 9.15.16 . 

9  If one should ask me , whether i can know a man in whom Jesus Christ is crucified ? I answer : yea very well by the word ; for if his spirit be in him than he walks so as Jesus Christ walked . 1 John 2.6 . he hath the same mind to suffer in the flesh phil. 2.5 . 1 pet. 4.1 . yea in his mind he is dead and crucified to the world . rom. 6.2 & 7.4 . gal. 6.14 . and his mind is in heaven : so his conversation is heavenly . col. 3.1.2 . phil. 3.20 . 

The 1. day of the week . 

1.  Being grieved and careful , least by speaking of mysteries to sinful and ignorant persons , the truth of our Lord God should be profaned , & the way of truth evil spoken of . Therefore i have desired wisdom , to give to every one according to their estate , and this is proposed unto me according to the word , namely , to keep those 3. degrees . 

1.  If any seek the living Lord , this the word saith , go sin no more , John 8.11 . for every transgression of a negative law , is a sin against God , and dishonour to our creator . lev. 4.2 . Therefore all that seek peace with God , must remove the evil of their thoughts , and works from before his majesty , and they must cease to do evil , esa. 1.16 . and thus they are to repent , confess , and forsake all former sins either against the word of God , or their neighbours , mat. 19.17 , 18 , 19  For turn over to 1.2 . Then if they have peace with God , and are made righteous from doing evil in the world ; they are to seek the ministry of reconciliation , that they May be reconciled unto God , in the body and communion of the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ , and in this they are to talk upon them the decree , act. 15. to keep in the love of the body of Christ , wherein they shall learn to know , what is the good and acceptable , and perfect will of God : that they May do it as they see the servants that are joined to his body , to do , and in this estate they are to walk in the light of those which are perfect members in the body of the sufferings for Christ Jesus . John 3.19 , 21. with heb. 13.7 , 8.  

3.  Now if any are able to hold the word of the new testament , in the enmity against the world , than they present their members as weapons of righteousness unto holiness . rom. 6.19 . wherein they are to do the will of God in their own persons and to walk worthy of the mysteries of holiness which they take unto themselves , in the law of separation . 2 cor. 6.16.17 . 

2.  In the law of the love of the creator . isa. 56. 6.  heb. 4.3 , 4.  

3.  In the coeincorporation by baptism into the body and death of Christ . rom. 6.3 . &c. col. 2. 6 — 11 , 13.  These degrees are of necessity to be of speed , that none May presume to come into the service of the only true god without an evident calling , and preparation for so holy a work . 

2.  I conceive the wedding garment , to be the true and perfect love of God in Christ . thus , there are 3 undevidable gifts , whereof if one fail all the other cease from Christ . viz. 1 faith . 2.  Hope and 3 love . 1 cor. 13.13 . 

1.  Faith is the substance of all the invisible promises which we hope for , whereby we believe that we shall enjoy them as certainly as if we did now enjoy them in sight , sense , and feeling , heb. 11. 1.2 . hope is the means whereby we are saved , and preserved ; notwithstanding all moral temptations , to wait in patience ; for what our faith apprehends but cannot see it , with mortal eye , rom. 8.24.25 . 35.1 pet. 1.5.1 cor. 2.9.10 . 

3.  Love extends itself beyond all ; for as the exercise and manifestation of it , is in the keeping of the commandments which concern both our Lord God , and our neighbours , Mark 12.29.30 . 31. so this love is stronger than all , yea then death , and it only is worthy of the wedding feast ; for hereby all pleasures , friends , wife , yea , and life is hated in respect of this calling , to the wedding supper and communion of Christ in immortality ; whereas all that love other things more than this communion do justly perish in their false and mortal love , and those which presume to come with a heart , and a heart , that is without this perfect love in the marriage of the son of the blessed , are all justly cast out for profaining the pure and immortal love with an unclean and mortal lust mat , 22 , 2 , &c. with Luke 16. &c. to 26.  eph. 5.23 , •o 32.2 . cor. 3.5.4 . 

1.  All that live in common or open sins do live without God in the world and these are unworthy of the love of the righteous ; for they will be a reproach unto such men : wherefore it is of necessity , that first all sinners do so know God , as not to sin against his presence , and word , and to have a good report for their conversation in the world before , they can be reconciled to God : so as to be joined in common love with the righteous in Christ . 

3.  I understand from John 3.8 . That there is a twofold wind or spirit . 

1.  The one is called the common wind , spirit , or air ; whereby all flesh do breath , and live the natural and mortal life , as wisd. 7.1 . with gen. 7.21.22 , 23.  The unclean or common spirit hath the authority of this air , and he worketh in all that have their conversation in the lusts of the flesh , &c.  eph. 2.2.3 . 

2.  The other is called the holy wind of spirit whereby such as are begotten from above by the spirit do breath and live the spiritual and immortal life , John 3.3.5.8 1 pet. 1.3.23.1 cor. 2.15.12.16 . 

This holy wind is the spirit of truth which the Lord Jesus giveth to all that he calleth and chooseth out of the world , which worketh in all children that walk after that holy wind , minding the things that are above in heaven , after the life of immortality , John 14.17.26 . rom. 8.1.14 . col. 3.1 , 2.  

4.  All the world is dark , and is laid in wickedness , and for this their sins are condemned and dead in the law before Christ Jesus came , when he came in the flesh , he was the light of the world , and all that by the discovery of that light , hated their evil works , did come unto the light , and love to walk in it , doing the truth , that their works May be manifested to be done in God ; but on the other side , there were and are another seed that have enmity against the light , and the children of light , and these will not come unto the light , but hate the light , because they love their own evil works of darkness : this light than is the confirmation of their former condemnation without any remedy , John 1.5.9 , with 3.11 , to 21. with 8.12 , 24.  

5.  The work of God for salvation is proposed by the house of God , 1 tim. 3 15.  

All that sin against the law of the house are enemies to God , ezeck. 43.7 to 11.12 . All that are reconciled in their minds , and will no more sin against God by transgressing the law of his house , do first desire and make peace with any of the servants of God that keep the house : after this admittance , they have freedom to converse with the household servants , and to learn the orders of the house , and May see the service and God , and behold their faith and godly conversation in love , but yet as strangers they are , not employed in any service of God to do as his servants , neither May they dare to presume or be admitted thereunto . 

If any do desire to draw near unto the majesty of the Lord of the house as servant , he must be admitted according to the law of the house in that kind , and from that time he must do all the will of God , as the other servants do . 

6.  The men of this worldly authority , when they have Christ , or any of his Christians under their hands in torments , do boast against them to save themselves , thinking that none can save our of their hands ; but this is the gate of God , whereby the righteous do go unto God in heavenly peace , mar. 50.30 , 31.  psal. 118.17.20 . 

The 2. day of the week . 

There is come into my mind , a sight of darkness and light , and how the children thereof are profitable or unprofitable to themselves , how they treasure to themselves hatred and wrath , or love and good pleasure from the only true God : thus the darkness is this world , and the au•hority of darkness is the tyrannising authority over the truth : the light is the law of the world to come , the authority thereof is Christ , in the authority of suffering for well doing . The children of darkness are they which live after the course of this present evil world , and the glory & authority thereof ; these go into darkness continually till they come thither , they spend every day without any other then mortal profit : so they pass away the year , and it goes into darkness without comfort , at length they have consumed the length of their age , and then they go into darkness without so much as worldly good : these are shut up in darkness , kept unto the judgement of the Lord , who shall render to them according to their unprofitable and evil works . 

The children of light are they which exercise themselves in the law and light that shineth to mortality , eschewing evil and doing good : as if they were always with the father of lights , and enlightened to treasure to themselves for the time to come . 

Those go into light continually , every day addeth unto their strength , and they profit in the true riches which preserve the man of God to an immortal life : the day and the year they spend in the light , going to immortality , and the time filleth up to their comfort , and consumeth their evil sorrow and sufferings for the light sake in this world ; when they have spent their time , all their labours go with them , they go out of this world , as a good servant to be refreshed , and rewarded for his good service , their immortal soul is gathered into paradise and joy ; way thing yet for the day of judgement and redemption of the body , when according to their good works , they shall be crowned with unutterable and immortal glory . 

Thus the children of light do so number their days , and spend their time : as that they May apply their hearts unto wisdom , and to receive the honour and glory thereof ; whereas the children of this world , as a bird that rejoiceth in the bait before the snare turn over and take it : so these rejoice in their temporary pleasures and mortal joys , until the judgement of the Lord overtake them in their rioting as a snare , out of which they shall not nor cannot escape . Luke 21.28.35 . 

2.  It is appointed from the beginning as the only way to immortality , from mortality , that righteousness here should suffer in inseculer conflicts , which conflicts whosoever refuse thereby to save their mortal life , do loose the immortal life , and that justly because they fear man more than the maker of man , mat. 10.28 . to 39  

3.  As treasure is distributed to the poor by the hands of men : so the treasure of the spirit of Christ is communicated to the poor , which live in the world by the distribution of the poor to whom it is committed . 

The 3. day of the week . 

I have seen how the children of this world study atheism , or to live without God , in that whereas the godly study to retoine God in all their knowledge by doing the work of the word in all obedience to it , as to God . rom 1.28 . jam. 1.22.25 . with John 1.1 . These of the world on the other side will not have God in all their thoughts ; but as ungodly do make void all ungodliness and conscience of God above , and mind only the fear of men , and the love of this present world : so as they keep their conscience sanctified towards men , to shine forth only from themselves to others , though in words they profess to know God and Christ : yet all their thoughts and practices do manifestly show , that they do deny to know God , as he is in spirit and truth , to live in all good conscience to him , as all do that hold the power of the word , is it is from the authority of the living God , and not from men , as it requireth obedience of all ; without respect of Pope , prelate , Emperor , King , Prince , noble , ignoble , Jew , gentile , bond or free , male or female ? 

2.  The trial of Christians by torments to death , is to discover the man of God , that is the hidden man of the heart , which in Christ is renewed again in knowledge , righteousness , and holiness , which as the power and spirit of Christ , the word doth show it solfe more lively in the sufferings of the mortal body ; for whereas the persecutors are deluded to think that there is no immortal soul in man ; but that their souls and bodies shall die together : these Christians by their faith in the estate of immortality , •o put a wonderful difference , in that there is in them a mind and spirit to overcome all the pains and torments of their body , and to triumph over all the power and authority of men and mortality : which doth evidently show , that in such men the divine nature of Christ in immortality is distinct from the human nature of mortality , as death is distinct from life ; which spirit and divinity of Christ , as it doth sustain them to suffer death , so it shall raise from death every that is sanctified by its abiding within it . 

3.  The sufferings of Christ do also put difference between those which worship and serve God in spirit and truth , and those which worship him in word or outward form ; for whereas all men in the world have God without them , and the power of God without them ; yea , and the heathen to show the mouth of man's heart , do make gods to look upon without them , and do within themselves retain the wisdom , power , and authority of their gods , and that without or against the true God , and his law or authority on the other side the Christians , only have the living God , his word , power , and authority within them ; and wheresoever , or in what estate soever they be , they carry their god within them , and their heart is to him as the ark to hold his law , and their body to contain his glorious essence so far as every one is capable of it , and this part or distribution of the spirit of God to every , doth witness and testify to the conscience , together , with the invisible and inconceaveable majesty of the spirit of God above , that they are of the seed and children of the living god in immortality , whereby also they May serve God in truth without any legal form or visible worship in place or company . The manifestation of this is first within every one to do according to the diverse effects the reo• : in so much as if it be so that many do meet together which have the gift of the same spirit , the more there are , the greater is the presence and power of God , that even the place doth shake as the glory of the one invisible majesty of God , inspiring and expiring the several effects of the essence of God's spirit 

4.  I have understanding of the power of God in the word , which saith : that if thou shalt confess with thy month the Lord Jesus , and shalt believe in thy heart , that God raised him from the dead , thou shalt be saved ; for with the heart it is believed unto righteousness , and with the mouth , it is confessed unto salvation . rom. 10.9.10 . And thus i propose it : there are all manner of torments proposed , and threatened to be inflicted upon whomsoever shall confess the Lord Jesus to be Christ the judge of all , if none dare to confess with his mouth what he believeth in his heart , for of the torments he goeth back from Christ ; but if any see the prize in immortality , namely , Jesus the Authoux and perfecter of that faith raised from the dead , and believeth in his heart , that if he suffer death with Christ , God will also raise him by Christ to life , this faith will encourage a Christian to enter the conflict in the love of Christ , and without fear to confess to his name : if after they enter combat with the seed of the serpent , are at length vanquished by intolerable pain , and are not able to endure the agony and conflict of martyrdom , they loose the glory of their confession ; for they are to hold the confession of their faith constantly unto death without wavering : but if they look to the end of the conflict , and set their eyes on the resurrection of Jesus , they by the power of his love , will hate their mortal life , and think it long before they can come to knock at the gates of death ; whereof he hath the keys to receive such into life rev. 1.18 . 

5.  These sufferings of Christ are of absolute necessity , to enter in life and immortality ; for by means of the serpent , we have put on the old and sinful man , which is mortal by reason of the lusts of deceit . And therefore in Jesus Christ we must put off this body of sin by death , that we May put on the new and spiritual man , which is immortal , by reason of this love in the truth . 

6.  The necessity of chastisements in Christ are showed by a schoolmaster : the child naturally hates his book , and would never learn it , except the Master did by his presence and chastisements keep him to learn . 

The child is the Christian , the book is to learn Christ , ephes. 4.20 . the rod are men in authority , the schoolmaster is the law , or the heavenly father , discovering our miserable and mortal estate by the law of his presence ; and as a child : so a Christian , if he should not learn obedience by what he suffers , would soon grow wild and vain , such as are worldly Christians , that in time are grown so proud , as to blot the book and tear it , to despise and burn the rod and to correct , control , contradict and defy the good Master . 

The 4. day of the week . 

I have observed the course of religion in the world , and i find that another word and authority doth alter the religion : as in Christian religion the word or law of the church is Christ manifest in the scriptures , and doctrine from the beginning , the authority thereof is from heaven manifested in power to hold the words against the authority of men . The sea or seat to govern according to this world and new covenant , is the Lord Jesus , his 12.  Apostles , and all that are built upon them , having the same word and spirit : their conversation is love , meekness and humility towards others : so as he which is most poor and humble in the flesh , is endued with most authority in the spirit of holiness : their faith is in immortality after this mortality , according to the communion in the resurrection of Jesus Christ the head of the whole church of true Christians . 

If now there stand up another man that taketh upon him the Christian religion , and the main of Jesus Christ , and the apostolic sea , if he bring in any other word , he bringeth in another Christ , he al•ereth the religion , if another authority of carnal force to impose his word upon the consciences of men , he opposeth Jesus in his spiritual authority which worketh in the heart invisibly : if he under the name of Christ enforce other Christians by oppression to do contrary to any word , or any jot or title of the scriptures delivered by the foundation of the Christian church , he is an Antichrist , he denyeth the father by presuming to possess the conscience of man which he made with his word , and he denyeth the son in denying the word and the power thereof . The conversation of such , is also contrary to the suffering Christians , being put up with mortal pride , to exalt themselves one over another , in the flesh and pride of life . Their faith is also contrary in that it is fixed on mortality ; wherein they rejoice and are confident of the durable estate in the pleasures of sin . And thus the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ immortality , is in all things perverted under the colour of his own name , and of his own word and ordinances to mortality , and wickedness greater than paganism . 

2.  It is observed that in process of time after the much blood of the Christians had brought forth the world to be Christian , from that time the church of Christ ceased to be visible of the world , and the world blinded itself under the name of the church of Christ which cannot so be for ecclesia , the church of Christ consisteth of the persons , that in all times are called out of the world to the unity of spirit , now the world cannot be called out of itself ; therefore the true and spiritual Christians are hidden to the world , under the feighned and carnal Christians , yet the church is as visible in itself now as it was , viz. when Christians suffer joyfully under worldly Christians , for the same cause of the word , commandment and faith of immortality as they did in the beginning . 

3.  Men deny the Catholic faith , when they labour to comprehend it under their carnal authority : for the Catholic faith , must needs be granted from the name of it , to be both universal and spiritual : if then it is such a faith , as is to extend to all the ends of the earth , such as withstand it , or hinder the spreading thereof by their wisdom and power , do deny that the faith should be universally obeyed and so Catholic . 

Again , s•eing faith is the only work of the spirit of truth , which spiritually worketh in all men alike . If anyby carnal authority do hinder the spiritual work of Christ , they fight against the spirit and faith of Christ to be preached to all nations , for the finishing of the body and church of Christ : and thus some that profess themselves to be of the Catholic faith of the church May deny it yea fight against both the faith , and the universality thereof . 

4.  If prayers and tears are the weapons , defence and authority of the true church of Christ , as all grant : then fire and sword must needs be the weapons and offensive authority , whereby the kingdom of Antichrist is discovered in all places . 

5.  It is a horrible thing to behold the creator without Christ the word ; for he teacheth with terror of death for transgression of the law : but he that seeing his estate to be thus before God , and goeth to Christ and learneth obedience in the word , and in the death of Jesus Christ , shall in him have boldness to stand before the throne of his gracein immortality . 

6.  A truth May be preached and yet made utterly void by worldly practice , as the popish Christians holds : that whatsoever the law saith , the gospel confirmeth ; and whatsoever the gospel saith , the same is agreeable to the law : that as Moses was the giver of the old law : Christ is the giver of new and a more perfect law : they divide the whole law into three parts . 1. the law of nature , the law of Moses , and the law of Christ , and that the gospel is revealed for no other cause , but to show to the world more perfect counsels and precepts than were in the old law , and a more perfect justification by doing them . pag. 27.2 . out of Fox ch•on . 

That inward concupiscence and vicious affections not breaking out in us with consent of will , are no mortal nor dammable sin , but only foams peccati ; and that this concupiscentia in us , is no depravation of the higher , but of the lower parts of man , &c. pag. 26. b. these things May have a good construction , simply from the word and spiritual authority , but as it is of them , the truth there of is not only made void , but used for a pretence of mischievous madness ; for it is certain that Christ came to confirm all things written in the law and the prophets , and by his priesthood to bring in that perfection , which was before wanting in the law . heb. 7.11.18 , 19  And it is true that in the Christians after baptism , the flesh lusteth against the spirit , as gal. 5. 17. and it is autophoron , indifferent , and as natural as to eat : which concupiscence remain for an occasion of watchfulness in the spirit to subdue it , and to check it , that it never be approved of in heart as to prevail so far , as to beg a desire in the heart , contrary to the law which saith , thou shalt not desire thy neighbour's wife , or his goods &c. but the spirit keepeth the flesh under in such sort as that it cannot prevail to do sin or consent to sin . joh. 3.9 . gal. 5.24 . 

7.  A true doctrine May be made void and confused in respect of time with aforegoing doctrine , as the Protestant Christians hold . That as all men coming by Adam are condemned originally before they grow up to commit any sin against the law : so all men be saved originally , being regenerate by faith in Christ , before they do any good work of charity or any other gooddeed . Fox p. 26. b.  this May have a favourable construction if time be put between the mortal generation and the immortal ; so as the natural man come to know his condemnation in mortality , and prepare his heart to receive the immortal seed , whereby to be regenerate from above , which from that time begetteth and enlighteneth the mind unto a lively hope , through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead . A . 1 pet. 1.3 . 23. with joh. 3.  

But whereas these two contrary generations are confounded in one name , in the baptism of Infan•s the doctrine of regeneration is quite extinct and abolished under a form of words ; fox . 24. b. thus , as ( Say they ) sin and death came originally by the disobedience of one to all men of his generation by nature : so righteousness and life come originally by the obedience of one , to all men regenerated of him by faith and baptism , rom. 5.  Here is a deceit of salvation from a child . For sin and righteousness have their contrary operation , as rom. 5.21 . with 6.13.20 . And so have death and life : now if sin and death come originally from the generation of man , and the child is made capable only of this first original estate in sin and death , then how can an infant that hath but one original estate in the condemnation to sin and death , have also another estate in the regeneration to immortality , before he hath so much understanding to know his natural estate , in sin , death , and mortality , or before he be able to sin , or to do any evil in act : this is confusion of two doctrines in one , whereby sin is put for righteousness , death for life , generation for regeneration , and condemnation for salvation , and by this means , men have only a natural estate in effect , and a spiritual estate in conceit of vanity ; whereas by Christ we discern the time of a man's life in his original sin & the fruits thereof , & the the time of a man's life , after baptism into the death of Christ , of his righteousness & . good fruits , which arise from the regeneration . 

8.  A doctrine May be well distinguished in word , and yet confounded in the work of the power of the spirit made void and deficient in any work ; thus distinction is made between the mortal part , and the immortal part in man : a regenerate man consisteth of two men , ( As a man May say ) of the old man , and of the new man , the nature of the old man is clean contrary to the nature of the new man : as being earthly and corrupt with Satan's seed ; the nature of the new man being heavenly and blessed with the celestial seed of God , in what he is an old man , he is a sinner , and an enemy to God , in what he is regenerate , he is righteous and holy , and a friend to God the seed of God preserving him from sin ; so that he cannot sin as the seed of the serpent : one man therefore which is regenerate , well May be called always just , and always sinful , just in respect of God's seed , and his regeneration ; sinful in respect of Satan's seed , and his first generation ; betwixt these two men therefore there is continual conflict and war most deadly ; thus saith Mr. Bradford in Fox p. 1655.  This doctrine it May be truly applied , but with it is mixed contrarities , which confound this , and make it of no force ; for there he bringeth in the comparison of Goliath , and such David the old man is perfect in his birth , an one as was Goliath : the new man is like a little child , such an one as was like little David ; for his birth is not perfect , until the day of his general resurrection . The old man therefore is more strong , lusty , and stirring then the new man , because the birth of the new man is but now begun , and the old man is perfectly born ; the flesh and old man by reason of his birth that is perfect , doth often for a time prevail against the new man ( Being but a child in comparison ) and that in such sort , as not only others ; but even the children of God themselves , think that they be nothing else but old , and that the spirit of God is lost and gone away , as the sun hidden by the clouds , yet after appeareth again , &c. such are the deceits of Antichristian doctrines , that none should discern the children of the devil , that Count sin , from the children of God that cannot Count sin , and therefore we have an express word to try and discern them by their spirits , 1 ioh. 3.  & 4.1 . &c. diverse reasons May be showed from this confusion , of a true doctrine to confirm the truth , and confute the falsehood by itself . 

As first , if there be deadly enmity between the old and the new , a contrary and disjoined nature in either , if once the old man get the victory again by any means over the new , it is to be feared , that he will make himself sure enough in the condemnation , as that he shall never recover himself to live by repentance , as heb. 6. 4. to 8.  

2.  If the flesh should prevail against the spirit , than Goliath doth overcome David , and the spiritual and new man in Christ is slain , and who can save it : and many absurdities will arise . 

3.  But seeing that which is born from above after the spirit of Christ , is of the spirit , and that which is after the flesh is flesh , distinctly as are flesh and spirit ; mortal and immortal distinct , the least part of that immortal spirit must needs be stronger than the strongest felsh of the body , for it is stronger than all the fleshly power of the world , 1 ioh. 4.2.4 . 

4.  Again , the new man after it hath a being in a man , is increased daily in the regeneration , but the old man dyeth daily in his generation , therefore that regenerate an which groweth daily getteth the victory to day , is better able to overcome to morrow . 2 cor. 4.16 . 

5.  Thus the comparison is made true , for David how little or young soever , he was well able by the power of his god to kill for ever the man of flesh that had none but mortal defence , and that before he came so near as to encounter with him , for he fought for the hope of Israel , . 

6.  Again , the comparison of the sun shadowed with black clouds , in not to this purpose , for we grant thus much , that they have not always the sunshine , but have sometimes heaviness and temptations in the flesh , which being overcome , the comforts return from above : but expect man can prove that the light of the sun is overcome in its course of the contrary darkness , otherwise then in the order of the day and night , it confirmeth that the son of righteousness never ceaseth to shine more or less , and all times sufficiently testify to the conscience that the sun giveth light through the clouds , to keep darkness from the understanding , till the day be ended by death . 

7.  And where it is said in conclusion that the birth is not perfected until the general day of his resurrection : this absolutely denieth the former , and the nature of regeneration , namely , that he is regenerate and a new man , for one cannot be a man till he be born . Therefore the new men must needs have a perfect birth , before it can be a new man , and so before the resurrection . For after baptism , this new man which is now create in body , is in his account risen from the dead , and living together with Christ , cel. 2.11.12 . rom. 6.3 . to 11.  

All which showeth the power and truth of the regeneration , that where divine nature doth live as doth a renewed mind , the flesh of that man must needs be kept , that Satan shall not touch that body to overcome the divine nature , so as to yield the members of that man to the service of sin unto death , 1 ioh. 5.18 . rom. 13.16.23 . 

By this doctrine we May distinguish in word and deed , and know every one by their fruits , for the word and spirit of Christ is the same in operation in all that are adopted . Men are ! not the children of God to day , and of the devil to morrow , as they Might be under the worldly justifications , but all they which are perfect in heart , whom the Lord loves , are obedient to death , and he loves to the end . 

9  It is manifest that the wedding garment is to love the marriage more than all goods in the world , or than ones own life . If any be found to presume to come to the wedding without this perfect love , & he be convinced to want it , he is condemned of his conscience as guilty , and God doth condemn him , and execute him by himself , as he did Ananias and Saphira for they not having this perfect love which was required , but a heart to love his money in part , was thus executed , for he was silent to death , mat. 22.1 . to 12.  Acts 5.1 , &c.  

10.  Among the Christians that are joined to the Lord Jesus Christ to show his death , there is in love a twofold communion , the one less and farther off , the other great and near to the Lord . The first is communion of goods , act. 4.32 . The next is communion of sufferings , as in one body and church of Christ , 1 pet. 4.8.13 — 16. with i ioh. 3.16 . 

Now in this brotherhood , if any have the good of this world , and do not communicate in love to him that hath need , it is impossible that he can have that love of God to lay down his life , blood , for his brother , that will not lay down daily as his common food to sustain him , 1 ioh. 3.16 , 17.  Therefore it is the judgement of the holy spirit , that whosoever is false in the common communion of goods , cannot hold the love in the holy communion of the body and blood of the Lord , and therefore the holy spirit doth give us to understand , that it is better for the man that doth lie and dissemble in the common communion , and more for the glory of God , that such an one should die by the hand of the invisible God in the first offence , then that he should live longer to blaspheme and deny the love of the Lord that made him , when he should come tobe tried for his love , how he doth hold the communion in the death of Christ , as acts 5.1 . to 13.  

11.  This common communion is natural , and is as food given to one part , as to the mouth , or distributeth the good and efficacy thereof to all and every of the members of the same body : yet it must be left free to the will of the possessor , and not in bondage under the sear of carnal compulsion ; for this is coutrary to the nature and holy spirit of love : but if a man see the necessities of the body , and sell any thing , the money remains free at his voluntary disposing in love , ( act. 5.4 ) or if a brother have much good in the world , he gives as the seeth good in love of the immortal good and life , James 2.8 — 12. 1 ioh. 3.17 . with 23.  This commandment to love one another , the Lord gave especially to his disciple , and every one is to try his own heart how this love remaineth in him , and the judgement of this law is left to his spirit , so as every Christian that suffereth want is to possess his soul in patience , of poverty , sickne• , or imprisonment , toward his brother , as towards his neighbour in this respect , and not so much as to desire any of his goods , but leave his heart to the motion of the god of all mercy and love . Notwithstanding on his part it shall be required , that detaineth that which is fit . As if by the example of others own purpose and promise to sell and to bring the price of the sale to the distribution of the whole body , and he lie against the holy spirit wherein he promised and detained a part , and yet say that there is all , this is a sin& a great breach of the love and truth of Christ , as act. 4.32.36 , 37. with 5.2 , 3.8 , 9 or if one have much good , and yet detain it from one member that wanteth , this his hardness doth discover to all the brethren that such a churl• hath a dead faith , and no love of God ; and to be such an one as is unprofitable to the body of Christ in any kind , and therefore such are known by the word of Christ , to deny Jesus and the communion of his body , and so being divided from the natural and true love of the body that suffereth ; they will be scone of the brethren to fall away of themselves , as leaves from a tree . 

The 5. day of the week . 

I consider the estate of the church of Christ in unity , universality , and free consent , that Jesus Christ is the head thereof , and is gone before , as a husband goeth before his wife by sufferings ; the place whither he goeth is the kingdom of heaven which cannot be entered into , but by the death of the flesh , 1 cor. 15.49 , 50. the door whereby we follow him is death and hell , whereof Christ hath the keys , rev. 1.18 . the power and authority of these keys is given to every one by mane through Jesus Christ , who in love to his father , having power to lay down his life , had in himself also power or authority to take it again , and this commandment he received of his father , John 10.17 , 18.  Therefore having in himself the keys of the kingdom of heaven : as being Christ the son of the living God , he gave them to Peter , to whom the father of Christ gave to know and acknowledge Jesus to be his son , as mat. 16.16 to 19  The authority of these keys is proper to every one that hath the testimony of Jesus ; by virtue whereof he openeth a door through death , to follow his mister Jesus into the kingdom of his father : this door every one that is constant to death , doth open in the eyes of all that see his constancy , according as Stephen the first martyr doth declare , even before his death , that others Might offer violence to enter into it , act 7.55 56.  And seeing these keys are so effectual towards God in the love of Jesus Christ . Therefore Peter by name , and so whoseever is sealed by the same holy spirit of promise , hath by virtue of these keys in Christ , authority also towards men before their sufferings , that whatsoever he or any one that is apt and able to hold the confession of Jesus to be Christ , by authority of the keys , hath also authority to bind or loose according to the word : so as whatsoever such do bind or loose , must needs be confirmed in heaven , where Christ that giveth the keys , is with his father , mat. 16.16.10 19  John 20.21 , 22 , 23.  

1.  Men now boast against the Jew , that the law is not of faith , and that faith is now come , and therefore ( Say they ) we are no more under the law , but under grace , as gal. 3.12.23.25 . with rom. 6.13 . This boasting against the Jew , is not carnal , but spiritual against God , who gave them the law , and this turneth to the shame of all such as so boast , and yet do worse things than they did : as appeareth by the word , faith , for the law , while it is holden under the authority of men , in the glory of a present and mortal state , is of sight which feareth men , and not of faith , which only feareth and apprehendeth the authority and power of the invisible God by the spirit of Christ : so as all that are holden under the fear and authority of men , are of faith no more than the Jews , yea it May be under the law more & worse than they , as being without the knowledge of the true God , and so of necessity , without any faith of God ; for whosoever hath faith , believeth that God is present with him , and seeth his thoughts and actions , and therefore will not dishonour his presence in which he liveth , by Counting sin against him , though no man seeth ; whereas the infidel that walketh by sight under the law , hath only respect to the fear , authority , and judgement of magistrates , and therefore when they can sin in secret , or without fear of bodily pain , or worldly shame , they do sin without and fear of God or conscience of the judgement to come ; whereby appeareth that all that live by the law of faith , do fear to offend without the fear of men , and that are of faith , they will in meekness and fear show to infidels what the life of faith is , both by word and example , that they also May know God . 

The 6. day of the week . 

1.  It is a misery to have ones body at liberty by the procurement of men , and ones mind and conscience in perpetual prison , by ones own act . 

2.  There is a twofold justification arising from the law : the one of works under the levitical priesthood , the other of faith under the priesthood of Christ Jesus . The former justification is only if sight , and by report of men , and it was effectual to justify the slosh before the King , and the authority of the kingdom , according to this justification , was Zachary and his wife , righteous before God in this life , Luke 1.5.6 . but this law made none perfect and pure in conscience before the spirit of God , heb. 9 8. to 14.  

Therefore of necessity , upon the defect of this first justification , ariseth a perfect justification which is of the kingdom of God , mat. 6.33 . This justification is of faith , in spirit and truth , according to the spiritual priesthood of Jesus Christ , which is effectual , to justify the heart and spirit of a man : so that in conscience of the work of the spirit ( Whereby the justifications of the law , is fulfilled in us , rom. 8.3.4 . ) we have boldness to come to the throne of the grace of God in the heavens , heb. 4.14 , 15 16. which freedom no unclean person , or secret sinner can have ; but only such as being condemned of men , have good consciences towards God : so as they can willingly suffer in the mortal blood , that so they May come to be present with the Lord , for the justification of their spirit , 1 tim 3.15.16 . 

3.  In the power of Christianity there is a twofold knowledge at the gate , the one of Christ , rev. 3.20 . the other of the Christian , mat. 7.8 . The gate standeth as an interstitium , or interposition between immortality and mortality , and it is called the gates of hell , and of death , which are the many tribulations , through which the Christians must enter into the kingdom of God , act. 14.22 . with rev. 7.14 . and they are the diverse torments , heb. 11.25 , 36.37 . and whatsoever authority the devil and his seed in mortal bodis have from the power of death to sever the mind and spirit of the Christian from Christ , heb. 2.14 . with mat. 16.18 . through this gate Jesus Christ the head is entered into the kingdom of heaven , and from death is living in immortality , Luke 24.26 . rev. 1.18 Christ therefore being in the state or immortal glory , knocketh on the farther side of the gate , calleth to his spouse that are in suffering estate of mortal shame to come away to him from mortality , to immortality . 

On this hither side of the gate , the spouse or church , which are every suffering Christian in the truth , do knock when they sigh in their ••ibulationss , being oppressed and grieved ; desiring that mortality May be swallowed up of life , and wishing hart•ly , that they Might be out of mortal bodies , & be present with the Lord , which is best of all , 2 cor. 42.4.6.8 . phil. 1.23 . And thus we May understand how earnestly Christ the husband knocks at one side , calling the Christian his wife , and we May consider how lovingly the wife also knocks at the other side , beseeching him to draw her , and endue her with power to put off the mortal clothing , whereby she is yet holden in this world from him , that so she May overcome all the power , principalities , and authorities which do keep them from the full enjoying of love , not that Christ can come to his spouse again into a mortal and cursed estate ; but that she having the earnest of his spirit , May follow him through the straightest gates to his glory , in an immortal and blessed estate : and as many as are thus gathered unto Christ from mortality , are the church of the first born , written in the heavens , and their spirits are perfected ; all which at the time of the judgement of Christ , shall receive that kingdom of God , which cannot be moved , heb. 12.22 . to 28.  

4.  It grieves me to hear such as think themselves to be spiritual and Christians , to boast in a carnal & mortal bondage , after the worldly elements of the heathen ; whereby they are enforced to eat swine's flesh , as a thing necessary to eternal salvation , and to justify themselves in defiance of God , his holy spirit and word ; whereas in Christ the lawful meats which were sanctified to an holy use for sacrifice , profited not to purge the conscience from sin , nor to justify before the holy God of Israel , heb. 9.8 . &c. these therefore are much deceived , and blinded in mortality , and reprobate to every good work , as tit. 1.15.16 . until they are by the light of the word , enlightened to immortality , and by the grace of God the saviour which hath appeared unto all men , are by chastisement taught what to deny , how to live , and for what to wait , tit. 2.7 . to 14.  

5.  From the fulfilling of this word , i will have mercy and not sacrifice , mat. 12.7 . hos. 6.7 . is showed what the Lord rejecteth , and what he now requireth in Christ . If any man bring to God an offering , or be envious against a brother , or neighbour , for God's sake , as he thinketh ; first he rejecteth the offering , for that it is the gain of oppression ; as if God should say , i gave thee life , and commanded thee not to defraud or oppress ; therefore i will not •obery for an offering , if the goods be lawfully gotten ; yet God rejecteth him , saying , i commanded thee to be merciful , and to love thy neighbour , and the stranger as thyself , which thou hast not done : this offering , and more than this , is by my will due to the poor , and so none of thine : therefore i will not have neglect of the poor , or transgression for an offering . If the offering be lawful , and free from sin , against the poor ; yet the Lord saith , i will not now have thee to offer thy goods in sacrifice , but that with them , thou extend mercy to all that are in want of thy mercy . If a man do thus serve God in his goods , yet offend in his person , in being hard hearted to his brethren , that confess and desire forgiveness of the trespass against him , if he yet bind and will not loose the sin , the Lord will say unto him , except you forgive men their offences , mar : 11.25.26 . neither will the heavenly father hear thee , to forgive thy sins , mat. 6.14.15 . All which showeth that it is in vain , or a procuring of judgement for any man to go to the Lord , by faith in Christ , and his heart not perfect in mercy and love to his brother , that he seeth with his eyes , 1 John 4.20 . 

The first day of the week . 

1.  The ear receiveth the word , as the mouth eateth meat : the bread which the mouth eateth is no bread , nor the life which bread sustaineth is no life , in respect of the bread of an immortal life : therefore the holy spirit calleth mortal man to eat of the true food for to live , which is done by hearing to obey the word ; for thus their soul shall live , &c. isai. 55.  〈◊〉 . Etc . 

And thus we eat the bread of God which is come down from heaven , and thus we are communicants in the body and blood of Christ for life , when we hear , and do the word of God , and be made obedient in the fellowship of his sufferings , John 6.27.33.35 . &c. this hearing is the same with believing , as John 6.47 . &c. and this is the immortal eating ; for not every one that heareth and understandeth the word , eateth or believeth to life ; but he only that so tasteth the word with his ear , as that he obey and delight in it from his heart to do the work thereof , in spirit and truth , and knowledge . 

2.  From the presence of God's being with us , we have faith as heb. 11.6 . with reu. 1.8 . For as we believe his presence to be such in his visitation , that in him we live , move , and have our beings so likewise in his inspiration ; whereby we are instructed to avoid all ways of error & heresy , and are guided into all truth : so also by his being with us in spiritual presence , we are kept by his power from all evil of this world , and are likewise rewarded with the blessing of his presence , because we wait on him , to seek him diligently , and to serve him with all our heart in love . 

This his presence requireth faith in his guidance , protection , and preservation , as in the mind , so in the body , that no evil shall come to us from him ; whether of the plague , or otherwise , as psal. 91.  Those which sin against his presence , and have not the love of God in them , do lie open to the hand of his destroying angel ; but whosoever have good consciences towards his presence with us , & love his name , if we should now fear the fears of worldly men , we dishonour the presence of the living God , we bewray our infidelity in his presence , which is all sufficient to keep us , that the evil one shall not hurt us , or if we are faithful in his presence , that hath all power in his hands : so as a sparrow cannot fall without him , nor a hair of our heads perish ; but h••• his all-seeing spirit , if we are thus perfect in hi• love , without fear or doubting of our safety when destructions , and distracting distresses a•• in the world , though notwithstanding in this life all things come alike to us : so as we are taken i• the plague , &c. yet we shall see that the hand 〈◊〉 our Master is present in it for our good , either to try our faith in his presence , and to make us mo•• perfect in love , or else out of his fellow-feeling of our reproach and misery , which we endure in this life , he is pleased to give us rest from our sufferings , and to bring us to himself , from the bondage of mortality ; for the blessings and promises of peace or long life , is of faith , and cannot be fully enjoyed by sight in this world ; while the woman ( Which is the church of Christ's presence or any member thereof , wherein his presence i• manifested ) is persecuted , and afflicted in this present evil world . 

3.  Having observed the natural evil of man's heart , infected by the evil and common spirit o• the Prince , of the authority of the air , by the operation whereof , they are naturally inclined either fullness of eating & drinking , & in the abundance , or in the want of houses , sheep , cattle , gold , silver , or other pleasures of life , to be lifted up in forgetfulness of God that made us , or to be cast down with worldly sorrow , and in these estates to leave the word , law , and presence of God to seek after our own hearts till destruction do utterly break the evil heart : i have seen the only means , whereby a man May possess his •wn heart , to rule it , and make it subject to his •pirit ; namely , by hearing , obeying and keeping his evil heart of the mortal soul subject to the ••bukess and chastisements which our creator •oth inflict : that enduring the pain in our flesh , •ur spirit May thereby know the fear of his presence in punishment , and thereby learn wis•om in the obedience of his son Jesus Christ , whom he hath proposed to us , and made a light •o immortality , the harder the strokes , or the •reater our afflictions are , the more earnestly we •ay cry , and the nearer we May draw unto his majesty . Prov. 15.30 . to 33.  heb. 12.  So as when •mong all estates of men in the world , whether •ewes or gentiles , we see troubles and amazements , fearing death , and seeking to save their ••fe , we shall find that only with the suffering Christians , is peace without fear of death ; be••use these according to the law , and example of •hrist , do possess their souls and mortal life in ••tience , under the death that man is able to kill ••em with . And therefore when the kingdom of God cometh to the terror of the worldlings , ••eses shall lift up their heads , because now their •edemption is come , Luke 21.19 . &c. to 36.  

4.  The Lord Jesus foreseeing how hardly men should be drawn to acknowledge him to be the Christ , and being acknowledged how easily men would be seduced by false prophets , and false Christ's to deny him : therefore , first he proveth himself to be the Christ that Moses did write of , who by miracles did confirm the truth of every jot and tittle of the law , and the prophets , as mat. 4.23.24 . with 5.17.18 , 19 &c. whereas false prophets under colour of miracles , did teach transgression of the law , as deut. 13.1 . &c. and 17 2. &c. with 18.13 . &c. and accordingly out Lord reacheth us to try the preachers , which after him should come in his name , as under the name of Jesus Christ , and prophets of God , thus ; if they call Lord , Lord , and in his name prophesy , and in his name cast out devils , and in his name do many miracles : yet if under pretence hereof , any of them do work lawlessness , that is , do transgress , and also teach men to transgress any the least of all the commandments in the law of God : these and all such are rejected and accursed of the Lord , and judge of the world , as false , and deceivers of men , mat. 5.19 . with 7.15.21 . 22.23 . whereby we see how fearful a thing it is , to forsake the law and the prophets , for in that estate we are without all means to know Jesus to be Christ in truth , without any knowledge to try deceivers ; but remain as men deceived , and deceiving others , and can by no means come to the true knowledge of Christ , till we believe the writings of Moses and the prophets , John 5.39 . 46.47 . which who so believe , and do the will of our father which is in heaven , and then call Jesus Lord , shall enter into the kingdom of heaven , mat. 7.21 . 

5.  A man May prophesy of a truth , and yet apply spiritual things to a carnal sense . As caraphas fearing the Romans should come and destroy them all : for Jesus the King of the Jews said , it is expedient rather that one die , them all ; whereas God intended the spiritual and eternal salvation by his death , John 11.47 . to 53.  Fear enforced the Jews to do what they did . 

6.  From the opposition of the authority of men , against the authority of God in Christ , we May see the bondage under men by the law , and the liberty of the law in Christ , in things indifferent : as it is lawful to the nations to remain in the presence , or to be circumcised upon occasion , in liberty from bondage oh the worldly authority , act. 16 3. with gal. 2 3 , 4 rom. 2.25.26 . It is lawful to marry , to not to marry , 1 cor. 7. 28.36.38 . with 9 5.  It is lawful to eat lawful meat , or it is lawful to abstain and to fast , or such like . But this liberty man be occasion of evil in respect of the different authorities : it a man fear the authority of men , and will be circumcised in bondage to their priesthood , he is fallen from the liberty of Christ , and hath denied the faith in his priesthood , act. 15.1 . &c. gal. 5. 1. &c.  

If on the other side , a man fear other worldly authority , and make circumcision in the liberty of the gospel to be sin ; such do deny the liberty wherein Christ hath made them free , to use it for their advantage in the gospel , act. 16.1.3 . 

So as in this thing of circumcision , if one be compelled to be circumcised , he is brought in bondage to men , and bound to observe the worldly elements , gal. 5.3 . If a man stand fast in the liberty , neither to be circumcised , nor to remain uncircumcised , in subjection to men , he holdeth the truth of the gospel , gal. 2.3.5 . with 5. 1 act. 16.3 . otherwise , if the word be not holden in freedom of spirit , it will be an occasion of evil under the bondage of men : and on the other side , it May be occasion of evil , under the authority of Christ , when it is not hold on as a thing indifferent ; namely , when men justify themselves , or think themselves the better for doing , or not doing it ; for circumcision is nothing , nor perpuce is nothing , but the keeping of the commandments of God , 1 cor. 7.18.19 . 

So if marriage be exhibited under the worldly authorities , it May bring the parties into bondage ; likewise , if lawful meats be forbidden by the doctrines of devils , we are to maintain our liberty in Christ , in assurance , that though we suffer death , yet he will raise us again according to his priesthood , 1 tim. 4.1 . &c. 10.  Always with this respect in the law of liberty , that there be no justification of condemnation on one side or other , in lawful meats ; but to judge indifferently , that he which cates is not the better by it , neither is he the worse which cates not . 1 cor. 8.8 . wherefore in all such indifferent things every man is to have respect to his own conscience before God , and to the present estate and nation , wherein he is either Jew or gentile , that he be without offence , but to use his liberty , not for any occasion to his own flesh , but to the profit of others , in such sort , that whether any eat or drink , or what other indifferent thing soever they do , they May do all to the glory of God . 1 cor. 10.23 , 32.33 , 31.  

The second day of the week . 

I have observed in Christ how the old man of the flesh doth naturally bring forth the new man , begotten in the spirit of truth , thus ; after that the heart hath conceived the immortal seed which is from above : so as for joy hereof , it estrange 〈◊〉 self from mortal vanities , by and by the Lords of this mortal flesh , will show their authority , and they will labour with all their force and wits to destroy this good conception , that they May again rule the heart : in this estate the mortal body of a man is as a woman in travel , which cries out , not to be eased of the pain , but to bring forth the fruit of her womb , and this in Christ is the travel of a Christian , he hath conceived the mind of Christ , and for this cause is persecuted , and suffers all things , until from out of the greatest torments of the heart , he is able to deliver or bring forth the spirit of that immortal seed unto Christ , whose it is , esa. 26.13 17. 18.  mat. 27.46 . with Luke 23.46 . heb 5 7.9.2 cor. 4.6 . amp ; c. with 5.2.4 5.  

2.  Further is noted in what respect the church of Christ , a woman , and the wife of Christ , because from the beginning she hath conceived in her heart the seed of God , which is the word Christ , and thus she hath traveled with shadow of Christ till her time was fulfilled , that she should bring forth the spirit and truth of Christ , which was when Jesus Christ , being made one flesh with the church , she by his divine nature gave up the word , law , and truth of God perfected into her husband's hands ; so as the carnal church is now delivered from that law and labour which was committed and required of her , for she hath now in Jesus Christ brought forth the spirit of holiness to God , by the death of the flesh , and in the resurrection of of the spiritual man , to the immortal life of God , her spiritual husband ; Jesus Christ then , which the church of God having suffered the pain of travel to death , & being risen from the dead , and exalted to glory as Lord and Christ , is made the head of his church in a more near and familiar manner , even as a man that going to take a wife , manifesteth the secrets of his hearty love unto her in way of espousals , who after his departure , returneth again to her in way of marriage , and giveth his own spirit , as iob. 14.16 . 17.18 — 26.  Acts 2.33 — 36.  This immortal seed therefore being freely communicated in the love of Christ , is gladly received of the church , and of none other , which traveleth in subjection to Christ her husband , to perfect that birth of the spiritual & immortal man , of whom she hath conceived immortal and spiritual seed , and thus is she become bone of his bone , and flesh of his flesh , in love ; which union in Christ , is confirmed to every soul of man , that in their several age or nation , are so beloved of God in Christ , that as an husband he should give of his immortal seed ; so as every one that conceiveth it in a good heart doth know both the union , and her husband : unto whom every such heart doth increase that seed of the new and immortal man daily , and in groweth by the obedience and death of the life-blood , unto a lively hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead . For such is the love of every good heart that she in her proper body will tenderly respect , to preserve that word of the living God , which she hath willingly conceived in her mind and heart , so as no cares shall choke , nor reproaches dismay , but that her body shall bring forth to her husband that word which abideth for ever , 1 pet. 1.3.4 — 22 , &c.  

3.  This word of God , in what body soever it come in the love and communion of sufferings in Christ Jesus , is the salvation of the same body to that immortal life in glory with Christ , for whereas the persecutors that would adulterate us from our husband , their dead shall not live , neither shall their ghosts be raised again , notwithstanding our bodies which have died to bring forth the spirit of truth , shall be raised to immortal truth of our head Christ , ( esa. 26. 13 — 18.19 . ) when being sanctified in the truth , with him we shall be perfected in one , with our father , and our Lord Christ Jesus , John 17.19 — 21. &c.  

4.  It is a wonderful wisdom to consider in Jesus Christ , how the Lord by his mercy doth call the world to judgement : for in that he hath sent his son into the world , with mercy toward all that show mercy , and in it he executeth the justice of his law on none by the law . It is most manifest , that all that out of their own heart do judge and condemn , showing no mercy to sinners , do by their own justice in the law , procure the Lord to enter into judgement with them , for their judgement without mercy . And thus we May see how the law was given by Moses , and sin was required by pesent justice : but grace and truth is by Jesus Christ , he requireth sinners to sin no more , and they shall not be judged for their sins past , and every one to show mercy , and they shall find mercy , math. 18.21 . to 35. if not , but that men will despise the grace of God towards them , by judging and condemning their fellow-servants , they are inexcusable before God , their own measure shall be measured to them , they have denied to show mercy , therefore mercy shall be denied to them , rom. 2.1 . to 5.  luk. 6.37.38 . 

5.  The cause of falling from the love of God is the evil of the heart , whereby men dissembled with men ; for when men retain the nature of swine , and yet will be washed , without doubt they will return to their filthiness . Or dogs by nature will turn to their kind , as 2 pet. 2.22 . Or evil trees cannot but bring forth evil fruit , whatsoever they show at first : whereas good , simple , and perfect of heart , that hath received the good seed , will bring forth fruit to perfection . When the tree is of a good nature , it cannot but bring forth good fruit , math. 7.16 , &c. the branch that is in Christ is fruitful to the father , and it is more fruitful , ioh. 15.1 . &c. the new man that is once born again from above is renewed daily , 2 cor. 5.17 . with 4.16 . 

Men that are imperfect , and wavering minded will look forward , and then backward , luk. 9.62 . iam. 1.8 . Whereas perfect men , forgetting the things behind , do stretch forward to the things before , they press hard to the mark , &c.  phil. 3.13.14.15 . All that are perfect in love & mercy towards the brethren , the grace of God , and his love , and mercy remaineth firm to them . 

6.  There is great difference between the repentance under the law of works , and the repentance under the law of faith . They after the levitical law were born holy according to the carnal commandment , and were instructed in the law of God , from the breasts , and whensoever they sinned , they repent , and were justified by the works of the law ; and because their conscience was never freed from the weakness of the flesh , they fell commonly into sin , and repent ; and this was the course of the obedient men , such as of David , till they came to know the free justification of God by faith : whereas the true repentance after the priesthood of Christ doth cleanse the conscience from the guilt of all sins past , and doth perfect them from that mind of the flesh , so as sin doth no looger reign in their mortal body ; but in this justification by faith in Christ , they present themselves to God , as living from the dead , and their members weapons of righteousness to God , hebr. 9.9 — 14. — rom. 6.2 . — 12.13 . 

The third day of the week . 

The mysteries of the kingdom are showed by the parable of a sour , luk. 8.10 . &c. with 5.  

The sour is the son of man , and the seed is the word of God , enlightening to immortality . The deceiver is the devil , both as he is a spirit , and as he hath the authority in men of this world , which as vessel , or a bed , do cover and darken the light of immortality in this world under mortality . The men that hear the word , are of four sorts . The first sort of hearers , are only hearers , and no doers ; these deceive themselves in the vain knowledge of the word : for the devil and the world take away the word from the heart , that they cannot believe the truth of it , in such sort , as to reform their lives , and to fulfil it in their obedience , that so they should be saved : but as an hard way hath seed , and showeth it , as to allure the fowls of the air . So a• hard••d heart and worldly mind , as matth. 13.15 . May have knowledge by the word , but they only boast of it in a common profession after the mortal life , whereby they May be made the better instruments for the devil to possess such hearts commonly to serve every lust as turn and to be subject , even as for a man to walk in a hard way at his pleasure : these are such as know , but believe not . 

2 the second sort are such , as receive the seed in stony ground . These do both know and believe the word so , as with joy to do it very hastily ; for as the stony ground doth make the seed to spring forth soonest , so these take the word quickly , with joy , as mat. 17.13.5.20 . matt. 4.5 . but have no strength of heart to hold the word constantly in the faith , hope , and love of immortality , but when the mortal authorities come upon them , and afflict them with the sun beams of their torments , and chastise them as a father , for that they would forsake them , and their mortal glory , to embrace a vain base word ( As it seemeth to them ) without any worldly society , honour , or pleasure . And thus worldly men being offended at the word , do rage against these sort of persons that with such joy received it ; whose hearts also being not prepared for these trials , do faint under the burden , and all their knowledge , faith , and obedience to the word is by force of the hard persecution , disdained to be any longer believed in their heart , and as stony ground it is able to bring the fruit of the word to no further perfection ; therefore they now submit their heart to the power that oppresseth from without them , by which all their former light is concluded in darkness . 

3.  The third sort are such as receive the seed amongst thorns : these also are such as know and believe for a time ; but they nourish an enemy to the word within them , namely , worldly cares , desire of riches , and the pleasures of this mortal life which May seem to sustain , and to give honour and credit to the word ; but in the end it will quite chocke the faith , hope , and love to immortality , as that such will fall away of themselves , wholly to embrace this present world : the reason is , because these were never perfect in love , nor sound in the faith ; but having a heart and a heart , the deceits of sin which are in the world through lust growing naturally in the heart will soon exalt such men in pride of knowledge to fall into the condemnation of the devil secretly : for thus much doth the parable import to them which know it , that the seed which falleth among thorns , doth by help of the thorns in some part of the seed , spring up to be taller and longer , yet at length the thorns take away the natural being of the corn , so as it perisheth as a man whose breath is stopped : if the thorns , riches , and pleasures of life be cut down and fall from him , he is seen to fall of himself as a tree , that being decayed at the root , is overswayed of the top , and the fall thereof is greater , by how much the weight of the branches is heavier : this is the estate of those which receive the word of Christ with the glory of the world , & pleasures of s••ss , the greater show it maketh the greater shame , it bringeth in the end , & the greater condemnation in the word , and none of these can bring forth fruit to perfection . 

4.  The last sort of men are like good ground , these receive the word as the children of wisdom , and the children of light : they know & believe the word , & with reverence , they prepare the heart that it be gentle , perfect , and simple , as worthy to receive it being careful , that what they know and believe , they May hold both in profession and practice , constantly and with increase : wherefore this good ground bringeth forth fruit in patience , Luke 8.15 . The reason is , because of the contrariety of the evil one , either in worldly authorities , or in the lusts of the flesh , which hate the word and gospel of immortality ; for he that receiveth the word of truth withal his heart and full resolution to suffer with Christ the saver thereof , this man can never fail : in persecution of the word , he hath prepared his heart to suffer , and so he continuath constant unto death , and he winneth , by holding the word , the crown of an immortal life . In all other temptations which are in himself , together with the world , he denyeth himself after the honour of this world , he hateth his own soul to satisfy it with the lusts thereof , he suffereth in the flesh , and so ceaseth from sin , 1 pet. 4.1 &c. patience maketh his heart soft to give rooting to the word , the harder the persecution of men , the softer the heart is to nourish the immortal seed , and to bring forth the fruit thereof in the perishing and death of the mortal flesh , choosing rather to lose his life , then lose the word of God , patience maketh his heart heard to resist the devil and all his deceits and temptations : he is open hearted , faithful and perfect in love to the Lord , by whose word he holdeth the assurance of immortality with him ; but he is close shut to obey the worldly vanities , he hateth to think of their wicked courses in mortality . This is the estate of those which are able to endure the try all , and to walls perfectly in the love of Christ : the more their oppression is from without , the greater is their obedience from the heart , the more their temptations are , the greater is the trial of their faith , which worketh the more patience : the more patience they possess their souls with , the more perfect the work of wisdom is , until they be perfect and entire , defective in nothing , jam , 1.2.3 , 4 , 5.  

Of all sorts of Christians that have heard the word of Christ : these only that suffer as Christians in patience of the good word , are able to bring forth the fruit thereof unto perfection . 

2.  This is the miserable estate of the men of this age , that while they think to fly from death , they fall into it , for flying from the patience of the word of life , they run after their own thoughts to save their life in mortality ; when they in so doing , lay themselves open to all miseries in this world , and do even feel the terrors of the second and immortal death , while they are yet living , and yet are forced to run into it . 

The fifth day of the week . 

There is great opposition of Christians in this world , all which in May dream i divided into 2. sorts , the one terrence , humain , and baptised under the authority of men , to live according to their several laws and corporations after the power of a mortal life . The other Christians are coelestical , divine , and baptised under the anointing and authority of the only true God , to live according to his holy law in their mind , looking through the resurrection of Jesus , unto that glorious life in immortality . 

2.  Having observed how such as profess themselves , preachers of light , are darkened in the world by leaving the express word , and wisdom of Christ , to follow mortal vanities ; i am drawn to discover their folly , that they can no more help a man to go the way of immortality , than a natural blind man can direct a man in the way of a mortal life . And therefore being in themselves so blinded with the god of this world , it is mischievous madness for them to presume to speak what they know not , thereby to deceive others , or else by their authority of blindness to hinder them , which being ignorant of their blindness , do inquire of them the good old way ; but it is safe for blind men to confesle they are blind , that all that err and have eyes , May inquire of others that do see : it yet they will make themselves preachers of light and immortality , they must be discouraged to the false preachers , that instead thereof , do indeed preach darkness and mortality , as to deceive others of the ways of life . 

3.  I understand that the Christians are not ministers of the letter , as 2 cor. 3.6 . because that were to take upon them the carnal authority of the scribes and Pharisees , who are charged with that , mat. 23.2.23 . yet to deliver the spirit and truth contained therein . 

The sixth day of the week . 

I had a sight of the love of God in man , and the sensible understanding thereof was wonderful in mine eyes . Man being by sin deprived the glory of God , wherein Adam uva create , is now by the evil spirit become subject to the body of the sins of the flesh , to sow to the flesh , and of the flesh to reap mortality . And to restrain man from sin , God gave his law , and gave power to condemn accordingly , to the chastisement of the flesh , and to death : yet the heart of man is naturally so evil , that this authority in evil minded men's hands cannot reform the mind , that so man should yet please God in mortality . Therefore lest mankind should be swallowed up in death for the sins of the flesh , the son of God by whom the world and man was made , became flesh , that in the love of God , he Might teach us in the flesh by the mediation and direction of his spirit manifested in the flesh , the truth of salvation in suffering death in the resurrection of the flesh , and in the full restoring to glory : yet flesh and blood is weak and cannot follow him in this hard and strait way . Wherefore the Lord of glory , condescending to man's weakness , hath given his holy spirit into the world , which being God's spirit Might redeem men from the earth in the death of Christ , who being departed in sight , hath sent his own spirit to teach men , and to guide them into all truth , how they should learn obedience in the sinful flesh , how to put off the carnal man of mortality , and to put on the spiritual man of immortality , how to mortify the carnal actions of the body to the holy spirit of Christ , & for to perfect the mystery of suffering in the flesh , this word and spirit of Christ Jesus doth give his Christian menwisdom how to suffer under the evil authorities of the world to death , and so to pass on in the way of Christ to immortal life . And as in the course of nature our mind was catyed wholly to live after the lusts of uncleannessse , so being converted to God by the power of this spirit , which worketh in our hearts mightily , our mind is carried wholly to live after the will of that holy spirit ; so that in this way we have no more to do , but to discharge ourselves of cares and pleasures of this world , and to be delivered from the body of death , which is after the old man ; that we May be presented in the new man to him that is now invisible , and that only hath immortality . 

2.  The word of the holy scriptures is more perfect than the inspiration without a plain word ; therefore who so resisteth the spirit of Christ manifested in express words , doth resist all means of salvation : for Christ came and gave his word to be made so plain with his life-blood , that now no man can more sensibly apprehend the image and nature of God and Christ , then by the letter , which we by reading do conceive in our mind ; so as though a man walk according to all that is written , and yet deny one little direction , this man resisteth God , with open face , this one word which he despiseth to do , it will cut him off from the life of the Christian and for this one thing the peace and protection of almighty will go from him , so as he will be in fear night and day , and evil May come to him suddenly , out of which he cannot escape , because the word of God is against him , the least part whereof is stronger than that min can quiet , or justify his own heart against it ; for it May be concluded , that what man soever wil• not yield obedience to an express word , will not follow the inspiration of God , moving his conscience without an evident scripture , either to do good to others , or evil to his flesh for Christ's sake . 

3.  It is great hypocrisy for men to preach the honour and glory of the cross of Christ , when they tkemselves fear , or refuse the condemnation of the cross , in the testimony or martyrdom of Jesus Christ . 

The first day of the week . 

1 the Lord Jesus Christ divideth himself into three parts , ioh. 14.6 . saying , i am 1.  The way , 
2.  The truth , 
3.  The life : 
that whosoever suffers for any of these , doth suffer for Christ's sake . 1.  The way is the division of the Christians from the glory and authority of the worldly priesthood , to follow him in spirit and truth according to the invisible authority of his priesthood . 
2.  The truth is the law , psal. 119 142. whose perfection as it is spiritual , every Christian acknowledgeth and suffereth for it . And in this sense , it May be said , that John Baptist his blood was shed for Christ , insomuch as he suffered for the testimony of the truth , or spiritual law , against turpitude in unlawful marriage . 
3.  The life , is the immortality after the death and resurrection of the body : if the carnal authority do by their force withhold this life mortality , and enforce to take the gospel in a mortal state ; in this case , the faith or Jesus Christ is suffered for , in the confession of his glory to be enjoyed in immortality , and not in this present life . 


2.  I have meditated how the fear of god-lord is the beginning of wisdom to the nations that are not under the law . When by any means any of them come to have any thing to do with the Lord ; he first requireth them to fear his name , which is to depart from evil , pride of mind , and every way which is contrary to his word ; this fear worketh a knowledge of his invisible and terrible presence ; that as a man will not sin against his law , so he will not presume to partake of his service , , and holy things , or any of his mysteries , until this fear have wrought a reconciliation , and peace of conscience with God , in such sort , as he so apprehendeth the immortal Lord in his mind , that he inclineth to love him , and to desire his law in his heart or mind , and to make an everlasting covenant with him in the mysteries of Christ . Whosoever of the nations that hath his heart thus purified by faith , willingly to take upon him the yoke and law of Christ in love , is accepted of God , as a son to partake of the mysteries of his holiness . 

3.  Whether we ought yield to a man's private opinion , thus far as not to offend him in doing what he misliked . Offences arise , either in respect of the authority of God , or of man . In respect of God , the offence doth rise from the world , or any of the world , when they do offend any that believe in Christ , and do hurt them in contempt of the authority of the word of God , matth. 18.6.7 . 

Again , offences arise between the servant of God , when the authority of his word is denied by transgressing the law thereof in any thing . 

Offences arise in respect of the authority of men , when the authority of Jew of gentile is publicly provoked by transgressing their commandments , or blaspheming their divine worship , act. 19.37 . 

Again , off••ce is also given by the Christian if he offer any violence , or carnal force , or use any evil words against a man that is otherwise persuaded then by the word of Christ , that walketh after his own heart , neither according to the law of God , nor the course of the commonwealth in this case , as i offend him not by evil word or deeds , so i am not bound to do as he dot• that i May nor offend him , but let him follow h•• will , and i will follow the law of righteousness otherwise , in this i May be brought in bondage a private man's conceit : i May harden him in error , and partake in his folly . And at last 〈◊〉 should be drawn to offend both the authority 〈◊〉 God and man , by favouring every one that are ••ven up to a reprobate sense . 

The second day of the week . 

The justifying of a sinner in the blood of Christ is the act of the spirit of Christ , and it hath 2 parts . 

1.  The acquitting of all sins past , that the sinner have no fear or conscience of guilt or punishment for them , rom. 3.25 . and this is applied by the merit of his blood . 

2.  The preserving from all sin by the power and spirit of Christ : so as the evil one cannot touch him by prevailing against the man , whom Christ hath made righteous , to move or carry him to do any sin ; but on the contrary he shew•th forth the righteousness of God in Christ , by the saith of Jesus ; whereby he communicateth in the sufferings and blood of Christ in his own •ody . 

The third day of the week . 

Jesus is truly a door to his suffering Christians on this manner : that when they through many tribulations are brought to death , then through his presence they enter into life ; for as it is by fight in a door , whereby men enter into other places : so when we come to death , there are two doors : the great door openeth to pass into the torment of the second death , the straighter door openeth to pass from death to eternal life , and this door and way is Jesus , to all that suffer death in the testimony of his name . 

The fourth day of the week : 

I cannot but admire the wisdom of the only true God , who having put enmyty into the world , so as of necessity offences are taken against his holy persons , to condemn them according to their worldly wisdom , and carnal authority , hath also given a law in Christ , according to which he will just•fie his children against the condemnation of me• , as rom. 8.33 . As if our heavenly father should say , i have given you my law , and i have given you my Christ to become flesh , that he Might be a perfect guide and redeemer of you , from the bondage of mortality in this evil world , so as the subject May know his duty to his magistrate : the son to the father , the servant to his Master : it every one do thus walk according to my word , in their several estates and degrees , and yet your superiors do take offence as you , for not obeying them rather than me , i will justify you in what you do in conscience of my law ; fear not their condemnation , but learn obedience in the flesh , as Christ Jesus my only son hath showed you , and look unto the throan of my judgement sent which i have appointed , and know my righteousness in the love of Christ , and come unto me from mortality and bondage ; for by constancy to death , you and every one of you , shall evercome and be more than conquerors , and you shall condemn then for sin , that have condemned you for sinners , in hatred of my word , and of my Christ , which i have given to be a light unto the world , whom with you they have killed . 

2.  In the estate of enmity between God and man , that repentance which men teach is apostasy from God ; for when a man yieldeth obedience to the word as the servant of God : if the authority of man do compel him to repent of this his obedience , in any matter wherein the word of God requireth obedience , and this man doth repent under the fear of man , and blaspheme the service of God as wicked , and magnify the service of man , as holy and righteous : it is manifest from antiquity , that this repentance is the worldly wickedness against God ; for whosoever in oath with them saith , destroy the wicked , saith in effect to destroy all Christians that live godly in Christ , and all the servants of God both great and small , because these only are the wicked in the evil world's account , and these that are righteous , are their spiritual enemies : so as whosoever seeth not this enmity to avoid it , as not to have communion of enmity with the world against Christ , is yet guilty of the curse with the seed of the serpent . 

The fifth day of the week 

It is noted , that he which preacheth the cross of Christ must do it sincerely , not , scaring the shame and death of the cross , in the communion of his sufferings ; but there are those which preach the cross of Christ , in enmity of the cross , in that they go back from Christ crucified , to follow their profit or pleasure in this mortal life . These also set up a throan of judgement in enmity against Christ , by authority whereof , they keep men from looking to the judgement if Christ : so as it is of necessity for every man to discern these two thrones of judgement ; for if a man fear the judgement of mortality , he is darkened from seeing the judgement of immortality ; but if he truly see the throan of judgement settled in heaven , he will be enlightenned , not to respect the human judgement of men on earth . 

The fifth day of the week : 

1.  The shame and reproach of Christ and his Christians is , that they are men without honour in the world , and suffer all things as base men : therefore they which follow him in the honour of the world , and in power to defend themselves from oppression , are not under the shadow of Christ's cross , for these Count it a great shame to suffer as a Christian constantly to death . 

2.  It is noted from 1 sam. 15.22.23 . That it is a worshipping of false God , to break the commandment of God for any worldly or carnal respect whatsoever . 

3.  The unclean meats forbidden in the law , note out how abominable the idol and false doctrines of devils should be unto us , to obey them in our souls : who so observeth the law , May escape what it discovereth as death . 

4.  It is noted that Christ made an end of the law , when he took revenge and desire of judgement out of men's hearts , that they should not now require eye for eye , and go to judgement one with another ; but on the contrary to forgive each other , and so to go to God , beseeching him to forgive them : and thus in all cases , to judge themselves and not others for sin . 

5.  It was the wisdom of God , that his own son Christ should come in poor state , that none Might be alured with worldly glory , nor terrified with mortal terrors ; but that who so receive him , May be known to follow him in true love , more of him , then of themselves . 

6.  Evil shepherds of men's souls , keeping the word in their own authority , do as if a shepherd , pretending to feed the flock , should keep the sheep from the pasture , and from safe feeding , and agree with these for a part , and with the wolf for the skin , and yet ask wages for their service . 

The sixth day of the week . 

1.  As the eye is the light of the mortal , so he mind is the light of the immortal man : the eye is simple when is clearly seeth by the light of the world , the mind is simple when it is clearly enlightenned by the word and spirit of Christ , which is the ••ue light to immortality : the mind kept under men's authority is as a man blindfolded . 

2.  If it be church-robbery , or s•criledge to take vessels and goods , consecrate to holy uses , what is it , to take the holy word itself out of the book , which is sealed in the blood of Christ . 

The first day of the week . 

Concerning the works of the law , rom. 3.20 . I have this understanding , that seeing that is certain , that none can be justified by the works of the law , namely , by the justifications holden in the ministry , mediation and priesthood levitical , constituted under the fear and authority of men : then we May conclude , that all the service under any worldly authorities , though it May seem far better than that of Rome , yet it will be found only to condemnation , and cannot justify as to purge the conscience from dead works , to serve the living god ; for as these were the works of the law of God in the worldly holiness , and authority of justification by men , so are these of other commonwealths , the works of their law constituted in their feigned holiness , and justifications by their own authority . And if that of Israel , could not cleanse the conscience , surely , all religions of men's devising , do make vain man more vain , and harden the heart to commit sin in enmity of the word of God . 

The third day of the week . 

1.  From ephes. 3.15 . is apparent , that as a householder is over his family , so the heavenly father is over his family , which consisteth of all his creation both in the heavens , and upon the earth : therefore his good servants are careful , that Christ ( Of whom all this family is named ) May dwell in our hearts by faith , looking to his invisible presence , being rooted and grounded in love , both towards the father and his son , who is over the family in immortality , and also towards each other , even as Christ loved us , when he for our instruction , became an household servant , and learned obedience as a servant , that by his example we Might be armed with the same mind , so to love , and so to be obedient , ephes. 3.15 — 177.  phil. 2. and thus to keep the unity of the spirit of Christ , for the increase of his body and church to a perfect man , that then he May come and receive us unto himself in immortality , when we shall see him as he is , ephes. 4.1 John 3. but woe to the folly of such as will not acknowledge the father nor the son , as they are over their house , but suffer their own reprobate sense to dwell in their hearts , and that walk by sight of the world , and not by faith , and not only are disobedient themselves ; but also compel others to rebel against the Mr. of the house : let hot my soul touch with them that do thus despite the spirit of grace , and provoke the good man of the house against their own souls . 

2.  It is evident , that though a man do keep all the law and commandments of God , yet he is unprofitable , Luke 17.10 . wherefore there is some excellent thing required in Christ in the state of perfection , as mat. 5.20 . to 47.48 . with Luke 6.20 . to 32. &c.  

3.  It must be granted , that they which keep the commandments of God to the end , shall inherit life according to the promise in the lawyer in such a life God is not glorified in Christ his son ; for in this estate men are defective , and want that one necessary thing , without which they May fail of the grace of God , namely , the perfect love of Christ wherein all worldly things are put away , with the love thereof , and that only for the love of Christ to follow him for the kingdom of God , Luke 18 18 . 22.-29 . with mat. 19.17 . &c. Mark 10.  

The sixth day of the week . 

I have received to put difference between the church gathered according to the letter in Moses , and the church gathered according to the spirit in Christ : the legal church is from the earth , the spiritual church is from heaven : the church by the law were and are to be gathered from all places of the earth , unto Jerusalem here beneath ; but the church which is called by the spirit of Jesus Christ , are delivered from this world , and are gathered from mortality unto the city of the living God , to heavenly Jerusalem : therefore as earthly Jerusalem is the mother of all those which are after the righteousness of the mortal seed : so Jerusalem which is above , is the mother of all the suffering Christians , which are born again of the immortal seed through Jesus Christ , the word of the living God , and which remaineth for ever , heb. 12.22.23 . gal. 4.26 . 1 pet. 1.23 . 

The first day of the week . 

From psalm . 91.  I have considered a preservative against the plagve of death , thus ; 

There was , is , and always shall be a twofold persons in the world , the greater part are after the seed of the serpent , and the remainder after the seed of the woman : between these two peoples there is enmity , and a perfect separation in the word . Over these there is a twofold government , or spiritual authority . Over the greater part , which are the childen of disobedience , is the devil . Satan , or the old serpent , that first deceived our parents , who is by his government the Prince of the authority of the air , ephes. 2.2 . his power wherewith he afflicteth , are the spiritual things of wickedness in heavenly places , ephes. 6.11.12 

The throne of his persons is the throne of misery , or perverseness by authority , whereof the frame being wicked , mischief by a law , and murder , and condemn for wicked the righteous and innocent souls , which patiently suffer persecution and death under them , for their conscience , of the service and word of their creator , psalm , 94.3 . — 20.21 . — rom. 8.36 . Mark . 4.17 . Over the poor afflicted persons is the protection of the most high , and the shadow of the almighty , psalm . 91.1 . who since they were separated out from their persecutors , under Moses the fraithfull servant of God , are known manifestly to bear the reproach of Christ . hebr. 11.25.26 — this persons are in one name called the Israel of God , g•l . 6.16 . which is not of any , whether Jew's or gentiles that trust under a carnal & visible authority ; but of all that come to put their confidence under the wings of the god of Israel , as Ruth did , Ruth 2.12 . These persons are known by that they serve , and declare the praises of the great name of God , the creator , every Sabbath day , psal 92.1 . luk. 4.16 . And for their creator's sake they are hated and afflicted of all other persons ; therefore the God the creator , being the judge of the earth , doth render vengeance to the proud and wicked persons , that afflict the persons of his heritage , whom he teacheth and instructeth out of his law , and also speak proudly against him the God of Jacob , psa. 94.1 . &c.  

According to this judgement , all the world is made subject to God , and guilty of death by the law in Christ Jesus , and none can be justified from sin , and so freed from the guilt of death , by any works under any worldly or carnal authorities , rom. 3.9 . — 19.20 . 

The spiritual things wherewith the Prince of the authority of the air doth invade , or bring men to death , are declared in the law to be especially three . The first , is the snare of the hunter . The second , the pestilence . The third , the keteb , or destruction , psal. 91.3 — 6.  

First , the snare of the hunter is sin , the reward whereof is death , rom. 7.23 . All therefore that sin against the god of their life , as the children of the devil are subject to all the curses in the law of God , 1 ioh. 3.8 . gal. 3.10 . 

Secondly , the second spiritual thing , that from hence doth manifestly invade men is , the pestilence , or plague of death , which is a sickness , call debir , a thing destroying . It is taken with the common air which is corrupted and poisoned with the crying sins of the most persons in the mother city , and into whomsoever this poisoned air entereth , it poisoneth the life , and soon killeth the body , except it have issue out of the body . 

3.  The other deadly destruction to the body , is called bitter destruction , Dent . 32.24 . which as an evil spirit , seizeth upon the body , and worketh torments in the joints and sinews ; which disease , some learned men call , Ophisthotonos , a strange and vehement disease in the neck , when by the stiffness of the nerves , the neck is strained backward to the shoulders , and killeth a man within four days : and therefore it is said to destroy at noon . psal. 91.6 . because thou Mayst see a sound body thus suddenly tormented before thine eyes , and thou canst see nothing but the evil done . 

These three evils the Lord Christ inflicteth upon his adversaries , for the redemption of his Israel from destruction . Wherefore the apostle Paul applying the salvation in Christ , 1 cor. 15.54 . to 57 with hos. 33.9 . — 14. setteth down five degrees , ( As those which can read the original text May see . ) 1.  This keteb , bitter destruction , he calleth the victory of hell . 
2.  The pestilence is called the sting of death . 
3.  The cause of this plague he affirmeth to be sin . 
4.  The power of sin to be the law . 
5.  The victory which the Christians have received over all these evils , is of God through Jesus Christ our Lord , 1 cor. 15.54 , &c. hos. 13.  


From hence we come to apply this preservasative against the plague and destruction ; who is the man whom the Lord will deliver ? him that God hath separated as Israel , exod. namely , him that knoweth in his conscience the only true God , from all other gods , and that he himself dwelleth under his protection , & delighteth under his shadow , psal. 91.1 . — 14.  ioh. 17.3 . This knowledge of God is discerned from all false knowledge by that , he which hath it keepeth the the commandments of God , 1 ioh. 2.4 . So as he which knoweth the true God , and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent , is united to the body and church of Christ , and knows him in spirit from all false Christ's , or devils ; as a woman knows her husband from all other men ; and therefore of all that do thus discern and know God in Christ , he is the saviour of their bodies , ephes. 5.23 . This man shall be kept in all his ways , psal. 91.11 . For seeing it is the truth in Christ , that all that are born of God do keep themselves so , as the evil one toucheth them not with any just accusation of sin , as 1 ioh. 5.18 . with 3.9 . It must needs follow that God their father will deliver them also from any deadly disease which is executed for sin . This temporary salvation , is applied only by Christ , and his Christians ; not against carnal wickednesses , but against spiritual evils ; namely , that these plagues shall not come without cause unto them , psal. 91.9 . For seeing Christ was baptised to suffer death by the seed of the world ; and seeing his Christians are baptised into the death of Jesus Christ , to show his death in resisting sin , till he come to judgement , i• must be granted as a truth , and applied for the glory of God in Christ , that no accidental death from him shall prevent any faithful Christian that he should not live to glorify God in the martyrdom of Jesus : but this is the man tha• shall be preserved to see a thousand fall on o•• side by the plague of death , and ten thousand 〈◊〉 the other side , yet it shall not come near him , only he shall behold it as the reward of God 〈◊〉 wicked men , psal. 91.7.8 . psalm . 15.  This is the preservation of every perfect man , whose faith overcometh the evil of the world , whose hope is God the creator , and whose habitation is the most high : psal. 91.9 . and not of him only , but of all , whose love is able to cover their sins , so as he require of the Lord life for any weak one that hath sinned , and the sin is not a sin unto death , 1 ioh. 5.19.20 . For thus is his boldness for his friends , also by warrant from the law , which saith unto him , and the plague shall not come near in thy tabernacle , psalm . 91.10 , which is not understood of any worldly dwelling , as under the law , but of the several persons , who with him do bear the reproach of Christ in some kind in enmity , that do come out of the sins of the city , by not partaking with her sins : these also May have faith , that they shall not partake of the plagues of the city , rev. 18.4 . Neither can any conclude from the law , that all which live in and under the law , die of the plague , do die to the second death ; for the plague of itself is only a bodily execution from God to the first death . For when both King and persons do in the fear of the true God , confess and forsake their sin , which is the cause thereof , from the anger of God , and in obedience do give themselves to fall into his hands , and rely upon his great mercies , in this case ; all that die of the plague we leave them to the mercy of the Lord , by whose death the King , and all that remain , May more earnestly beseech the Lord , to remit his hand , 2 sam. 24.  

Wherefore every one that can truly apply the god of Israel to be his shadow , Christ , his law and truth , to be his shield and buckler , and hath in himself the baptism of Christ ; by virtue whereof , he hath always within him the request of a good conscience calling unto God through the resurrection of Jesus Christ ( 1 pet. 3.21 . ) this man hath the faith of God in him , and therefore doth not fear any evil of the day or night , psal. 125. neither doth he flee as those that are conscious of their sins against God , but remaineth as sure as Jerusalem , which is above , and is the mother of all the true children of God : for the rod of wickedness shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous . This is the work of faith , whereby they pray in faith to be delivered from the evil one , and are delivered , mat. 6.13 . whereas the faith of all that serve idol God's is a deceit , and the prayer of the sinner is abomination , and will work infidelity and terrors from God , as their consciences do testify , that they May repent of their sins , and be reconciled unto the true God in truth . 

2.  This assurance is to all Jsrael in the law , under the sign of the blood of the Passover ; sprinkled out on their upper door posts whereby they were assured that the destroyer should not , or could not hurt the poor , persecuted and oppressed for their desire of liberty , and freedom of body and mind , to serve the living God , as exod. 12.  heb. 11.28 . which was true in this thing to save the persecuted Isreal from the mortality of persecuting Egypt , and is but a figure or shadow of that faith , which the spiritual Israelites have , that know in themselves that Christ their pass over is killed for them , ( 1 cor. 5.7 . ) for these desiring also to serve that one only true God , are also persecuted ; wherein being chastized of the Lord in the communion of the sufferings of Christ , they do show and declare this death before the Lord , and one with another , which who so do it in love , cannot but know that the condemnation of the world is nothing to them , as to condemn them for the sins of the world , which are pardoned to them in the death of Christ , from the time of their baptism of repentance , for the forgiveness of sins , if they walk worthy of this calling , and continue constant and faithful in this communion unto death , 1 cor. 11.25 . to 32.  Mark . 1.4 . with heb. 9.14 . rev. 2.10 . 

The third day of the week . 

1.  I understand that i put on Christ , when being baptised into his death , i put on his death upon my mortality , to show it in my sufferings to death , and i put on his immortality upon my mortal mind , and in all things have the mind of Christ to guide me in my life , and to give me to mind only the things that are above with him in immortality . 

2.  I am instructed to put difference between the teaching under the law , and under the authority of Christ : the law commandeth obedience upon pain of death , saying , thou shalt not do thus or thus ; or thou shalt do thus or thus ; but Christ saith , thou shalt love the Lord thy God , &c. thou shalt love thy neighbour , &c. so that a man is first taught so truly to know the true God , as to love him , and when he hath obtained this love , than he doth willingly all , whatsoever he hath commanded , and also he rejoiceth in the law of Christ , which is the bond of perfection . 

The third day of the week . 

I consider the reason of doing miracles from the word : that whosoever hath the word of God in him to do it , and to suffer for it in the spirit of Christ , he hath the word with him , to effect whatsoever he desireth of the father , in the name of Christ , John 15.7.5 . 

The fourth day of the week . 

In the common wealth of Israel , there is the enmity of the creator : there are the men of the worldly authority , that justify themselves , and condemn and persecute the true prophet , and the obedient children of Zion , the mother city , and God justifieth them against their accusers : there is the fear of men , and the fear of God in separation : there is the law of God holden in the worldly authorities , and the law within the faithful in opposition : the worldly men make to themselves a light , and walk in it , condemning the oppressed , as if they being separated from them did walk in darkness without light . Thus carnal Israel in all things walk by sight in a visible worship of God , persecuting and despising all that submit not to their glory : whereas the spiritual Israel , though they seem to this world , as living in darkness , and dishonour , without the scare of men , and without the law given by Moses , yet it is far otherwise in spirit and truth , for God their god is a light unto them , they fear God and obey him , and they are not without the law of God , but the law is within them : and these only are the redeemed of God the Lord , as esa. 50.51.1 cor. 9.20.21 . 

2.  In a general enmity , Babel oppresseth •srael . and God hath purged and chosen Jsrael in affliction , and hath given his glory unto him and will be glorified in him esa. 47.  & 48.  & 41.9 . & 42.8 with 46.13 . & 49.4 . 

3.  Abraham and Sarah are a type of God and Zion : the barrenness of the one is compared to the solitariness of the other , and the delight and comfort of the one is signified to be fulfilled in the other , esa. 51.1 . &c. 54 — 

4.  If the way of Christ were , that his persons should so low him in the life of the flesh to immortality , than men would perish in their haste : but seeing he is gone before in reproach through death to life , all that follow him in this way of suffering death in the flesh do walk soberly , and make no haste ; but go out so as the Lord Jesus is gone before them , esa. 52.11.12 — & 53. with luk. 9 22.23 . — 2 tim. 1.10 . 

The fifth day of the week . 

As i understand carnal adultery , and fornication in the flesh ; so i apply spiritual adultery and fornication in the spirit , from esa. 57.3.5 . &c.  

If the worldly authoritie• make to themselves gods , and do worship to them , they are men that engender with gods in such a place , vers. 5. &c. and all that go with them commit whoredom against God their maker , either as adulterers that have the authority of a man , or adulte••ss••ss that willingly submit to mortal shame . And so further we May conceive , that what man or woman soever hath in them the spirit or authority of idols , or other gods , if they enforce others to agree to their spirit , they are tyrannous over the conscience , and are as they which ravish the weaker to their filthy lusts . If any of these privately do allure any to consent to their spirit , and to submit to them in prayer and spiritual worship of God ; these deceivers , or any one of them , with many , or but with one that is alured , hath committed the act of spiritual whoredom with the mind of all that are subject : therefore it standeth us upon , both to shun all idol worship in public , and to try all spirits that we shall be subject unto , in private prayer , or submission in conference . For by submission in conference with the unclean spirit , Eve and the whole world is deceived , and so it is manifest that whosoever humbleth himself an another's desire in prayer , is become one spirit with him that prayed , and thereby is defiled ( If he have a• common spirit ) by the word , that from what he in his prayer , conceived to be God , entered as seed of the unclean spirit , into the heart of all that in unity received the spirit of that prayer a wherefore it is as necessary to know the God , only one true God , and the one spirit of holiness in Christ Jesus , as it is for a maid on wise to know her own husband from all adulterers , and that they be one spirit with him only , and not weak to any other that wait to deceive and abuse to vanity . 

The sixth day of the week . 

There are communicants of the body of Christ in showing his death , by suffering death till he come . And there are communicants of devils , or serpents , in showing their pride , by killing the righteous blood , as 1 cor. 10.16 . to 21.  &  . 26. — with math. 23.33 . — 35.  

All that continue perfect and single hearted in the word of Christ , have his word and presence to keep them from the evil of the world , until they have finished their testimony , and have showed his death , ioh. 17.14 , 15 , &c. with revel. 11.7 . 

But if any communicate outwardly in profession of Christ crucified , and discern not his body killed in the enmity of the world , so as to show themselves a member thereof , by manifesting Christ's death in their death , and their death to be for Christ's cause , 2 cor. 4.9.10.11 . These coming short of communicating in the spirit of Christ , in not discerning the presence of his body , both to suffer in the flesh , and to sustain in the spirit , May fall into sickness , weaknesses , yea , and into death among those which die of the plague , after the condemnation of the world : but if in this plague of the world we discern our own weaknesses , our ignorance of his invisible presence , to save , or to kill , and our readiness to go backe from showing his death by divers worldly or carnal temptations , moving us to save our souls , from following Christ that died by suffering for us , for which causes we May be left to the evil of the world , and do now confess our sin against Christ , and our readiness to deny the faith of Jesus , and do take our sickness , weakness , or danger of infection with the sin of the world , as a chastisement for our profit , as 1 cor. 11.29 30.31.32 . and learning obedience under the present hand of our Lord , resolving to renew our covenants in his communion , and do thus with simple hearts pray to the father of our Lord Jesus Christ , by the spirit of holiness in his resurrection , all things will work that we May live to glorify God our creator , in the love of his word , and May be preserved to obtain that crown of life , which is in the martyrdom of Jesus . 

The first day of the week . 

There is a corporal idleness , which is the way of deadly sin , as ezech. 16.49 . And there is a spiritual idleness , which is the way of apostasy from Christ , as 2 pet. 1.5 . to 8.  Now the common professors , and such as have the authority , and glory of the world , know no idleness but bodily idleness , and when they urge men to labour , they compel to bodily labour , in a worldly calling for riches , or to get the meat that perisheth : but how to labour for assurance to make their calling and election sure , they are blind . Wherefore seeing corporal labour is but a type or example of true Christian labour in the mind ; all that so much urge labour in an outward calling , and confound the labour in inward calling , as a thing inferior to the type , these are deceivers of men's mind , and to be avoided , Mark . 8.36 . 

The sixth day of the week 

I understand by that in rom. 3.5 . to 8 , how God in judging the world , bringeth wrath upon man for their sins . If man doth repent , and turn to God ; tho unrighteousness and the lie , according to which he walked before his conversion , doth now commend the righteousness and truth of God ; thu• , in that he which was unrighteous , is not now to be judged according to what he was ; namely , a sinner , but the righteousness of God is to be commended in him ; because that he which was a sinner , is now righteous , and will do no evil , no not though good May come of it : and the lie of him which was once deceived , maketh the truth of God abound to his glory , thus in that he which was a liar , doth now walk in the truth , and convinceth the world of Gune . 

The first day of the week . 

In this plague i have considered the enmity of God , iam. 4.4 . How from the beginning , since mankind was divided upon the earth , the judgement of God the creator , and the judgement of men are contrary ; in that evil men sit on earth to judge God in his word and persons , rom. 3.4 . and on the other side , God sitteth invisibly on his thraone , judging the men of the world in righteousness , psa. 9.1 chro. 16.14 . 2 chron. 6.30 . The judgements of men are in sight , but the judgements of God are seen of his persons by faith , and they discern how God he killeth men by the plague , &c.  

According to the judgement of men , Christ and all his persons have their temptation under the authorities of men , luk. 22.28 . 

According to the judgement of God , the whole world hath its temptation coming from God , rev. 3 10.  

From whence we May gather in truth , that seeing these two judgement seats are so contrary , and the persons that are separated to put difference so contrary ; the persons of God are so far from partaking of the judgements of God upon the persons of the world , as the persons of the world are far from the judgements of men in the sufferings of Christ . Notwithstanding , if any of the persons that are separated to God do sin secretly , or openly , he judgeth them by plague , or other curses , and so killeth them like wicked men of the world , as levit , 26 25 . 25-num . 16.11 . — 46. with rev. 2.21 — 23.  

2.  I consider that it proceedeth from the efficacy of the resurrection of Christ to justify from sin , rom. 4 25. with 1.4 , & 5.1 — 19  

And all that do not apprehend the truth of Christ , raised from the dead , they are yet in their sins , 1 cor. 15.17 . 

All that condemn us for doing the law , in the righteousness of Christ do judge the law , and do in effect say that the law is sin , as rom. 7 7. whereas all that do the law , confirm it to be holy , just , and good . 

The third day of the week . 

By observing the power of God , present t• help , i have compared salvation from the plague ( Or other such curses ) by the faith of Jesus , to that salvation from the bi•ing of serpents , when by faith they looked to the brazen serpent , and to the word of our god for help , as num. 21. with ioh. 8.14.15 . 

That whosoever can by the word within him , apply the communion of Christ , either in his own body , by suffering , as a Christian , or in true love and mercy with any that so suffer ; if any such are smitten , or infected with the plague , and they presently pray in faith to Jesus the King of Israel . looking to his power , authority , and immortality , together also , to the fellowship of his sufferings here on earth . I am persuaded that the plague shall have no more power over their bodies , but they shall be preserved to glorify God , in the love of the church of Christ , as they desire : but they must be mindful in every danger presently to look up to Jesus , whom God gave to save the world , and they must look , or pray in faith , of his name and of his judgement , joh 3.16.17.18 . 

The fourth day of the week : 

I have considered that they which have the martyrdom of Christ , God truly known to them in their own sufferings , have the communion of the son of God , Jesus Christ in whom they are wonderfully enriched in all speech , and in all knowledge , 1 cor. 1.5 , to 9 with 2.1.2 . — 

The fifth day of the week : 

I have considered the wonderful price of man's purchase , and the reason of our being God's own peculiar body in this price given , thus Christ having given himself for the life of the world , and being glorified from the sufferings in mortality , hath obtained to give his holy spirit to those which follow him in the new birth , ioh. 14.16 — 26. with act. 2.33 . 

All therefore that deny themselves in their sins , and bring their bodies subject to God , so as he accepts of their body for a temple , by the gift of his holy spirit ; these are now bought with this price of the holy spirit which is of God : therefore seeing the spirit which is in the body , is one with God in Christ , it is manifest , that not so much as the body is any man's own , but it is Christ's which liveth in it , 1 cor 6.19.20 17. with gal. 2.20 . 

And thus every man that in the baptism of Christ , hath received the earnest of his spirit , as 2 cor. 1.22 . & 5.5 . ephes. 1.14 . Is bought with the precious blood of Christ , in that by the death of his flesh , he imparted the word of the living God , which remaineth for ever , according to the work of God in the resurrection of Jesus , 〈◊〉 1 pet. 1.18 . to 25.  So as now he must give his body , which is thus bought from the earth , and from earthly men , to follow the holy spirit of Christ , whithersoever it shall guide his body till death . ioh. 16.13 . — with revel. 14.3.4 . 

The sixth day of the week . 

In my sleep by night , i was instructed in the righteous judgements of our God , by comparing them with the judgements of men , thus . There are diverse states of government in the world , and these all have their religion several under their own authority . If any of these kingdoms do send forth their spiritual authority to condemn and execute all within their dominion , which ( As they term them ) are heretics , schismatickes , and rebels against the present religion or worship of God , constituted by their authority : at the publishing of this judgement , all that are guilty in their consciences do flee and hide themselves as from men , whereas all that are faithful in that religion , and devour in that will-worship , do not scare but are more bold and confident under the power of that God , knowing that every man shall be examined by name , whether he be heretic ; if he be so found , it is examined , whether he will repent , and conform to their will , and not one shall perish without good trial . 

Such is the estate of the kingdom of God our creator , in the authority of his Christ , those of the world whose hearts condemn them of rebellion against the world , and will of Majestistie , and do fear , and shift to put off his excention , whereas all that repent , and are reconciled to him in all things , and know the reason of his judgement , are safe from fear of the evil which is sent against those which are from their maker . For if men be so just , as nor to condemn one that is no rebel , or that will repent : how shall we think that the executioners of the judgement of God in the plague , war , or famine , are careless to destroy any one without great cause . 

The first day of the week . 

I have grieved , to consider how men are deceived by the authority , or God of this world : in that they bring all , both God and Christ , spirit and word , subject to their judgement , a thes. 2.4 . So that whosoever pray in spirit , subject to their spiritual authority , they pray but to what they are servants unto , which cannot help , because it is the fear and authority of mortal man , to whom such spiritual service is done , the only true God and his Christ is despised , the power and wisdom of man is exalted in their hearts , therefore if man do not hear and help , there is not God to hear , except it be to require vengeance for the abuse of his name and word . 

2 i have considered , that they which use the word of the holy scriptures , translated or preached in worldly glory under moral authority , their estate is far more inexecusable , than they which never use that word in way of prayer , praise , thanksgiving , or spiritual worship , because these do not so blaspheme God in Christ , as to give that honour unto man , the creature , which is due to the creator , as the professors do . 

3.  I have observed , how the wise men of this world do destroy their wisdom by their authority , for in any doctrine of religion , they will propose the holy scriptures to be then wisdom and ground of truth : but if their doctrine be opposed by any , than they leave their wisdom and slay to their au•hority for help : which showeth that their wisdom is but a pretence , and that their authority is the pillar and ground of their church . 

4.  I have noted also the deceit of man's mind , that not what he professes , or pretendeth in word to be his god and Christ , is so to him , but what he mindeth in his heart under such a pretence : as if a man profess• the only true God , or preach the Lord Jesus Christ , and indeed do mind another word or authority then of God : or do seek meat for his belly under the name of Jesus Christ : in these cases it is not what he speaketh , but what he imagineth , mindeth and seeketh indeed , which is his god : and for the obtaining of the desire of his mind , he denyeth God in deed , and all power of godliness . 

5.  Whatsoever spiritual service or worship men perform as to God , their reading , prayers , cryings , howlings , tears , and assembling in idol churches are all turned into sin , while they know not God , but give that service to the world or authority of men , which is only due unto God the creator of all men , according to his word and will , manifested from the beginning in Christ . 

The fifth day of the week . 

The building and maintaining of the heathen idol temples , hath been in enmity of the temple of our god in Israel , but now they are in contempt of the temple of Christ , which is his body endued with the holy spirit therefore all that partake of i doll-temples do seek their life and honour in the flesh , under the persecutor , and thereby turns the back in contempt of the reproach of Christ : they all deceive themselves in the flesh ; they seek to save themselves by the authority of the devil to kill ; whereas to deny their service is to deny ones self ; for they will spoil one of all . 

Fjnjs . 












































































































































































