midnight's meditations of death : with pious and profitable observations , and consolations : 

Perused by Francis Quarles a little before his death . 

Published by e. b.  

London , printed by John Macock , and are to be sold at his house , in white bear court , on Adling hill . 1646.  

Profitable and pious thoughts of death . 

Part 1.  of death's certainty . 

In heaven's high parliament an act is passed , 
Subscribed by that eternal three in one , 
That each create wight must one day taste 
Of death's grim terrors : they exempted none 
That sprang from Adam . All that red-earth-strain 
Must to their earth again . 
An ancient register of burials lies 
In genesis , to let us understand 
That whosoever is begotten dyes , 
And every sort is under death's command . 
His empire 's large : rich , poor , old , young , and all 
Must go when he doth call . 
Man's life 's a book : and some of them are bound 
Handsome and richly ; some but meanly clad : 
And for their matter , some of them are found 
Learned and pious : others are too bad 
For vilest fires : both have their end . 
There 's a conclusion penned 
As well as title-page ; that 's infancy . 
The matter ; that 's the whole course of our lives . 
One 's Satan's servant walking wickedly ; 
Another 's pious , and in goodness thrives ; 
One 's beggarly , another 's rich and brave : 
Both drop into the grave . 
One man ( A book in folio ) lives till age 
Hath made him crooked and put out his eyes : 
His beard doth penance . And death in a rage 
Mows down another whilst the infant cries 
In 's midwives' lap : ( That 's an epitome ) 
Both wear deaths livery . 
God made not death : whence are we mortal then ? 
Sure sin 's the parent of this pale-faced foe ; 
Naught else did hatch it : and the first of men 
He was death's grandfather : and all the woe 
That in this or the next life we are in 
Is caused by our sin . 
meditation 1.  

If i must die , i will catch at every thing 
That May but mind me of my latest breath . 
Deaths-heads , graves , knells , blacks , tombs , all these shall bring 
Into my soul such useful thoughts of death , 
That this sable King of fears , 
Though in chiefest of my health 
He behind me come by stealth , 
Shall not catch me unawares . 
When-e're i visit any dying friend , 
Each sigh and scrich , and every death-bed-groan 
Shall read me such a lecture of mine end , 
That i will suppose his case will be mine own . 
As this poor man here doth lie 
Racked all o'er with deadly pain , 
Never like to rise again , 
Time will come when so must i.  
Thus ghastly shall i look , thus every part 
Of me shall suffer , thus my lips shall shrivel , 
My teeth shall grin , and thus my drooping heart 
Shall smoke out sighs and groans ; and all the evil 
Which i see this man lie under , 
What sin earns and death doth pay , 
I shall feel another day . 
Sin from torment who can sunder ? 
Thus will my mournful friends about me come : 
My liveless carcase shall be stretched out . 
I must be packing to my longest home : 
Thus will the mourners walk the streets about . 
Thus for me the bells will toll : 
Thus must i bid all adieu , 
World , and wife , and children too : 
Thus must i breathe out my soul . 
At others funerals when i see a grave , 
That grave shall mind me of mortality . 
I 'll think that such a lodging i must have : 
Thus in the pit my bones must scattered lie ; 
Here one bone and there another , 
Here my ribs , and there my scull , 
And my mouth of earth be full . 
I must call the worms my mother . 
When i do look abroad , methinks i see 
A funeral sermon penned in every thing . 
Each creature speaks me mortal : yonder tree , 
Which , not a quarter since , the glorious spring 
Had most proudly clothed in green , 
And was tall , and young , and strong , 
Now the axe hath laid along : 
Nothing but his stump is seen . 
And yonder fruitful valleys yesternight 
Did laugh and sing , they stood so thick with corn : 
In was the sickle , and 't was cut down quite , 
And not a sheaf will stand to morrow morn . 
Yonder beauteous imps of May , 
Pretty eye-delighting flowers , 
Whose face heaven doth wash with showers 
To put on their best array : 
I saw the fairest , the lily , and carnation , 
And coy Adonis particoloured son , 
Subject to such a sudden alteration 
That in a day their fading beauty 's gone . 
This tree , this corn , and this flower , 
Or what things else vainest air , 
To myself i do compare , 
Who May die within this hour . 
meditation 2.  

I 'll ne'er be proud of beauty if i must 
Be blemished when i die : and if the grave 
Will mix my beauty with the vilest dust , 
What profits pride ? Reader , I 'll pardon crave 
Here to set you down a story 
Of as rare and fair a she 
As the sun did ever see , 
Whom death robbed of all her glory . 
I once saw Phoebus in his midday shine 
Triumphing like the sovereign of the skies , 
Until two brighter rays , both more divine , 
Outblazed his : and they were this nymphs eyes . 
Forthwith sol curtained his light , 
Looking very red for shame 
To be vanquished by this Dame , 
And did slink out of her sight . 
I once saw silver Cynthia , nights fair Queen , 
In her full orb dimming each lesser flame , 
Till this nymphs beauty-vying front was seen 
Outshining hers : then she looked wan for shame . 
The man in her , knew he how 
But to quit that giddy place , 
She had so divine a face , 
Would have dwelled upon her brow . 
Once was this woman pleased to walk the fields 
Then proudly fragrant with Dame Flora's store : 
The damask rose unto her beauty yields , 
And was contented to be fair no more . 
Sure i cannot say how truly , 
Yet 'mongst many it was a fame , 
That the rose did blush for shame , 
And the violet looked most bluly . 
Once did this woman to the temple go , 
Where doth fair Venus' marble-statue lie 
Cut to the life , that one can hardly know 
But that it lives indeed : when she came nigh , 
He who then the temple kept 
After would be often telling 
She was so super-excelling 
That for mad the marble wept . 
Melodious music 's warbled by the spheres ; 
Swans sing their epitaphs in curious lays , 
Once with a singing swan a part she bears : 
As soon 's those coral doors dismissed her voice , 
The poor swan held his peace and died : 
And the spheres ( As men do say ) 
Dumbly move unto this day . 
This was by a river's side . 
What think you now of such a glorious woman ? 
This phoenix sure was she , if any might , 
That Might be proud : and yet the tongue of no man 
Can well express , nor any pen can write 
What grim death hath done unto her ; 
Now she 's of another feature , 
Hardly can you know the creature : 
Stay a while , and we will view her . 
Th' almighty King that dwells above in heaven 
Directs to 's high shrieve death a certain writ , 
Wherein a strait imperial charge was given , 
At 's utmost peril forthwith on sight of it 
To arrest that piece of beauty 
And to wrap her up in clay 
'Gainst the last great judgement-day . 
Death addressed him to his duty ; 
And with great care gives warrant by and by 
Unto his bailiffs , fever , pox , and gout , 
Frenzy , strangury , colic , squinancy , 
Consumption , dropsy , and an ugly rout 
Beside these , for to assail her : 
Death's command was , that they must 
Tie her fast in chains of dust : 
He gave charge that none should bail her . 
You would not think with what a furious pace 
These catchpoles fly to pull this creature down : 
But pox was nimblest ; she got to her face 
And ploughed it up . This hag goes in a gown 
Rugged and of colour tawny , 
Buttoned o'er from top to toe ; 
( Skin-deep beauties deadly foe ) 
Uglier hag was never any . 
Fain would the rest have fastened on her too , 
But that this hag had frighted out her soul . 
Now looks her carcase of another hue , 
Grim , ugly , loathsome , ghastly , and as foul 
As did ever eye look on . 
What 's become of that complexion 
Which held all hearts in subjection ? 
In a moment all is gone . 
If we Might be so bold to dig the grave 
Some few years hence where this good woman lies , 
Sure we should find this beauty but a slave 
To pallid putrefaction , and a prize 
For those silly vermin worms : 
As they crawl in stinking swarms 
She doth hug them in her arms , 
And doth give them suck by turns . 
Here 's a deformed lump indeed : and this 
Must be the fortune of the fairest face . 
None then are proud but fools : they love amiss 
Whose hearts are chained to any thing but grace . 
From the beauty of the skin 
In the loveliest outward part , 
Lord , vouchsafe to turn my heart 
To love that which is within . 
meditation 3.  

If death will come , sure there will come an end 
Of all this world's deep-biting misery . 
Nothing adverse that 's here on earth doth tend 
Beyond the grave : that 's a delivery 
From the power of men and devils , 
And whatever other woe 
May befall us here below 
Death's a shelter from all evils . 
Here i am poor : my daily drops of sweat 
Will not maintain my full-stocked family : 
A dozen hungry children cry for meat , 
And i have none ; nor will words satisfy . 
Could i give their belly ears , 
It were a comfort , or could fill 
Hungry stomaches with good will , 
Or make daily bread of tears . 
Here the oppressor with his gripping claws 
Sits on my skirts : my racking landlord rears 
Both rent and fine ; with potent looks he awes 
Me from mine own . Scarce any man but bears 
In his bosom Ahab's heart . 
Horse-leach-like that 's ever craving 
Other men's , and sick of having , 
Right or wrong , will catch a part . 
Here in these clay-built houses sickness reigns : 
I have more maladies than i can name : 
Each member of my body hath its pains . 
Moreover , weeping , groaning , sadness , shame , 
Slanders , melancholy , fear , 
Discontents , disgraces , losses , 
And a thousand other crosses 
Must be born if i live here . 
But these are finite all . When i am dead 
My poverty is ended and my care : 
I hear my famished children cry for bread 
No longer . Then i drink , i lodge , i fare 
Just as well as Caesar doth : 
There ends cold and nakedness , 
All my former wretchedness . 
Death is meat , and drink , and cloth . 
There 's no face-grinding : there the mighty cease 
From troubling ; there the weary be at rest : 
The servant 's freed ; the prisoner is at ease : 
All 's still and quiet ; no man is oppressed : 
For incroachers there are none . 
Not a poor man 's wronged , nor 
Is his vineyard longed for : 
Every man May keep his own . 
Sickness there 's none : whenever death shall take 
My body hence and lodge it in the clay , 
I shall not feel a tooth or finger ache , 
Nor any other misery that May 
In the least degree displease me . 
For all sores the grave hath plasters , 
And it cureth all disasters : 
Of all burdens death will ease me . 
Malicious tongues fired below in hell 
There will not hurt me ; nor the poisonous breath 
Of whispering detractors : i shall dwell 
Securely in the dust . One stroke of death 
Sets me out of gunshot quite ; 
Not the deepest-piercing tongue 
Can there do me any wrong : 
Bark they May , but cannot bite . 
Lord , i am thine : and if it be thy will , 
While i do live a stranger here below , 
Brim-high with bitterness my cup to fill , 
And make me drink it ; yet , Lord , withal bestow 
But thy grace , and thou shalt see me 
Patient : and my comfort 's this , 
That a short affliction it is : 
In a moment death May free me . 
meditation 4.  

If i must die , it must be my endeavour 
So to provide that every thought of death 
May be a thought of comfort : that whenever 
That aged sire shall take away my breath , 
I May willingly lay down 
This old house that 's made of clay , 
Gladly welcoming the day 
That brings an eternal crown . 
But of all things a holy life 's the way 
Must lead me to a comfortable end ; 
To crucify my lusts , and to obey 
God's sacred will in all things : this doth tend 
Unto comfort , joy and ease . 
Mark the man that is upright , 
And sets God always in 's sight , 
That man's end is ever peace . 
What makes me fear a serpent ? It is his sting ; 
The mischief 's there : when that is taken out , 
I can look on him as a harmless thing , 
And in my bosom carry him about . 
What makes death look ruefully ? 
Not death's self : it is his sting 
That doth fear and horror bring , 
And makes men so loathe to die . 
The sting of death is sin : but there 's a Jesus 
Hath plucked it out . The guilt 's done quite away ; 
The stain is washed . He sent his spirit to ease us 
In some good measure of that kingly sway 
Which o'er us sin held before . 
Blessed work of grace ! now i 
Strongest lusts can mortify : 
In my soul sin reigns no more . 
Now in me holiness is wrought : which is 
A pious disposition of the heart , 
Inclining me to hate what 's done amiss 
In me and others , never to depart 
From God to left hand or right , 
Nor one of his laws to break ; 
But to think and do and speak 
what 's well-pleasing in his sight . 
Each act from faith and love ariseth , and 
The end i aim at is my maker's praise ; 
His word 's my rule : my warrant 's his command . 
Thus am i fitted : death , cut off my days , 
If thou wilt , within this hour , 
I will thank thee for thy pain : 
For to me to die is gain . 
I 'll not fear a jot thy power . 
What canst thou do that justly May affright me ? 
Though with thee in the dark i dwell a space , 
Yet canst thou not eternally benight me : 
Thou art my passage to a glorious place , 
Where shall not be any night . 
My raised ashes shall enjoy 
There an everlasting day , 
And an uneclipsed light . 
I fear not death because of putrefaction , 
Nor ( If i Might ) would willingly decline it : 
My body gains by it ; it is the graves best action : 
God , as a founder , melts it to refine it . 
Death cannot annihilate , 
And in despite of the grave , 
Yet i shall a body have , 
Fairer and in better state . 
God's second work excels his first by odds : 
Our second birth , life , Adam , to repair 
Our bodies , is a second work of gods , 
To make them better than at first they were , 
Glorious , immortal , sound , 
Nimble , beautiful , and so 
Splendid that from top to toe 
Not a blemish May be found . 
What beggar weeps when 's rags are thrown away 
To put on better clothes ? Who is it will grieve 
To pull a rotten house down , that it May 
Be fairer built ? Why should we not receive 
Death with both hands when he comes 
To pull off those rags that hide us , 
To unhouse us , and provide us 
Richer clothes and better homes ? 
The gripping pangs of death do not affright 
My heart at all : i have deserved more . 
And if upon no other terms i Might 
Enjoy my god , i to my God would go 
Through hell's self , although a throng 
Of an hundred thousand juries 
Of the blackest infernal furies 
Clawed me as i went along . 
Nor can those inward terrors make me quake 
Which deathbeds often on the soul do bring . 
I have no death-bed-reckonings for to make ; 
It was made while i was well , and every thing 
Was dispatched before , that i 
Nothing in the world now , save 
Home-desiring longings , have 
Then to do but just to die . 
Nor doth it trouble me that death will take me 
From those delights that are enjoyed below . 
Alas , i know that none of them can make me 
One jot the happier man , nor can bestow 
Any comfort . Carnal gladness , 
Mirth , delight and jollity , 
This world's best felicity , 
All is vanity and madness ; 
Mere empty husks . Had i as many treasures 
In my possession as the muddiest wretch 
Did ever covet , and as many pleasures 
As from the creature fleshly men can fetch ; 
Had i this : or if i were 
Supreme monarch , only Lord 
Of what earth and sea afford : 
Yet i would not settle here . 
To be dissolved is better : death doth bring 
A fairer fortune than it takes away . 
It sets us in a world where every thing 
Is a happiness , a full and solid joy , 
Not to be conceived before 
We come thither : but the bliss 
Which exceedeth all is this , 
That there we shall sin no more . 
Lord , grant a copious portion of thy spirit . 
The more i have of that the less i fear 
What death can do ; for sure i shall inherit 
All joy in heaven if i am holy here : 
Naught suits with heaven but sanctity . 
Let , my God , thy spirit and grace 
Fit me for that holy place 
And that holy company . 
meditation 5.  

If death will come , what do men mean to sin 
With so much greediness ? methinks i see 
What a sad case the godless world is in , 
How fast asleep in her security . 
Fearlessely in sin men live , 
As if death would never come , 
Or there were no day of doom 
When they must a reckoning give . 
Observe a little yonder black-mouthed swearer , 
How 's tongue with oaths and curses pelts the skies : 
It would grieve the heart of any pious hearer 
But to bear witness of his blasphemies . 
He darts wounds at God on high , 
Puts on cursing as his clothes , 
And doth wrap his tongue in oaths 
To abuse eternity . 
In lawless lust the fornicator fries , 
And longs to slake it 'twixt forbidden sheets : 
Ne'er sets the sun but his adulterous eyes 
Observes the twilight , and his harlot meets . 
That which follows , when the night 
Draws its curtain o'er the air 
To conceal this goatish pair , 
Modesty forbids to write . 
And i could show you ( Were it worth the viewing ) 
In that room three or four drunkards reeling : 
In this , as many more that sweat with spewing ; 
Some that have drunk away their sense and feeling ; 
Men of all sorts in their wine 
And their ale sit domineering , 
Cursing , railing , roaring , swearing , 
Under every base sign . 
It is said ( So vile is this big-bellied sin ) 
That in a day and less some four or five 
Of lusty drunken throats will swallow in 
More than hath kept two families alive 
A whole fortnight ( Yet made they 
Merry with it . ) Had i my wishes , 
Such gulls should not drink like fishes ; 
But their throats should change their trade 
The covetous man with his usurious clutches 
Doth catch and hold fast all the wealth he May : 
He leans on it as a cripple on his crutches . 
The miser studies nothing night and day 
But his gain : he 's like a swine 
Looking downward , like a mole 
Blind , and of an earthen soul , 
Minding nothing that 's divine . 
These , and beside these other sorts of sinners , 
In every parish you May daily see 
As greedy at their sins as at their dinners , 
And wallowing in all impiety . 
Sure these miscreants do never 
Entertain a thought of dying ; 
Nor yet are afraid of frying 
In hell flames for altogether . 
Thou God of spirits , be pleased to awe my heart 
With death and judgement : that , when i would sin , 
I May remember that i must depart , 
And whatsoever condition i am in 
When i sink under death's hand , 
( There 's no penance in the grave , 
Nor then can i mercy have ) 
So must i in judgement stand . 
meditation 6.  

Lord , what a thief is death ! it tobs us quite 
Of all the world ; great men , of all their honours ; 
Luxurious men , of all their fond delight ; 
Rich men , of all their money , farms and manors . 
Naked did the world find us , 
And the world will leave us so : 
We shall carry when we go 
Nothing , but leave all behind us . 
Let death do 's worst , ambitious men do climb 
By any sin though it be ne'er so foul : 
Gold-thirsty misers swallow any crime 
That brings gain with it , though it kill the soul . 
Here for gain is overreaching , 
Cozening , cheating , lying , stealing , 
Knavish and sinister dealing ; 
All arts of the devils teaching . 
Whilst i am well advised I 'll never strive 
T' increase my wealth , if it will increase my sin : 
I will be rather poor than seek to thrive 
By means unlawful : all 's not worth a pin . 
When mine eyelids death doth close , 
What i sinned for must be 
Shaked hands with eternally , 
But the sin that with me goes . 
I will not wast love upon these lower things , 
Nor on the choicest of them doting sit : 
For when sad death a habeas corpus brings , 
To take the world from me and me from it , 
'Gainst which i have no protection ; 
To spend love in what i May 
Nowhere but on earth enjoy , 
Were to loose all my affection . 
The longest lease of temporals God doth make 
Is but for life . I will patiently behave 
Myself , though from me God be pleased to take 
In middle age that which his bounty gave : 
Neither discontent nor passion 
Shall make me repine or grumble ; 
It is a way to make me humble , 
And takes from me a temptation . 
Thou madest my heart , Lord : keep it for thyself , 
Lest love of dust eternally undo me : 
Vouchsafe that this vain worthless empty pelf 
May never win me , though it daily woo me . 
If it were lovely , yet it is gone 
When i die . Lord , make me see 
That there is enough in thee 
To place all my love upon . 
meditation 7.  

I am a stranger and a pilgrim here : 
The world 's mine inn , it is not my dwelling-place ; 
( In this condition all my fathers were ) 
The life i live below is but a race . 
Here i sojourn some few years : 
This world is a country strange ; 
Death my pilgrimage will change 
For a home above the spheres . 
In elder time the goddess quiet had 
Her temple ; but it was placed without the gates 
Of ethnic Rome ; to show that good and bad 
Have here their vexing and disturbing fates , 
And do bear their cross about 
Whilst within the walls they stay 
Of this world , and shall enjoy 
No rest till death let them out . 
Here i am looked upon with divers eyes , 
Sometimes of envy , sometimes of disdain : 
Here i endure a thousand miseries : 
Some vex my person , some my credit stain ; 
My estate 's impaired by some : 
But yet this doth comfort me , 
That hereafter i shall be 
Better used when i come home . 
In all estates my patience shall sustain me : 
I am resolved never to repine 
Though ne'er so coursely this world entertain me : 
Such is a stranger's lot ; such must be mine . 
Were i of the world , to dwell 
Here as in my proper home , 
Without thoughts of life to come , 
Than the world would use me well . 
I am not of their minds in whom appears 
No care for any world but this below : 
Who lay up goods in store for many years , 
As if they were at home ; but will bestow 
Neither care nor industry 
Upon heaven , as if there 
They were strangers but had here 
A lease of eternity . 
The banished Naso weeps in sable strain 
The woes of banishment : nor could i tell , 
If death and it were offered , of the twain 
Which to make choice of . O! to take farewell 
Of our native soil , to part 
With our friends and children dear , 
And a wife that is so near , 
Must needs kill the stoutest heart . 
What is it then to be absent from that house , 
Eternal in the heavens , not made with hands ! 
From angels , saints , God , Christ himself , whose spouse 
Our soul is ! from a haven where nothing jands 
That defileth ; where 's no danger , 
No fear , no pain , no distress : 
All 's eternal happiness ! 
What is it to be here a stranger ! 
I have been oft abroad , yet ne'er could find 
Half that contentment which i found at home ; 
Methought that nothing suited with my mind 
Into what place soever i did come : 
Though i nothing needed there , 
Neither clothes , nor drink , nor meat , 
Nor fit recreations , yet 
Methought home exceeded far . 
Thither did my affections always bend ; 
And i have wished , before i came halfway , 
A thousand times , my journey at an end , 
And have been angry with a minutes stay : 
Sunset i did ever fear ; 
And a hill or dirty mile , 
That delayed me but a while , 
Seemed to set me back a year . 
I built not tabernacles in mine inn , 
Nor ever cried out , it is good being here . 
No company would i be ever in 
That drowned but half an hour in wine or bier . 
I have wished my horse would run 
With a far more winged speed 
Then those skittish jades that did 
Draw the chariot of the sun . 
From carnal self-love , Lord , my heart unfetter , 
And then shall i desire my heavenly home 
More than this here , because that home is better , 
And pray with fervency , thy kingdom come . 
Lord , had thy poor servant done 
What thou hast set him about , 
I would never be without 
Holy longings to be gone . 
meditation 8.  

There was a state , as i have heard it spoken , 
( The tale doth almost all belief surpass ) 
That had a custom never to be broken , 
( But a bad custom i am sure it was ) 
Amongst themselves their King to choose : 
The elected man must be 
King as long 's they would , and he 
When they pleased his crown must loose . 
This state elected and deposed when 
And whom they would : but the deposed Prince 
They suffered not to live 'mongst other men , 
But drove him to a country far from thence 
Into woeful banishment , 
Where he changed his royalty 
For want and all misery ; 
Scarce a kingly punishment . 
One King there was that whilst his crown was on , 
Knowing his subjects fickle disposition , 
Beat his crown-worthy head to think upon 
Some course of providence , to make provision 
At the place of 's banishment : 
Full-stuffed bags of money , and 
What things else Might purchase land , 
He into that kingdom sent . 
It came to pass after some certain years , 
His yoke seemed heavy , and his persons frowned : 
King-sick they were ; their purpose soon appears : 
A new King 's chosen and the old 's uncrow'nd . 
And for exile , this foul beast , 
Giddy , variable , rude , 
The unconstant multitude , 
Dealt with him as with the rest . 
But that his wiser providence was such , 
When 's banished predecessors lived poor , 
What he had sent before was full as much 
As did exclude want or desire of more . 
There he lacks not any thing ; 
He doth purchase towns and fields , 
And what else the country yields : 
In estate he 's still a King . 
So shall we fare hereafter in the next 
As we provide in this life . Sure i see 
A providence in all : who is not vexed , 
And plunged , and lean with too much industry ? 
Men of all sorts run and ride , 
Sweat and toil , and cark and care , 
Get and keep , and pinch and spare ; 
And all 's done for to provide . 
For to provide ? what ? goods , and lands , and money , 
Honours , preferments , pleasures , wealth and friends : 
( As bees in summertime provide their honey ) 
To sublunaries their provision tends , 
And no farther ; it is for dust 
That they labour and thick clay , 
For these goods that will away , 
And for treasures that will rust . 
For to provide ? for what ? Their present life , 
That 's natural ; their bodies have their care : 
Their spiritual state 's neglected : there 's no strife 
For grace and goodness . Souls immortal are , 
Living everlastingly 
In eternal woe or bliss , 
As here our provision is , 
Yet are not a jot set by . 
Men do provide amiss : full well i know it , 
I shall be banished from this sin-smote place : 
All here is fading , and i must forgo it . 
What shall i lay up for hereafter ? grace , 
An unspotted conscience , 
Faith in Christ , sobriety , 
Holiness , and honesty : 
These will help when i go hence . 
Strengthen those graces , Lord , which thou hast given , 
And i shall quickly change both care and love ; 
My care for earth into a care for heaven , 
Take off my heart from hence , and fix it above , 
And will lay up all provision 
For that life which is to come 
Whilst a stranger , that at home 
I May find a blessed condition . 
Part ii of death's impartiality : 

From whose stroke neither Riches , Can protect us . Honours , Pleasures , Friends , Youth , Nor any thing 

Sect. i. riches cannot protect us srom the stroke of death . 

Of richest men in holy writ i read , 
Whose basket & whose store the Lord had blessed , 
And in the land exceedingly increased 
Their wealthy substance ; yet they all are dead . 
Riches do not immortalize our nature : 
The richest dies as well 's the poorest creature . 
Above all , the wealth of Solomon did pass ; 
Ne'er was man Master of a greater store : 
He went beyond all Kings that went before . 
Silver as stones , and purest gold as brass , 
Adorned Jerusalem : a glorious thing ! 
Yet death strikes into dust this wealthy King . 
meditation 1.  

If 'gainst death's stroke my riches cannot arm me , 
Nor comfort me a jot when i am dying : 
I 'll take a care these witches do not harm me 
Whilst i do live . I know they will be trying 
To do me any mischief ; as before 
And now they mischief all the whole world o'er . 
Some riches hurt with that old sin of pride : 
Rich men extremely swell ; most commonly 
This sin and wealth both in one house abide : 
Poor men are loo'kd on with a scornful eye . 
Strangely is his heart puffed up with pride 's bellows 
That hath a fatter fortune than his fellows . 
His words are big , looks lofty , mind is high ; 
He with his purse will needs drive all before him : 
He ever looks for the precedency ; 
And vexed he is if men do not adore him : 
He bears the sway : another man must be , 
If not so rich , not half so good as he . 
Some men wealth doth infect with churlishness : 
They answer roughly : they are crabbed misers . 
( Course bread yields hardest crust ) this is a dress 
Wherewith wealth decks our accidental risers . 
Since nabals death a thousand rich men be 
In every point as very hogs as he . 
Some wealth makes prodigals : there 's no excess 
But they run into . Back and belly strive 
Which shall spend most : belly , with drunkenness 
And gormandizing : back , for to contrive 
New stuffs and fashions . This excessive crew 
Have ways to spend that dives never knew . 
Observe these caterpillars : one man puts 
Into his throat a cellar full of drink : 
Another makes a shambles of his guts . 
The back is not behind ; you would not think , 
How for themselves , and for their curious Dames , 
One suit of clothes a good fat manor lames . 
Some wealth makes idle : like so many drones 
They suck what others sweat for , and do hate 
All good employments . Many wealthy ones 
Have neither callings in the church nor state ; 
And during life do nothing day by day 
But sit to eat and drink , and rise to play . 
These mischiefs are in wealth and many more : 
It throws men into many a foolish lust . 
But if God's bounty multiply my store , 
I 'll drain these vices from it : for when i must 
Groan on my deathbed , these sins will displease me 
And fright my soul , but riches cannot ease me . 
Lord , either keep me poor , or make me rich 
In grace as well as goods : my wealth undress 
( If i have any ) of those vices which 
Are wont to clothe it ; so shall i possess 
Riches without those sins that riches bring ,  
That when death comes they sharpen not his sting . 
meditation 2.  

Though God doth bless me all my time along 
With best of blessings , make my courses thrive , 
Fill full my garners , make my oxen strong 
To labour ; and although his bounty give 
As much to me as to a thousand more ; 
Though i am rich and all my neighbours poor ; 
Though fortune fan me with a courteous wing ; 
Though gold be at my beck ; though i have sailed 
With prosperous gales ; though not an adverse thing 
Did ere betide me , though i never failed 
Of good success in any undertaking : 
Yet am i still one of the common making ; 
A piece of dust and clay : and i May go 
Into my grave as soon 's a poorer man . 
Our mould 's alike ; God at first made us so : 
He makes the rich man's life but like a span ; 
And so the beggars is ; just both alike : 
And both fall when impartial death doth strike . 
When they are fallen both alike they lie ; 
Both breathless , noisome , liveless , senseless , cold : 
Both like the grass are withered , dead and dry ; 
And both of them are ghastly to behold . 
The odds is this , the poor man 'mongst the crowd 
Of buried mortals hath the coursest shroud . 
Why sin the foolish sons of men for gain ? 
Why doth the landlord rack ? the us'rer bite ? 
Why doth the judge with bribes his conscience stain ? 
Why doth the bawling lawyer take delight 
In spinning causes to a needless length , 
Until his client's purse hath lost its strength ? 
Why are God's ministers become men-pleasers ? 
And why are patroness simoniacal ? 
Why are our advocates such nippy teasers 
Of honest causes ? why the devil and all 
Do misers scrape ? and why do tradesmen rear 
Their price , yet sell time dearer than their ware ? 
Sure these bad courses cannot choose but hurt us ; 
They make deaths looks more ghastly , and his sting 
More piercing : but our wealth cannot support us 
'Gainst smallest pains and fears that death will bring . 
Riches do promise much but do deceive us : 
When we have need of succour than they leave us . 
Anoint me , Lord , with eyesalve , to discern 
What poor contents the world affords at best . 
Instruct me , Lord , and i shall quickly learn 
That without thee there 's no condition blessed . 
Bad ways of gaining into hell will drive me : 
But all my wealth will not from death reprieve me . 
meditation 3.  

Some therefore sin because they do abound 
In store of wealth : this is the only ground 
Of many sins . God's laws they do transgress ; 
They wrong their equals , and the poor oppress ; 
They tread religion and civility 
Both under foot ; all kind of tyranny 
They exercise on all within their reach . 
Nothing can keep them in ; they make a breach 
Through all those fences which at the beginning 
God set to keep rebellious man from sinning : 
They will be revellers , whoremongers , swearers , 
Drunkards , oppressors , liars , and forbearers 
Of no impiety : this is the reason , 
Great men they are , and rich . It is petty treason , 
Though in a modest way , for to reprove 
Those sinful courses which our betters love . 
If we dare do it , though we have a calling 
To do it boldly , we are taxed for bawling 
And saucy fellows ; and another day 
Sure we shall smart for it . Lord , i will never say , 
I will sin because I 'm rich ; unless that i 
Could say , I 'm rich , and therefore will not die . 
meditation 4.  

If from death's stroke my riches cannot shield me , 
Nor on my deathbed any comfort give ; 
Then i will take a care that they shall yield me 
Some joy and comfort whilst i am alive , 
And never shall a jot my sins increase , 
Nor hinder me from going hence in peace . 
I will get them well : my calling shall be lawful ; 
My brows or brains shall sweat for what i have : 
And i will use my calling with an awful 
Regard of God and conscience ; nor will crave 
What i have not a right to . They do eat 
Scarce their own bread whose faces never sweat 
Unless they sweat with eating . Nor can i 
Find any warrant for those ways of gain 
Which many men do get their livings by : 
To keep a needless alehouse to maintain 
An idle family : to be a pander , 
A fortune-teller , or an ape's commander : 
A purblind Crowder , or a rogue that canteth ; 
A cuckold by consent for ready pay : 
A sturdy beggar that not one limb wanteth : 
Or one that borrows money on the way : 
A us'rer , who whether it shine or rain , 
If the sun stand not still , is sure of gain . 
For these i find no warrant : nor for dealing 
Deceitfully in selling or in buying . 
To take more than what 's sold is worth , is stealing ; 
Or to give less : the art of multiplying 
Our lands , or gold , or silver , by subtracting 
From other men's , or by unjust exacting 
What is not ours . Better ( In my opinion ) 
It were to feed on barley-bread and pottage 
Made of salt , water , and an onion : 
To wear a threadbare coat , and in a cottage 
Smoke-bound and rusty pennyless to dwell , 
Then to get wealth unless i get it well . 
And when it is justly gotten , every thought 
That i will bestow upon it shall be such 
As it deserves : if heaven's full hand hath brought 
Plenty into my bosom , if as much 
I have as i could wish , my care shall be 
To think of 't all as of a vanity . 
A vanity that , for aught i do know , 
May take its flight and in an hour leave me . 
As God had many ways for to bestow 
His bounty on me , he hath to bereave me 
As many more : as moveables i will deem it 
From me , or with me ; and i will esteem it 
A strong temptation unto many a sin , 
That never will perform what it doth promise : 
That wealth's fair books when we are deepest in 
The greater reckoning god exacteth from us . 
I will not afford my wealth a better thought : 
And i do think i think on it as i ought . 
And as i ought i will use it : not to be fuel 
For any lust , nor to maintain my riot ; 
Not to be prodigal , vainglorious , cruel ; 
Nor yet to make my potent purse disquiet 
My poorer brother : but from thence I 'll raise 
My neighbour's profit and my maker's praise . 
Where there is need , i will ready be to give , 
Glad to distribute : naked ones i will cover : 
Hungry , and thirsty souls i will relieve : 
Widows distressed in me shall find another 
Husband : to orphans i will be in stead 
Of parents to provide their daily bread . 
I will never empty send the poor away : 
The church shall ever find my purse untied : 
The King shall have his due without delay : 
The commonwealth shall never be denied . 
Thus shall my wealth be common unto many , 
If ever God be pleased to send me any . 
Riches so justly gotten , and employed 
So piously , although they cannot make 
A man immortal , that he should avoid 
The grave and rottenness ; yet do not shake 
The soul with terrors and such desperate fears , 
As what 's ill gotten doth , when death appears , 
Make me a faithful steward , holy father , 
Of what thou hast entrusted me withal . 
Where i strawed not grant i May never gather ; 
Nor sin in spending : then send death to call 
Me to account , Lord , when thou wilt , and i 
Shall entertain the message joyfully . 
Sect. 2.  honour's cannot protect us from the stroke of death . 

Of honours all that can be said doth meet 
In Kings and Princes ; glory , majesty , 
Command , and titles : yet their sacred feet 
Trudge to the grave-ward . Power , royalty , 
A kingdom , crown , and sceptre cannot be 
Protections against mortality . 
Princes are God's on earth ; yet sure they must , 
As well as meaner men , be sick and die : 
Their royal bodies shall be changed to dust : 
No crown below is worn eternally . 
Of all those Kings which in God's book we read 
One died , and another reigned in 's stead . 
If good and loyal subjects had their wish , 
A gracious Prince should never see the grave ; 
Nor should his royal corpse be made a dish 
For worms : but pious wishes will not save 
A King from dust . As other men's , his breath 
Is in his nostrils : crowns must bow to death . 
Sure , were it not a kind of petty treason 
To wish his majesty so long without 
A crown of glory , i should think it reason 
To pray his lamp of life Might ne'er go out . 
Though not in 's self , yet , Lord , grant he May be 
Immortal in a blessed progeny . 
meditation 1.  

'Mongst us an humble great one is a wonder 
Rarer by odds then is a winter's thunder . 
Great men and good each other seldom kiss : 
Pride to preferment 's married . O! there is 
Not a thought within their brain 
Of a grave , nor yet of seeing 
Death ; nor do they dream of being 
Changed into dust again . 
Consider , Sir , though you have been a taster 
Of Prince's favours , mounted all degrees 
Of honour ; have been called , Lord , and Master ; 
Though your approach hath bowed as many knees 
As once mighty Haman's : yet 
Is it not eternity 
That you hold your greatness by . 
Death and you must one day meet . 
As i remember , i have read a story , 
That one in embassy sent from the King 
Of Persia to Rome , was showed the glory 
Of that proud city : every famous thing 
That was by the Romans thought 
To express the great and mighty 
Prowess of their glorious city , 
Thither was the Persian brought . 
There he beheld such glorious structures , raised 
To dare the skies , that outwent all examples ; 
Where art and cost workman and founder praised : 
Baths , theatres , tombs , monuments , and temples , 
Statues that would wonder-strike 
Any mortal man that should 
Once behold them ; neither could 
All the world show the like . 
After this view Rome's mighty Emperor , 
Longing for praises , in the Persian tongue 
Demanded of this strange ambassador 
What he now thought of Rome . I should do wrong 
To your sacred majesty , 
Thus th' ambassador replied , 
And this glorious place beside , 
If i should not magnify 
Both you and it . But one thing i dislike 
In Rome itself : i see that death doth reign 
As well here as in Persia , and doth strike 
The greatest down , and when he please doth chain 
Persons , senators and Kings 
In cold fetters made of dust : 
Even noble Romans must 
Feel what putrefaction brings . 
Your Emperors themselves have had their turns 
In funeral piles . These tombs can testify 
The Caesar's mortal . In these sacred urns 
What lies but royal dust ? Mortality 
Happens here : and i know no man 
But hath power to hold his breath 
As long , and is free from death 
As much as the noblest Roman . 
Look we a little on this land of ours : 
Here 's plenty , peace and every other blessing . 
Into her bosom God in plenteous showers 
Rains kindnesses that are beyond expressing . 
Sure we of this kingdom May 
Justly our creator praise 
For a share in happier days 
Than Rome did at best enjoy . 
Ours is a land of barley and of wheat : 
Our stones are iron , and our hills yield brafse . 
A land wherein th' inhabitants do eat 
Bread without scarceness ; here our blessings pass 
All enumeration : 
What God severally bestows 
Upon others jointly flows 
From his bounty to this nation . 
Yet here men die too : not the russet clowns , 
And peasants only that do hold the plow , 
And shepherds that sit piping on the downs , 
And milkmaids that do curtsy to a cow ; 
But those noble men that have 
Titles , lordships , farms and manors , 
And a great book full of honours : 
These go down into the grave . 
See you not yonder super-stately palace ? 
Three generations since that house was builded . 
A great man did it for his lordship's solace 
In summertime ; but dying up he yielded 
To his heir this stately pile : 
This heir left it to his brother ; 
He died too : and then another 
Swaggered there a little while . 
And he that had it last is now removed 
A story lower down into the dust . 
Those swelling titles which were so beloved ; 
That great estate in which the man did trust ; 
Troops of gallants that did give 
Their attendance ; all that treasure 
Waiting on his lordship's pleasure 
Could not keep the man alive . 
Mark yonder marble-tomb : beneath it hath 
This man a lodging . All those lines you see 
On this side are a praising epitaph , 
And on the other side his titles be . 
Of this fabric if we Might 
One piece from another sunder , 
And behold what lieth under , 
It would be scarce so fair a sight . 
Great ones , remember that there is a place 
Which poor men call a deathbed , and a time 
Of parting hence ; you walk a nimble pace 
To earth-ward every hour . Here though you climb 
Up to honour's highest round , 
Drink a cup full to the brim 
Of the world , in pleasures swim , 
Death will lay you under ground . 
meditation 2.  

Whose heart so adamantine but would weep 
Sad crimson drops to think upon some risers ▪ 
Lord , what a wicked shuffling they do keep 
To lift themselves ! Some have been sacrificers 
Of their fathers , brothers , friends , 
Kinsfolk , children , and have stood 
Wetshod every step in blood , 
To attain their lofty ends . 
Of martyrs what a lamentable heap 
Did Herod make for fear to loose his crown ! 
A mother would have sold a cradle cheap 
To buy a coffin or a mourning gown . 
This fell tyrant's rage appears 
Running down each parent's face : 
His wrath left in every place 
Childless mothers drowned in tears . 
And Absolom , that miracle of beauty , 
So eagerly did long to be a King , 
That he could soon unlearn his filial duty , 
And by a strange rebellion fain would bring 
The thrice-venerable head 
Of his aged father down 
To the grave without a crown , 
And he triumph in his stead . 
Abimelech , so strong was his ambition , 
A bloody bargain made with certain men 
Of Belial , and to hinder competition 
Did sacrifice at once threescore and ten 
Of his brothers on a stone : 
With so foul and deep a guilt 
So much harmless blood is spilt , 
That himself May reign alone . 
Of that inhuman hell bred tragedy 
By Athaliah on the royal seed , 
The motive was desire of majesty , 
And that her own arms Might the better speed . 
Our third Richard goes for one 
Of those butchers who think good 
To cement their crowns with blood , 
And by murders reach a throne . 
The great Turks absolute prerogative , 
Which in security his crown mainteins , 
Is not to suffer one of them to live 
That hath a drop of royal blood in 's veins : 
When he 's crowned there 's nothing lacking 
That May to the safety tend 
Of this monarch , but to send 
The ghosts of his kinsmen packing . 
If i at leisure were to write a story 
Of such black deeds as these at large , i could 
Tell you of numbers who to purchase glory , 
Honours and high rooms in the world , have sold 
( And this policy they call ) 
A good conscience , dearer far 
Than a thousand kingdoms are , 
And to boot their god and all . 
And yet when all is done , there dwells a God above , 
A god that 's greater than the greatest are , 
Who can and will send death for to remove 
The greatest hence , and bring them to the bar : 
Where must stand both small and great , 
To have sentence e'er they go 
Of eternal bliss or woe 
At God's dreadful judgement-seat . 
When you are seated highest let your carriage 
Be full of piety : you do an act 
Worthy your greatness if you make a marriage 
It it and goodness , if you do contract 
Honours unto holiness . 
Ever give the Lord his due 
Honour who hath honoured you : 
Then will death affright the less . 
Affright the less ? It will not affright at all . 
The errand 's welcome when a charge is given 
To that grim pursuivant that he must call 
Your honours hence unto a court in heaven . 
To be great is not the thing 
That can dying-comforts yield : 
Goodness only is the field 
Whence all soul-refreshings spring . 
meditation 3.  

If ever it should please God and the King 
( Which i do not desire ) to give me honours ; 
Yet never should my best preferments bring 
Vices to boot : they should not change my manners . 
Many a man hath been good 
Unpreferred , and not a slave 
To his lusts ; yet honours have 
Put him in another mood . 
Of Saul we hear no evil whilst he stood 
Endowed with nothing but a private fortune : 
And afterward we hear as little good 
Of Saul a King : his honours did importune 
His bad nature to produce 
Such fruits as were too unfit 
For a King , and to commit 
Sins that were beyond excuse . 
As long as man is limited within 
The bounds of humble , base and mean estate , 
He seems to make some conscience of a sin , 
And one that would be good at any rate : 
But no wickedness he spares 
When ( By chance ) the man is mounted 
And 'mongst great ones is accounted ; 
Then the man himself declares . 
Then his depraved nature with loose reins 
Runs uncontrolledly into the mire 
Of all impiety ; no sin remains 
Unacted by him : doth he but desire 
To be wicked , vain or idle , 
Any lust to satisfy , 
That lust he will gratify : 
His affections wear no bridle . 
I will never be deboist although my seat 
Of glory in the world be ne'er so high : 
I will not therefore sin because I 'm great ; 
For if i greater were , yet i must die , 
And must at God's bench appear , 
Where my sentence shall be given 
To receive a hell or heaven , 
As my doings have been here . 
Sect. 3.  pleasures cannot protect us from the stroke of death . 

Under the sun there was not any joy 
Which Solomon that wise and famous King 
Had not a taste of : whatsoever May 
Gladness , content , delight and solace bring , 
That he from the creature gathers ; 
Not one pleasure doth he keep 
His heart from : yet he 's asleep 
In the dust among his fathers . 
His senses had those objects which delight , 
Content , and please and ravish most his touch ; 
His taste , his hearing , smelling , and his sight , 
His mind and humour too , all had as much 
Of delicious satisfaction 
As from all beneath the sky 
Ever could be fetched by 
Any possible extraction . 
Three hundred concubines he had to please 
His touch : by turns each of them was his guest 
At night . Seven hundred wives beside all these ; 
The worst of them a Princess at the least . 
Such a female army meets , 
To make his delight run o'er . 
Sure they are enough to store 
Twice five hundred pair of sheets . 
To please his taste this great Kings daily cheer 
Exceeded for variety and plenty : 
He had his roebuck and his fallow-deer , 
His fatted fowl , and every other dainty . 
He had palate-pleasing wine : 
Gormandizers , whose best wishes 
Terminate in toothsome dishes , 
Nowhere else would sup or dine . 
And every day both men and women-singers 
Imprisoned his ear with charming voices : 
The viol touched with artificial fingers , 
An organs breathing most melodious noises : 
Sackbut , psaltery , recorder , 
The shrill cornet , and the sharp 
Trumpet , Dulcimer and harp ; 
These all sounded in their order . 
And in his gardens he had lovely ranks 
Of flowers for odour all sweets else excelling , 
Whose beauteous lustre stellified the banks ; 
All these were to delight his sense of smelling , 
And perfumes of sweetest savour , 
Which all other nations bring 
As a present from their King 
Who did woo his princely favour . 
For objects which were wont to please the eye , 
He wanted none . Did he desire a sight 
Of what Might most affect ? variety 
Of loveliest objects spangled with delight 
Everiewhere themselves present : 
Scarce did anywhere appear 
Other objects than did wear 
Outsides clothed with content . 
Behold his thousand wives ! If he would know 
The height of beauty , it is seen in those . 
A battle in a field of sanguine snow 
Betwixt the spotless lily and the rose : 
Part they would on no condition , 
Nor would either of them yield ; 
Yet at length are reconciled , 
And there made a composition . 
His gorgeous clothes , his silver and his gold , 
His jewels , his incomparable treasure 
Were all of them delightsome to behold , 
And gave the eye a glorious glut of pleasure . 
His friends , his magnificent 
Buildings , fishponds , gardens , bowers 
Interlaced with gallant flowers 
Gave both eye and mind content . 
Yet he 's dead . Delights cannot protect us 
From death's assaults ; pleasures eternize not 
Our nature : yea , when sickness shall deject us 
They will not ease nor comfort us a jot . 
What doth most exactly please us 
Here appears not where a grave is ; 
And what most of all doth ravish 
On a deathbed will not ease us . 
meditation 1.  

Methinks the trade of brainless epicures 
Is not so good as it doth seem to be . 
The sweetest cup of luxury procures 
No man below an immortality . 
Yea , when sicknesses do lay 
Him upon his bed , and strain 
Every part with deadly pain , 
All his pleasures fly away . 
Let 's put the case there was a belly-god , 
Whose study it was to give his throat content ; 
To sacrifice to 's paunch both roast and sod 
Was his religion . Every element 
Its employment had : the waters , 
Fruitful earth and nimble air , 
Ransacked with a costly care , 
For fish , flesh and fowl , were cators : 
The other cooked it . This luxurious race 
Did breathe his stomach twice a day at least ; 
And each dish floated in provoking sauce , 
Which still afresh his appetite increased . 
From dives that 's now in hell , 
For a table full of rare , 
Toothsome and delicious fare , 
This man bears away the bell . 
Well ; this fat hog of Epicurus sty 
Falls sick of surfeiting , or else the gout 
Or dropsy gripes him most tormentingly , 
That you would think his soul were going out . 
Pains do hinder him from sleeping , 
He lies restless , and is so 
Full of tossings to and fro 
That his house is filled with weeping . 
His servants , seeing him so out of quiet , 
Sadly bespoke him thus , Sir , here 's a pheasant , 
A dish of partridge , larks , or quails , ( A diet 
Your worship loves ) a cup of rich and pleasant 
Wine that comforts where it goes , 
Muscadine , Canary , Sherrie , 
That hath often made you merry : 
This May ease you of your throes . 
The man replied , if i had wine by odds 
Better than nectar , which the poets feign 
Was drunk in goblets by the heathen gods , 
It would not ease me of my smallest pain . 
Should God rain me from the skies 
Manna , glorious angels food , 
It would not do me any good : 
'Gainst it would my stomachrise 
There was another that placed no delight 
In any thing but wealth ; his chiefest good 
Was purest gold : whether it were wrong or right 
He would be gaining : for he never stood 
Upon conscience at all . 
And to cry down avarice , 
As he thought , was a device 
Merely puritanical . 
To lie , to cheat , to swear , and , which is worse , 
To forswear , to dissemble in his dealing , 
Went ever down with him as things of course : 
Nor would he slack a jot at downright stealing . 
Blind he was not ; yet he saw 
Not that statute-usury 
Was at all forbidden by 
Any part of moral law . 
It was fish whatever came within his net : 
Sweet smelled the dunghill that afforded gain . 
On such a thriving pin his heart was set , 
No thoughts but golden lodged in his brain . 
Scraping thus early and late , 
And increasing by these bad 
Ways and means , at length he had 
Heaped up a vast estate . 
They say a Turkish musulman , that dyes 
A faithful servant unto Mahomet , 
Shall presently enjoy a paradise 
Of brave delights indeed : the place is set 
All about with glorious matters ; 
There are rivers , pleasant benches 
Strawed with flowers , & gallant wenches 
That have eyes as broad as platters , 
And many other joys as good as these . 
But all are babbles to that strong content 
Wherewith the man we told you of doth please 
Himself in his estate : more merriment 
In the images of Kings 
Doth he find then six or seven 
Martyred Turks do in their heaven . 
Hearken how the miser sings ; 
I will eat , drink , and play , 
And i will freely enjoy 
My pleasures before i am old ; 
I will be sorry no more , 
For my soul hath in store 
Abundance of silver and gold . 
In this day and night 
Will i place my delight ; 
It shall fatten my heart with laughter . 
No man shall excel me ; 
For who is it can tell me 
What pleasures there will be hereafter ? 
His irreligious song was hardly ended , 
When at his gate was heard one softly knocking : 
It was that tyrant death , who came attended 
With troops of gripping throes ; all these came flocking 
Round about this golden fool . 
As the issue did assure us , 
God had sent these ghastly furies 
For to take away his soul . 
Alas , Sir , said his servants what May be 
The cause you send us out such woeful groans ? 
How fell you into such an agony ? 
What ails your throat , your head , your heart , your bones 
Or your stomach , or your brains , 
That you howl so ? here before you 
Is that which must needs restore you , 
And ease your extremest pains . 
Here 's gold and silver and as stately stuff 
As England , Scotland , France , or Ireland yields : 
Of jewels and of plate you have enough : 
Of any man you have the fruitfullest fields . 
Fattest oxen throng your stall ; 
Tenants tumble in your rent : 
Those to whom you money Lent 
Bring both use and principal . 
This cannot choose but comfort . But the man , 
That lay upon his easeless deathbed sprawling , 
Made this reply , if any of you can 
By marks infallible make sure my calling 
To my soul , and my election ; 
If from any text divine 
You could prove that Christ is mine , 
This would be a good refection . 
Or if you could assure my parting ghost 
Of seeing God to all eternity , 
Of being one amongst that heavenly host 
Whose bliss it is to praise him endlessely ; 
This were comfort that accordeth 
With his case that is distressed 
As now i am , but the rest 
On a deathbed none affordeth . 
There was another man whose occupation 
Was to pass time away : he made a trade 
Of that which men do call a recreation : 
He was indeed a very merry blade . 
Taverns , bowling-alleys , plays , 
Dancing , fishing , fowling , racing , 
Hawking , Hunting , coursing , tracing , 
Took up all his healthful days . 
But on a time a sudden sickness came , 
And seized him in each extremer part , 
( This grudging did begin to spoil his game ) 
But at the length it fastened on his heart ; 
There it plunged him woefully , 
And forthwith the man is led 
Home and laid upon his bed : 
Think him now at point to die . 
A little after came into the room 
A gallant troup of necessary stuff , 
His coachman , falconer , huntsman , page , and groom , 
His Mistress with her hands both in a muff , 
Sorry all to see him so . 
But see how these fools invent 
To give a sick man content , 
And to ease him ere they go . 
One breaks a jest , another tells a tale ; 
One strikes the lute , another sings a ditty ; 
( But neither of them pray to God at all ) 
Another tells what news is in the city : 
Every man is in his vein , 
And all jointly do contrive 
Pleasant passages to drive 
Out of door their Master's pain . 
They asked him if he pleased to take the air , 
Or call for 's coach and ride to see a play . 
And whether he would hunt the buck or hare , 
Or to a tavern go to drive away 
Or to drown times tediousness , 
Or else to a tennis-court 
Whither gallants do resort , 
Or else play a game at chess . 
The man replied , ye know i must be gone 
The way of all , i cannot tell how soon ; 
And i have other things to think upon : 
Already it is with me afternoon ; 
Erelong my declining sun 
Needs must set . Oh! my life hangs 
On a thread : these mortal pangs 
Crack it . Out my glass is run . 
Time was i doted on these idle toys : 
Now can they not a dram of comfort yield . 
Too late i see they are not deathbed joys , 
No refuge from soul-vexing storms , no shield 
When a mortal blow is given . 
Prate no more : let not a man 
Open 's mouth unless he can 
Tell me how to get to heaven . 
There was another that for nothing cared 
( It was a woman ) but for vain excess 
In bravery of clothes ; no cost was spared , 
Nor art , nor care , that served to express 
To the full a female pride : 
But at length it came to pass 
That this spruce and gallant lass 
Fell extremely sick and died . 
But i must tell you , that , whilst like a lion 
Pains tore her bones in pieces , ere she sent 
Her last breath out , ( Imagine her of Zion 
A matchless daughter ) to her chamber went , 
Weeping ripe , her good handmaiden , 
Purposing as much as May be 
To cheer up her dying Lady : 
For with comforts was she laden . 
Thus she began , and spoke it with a grace , 
Be comforted , good madam , never let 
A little sickness spoil so good a face ; 
Your ladyship cannot so soon forget 
Your contents . If ever any 
Gentlewoman lived that Might 
Find materials of delight , 
You ; good madam , have as many . 
Here for your feet are tinkling ornaments ; 
Here are your bonnets , and your net-work-cauls , 
Fine linen tono that every eye contents , 
Your head-bands , tablets , earrings , chains , and falls , 
Your nose-jewels , and your rings , 
Your hoods , crisping-pins , & wimples , 
Glasses that bewray your pimples , 
Vails , and other pretty things : 
Here are your dainty mantles , and your suits 
Of changeable apparel , and your tires 
Round like the moon , your bracelets , ( Finger-fruits ) 
Of busy hours ) mufflers , and golden wires ; 
And so many more that no man 
Can repeat nor yet remember 
From October to September : 
This would comfort any woman . 
Suppose her , if you will , an English Lady ; 
And think you hear her waiting-gentlewoman 
Bespeak her thus , madam , here is a gaudy 
And glorious show , ( These fashions are not common . ) 
Here 's your beaver and your feather , 
Here are silver-ribband knots , 
Trunks full of rich riding-coats , 
Gallant shelters 'gainst the weather . 
Here are your holland and your cambrick-smocks , 
Your gowns of velvet , satin , taffaty , 
Irons to curvifie your flaxen locks , 
And spangled roses that outshine the sky : 
For your head here 's precious gear , 
Bonelace-cros-cloths , squares & shadows , 
Dressings , which your worship made us 
Work upon above a year . 
Rich chains of pearl to tie your hair together , 
And others to adorn your snowy breast ; 
Silk stockings , starlike shoes of Spanish leather : 
And that which far excelleth all the rest 
And begets most admiration , 
Of your clothes is not their matter , 
Though the world affords not better , 
But it is their frenchest fashion . 
Madame , believe it , the fairest of the graces 
Subscribes to you . Whenever you appear 
Adorned with your gold and silver-laces , 
Your presence makes the greediest eye good cheer . 
This consideration 
In time past was wont to please you : 
Now then , madam , let it ease you 
And afford you consolation . 
The dying woman , when this speech was done , 
After a groan or two made this reply , 
Doth such a curtain-lecture suit with one 
That every hour doth look when she should die ? 
It is not congruous . Werest thou able 
My poor naked soul to dress 
With a saviour's righteousness , 
This indeed were comfortable : 
But all the rest is not . Oh! how i grieve 
To think upon my former vanity : 
Alas , i feel these toys cannot relieve , 
Nor ease , nor comfort . Thus let luxury 
Pitch on what it will , its joys 
Are but painted , nor can bring us 
Ease when pangs of death do wring us , 
Much less can they make our days 
Eternal here . Thy servant , Lord , beseecheth 
The presence of thy spirit that discovers 
How vain that carnal joy is which bewitcheth 
With pleasant poison all her sottish lovers . 
Letnot earth-delights forestall me : 
Help thy servant to provide 
Pleasures that will then abide 
When thou sendest death to call me . 
meditation 2.  

Farewell those pleasures which the creatures breed : 
These carnal comforts shall be none of mine ; 
They slink away in time of greatest need : 
I 'll get me comforts that are more divine , 
Such as God provideth for us 
By his spirit and in his word : 
They are such as will afford 
Joy unspeakable and glorious . 
Unsanctified palates cannot find 
A relish in God's service : it is their folly 
That nothing in it suiteth with their mind , 
That they account religion melancholy . 
And the cause of their misprision 
Is because they cannot see 
Things divine ; for yet they be 
In their natural condition . 
But sanctified souls have better eyes . 
Each person in the sacred trinity 
Sends comfort down , and such as far outvies 
The best delight that is below the sky . 
Father , son , and holy ghost , 
Be it spoke with reverence , 
Seem to strive which shall dispense 
Blessings that do comfort most . 
The father , as his title often writes 
Himself a god of peace and consolation , 
He sends me comforts by those sacred lights 
Which bring me errands from his habitation : 
And so firm and full and free 
Is each promise in his book , 
That on whichsoe'r i look 
Blessed comforts i do see : 
So firm , that first the hugest hills and mountains 
Shall dance out of their places , stars shall fall , 
Streams shall run backward to their mother-fountains , 
The earth shall tumble , ere he will recall 
One of 's promises : for why , 
( And this gives strong consolation 
In the midst of temptation ) 
He 's a god , and cannot lie . 
So full , that there 's not any thing left out 
That i could wish . What i would have him be 
God is . Would i be compassed about 
With mercy ? find relief in misery ? 
Would i by his spirit be led ? 
And have all my sins forgiven ? 
And hereafter go to heaven ? 
All this God hath promised . 
So free , that to deserve that promised glory 
I nothing have but what his mercy gave me : 
It is gratis rather than compensatory 
Whatever God doth to convert or save me . 
And if any good i do , 
It is done by supplies divine ; 
So God's work and none of mine : 
Grace begins and ends it too . 
What if by nature i was made a sheep , 
And by corruption i am gone astray , 
Whether i think , or speak , or do , or sleep , 
Or wake , do ever wander from the way 
I was set in , and am tossed 
So by lust that my soul wanders 
Into many by-meanders , 
Like a silly sheep that 's lost ? 
Yet God 's my shepherd : when his mercy spied me 
Wand'ring it brought me home ; and ever since 
It doth watch over , feed , defend , and guide me , 
And ever will do so till i go hence : 
And hereafter in the even , 
When my latest sand is run , 
And my pasture here is done , 
It will fold my soul in heaven . 
The son doth comfort . It was his errand down 
To preach glad tidings to the meek , and turn 
Their woe to ease ; to earn a glorious crown 
For sinners , and to comfort those that mourn ; 
Brokenhearted ones to bind , 
And to set at liberty 
Prisoners in captivity , 
And give eyesight to the blind . 
There 's comfort in his wounds : his sacred stripes 
Do heal our leprous souls of all their sores : 
It is nothing but his precious blood that wipes 
Our guilt away and cancelleth our scores . 
Six times did he shed his blood , 
( And sure out estate did need it 
That so many times he did it ) 
And each drop was for our good . 
Those circumcision-drops of 's infancy , 
Those drops that 's anguish in the garden vented , 
Those drops when he was scourged jewishly , 
Those drops when 's head with sharpest thorns was tented , 
Those drops when his limbs were nailed 
To the cross , those when the fierce 
Soldier's spear his side did pierce ; 
Each drop for our good prevailed . 
There 's comfort in his cross : that vile old man 
That hangs about us to our dying day 
Is crucified with him that it can 
Not exercise half of its wont sway : 
Lessened is its kingly power . 
Surely sin , it struggles so , 
Hath received a mortal blow , 
And is dying every hour . 
There 's comfort in his death : for us he died , 
For us he felt his father's heavy wrath , 
And his impartial justice satisfied , 
And us his all-sufficient passion hath 
Plucked from Satan vi & armis , 
And his meritorious pain 
Freed us from sins guilt and stain , 
And whatever else Might harm us . 
There 's comfort in his resurrection too . 
He rose again that we Might be accounted 
Righteous and just , ( This no man else could do ) 
And that our sins , whose number far surmounted 
All the stars that shine in heaven , 
All our hairs , and all the sand 
That lies scattered on the strand , 
For his sake Might be forgiven . 
And God the holy ghost doth comfort bring : 
By special office it is his employment 
To settle in the soul a lively spring , 
From whence doth issue such a sweet enjoyment 
Of divine , heart-pleasing bliss , 
As the world will not believe , 
Nor can any heart conceive 
But the heart wherein it is . 
It is this blessed spirit that doth seal 
Assurance to my conscience of a share 
In what God , in and through his son , doth deal 
To needy sinners that converted are . 
It assures me of God's love 
In the free and full remission 
Of my sins , and exhibition 
Of those joys that are above . 
Let now the world , that 's wont to tell a story 
Of strange delights , show me but such a pleasure , 
As to be sure of God , and Christ , and glory , 
And then I 'll hug it as my choicest treasure . 
Thus each person of the three 
Is employed ( If i do live 
Holy as i ought ) to give 
Joy and comfort unto me . 
Grant a man once to be in Christ , and he 
On sublunary pleasures soon will trample ; 
And yet for pleasures , who shows best , will vie 
With all the world : give him but one example , 
What gets pleasure , and what feeds it ; 
Whatsoever 'mongst earthly things 
To the mind most pleasure brings ; 
He can show what far exceeds it . 
Can learning please ? he is a man of parts . 
Me thinks sure at his very finger's end 
He hath exactly all the liberal arts ; 
At least he hath such arts as will commend 
Any man a great deal more , 
And will sooner bring to heaven , 
Then will any of those seven 
On which learned men do poor . 
His logic is so scientifical , 
His syllogisms are in so blessed a mood , 
A thousand arguments his heart lets fall 
That rightly from good premises conclude 
Him a child of God on high , 
And a member of his son , 
And an heir , when 's race is run , 
Of a blessed eternity . 
His rhetoric excels . He can persuade 
More than those well-penned sweet orations which 
Demosthenes or Tully ever made . 
Doth he that prayer-hearing God beseech ? 
Presently his ear he gains . 
For fine words it is no matter : 
Let him like a swallow chatter 
Or a crane , yet he obtains . 
And for arithmetic ; his numeration 
Is of his days : this makes the man apply 
His heart to wisdom , that in any station 
He May perform his duty prudently . 
And those sins , to make them hateful , 
Which his conscience most do cumber 
Every day the man doth number ; 
And God's blessings , to be grateful . 
And for addition ; it is his diligence 
Virtue to add to faith ; to virtue , knowledge ; 
Love , godliness , peace , kindness , patience , 
One to another : that his soul 's a college 
Filled with divinest graces : 
And not one grace idle lies , 
But all do their exercise 
In their several turns and places . 
When he subtracteth , it is not from the poor , 
As most men do , not from the King nor church ; 
But from sins monstrous body . More and more 
He weakens the old man that lies at lurch 
In each of his faculties , 
And his master-sin , the strongest 
Lust that hath been harboured longest 
In his soul he mortifies . 
He multiplies not , as in many places 
Men do , his riches ; but he multiplies 
And doth augment his saving gifts and graces , 
If not in habit yet in exercise . 
He divides his goods , he feedeth 
Hungry bellies , and relieveth 
Such as are distressed , and giveth 
Unto every one that needeth . 
When he reduceth , it is his conversation 
In every point from what it was by nature : 
He moulds his life into another fashion , 
And shows himself to be a new-made creature . 
And for such a man's progression ; 
He 's not fixed in his place 
Like a statue , but in grace 
Grows to credit his profession . 
He ever worketh by the rule of three 
That do above in heaven bear record . 
The golden rule , whereby his actions be 
Squared and directed , is their written word . 
Though sometimes he work by fractions , 
Gives God broken services , 
'Cause he 's flesh in part ; yet is 
He sincere in all his actions . 
And for a pious man's astronomy ; 
What if he cannot tell the several motions 
Those orbs have which do roll about the sky ? 
Stars names , site , bigness , and such other notions ? 
What if he know not how soon 
The sun will eclipsed be ? 
Nor hath wit enough to see 
The new world that 's in the moon ? 
Yet he doth know the milky way that leads 
Unto the palace of the highest King : 
Whose presence the whole host of heaven dreads , 
Who made the stars , the spheres , and every thing ; 
Steers the course that each orb runs , 
Binds stars influence , loseth the bands 
Of Orion , and his hands 
Guide Arcturus with his sons . 
For geometry ; what if he cannot tell 
How many miles the vast earth is about ? 
Yet doth his pious art by far excel 
In finding many greater matters out : 
Matters that exceed the strength 
Of best wits , the full extension 
Of Christ 's love in each dimension , 
Height , and depth , & breadth , & length . 
For grammar ; he can wickedness decline . 
His supernatural philosophy 
Is wisdom to salvation . Most divine 
His music is : that God that dwells on high 
Is pleased with no other tone . 
There is nothing he can hear 
Makes such music in his ear 
As a sanctified groan . 
For physic ; his most admirable knowledge 
Hath found out a catholicon . ( This ranks 
His skill deservedly above the college , 
Above French or Italian mountebanks . ) 
There 's no sickness , he is sure , 
Be it ne'er so strong or foul , 
That affecteth any soul , 
But the blood of Christ can cure . 
The greatest clerk is but a learned fool , 
if 's learning be not mixed with godliness , 
The greatest scholar's he that goes to school 
To learn of Christ the ways of holiness . 
Thus if learning be a treasure 
That doth please , or skill in arts , 
Or to be a man of parts ; 
He that 's holy finds this pleasure . 
Doth toothsome and delicious cheer delight ? 
The godly have it once a week at least . 
Our bounty-handed saviour doth invite 
His servants to a rich and sumptuous feast , 
Where his own self is our server ; 
Such a feast of fattest things 
As if all the guests were Kings : 
Where faith May be her own carver . 
Do riches please ? A godly man's estate 
Surpasseth that of Croesus : he hath more 
Than out of Christ is had at any rate . 
God hath endowed him with a blessed store 
Better than a heap of gold , 
Which nor thief , nor moth , nor rust , 
Can steal , eat , or turn to dust : 
His are bags that ne'er wax old . 
God's rich and precious promises are his , 
Which by a precious faith he makes his own : 
God's richest mercy ; there 's no wealth like this : 
Christ's precious blood , whereof a drop alone 
Was of higher valuation 
Than all men and angels be , 
Or what e'er the sun did see 
Ever since the first creation . 
Doth rich apparel please ? Christ's righteousness 
Clothes all his members to conceal their shame . 
Ne'er was King's daughter in so pure a dress , 
Unless she were adorned with the same . 
It is a robe that God doth please : 
Angels that on God do wait , 
And ne'er lost their first estate , 
Are not clothed like one of these . 
For all delights , the cheating world hath none 
So good by half 'mongst all her painted store 
As those the soul finds in religion : 
With purest joy the pious heart runs o'er . 
Let the world diversify 
Her delights a thousand ways , 
Yet they come short of those joys 
That are found in piety . 
When i must die , my joy that 's natural 
Forsaketh me ; that which is secular 
Takes leave afsoon as ever death doth call ; 
Joys that were criminal converted are 
Into most tormenting fears : 
Only that which is divine 
On a deathbed will be mine . 
And what if when death appears 
It cannot shield me from that fatal blow ? 
( I would not it should do me so much wrong : 
For if i were immortal here below 
I were not happy ) yet it will go along 
With me when i do depart . 
Carnal joys , Lord , from me banish , 
Let divine delights replenish 
Every corner of my heart . 
Sect. 4.  friends cannot protect us from the stroke of death . 

If i were great , rich , prosperous , secure , 
Successful in the world , i should be sure 
That more time-servers would my friendship woo , 
Than i could reckon in a year or two . 
As greedy eagles to a carcase hasten , 
And with sharp talons on their prey do fasten ; 
So would they flock about me . Or if i 
Could learn the art of popularity , 
I Might be rich in friends , yet all my store 
Would not know how to keep death out of door . 
meditation 1.  

Of Proteus it is feigned that he could 
Transform himself to any kind of shape : 
Into a dove , or lamb , and when he would , 
Into a tiger , lion , bear , or ape , 
Or a mountain , rock , or spring , 
Or earth , water , fire , air , 
Into any forms tha• are 
Stamped in any kind of thing . 
And Aristippus could exactly flatter : 
He had the art of winning gainful friends , 
And , that his fortune Might be made the fatter , 
Had all behaviours at his finger's ends . 
He could groan when 's friend was sickly , 
And could weep when he was sad : 
Any humour , good or bad , 
Did become him very quickly . 
Did i believe that metempsychosis 
Pythagoras did dream of , i should swear 
That Proteus ghost to this day neither is 
In hell nor yet in heaven , but doth wear 
Now a body , and the base 
Ghost of Aristippus dwells 
In a thousand bodies : else 
How could thousands have the face 
To personate so many humours ? act 
So many parts at once , and balk no sin ? 
Yea , perpetrate with ease the basest fact 
That hell e'er punished , to wind them in-to great friendships , though they miss 
Heavens favour , all the while 
Dreaming that a great man's smile 
Is on earth the only bliss ? 
And yet when that last enemy shall come 
And grind their aching bones with gripping throes , 
To bring their bodies to their longest home , 
There 's not a man 'mongst all their friends that knows 
How to take away their pain . 
In comes ghastly death among 
The midst of that friendly throng , 
And turns them to dust again . 
meditation 2.  

there 's none among the sacred troup of saints 
Yet militant below but doth desire 
God's favour most , and most of all laments 
When it is lost , and always sets a higher 
Estimate upon the rays 
That are darted from above 
By the god of peace and love , 
Then on all he here enjoys . 
Ne'er doth the chased hart in hottest weather , 
When horse and hound pursue him o'er the plains , 
And hunt him sweeting twenty miles together , 
That all his blood is boiled within his veins , 
When he 's to the hardest driven , 
Pant so much for water-brooks , 
As a soul deserted looks 
For a kind aspect from heaven . 
Once did Elias zealous prayers climb 
To heaven , and made the windows there so fast 
( This came to pass in wicked Ahab's time ) 
That one and twenty months twice told were past 
E'er there fell a shower of rain 
Or a drop of morning dew : 
In the meadows nothing grew , 
Nor was any kind of grain 
Fed by the parched mould . How do ye think 
That thirsty , dry , and barren land did yawn 
And gape to heavenward for a draught of drink ? 
Just so , whene'r God's favour is withdrawn 
From a soul , it doth distress her . 
Ne'er earth thirsted more for rain , 
Then doth she for God again 
To relieve her and refresh her . 
Have you not seen a mother's woeful tears 
Embalm the carcase of her only son ? 
How to all comfort she stops both her ears , 
Wrings both her hands , and makes a bitter moan ? 
Fain in sorrow would she swim , 
Or be drowned , it is so deep : 
She hath heart enough to weep 
Heaven full up to the brim . 
But this is nothing to that matchless anguish 
That breaks in pieces every pious heart , 
And makes the soul with darkest sadness languish , 
If from it a sense of God's good will depart . 
Oh how strangely David 's troubled 
When God hide away his face ! 
( Though but for a little space ) 
See how his complaints are doubled . 
How long ? for ever , Lord , wilt thou forget me ? 
How long wilt thou thy gracious visage hide ? 
How long be angry ? wilt thou never let me 
Enjoy thy face again ? shall i abide 
Thus for evermore bereft 
Of all comfort , joy , and peace ? 
Shall my soul ne'er dwell at ease ? 
Hast thou , Lord , no mercy left ? 
Oh once again be pleased to turn , and give 
My soul a relish of thy wont grace : 
There 's nothing can my sadded heart relieve , 
If thou dost hide thy comfortable face . 
Thou in tears thy servant drownest , 
Thou dost fill my cheeks with furrows 
And my soul with ghastly sorrows , 
Whensoever , Lord , thou frown'st . 
The world doth value at a precious rate 
Things here below . Some highly prize their sport ; 
Some , jewels ; some , a plentiful estate ; 
And some , preferments in a Prince's court : 
But for life ; we so esteem it 
Above whatsoever is best , 
That with loss of all the rest 
We are ready to redeem it . 
But none of these God's children do regard 
So much as God's love by a thousand parts : 
Feel they but this , to entertain it is spared 
The best and highest room in all their hearts . 
They affect no worldly pelf 
In comparison of this 
Kindness ; yea , to them it is 
Better far than life itself . 
Have they no reason for this eager thirst 
After God's love and friendship ? sure they see 
God's favour and his kindness is the first 
And chiefest good : all other friendships be 
Most deceitful , trustless , vain . 
When the pangs of death do seize us 
Mortal favours cannot ease us : 
God can rid us of our pain . 
But grant he do not , yet these pains shall send 
Our souls to him that loves us , to enjoy 
A painless life that ne'er shall see an end . 
He whom God loves can on a deathbed say , 
I know my redeemer liveth ; 
For me there 's laid up a crown : 
When this clay-built house is down 
God a better mansion giveth . 
I will never woo the smile of man , whose breath 
Is in his nostrils , by sinister ways ; 
It will not advantage at the hour of death : 
All my supportment on these carnal stays 
At the length will but deceive me . 
It is to have a friend above , 
It is God's favour and his love , 
Or else nothing , must relieve me . 
Lord , make thy graces in my soul appear ; 
My heart from every loathsome blemish cleanse , 
That i May clearly see thine image there ; 
For that 's an undeceived evidence 
Of thy favour : which when i 
Once am certain to obtain , 
I will not faint for any pain , 
Nor will care how soon i die . 
Sect. 5.  youth cannot protect us from the stroke of death . 

A young man May die , but an old man must ; 
This May die quickly , that cannot live long : 
Often are graves filled full with youthful dust . 
Though youth be jocund , lusty , merry , strong , 
Yet is it subject unto death-bed-pains ; 
It is mortal blood that runs along their veins . 
In all appearance old men's halting feet are 
Moved to the grave-ward with the greatest speed , 
( Like that disciple which did outrun Peter ) 
But sometimes younger men step in indeed : 
And peradventure twenty years or more 
Sooner than those that looked in before . 
Graves gape for every sort : the butcher 's seen 
Often to kill the youngest of the flock . 
Some long to pluck those apples that are green : 
Death crops the branches and forbears the stock . 
Children are wrapped up in their winding-sheets , 
And aged parents mourn about the streets . 
Jobs children died before himself : for after 
The death of ten he lived to get ten other . 
We sigh out , ah my son ! or , ah my daughter ! 
As oft as , ah my father , or my mother ! 
The first that ever died resigned his breath 
Nine hundred years before his father's death . 
Yea , many times , death's gripings are so Crucls , 
Before the groaning mother's child-birth-pain 
Is past , the infant 's buried ; like a jewel 
But shown and presently shut up again , 
Perhaps within a minute after birth 
Is forthwith sent to cradle in the earth . 
Perhaps he is not born at all , yet dyes , 
And dyes a very thrifty death : to save 
Funeral expenses he in 's mother lies 
Entombed , both lodged in a single grave : 
And with him lies in one poor narrow room 
His swaddling-clouts , nurse , mother , cradle , tomb . 
meditation 1.  

Some sins there be ( As holy writ doth teach ) 
That interrupt the current of our days : 
He that 's found guilty of them cannot reach 
That length of life which he that 's free enjoys . 
Sin ( You know ) and death are twins , 
Or death is sin's progeny . 
Many of us if we die 
In our youth May thank our sins . 
One sin is disobedience to that pair 
Which did beget us . If i shall despise 
My parents lawful precepts , if my care 
Be not to do what 's pleasing in their eyes , 
If i willingly neglect 
Any thing which i do know 
Is a duty that i owe , 
I May death betimes expect . 
Another sin is unprepared receiving 
That blessed supper which doth feed and heal , 
And in and to a soul that is believing 
A full release of sins doth freely seal : 
Where that body and that blood 
Is presented on the table , 
Which are infinitely able 
To do hungriest sinners good . 
If i come hither an unworthy guest ; 
Or if before my heart i do not prove ; 
Or if i come as to a common feast ; 
Or come without thanks , knowledge , faith , and love : 
If i carry any crime 
Thither with me unlamented , 
Or go ere i have repent , 
Death May take me hence betime . 
Another is blood-thirstiness : when we 
To do a mischief are so strongly bent 
That we sleep not unless our projects be 
Contrived to ensnare the innocent : 
When we are so like the devil , 
Every way satanical , 
That tongue , brains , heart , hands , and all 
Are employed in what is evil . 
These sins and others like them do procure 
Untimely deaths . Lord , purify my heart 
From every sin ; but chiefly , Lord , secure 
My soul from these , that i May not depart 
Hence too soon . Lord , my desire 
Is not to live long ; but i 
Only pray that i May die 
In thy favour not thine ire . 
meditation 2.  

There is a sin that seldom doth escape 
A rich man's heir , ( Yet it is a foul transgression ) 
For parent's death with open mouth to gape , 
That their estates May come to his possession . 
He gapes that his friends May sleep : 
parentalia are rites 
Very welcome : he delights 
At a father's grave to weep . 
Poor harebrained fool ! Perhaps thou Mayest go first : 
This night thy younger soul May be required ; 
Thy death May frustrate that ungodly thirst : 
Whose then is that estate thou hast desired ? 
If these gallants were not blind , 
Sure they could not choose but see 
That a thousand children be 
Dead , their parents left behind . 
Of any kind of sin ( To speak the truth ) 
That Satan can beget upon the soul , 
Most commonly man 's guiltiest in his youth : 
Our youthful nature is beyond control . 
Some examples are afforded , 
In whose history appears 
Looseness in our younger years : 
These the scriptures have recorded . 
The very first that e'er sucked mother's teat , 
Because his works were naught , his brother's good , 
Did boil his choler to so strong a heat 
That he must slake it in his brother's blood . 
How much rancour did he show 
So much harmless blood to spill , 
And a quarter-part to kill 
Of all mankind at a blow ? 
Unnatural , accursed , graceless Cham 
Never did grieve , nor sigh , nor blush , but he 
Laughed at and mocked his drunken father's shame . 
( A sober fathers curse his portion be . ) 
Profane Esau did make sale 
Of 's birthright for 's bellyful ; 
As 'mongst us there 's many a gull 
That sells heaven for pots of ale . 
And Absalon was most deformed within ; 
His head-piece had more hair than wit by odds : 
His beauty went no deeper than his skin ; 
He feared not man's law nor regarded gods . 
In him David had a son 
Beastly and ambitious too : 
He did wrong his bed , and do 
What he could to steal his throne . 
Incestuous Amnon dotes upon his sister , 
And in his own blood cools his lawless fires . 
That brother should have sinned that had but kissed her , 
If moved unto it by unchaste desires : 
But he makes a rape upon her , 
And so furious is his lust 
That it cannot hold but must 
Rob a virgin of her honour . 
And i could tell you of a number more 
Most sinful , vicious , vile , exorbitant , 
Whose courses are upon the scriptures score , 
As if their youth had sealed them a grant 
To be neither wise nor holy , 
But to run into excess 
Of all kind of wickedness , 
And do homage unto folly . 
The sage Gymnosophists , who first did give 
The wilder Indian's good and wholesome laws : 
The Magi , by whom Persia learned to live 
In order : the chaldei , whose wise laws 
The Assyrians justly ruled 
And did guide in every thing : 
Numa , Rome's devoutest King , 
Who the elder Romans schooled : 
That famous Solon , whom th' Athenians owe 
For all their statutes : and Lycurgus , he 
Whose wisdom taught the Spartans how to know 
What to omit and do : and more there be 
That have published wholesome laws 
To curb all indeed ; but yet 
Chiefly it was to put a bit 
In men's wild and youthful jaws . 
It is a sign that colt is wild that needs 
So strong a bridle . Ground that doth require 
So much manuring sure is full of weeds . 
It is because she wallows in the mire 
That we need to wash a sow . 
Men in youth must needs be bad , 
To curb whom those laws were made 
Which we told you of but now . 
It was a commanded custom that the Jews 
Should once in every two and fifty weeks 
Visit their temple ; no man Might refuse 
To worship there . Each fourth year the Greeks 
Their Olympian sacrifice 
Orderly performed : and 
Th' Egyptians used to stand 
Lifting up devoutest eyes 
Unto their idol every seventh year 
Within th' appointed temple . And it is said 
Once in ten years the Romans did appear 
To sacrifice : then was Apollo paid 
His great hecatomb , and then 
Unto Delphos many went 
With their gifts , for thither sent 
Presents every sort of men . 
And of the Samnites authors do relate , 
That th' ancientest of them did most solemnly 
Once in five years their lustra celebrate : 
But it is delivered by antiquity 
That the youth of all these nations 
Strictly all commanded were 
To these places to repair 
Oftener to make their oblations . 
What doth this intimate , but that the crimes 
Of youth are great and frequent , and their vices 
Exorbitant , that they so many times 
Have need to purge them by such sacrifices ? 
By experience we do find 
What bad courses men do follow 
In their youth , and how they wallow 
In base lusts of every kind . 
And if you ask these brainless hotspurs why 
They dedicated themselves to such lewd courses ; 
They yet are young , these gallants still reply , 
And youth must have its swing : but no remorse is 
Wrought at all in any heart 
For this lewdness ; there remains 
Not a thought within their brains , 
That the youngest May depart . 
Lord , take possession of my heart betimes : 
My youth is fittest for thy service ; take it 
Unto thyself : make white those crimson crimes 
That fain would soil it : let me never make it 
A pretence ( As many do ) 
To be lewd , but think that i 
In the height of youth May die , 
May die and be damned too . 
meditation 3.  

Parent's methinks betime should strive to make 
Their children good , that heaven May receive them . 
If God should send an early death to take 
Them from the earth , it cannot choose but grieve them , 
And fill full with bitter woe 
Any parent's heart to see 
That their children wicked be , 
And death come and find them so . 
Those fruitful couples whom the Lord hath blessed 
With children , should take greatest care to breed them 
Religiously : in this more love 's expressed , 
Then in their care to clothe them or to feed them , 
Or what else they can bestow 
For their life or livelihood , 
And to do their children good 
In the things that are below . 
You must instruct your children in their way : 
That 's double , civil and religious too : 
They must be taught God's precepts to obey , 
And to their neighbours give what is their due . 
If you do not strive to set them , 
By that rule which God hath given , 
In the way that leads to heaven , 
You did wrong them to beget them . 
There 's such a power and force in education , 
That justly we May call it a second nature : 
Nature finds matter , nurture gives the fashion , 
And turns a man into another creature . 
If a youth in 's manners halt , 
On his parents we do lay 
All the blame , and use to say , 
That his breeding is in fault . 
The heathen , who did see but by that light 
Which purblind nature lent them , ever caught 
At all occasions they conceived Might 
Be helps to have their youth in goodness taught . 
In their bodies would they find 
( For nowhere but in the book 
Of the creatures did they look ) 
Lessons to instruct the mind . 
It is observed that Socrates let pass 
No ways nor means at all that Might conduce 
To their amendment : often to a glass 
He brought them , and that shadow had its use . 
By his means their faces bred them : 
For however their complexion 
Did appear , by that reflection 
From it a lecture would he read them . 
That fair ones must take heed they did not soil 
That comely outside with deformitity 
Within : to have an inside foul would spoil 
The choicest beauty : that their symmetry , 
Just proportion of parts , 
And their comeliness of face 
Was not worth a jot , if grace 
Did not beautify their hearts . 
And that deformed ones should have a care , 
That virtuous endowments , of the soul 
Might recompense those blemishes that were 
By nature placed to make the body foul : 
That the mind and nothing else 
Makes us either foul or fair . 
Outside beauties nothing are 
To a mind where virtue dwells . 
Of any age their youth is fittest to take 
The print of vice or virtue : it is a clean 
Unwritten table , where a man May make 
What characters he will . If e'er you mean 
To make straight a crooked tree , 
You must do it while it is a twig : 
When your children are grown big 
They will not reform be . 
Sometimes ( If need require ) you shall do well 
To use the rod : if duly you correct them , 
It May be a means to whip their souls from hell : 
From many sins May prudent stripes protect them . 
No such physic as the rod : 
There 's health in a loving scourge , 
It will children's manners purge , 
And will make them fit for God . 
But whensoever you fasten any blows , 
Let sins against the holy name of God 
Be first corrected : for a child that knows 
To give his due to heaven , on him the rod 
Will prevail with little labour 
To correct him how to live 
Civilly , and how to give 
What he owes unto his neighbour . 
And yet you must be moderate in strokes : 
You May not make a trade of chastisements . 
A parent that corrects too much provokes 
His child to wrath ; so pious documents 
Will be cast away in vain . 
Too much mercy is not fit , 
Neither too much rigour ; yet 
Mercy 's better of the twain . 
That high and great Jehovah , whom we find 
Adorned with mercy , goodness , justice , wrath , 
Is evermore to mercy most inclined : 
Of all the rest that most employment hath . 
He that suffered near mount Zion , 
( And whatever he did hallow 
By his practice we should follow ) 
Was a lamb as well 's a lion . 
And e'er you strike observe their dispositions : 
Those four complexions in man's grosser part 
Are but a few ; the finer part 's conditions 
Are many more . Some at a look will start ; 
Others will but make a mock 
At the lash itself , and never 
Will express the least endeavour 
To amend with many a knock . 
The nat'ralists can tell you of a stone 
Extremely hard , which blood or milk will soften : 
But with the strongest hammer there is none 
Can do it , though he beat it ne'er so often . 
The sea yields a certain weed , 
Which , if gently gripped , will fly ; 
Roughly , will yield presently : 
Rigour such stout nature's need . 
Some children's dispositions are like nettles : 
The gentl'er you do handle them they sting 
The more ; fair means in them no virtue settles : 
Some are like thorns ; the harder you do wring 
The more deeply will they pierce . 
Mark their natures , and you shall 
By due chastisements recall 
Both the gentle and the fierce . 
But it must be above all your chiefest care 
To shine before your children by the light 
Of good example : for examples are 
Of most prevailing natures . What the sight 
Can be Master of appears 
To be more convincing far 
Then all other truths that are 
Only objects of the ears . 
A high perfection did the heathen deem it 
To imitate their Jove : were it but in 
His close adulteries , they did esteem it 
A commendable passage not a sin . 
In a wrong way , or a right , 
Samplers lead , i know not how : 
If King Alexander bow 
Not a courtier stands upright . 
If Cyrus' nose be bad , or if a scar 
Chance to disfigure his imperial face ; 
If Plato 's learned shoulders be too square ; 
One 's subjects' , th' others scholars , are so base 
As to draw it into a fashion : 
And if Aristotle stammer , 
All his boys will lisp and hammer 
Out their words in imitation . 
If cruel Dionysius tyrannize , 
Each man grows fierce : and if Antiochus 
Be lustful , he is not accounted wise 
That will not be effeminate : and thus 
Ptolemeus Philadelph 
Loving letters , by example 
Egypt underfoot did trample 
Ignorance as did himself . 
With scholars ( Like himself ) Augustus filled 
The Roman empire : and Tiberius he 
Stored it with such as were exactly skilled 
In fair dissimulation , and could be 
Leaders in the hateful train 
Of those monsters who by heart 
Had learned perfectly the art 
To dissemble , lie , and feign . 
Good Constantine's example filled the land 
With Christians like himself , and Julian's did 
Beget a troup of atheists : such command 
Examples have . In holy writ we read 
That examples either way , 
For God or against him , for 
Great Jehovah's worship or 
Baalim's , did the persons sway . 
If Israel's or Judah 's King were good , 
The persons presently destroyed their groves : 
Scarce in the land a graved image stood : 
High places owls did rest in : each man loves 
( At the least in show ) that jealous 
God that in the desert fed them , 
And from Egypt 's bondage led them ; 
For him only are they zealous . 
If Israel's or Judah 's King were bad , 
So were the persons : altars straight were reared 
To senseless idols ; not a house but had 
Their graved images ; and no man feared 
Unto Baal to bend his knee . 
Men live by similitude 
More than law ; and most conclude 
Upon what their Princes be . 
If Nabuchadnezzar the mighty King 
Be pleased to fall down to a golden image , 
Thither with speed do their devotions bring 
Persons of every kingdom , tongue , and lineage . 
Three excepted , all adore him : 
There 's not one enough precise 
To refuse ; it doth suffice 
That the King did so before him . 
Thou art a King if thou a parent art , 
Each family 's a petty kingdom , and 
The parent's monarch : it were a kingly part 
To make thy little subjects understand 
How in virtue to excel 
By thy practice ; that 's a skill 
Above all other : children will 
No way else be taught so well . 
Look how the primum mobile doth move , 
Accordingly do move the other spheres : 
As in a Jack the wheel that is above 
With its first mover just proportion bears . 
In a family it is so : 
Look what way the parents take , 
That the rest their rule will make , 
Chiefly there the children go . 
Not any godly precept so exact is , 
Which you shall teach your children to obey ; 
But that , if you shall thwart it by your practice , 
Thus will your junior houshold-members say , 
At least they will whisper thus , 
If virtue be good , then why 
Do not you live virtuously ? 
If not , why do ye press it on us ? 
If by these ways you strive to educate , 
Whom God hath blessed with fruitful progenies , 
Your children well , their early death or late 
Shall not a jot augment your miseries . 
A child's death is not a rod 
To afflict a parent's heart . 
He that dyes well doth depart 
Hence that he May live with God . 
Lord , if thou make my wife a fruitful vine , 
Make it withal my chiefest care to dress 
The branches well ; the glory shall be thine , 
And if they die my grief shall be the less . 
A child's death 's a precious savour 
In thy nostrils that was here 
Taught to live , Lord , in thy fear ; 
For he dieth in thy favour . 
meditation 4.  

If youth itself May drop into the grave , 
When children die methinks they should bequeathe 
Surviving parents comforts . Sure they have 
No cause ( Were not affection strong ) to grieve 
Overmuch , as many do : 
For death is impartial , 
By his stroke all ages fall , 
Both the oldest and youngest too . 
Think duly on it . Why should your eyes run o'er 
For what you have no way to remedy ? 
If you should heaven eternally implore , 
It would not send them back . But you will reply , 
'Cause there 's no way to be found 
That May help us to recover 
Them again , our eyes run over , 
And our tears do so abound . 
Nor ever will your highest flood of sorrow 
Transport them back into the world again : 
Yourselves May follow them before to morrow . 
Those deep-fetched sighs are smoked out all in vain , 
So are all those drops you mourn 
Shed in vain ; haply you May 
Soon go after them , but they 
Are too happy to return . 
Is it your love that doth produce such groans ? 
How easily alas is love mistaken ! 
Methinks you cannot love and grieve at once ; 
To love were to rejoice that they have shaken 
Hands with misery to dwell 
In a world of bliss above ; 
Grief at this is far from love , 
It seems not to wish them well . 
Or is it because that they are dead you weep ? 
I do not think that when they were begotten , 
You dreamt them death-free , or had hopes to keep 
Them here for ever ; that they would be rotten 
In their graves you could not choose 
But consider : for a span 
To be quickly ended , can 
Never go for any news . 
Nor with good reason can you lay the blame 
On death at all , but on yourselves that did 
Beget them mortal : for the very same 
Matter wherewith they were begot and fed , 
Fits them for an alteration 
By the hand of death . If you 
Grudge that death hath taken his due , 
You May blame their generation . 
Or do you grieve because they died so soon ? 
If ways be foul , and journeys perilous , 
Who taketh up his lodging e'er it be noon 
Is best at ease . It is like God loveth those 
Whom he takes betime away : 
Sad experience lets us know 
That the happiest here below 
Have a miserable stay . 
Or is your only child deceased , that passion 
Doth domineer so ? here i could allow 
Methinks your tears a free immoderation , 
But that ( On better ground than Jephtha's vow ) 
I remember what was done 
By that parent , who is penned 
Down for great Jehovah's friend , 
In case of his only son . 
Even when it was dead a miracle did fill 
His Sarah's womb , but it was filled but once . 
Isaac was all : yet Abraham must kill 
This all himself . God did it for the nonce 
That he Might his graces prove , 
Yet the man made no denial , 
But did by so strange a trial 
Manifest his faith and love . 
This case must needs strike nearer to the heart 
Than yours ; yet he doth presently submit . 
Love ( I confess ) is very loathe to part 
With what it loves , but grace doth put a bit 
Into nature's mouth that she 
May not grumble nor repine 
At what 's a decree divine , 
But subscribe it cheerfully . 
Just like the autumn-sap of fruitful trees 
So love descends ; and it is ardent when 
Dispersed , but by infinite degrees 
More ardent when it is contracted : men 
That have but an only son , 
If death take him hence , their loss 
Is a great one ; but this cross 
Must be born . Thy will be done , 
Is what yourselves do pray for every day : 
And when this will of God 's declared , you 
Greatly offend if you do murmur . May 
Not God , and sin , and nature claim their due ? 
Very ill you do behave you 
If you give not heaven leave 
Thankfully for to bereave 
You again of what it gave you . 
Lord , if thou please to stock my table round 
About with children , yet i will be glad : 
Nor shall my sorrow overmuch abound , 
Though i do see them in their graveclothes clad ; 
For the sooner are they blessed : 
And within the shortest space 
Whom thou helpest to win a race , 
They the sooner are at rest . 
meditation 5.  

We do not die by chance nor yet by fortune , 
But how and when the Lord will have us die : 
He numbers all our days ; we cannot shorten 
Nor lengthen them a minute : destiny 
Neither spins nor cuts the thread . 
God a certain period sets : 
No man shorter falls , or gets 
Further , than the bounds decreed . 
If God vouchsafe to number out the hairs 
That do adorn and clothe our sinful heads ; 
Who doubteth that his providence forbears 
To Count our days ? If not a sparrow treads 
On the earth 's face thus or thus , 
But his providence awaketh 
For to note it , sure he taketh 
Greater care by far of us . 
If any godless wits so curious be 
To talk of Hezekiah's fifteen years , 
His sentence God did change , not his decree , 
The answer is : yet Esay 's tongue appears 
To speak not a jot the less 
Truth ; it was with a supposition : 
God doth threaten with condition 
Either tacit or express . 
When pestilence , that loathsome , dreadful hag , 
Bepatched with botches , wanders up and down , 
And into every household drops the plague , 
Scarce any Turk in an infected town 
But will wife and friend afford 
Daily visits and embraces : 
They fly no contagious places , 
Nor fear either bed or board . 
Their reason is , God's providence doth write 
Their fortunes on their foreheads ; neither can 
Their day of life be longer , nor their night 
Of death come sooner than God wills it : man 
Must yield 's ghost when God will haveit . 
For health and life , if God will 
Save it , it is not plague can kill : 
If not , it is not they can save it . 
Such blockheads have not brains enough to think 
That as the time , so God withal decrees 
The means of life ; as physic , meat and drink , 
Clothes , recreations , and what else he sees 
Needful . They themselves destroy , 
And are to their safety strangers , 
That run into mortal dangers , 
And not shun them when they May . 
Howe'er employed , Lord , grant i May have leisure 
Religiously to meditate that thou 
My days dost number , and my life dost measure , 
And make me think , Lord , that this very now , 
That this twinkling of an eye 
Is the period thou hast set : 
Lord , grant i May ne'er forget 
That this moment i May die . 
Part iii of death's suddenness . 

Though sometimes death doth stay till it be late 
At night , until our most decrepit years , 
And when he comes , doth ( Like a King ) in state 
Send harbingers before ; yet death appears 
Sometimes unlooked for early in the morning , 
And takes us up before he gives us warning . 
When at full tide our youthful blood doth flow 
In every vein , and when our pulses dance 
A healthful measure , when our stomachs know 
No qualms at all , as we would say by chance 
Snatched are our bodies to their longest homes , 
And death is past before a sickness comes . 
How many sleepy mortals go to bed 
With healthful bodies , and do rise no more ! 
How many hungry mortals have been fed 
Contentedly at dinner ? yet before 
Against a second meal they whet their knives 
Death steals away their stomachs and their lives . 
How many in the morning walk abroad 
For to be breathed on by the keener air ? 
Perhaps to clarify their grosser blood , 
Or else to make their rougher cheeks look fair . 
But e'er they tread a furlong in the frost , 
Death nips them : so their former labour 's lost . 
Nature is parsimonious : man May live 
With little : but alas with how much less 
A man May die ! There 's nothing but May give 
A mortal blow : small matters May undress 
Our souls of clay . A thousand ways we have 
To send our crazy bodies to the grave . 
The elements confeder how they May 
Procure our death : the air we suck to live 
Itself hath poi'sned thousands in a day , 
And made such havoc that the slain did strive 
For elbow-room in churchyards : houses were 
Good cheap , and only shrowds and coffins dear . 
If we could come to speak with Pharaoh's ghost , 
It would tell how many met with sudden graves 
Beneath the water ; that a mighty host 
Was slain and buried by the surly waves , 
Except a few which surfeited with store 
The cropsick sea did vomit on the shore . 
Sometimes our mother earth , as if she were 
So hunger-bitten that she needs must eat 
Her children , gapes as for some toothsome cheer , 
And multitudes one swallow down doth let ; 
Which either in her womb she doth bestow , 
Or else doth send them to the world below . 
That useful creature fire , whose light and heat 
Doth comfort , and , when earth doth penance , warm us , 
Whose cookery provides us wholesome meat ; 
Yet mortally this element doth harm us . 
One morning sent from heaven such dreadful flashes 
As did entomb five cities in their ashes . 
We May remember some that have been killed 
By falls of buildings ; some , by drunken swords . 
By beasts both wild and tame our blood is spilt . 
There 's not a creature but a death affords . 
Above forty children's limbs God's anger tears 
In pieces with the teeth of savage bears . 
But there 's some likely hood that sudden death 
By means like these May easily befall us : 
But many times we mortals lose our breath 
By ways less probable . The Lord doth call us 
Upon a sudden hence by petty things : 
Sometimes the meanest means death's errand brings . 
Our staff of life May kill : a little crumb 
Of bread May choke us going down awry . 
A small hair in their drink hath caused some 
To breathe their last . By any thing we die . 
Sometimes a sudden grief or sudden joy 
Have might enough to take our souls away . 
meditation 1.  

How weak 's the thread of life , that any thing 
How weak so e'er can break it by and by ! 
How short 's the thread of life , that death can bring 
Both ends of it together suddenly ! 
Well May the scriptures write the life of man 
As weak as water and as short 's a span . 
How soon is water spilt upon the ground ! 
Once spilt , what hand can gather it up again ? 
Foam that doth rise to day is seldom found 
Floating to morrow . When the wanton rain 
Gets bubbles to make sport with on the water , 
A minute breaks them into their first matter . 
Such is our life . How soon doth death uncase 
Our souls ? and when they once are fled away , 
Who can return them ? As upon the face 
Of thirsty ground when water 's shed to day , 
The morrow sees it not : so when we die 
None can revive us ; as we fall , we lie . 
Our life 's a vapour . Vapours do arise 
Sometimes indeed with such a seeming power , 
As if they would eclipse the glorious skies , 
And muffle up the world , but in an hour 
Or two at most these vapours are blown o'er , 
And leave the air as clear as it was before . 
We look big here a little while and bristle , 
And shoulder in the smiling world , as though 
There were no dancing but as we would whistle , 
So strangely domineer we here below . 
But as a vapour in a sunshine day 
We vanish on a fudden quite away . 
Our life is like the smoke of new-made fire : 
As we in age and stature upward tend , 
Our dissolution is so much the nigher . 
Smoke builds but castles in the air : ascend 
Indeed it doth aloft , but yet it must 
At highest dissolve , we vanish into dust . 
What is a shadow ? Nothing . Grant it were 
A thing that had a name and being too , 
Yet let a cloud 'twixt us and heaven appear , 
it 's turned into its former nothing . Do 
Our shadows vanish ? surely so do we : 
At noon a man , at night a corpse we see . 
Our life 's a cloud , and from variety 
Of vapours are create diverse sorts : 
The stronger last a time , the weaker fly 
With lesfe ado ; yet half a day transports 
Both strongest and weakest hence , and in their flight 
Their nimble speed outruns the quickest sight . 
Some men are healthful , merry , lusty , strong ; 
Some crazy , weak , sad , sickly , drooping : both 
Post hence with winged speed : we May not wrong 
Life's footmanship ; for sure with greater sloth 
Clouds through the air the strongest wind doth send , 
Then frail man's life doth gallop to its end . 
With greater sloth ? A man that now is here , 
Perhaps an hour , yea half a minute hence , 
That man May in another world appear . 
Our life moves faster than those things which sense 
Acquaint us with , faster than ships by far , 
Or birds , or bullets that do plow the air . 
All flesh is grass : how suddenly that fades ! 
Grass in the morning standeth proudly green , 
E'er night the husbandmen prepare their blades 
To cut it down , and not a leaf is seen 
But e'er the morrow 's withered into hay , 
That in its summer-suit was clothed to day . 
We grow and flourish in the world a space , 
Our days with ease , mirth , health , strength , heaven doth crown : 
But it is not long we run this happy race , 
Death cometh with his scythe and mows us down , 
When we are apt to say , for aught we know 
As yet we have an age of days to grow . 
Our life 's a flower that groweth in the field . 
A garden-flower is but a fading thing , 
Though it hath hedges , banks , and walls to shield 
Itself from cropping : long it is e'er the spring 
Doth bring it forth ; three quarters of a year 
Are gone before its beauty doth appear . 
And when it shineth in its fairest pride , 
One hand or other will be sure to pluck it . 
But let 's suppose all snatching fingers tied , 
And grant withal that never bee doth suck it 
To blemish it a jot , yet will the breath 
Of winter blow the fairest flower to death . 
It is long before we get us very far 
Into the world : for after generation 
There is a time when lifeless lumps we are , 
And have not bodies of a human fashion : 
Such as we have both life and motion want , 
And when we live we live but like a plant . 
A while we do but grow : then like a beast 
We have our senses : next indeed we live 
The life of him that lives to be a feast 
For despicable worms . The womb doth give 
No passage to us yet ; we are ( Like corn 
Sown lately ) fit to be but are not born . 
When born , it is long before we can procure 
Our legs or understandings to assist us : 
And then it is long before we grow mature : 
And all this while if sudden death hath missed us , 
Yet in the hoary winter of our age 
Our part is ended and we quit the stage . 
Lord , what is man ? Lord , rather what am i ? 
I cannot tell myself unless thou teach me : 
From thee came know thyself down through the sky 
To mortals here . Thy servant doth beseech thee 
To make me know , though it be to my shame , 
How vanishing , how weak , and frail i am . 
meditation 2.  

What would i do if i were sure to die 
Within this hour ? sure heartily repent , 
My sinful couch should never more be dry 
But drowned in tears , sad groans my heart should rent , 
And my sorrow still increase 
With repenting till i die , 
That once reconciled i 
Might be found of God in peace . 
Then presently I 'll set about it , for 
My time 's uncertain , and for aught i know 
God May not leave my soul a minute more 
To animate my body here below . 
Deep-fetched sighs and godly sorrow 
Shall possess my heart to day : 
It is a foolish sin to say 
That i will •epent to morrow . 
What if i die before ? just as the tree 
Doth fall it lies . When i am in the grave 
I cannot grieve for sin , nor can i be 
Converted unto God , nor pardon crave . 
Had i breath and grace to crave it , 
Yet God's time of mercy 's gone : 
It is given in this life alone , 
In the next i cannot have it . 
What would i leave undone if ghastly death 
Stood at my elbow ? sure i would not wallow 
In those pollutions that reign here beneath ; 
No lewd and wicked courses would i follow . 
I should tremble at a thought 
Of uncleanness , if i were 
Sure that dreadful time were near 
When i must to earth be brought . 
Why should i sin at all ? for in the act 
Of my next sin a sudden death May catch me . 
( A town secure is much the sooner sacked . ) 
What know i but God setteth death to watch me , 
That when any lust hath pressed me 
For his service , that i May 
Down to hell without delay , 
Death May presently arrest me ? 
If we did well , still should we fear to meet 
Death in those places where we use to sin , 
And as we enter think we hear the feet 
Of death behind us coming softly in ? 
We should fear when sins delight us , 
When we swallow any crime , 
Lest that very point of time 
Justice should send death to smite us . 
I know whatever is on this side hell , 
Is mercy all : that we were not sent thither 
When we sinned last , is mercy . What befell 
Zimri and Cozbi as they lay together ? 
Phinehas zealous spear did thrust 
Both to death , and bored holes 
To let out those guilty souls , 
Which were melted into lust . 
Help me , oh Lord ; to do and leave undone 
What thou commandest , for sudden death prepare me , 
That at what time soe'er my glass is run 
Thy holy angels May to heaven bear me . 
Give thy servant grace , that i 
May so fear the face of sin 
As a serpents , lest that in 
Th' unrepented act i die . 
meditation 3.  

Doth death come suddenly ? so much the better : 
If i am ready and do daily die , 
So much the sooner it will my soul unfetter 
T' enjoy the best degree of liberty . 
And if death will send me where 
I shall evermore remain , 
I will never care how vain , 
Or how frail my life is here . 
My life is like the wind : but when this puff 
Is passed i shall eternally enjoy 
A place in heaven , where all is calm enough , 
Where never blast is felt that brings annoy , 
Where is everlasting ease , 
Not a storm nor tempest there , 
Nor a jot of trouble , where 
All is quietness and peace . 
My life is like a vapour : but assoon 
As this thin mist , this vapour , is dispersed , 
My day shall be an undeclining noon , 
Whose glorious brightness cannot be rehearsed , 
Which will show me ( For so clear 
And so shining is that place ) 
God immortal face to face , 
Whom i saw but darkly here . 
My life is water spilt and cast away 
Upon the ground : but after it is shod , 
In stead thereof i shall a stream enjoy , 
As crystal clear , which from the throne of God 
And the lamb of God proceedeth . 
Water it is of life , and lasteth 
Ever , which a soul that tasteth 
Once no more refreshing needeth . 
My life is like a shadow that doth vanish : 
But whensoever this shadow 's vanished quite , 
Substantial glories will my soul replenish , 
And solid joys will crown it with delight . 
The worlds are but fading joys ; 
Shadows we all purchase here : 
Never until death appear 
Have we true and real joys . 
My life 's a flower : but when it withers here 
It is transplanted into paradise , 
Where all things planted flourish all the year , 
Where Boreas never breathes a cake of ice . 
With sweet air the place is blessed ; 
There is an eternal spring : 
Thither , Lord , thy servant bring . 
Here my homely muse doth rest , 
Nor another flight will make 
Till she see how this will take . 
Finis . 














