The great messenger of mortality : or , a dialogue betwixt death and a Lady . 



Death .  Fair Lady , lay your costly robes aside , 
No longer May you glory in your pride : 
Take leave of all your carnal vain delight , 
I 'm come to summon you away this night . 


Lady .  What bold attempt is this ? pray let me know , 
From whence you come , and whither i must go . 
Shall i , who am a Lady , stoop or bow 
To such a pale-faced visage , who art thou ? 


Death .  Do you not know me ? Well , I 'll tell you then , 
't is i that conquer all the sons of men . 
No pitch of honour from my dart is free ; 
My name is death , have you not heard of me ? 


Lady .  Yes , i have heard of thee , time after time , 
But being in the glory of my prime , 
I did not think you would have called so soon . 
Why must my morning sun go down at noon ? 


Death .  Talk not of noon , you May as well be mute , 
This is no time at all for to dispute . 
Your riches , jewels , gold , and garments brave ; 
Your houses , lands , must all new Masters have . 
Tho' thy vain heart to riches was inclined 
Yet thou must die , and leave them all behind . 


Lady .  My heart is cold , i tremble at the news . 
here 's bags of gold , if thou wilt me excuse , 
And seize on those ( Thus finish thou the strife ) 
On such as are a weary of their life . 
Are there not many bound in prison strong , 
In bitter grief of soul have languished long , 
From all would find a grave , a place of rest , 
From all their grief , in which they are oppressed . 
Besides , there 's many with their hoary head . 
And palsy joints , by which their joys are fled , 
Release thou them whose sorrows are so great . 
But spare my life to have a longer date . 


Death .  Tho' they by age are full of grief and pain , 
Yet their appointed time they must remain . 
I come to none before my warrant 's sealed , 
And when it is , they must submit and yield . 
I take no bribe , believe me , this is true , 
Prepare yourself to go , i come for you . 


Lady .  death , be not so severe , let me obtain 
A little longer time to live and reign . 
Fain would i stay , if thou my life wilt spare , 
I have a daughter beautiful and fair , 
I 'd live to see her wed , whom i adore . 
Grant me but this , and i will ask no more . 


Death .  This is a slender frivolous excuse . 
I have you fast , and will not let you loose . 
Leave her to providence , for you must go 
A long with me , whether you will or no . 
Ay , death , command Kings to leave their crowns , 
And at my feet they lay their sceptres down . 
If unto Kings this favour i not give , 
But cut them off , can you expect to live 
Beyond the limit of your time and space 
No , i must send you to another place . 


Lady .  You learned doctors , now express your skill , 
And let not death of me obtain his will . 
Prepare your cordials , let me comfort find . 
My gold shall fly like chaste before the wind.  


Death .  Forbear to call , their skill will never do , 
They are but mortals here , as well as you . 
I give the fatal wound , my dart is sure , 
 I is far beyond the doctor's skill to cure . 
How freely can you let your riches fly . 
To purchase death , rather than yield to die . 
But while you flourished here in all your store , 
You would not give one penny to the poor , 
Tho' in God's name they suit to you did make , 
You would not spare one penny for his sake . 
My Lord beheld wherein you did amiss , 
And calls you hence to give account for this . 


Lady .  Oh , heavy news ! must i no longer stay ? 
How shall i stand in the great judgement day ? 
Down from her eyes the crystal tears did flow . 
She said , none knows what i do undergo . 
Upon a bed of sorrow here i lie , 
My carnal life makes me afraid to die . 
My sins , alas ! are many , gross , and soul . 
Lord Jesus Christ have mercy on my soul . 
And tho' i do deserve thy righteous frown , 
Yet pardon , Lord , and pour a blessing down . 
Then with a dying sigh her heart did break , 
And did the pleasures of this world forsake . 
Thus May we see the high and mighty fall . 
For cruel death shows no respect at all , 
To any one of high or low degree . 
Great men submit to death as well as we . 
Tho' they are gay , their lives are but a span.  
A lump of clay , so vile a creature 's marl 


Printed and sold in bow-church-yard , London . 






