Of the death of Christ , the price he paid , and the purchase he made . or , the satisfaction , and merit of the death of Christ cleared , the universality of redemption thereby oppugned : and the doctrine concerning these things formerly delivered in a treatise against universal redemption vindicated from the exceptions , and objections of mr Baxter . 

By j. Owen , minister of the gospel . 

London : printed by Peter Cole , at the sign of the printing-press in Cornhill , near the royal exchange , 1650.  

To the right honourable , Oliver Cromwell , esq Lord lieutenant of Ireland , &c.  

To excuse the dedication of a book , which seems not to be like apples of gold in pictures of silver , in a time of so much preparation for war , this is my apology : the brief discourse following , being composed in Ireland , where through the presence of God with you , in your great employment , i enjoyed peace and quietness for a season in the service of my Master , and now stepping into the [ ⁂ ] world , by providence , upon your return into this nation , it seems to crave the signature of your name at the entrance : besides , being almost wholly polemical ( For men of learning also , have their polemicks , and those , as in the management of some , as pernicious to the nations professing the name of Christ , as the contest of the sword ) it lays a second claim thereunto , from its proportion to the present work whereunto you are called forth . 

Perhaps the differences , about which the contest here managed , is , May appear to some , not to be of so great weight and importance , as to deserve that serious and public agitation , which is now given to them : especially in these days , wherein things of nearer concernment to the foundation of faith , do come continually under debate . But besides that no one title , of the faith once delivered unto the saints , is to be yielded unto gainsayers , the way whereby opposition is made unto any truth , is seriously to be considered . It was said of Caesar , that solus accessit sobrius ad perdendam rempublicam , he alone ( Amongst many other undertakers ) attempted soberly to destroy the commonwealth , and therefore was the most earnestly to be resisted . In the broaching of many opinions , abhorrent from the truth of the gospel in these days , very few have gone soberly to work . For the most part , a perverse spirit of giddiness hath been mingled with their undertakings , whereby , though they have made a great noise in the world , and overthrown the faith of some , yet their beloved self-conceptions being full of self-contradictions , asserted with much passion and confidence , little reason or judgement , having no determinate end affixed to them , i no way doubt , but that in due time they will easily sink of themselves . 

He , with whom , in some part of this treatise , i have to do , hath been serious in his undertaking , and being not destitute of abilities for the carrying on of his intendment , it is requisite the truth by him mistaken , should receive a serious vindication , which i hope also is performed , so far as occasion , was by his writing , to me administered . 

Neither will the things here discussed i am persuaded seem light unto you , who have learned to value every truth of God , at the rate , whereunto it is stamped from above : especially those which so nearly concern him , whom your soul loveth , as these following will be found to do . 

For my own part , having no kind of interest in the things now a doing , neither one way , nor other , but only so far , as the great interest of Christ and the gospel is concerned , nor any design in my thoughts , but only to lay hold of every orderly advantage to preach the Lord Jesus , and him crucified , even him alone ; and withal , to give testimony to the whole counsel [ ⁂ ] of God , as revealed in his word , in opposition to the many foolish delusions , which through the craft of Satan , and the vanity of men's darkened minds , have got entrance into the world , continually lamenting the sad mistake of many ministers of the gospel immixing themselves so far in civil contests , as to make them oftentimes the subject of their public pains in preaching and writing , i hope there is no need of an apology , for my labouring in this kind . 

As to this presentation of these few sheets to you , besides what is above mentioned , my assurance of your faithful adherence to the form of wholesome words , and pattern of sound doctrine , that cannot be gainsaid , gave encouragement unto , 

June 1.  your excellencies most humble and obliged servant , in our dearest Lord , J. Owen . 

To the reader . 

Of all the controversies wherewith the disciple of Christ , through the craft of Satan , and their own knowing but in part , have in several ages been exercised ; there have been none of so great weight and importance upon all considerations whatever , as those which immediately concern the person and grace of him , by whose name they are called . 

As his person was almost the sole subject of contest , ( Of any moment ) for the space of many ages succeeding his converse in the flesh with the sons of men ; so in these latter days , through the darkness of their own spirits , and the seducements of the spirit of darkness , many in an especial manner do draw forth variety of uncouth thoughts concerning his grace , and the dispensation of the love of God towards mankind in him . 

Yet have not these things been so distinctlly managed , but that as they of old with their oppositions to his person , did also labour to decry and disannul the work of his grace , so many of those who of latter days have been led away into dangerous misapprehensions of his grace , both as to the foundation and efficacy of it , have also wrested the things concerning his person to their own destruction . 

Of those that have entangled the spirits of the men of this generation , turning aside many from the simplicity of the gospel , and the truth as it is in Jesus , none have been obtruded upon the saints of God , with greater confidence , nor carried out to a more unhappy issue , than such , as assisting corrupted nature to unbend itself from under the sovereignty of God , and loosening the thoughts of men's hearts from their captivity to the obedience of the gospel , do suit the mystery of God in Christ reconciling sinners unto himself , to the fleshly wisdom and reasonings of a man : it was in our hopes and expectation , not many years ago , that the Lord would graciously have turned back all those bitter streams , which issuing from the pride , unthankfulness , and wisdom of the carnal mind , had many ways attempted to overflow the doctrine of the grace of God , that bringeth salvation ; but finding now by experience , that the day of the church's rest from persecution , is the day of Satan's main work , for seducing and temptation , and that not a few are attempting once more , to renew the contest of sinful , guilty , defiled , nature , against the sovereignty , distinguishing love , and effectual grace of God , it cannot but be convenient , yea necessary , that the faith once delivered to the saints , be contended for , and asserted from the word of truth , in the like public way , wherein it is opposed . 

It hath been the constant practice of all persons in all ages , who have made it their design to beget and propagate a belief of any doctrine contrary to the form of wholesome words , to begin with , and insist mainly upon those parts of their beloved conception and off spring , which seem to be most beautiful and taking , for the turning aside of poor weak unlearned and unstable souls : knowing full well , that their judgements and assertions being once engaged , such is the frame of men's spirits under delusion , that they will choose rather to swallow down all that follows , then to discharge themselves of what they have already received . 

Upon this account , those who of late days have themselves drank large draughts of the very dregs of Pelagianism , do hold out at first , only a desire to be pledged in a taste of the universality of the merit of Christ , for the redemption ( Or rather something else , well i wot not what ) of all and every man ; finding this rendered plausible from some general expressions in the word , seeming to cast an eye of favour that way in the light wherein they stand , as also to be a fit subject for them to varnish over , and deck up , with loose , ambiguous , rhetorical expressions , they attempt with all their might to get entertainment for it , knowing that those who shall receive it , May well call it Gad , being sent before , only to take up quarters for the troop that follows . 

To obviate this evil , which being thus planted , and watered through other subtleties and advantages , hath received no small increase , i have once and again cast in my mite into the treasury of that rich provision , which the Lord hath enabled many men of eminent learning and piety , to draw forth from the inexhaustible store-house of divine truth , and to prepare it for the use of the saints . 

In one of those treatises , having at large handled the several concernments of the death of Christ , as to the satisfaction and merit thereof , in their nature and tendency , as well as their object and extent , and finding some opposition made to sundry truths therein delivered , i have attemp•ed through the assistance of grace , to vindicate them , from that opposition , in this ensuing discourse , as also taken occasion to hold forth sundry other things of weight and importance , of all which you have an accoun• given , in the first chapters thereof , whither i remit the reader . 

For the present there are some few things , which ( Christian reader ) i desire to acquaint thee withal in particular , which something nearly concern the business we have in hand . 

Since , not only the complete finishing of this treatise under my hand , which is now about 5 months ago , but also the printing of some part of it , the two dissertatious of dr Davenant , of the death of Christ , and of predestination and reprobation were setforth : in both which , especially the former , there are sundry assertions , positions , and thesis , differing from what is delivered in the ensuing treatise , and as i suppose repugnant unto truth itself : the whole of that persuasion , i confess , which he endeavoureth in them to maintain , is suited to the expressions of sundry learned men , as Austin , Hillary , Fulgentius , Prosper , who in their generations deserved exceeding well or the church of God : but that it is free from opposition to the scripture , or indeed self-contradiction , is not so apparent . Yea , through the patience and goodness of God , i undertake to demonstrate , that the main foundation of his whole dissertation about the death of Christ , with many inferences from thence , are neither found in , nor founded on the word , but that the several parts thereof , are mutually conflicting and destructive of each other , to the great prejudice of the truth therein contained . 

It is a thing of the saddest consideration possible , that wise and learned men , should once suppose , by tempering the truths of God , so that they May be suited to the self-indulgency of unsubdued carnal affections , to give any lustre to them , or in the least to remove that scandal and offence , which the fleshly minded doth take continually at those ways of God , which are far above out of its sight . that this is the grand design of such undertakings , as that of the learned Bishop now mentioned , even to force the mysteries of the gospel , to a condescension and suitableness unto the unpurged relics of the wisdom of nature , when all our thoughts ought to be captivated to the obedience thereof , is to me most apparent . Whence else should it proceed , that so many unscriptural distinctions , of the various intentions of God in the business of redemption , with the holding out for the confirmation of one part of their opinion , viz. that Christ died for all , and every one , in such a sense , those very arguments , which the most that own the truth of their inferences , do employ merely against the latter part of their opinion , viz in some sense he died only for the elect , with sundry inextricable entanglements , should fill up both the pages of their discourses . 

It is no way clear to me , what glory redoundeth to the grace of God , what exaltation is given to the death of Christ , what encouragement to sinners in the things of God , by maintaining , that our saviour in the intention , and from the designment of his father , died for the redemption of million , for whom he purchased not one dram of saving grace , and concerning whom , it was the purpose of God from eternity , not to make out unto them effectually , any of those means for a participation in the fruits of his death , without which it is impossible but it should be useless and unprofitable unto them : and yet this is the main design of that dissertation concerning the death of Christ : what in that , and the ensuing discourse , is argued and contended for , according to the mind of God , we thankfully accept : and had it not been condited with the unsavoury salt of human wisdom , it had been exceeding acceptable , especially at this time . For , 

2 , that there are some more than ordinary endeavours for the supportment and reinforcing of the almost conclamated cause of Arminianism , ready to be handed unto public view , is commonly reported and believed : concerning which also many swelling words ( Of which there lies great abundance on every side ) are daily vented , as of some unparalelled product of truth and industry , as though , nil oriturum alias , nil ortum tale , for the most part , by such as are utterly ignorant , how far these controversies have been sifted , and to what issue they have been driven long ago . 

For my part , as i have not as yet of late , heard or read any thing of this kind , either from public disputes , or in printed sheets , but only long since exploded sophisms , inconsequent consequencies , weak objections , fully , soundly answered many a day since , nor by the taste which i have already received , have i any reason to expect from the great endeavours which are entering the city of God with Io triumphs any thing beyond fruitless attempts to varnish over with plausible appearances , formerly decried invectives and reasonings , whose deformity and nakedness have been often discovered to the loathing of them by the saints of God ; so i no way doubt , but that the Lord , whose truth is precious to him , will continue to pour out , from the rich provision which he hath made for the use of his church , and laid it up in the Lord Jesus , suitable gifts and abilities , against all opposition whereunto by the craft of Satan it is exposed : i shall say no more , though occasion be administered to deplore that success , which the spirit of seduction that is gone out in this hour of temptation , hath had in prevaising upon them that live in the earth , to turn away their minds from sound doctrine and the form of wholesome words : only i desire to commend the reader unto those two apostolical cautions , one , 1 tim. 1. 18 , 19 the other , 1 tim. 6. 20. and to commit him to the grace of God . 

May 15th . J. o.  

Of the death of Christ . 

Cap. i.  

The occasion of this discourse , with the intendment of the whole . 

A few words will briefly acquaint the reader with the occasion of this discourse ensuing : it is now about 2 years since i published a treatise about the redemption , and satisfaction that is in the blood of Chrst : my aim was to hold out the whole work of redemption , as flowing from the love of the father , dispensed in the blood of the son , and made effectual by the application of the spirit of grace : and because in this whole dispensation , and in all the method of God's proceedings to make us nigh to himself in the blood of Jesus : there is no one thing so commonly controverted , as the object of that redemption in respect of the extent of it : that in the whole , i did specially intend . 

What by the grace of him ( who supplieth seed to the sour ) was attained in that undertaking , is left unto the judgement of men , upon the issue of his blessing thereunto ; altogether i am not out of hopes , that , that labour in the Lord was not in vain . 

The universality of redemption ( One thing in that treatise mainly opposed ) having of old , and of late got room in the minds of some men , otherwise furnished with many precious truths , and eminent gifts , i was not without expectation of some opposition to be made thereunto : something also ( I have been informed ) hath been attempted that way ; but i am yet at so much quiet in that regard , as an utter nescience of them , can afford . 

Only whereas many other questions are incidently , and by the way handled therein , as about the satisfaction , and merit of Christ , &c.  It pleased mr Baxter , a learned divine , in an appendix to a treatise of justification by him lately published , to turn aside in the censure of some of them , and opposition to them . 

Indeed most of his exceptions do lie rather against words , than things ; expressions , than opinions ; ways of delivering things , than the doctrines themselves , as the reader will perceive ; so that of this labour i Might ease myself with this just apology ; that i was desired , and pressed to handle the things of that discourse , in the most popular way they were capable of , and in the best accommodation to vulgar capacities ; so that it is no wonder , if some expressions therein , May be found to want some grains of accurateness ( Though they have not one dram the less of truth ) in a scholastical balance : 

Notwithstanding , because 

1 i am not as yet convinced by any thing in m. Baxter's censure , and opposition , that there was any such unblameable deviation as is pretended , but rather the words of truth , and sobriety , clothing a doctrine of wholsomeness ; and especially , because the things pointed at are in themselves weighty , and needing some exactness in the delivery , to give a right apprehension of them : i was willing once more to attempt whether the grace of God with me , who am less than the least of all saints , Might give any further light into the right understanding of them according to the truth , to the advantage of any that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity . 

The true nature of the satisfaction of Christ , with the kind of payment of our debt by him made and accomplished , is doubtless worthy of our most serious enquiry : the right constitution of the immediate effects of the death of Christ , the relation of men to the election of God , and the redemption of Christ , with their several states and conditions in reference unto those works of grace , aught to be of no less esteem : and that not only for the nature and excellency of the things themselves , but also because a right disposal of them , gives more light into the stating and settling many other controverted truths about faith , justification , vocation , and the like : these are the subjects about which i am called forth in my own , or rather truths defence . 

For the treatise , and subject thereof , whose latter part gives rise to this ; i shall say no more , but as there are in it many footsteps of commendable learning , industry , and diligence ; so to my present apprehension the chief intendments of it , with very many occasional expressions of the author's judgement in sundry particulars , are obnoxious to just opposition from truth itself . 

It is not at all in my thoughts , to engage myself into the chief controversy there agitated ; though i could desire , that some to whom providence hath given more leisure , and opportunities for such employments , would candidly examine those aphorisms , for the further advantage of truth and light . 

But whereas the learned author hath to make straight the work he had in hand , endeavoured to cast some part of the doctrine of the satisfaction , and redemption of Christ , as by me delivered , into a crooked frame , and that with some such passages of censure , as Might have been omitted , without losing the least grace of his book , or style : i shall with the Lord's assistance , endeavour to reinforce what of truth hath been thereby assaulted in vain , and more especially take occasion from thence further to unfold those mysteries , which to our apprehension , are wrapped up in no small darkness : there being in them some things difficult , and hard to be understood . 

The first thing then , which that learned divine chose to stand in distance from me in , is concerning the nature of the payment made for sin by the blood of Christ ; whether it be ejusdem , or tantidem ; and of the sense of those expresions , is our first debate : in handling whereof , i hope i shall not only satisfy the reader as to the truth of what i had before written ; but also further clear the whole doctrine of satisfaction , with especial reference to the kind of the payment that Christ made , and punishment which he underwent . 

The other head wrappeth in itself many particulars concerning the immediate fruit , or effects of the death of Christ , the state of elect redeemed ones before actual believing , the nature of redemption , reconciliation , the differencing of persons in God's eternal purposes ; to the consideration of all which , and sundry other particulars , i have occasion offered me , in defence of the truth impugned . 

These now and the like , being things in themselves weighty , and the difference about them being for the most part rather as to the way of the delivery , then as to things themselves : in the handling of them , i could not attend merely to the advantage offered by m. Baxter's discourse , but choose rather to cast them into another method , which Might be distinct , clear , and accommodate to the things themselves : so that i hope the reader May ( With some profit ) see the whole dispensation of the love of God to his elect through Christ , with the relation of the elect in several conditions , unto the several actings of God in that dispensation succinctly laid down . 

The accommodation also of all delivered , to many weighty controversies , i have added . 

If the way of handling these things here used , be blamed by any , i hope the judicious will see , that it is such as the matter itself will bear . 

There hath not been many things in my whole enquiry after the mind of God in his word , which have more exercised my thoughts , than the right ordering , and distinct disposal of those whereof we treat ; if the Lord hath discovered any thing unto me , or made out any thing by me , that May be for the benefit of any of his , i shall rejoice ; it being always in my desire , that all things Might fall out to the advantage of the gospel : and so i address myself to the matter before me . 

Cap. ii  

An entrance into the whole ; of the nature of the payment made by Christ ; with the right stating of the things in difference . 

Mr. Baxter having composed his aphorisms of justification , with their explications : before the publishing of them in print , he communicated them ( As should appear ) to some of his near acquaintance : unto some things in them contained , one of his said friends gives in some exceptions ; amongst other things he opposeth unto those aphorisms , he also points at my contrary judgement in one or two particulars , with my reasons produced for the confirmation thereof . This provoketh their learned author ( Though unwilling ) to turn aside to the consideration of those reasons . Now the first of those particulars being about the payment made for sin , in the blood of Christ , of what sort , and kind it is : i shall willingly carry on the inquiry to this further issue , whereunto i am drawn out . 

1 he looks upon the stating of the question as i professedly laid it down at my entrance into that disputation , and declares , that it is nothing at all to the question he hath in hand , nor looking that way . 

he distinguisheth ( saith m. Baxter ) betwixt paying the very thing that is in the obligation , and paying of so much in another kind : now this is not our question , nor any thing to it . append. p. 137.  



If it be so , i know no reason why i was plucked in to the following dispute , nor why m. Baxter should cast away so many pages of his book , upon that which is nothing at all to the business he had in hand . 

But though there be nothing to this purpose , page 137 of my book , the place he was sent to , yet page 140 there is : as also something contrary to what is expressed in the former place , which he intimates in these words ; 

in page 140 , he states the question far otherwise , ( and yet supposeth it the same ) viz. whether Christ paid the idem , or the tantundum ? which he interpreteth thus , ( that which is not the same , nor equivalent unto it , but only in the gracious acceptation of the creditor : now what he means by ( not equivalent ) i cannot tell . 



1 if he mean ( not of equal value ) than he fights with a shadow : he wrongeth Grotius ( for aught i can find in him ) who teacheth no such doctrine : however i do not so use to English ( solutio tantidem . ) but if he mean that it is not equivalent , in procuring its end ipso facto , delivering the debtor , without the intervention of a new concession or contract of the creditor ( as solutio ejusdem doth ) than i confess Grotius is against him , and so am i . 



so also ( God's gracious acceptance ) is either in accepting less in value than was due , and so remitting the rest without payment , ( this i plead not for ) or else it is his accepting a refusable payment , which though equal in value , yet he May choose to accept according to the tenor of the obligation : this is gracious acceptance which Grotius maintaineth : and so do i : and so distinguish betwixt solutio , and satisfactio , payment and satisfaction . 

thus far he . 

Sundry things are here imagined , and asserted : 1 several passages are pointed at in my treatise , and a contradiction between them intimated . 2 various conjectures given at my ( Plain , very plain ) meaning , and divers things objected answerable to those conjectures , &c.  Wherefore to clear the whole , i shall first give you in the passages opposed , and then vindicate them from mutual opposition , with what is besides charged on them . 

The first place mentioned in my treatise is in page 137. where after i had discoursed of the nature of satisfaction , in reference both unto things real and personal , i laid down a distinction in these words : 

there May be a twofold satisfaction : 1 by a solution or payment of the very thing that is in the obligation ; either , by the party himself who is bound , or by some other in his stead : as if i owe a man 20 pounds , and my friend goeth and payeth it , my creditor is fully satisfied . 2 by a solution or paying of so much although in another kind , not the same that is in the obligation , which by the creditors acceptation stands in lieu of it : upon which also , freedom followeth from the obligation , by virtue of an act of favour . 



What now says m. b. to this ? Why ? it is nothing to the business he hath in hand . 



Let then this pass , and look to the next passage , which is opposed , and supposed to stand in opposition to the other . 

Having laid down the former distinction , passing on to some other things concerning the nature of satisfaction , and the establishment of that of Christ from the scripture , in page 140 , i apply that distinction laid down before in general , to the kind of satisfaction made by Christ , in these words : 

whereas i said that there is a twofold satisfaction , whereby the debtor is freed from the obligation , that is upon him ; the one being solutio ejusdem , payment of the same thing that was in the obligation : the other solutio tantidem , of that which is not the same , nor equivalent unto it , but only in the gracious acceptation of the creditor : it is worth our inquiry , which of these it was that our saviour did perform . 



And accordingly i refer it to the first . 

this ( saith m. b. ) is a stating of the question far otherwise then before , yet supposing it the same . 



But this i was so far from once mistrusting before , as that being informed of it , i cannot as yet apprehend it to be so . 

In page 137 i lay down a distinction in general about the several kinds of satisfaction , which page 140 i plainly apply to the satisfaction of Christ , without any new , much less changed stating of a question . 

My whole aim in that inquiry , was to search out that kind of punishment , which Christ underwent in making satisfaction for sin , viz.  whether it were the same that was threatened to the transgressors themselves , or whether something else which God accepted in lieu thereof , relaxing the law , not only as to the person suffering , but also as to the penalty to be undergone ? 



The first of these ( And that with the concurrent suffrage of far the greatest number of Protestant divines ) i assert with sundry arguments , page 141 , 142 , &c.  154 , 155 , 156.  Unto which assertion , he neither opposeth himself , nor once attempteth to answer any of the arguments whereby i proved it . 

This being my intendment , page 137 , i intimate that Christ paid the same thing that was in the obligation , as if in things real a friend should pay 20 pounds for him that owed so much , and not any thing in another kind : and page 140 i affirm that he paid idem , that is the same thing that was in the obligation ; and not tantundum , something equivalent thereunto , in another kind . 

the first of these is nothing to our purpose ( saith m. b. ) but the latter ; the latter crossing the former . 

so he . but truly ( Such is my dulness ) i cannot as yet be won to his mind herein . 

but though i agree with my self , perhaps i do not with the truth . that description of solutio tantidem , viz. that it is a payment of that which is not the same , nor equivalent unto it , but only in the gracious acceptation of the creditor , is peculiarly opposed . 

To make this expression obnoxious to an exception , m. b. divides it , that so it May be entangled with a fallacy , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : and first , he asks ( As before ) what i mean by [ not equivalent ] and hereunto suppossing two answers , to the first he opposseth a shadow , to the latter himself . 

1 if ( saith he ) by [ not equivalent ] you mean not of equal value , you fight with a shadow , and wrong Grotius : however i do not use so to English solutio tantidem . 



By [ not equivalent ] i mean that which is not of equal value , or certainly i mistake the word ; and if so , had need enough to have gone to m. b. or some other learned man , to have learned to English solutio tantidem . 

but , do i not then fight with a shadow ? 

Truly cut my words thus off in the middle of their sense , and they will be found fit to cope with no other adversary : but take them as they lie , and as intended , and there is scarce any shadow of opposition to them , cast by m. b. passing by . My words are , ( it is not equivalent , but only in the gracious acceptation of the creditor : ) is not the plain meaning of these words , that tantundem in satisfaction , is not equivalent to idem {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , but only {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ? what is denied of it absolutely , is affirmed in some respect . he that says , it is not equivalent , but only in gracious acceptation , in that sense affirms it to be equivalent ; and that it is in respect of that sense , that the things so called , is said to be tantundem , that is equivalent . 

Now what excepts m. b. hereunto ? Doth he assert tantundem to be in this matter equivalent unto idem {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ? It is the very thing he opposeth all along , maintaining that solutio tantidem stands in need of gracious acceptance , ejusdem of none : and therefore they are not as to their end {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} equivalent . 

Or will he deny it to be equivalent in God's gracious acceptance ? this he also contendeth for himself . Though refusable , yet equivalent . 

What then is my crime ? I wrong Grotius ! wherein ? in imposing on him , that he should say , it was not of equal value to the idem ▪ that Christ paid . Not one such word , in any of the places mentioned . I say , Grotius maintains , that the satisfaction of Christ , was solutio tantidem . will you deny it ? Is it not his main endeavour to prove it so ? Again , tantundem i say is not in this case equivalent to idem , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , but only {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : doth not m. b. labour to prove the same ? Where then is the difference ? Were it not for ignoratio elenchi in the bottom , and fallacia plurium interrogationum at the top , this discourse would have been very empty . 

2 , but he casts my words into another frame , to give their sense another appearance ; and saith , 

if you mean that it is not equivalent in procuring its end , ipso facto , delivering the debtor without the intervention of a new concession or contract of the creditor , as solutio ejusdem doth , than i confess Grotius is against you , and so am i . 



Of Grotius i shall speak afterwards : for the present i apply myself to m. b. and say , 

1 if he intend to oppose himself to any thing i handle and assert in the place he considereth , he doth by this quaerie-plainly {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and that from a second inadvertency of the argument in hand ; it is of the nature of the penalty undergone , and not of the efficacy of the satisfaction made thereby , that i there dispute . 

2 i conceive that in this interrogation and answer , he wholly gives up the cause , that he pretends to plead , and joins with me ( As he conceives my sense to be ) against Grotius and himself . 

; if ( saith he ) he mean that it is not equivalent , in procuring its end ipso facto , without the intervention of a new concession or contract as solutio ejusdem doth , than i am against him . 



Well then : m. b. maintains that solutio tantidem is equivalent with solutio ejusdem in obtaining its end ipso facto : for saith he , if i say it is not equivalent , he is against me . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . But is this his mind indeed ? Will his words bear any other sense ? 

3 whether tantundem and idem in the way of satisfaction be equivalent to the obtaining the end ipso facto aimed at , ( Which he here asserts , though elsewhere constantly denies couching in this distinction the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} of a great part of his discourse ) certainly is nothing at all to the question i there agitated ; maintaining , that it was idem and not tantundum that Christ paid , and so the end of it obtained ipso facto , answerable to the kind of the efficacy and procurement thereof . 

But perhaps i do not conceive his mind aright : peradventure his mind is , that if i do maintain the satisfaction of Christ to procure the end aimed at , ipso facto , as solutio ejusdem would have done , then to profess himself my adversary . but , 

1 this is not here expressed , nor intimated . 
2 it is nothing at all to me , who place the matter of the satisfaction of Christ , in solutione ejusdem . 
3 about the end of satisfaction in the place opposed i speak not , but only of the nature of the penalty undergone whereby it was made . 
4 to the thing itself , i desire to inquire ; 
1 what m. b. intends by solutio ejusdem in the business in hand ? Doth he not maintain it to be the offenders own undergoing the penalty of the law ? what end i pray doth this obtain ipso facto ? can it be any other but the glory of God's justice in the everlasting destruction of the creature ? how then can it possibly be supposed to attain the end spoken of ipso facto ? if this be the only meaning of solutio ejusdem , in this sense , the end of it is distant from the end of satisfaction {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

By the laying the penalty on Christ , that God intended the freedom of those for whom he underwent that penalty , i suppose cannot be doubted : but in inflicting it on the offenders themselves , that he hath any such aim , wants an origin to assert . 

2 whether the penalty due to one , May not be undergone by another ? and if so , whether it be not the same penalty ( The idem ) or no ? In things real , i gave an instance before : if a man pay twenty pounds for another who owed it , doth not he pay the idem in the obligation ? And May not this hold in things personal also ? 

Of the satisfaction of Christ procuring its end ipso facto , ( I mean in its own kind , for the death of Christ must be considered as meritorious , as well as satisfactory if deliverance be attended as the end of it ) i shall speak afterwards in its proper place . The present controversy is no more but this ; 

whether Christ underwent the penalty threatened unto us , or some other thing accepted in stead thereof , by a new constitution ? which is all one , whether in laying our iniquities upon Christ , the law of God was relaxed only as to the persons suffering , or also as to the penalty suffered ? that is , whether Christ paid the idem in the obligation , or tantundum ? to suppose that the idem of the obligation is not only the penalty itself , but also the offenders own suffering that penalty , and then to inquire , whether Christ underwent the idem , is to create an easy enemy , to triumph in his dejection . 

That the law was relaxed , as to the persons suffering , i positively assert ; but as to the penalty itself , that is not mentioned . Of these two things alone then must be our inquiry . 

1 whether Christ in making satisfaction , underwent that penalty that was threatened to the offenders themselves ? 
2 whether the penalty though undergone by another , be not the idem of the obligation ? 
Of both these after the clearing of the residue of mr Baxter's exceptions . 

Nextly he requireth what i intend by gracious acceptance , or rather giveth in his own sense of it , in these words . 

so also ( God's gracious acceptance ) is either his accepting less in value than was due , and so remitting the rest without payment : this i plead not for : or else it is his accepting of a refuseable payment , which though equal in value , yet he May choose to accept according to the tenor of the obligation . This is gracious acceptance which Grotius maintaineth : and so do i.  

thus far , he . 

Now neither is this any more to the business 〈◊〉 have in hand . For , 

1 the value of any satisfaction in this business , ariseth not from the innate worth of the things whereby it is made ; but purely from God's free constitution of them to such an end . A distinction cannot be allowed of more or less value in the things appointed of God for the same end ; all their value ariseth merely from that appointment : they have so much as he ascribeth to them , and no more : now neither idem nor tantundum are here satisfactory , but by virtue of divine constitution : only in tantundem i require a peculiar acceptance to make it equivalent to idem in this business , that is as to satisfaction : or ( If you please ) an acceptance of that which is not idem , to make it a tantundum . so that this gracious acceptance , is not an accepting of that which is less in value than what is in the obligation , but a free constitution appointing another thing to the end , which before was not appointed . 

2 he supposeth me , ( If in so many mistakes of his , i mistake him not ) to deny all gracious acceptance where the idem is paid , which ( In the present case ) is false : i assert it necessary , because not paid per eundem : yea and that other person not procured by the debtor , but graciously assigned by the creditor . 

3 to make up his gracious acceptance in his latter sense , he distinguisheth of payments refusable , and not refusable ; in the application of which distinction unto the payment made by Christ , i cannot close with him . 

For , 

A payment is refusable either absolutely and in itself , or upon supposal : the death of Christ considered absolutely and in itself , May be said to be refusable as to be made a payment ; not a refusable payment : and that , not because not refusable , but because not a payment . nothing can possibly tend to the procurement and compassing of any end by the way of payment , with the Lord , but what is built upon some free compact , promise , or obligation of his own . but now consider it as an issue flowing from divine constitution , making it a payment , and so it was no way refusable , as to the compassing of the end appointed . Thus also , as to the obligation of the law , for the fulfilling thereof , it was refusable in respect of the person paying , not in respect of the payment made : that former respect being also taken off by divine constitution , and relaxation of the law as to that , it becometh wholly unrefusable : that is , as it was paid it was so ; for satisfaction was made thereby upon the former supposals of constitution and relaxation . 

4 doth not mr b. suppose , that in the very tenure of the obligation there is required a solution , tending to the same end as satisfaction doth ? Nay , is not that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} of this discourse ? Deliverance is the aim of satisfaction , which receives its spring and being from the constitution thereof . But is there any such thing as deliverance once aimed at , or intended in the tenor of the obligation ? I suppose no . 

5 neither is the distinction of solutio and satisfactio ( Which mr b. closeth withal ) of any weight in this business ; unless it would hold {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which it will not , and so is of no use here . 

For , 

1 there is solutio tantidem , as well as ejusdem , and therein consists satisfaction according to mr b.  
2 whether satisfaction be inconsistent with solutio ejusdem , but not per eundem is the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 
After all this mr b. adds , 

Yet here mr Owen enters the list with Grotius . 

Where i pray ? i Might very justly make enquiry from the beginning to the ending of this discourse , to find out what it is , that this word here , particularly answereth unto . But to avoid as much as possible all strife of words , i desire the reader to view the controversy agitated between Grotius and myself , not as here represented by mr Baxter , so changed by a new dress , that i Might justly refuse to take any acquaintance with it , but as by myself laid down in the places excepted against ; and he will quickly find it to be , 

1 not whether the law were at all relaxed , but whether it were relaxed as well in respect of the penalty to be suffered , as of the person suffering ? that is , whether God be only a rector , or a rector and creditor also in this business ? ( Which controversy by the way , is so confusedly proposed , or rather strangely handled by mr b. page 145 , where he adjudges me in a sucessless assault of Grotius , as makes it evident he never once perused it . ) 

2 nor secondly , whether there be any need of God's gracious acceptance in this business , or no ; for i assert it necessary ( As before described ) in reference to solutio ejusdem , sed non per eundem . 

3 neither thirdly , whether the satisfaction of Christ considered absolutely , and in statu diviso , and materially , be refusable , which i considered not , or be unrefusable , supposing the divine constitution , which Grotius ( As i take it ) delivered not himself in . Nor , 

4 about the value of the payment of Christ in reference to acceptance ; but merely ( As i said before , ) 

whether the Lord appointing an end of deliverance , neither intimated nor couched in the obligation , nor any of its attendencies , constituting a way for the attainment of that end , by receiving satisfaction to the obligation , did appoint that the thing in the obligation should be paid though by another , or else some new thing that ( of itself , and by itself ) never was in the obligation , either before or after its solution : as the payment made by Christ must be granted such , unless it were for substance the same which the law required . 



And here ( With most divines ) i maintain the first , viz. that the law was relaxed in respect of the person suffering , but executed in respect of the penalty suffered : relaxation and execution are not in this business opposed {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} but only {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

He that would see this further affirmed , May consult what i wrote of it in the place opposed , which is not once moved by any thing here spoken to the contrary . 

By the way observe , i speak only of the penalty of the law , and the passive righteousness of Christ , strictly so called : for his active righteousness or obedience to the law , ( Though he did many things we were not obliged unto , for the manifestation of himself , and confirmation of the doctrine of the gospel ) that it was the very idem of us required . I suppose none can doubt . 

What place that active righteousness of Christ hath , or what is its use in our justification , i do not now inquire , being unwilling to immix myself unnecessarily in any controversy , though i cannot but suppose that m. b. his discourse hereabouts gives advantage enough , even minorum gentium theologis , to ordinary divines ( As he calls them ) to deal with him in it . 

Cap. iii  

The arguments of Grotius , and their defence by Mr. Baxter , about the penalty under-gone by Christ in making satisfaction , considered . 

The state of the question in hand being as above laid down , let us now see what mr Baxter his judgement is of my success in that undertaking : concerning which he thus delivereth himself ; 

Yet here mr Owen enters the list with Grotius , and , 

1 he overlooketh his greatest arguments . 
2 he slightly answereth only two. . 
3 and when he hath done , he saith as Grotius doth , and yieldeth the whole cause . 
These three things i will make appear in order . append. pag. 139.  

A most unhappy issue as can possibly be imagined , made up of deceit , weakness . and self-contradiction . but how is all this proved ? 

To make the first thing appear , he produceth the argument overlooked . 

the chief argument of Grotius and Vossius ( saith he ) is drawn from the tenor of the obligation , and from the event . The obligation chargeth punishment on the offender himself . It saith [ in the day thou eatest thou shalt die ] and [ cursed is every one that continueth not in all things , &c. ] now if the same in the obligation be paid , than the law is executed , and not relaxed : and then every sinner must die himself ; for that is the idem , and very thing threatened : so that here , dum alias soluit , simul aliud solvitur . the law threatened not Christ , but us : ( besides that , Christ suffered not the loss of God's love , nor his image and graces , nor eternity of torment , of which i have spoken in the treatise ) what saith mr Owen to any of this ? 



Let the reader observe what it is we have in hand . it is not the main of the controversy debated by Grotius wherein i do oppose him : neither yet all in that particular whereabout the opposition is . Now suppose ( As he doth ) that the punishing of the person offending is in the obligation , yet i cannot but conceive that there be two distinct things here : 1 the constitution of the penalty itself to be undergone . 2 the terminating of this penalty upon the person offending . For this latter , i assert a relaxation of the law , which Might be done , and yet the penalty itself in reference to its constitution be established . In those places then ( in the day thou eatest , &c. ) there is death and the curse appointed for the penalty , and the person offending appointed for the sufferer . That the law is relaxed , in the latter i grant , that the former was executed on Christ i prove . 

Now what says this argument to the contrary ? 

If the same in the obligation be paid , than the law is executed , not relaxed . Then every sinner must die himself , for that is the idem and very thing threatened . So that here dum alias soluit aliud solvitur . 

Answer : 

1 the matter of the obligation having plainly a double consideration , as before , it May be both executed and relaxed in sundry respects . 
2 the idem and very thing threatened in the constitution of the law , is death ; the terminating of that penalty to the person offending , was in the commination , and had it not been released , must have been in the execution : but in the constitution of the obligation which respects purely the kind of penalty , primarily it was not . death is the reward of sin , is all that is there . 
3 we inquire not about payment , but suffering . to make that suffering a payment supposeth another constitution : by virtue whereof Christ suffering the same that was threatened : it became another thing in payment , than it would have been , if the person offending had suffered himself . 
4 that the law threatened not Christ but us , is most true : but the question is , whether Christ underwent not the threatening of the law , not we ? A commutation of persons is allowed , Christ undergoing the penalty of the offence , though he were not the person offending , i cannot but still suppose that he paid the idem of the obligation . 
5 for the parenthesis about Christ's not suffering the loss of God's love , &c. and the like objections , they have been answered near a thousand times already , and that by no ordinary divines neither ; so that i shall not further trouble any therewith . 
How this is the argument , the great chief argument of Grotius and Vossius , which mr Baxter affirms i overlooked . 

That i did not express it , i easily grant : neither will i so wrong the ingenious reader as to make any long apology for my omission of it , considering the state of the matter in difference as before proposed : when mr b. or any man else , shall be able to draw out any conclusion from thence , that granting the relaxation of the law as to the person suffering , the Lord Christ did not undergo the penalty constituted therein , or that undergoing the very penalty appointed , he did not pay the idem in the obligation , ( Supposing a new constitution for the converting of suffering into a satisfactory payment ) i shall then give a reason why i considered it not . 

In the next place mr b. giveth in the two arguments wherewith i deal . And for the first , about an acquitment ipso facto upon the payment of the idem in the obligation , with my answer , refers it to be considered in another place : which though i receive no small injury by , as shall be there declared , yet that i May not transgress the order of discourse set me , i pass it by also until then . 

The second argument of Grotius with my answer , he thus expresseth : 

to the second argument that the payment of the same thing in the obligation leaveth no room for pardon , he answereth thus : 



1 God's pardoning compriseth the whole dispensation of grace in Christ ; as 1 the laying of our sin on Christ : 2 the imputation of his righteousness to us , which is no less of grace and mercy . However God pardoneth all to us , but nothing to Christ : so that the freedom of pardon hath its foundation . 



1 in God's will freely appointing this satisfaction of Christ . 
2 in a gracious acceptation of the decreed satisfaction in our stead . 
3 in a free application of the death of Christ to us . 


to which i answer , &c.  

so far he . 

Though this May appear to be a distinct expression of my answer , yet because it seems to me , that the very strength of it as laid down , is omitted ; i shall desire the reader to peruse it as it is there proposed , and it will give him some light into the thing in hand . I apply myself to what is here expressed , and answer : 

1 to the objection proposed from Grotius as above , i gave a threefold answer . 

1 that gracious condonation of sin , which i conceive to be the sum of the glad tidings of the gospel , seemeth to comprise those two acts before recounted ; both which i there prove to be free , because the very merit and satisfaction of Christ himself was founded on a free compact and covenant , or constitution . 

Now i had three reasons ( Among others ) that prevailed with me to make gracious condonation of so large extent , which i shall express , and leave them to the thoughts of every judicious reader , whether they are enforcing thereunto , or no ; being exceedingly indifferent what his determination is : for the weight of my answer depends not on it at all . 

And they are these : 

1 , because that single act of remission of sins to particular persons , ( Which is nothing but a dissolution of the obligation of the law , as unto them , whereby they are bound over to punishment ) as it is commonly restrained , is affirmed by them whom Grotius in that book opposed ( Into whose tents he was afterwards a renegado ) to be inconsistent with any satisfaction at all ; yea , that which Grotius maintains per tantundem . but now if you extend that gospel phrase to the compass i have mentioned , they have not the least colour so to do . 

2.  whereas the scripture mentioneth , that through Christ is preached the forgiveness of sin , act. 13. 38.  i do suppose that phrase to be comprehensive of the whole manifestation of God in the covenant of grace . 

3 , God expressly saith , that this is his covenant , that he will be merciful to our unrighteousness , heb. 8. 12.  

By the way i cannot close with mr b. that this place to the Hebrews , and the other of Jeremiah , 31. 32 , 33. do comprise but part of the covenant , not the whole . God saying expressly , this is my covenant : to say it is not , is not to interpret the word , but to deny it . It is true , it is not said that is the whole covenant ; no more is it that Christ is the way , the truth , and the life only . as the want of that term of nestriction , doth not enlarge in that , no more doth the want of the note of universality restrain in this . To say thus , because here is no condition expressed , is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . If you mean such a condition as God requireth of us , and yet worketh in us , it is there punctually expressed , with reference to the nature of the covenant , whereof it is a condition , which is to effect all the conditions thereof , in the Covenanters . This by the way , having resolvedly tied up myself from a debate of those positions which mr b. dogmatizeth ; though a large field , and easy to be walked in , lies open on every hand , for the scattering of many magisterial dictates , which with confidence enough are crudily asserted . 

This is ( To return ) my first answer , to the forementioned objection , with the reasons of it , whereunto mr b. excepteth , as followeth . 

1 pardon implieth Christ's death as a cause ; but i would he had showed the scripture that makes pardon so large a thing , as to comprise the whole dispensation of grace ; or that maketh Christ's death to be a part of it , or comprised in it . 
2 if such a word were in the scripture , will he not confess it to be figurative , and not proper , and so not fit for this dispute . 
3 else when he saith , that Christ's death procured our pardon , he meaneth that it procured itself . 


so he . 

To all which i say , 

1 the death of Christ , as it is a cause of pardon , is not once mentioned in any of my answers : there is a wide difference ( In consideration ) between God's imputation of sin to Christ , and the death of Christ , as the meritorious cause of pardon . so that this is pura ignoratio elenchi . 

2 take pardon in the large sense i intimated , and so the death of Christ is not the meritorious cause of the whole , but only of that particular in it , wherein it is commonly supposed solely to consist , of which before : but , 

In what sense , and upon what grounds , i extended gracious condonation of sin , unto that compass here mentioned , i have now expressed . Let it stand or fall , as it suits the judgement of the reader : the weight of my answer depends not on it , at all . 

My second answer to that objection i gave in these words . 

That remission , grace , and pardon which is in God for sinners , is not oppossed to Christ's merits and satisfaction , but ours : he pardoneth all to us , but he spared not his only son , he bated him not one farthing . 

to this mr b , thus expressing it , ( But it is of grace to us , though not to Christ ) answereth : doth not that clearly intimate , that Christ was not in the obligation ? That the law doth threaten every man personally , or else it had been no favour to accept it of another . 

It is marvelous to me , that a learned man should voluntarily choose an adversary to himself , and yet consider the very leaves which he undertakes to confute , with so much contempt or oscitancy , as to labour to prove against him , what he positively asserts terminis terminantibus . that Christ was not in the obligation , that he was put in as a surety by his own consent , God by his sovereignty dispensing with the law as to that , yet as a creditor exacting of him the due debt of the law , is the main intendment of the place mr Baxter here considereth . 

2 grant all that here is said , how doth it prove that Christ underwent not the very penalty of the law ? Is it because he was not primarily in the obligation ? He was put in as a surety to be the object of its execution . Is it because the law doth threaten every man personally ? Christ underwent really , what was threatened to others : as shall be proved : but , it is not then of favour to accept it : but this is the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . And thus to set it down , is but a petition {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

3 how doth this elude the force of my answer ? I see it not at all . 

After this , i give a third answer to the former objection , manifesting how the freedom of pardon , May consist with Christ satisfaction , in these words : 

The freedom then of pardon hath not its foundation in any defect of the merit or satisfaction of Christ ; but in three other things : 

1 the will of God freely appointing the satisfaction of Christ : joh. 3. 16.  Rom. 5. 8. 1 joh. 4. 9  
2 in a gracious acceptation of that decreed satisfaction in our steads , so many , no more . 
3 in a free application of the death of Christ unto us . Remission then excludes not a full satisfaction by the solution of the very thing in the obligation , but only the solution or satisfaction of him to whom pardon and remission is granted . 


It being the freedom of pardon that is denied . Upon the supposals of such a satisfaction as i assert , i demonstrate from whence that freedom doth accrue unto it , notwithstanding a supposal of such a satisfaction : not that pardon consisteth in the three things there recounted , but that it hath its freedom from them : that is , supposing those three things , notwithstanding the intervention of payment made by Christ , it cannot be , but remission of sin unto us must be a free and gracious act . 

To all this mr b. opposeth divers things . For , 

1 imputation of righteousness ( saith he ) is not any part of pardon , but a necessary antecedent . 
2 the same May be said of God's acceptation . 
3 its application is a large phrase , and May be meant of several acts ; but of which here i know not . 
In a word this mistake is very great . i affirm the freedom of pardon to depend on those things ; he answereth , that pardon doth not consist in these things . it is the freedom of pardon , whence it is ; not the nature of pardon , wherein it is , that we have under consideration . 

But ( saith he ) how can he call it a gracious acceptation , a gracious imputation , a free application , if it were the same thing the law requireth that was paid ? 

To pay all according to the full exaction of the obligation , needeth no favour to procure acceptance , imputation , or application . Can justice refuse to accept of such a payment ? or can it require any more ? 

Though i know not directly what it is he means by saying ( I call it ) yet i pass it over . 

2 if all this were done by the persons themselves , or any one in their stead , procured and appointed by themselves , than were there some difficulty in these questions ; but this being otherwise , there is none at all , as hath been declared . 

3 how the payment made by Christ was of grace , yet in respect of the obligation of the law needed no favour , nor was refusable by justice , supposing its free constitution , shall be afterwards declared . To me the author seems not to have his wont cleverness in this whole section , which Might administer occasion of further inquiry and exceptions , but i forbear . 

And thus much be spoken , for the clearing and vindicating my answer to the arguments of Grotius against Christ's paying the idem of the obligation : the next shall further confirm the truth . 

Cap. iv.  

Further of the matter of the satisfaction of Christ , wherein is proved , that it was the same that was in the obligation . 

It being supposed not to be sufficient to have showed the weakness of my endeavour to assert and vindicate from opposition , what i had undertaken . 

mr Baxter addeth , that i give up the cause about which i contend , as having indeed not understood him , whom i undertook to oppose , in these words : 

Mr Owen giveth up the cause at last , and saith as Grotius : ( Having not understood Grotius his meaning ) as appeareth , pag. 141 , 142 , 143.  

Whether i understand Grotius or no , will by and by appear . Whether mr b. understandeth me , or the controversy by me handled , you shall have now a trial . 

The assertion which alone i seek to maintain , is this ; 

That the punishment which our saviour underwent , was the same that the law required of us : God relaxing his law as to the person suffering , but not as to the penalty suffered . 

Now , if from this i draw back in any of the concessions following collected from pag. 141 , 142 , 143.  I depracate not the censure of giving up the cause i contended for . if otherwise , there is a great mistake in some body of the whole business . 

Of the things than observe according to mr b. his order , i shall take a brief account . 

1 he acknowledgeth ( saith he ) that the payment is not made by the party to whom remission is granted , ( And so saith every man that is a Christian . ) 



This is a part of the position itself i maintain , and so no going back from it : so that as to this , i May pass as a Christian . 

2 he saith ( adds he ) it was a full valuable compensation ( Therefore not of the same . 



1 this inference would trouble mr b. to prove . 
2 therefore not made by the same , nor by any of the debtors appointment , will follow , ( perhaps ) but no more . 
3 that by reason of the obligation upon us , we ourselves were bound to undergo the punishment . Therefore Christ's punishment was not in the obligation , but only ours , and so the law was not fully executed , but relaxed . 


1 this is my thesis fully , the law was executed as to its penalty , relaxed as to the person suffering . 

2 the punishment that Christ underwent , was in the obligation , though threatened to us . 

4 he saith , he meaneth not that Christ bore the same punishment due to us in all accidents of duration and the like : but the same in weight and preasure ( therefore not the same in the obligation , because not fully the same act . 



The accidents i mention , follow and attend the person suffering , and not the penalty itself . All evils in any suffering as far as they are sinful , attend the condition of the parties that suffer : every thing usually recounted by those who make this and the like exceptions , as far as they are purely penal , were on Christ . 

5 he saith God had power so far to relax his own law , as to have the name of a surety put into the obligation , which before was not there , and then to require the whole debt of that surety . 



and what saith Grotius more than this ? If the same things in the obligation be paid , than the law is executed : and if executed , than not relaxed . Here he confesseth . That the sureties name was not in the obligation , and that God relaxed the law to put it in . Now the main business that Grotius drives at there , is to prove this relaxation of the law , and the non-execution of it on the offenders threatened . thus far mr Baxter . 



1 all this proves not at all the things intended , neither doth any concession here mentioned , in the least take off from the main assertion i maintain , as is apparent any at first view . 2 Grotius is so far from saying more than i do , that he says not so much . 3 this paralogism if the law be executed , than not relaxed ; and on the contrary , ariseth-meerly from a non-consideration of the nature of contradictories : the opposition fancied here is not {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as is required of contradictions : 4 the observation , that crown main business is other , discovereth the bottom of m. b. his mistake . Even a supposal that i should oppose Grotius in his main intendment in the place considered , which was not once in my thoughts . It was merely about the nature of the penalty that Christ underwent , that i discoursed . How the relaxation of the law , as to the commutation of persons May be established , whether we affirm , Christ to have paid the idem or tantundem . and that mr b. affirms the same with me , i can prove by twenty instances . The reader ( If he please ) May consult pag. 18.  & 25. 33 , 34 , 35. 42. 48. and in plain terms pag. 81.  in respect of punishment abstracting from persons , the law was not dispensed withal as to Christ ? and what said i more ? 

And so much ( If not too much ) to mr Baxter's exceptions , which of what weight and force they are , i leave to others to judge . 

That which i maintain as to this point in difference , i have also made apparent ; it is wholly comprised under these two heads : 

1 Christ suffered the same penalty which was in the obligation . 
2 to do so , is to make payment ejusdem , and not tantidem . 
The reasons of both , i shall briefly subjoin . 

And as to the first , they are these following : 

1 the scripture hath expressly revealed the translation of punishment in respect of the subjects suffering it : but hath not spoken one word of the change of the kind of punishment , but rather the contrary is affirmed . rom. 8. 32.  he spared not his own son , but delivered him up for us all . 

2 all the punishment due to us , was contained in the curse and sanction of the law : that is the penalty of the obligation whereof we spoke ; but this was undergone by the Lord Christ . for he hath redeemed us from the curse of the law , being made a curse for us , gall . 3. 13.  

3 where God condemneth sin , there he condems it , in that very punishment which is due unto it in the sinner , or rather to the sinner for it . He hath revealed but one rule of his proceeding in this case . How he condemned sin in the flesh of Christ : or in him , sent in the likeness of sinful flesh . Rom. 8. 30.  God sending his own son in the likeness of sinful flesh , and for sin condemned sin in the flesh . the condemning of sin , is the infliction of punishment due to sin . 

4 the whole penalty of sin is death , gen. 2. 11.  This Christ underwent for us . heb. 2. 14.  He tasted death . and to die for another , is to undergo that death which that other should have undergone , 2 sam. 18. 33.  It is true , this death May be considered either in respect of its essence , ( If i May be allowed so to speak ) which is called the pains of hell which Christ underwent , psal. 18. 6. and 22. 1.  Luke 22. 44. or of its attendencies , as duration and the like , which he could not undergo : psal. 16. 20.  Acts 2.  So that whereas eternal death May be considered two ways , either as such in potentia , and in its own nature , or as actually : so , our saviour underwent it not in the latter , but first sense , heb. 2. 9 14. which by the dignity of his person , 1 pet. 3. 18.  Heb. 9 26. 28.  Rom. 5. 9 which raises the estimation of punishment , is aequipotent to the other . There is a sameness in Christ's sufferings with that in the obligation in respect of essence , and equivalency in respect of attendencies . 

5 the meeting of our iniquities upon Christ , isa. 53. 6. and his being thereby made sin for us , 2 cor. 5. 21. lay the very punishment of our sin , as to us threatened , upon him . 

6 consider the scriptural descriptions you have of his perpessions , and see if they do not plainly hold out the utmost that ever was threatened to sin . There is the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} isa. 53. 5.  Peter's {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , 1 pet. 2. 24. the liver , nibex , wound , stripe , that in our stead was so on him , that thereby we are healed . Those expressions of the condition of his soul in his sufferings , whereby he is said {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , mat. 26. 34.  Mark 14. 33.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Luke 22. 44.  Sadness unto death , mat. 26. 38.  That dreadful cry , why hast thou forsaken me ? those cries out of the deep , and mighty supplications under his fear , heb. 5. 7. that were upon him do all make out , that the bitterness of the death due to sin was fully upon his soul . sum all his outward appearing preasures , mocks , scoffs , scorns , cross , wounds , death , &c.  and what do some of their afflictions , who have suffered for his name , come short of it ? And yet how far were they above those dreadful expressions of anguish , which we find upon the fellow of the Lord of hosts , the lion of the tribe of Judah , who received not the spirit by measure , but was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows ? certainly his unconceivable sufferings were in an other kind , and such as set no example to any of his , to suffer in after him . It was no less than the weight of the wrath of God , and the whole punishment due to sin , that he wrestled under . 

2 the second part of my position is to me confirmed by these , and the like arguments : that there is a distinction to be allowed between the penalty and the person suffering , is a common apprehension : especially when the nature of the penalty is only enquired after . If a man that had but one eye were censured to have an eye put out , and a dear friend pitying his deplorable condition , knowing , that by undergoing the punishment decreed , he must be left to utter blindness , should upon the allowance of commutation ( As in Zaleucus case ) submit to have one of his own eyes put out , and so satisfy the sentence given , though by having two eyes , he avoid himself the misery that would have attended the others suffering , who had but one . If ( I say ) in this case , any should ask , whether he underwent the idem the other should have done , or tantundem , i suppose the answer would be easy . In things real it is unquestionable ; and in things personally , i shall pursue it no further , lest it should prove a strife of words . and thus far of the suffering of Christ in a way of controversy : what follows will be more positive . 

Cap. v.  

The second head about justification before believing . 

The next thing i am called into question about , is concerning actual , and absolute justification before believing : this mr Baxter speaks to page 146 , and so forward : and first answers the arguments of maccovius for such justification , and then page 151 applies himself to remove such further arguments , and places of scripture , as are by me produced for the confirmation of that assertion . 

Here perhaps i could have desired a little more candour . To have an Opinionion fastened on me , which i never once received , nor intimated the least thought of , in that whole treatise , or any other of mine ; and than my arguments answered as to such an end , and purpose , as i not once intended to promote by them , is a little to harsh dealing . It is a facile thing , to render any man's reasonings exceedingly weak , and ridiculous , if we May impose upon them such , and such things to be proved by them , which their author never once intended . 

For partional justification , evangelical justification , whereby a sinner is completely justified , that it should precede believing , i have not only not asserted , but positively denied , and disproved by many arguments : to be now traduced as a patron of that opinion , and my reasons for it , publicly answered , seems to me something uncouth : however i am resolved not to interpose in other men's disputes , and differences , yet lest i should be again , and further mistaken in this , i shall briefly give in my thoughts to the whole difficulty : after i have discovered , and discussed the ground , and occasion of this mistake . 

In an answer to an argument of Grotius about the satisfaction of Christ , denying that by it we are ipso facto delivered from the penalty due to sin : i affirmed that by his death , Christ did actually , or ipso facto deliver us from the curse , by being made a curse for us ; and this is that , which gave occasion , to that imputation before mentioned . 

To clear my mind in this , i must desire the reader to consider , that my answer is but a denial of Grotius his assertions : in what kind , and respect Grotius doth there deny that we are ipso facto delivered by the satisfaction of Christ , in that sense , and that only , do i affirm that we are so : otherwise there were no contradictions between his assertion , and mine , not speaking ad idem , and eodem respectu . 

The truth is , Grotius doth not in that place whence this argument is taken , fully , or clearly manifest , what he intends by a deliverance which is not actual , or ipso facto : and therefore i made bold to interpret his mind , by the analogy of that opinion wherewith he was thoroughly infected about the death of Christ . According to that , Christ delivering us by his satisfaction , not actually , nor ipso facto , is so to make satisfaction for us , as that we shall have no benefit by his death , but upon the performance of a condition , which himself by that death of his , did not absolutely procure . This was that which i opposed and therefore affirmed , that Christ by his death did actually , or ipso facto , deliver us . 

Let the reader then here observe : 

1 that our deliverance is to be referred to the death of Christ , according to its own causality ; that is , as a cause meritorious : now such causes do actually , and ipso facto produce all those effects , which immediately slow from them ; not in an immediation of time , but causality . look then what effects do follow , or what things soever are procured by them , without the interposition of any other cause in the same kind , they are said to be procured by them actually , or ipso facto . 

2 that i have abundantly proved in the treatise mentioned , that if the fruits of the death of Christ , be to be communicated unto us upon condition , and that condition to be among those fruits , and be itself to be absolutely communicated upon no condition , than all the fruits of the death of Christ , are as absolutely procured for them , for whom he died , as if no condition had been prescribed ; for these things come all to one . 

3 i have proved in the same place , that faith , which is this condition , is itself procured by the death of Christ , for them for whom he died , to be freely bestowed on them , without the prescription of any such condition as on whose fulfilling , the collation of it should depend . 

These things being considered ( As i hoped they would have been by every one , that should undertake to censure any thing , as to this business in that treatise ( They being there all handled at large ) it is apparent what i intended by this actual deliverance : viz. that the Lord Jesus by the satisfaction & merit of his death , & obligation made for all , & only his elect , hath actually , & absolutely purchased , & procured for them all spiritual blessings of grace , & glory to be made out unto them , and bestowed upon them in God's way , and time , without dependence on any condition to be by them performed , not absolutely procured for them thereby : whereby they became to have a right unto the good things by him purchased , to be in due time possessed according to God's way , method , and appointment . 

From a faithful adherence unto this persuasion , i see nothing as yet of the least efficacy , or force to dissuade me : and am bold to tell these concerned therein , that their conditional satisfaction , or their suspending the fruits of the death of Christ upon conditions , as though the Lord should give him to die for us upon condition of such , and such things , is a vain figment , contrary to the scriptures , inconsistent in itself , and destructive of the true value , and virtue of the death of Christ ; which by the Lord's assistance , i shall be ready at any time to demonstrate . 

My intention in the place excepted against being cleared , i shall now tender my thoughts to these two things : 1 the distinct consideration of the acts of the will of God , before , and after the satisfaction of Christ : as also before , and after our believing towards us , as unto justification . 2 the distinct estate of the sinner upon that consideration : with what is the right to the fruits of the death of Christ which the elect of God have before believing . 

Cap. vi . 

Of the acts of God's will towards sinners , antecedent and consequent to the satisfaction of Christ : of Grotius judgement herein . 

The distinct consideration of the acts of God's will , in reference to the satisfaction of Christ , and our believing , ( According to the former proposal ) is the first thing to be considered . 

Grotius , who with many ( And in an especial manner with mr Baxter ) is of very great account , ( And that in theology ) distinguisheth ( As himself calls them with a school term ) 3 moments , or instances of the divine will . 

a 1 before the death of Christ , either actually accomplished , or in the purpose , and foreknowledge of God ; in this instant ( He saith ) God is angry with the sinner , but so , as that he is not averse from all ways of laying down his anger . 

b 2 upon the death of Christ , or that being supposed , wherein God not only purposeth , but also promiseth to lay aside his anger . 

c 3 when a man by true faith believeth in Christ , and Christ according to the tenure of the covenant commendeth him to God : here now God lays aside his anger , and receiveth man into favour . thus far he . 

Amongst all the attempts of distinguishing the acts of God's will in reference unto Christ , and sinners , what ever i considered , i never found any more slight atheological , and discrepant from the truth , than this of Grotius . 

d to measure the almighty by the standard of a man , and to frame in the mind a mutable idol , instead of the eternal , unchangeable God , is a thing that the fleshly reasonings of dark understandings are prone unto . Feigns the Lord in one instant angry , afterwards promising to cease to be so , then in another instant laying down his anger , and taking up a contrary affection , and you seem to me , to do no less . 

What it May be esteemed in law , which was that author's faculty , i know not : but suppose in divinity , that ( Notwithstanding the manifold attempts of some {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} in most heads of religion ) e the ascribing unto the most holy , things alien , and opposite unto his glorious nature , is by common consent , accounted no less than f blasphemy : whither this be here done , or no , May easily appear . I hope then without the offence of any , i May be allowed to call those dictates of Grotius to the rule , and measure of truth . 

1 before the foresight of the death of Christ ( saith he ) God is angry with sinners , but not wholly averse from all ways of laying aside that anger . 

answ. 1 that God should be conceived angry after the manner of men , or with any such kind of passion , is gross anthropomorphism ; as bad , if not worse , than the assigning of him a bodily shape . g the anger of God is a pure act of his will , whereby he will effect ▪ and inflict the effects of anger . Now what is before the foresight of the death of Christ , is certainly from eternity . God's anger must respect either the purpose of God , or the effects of it . The latter it cannot be , for they are undoubtedly all temporal . It must be then his purpose from eternity to inflict punishment , that is the effect of anger . This then is the first thing in the business of redemption assigned by Grotius , unto the Lord . viz. he purposed from eternity , to inflict punishment on sinners : and on what sinners ? even those , for whom he gives Christ to die , and afterwards receives into favour , as he expresseth himself . Behold here a mystery of Vorstian theology : God changing his eternal purposes . h this Arminius at first could not down withal , inferring from hence , that the will of God differed not from his essence , that every act thereof , is , 1 most simple : 2 infinite : 3 eternal : 4 immutable : 5 holy . Reason itself would fain speak in this cause , but that the scriptures do so abound , many places are noted in the margin . ja. 1. 17. 2 tim. 2. 19  Ps. 33. 9 , 10 , 11.  acts. 15. 18.  &c. May be added . A mutable god , is of the dunghill . 

2 that the death of Christ is not comprised in the first consideration of God's mind , and act of his will towards sinners to be saved , is assumed gratis . 

3 he is not ( Saith he ) averse from all ways of laying down this anger . this Schem Grotius placeth ( As is evident ) in God , as the foundation , and bottom of sending Christ for our redemption . This he immediately subjoins without the least intimation of any further inclination in God towards sinners , for whom he gives his son . But , 

1 this is a mere negation of inflicting anger for the present : or a suspension of that affection from working according to its quality ; which how it can be ascribed to the pure and active i will of God , i know not . Yea , it is above disproved . 

2 such a kind of frame , as it is injurious to God , so to be held out as the fountain of his sending Christ to die for us , is ( I am persuaded ) an abhorrency to Christians . And , 

3 whether this answer that , which the scripture holds out , as the most intense distinguishing love . joh. 3. 16.  rom. 5. 8. chap. 8. 32. 1 joh. 4. 9 , 10. is easily discernible . A natural velleity to the good of the creature , is the thing here couched , but was never proved . 

In the second instance , God ( saith he ) the death of Christ being supposed , not only determineth , but also promiseth to lay aside his anger . 

1 what terms can be invented to hold out more expressly a change , and alteration in the unchangeable God , than these here used , i know not . 2 that the will or mind of God , is altered from one respect towards us , to another , by the consideration of the death of Christ , is a low , carnal conception . The will of God is not moved by any thing without itself . k alterations are in the things altered , not in the will of God concerning them . 3 to make this the whole effect of the death of Christ , ( that God should determine , and promise to lay aside his wrath ) is l no scripture discovery , either as to name , or thing . 4 the purposes of God , which are all eternal , and the promises of God , which are all made in time , are very inconveniently ranged in the same series . 5 that by the death of Christ , atonement is made , everlasting redemption purchased , that God is reconciled , a right unto freedom obtained , for those for whom he died , shall be afterwards declared . 6 if God doth only purpose , and promise to lay aside his anger upon the death of Christ , but doth it not until our actual believing ; then , 1 our faith is the proper procuring cause of reconciliation ; the death of Christ , but a requisite antecedent , which is not the scripture phrase . Rom. 5. 10. 2 cor. 5. 18.  Eph. 2. 16.  Col. 1. 20 , 21.  Dan. 9 24.  Heb. 2. 17.  Eph. 1. 7.  heb. 9 12. 2  How comes the sinner by faith , if it is the gift of God ? it must be an issue of anger , and enmity , for that Schem only , is actually ascribed to him , before our enjoyment of it ; strange ! that God should be so far reconciled , as to give us faith , that we May be reconciled to him , that thereupon he May be reconciled to us . 

3 for the third instance , of God's receiving the sinner into love , and favour upon his believing , quite laying aside his anger . i answer : to wave the anthropomorphism , wherewith this assertion is tainted as the former : if by receiving into favour , he intend absolute , complete pactional justification , being an act of favour , quitting the sinner from the guilt of sin , charged by the accusation of the law , terminated on the conscience of a sinner : i confess it , in order of nature , to follow our believing . 

I Might consider further the attempts of others for the right sttating of this business , but it would draw me beyond my intention . his failings herein , who is so often mentioned , and so much used , by him , who gives occasion to this rescript , i could not but remark . What are my own thoughts and apprehensions of the whole , i shall in the next place briefly impart . 

Now to make way hereunto , some things i must suppose : which though some of them otherwhere controverted , yet not at all in reference to the present business : and they are these . 

1 that Christ died only for the elect : or God gave his son to die only for those , whom he chooseth to life , and salvation for the praise of his glorious grace . 

This is granted by mr Baxter , where he affirms , that Christ bare not punishment for them , who must bear punishment themselves in eternal fire . thes. 33. p. 162.  And again , Christ died not for final unbelief . thes. 32. p. 159. therefore not for them who are finally unbelievers , as all non-elected are , and shall be . For what sinners he died , he died for all their sins , rom. 5. 6 , 7 , 8. 2 cor. 5. 21. 1 joh. 1. 7.  

If any shall say , that as he died not for the final unbelief of others , so not for the final unbelief of the elect , and so not for final unbelief at all . 

I answer , 

First , if by final unbelief , you mean that which is actually so , Christ satisfied not for it . His satisfaction cannot be extended to those things , whose existence is prevented by his merit . The omission of this in the consideration of the death Christ , lies at the bottom of many mistakes . Merit , and satisfaction , are of equal extent as to their objects : both also tend to the same end , but in sundry respects . 

Secondly , if by final unbelief , you understand that which would be so , notwithstanding all means , and remedies , were it not for the death of Christ , so he did satisfy for it . its existens being prevented by his merit . So then , if Christ died not for final unbelief , he died not for the finally unbelieving : though the satisfaction of his death hath not paid for it , the merit of his death would remove it . 

Thirdly , i suppose , that the means , as well as the ends , grace , as glory , are the purchase , and procurement of Jesus Christ : see this proved in my treatise of redemption . Lib. 3. cap. 4. &c.  

Fourthly , that God is absolutely immutable , & unchangeable in all his attributes : neither doth his will admit of any alteration . This proved above . 

fifthly , that the will of God is not moved properly by any external cause whatsoever , unto any of its acts , whether imminent , or transient . for , 

1 M by a moving cause , we understand a cause morally efficient ; and if any thing were so properly in respect of any act of God's will , than the act ( Which is the will of God acting ) must in some respect , ( viz. as it is an effect ) be less worthy , and inferior to the cause ; for so is every effect , in respect of its cause . And , 

2 every effect produced , proceedeth from a passive possibility unto the effect , which can no way be assigned unto God , besides it must be temporary ; for nothing that is eternal , can have dependence upon that , whose rise is in time : and such are all things external to the will of God , even the merit of Christ himself . 

3 i cannot imagine how there can be any other cause , why God willeth any thing , than why he not willeth , or willeth not other things , which for any to assign , will be found difficult : mat. 11. 25. chap. 20. 15.  So then when God willeth one thing for another , as our salvation for the death of Christ , the one is the cause of the other ; neither moveth the will of God . Hence , 

sixthly , all alterations are in the things , concerning which the acts of the will of God are , none in the will of God its self . 

These things being premised , what was before proposed , i shall now in order make out ; beginning with the eternal acts of the will of God towards us , antecedent to all , or any consideration of the death of Christ . 

Cap. vii . 

In particular of the will of God towards them for whom Christ died , and their state , and condition as considered antecedanous to the death of Christ , and all efficiency thereof . 

First then , the habitude of God towards man , antecedent to all foresight of the death of Christ , is an act of supreme sovereignty , and dominion , appointing them , by means suited to the manifestation of his glorious properties , according to his infinitely wise , and free disposal , to eternal life , and salvation , for the praise of his glorious grace . 

That this salvation was never but one , or of one kind , consisting in the same kind of happiness , in reference unto God's appointment , needs not much proving . To think that God appointed one kind of condition for man if he had continue in innocency , and another upon his recovery from the fall ; is to think , that his prescience is but conjectural , and his will alterable . 

In this instant then , we suppose no kind of affection in God , properly so called : no changeable resolution , no inclinableness , and propensity of nature , to the good of the creature in general , no frame of being angry , with only a not-averseness to the laying down of his anger , &c.  all which , and the like are derogatory to the infinite perfection of God . 

Nor yet any act of pitying , and pardoning mercy , much less any quiting , or clearing of sinners , whereby they should be justified from eternity ; the permission of sin itself in the purpose of it , being not presupposed , but included in this habitude of God's will towards man , to make it complete . 

Neither any absolute intention of doing good unto man , without respect unto Christ , and his merits , they referring to the good to be done , not to his appointment ; for by them is this purpose of his to be accomplished . 

Nor lastly , doth it contain any actual relaxation , suspension , or abrogation of that law and it 's penalties , by which it is his will the creature shall be regulated , in reference to the persons concerning whom this act of his will is : they standing indeed , in that relation thereunto , as in the season of their existence , their several conditions expose them to , by virtue of the first constitution of that law . 

But it is such an act of his will , as in the scripture is termed {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , Acts 2. 23.  Rom. 8. 29. 1 pet. 1. 20.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , rom. 8. 28. 9 11.  Eph. 3. 11.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , mat. 11. 26.  Eph. 1. 5. 2 thess. 1. 11.  Luke 12. 32.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , eph. 1. 11.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 2 tim. 2 19  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , eph. 1. 5. 11.  Rom. 8. 29.  Ordination , or appointment unto life , act. 13. 48. 1 thess. 5. 5. 9  All which , and divers other expressions , point at the same thing . 

Divines commonly in one word call it his decree of election , and sometimes according to scripture , election itself , eph. 1. 4.  Neither doth the word hold out any habitude of God towards man . Antecedaneous to all efficiency of the death of Christ , but only this : i speak of them only in this whole discourse for whom he died . 

That this is an act of sovereignty , or supreme dominion , and not of mercy ( Properly so called ) hath been by others abundantly proved . And this i place as the causa {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} of the satisfaction of Christ , and the whole dispensation of making out love unto us , through various acts of mercy . 

This in the scripture is called the love of God . Rom. 9 13. and is set out as the most intense love , that ever he beareth to any of his creatures : joh. 3. 16.  Rom. 5. 8. 1 joh. 4. 9  Being indeed as properly love , as love can be assigned unto God . His love is but an act of his will , whereby , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . And in respect of effects , ( In which respect , chiefly affections are ascribed unto God ) it hath the most eminent possible . Now this being discriminating , can no way be reconciled with the common affection before disproved . 

For the order , and series of the purposes of God , as most natural for our apprehension , and agreeable to his own infinite wisdom , tending to the completing of this love , in all its issues , and fruits , as it is more curious ( Perhaps ) in the framing , then necessary to be known , so certainly , it would be too long and intricate a work for me to discuss at present , in reference to this intendment . Only in general , this must be granted , that all the thoughts of God , concerning the way of accomplishing this act of his will , must be subordinate hereunto , as comprising the end , and coordinate among themselves , as being concerning the means . 

In particular , the constitution , or appointment of the covenant of freegrace , for the recovery , and bringing home unto God of fallen man , hath immediate dependence thereon , i mean in that way of dependence , which their order gives unto them . I cannot assent to what mr Baxter hath asserted in this matter ; thess. 14.  Expl. p. 90.  the satisfaction of Christ ( Saith he ) to the law , goes before the new covenant , though not in regard of its payment ( which was in the fullness of time ) yet in undertaking , acceptance , and efficacy ; there could be no treating on new terms , until the old obligation was satisfied , and suspended . 

Had he attempted the proof of this assertion , perhaps he would have found it a more difficult undertaking , then barely to affirm it . Some few reasons to the contrary , that present themselves , i shall briefly set down . 

1 Christ himself with his whole satisfaction , and merit , is included in the covenant : therefore his satisfaction is not antecedent to the covenant . the first appeareth , in that all promises of pardoning mercy are in , and of this new covenant . heb. 8. 10. 12. but now , in them , as the foundation of that mercy , is Christ himself with his satisfaction comprised , gen. 3. 15.  Esa. 9 6 , 7.  

2 he , who in all that he is , as made unto us , was the mediator of the new covanant , and whose merit , and satisfaction in all that they are , are appointed for the procuring the mercies of the new covenant , his satisfaction is not antecedent to the covenant , heb. 7. 22. chap. 8. 6. &c.  

3 the constitution of the new covenant , as it is in the purpose of God , is the rise , and fountain of giving Christ with his satisfaction for us . It is in the purpose of God to save us through faith by pardoning mercy : in the pursuit of that design , and for the praise of that glorious grace , is Christ given . Joh. 3. 16.  Rom. 8. 32.  Or thus : 

4 if the designation of that way of life , and salvation , which is administered by the gospel , be antecedent to the satisfaction of Christ , than the satisfaction of Christ is not antecedent to the new covenant : for nothing can be before , and after the same thing : understand the designation of the way of life , and the satisfaction of Christ , in the same order of decree , or execution . Now the supposal is manifest : the satisfaction of Christ being appointed as the means of accomplishing that way of life . 

If mr Baxter intendeth those latter words ( there could be no treating on new terms , before the old obligation was satisfied , or suspended ) as a proof of his former assertion , he will fail in his intendment , as i suppose . For , 

1 treating on new terms , denoteth either consilium in eundi foederis , or exequendi : if the first , it is nothing but the purpose of God to save his elect by pardoning mercy , for the praise of his glorious grace : this is wholly antecedent to any efficiency of the death , and satisfaction of Christ , as being of mere , and absolute grace , jer. 31. 3. hab. 8. 7 , 8.  

If the latter be intended , or the actual taking of sinners into covenant , by working an acceptance of it upon their spirits , and obedience to the condition of it , in their hearts , then though the satisfaction of Christ be antecedent here unto , yet it is not thence , antecedent to the new covenant : for the new covenant , and taking into covenant , are distinct . 

This then being assigned unto God after our manner of apprehension , the next inquiry is into the state , and condition of those persons , who are the peculiar object of the act of God's will before described , in reference thereunto , antecedaneous to all consideration of the death of Christ , and all efficacy thereof . 

The scripture speaking of them in this condition , saith , that they are beloved : rom. 9 13.  Rom. 11. 28.  elected : eph. 14.  ordained unto eternal life : Acts 13. 48. 2 thess. 2 13.  Whether only the eternal actings of the will of God towards them , or also their own change , either actual in respect of real state , and condition ; or relative in reference to the purpose of God , is not certainly evident . Hereunto then , i propose these two things : 

1 by the eternal love , purpose , and act of God's will towards them that shall be saved , ( Who are so from thence ) they are not actually changed from that condition ▪ which is common to them , with all the sons of men after the fall . 

2 by virtue of that love alone , they have not so much as personal right unto any of those things which are the proper effects of that love , and which it produceth in due season , beseemingly to the wisdom , and justice of God . 

Either of these assertions shall be briefly proved . 

For the first , it is manifest : 

1 from that act of God's will , which to this love is contradistinct : what change is wrought in the loved , or elected , by the purpose of God according to election ; an answerable change must be wrought in the hated , and appointed to condemnation , by the decree of reprobation : now that this should really alter the condition of men , and actually dispose them under the consequences of that purpose , cannot be granted . 

2 Anallogie from other eternal purposes of God , gives a demonstration hereof . The eternal purposes of the divine will , for the creation of the world out of nothing ; left that nothing , as very nothing as ever , until an act of almighty power gave ( In the beginning ) existence , and being to the things , that are seen . Things have their certain fructurition , not instant actual existence from the eternal purposes of God , concerning them . 

3 the scripture plainly placeth all men in the same state and condition before conversion , and reconciliation . we have proved , that Jews , and gentiles are all under sin , rom. 3. 9 , 10.  So every mouth is stopped , and all the world is become guilty before God . verse 19  All being by nature , children of wrath : eph. 2. 3.  The condition of all in vnregeneracy , is really one , and the same . Those who think it is a mistaken apprehension in the elect to think so , are certainly too much mistaken in that apprehension . he that believeth not the son , the wrath of God abideth on him , joh. 3. 36.  If the misapprehension be , as as they say it is , unbelief , it leaves them , in whom it is , under the wrath of God . 

He that would see this further cleared , and confirmed , May consult my treatise of redemption , lib. 3. cap. 8. where it is purposely , and expressly handled at large . 

Hence mr Baxter May have some directions how to dispose of that censure concerning me , which yet he is pleased to say , that he suspendeth , page 158. viz. that i should affirm justification to be nothing but the manifestation of eternal love , which i have more , then in one place , or two , expressly opposed . That any one should but here , and there consult a few lines , or leaves of my treatise , i no way blame : in such things we all use our liberty : but that upon so slight a view , as cannot possibly represent the frame , structure , and coherence of my judgement in any particular , to undertake a confutation , and censure of it , cannot well be done without some regret to candid ingenuity . 

For the second assertion laid down , which goeth something farther , than the former , it is easily deduced from the same principles therewithal : i shall therefore add only one argument for the confirmation thereof . 

God having appointed that his eternal love in the fruits thereof , should be no otherways communicated but only in , and by Christ , all right thereunto , must of necessity be of his procurement , and purchasing . Yea , the end of the mediation of the Lord Jesus , is , to give right , title , and possession in their several order , and seasons unto , and in all the fruits , issues , and tendencies of that love , unto them whose mediator he is appointed to be . 

Thus far then , all is seated in the bosom of the almighty . All differencing acts of grace flowing from hence , being to be made out as seems good unto him in his infinite wise sovereignty ; from whence alone is the disposal of all these things , as to that order which May most conduce to his glory : and this also writes vanity upon the objection ( Insisted on by mr Baxter , page 157. ) that when we have a right , we must presently have a possession : all these things being to be moderated according to his free sovereign disposal . 

And this concerneth the first instant proposed . 

Cap. viii . 

Of the will of God in reference to them for whom Christ died immediately upon the consideration of his death ; and their state , and condition before actual believing in relation thereunto . 

The second instant proposed to be considered , is , in the immediate issue of the death of Christ , as purposed , and accomplished . Purpose , and accomplishment are indeed different ; but their effects in respect of God , are the same . In reference to us also ▪ the death of Christ hath the same efficacy as promised , and as performed . What acts the scripture ascribes unto God , antecedent unto any consideration of the death of Christ ( Or at least such as are absolutely free , and of sovereignty , without any influence of causality from thence ) we saw before : ( For as for the order of God's decrees compared among themselves , i will not with any one contend ) here we inquire what it holdeth out of him , that being in all its efficacy supposed . 

And we affirm , 

1 that the will of God is not moved to any thing thereby , nor changed into any other respect towards those for whom Christ died , than what it had before ; this was formerly proved , and must again be touched on . But , 

2 the death of Christ purposed , and accounted effectual ( As before ) God can agreeable to his infinite justice , wisdom , truth , and appointment , make out unto sinners for whom Christ died , or was to die , all those good things , which he before purposed , and willed by such means to them : those things being purchased , and procured , and all hindrances of bestowing them , being removed , by that satisfaction , and merit , which by free compact , he agreed , and consented should be in that death of Christ . 

3 that as the making out of all spiritual blessings , first purposed by the father , then purchased by the son , that they Might be bestowed condecently to divine justice ; God hath reserved it to his own sovereign disposal . that it be done , so that they for whom this whole dispensation is appointed , May really enjoy the fruits of it , is all , that necessarily is included , either in the purpose , or purchase . 

Hence it is that the discharge of the debtor , doth not immediately follow the payment of the debt by Christ , not because that payment is refusable ; but because in that very covenant , and compact , from whence it is that the death of Christ , is a payment ; God reserveth to himself this right , and liberty , to discharge the debtor , when , and how he pleaseth . I mean as to times and seasons ; for otherwise , the means of actual freedom , is procured by that payment , though not considered merely as a payment , which denotes only satisfaction , but as it had adjoined merit also . 

Therefore that principle much used , and rested on by mr Baxter in the business of satisfaction , to obviate this very difficulty , of a not immediate discharge , if Christ paid the debt , viz. that the satisfaction of Christ is a refusable payment ; which he presseth page 149 , 150. is neither true in itself , nor accommodate to this difficulty ▪ 

1 not true : for , 

The suffering of Christ May be considered , either , 

1 , absolutely , as in itself , abstracting from the consideration of any covenant , or compact thereabout ; and so it cannot be said to be a refusable payment : not because not refusable , but because no payment . that any thing should have any such reference unto God as a payment , or satisfaction , whether refusable or otherwise , is not from its self , and its own nature , but from the constitution of God alone . Between God , and the creature there is no equality , not so much as of proportion . Christ in respect of his human nature , though united to the deity , is a creature , and so could not absolutely satisfy , or merit any thing at the hand of God : i mean with that kind of merit , which ariseth from an absolute proportion of things . This merit , can be found only among creatures : and the advancement of Christ's humanity takes it not out of that number . Neither in this sense can any satisfaction be made to God for sin . The sinners own undergoing the penalty neither is satisfaction in the sense whereof we speak , neither can it properly be said to be so at all ; no more than a thing to be done , which is endlessly in doing . 

2 it May be considered with reference unto God's constitution , and determinatiou , predestmating Christ unto that work , and appointing the work by him to be accomplished , to be satisfactory , equaling ( By that constitution ) the end , and the means . And thus the satisfaction of Christ in the justice of God was not refusable ; the wisdom , truth , justice , and suitable purpose of God , being engaged to the contrary . 

2 , this distinction is not accommodate to this difficulty ; the sole reason thereof being what was held out . before , of the interest of God's sovereign right to the bestowing of purposed , purchased , promised blessings , as to times , and seasons , according to the free council of his own will . 

3 , hence than it is , that God in the scripture upon the death of Christ is said to be reconciled , to be returned unto peace with them for whom he so died , the enmity being slain , and peace actually made , ephes. 2. 14 , 15 , 16.  Collos. 1. 20. because he now will , and May , suitablely to his justice ▪ wisdom , and appointment , make out unto them ? for whom the atonement was made , all fruits of love , peace , and amity . heb. 2. 17.  Rom. 5. 10 , 11. 2 cor. 5. 19  

The objection unto this , how then can God deny us the present possession of heaven ; used by mr Baxter , page 157. is not of any force , the whole disposal of these things , being left to his own pleasure . 

And this is the scheme , which upon the death of Christ , we assign unto God : he is atoned , appeased , actually reconciled , at peace with those for whom Christ died , and in due time for his sake will bestow upon them all the fruits , and issues of love , and renewed friendship . 

This possibly May give some light into the immediate effect of the death of Christ ; which though i shall not purposely now handle , yet mr Baxter with much diligence having employed himself in the investigation thereof , i shall turn aside a little to consider his assertions , in this particular . 

Cap. ix. . 

A degression concerning the immediate effect of the death of Christ . 

it is one of the greatest and noblest questions in our controverted divinity , what are the immediate effects of Christ's death ? He that can rightly answer this , is a divine indeed ; and by help of this , May expedite most other controversies about redemption , and justification . In a word ; the effects of redemption undertaken , could not be upon a subject not yet existent , and so no subject , though it Might be for them . None but Adam and Eve were then existent : yet as soon as we do exist , we receive benefit from it . The suspending of the rigorous execution of the sentence of the law , is the most observable immediate effect of the death of Christ ; which suspension is some kind of deliverance from it . 

thus far mr Baxter . thess. 9  Explicat . pag. 67.  

There are scarce more lines , then mistakes in this discourse : some of them May be touched on . 

1 effects are to be considered with respect to their causes . Causes are real , or moral . Real , or physical causes , produce their effects immediately , either immediatione suppositi , or virtutis : unto them the subject must be existent . I speak not of creating power , where the act produceth its object . 

moral causes do never immediately acting their own effects , nor have any immediate influence into them : there is between such causes , and their effects , the intervention of some 3d thing , previous to them both , viz. proportion , constitution , law , covenant , which takes in the cause , and lets out the effect : and this for all circumstances of where , how , when , suitable to the limitations in them expressed , or employed : with the nature of the things themselves . 

The death of Christ is a moral cause , in respect of all its effects : whether those subjects on which it is to have its effects , be existent , or not existent , at the time of its performance , is nothing at all considerable : if it wrought physically , and efficiently , the existence of the subjects on which it were to work , were requisite . It is altogether in vain to inquire of the immediate effects of Christ's death upon an existent subject : by the way : that Adam and Eve only were existent , when Christ undertook the work of redemption , to me is not clear : no , nor yet the following assertion , that as soon as we do exist , we receive benefit by it : taking benefit , for a benefit actually collated ( As mr Baxter doth ) not for a right to a benefit , or the purpose of bestowing one , which will operate in its due time : this is easily affirmed ; and therefore eadem facilitate is denied . 

I have no fancy to strive to carry the bell , and to be accounted a divine indeed , by attempting at this time , a right stating of , and answer to this question proposed : i am not altogether ignorant of the endeavour of others , even as to this particular , and have formerly spoken something that way myself . 

Mr Baxter seems here to understand by this question , ( viz. what is the immediate effect of the death of Christ ) what is the first benefit , which from the death of Christ , accrueth unto them for whom he died : not what is the first thing , that every particular person is actually in his own person , in his own time made partaker of : but a benefit generally established , and in being , upon the designment of the work of redemption , which every one for whom Christ died hath a share of : and of this he positively affirms , that the suspending of the rigorous execution of the sentence of the law , is the most observable , immediate effect of the death of Christ : and so deserves the title of a divine indeed . 

Now truly ( Though not to contend for the bell with mr Baxter , whereof i confess myself utterly unworthy , and willingly for many commendable parts ascribe it unto him ) i cannot close with him , nor assent unto that assertion : very gladly would i see mr Baxter's arguments for this ; but those , ( As in most other controverted things in this book ) he is pleased to conceal : and therefore though it Might suffice me , to give in my dissent , and so wait for further proof ; yet that it May be apparent , that i do not deny this merely because its said , not proved , ( Which in things not clear in themselves is a provocation so to do ) i shall oppose one or two arguments unto it . 

All the effects of the death of Christ are peculiar only to the elect , to some : the suspension of the rigorous execution of the law , is not so . ergo . 

The minor is apparent : the major proved by all the arguments against universal redemption used in my former treatise . 

2 all the effects of the death of Christ are spiritual , distinguishing , and saving , to the praise of God's free grace . 

the suspending of the vigorous execution of the law , is not so . ergo , 

The assumption is manifest : 't is only a not immediate casting into hell , which is not a spiritual distinguishing mercy : but in respect to many , tends to the manifestation of God's justice . Rom. 9 22.  

The proposition is evident . The promises made unto Christ upon his undertaking this work , doubtless do hold out all that he effected by his death . Of what nature they are , and what is the main tendance of them i have elsewhere discovered , from the first to the last , they are restrained to distinguishing mercies : see isa. 49. 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10. chap. 53. 10 , 11 , 12.  Isa. 61. 1 , 2. and no less is positively affirmed , eph. 1. 4. rev. 1. 5 , 6.  

If mr Baxter say , that his meaning in this is , that if Christ had not undertaken the work of redemption , and satisfaction , than the law must have had rigorous execution upon all , and therefore this being suspended upon his undertaking of it , is the first fruit of the death of Christ . 

Notwithstanding this , yet that suspension ( Which in respect of the different persons towards whom it is actually exercised , hath different ends ) is not a fruit , nor effect of the death of Christ , but a free issue , of the same eternally wise providence , sovereignty , and grace , as the death of Christ himself is : if then by the rigorous execution of the law , you intend the immediate execution of the law in all its rigour , and punishments , this if it had been effected , could in your own judgement have reached Adam , and Eve , and no more ; and would have so reached them , as to cut off the generation of mankind in that root : if so , and this be the fruit of Christ's death , why do you not reckon the procreation of human race , among those fruits also ? for had it not been for this suspension , that also had failed : which is as good a causative connection , as that between the death of Christ , and this suspension : had not he undertaken the work of redemption , it had not been . 

If by a rigorous execution , you intend the penalty of the law , inflicted in that way , which hath pleased the will of the lawgiver by several parts , and degrees , from conception through birth , life , death , to eternity ; the curse of it being wholly incumbent in respect of desert , and making out itself , according to God's appointment , than the suspension thereof is not the immediate effect of the death of Christ ; which ( Opposing the first arguments to the former acceptation ) i further prove : if those for whom Christ died do lie under this rigorous execution of the law , that is the curse of it , until some other effect of Christ's death be wrought upon them , then that is not the first effect of the death of Christ : but that supposal is true : joh. 3. 36.  Ephes. 2. 3. therefore so also the inference . 

2 in a word : take the suspending of the rigorous execution of the law , for the purpose of God , and his acting accordingly , not to leave his elect under the actual curse of it ; so it is no fruit of the death of Christ , but an issue of the same grace ; from whence also the death of Christ proceeds . 

take it for an actual freeing of their persons from the breach of it , and its curse , and so it differs not from justification , and is not the immediate effect of Christ's death in mr Baxter's judgement . 

take it for the not immediately executing of the law upon the first offence , and i can as well say , Christ died because the law was suspended ; as you , that the law was suspended because Christ died : had not either been , the other had not been . 

take it for the actual forbearance of God towards all the world , and so it falls under my two first arguments . 

take it thus , that God for the death of Christ , will deal with all men upon a new law , freeing all from the gild of the first broken law , and covenant : so it is non ens.  

if you mean by it gods entering into a new way of salvation with those for whom Christ died : this on the part of God is antecedaneous to the consideration of the death of Christ , and of the same free grace with itself . 

For the question itself ( As i said before ) i shall not here in terms take it up , the following discourse will give light into it : i have also spoken largely to it in another place ; and that distinctly . 

The sum is : i conceive that all the intermediate effects of the death of Christ , tending to its ultimate procurement of the glory of God , are all in respect of his death immediate ; that is , with such an immediation as attends moral causes : now these concerning them for whom he died , as they are not immediately bestowed on them ( The ultimate attingency of the cause , and the first rise of the effect , lying in an intervening compact ) so not simul , at once neither : though simul , and a like procured : the cause of this , being that relation , coherence , and causality , which the Lord hath appointed between the several effects ( Or rather parts of the same effect ) of the death of Christ , in reference to the main , and ultimate end to be thereby attained : as at large i have discused : lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 52 , 53 , &c.  In one word , the first effect of the death of Christ in this sense , is the first fruit of election : for , for the procuring ▪ and purchasing of the fruits thereof , and them alone , did Christ die . 

If i mistake not , mr Baxter himself is not settled fully in this persuasion , that the suspension of the rigorous execution of the law , is the most immediate effect of the death of Christ : for pag. 52. these words which he useth [ God the father doth accept the sufferings and merits of his son , as a full satisfaction to his violated law , and as a valuable consideration upon which he will wholly acquit and forgive the offenders themselves , and receive them again into favour , so that they will but receive his son upon the terms expressed in the gospel ] seems to place the ultimate efficacy of the death of Christ in God's acceptation of it , as to our good , on the condition of faith , and obedience . 

Which , first makes the suspension of the law to be so far from being the first effect of the death of Christ : that the last reacheth not so far : and 2dly , the fond absurdity of this conditional acceptation i have before declared . 

Neither am i clear to which of those assertions , that of page 92 , ( Where he affirms , that some benefit by Christ the condemned did receive ) is most accommodate : neither can i easily receive what is here asserted ; if by benefit you understand that which in respect of them is intentionally so . 

For , first , condemned persons , as condemned persons surely receive no benefit by Christ , for they are condemned . 

Secondly , the delay of the condemnation of reprobates , is no part of the purchase of Christ : the scripture says , nor more , nor less of any such thing : but peculiarly assigns it to another cause . Rom. 9  

Cap. x.  

Of the merit of Christ , and its immediate efficacy , what it effecteth in what it resteth , with the state of those for whom Christ died in reference to his death , & of their right to the fruits of his death before believing . 

That they for whom Christ died , have a right to the things which he purchased thereby , ( That is an actual right , for so men May have , to what they have not in actual possession ) is no singular conception of mineour divines freely express themselves to this purpose . 

Even the commender , and publisher of Grotius his book of satisfaction , learned Vossius himself , affirmeth , that Christ by his death purchased for us a double right : first , a right of escaping punishment , and then a right of obtaining the reward . 

By the way , i cannot close with his distinction in that place , of some things , that Christ by his life , and death , purchased for us , and other , that he daily bestoweth : for the things he daily bestoweth , are of them , which by his death he purchased . 

My expressions then alone are not subject to the consequences charged on them , for asserting a right to life , and salvation in them for whom Christ died , even before believing . 

Yea , some have gone farther , and affirmed , that those for whom Christ died , are in some manner restored into saving favour . 

Not to mention some of them , to whose judgement mr Baxter seems to accede , who assert universal justification , and restauration into grace upon the death of Christ : but i lay no weight on these things . 

To clear my thoughts in this particular , two things must necessarily be enquired into , and made out . 

1 seeing the satisfaction , and merit of Christ , do tend directly for the good of them for whom he died , and that there is a distance , and space of time , between that death , and their participation of the good things purchased thereby , wherein lieth , or in what resteth the efficacy of that his death , with the principle of the certain futurition , of the spiritual things so procured , which those for whom he died , shall assuredly in due time enjoy . 

2 wherein lies the obligation unto death , hell , & wrath , which before believing the scripture affirms to be upon the elect , seeing Christ hath actually purchased for them freedom from these things : and this , without more ado , will be cleared in the former . 

1 for the first then , upon the issue of the death of Christ , something being supposed in God beyond his mere purpose , of which before , something's being actually procured , and purchased by it , which yet they for whom they are so purchased , neither do , nor possibly can upon the purchase immediately possess , and enjoy : it is enquired , wherein resteth the efficacy of his death , which in due time causeth the making out of all those spiritual blessings , which by it are so procured . 

Now this must be either in those for whom he died , or in himself as mediator , or in his father who sent him . 

1 that it is not in them for whom he died , is apparent : upon the death of Christ , in purpose , and promise , when first its efficacy took place . they were not : i mean actually existent : true ! They were potentially in the purpose of God : but will that make them a meet subject for the residence of this right , and merit whereof we speak ? as is the thing , such are all its affections , and adjuncts : but possible , if it be no more . This is something actual whereof we speak . 

2 that it is not in Christ as mediator , is no less evident . He that makes satisfaction , and he to whom it is made , he who meriteth any thing , and he at whose hands he meriteth it , must be distinguished . The second person under the notion of performing the work of mediation , receiveth not satisfaction . 

The power Christ receiveth of the father , because he is the son of man , to give eternal life to those given him of his father , is of latter consideration to that we have in hand , being a result , and consequence thereof . 

3 it must therefore be in the father , or God , as receiving satisfaction . 

Of all the attributes of God where this May be placed ( To speak after the manner of men ) one of these four must needs be the proper seat of it : 1 his power . 
2 his will . 
3 his justice . 
4 his truth . 


1 , his power , and then it must be , not that God hath any addition of power , for that cannot be to him who is omnipotent ; but that a way is made for the exercise of his power , which before by somewhat from himself was shut up . 

And as some suppose it is no otherwise . That whereas the Lord could not make out grace , and favour unto sinners because of his justice necessarily inclining him to their punishment , and destruction . Now that justice being satisfied in Christ , he can collate any spiritual blessings upon them , as he seeth good . 

But this i have disproved elsewhere , and manifested . 

1 that the foundation of this apprehension , ( Being an impossibility in God to forgive sin , without satisfaction , because of the contrariety of it to the properties of his nature ) is a groundless assertion . And , 
2 the foundation of God , in sending his son to die for his elect is oppugned hereby . And it , 
3 is destructive to all the proper fruits , and effects of the death of Christ , &c.  Lib. 2. cap. 2.  
2 , in the will of God , it seems that the merit and fruits of the death of Christ , whereof we treat seem better to be treasured : and from hence it is , that he can will , or willeth to us the good things purchased by it . But , 

1 that the will of God should by the death of Christ be changed into any other habitude then what it was in before , was before disproved . 

2 that now God can will good things to us , holds out the enlargement of his power as to the acting thereof , mentioned above , rather than any thing properly belonging to the will of God . 

3 God's willing good things to us , it cannot consist in : his willing of a thing is operative of it : it is his efficacious energetical will whereof we speak . When he actually willeth grace , we have grace : and when he willeth glory , we have glory : but that concerning which we speak , is antecedent to the actual making out of grace , and glory to us , being the procuring cause of them ; though not of that act of the will of God , whereby they are bestowed . 

His justice , and truth only remain . For justice , that which is commutative properly , with one consent is removed from God . who hath given first unto him , and it shall be rendered unto him again . neither is distributive justice to be supposed in him , antecedent to some free engagement of his own . Where no obligation is , there cannot be so much as distributive justice properly . All obligation from God to the creature , is from his own free engagement : otherwise he stands in no relation to it , but of absolute dominion , and sovereignty . All the justice of God then ( We consider not the universal rectitude of his nature , but ) in reference to the creature , is justitia regiminis . psal. 33. 4 , 5. 1 joh. 1. 5. and therefore must suppose some free constitution of his will . 

This then rightly considered , do i affirm to be affected with the merit of Christ : there i place the procuring efficacy thereof , whence it is , that all the fruits of it are made out unto us . But this in due order . 

The first thing of immediate concernment hereunto , is the covenant of the father with the son : the free engagement of God , to do such and such things for Christ , upon the performance of such other things to him appointed . This is the foundation of the merit of Christ as was before declared . Hence is distributive justice ascribed to God , as to this thing . It is righteous with him being engaged by his own free purpose and promise , to make out those things , which he appointed to be the fruit and procurement of the death of Christ . And from thence it is , that all the things purchased by the death of Christ , become due to those for whom he died : even from the equity attending this justice of God . 

Herein also his truth hath a share : by his truth , i understand his fidelity and veracity in the performance of all his engagements . This immediately attends every obligation that by any free act of his will , God is pleased in his wisdom to put upon himself : and is naturally under consideration before that distributive justice whereby he is inclined to the performance itself of them . 

This then is that i say ; 

God by free purpose and compact , making way for the merit of Christ , which absolutely could be none , is obliged from the veracity and justice , which attends all his engagements , to make out as in his infinite wisdom shall seem meet ; all those things which he hath set , appointed , and proposed as the fruit and purchase of his death , unto all them for whom he died 

. And in this , rests the merit of Christ . 

Here two things May be observed ; 

1 what we ascribe to the merit of Christ : viz. the accomplishment of that condition , which God required to make way , that the obligation which he had freely put upon himself , Might be in actual force . And so much , ( How rightly , i leave to himself to consider ) doth mr Baxter assign to our own works : thes. 26. p. 140.  

2 the mistake of those who wind up the merit of Christ , as affecting God ( If i May so speak ) unto a conditional engagement , viz. that we shall be made partakers of the fruits of it , upon such and such conditions , to be by us fulfilled . For , 

1 all such conditions ( If spiritual blessings ) are part of the purchase of the death of Christ : and if not , are no way fit to be conditions of such an attainment . 

2 it cannot be made apparent how any such conditional stipulation can be ascribed unto God . That God should engage upon the death of Christ , to make out grace and glory , liberty and beauty , unto those for whom he died , upon condition they do so , or so . 

1 leaves no proper place for the merit of Christ . 

2 is very improperly ascribed unto God . lawyers tell us , that all stipulations about things future , are either sub conditione , or sub termino . stipulations or engagements upon condition . that are properly so , do suppose him that makes the engagement to be altogether uncertain of the event thereof . 

Stipulations sub termino , are absolute to make out the things engaged about , at such a season . Upon the very instant of such a stipulation as this , an obligation follows as to the thing , though no action be allowed to him to whom it is made , until the term and time appointed be come . 

In those stipulations that are under condition , no obligation ariseth at all from them , it being wholly uncertain whether the condition will be fulfilled or no . Only in two cases doth such an engagement bring on an immediate obligation . 

1 if the condition required be in things necessary and unalterable : as if Cajus should engage himself into Tilius to give him an 100 l. for his house on the morrow if the sun shine : here ariseth an immediate obligation ▪ and it is the same as if it had been conceived only sub termino , without condition at all . 

2 if by any means , he that makes the stipulation , knows infallibly , that the condition will be fulfilled , though he to whom it is made , knows it not . In this respect also , the stipulation sub conditione , introduceth an immediate obligation , and in that regard , is coincident with that which is only sub termino . 

Whither an engagement upon condition properly , without the former respects , that is a stipulation to an event dubious and uncertain , can be ascribed unto God , is easy to determine . To assert it , oppugnes the whole nature of the deity , and over-throws the properties thereof , immediately and directly . All other stipulations under condition are coincident ( As i said before ) with that which is sub termino only , from whence ariseth an immediate obligation for the performance of the thing stipulated about ; though there be not an immediate action granted him unto whom it is made . 

Surely they are wide , ( If not very wild ) who affirm , that all the stipulations on the part of God upon the death of Christ are upon a condition , which himself knows to be impossible for them to perform to whom they are made , which amongst wise men are always accounted nugatory and null . 

This being then so vain , i say that the merit of Christ flowing from the free purpose and compact of God , resteth on his justice thence also arising , fixing thereon an obligation to make out all the fruits of it , unto them for whom he died , sub termino only ; whereby a present right is granted them thereunto , though they cannot plead for present enjoyment . 

Cap. xi . 

More particularly of the state and right of them for whom Christ died , before believing . 

The former assertions about the merit of Christ , being in some measure cleared , we May hence have light into the state and condition of those for whom Christ died in their several generations before believing . 

To make this the more fully appear , we must distinguish between their present state or possession , and their present right . their state is not changed , because all the procurements of the death of Christ , are to be made out unto them by virtue of a stipulation sub termino , that term or season being not come . So that still in present actual state , i leave them as before , not justified , not sanctified , not entered into covenant . 

Right also is twofold : 1 in re , as the father hath a right to his estate . And this jus in re , holds , though the estate be unjustly , or forcibly detained from him . 
2 ad rem , so the son hath a right to the estate of his father , being to enjoy it at his death . 


The first right is presently actionable upon any detainment : the latter not so . The first , we do not ascribe to the elect in this condition , viz. that which is in re , and instantly actionable ; but that which is ad rem , and sub termino . 

This being that which i aimed at , and being by mr Baxter opposed , i will further consider it , that it May appear whether any thing in this assertion be justly blamable . 

I said , that by the death of Christ , we have actual right to the good things purchased by that death : that right which is not actual ( To speak a word to that term ) is not . The contradistinct affection hereunto , is potential . and this is totally destructive to the nature of a right . All right is actual , or not at all . 

To evince the main assertion ; i shall , 1 , show the nature and quality of this right . 
2 , the bottom or foundation of it ; and 
3 , prove the thesis . 


1 by right i understand , jus in general , now jus est , quod justum est : aug. in psal. 144. sub . Fon. that is right , which it is just should be . and quiquid rectum est , justum est : A•sel . de verit . Cap. 13. it is just , all that should be , which hath a rectitude in itself . Farther ; what this justum is , Aquinas tells you , 22. ae . q. 57 a. 1. c. justum est quod respondet secundum aliquam aequalitatem alteri . then a thing is just when it stands in some equality unto those things whereunto it relates . And this equality or adaequation of things is twofold . 

1 that which ariseth from the nature of the things themselves : as an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth , &c.  
2 that which ariseth from a proportion condescended unto , by Condict , agreement , covenant , or common consent . dupliciter est aliquid adaequatum : uno modo ex natura ipsius rei : alio modo cum est commensuratum ex condicto sive ex commune placito : aqui.  
In the first sense , as to a right that should accrue unto the creatures in respect of God , from the commensuration of the things themselves , we showed before that it cannot be . It must be from some grant , compact , covenant , or the like , from whence a right in reference to the faithfulness or righteousness of God , May arise . 

The right then whereof we speak , which they for whom Christ died , have to the things which by his death are procured , consists in that equity , proportion , and equality , which upon the free compact , constitution , and consent of God the father , is , between the death of Christ and their enjoyment of the fruits of that death . It is just and equal , that they should enjoy the fruits of his death in due time . Neither is the right of any man , to any thing , any more , but such a frame and order of things , that it is just either from the nature of the things themselves , or from common consent and agreement , that he should enjoy that thing . this is the right whereof we speak : which in their sense the very Socinians grant . Christus jus quoddam ad obtinendam remissionem peccatorum & salutem ( morte sua ) nobis dedit . Crellius , adu . Groti . Cap. 1.  

2 : for the foundation of this right : seeing that before the consideration of the death of Christ ( As was declared ) it is not , from thence it must needs be , nothing of any likelihood to be such a foundation being coincident therewithal . 

Now whereas in the death of Christ two things are considered : 1 the satisfaction ; and 2dly the merit thereof ; it May be enquired after , under whether respect this right relates thereunto . 

1 the satisfaction of Christ tends in all that it is , to the honour and reparation of the justice of God . This then in its utmost extent and efficacy , cannot give ground to build such a right upon . The ultimate effect of satisfaction , May be accomplished , and yet not the least right to any good thing communicated to them for whom this satisfaction is made . The good things attending the death of Christ May be referred unto two heads : the amotion of evil , and the collation of good . For the first , the amotion of evil , the taking that from us , that it May not grieve us , and subducting us from the power and presence thereof , it is immediately aimed at by satisfaction . That the curse of the law be not executed , that the wrath to come be not poured out , is the utmost reach of the death of Christ considered as satisfactory . Yea in itself , as only such , it proceedeth not so far , as to give us a right to escape these things , but only presents that to the justice of God , whereby it May be preserved in all its glory , severity , and exact purity , though these things be not inflicted on us . This i say i conceive to be the utmost tendency of the death of Christ as satisfactory . That condemnation cannot possibly de facto follow where such satisfaction hath been made , is immediately from the equity of justice so repaired as above . For positive good things , in grace and glory by satisfaction alone , they are not at all respected . 

2 , there is the merit of the death of Christ , and that principally intendeth the glory of God in our enjoying those good things whereof it is the merit or desert . And this is the foundation of that right whereof we treat . What Christ hath merited for us , it is just and equal we should have ; that is , we have right unto it : and this before believing . Faith gives us actual possession as to some part , and a new pactional right , as to the whole ; but this right , or that equalling of things upon divine constitution ( jus est operatio illa qua sit aequalitas : peasant . in tom. 22. ae . q. 57 ) whereby it becomes just and right that we should obtain the things purchased by it , is from the merit of Christ alone . What Christ hath merited is so far granted , as that they for whom it is so merited have a right unto it . 

The sum then of what we have to prove , is , 

that the merit of the death of the Lord Jesus , hath according to the constitution of the father , so procured of him the good things aimed at , and intended thereby , that it is just , right , and equal , that they for whom they are so procured , should certainly and infallibly enjoy them at the appointed season ; and therefore unto them they have an actual right even before believing ; faith itself being of the number of those things so procured . 



All which i prove as followeth ; 

1 , the very terms before mentioned , enforce no less . If it be justum before their believing , that those for whom Christ died , should enjoy the fruits of his death ; then have they even before believing , jus , or a right thereunto : for jus est quod justum est : that it is right and equal that they should enjoy those fruits is manifest . For.  

1 : it was the engagement of the father to the son upon his undertaking to die for them , that they should so do . Isa. 53. 10 , 11 , 12.  

2 : in that undertaking , he accomplished all that was of him required . Joh. 17. 4.  

2 ; that which is merited and procured for any one , thereunto he for whom it is procured , certainly hath a right . That which is obtained for me is mine in actual right , though not perhaps in actual possession . The thing that is obtained , is granted by him of whom it is obtained , and that unto them for whom it is obtained . In some sense or other , that is a man's , which is procured for him . In saying it is procured for him , we say no less . If this than be not in respect of possession , it must be in respect of right . Now all the fruits of the death of Christ are obtained and procured by his merit for them , for whom he died . He obtains for them eternal redemption . heb. 9 12. purchasing them with his own blood . act. 20. 28.  Heb. 2. 14. 1 pet. 1. 18.  Gal. 1. 4. rev. 14. 3 , 4.  

The very nature of merit described by the apostle , rom. 4. 4. infers no less . Where merit intercedes , the effect is reckoned as of debt : that which is my due debt , i have a right unto . The fruits of the death of Christ , are the issues of merit , ( Bottomed on God's gracious acceptation ) and reckoned as of debt . 

He for whom a ransom is paid , hath a right unto his liberty by virtue of that payment . 

3 : 2 pet. 1. 1.  The saints are said to obtain precious faith through the reghteousness of God . it is a righteous thing with God , to give faith to them for whom Christ died ; because thereby they have a right unto it : faith being amongst the most precious fruits of the death of Christ , by virtue thereof , becometh their due for whom he died . 

4 : the condition of persons under merit , and demerit , in respect of good or evil is alike . The proportion of things requires it . Now men under demerit are under an obligation unto punishment : and it is a righteous thing with God , to recompense tribulation unto them : 2 thess. 1. 6.  It being the judgement of God that they who do such things are worthy of death : rom. 1. 32.  They then who are under merit , have also a right unto that whereof it is the merit . It is not of any force to say , that they are not under that merit , but only upon condition . For this is , 1 , false : 2 , with God this is all one as if there were no condition at the season and term appointed ; for the making out the fruit of that merit , as hath been declared . Neither yet to object , that it is not their own merit , but of another which respects them : that other being their surety , doing that whereby he merited only on their behalf ; yea in their stead , they dying with him : though the same in them could not have been meritorious : they being at best , mere men ; and at worst , very sinful men . 

5 : a compact or covenant being made of giving life and salvation upon the condition of obedience to certain persons , that condition being completely fulfilled as it was in the death of Christ , claim being made of the promise , according to the tenure of the compact , and the persons presented for the enjoyment of it , surely those persons have an actual right unto it : that all this is so , see isa. 49. 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , &c. psal. 2. 2. 4 , 5.  Isa. 53. 10 , 11 , 12.  Joh. 17. 3.  & 2. 21.  Heb. 2.  

And so much for this also , concerning the issue of the death of Christ , and the right of the elect to the fruits of it before believing . 

Cap. xii . 

Of the way whereby they actually attain and enjoy faith and grace , who have a right thereunto by the death of Christ . 

The way and causes of bestowing faith on them , who are under the condition before described , is the next thing to be enquired after . 

What are the thoughts of God from eternity concerning those for whom Christ was to die , with the state they are left in , in relation to those thoughts ; as also what is the will of God towards them , immediately upon the consideration of the death of Christ , with the right which to them accrues thereby , being considered , it remaineth ( I say ) that we declare the way and method whereby they obtain faith through the righteousness of God . 

And here we must lay down certain positions . As ; 

1 , notwithstanding the right granted them for whom Christ died , upon his death , to a better state and condition in due time , ( That is in the season , suiting the infinitely-wise-sovereignty of God ) yet as to their present condition in point of enjoyment , they are not actually differenced from others : their prayers are an abomination to the Lord , prov. 28. 9 all things are to them unclean , tit. 1. 15. they are under the power of Satan , eph. 2. 2. in bondage unto death , heb. 2. 14.  Obnoxious to the curse , and condemning power of the law in the conscience , gal. 3. 13. having sin reigning in them , rom. 6. 17. &c.  

2 , what spiritual blessings soever are bestowed on any soul ( I mean peculiarly distinguishing mercies and graces ) they are all bestowed and collated for Christ's sake : that is , they are purchased by his merit , and procured by his intercession thereupon . 

That supernatural graces cannot be traduced from any natural faculty , or attained by the utmost endeavour of nature , howsoever affected with outward advantages , i now take for granted . These things i looked upon as the free-gifts of love : so the scripture , joh. 15. 5. 2 cor. 3. 5.  Eph. 2. 8. 1 cor. 4. 7.  Eph. 2. 10.  Mat. 11. 25 , 26.  Act. 16. 14. &c.  

Now the dispensation of all these , as it is through Christ , so they are for Christ . on whomsoever they are bestowed it is for Christ's sake : for instance , 

Peter and Judas are unbelievers . Faith is given ( for faith is given ) to Peter , not to Judas . whence is this difference ? Presupposing God's sovereign discriminating purpose , the immediate procuring cause of faith for Peter , is the merit of Christ . to us it is given on the behalf of Christ to believe on him : phil. 1. 20.  We are blessed with all spiritual blessings in him : eph. 1. 3.  Whatsoever is in the promise of the covenant is certainly of his procurement ; for therefore he is the surety , heb. 7. 22.  And his blood , ( The ransom he paid ) is the blood of the covenant : mat. 26. 28.  Whereby all the promises thereof , become in him yea , and in him amen , 2 cor. 1. 20.  And whether faith be of the blessings of the covenant , and conclude in the promise thereof or no ; let the scripture be judge . Jer. 31. 31 , 32.  Ezek. 36. 26.  Heb. 8. 9 , 10 , 11.  

Furthermore , what we have through him , we have so him . All these things , being made out on this condition , that he should make his soul an offering for sin , isa. 53. 10 

3 , that all the procurements of the death of Christ in the behalf of his , are to be made out by virtue of a stipulation sub termino : or in respect of their actual collation and bestowing , they are to be made out in the season limited and appointed by the will of the father . Of this before . 

4 , no blessing can be given us for Christ's sake , unless in order of nature , Christ be first reckoned unto us . 

Here i must do two things ; 

1 declare what i mean by reckoning Christ unto us : and then , 
2 prove the assertion as laid down . 
God's reckoning Christ , in our present sense , is the imputing of Christ unto ungodly unbelieving sinners for whom he died , so far , as to account him theirs , to bestow faith and grace upon them for his sake . 

This than i say , at the accomplishment of the appointed time , the Lord reckons and accounts and makes out his son Christ , to such and such sinners , and for his sake , gives them faith , &c.  Exercising of love actually in the bestowing of grace upon any particular soul , in a distinguishing manner , for Christ's sake , doth suppose this accounting of Christ to be his , and from thence he is so indeed : which is the present thesis , and May be proved . For : 

1 ; why doth the Lord bestow faith on Peter , not on Judas ? because Christ dying for Peter , and purchasing for him the grace of the covenant , he had a right unto it , and God according to his promise bestowed it : with Judas , it was not so . 

But then , why doth the Lord bestow faith on Peter at the 40th year of his age , and not before , or after ? Because then the term is expired , which upon the purchase , was by the counsel of God's will prefixed to the giving in , the beginning of the thing purchased unto him . 

What then doth the Lord do , when he thus bestoweth faith on him ? For Christ's sake ( His death procuring the gift , not moving the will of the giver ) he creates faith in him , by the way and means snited to such a work . Eph. 1. 18 , 19 chap. 2. 1 , &c.  

If then this be done for Christ's sake , than is Christ made ours , before we believe . Else , why is faith given him at this instant for Christ's sake , and not to another , for whom also he died ? That it is done then , is , because the appointed time is come ; that it is done then for Christ , is because Christ is first given to him . 

I cannot conceive how any thing should be made out to me for Christ , and Christ himself not be given to me ; he being made unto us of God , righteousness . 1 cor. 1. 30.  

2 the apostle holds out this very method of the dispensation of grace , rom. 8. 32.  He that spared not his son , but delivered him up to death for us all , how shall he not with him freely give us all things ? 

First Christ is given for us , then to us , then with him ( He having the pre-eminence in all things ) all things : and this being , also , for him , ( Phil. 1. 29.  ) he is certainly in the order of nature given in the first place . He being made ours , we receive the atonement by him , rom. 5. 11.  

How Christ is said to be received by faith , if he be ours before believing , is easily resolved . Christ is ours before and after believing in a different sense . He who is made ours , in an act of God's love , that for him we May have faith , May be found and made ours in a promise of reconciliation by believing . 

I offer also , whether absolution from the guilt of sin , and obligation unto death , though not as terminated in the conscience for complete justification , do not proceed our actual believing . for , what is that love of God which through Christ is effectual to bestow faith upon the unbelieving ? And how can so great love in the actual exercise of it producing the most distinguishing mercies , consist with any such act of God's will , as at the same instant should bind that person under the gild of sin ? 

Perhaps also this May be the justification of the ungodly mentioned , rom. 4.  God's absolving a sinner in heaven , by accounting Christ unto him , and then bestowing him , upon him , and for his sake enduing him with faith to believe . 

That we should be blessed with all spiritual blessings in Christ , and yet Christ not ours in a peculiar manner before the bestowing of those blessings on us , is somewhat strange . Yea he must be our Christ , before it is given to us for him to believe : why else is it not given to all others so to do . I speak not of the supreme distinguishing cause , mat. 11. 25 , 26. but of the proximate procuring cause , which is the blood of Christ . 

Neither yet do i hence assert complete justification to be before believing . 

Absolution in heaven , and justification differ as part and whole . 

Again , absolution May be considered , either as a pure act of the will of God in itself , or as it is received , believed , apprehend , in , and by the soul of the guilty . For absolution in the first sense , it is evident it must proceed believing : as a discharge from the effects of anger , naturally proceeds all collation of any fruits of love , such as is faith . 

object . but if God account Christ unto , and bestow him upon a sinner before believing , and upon that account , absolve him from the obligation unto death and hell which for sin he lies under , what wants this of complete justification ? 

answ. much every way . 

1 it wants that act of pardoning mercy ( On the part of God ) which is to be terminated and completed in the conscience of the sinner ; this lies in the promise . 
2 it wants the heart's persuasion concerning the truth and goodness , of the promise , and the mercy held out in the promise . 
3 it wants the souls rolling itself upon Christ , and receiving of Christ , as the author and finisher of that mercy , an all-sufficient saviour to them that believe . 
So that by faith alone we obtain and receive the forgiveness of sin : for notwithstanding any antecedent act of God concerning us , in and for Christ , we do not actually receive a complete soul-freing discharge until we believe . 

And thus the Lord Christ hath the pre-eminence in all things . he is the author and finisher of our faith . 

This then is that which here we assign unto the Lord . Upon the accomplishment of the appointed season , for the making out the fruits of the death of Christ unto them for whom he died , he loves them freely , says to them , live , gives them his son , with , and for him , all things , bringing forth the choicest issue of his being reconciled in the blood of Jesus , whilst we are enemies , and totally alimated from him . 

It will not be requisite at all , ( As to our purpose in hand ) to make particular enquiry into the state and condition of them towards whom such are the actings of God as we before described . What it is that gives them the first real alteration of condition and distinguishment from others , i have now no occasion to handle . 

So far as advantage hath been offered , i have laboured to distinguish aright those things , whose confusion and misapprehension lies at the bottom of very many dangerous mistakes : how the foregoing discourse May be accommodated and improved for the removal of those mistakes , i shall leave to the consideration of others . 

Cap. xiii . 

The removal of sundry objections to some things formerly taught , about the death of Christ : upon the principles now delivered . 

Having fully declared not only what was my intendment in the expressions so exceedingly mistaken by mr Baxter , as hath in part already been made manifest , and will instantly more fully appear ; i shall now take a view of what is imposed on me as my judgement , and the opposition made thereunto , so far as May be needful for the clearing of the one , and removing of the other , at least in what they May really concern what i did deliver in the treatise impugned . 

In page 146 of his apendix mr Baxter endeavours to vindicate a thesis of his from some exceptions , that he was by his friend pointed to , unto which it seemed liable and obnoxious . 

the thesis he lays down , is , that no man is actually and absolutely justified upon the mere payment of the debt by Christ , till they become believers . 

Against this article ( As he calls it ) he produceth some objections of maccovius , censuring his assertions to be senseless , his positions strange and abhored , his arguments weak and ineffectual ; with some other expressions to the same purpose . 

1 , i am now by the providence of God in a condition of separation from my own small library , neither can i here attain the sight of maccovius disputations ; so that i shall not at all interpose myself in this contest ; only i must needs say . 1 i did not formerly account maccovius to be so senseless and weak a disputant as here he is represented to be . 

2 , that for mr Baxter's answer to that argument ( Where the debt is paid , there discharge must follow ; by asserting the payment made by Christ to be refusable , and the interest of sinners in that payment to be purely upon the performance of a condition . i have fully before in both parts of it demonstrated to be weak , and inconsistent with itself , and truth . That the Interesting of sinners in the payment made by Christ , at such and such a season , is from the sovereignty of God , and his free engagement sub termino for this end ; hath been also fully manifested . 

But secondly , mr Baxter affirms , that to these arguments of maccovius , mr Owen adds some in the place against Grotius whereunto he was referred . 

to what end , you will say , doth mr Owen add these arguments ? Why to prove that men are actually , and absolutely , justified upon the mere payment of the debt by Christ before believing . 

But , fidem tuam ! is there any one argument in my whole book used to any such purpose ? Do i labour to prove that which i never affirmed ? never thought ? never believed ? 

In what sense i affirmed that by the death of Christ , we are actually , and ipso facto , delivered from death ( That is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , we have in due time , the time appointed , free and full deliverance thereby , without the intervention of any condition on our part , not absolutely procured for us by his death ) i have before declared . How much this comes short of actual and absolute justification , i need not now mention : i shall therefore only so far consider the answers given by mr Baxter ; as they May seem to impair or entrench upon the main truth i assert , and that in the order by him laid down . 

These ( saith he ) mr Owen layeth down . 

1 by death he delivereth us from death . 

answ. not immediately , nor absolutely , nor by his death alone , but by that as a price , supposing other causes on his part , and conditions on ours , to concur before the actual deliverance . 

reply . 1 to what end i mention that place of the apostle was before declared : 2 by the death of Christ we are immediately delivered from death with that immediation which is proper to the efficiency of causes , which produce their effects by the way of moral procurement : that is certainly , without the intervention of any other cause of the like kind : and , 3 absolutely , no condition being interposed between the cause and the effect , Christ's death , and our total deliverance , but such as is part of our deliverance , and solely procured by that death : though that death of Christ be not considered as alone , that is separated from his obedience , resurrection , and intercession , when the work of redemption is assigned to it in the scripture . 

4 by the death of Christ as a price : i suppose you understand his purchase , as well as his payment ; his merit , as well as his satisfaction ; or else this is a false notion of the death of Christ , as the cause of our deliverance . 

5 all other causes concurring on the part of Christ for our deliverance , are 1 either not of the same kind with his death ; or , 2 bottomed on his death , and flowing from thence ; so that summarily all May be resolved thereinto . 

6 the conditions on our part , in the sense intended , are often mentioned , never proved ; nor i am persuaded will never be . But he adds : 

2 he saith the elect are said to die , and rise with Christ . 

answ. 1 not in respect of time , as if we died and rose at the same time , either really , or in God's esteem . 2 not that we died in his dying , and rose in his rising . But , 3 it is spoken of the distant mediate effects of his death , and the immediate effects of his spirit on us , rising by regeneration to union and communion with Christ . so he . 

Reply . 1 i pass the 1 , and 2 , exceptions , notwithstanding , that of gods not esteeming of us as in Christ upon his performance of the acts of his mediation for us , Might admit of some consideration . 

2 the inference here couched , that these things are the immediate effects of Christ's spirit on us , therefore the distant and mediate effects of his death for us , is very weak and unconcluding . The death of Christ procureth these things as a cause moral and impelling : the spirit worketh as an efficient , and therefore the same thing May be the immediate effect of them both , according to their several kinds of efficacy . And so indeed they are . Our actual conversion , the efficient whereof is the spirit , is the immediate procurement of the merit of Christ : see this at large in my treatise opposed . I know not any man that hath run out into more wide mistakes about the immediate effects of the death of Christ , than mr Baxter , who pretends to so much accurateness in this particular . 

3 he saith ( Adds mr Baxter ) Christ hath redeemed us from the curse , being made a curse for us . 

answ. i explained before how far we are freed by redemption : he hath restored us , that is , paid the price , but with no intent that we should by that redemption , be immediately or absolutely freed . 

Yet when we are freed , it is to be ascribed to his death as the meritorious cause , but not as the only cause . 

reply . 1 a being freed so far , or so far , by redemption , and not wholly , fully , or completely , what ever men May explain , the scripture is wholly silent of . 

2 that Christ in paying a price , had no intent that those he paid it for , should be immediately or absolutely freed , is crudely enough asserted . 1 of the immediateness of their delivery , i have spoken already . It hath as strict an immediation as the nature of such causes and effects will bear . 2 if he intended not that those for whom he died should be absolutely freed , then either he intended not their freedom at all , and so the negation is upon the term freed : or the negation of his intention is only as to the qualification , absolutely , and so his intention to free them is asserted , and the affection of absolutness in that intention , only denied . 

If the first be meant ; 1 it is contrary to innumerable express testimonies of scriptures . 2 it renders the son of God , dying with no determinate end , or designed purpose at all , in reference to them for whom he died : a thing we would not ascribe to a wise man , in a far more easy undertaking . 

If the second : 1 i desire to know , what is this intention here assigned to our saviour ? he paid a price , or ransom for us , he bought and purchased us by his blood , to be a peculiar persons to himself ; he redeemed us from the curse and wrath due to us , that we May be conditionally freed . all things intended under condition , are as to their accomplishment uncertain . the condition May be fulfilled , or it May not be fulfilled ; and therefore the thing intended thereon , can have no certainty as to its accomplishment , in the mind of the intender . This then is that which is ascribed to the Lord Jesus : making his soul an offering for sin , laying down his life a ransom for mercy , and tasting death , to free the children given him from death , praying together that those for whom he died , Might be partakers of his glory ; yet was altogether uncertain whether ever any one of them , should at all partake of the good things , which in his whole undertaking of mediation , he aimed at . Thus is he made a surety of an uncertain covenant , a purchaser of an inheritance perhaps never to be enjoyed , a priest sanctifying none by his sacrifice , &c.  

2 is the accomplishment of this condition , upon which freedom depends in the intention of Christ , certain in his mind , under that intention ? I ask then , whence that assurance doth accrue ? Is it from his foresight of their good using their abilities to fulfil the condition to them prescribed ? See then , whither you have rolled this stone ! The folly , and absurdity of this , hath been long since sufficiently discovered . 

But is it from hence , because by his death , he purchaseth for them , the completing of that condition in them ? Thus , he pays a price with intention that those for whom he pays it , shall be freed , by enjoying that freedom under such a condition as he procures for them ; and thereupon knows , that at the appointed time , it shall be wrought in them . What differs this in the close from absolute freedom ? 

Further : feign some of them for whom Christ died to fulfil this condition , others not ; and it will be more evident , that the greatest uncertainty possible , as to the issues of his death , must be assigned to him in his dying . The pretence of an effectual discriminating purpose of free grace , following the purpose of giving Christ , promisuously for all , will not salve the contradictions of this assertion . 

But the truth is , this whole figment of conditional freedom , is every way unsavoury : that very thing which is assigned for the condition of our freedom , being itself the chiefest part of it : the whole indeed as here begun : potential , conditional , not actual , not absolute issues and effects of the death of Christ , have been abundantly disproved already . 

That which follows in mr Baxter from page 152 , unto page 155. chap. 19 belongs not to me : being only a declaration of his own judgement about the things in hand : wherein , although many things are not only incommodiously expressed , to suit the un-scriptural method of these mysteris which he hath framed in his mind , but also directly opposite to the truth ; yet i shall not here meddle with it , referring them who desire satisfaction in this business , to a serious consideration of what i have above-written to this purpose . 

page 155.  C. 20. he returns to the consideration of my assertion concerning our deliverance ipso facto , by the blood of Christ : and tells you , 

i do not understand mr Owen his meaning : for he saith , that Christ did actually , and ipso facto , deliver us from the curse and obligation ; yet we do not instantly apprehend and perceive it , nor yet possess it : but only we have actual right to all the fruits of his death . 

&c. so he . 

answ. the things of that treatise were written with the pen of a vulgar scribe , that every one Might run and read : whence then it should be , that so learned a man should not understand my meaning , unless from his own prejudice , i know not : however , i have now so fully delivered my sense and meaning as to these things , that i hope no place remaineth for discreptation thereabout . But let us look a little into mr Baxter's inquiry after that , which he professeth not well to understand : 

1 ( saith he ) whether a man May fitly be said actually and ipso facto to be delivered and discharged , who is not at all delivered , but only hath a right to deliverance : i doubt . 



answ. to unriddle this , with most of the following exceptions , and to resolve his doubt so far as i am concerned , as having administered occasion thereunto , i shall transcribe the place from whence these difficulties are pretended to arise . 

The passage is in lib. 3. cap. 7. of that treatise , page 140 , 141. as followeth : 

that actual freedom from the obligation doth not follow the satisfaction made by Christ , cannot be granted . For by his death , he did deliver us from death : and that actually so far , as that the elect are said to die and rise with him : he did actually or ipso facto deliver us from the curse , by being made a curse for us . The hand-writing that was against us , even the whole obligation was taken out of the way , and nailed to his cross . It is true , all for whom he did this do not instantly actually apprehend and perceive it : which is impossible . But yet that hinders not ; but that they have all the fruits of his death in actual right , though not in actual possession : which last they cannot have until at least it be made known to them . As if a man pay a ransom for a prisoner detained in a foreign country ; the very day of the payment and acceptation of it , the prisoner hath right to his liberty , though he cannot enjoy it , until such time as tidings of it is brought unto him , and a warrant produced for his liberty . So that , that reason is nothing but a begging {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 2dly , the satisfaction of Christ by the payment of the same thing that was in the obligation , is no way prejudicial to that free gracious condonation of sin so often mentioned . God's gracious condonation of sin , compriseth the whole dispensation of grace towards us in Christ : whereof there are two parts : 1 the laying of our sin on Christ ; or making him to be sin for us , which was merely and purely an act of free grace . 2 the gracious imputation of the righteousness of Christ to us : or making us the righteousness of God in him ; which is no less of grace and mercy : however that remission , grace , and pardon which is in God for sinners , is not opposed to Christ's merits , but ours . He pardoneth all to us , but he spareth not his only son : the freedom then of pardon hath not its foundation in any defect of the merit or satisfaction of Christ , but in three other things : 1 the will of God freely appointing this satisfaction of Christ : joh. 3. 10.  Rom. 5. 8. 2  In a gracious acceptation of that decreed satisfaction in our steads , so many , no more . 3 in a free application of the death of Christ unto us : remission then excludes not a full satisfaction by the solution of the very thing in the obligation , but only the solution or satisfaction of him to whom remission is granted , 

&c.  

All that is here affirmed , May be reduced to these heads : 

1 actual freedom from the obligation is the immediate fruit of the death of Christ : understand such an immediation , as i have often described . 

2 hence , Christ is said actually or ipso facto to deliver us , because our deliverance which is to be accomplished sub termino , is the infallible , absolute , immediate issue and product of what he did for us . actual and ipso facto , are opposed to the intervention of any such thing , as should make our deliverance to be only potential , or conditional . 

3 those for whom Christ doth work this deliverance , are not as to a simulty of time actually delivered : they neither enjoy , nor are acquainted with any such deliverance until the appointed time be come , but have actual right thereunto , to possess it in due season . 

This being the sum and plain intendment of that place , i suppose there will not need any operous endeavour to remove the objections that are laid against it : and therefore to that before expressed , i say , Christ hath actually and ipso facto procured our deliverance : hence we have actual right unto it , but not actual possession of it : and where the difficulty of this should rest , i know not . Men May as oft as they please create contradictions in their own minds , and entangle themselves with doubts in the knots which themselves have tied . But , 

2 ( saith he ) knowledge and possession of a deliverance are far different things . 



answ. 1 he maketh them so , who plainly intimates , that the reason why it is not apprehend , is , because it is not possessed : and always speaks disjunctively of them . 

2 besides , this proposition of the distance of these two , is not universally true , as i could easily demonstrate . 

3 our knowledge therefore ( he adds ) doth not give us possession : so that the similitude sails : for it is the creditors knowledge and satisfaction that is requisite to deliverance : and our creditor was not in a far and strange country , but knew immediately , and could either have made us quickly know , or turned us free before we had known the cause . 



answ. 1 whether or no , or how far knowledge gives us possession , i shall not now dispute : only considering in what sense knowledge is here used ; and often in the scripture , the deliverance also spoken of , being such , as no small part thereof consists in this knowledge , and without it ( In the seed at least ) is not , i cannot but say , that such kind of affirmations in things of this weight , are very slender proofs : yea further , whereas the enjoyment of this deliverance is either as to the being of it , or to the comfort of it ; the latter is given us by this knowledge merely , the former consists therein mainly , joh. 17. 3.  

2 similitudes are allowed their grains to make them current : but yet , as our creditors knowledge and satisfaction is required to our deliverance , so not that only ; but ours also , as to our actual enjoyment of it . It is true , he could have made us quickly know it : but who hath been his counsellor ? this is left to his sovereign and free disposal , our deliverance being purchased to be made out in the season thereby appointed . But , that God could have made us free , before we knew the cause , ( Supposing his constitution of the way of salvation revealed in the blood of Jesus , which lies at the bottom of all these disputes ) is a most anti-evangelical assertion , and diametrally opposed to the whole way of God's dealing with sinners . But he adds , 

4 neither can it be understood how God can so long deny us the possession of heaven , if we had such actual absolute right so long ago , which seems to me to express a jus ad rem , and in re . 



answ. 1 i love not to inquire into the reason of God's actings , which are according to the counsel of his own will : and yet think it not very difficult to conceive how a son is for a season kept as a servant , though he be heir of all . 

2 he speaks as though this deliverance lay all in heaven , whereas it is here fully enjoyed on the earth though not in all the degrees of the fruits thereof . 

3 if the right whereof we speak were jus in re , i see not well indeed how God could keep us from the possession of it as mr Baxter says : a man cannot be kept long from what he hath . But saith he , 

5 if he mean a right to future possession , i do not see how right and possession should stand at so many years distance : to have right to God's favour , and possession of that favour seem to me of nearer kin . Except he should think that possession of favour is nothing but the knowledge or feeling of it : and that faith justifieth only in loco conscientia : but i will not censure so hardly until i know . 



answ. 1 if at so many years distance it May not be allowed , he had done well to express at how many it Might . For my part , placing this right upon the purchase of Christ , ( As before , ) and possession in the actual enjoyment of the fruits of that purchase ; then referring the distance between them to the good pleasure of God , who had granted and established that right to an enjoyment sub termino , i see no difficulty , no perplexity in this at all . 

2 that no small portion of favour consists in a sense and knowledge of the kindness of God in its actings terminated upon the conscience , i must believe , whatever mr Baxter be pleased to censure . it is far more facile to give the hardest censures , then to answer the easiest arguments . 

3 the place where faith justifieth i am not so solicitous about , as the manner how : which of all other ways commonly insisted on , i conceive not to be ; as it is our now obedience : yet that in this work , it looks further than the conscience , i easily grant . 

The most of what is subjoined to these exceptions , is fully answered in what went before . 

As much as possible , i shall avoid all repetitions of the same things : only whereas he affirmeth , that to have right to justification , and to have possession of it , is all one ; i must needs enter my dissent thereunto : which May suffice until it be attempted to be put upon the proof . If he shall say , that a right to a future justification at the day of judgement , is the same with the possession of present actual justification , it is neither true , nor any thing to the business in hand . 

In the close , he shuts up this discourse , and enters into another ; giving in his thoughts about the immediate effects of the death of Christ : a matter wherein he pretends to great accurateness , censuring others , for not being able to distinguish aright of them , and so to spend abundance of labour in vain , in their discourses thereabout . Particularly here he denies ( And calls it a dangerous error to suppose ) that actual remission and justification are immediate effects of his death , or any right thereunto , which he attempteth to prove by sundry arguments . 

Of the effects of the death of Christ , and what relation they all stand in thereunto , i have spoken at large before . Now because actual remission is denied to be an immediate effect of the death of Christ , and so a potential remission not once mentioned in the book of God is tacitly substituted in the room thereof , and this also in opposition to what i had delivered , i shall briefly consider his arguments , and so give an end to this debate . 

argum. 1 what right soever God giveth unto men in things supernatural ( such as justification , remission , and adoption ) he giveth it by his written laws . But by these laws he hath given no such thing to any unbelievers , such as are the elect before conversion : therefore , &c.  



the major is evident : God's decree giveth no man a personal right to the mercy intended him . And for the minor , no man can produce the scripture giving to unbelievers such a right . 



answ. 1 taking the laws of God in the strict and proper sense , and it is so far from being a truth , that what right God gives to any , he gives it by his written laws ; that indeed the laws of God give no right to any one , concerning any thing , whether supernatural or otherwise . The end of the law is not to give right , but to exact obedience : and that chiefly if not upon the sum , solely . The usual proper genuine signification of God's laws , being his revealed will for our obedience , i know not why mr Baxter should bring them in , in the latitude of his single apprehension to be a medium in an argument . Hence , 

2 here is not a sufficient annumeration of causes ; the promises of God are to be added , and those either made to us , or to any other for our good . But , 

3 that the decree of God gives to no man a right to the thing concerning which the decree is , is so far from being a sufficient proof of the major , that it is in itself very questionable , if not unquestionably false . That the decree gives not being and existence to the things concerning which it is , is an old rule . That no right should from it arise , unto that thing by virtue thereof , is not yet so clear . Right is but jus . Jus est quod justum est . if it be just or right , that any one should have such a thing , he is said to have a right thereunto . now , supposing the decree of God , that a man shall , by such means , have such a thing , is it not just , equitable and condecent unto righteousness that he should have it ? But yet further , 

4 we are not at all speaking of a right founded on God's decrees , ( Which considering what was proposed to be proved by this argument ; i wonder how it found any mention here ) but upon two other things . 

1 the covenant of God with Christ about the pardoning , justifying , and saving of those , for whose sin he should make his soul an offering : which covenant respecting Christ as mediator God and man , is not to be reckoned among the mere decrees and purposes of God , containing in itself all those promises and engagements whereon the Lord Jesus in the work of redemption rolled himself . now in this covenant , God engaged himself ( As i said before ) to make out to those for whom Christ undertook , whatsoever was the fruit of his purchase , and that was what in his good pleasure was assigned thereunto . And this is the first bottom of this right . 

2 the purchase of Christ being completed by the performance of all things by divine constitution thereunto allotted , and himself acquitted and exonerated of the whole debt of their sin for whom he suffered , which was charged on him ; he makes demand of the accomplishment of the forementioned engagement made to him , concerning the freedom and deliverance of the persons whose sins were laid on him , and whose bringing unto glory he undertook . 

On these two , i say it is , that our right to the fruits of the death of Christ , even before believing , doth depend : from hence at least it is right and equal , that we do in the time appointed enjoy these things . Yea to say , that we have right upon believing to the fruits of the death of Christ affirmed universally , can only be affirmed of a jus in re , such a right , as hath ( At least in part ) conjoined actual possession , believing itself being no small portion of these fruits . 

This argument then being fallacious , omitting the chief causes in annumeration , concludes not the thing proposed . Besides it is in no small measure faulty , in that the first thing proposed to be confirmed was , that remission of sin , and justification are not the immediate effects of Christ's death , whereof in this argument there is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

argum. 2.  if God hate all the works of iniquity , and we are all by nature the children of wrath , and without faith it is impossible to please God , and he that believeth not is condemned already , then certainly the elect while they are unbelievers , are not actually de facto , no nor in personal right delivered from this hatred , wrath , displeasure , and condemnation : but , ergo . 



answ. 1 this argument , for what indeed it will prove is handled at large in my treatise of redemption , as also reurged in the pages foregoing . Against actual justification from eternity , it hath its efficacy . 

2 it doth also conclude , that the elect whilst unbelievers , are not actually and de facto put in possession of the issues of love , faith being with the first of them . But , 

3 that they have not upon the grounds forementioned , a right to these things . 

Or , 

4 that justification is not the immediate effect of the death of Christ ( Being the sole things in question ) it hath the same unhappiness with the former , not once to mention . 

argum. 3.  if we are justified only by faith , then certainly not before faith . But we are justified only by faith . ergo . 



Answ . 1 if i mistake not , it is not justification before faith , but a right to the fruits of the death of Christ before faith that is to be proved . 

2 that justification is not the immediate effect of the death of Christ to which ends for this argument , valeat quantum valere potest : to me , it comes not within many miles of the thing in question . So that with the absurd answers supposed thereunto , we pass it by . 

The like also i am enforced to say of the two other that follow , being of the same length and breadth with those foregoing , too short & narrow to cover the things in question so that though they May have their strength to their own proper end , yet as to the things proposed to be proved , there is nothing in their genuine conclusions looking that way . 

If i Might take the liberty of guessing , i should suppose the mistake which lead this author to all this labour in vain , is , that the immediate effects of the death of Christ must be immediately enjoyed by them for whom he died . Which assertion hath not indeed the least colour of truth . The effects of the death of Christ are not said to be immediate , in reference to others enjoyment of them , but unto their causality by that death . Whatever it be , that in the first place is made out to sinners for the death of Christ , when ever it be done , that is the immediate effect thereof , as to them : as to them i say , for in its first tendency , it hath a more immediate object . 

If mr Baxter go on with his intentions about a tract concerning universal redemption , perhaps we May have these things cleared : and yet we must tell him before hand , that if he draw forth nothing on that subject but what is done by Amiraldus , and like things to them , he will give little satisfaction to learned and stable men , upon the issue of his undertaking . 

I shall not presume to take another man's task out of his hand , especially one's who is so every way able to go through with it ; else i durst undertake to demonstrate that treatise of Amiraldus , mentioned by mr Baxter , to be full of weak and sophistical argumentations , absurd contradictions , vain strife of words ; and in sum to be , as birthless a tympanous endeavour , as ever so learned a man was engaged in . 

For the present , being by God's providence removed for a season from my native soil , attended with more than ordinary weaknesses and infirmities , separated from my library , burdened with manifold employments , with constant preaching to a numerous multitude , of as thirsting a persons after the gospel , as ever yet i conversed withal ; it sufficeth me , that i have obtained this mercy , briefly and plainly to vindicate the truth from mistakes , and something further to unfold the mystery of our redemption in Christ , all with so facile and placid an endeavour , as is usually upon the spirits of men , in the familiar writings of one friend to another . That it hath been my aim to seek after truth , and to keep close to the form of wholesome words delivered to us , will ( I hope ) appear to them that love truth , and peace . 

Dublin-castle , decemb. 20. 1649.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

Finis . 

Errata . 

The author having no opportunity to attend the press , and being absent many miles during the printing the most part of it , finds the accenting of sundry Greek expressions omitted , with other mistakes , which he desireth the reader to correct as followeth : 

Pag. 5. l. 10. r. have . p. 9 l. 23.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 10. l. 8. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , so also in other places . l. 9  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 11. l. 10.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . l. 26.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 12. l. 21.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 15. l. 3.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . l. 14.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 16. l. 9 huddled . p. 19 l. 10. alius . p. 20. l. 4. now . p. 22. l. 22.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 24. l. 22.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 27. l. 12. observed . p. 28. l. 24. not all the thing . l. 26. to any . p. 29. l. 4.  Now the . p. 30. l. 6.  Now he . p. 31. l. 1.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . l. 4.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . l. 11. pressures . p. 32. l. ult. pactional . p. 33. l. 24.  Contradiction . p. 34. l. 33.  Oblation made . p. 36. l. 22. that ever i. l. 31. feign . p. 44. l. 8.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 47. l. 3. of God , is thus held out . l. 27.  Analogy . l. 33. fturition . p. 54. l. ult. actuate their own . p. 76. l. 29.  Concluded . p. 78. l. 30. precede . p. 82. l. 27.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 85. l. 28. many . p. 87. l. 20. disceptation . p. 88 l. 17.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . p. 91. l. 20. foro conscientiae . p. 95. l. 3.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Pag. 29. in the margin , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 





display of armin. salus electorun sanguis jesu . salus elect.  rom 8. 7.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : ignat. ad phi•ad . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Homer Iliad . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} v.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . eph. 4. 11 , 12 , 13.  haereses , de quorandam infirmitatibus habent , quod valent , nihil valentes , si in bene valentem fidem in currant . tertul. de praesc . ad haer.  Mat. 24. 24.  

answ . answ . pa. 138 , 139  answ . answ . answ . answ . answ . answ . answ . answ . answ . answ . answ . a distinguenda sunt tria momenta divinae voluntatis . Primum est , ante christi mortem positam aut re ipsa , aut in decreto dei , et praescientia . In hoc momento iratus peccatori est deus , sed ita , ut non aversetur omnes . irae deponendae vias , ac rationes . b secundum momentum est , posita jam christi morte , in quo deus jam non constituit tantum , sed & promittit iram se depositurum . c tertium est , cum homo vera fide in christum credit , et christus ex foederis formula credentem deo commendit . Hic jam deus deponit iram , hominemque in gratiam recipit . de satisfact. . Christi . Cap. 7.  d ps. 50. 21  Exod. 3. 14. 1 sam. 15. 29  Job 23. 13.  Psa. 102. 26 , 27.  Isa. 14. 27.  e 2 king. 19 6  Isa. 37. 3 1 tim. 1. 13  f quidcunque negat aliquid de deo , quod ei convenit , vel asserit de eo , quod ei non convenit , derogat divinae bonitati , & est blasphemus . thom. 22. ae . q. 13. a. 1. c.  g Libra voluntas ulciscendae injuriae . quae dicuntur {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , intelligenda sunt {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Amor , et gaudium , & alia ejusmodi , cum attribuuntur deo , significant simplicem actum voluntatis , cum similitudine effectus , absque passione : aquin. 12. q. 22. a. 3.  eph. 1. 11.  h arm. disp. pub . de natu . Dei . thes. 51.  i ep. 1. 11  answ . k aliud est mutare voluntatem , aliud velle aliquarum rerum mutationem . l mat. 18.   1 tim. 1. 15  Ep. 5. 26 , 27.  Ep. 2. 15 , 16.  Col. 1. 13. 1 joh. 1. 7.  &c.  eph. 2. 8  phil. 1. 29  heb. 9 12  M cum voluntas sit ejus essentia , non movetur ab alio à se , sed à se tantum , eo modo loquendi , quo intelligere , et velle , dicitur motus , et secundum hoc Plato dixit , primum movins movet seipsum : aq. p. 1. q. 19 a. 2. a. 3.  answ . answ . omnes illi pro quibus christus ex intentione dei satis fecit , sunt deo reconciliati . i. e. in favorem saluti ferum aliquo modo restituti . Ames . antisinod . p. 164.  si de debitum quaeratur ▪ respectu creaturae in deum cadere non potest : nisi ex aliqua suppositione ipsi deo voluntaria et libera : quae non potest esse nisi promissio aut pactio aliqua , ex quibus fidelitatis aut justitiae debitum oriri solet : Suares . Relect. de lib.  Div. volu . Disp . L. di sec. 2. n. 5.  nulla justitia proprie esse potest , ubi nulla intercedit obligatio : deus autem nulla obligation tenetur , antequam ipse fidem suam astringat : ergo ante promissionem nulla justitia etiam distributiva in deo reperitur . vas . n. 1. q. 21. a. 1. disp. 86.  eph. 1. 11  gal. 4. 1  joh. 1. 12  rom. 5. 11  eph. 1. 11  col. 1. 12 , 13 , 14.  psal. 4. 6  2 cor. 4. 6.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . lex aut punit , aut vetat , aut permittit , aut consulit , aut hortatur : f. de leg. 1 joh. 3. 4.  decretum nil ponit in esse , praedestinatio in praedestinato aquin.  eph. 1. 4.  2 pet. 1. 1.  cururceus exit . isa. 50. 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9  joh. 17. 4. 2 tim. 3. 16.  joh. 17.  heb. 9 24.  












































































































