THE REGAL Proto-martyr ; OR , The MEMORIAL of the MARTYRDOM OF Charles the First . 

In a Sermon preached upon the first Fast of Public Appointment for it . 

An Appendix to the GRAND CONSPIRACY . 

By John Allington Rector of Vppingham . 

Cui prodest scelus , is fecit . Medea Jasoni . 



LONDON , Printed by J. W. for W. Gilbert , Bookseller at the Halfmoon in St. Paul's Churchyard , 1672.  

To the Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS TREVOR Knight and Baronet , and one of the Honourable Order of the Knights of the BATH . 

SIR , 

For as much as the Period of the Grand Conspiracy came forth as the First-fruits of my public gratitude , I could not let this Appendix walk abroad without your cognisance ; which I am therefore willing myself , & any thing of mine should wear , because one Tongue is too little to tell the world what a Patron I have had , & have ; and the good God grant I may long have . 

It is I confess an easy thing for me to say thus , and seriously it were an ill thing in me to say lesle ; for the greatest good that in this world I enjoy , it came from your single Heart and free Hand . 

Now after a Period , to talk of the Grand Conspiracy , may seem that I had done before I had made an end . But truly speaking : The Subject of this Sermon , it is the survey of that Gild which the Grand Conspirators and their Abettors acted and contracted before the other Sermons could have a being : So that this is but a Label to the Crown , and an Appendix to the sad Story . The Drift of this only is , to knock at every door , to see how much of this guilt may lie in every bosom ; not to upbraid any , but to exhort all , so to examine , that our Penitence may be proportionable to our Failing . For , 

Though He fell by Open Enemies , yet he was wounded in the House of his Friends . For whilst they stood a far off , the diligent in mischief came up close ; whilst they were wary , the other were working : so that a Non obstans lieth at many a door , and a Non manifestans at as many . And rare is that Subject , who in no measure was wanting to this Sacred Person . Let the Discourse be your scrutiny ; and the presentation of it , a fresh but a short acknowledgement of his great Obligations for abundant Kindnesses heaped upon ( My most honoured Patron ! ) 

From my Study in Leomington Hastang , Nou. 13. 1671.  Your humble , affectionate , and most obliged Chaplain , John Allington . 

To the Reader . 

This following Discourse it hath made no haste unto the Press ; for it was preached first , when first that sad Day was made Rubrical , ( the Author then being in that Zoar wherein the good God preserved him for better times . ) It since hath been repeated in two Corporations , a City and a Town ; in the one it was censured thus , He came hither to make us guilty of the KING'S death ! In the other , It were well to be preached oft , that men might become more sensible of their latent guilt . Now I profess before the world , my intentions when I by the mercies of God conceived it , & when at any time by his assistance I was delivered of it , ever were to work upon my Auditory ; and as far as in me lay to prick the Heart , and wound that soul , which either by Thought , Word or Deed had assisted that Grand Conspiracy . 

For being I well know , Frustra praetereunt leges , quem non absolvit Conscientia , that Laws vainly pass over and clear an Offender , whilst yet the guilt lieth upon the soul ; my design was ever to make those who are conscious , know , Though a suppressing and stifling of evidence may carry off a Malefactor ; and a Pardon may preserve a Murderer ; though an Act of Indemnity may clear an estate , and as to secular disturbances and to legal inflictions secure a man Yet such who before God stand guilty of Intrusions , violent Detentions , Sacrilege , Blood , Rebellion , Schism , etc.  These though they stand as recti in curia , discharged in all Courts , freed from all legal molestations or vexatious upbraiding ; yet before their own Consciences ( if not seared ) can absolve or speak peace unto them : they must repent them truly , and they must be most heartily sorrowful for all these Misdoing ! yea if that received piece of Divinity be true , Non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur oblatum , the sin is not remitted till the prey is restored ; then , whoever have wronged any , they must have Zachaeus care , where they have wronged to restore ; & where wrongs have been so highly acted , that more than all will not do it ; then the acknowledgement must needs be great , and the anguishes of soul as proportionable as may be , to the anguishes of those who perished by their default , and were not heard in their most just complaints and saddest exigencies . 

In the following Discourse you shall find that good St. Paul , when he became a Convert , & was now sensible of that far distant consent which mainly appears by looking to the raiment of those who stoned Stephen ! ( being for aught we know nor Accuser , nor witness , nor Executioner , nor Judge ) He was for this consent so extremely humbled ; that he publicly confessed , ( and with an holy indignation against the fact ) said , Ipse ego , When the blood of the Martyr Stephen was shed , I also was standing by and consenting to his death , and kept the raiment of them who slew him , Acts 22.  Before Men , brethren & Fathers , before a great assembly he deplored his guilt . I was standing by and consenting to his death ! I kept the raiment of them who slew him ! 

I am content in Charity to hope that God hath touched the souls of many who were then well pleased when the blood of our Regal Martyr was shed ! & I will hope they may have bewailed their guilt : But it were much more conducing toward their Remission & pardon of so great a crime , if they became as St. Paul was , more public Penitents : For that such who have openly slandered the Footsteps of Gods Anointed , and in public Meetings reviled and spoken against that holy one . And as for instance . If any of the Orthodox of those times , having zeal proportioned to his Interest , should have been so prodigiously wicked as to pray , — Lord now thou hast destroyed the Lion , take away the Whelps also ! Whether such an one ought not as publicly to bewail his rashness , and as openly to retract such an horrid saying , ( then called praying ) I leave it to a Conscience and to a Casuist . 

The following Sermon I may tell you , hath been importunately desired ; and now many more may have it than did so . But I should wish none to give a penny for it , or to lay an eye upon it , unless they will resolve to make a conscientious reflection on it . 

Sure I am it is not personal ; and as sure that few persons shall read it , but may find a share in it , and take just occasion , either to ask God's pardon for some omission ; or to give God praise that made them so right hearted , as to be delivered from that extensive Gild which few escaped . 

This Sermon cannot possibly make any guilty who are not ; but possibly it may show some to be so , who have not thought they were . And therefore , whereas upon that solemn Day we are taught to pray , Lay not the Gild of this Innocent Blood , ( the shedding whereof , nothing but the Blood of thy Son can expiate ) lay it not to the Charge of thy People of this Land , nor let it ever be required of us , or our Posterity — 



This Discourse ( God so working ) may occasion that this Prayer may be preferred with more sense , heart and feeling than before it hath been : which to his Glory may the good God effect , it will glad and rejoice the heart of 

Thy Friend in the Lord , J. A.  From my Study , Nou. 13. 1671.  

THE REGAL Proto-martyr . 

Acts 8. part of the 1.  Ver.  

And SAUL was consenting to his death . 

IN these words are two eminent persons to be looked upon , Saul and Stephen ; a Martyr and a Persecutor : and indeed for as much a Veritas Odium , naked Truth begets Armed Malice ; no wonder to see the Persecutor at the heels of the Martyr , and to read of his Death , who durst be so bold as to give witness to a Dangerous and Loyal Truth . 

Now concerning this Martyr some things are obviously to be observed , before we can come exactly to the Text. 1  His Ordination , he was a person separate from the people . 2.  The Danger bound up in that profession . 3.  The particular Truth for the which he was put to death . 

In the sixth Chapter you shall find a Motion made by the Apostles , vers . 3.  That seven men of honest report should be looked up , and be brought to them to be put into Holy Orders ; upon which Stephen being found a Man full of faith and the Holy Ghost was one . Where by the way we may observe , that albeit S. Stephen was a person of excellent endowments , a person abundantly gifted , a person full of faith and the Holy Ghost ! yet he did not assume or take an Holy Office on him ; nay the Congregation who looked him up and made choice on him , they had no power to confer Orders , or to make him what they desired , for v. 6.  They set him before the Apostles , and when they had prayed , they laid hands on him . So that though the people looked him up , v. 3. it was the Apostles who appointed him to his Business ; though the people found him out , it was the Apostles who sent him out . Manus ei imposuerunt , it was they that laid hands upon him ! So that the first thing observable concerning the Death of the glorious Martyr is , he was an Ordained person , he was one who by Imposition of Apostolical Hands and Prayer , was set apart and designed for holy use . The First Christian Martyr was in Apostolical Holy Orders . 

Secondly , The Danger involved and bound up in this profession ; for whereas before he lived secure and private , as a Christian or a Disciple ; now called to a public employment , and set apart for a peculiar and Holy use , he was not long in his Office ; for , for aught we read , his first Sermon cost him his life . 't is true indeed he was chosen to minister unto Widows ; Acts 6. 1. yet by his employment it appears he was not chosen to that Ministration only ; for Stephen full of Faith and Power did great Wonders and Miracles among the people : vers . 8. yea , though there was an whole Assembly , an whole Assembly of Libertines against him , he held not his peace , ver . 9 but so he disputed , and so spoke , that as the Text implies , They dispatched him for it . An Argument to me , That Holy Orders are not only Honos , but Onus ; not only an advance to Honour , but an expose to Hazard , insomuch that by how much God is pleased to take a man nigher to himself , by so much the more is he , than another , exposed to the Hate of the World , and bound to abide Death or Danger for him . For our Blessed Lord and Master , he whose Manhood of all others was nighest in conjunction with the Deity , he was ( as I may say ) therefore put into Holy Orders , therefore made a Priest , that through the Eternal Spirit , he might offer himself to God : Heb. 9 14. therefore was he made a Priest , that he might be a Sacrifice . 

And indeed , whereas Christians in general are by St. Peter called An Holy Priesthood , 1 Pet. 2. 5.  I know nothing that this can more safely and seasonably admonish than to remember , if we are Priests , we must then sacrifice , and sacrifice no lesle than our very selves to God's glory ! For so did our pattern , so did our high Priest who is set before us ; So did St. Stephen , who though a Deacon and one in the lowest step of Holy Office , when he was put to it he declined not , but to his Masters and to his King's glory , he so spoke that he died for it , For Saul was consenting to his death ! 

Lastly , To come up to the Text , let us see and observe what that particular Truth was , and what that very Speech for which he was thus used ; for the which the Jews cried out , Run upon him , and stoned him to death : and you shall find it was , only for accusing them , and sharply setting before them the Murder of their King. For , Acts 7. 52. you shall find these words , Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted , and they have slain them who showed before of the coming of the just one , of whom yet have been now the Betrayers and the Murderers . 

When St. Stephen though full of the Holy Ghost , was so bold as to tell the Rebellious Jews of their kill the Prophets , and of their putting to death the Just one , it presently followeth v. 53.  When they heard these things they were cut to the heart , and they gnashed on him with their teeth . When St. Stephen was so bold as to tell them how they had 〈◊〉 trayed their King , and murdered the Lords Anointed ! When he was so bold , as to set their so horrid and so bloody Rebellion before their eyes , no wonder if they resolve to cut off him , who had thus cut them ; to break his head , who had broke their hearts . 

It is oft said , Many a man love's the Treason , who hate's the Traitor . But here we have a Treason , which the Traitors themselves endure not to hear on ! For , 

Acts 5. 40.  The Counsel of State for the time being ; even those whose hands were imbrued in the blood of their King , they call and command the Apostles , that they should not speak in the Name of Jesus . Jesus the King of the Jews ; his Murderers commanded that no mention be made of him ; command even his own Servants , even the nighest to him , not to do any thing , no not to speak in the King's Name ! Yea , so did the memory of their Rebellion crucify their souls , that witness St. Stephen they were ready to slay and to stone the Speaker : For , having nothing to answer in Defense of their Rebellion , having nothing to answer for their Murder of Gods Anointed ! having nothing to keep off that deadly stab which the charge of their kill the just one gave unto their very souls , Acts 7. 57  They stop their ears , but with wide open mouths they ran upon him ; and to stop that mouth whose truth cut their hearts , for want of arguments so silenced him with stones , that he died at their feet ! of whose death the Holy Ghost is pleased to take notice , and to record not only the Actors , but a bare Consenter also , in these words , And Saul was consenting to his death . 

But what talk I of the Murder of a Deacon , upon a day solemnly set a part to be humbled for the Murder of a King ! my answer is , I find so nigh a conjunction between Sacred Majesty and Holy Order ; between Prince and Priest ; between Gods anointed to be Kings , and Gods anointed to be Prophets , that we can scarce find the man who will wrong the one , but if occasion serve , he would do as much for the other , and therefore we find them both equally shielded in one verse , Touch not mine Anointed , and do my Prophets no harm , Psalm 105.  They who will harm the Prophets , they will not stick to arm against the Anointed : They who killed the Just one , they made nothing of murdering his Messengers : and indeed , in order to this horrid Murder , in order to the betraying of our Just one , and the Lords Anointed , what was more previous than the stoning of his Prophets , the sequestering , silencing and depriving from all comforts of this life , who ever durst as did Stephen , magnify the Lords Anointed , or did dare to say , They were his Betrrayers or his Murderers ? 

Indeed , between Deacon and King there is a great disproportion : Deacon the lowest degree of Ministry , and King the superexcellent for Majesty : and yet the same Kings who are sometime called Gods , they are also styled , Rom. 13. 3.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , God's Deacons too , that is , Gods selected and peculiar Servants : and thus considered , St. Stephen and our Sovereign may very well admit a Parallel : 

For , 

Was S. Stephen , Acts 6. 5.  a man full of Faiih and the Holy Ghost : such was our Sovereign . Full of Faith , for it was in faith of a better , that he gave up his earthly Crown . Full of the Holy Ghost , for the most envious cannot deny his Meditations and Solitudes to be the undoubted Breathe of that Spirit ! 

Was Saint Stephen endowed with such high parts and gifts that v. 10.  They were not able to resist the Wisdom , and the Spirit by which he spoke ? Even so was it with our Blessed Sovereign , or else we had never heard of An Ordinance for no Addresses ; nor , as himself speaks , had he been assailed with Armies instead of Arguments : yea , when his cursed Conspirators , when those who sought his life , and those who in order to it had declared him A Fool , one unfit to govern , when they had divested him of all counsel , and sequestered him from all Advice , when many , and the choicest of the pack were sent to him ( as the Herodians to our Saviour to entrap and entangle him in his words : ) they found him so qualified , as the Book of God testifieth of S. Stephen , That they were not able to resist the Wisdom , and the Spirit by which he spoke : and therefore as St. Stephen was confuted with stones , because they were not able to do it with Arguments : Even so therefore was our Blessed Sovereign not permitted to speak against the High Court of Justice ! Therefore brought to his Scaffold , and therefore cut off ; because they were not able to resist his Wisdom ! because they found he was no lesle good than great , as they served St. Stephen , Acts 7. 58. even so they ran upon him and cast him out of the City . Yea , the very circumstance of place , whence those came who did this deed , that relateth to St. Stephen too : for the High Court of Justice , that pack of Miscreants which were sent to do this Villainy , they came forth of St. Stephen's Chapel . 

Now being in Stephen's Martyrdom , the Spirit of God is so severe , as to take notice not only of those ( who as I may say , sealed and signed his death ) not only of those who ran upon him , and were the actors in this Murder : but of a very Accessary , of a slander by , of one who gave no vote , flung no stone , did no hurt : being the Spirit of God takes notice of one who did only look to the clothing of those that stoned him , verse . 58.  One that did only look on and like the thing : certainly we shall find Consenters as well as Actors are mightily to be humbled for the sin of this day ; Not only they who plotted , and preached , and prepared the Murder ; but those also who liked it when it was done : Those who by any complacency or after act , or subscription avowed the thing . All such are guilty of the Horrid Murder of this Day , or else vainly did the Holy Pen observe what is our present Text , And Saul was consenting to his death . 



In , and about these Words we shall consider of these three Propositions . First , a man may be guilty of that sin in which he was no actor , by being only as Saul here stands recorded , A Consenter . 

Secondly , a guilt may be postnate unto a fact , for after the stoning of Saint Stephen it is observed , and not before , that Saul was consenting to his death . 

Lastly , Consent may contract so deep a guilt , that without confession and contrition , it may hale the vengeance of an Actor upon the Consenters head . 

First , A man may be guilty of that sin etc.  Consent it is the conception , and the first quickening of every sin ; consent it is that which gives the first being to every iniquity , insomuch that he who consenteth , though he never act further , is an actual sinner before his God : Nam scelus intra se tantum qui cogitat ultum . 



And therefore said our Blessed Master , Matt. 5. 28.  Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her , hath committed adultery already with her in his heart . He who hath a wanton , a lascivious and an adulterate reflection upon a beauty ; he who looks , and lusts , though he never exchange a word , never touch , handle or come nigh the woman ; even this very consent , this very complacency it is Adultery in the eye of the most pure : For , saith our Saviour , ( the son of a Virgin ) he hath committed adultery with her already in his heart . 

And as consent in the Concupiscible , even so consent in the Irascible it contracts a like guilt : For , as he is an adulterer who looketh and lusteth , though he never violate the chastity of the woman : even so a man may be guilty of Murder , and yet never draw blood ; a man may be a Manslayer , and yet never harm or hurt a person : For the express determination and words of St. John are , Whosoever hates his brother is a Murderer . 1 Jo. 3. 15.  

Now if it be so , that consent is the window that first le 's in the thief , consent the pass by which the Destroyer entereth into our Souls ; if it be so , that Consent makes us guilty even of the sin of others ; for , if Consent abstracted from all outward Action makes the whole Man guilty ; if guilt takes its rise , not from the Act , but from Consent , it is all a matter who Acts , for who ever consenteth he is also guilty . 

In the Beginning of Time , when the Devil first endeavoured to bring sin into the World , He took upon Him the form of a Serpent , Gen. 3. in that he spoke unto the woman ; told Her , God meant nothing lesle than what He said , That they should die ; yea , rather they should become as Gods ; and all this , only to gain a Consent ; so that it was consent that brought Sin into the World , it was Consent that made Eve a sinner ; Consent that made Her guilty of the Devil's Machination . 

On the other side ; when our blessed Lord and Master come to Destroy the works of the Devil ; The Devil He could gain no Consent ; and therefore though He set before him , All the Kingdoms of the World , and the glory of them , yet saith our Saviour , John 14. 30.  The Prince of this world cometh , and hath Nothing in me . Let the Devil and His Angels do all they can , they can get no ground , they can have nothing in us , or any of us , but with consent only ; so that , of all things that are under our power ; of all the Talents committed to our charge , we ought to be more choice of none than of this we have now in Hand , Our Consent : 't is this that makes us miserable ; This , that makes us happy , it is this that maketh us virtuous , and 't is this that makes us vicious ; 't is this , that makes us God's , and 't is this that makes us the Devils . 

'T was Consent , that made the Devil's suggestion become Eves sin , it was consent that made Eve's entisement become Adam's Transgression ; and it is consent that makes every Tentation become our guilt ; so that you see to very great purpose it was here observed , that though Saul was not an Actor , yet He was a Consenter to his death . 

Whereas then the Business of this great Day is , to be Humbled before the great God , for the foulest Murder ( except that of the Son of God ) that was ever read on ; it concerns every of us to lay Hand upon the Heart and as the Twelve did , ( when their King and Master foretold His Treachery ) to say , Master , Is it I ? Math. 26. 22.  It concerns every of us to consider how far we were toward the guilt of this great Crime ; How far either by way of Default or Consent , we have drawn up , even to this Murder . 

1 Tim. 5. 22.  Lay Hands suddenly on no Man ; neither be partaker of other men's sins . This exhortation of St. Paul , not only admonisheth Timothy to take Heed of sinning , by an overhasty , either Ordination or Absolution : But also to take heed that He become not a Party , or partaker in other men's sins . 

Now the great sins which we are this Day ( or at this Time ) to recollect , it is the Murder of God's Anointed , the betraying and butchering of our King ; Now this , though it was Paucorum Crimen , the abominable acting of some few ; yet it was Multorum Delictum , the Failance and the sin of too too many , and that upon these Accounts . 

1.  In Respect of Acts Antecedent and going before . 

2.  In Respect of Acts Consequent and following after . 

Upon both which , we shall find , Consent and Gild , it will rise like a Land-flood , and carry almost all afore it ; so that albeit , few were those who washed their Hands in His Blood , we shall find few also are those who are not besprinkled with it . 

First , then let us consider what previous and antecedent Acts may involve a Gild in this Murder : I shall instance only in Two : 

1.  A Provocation of our God.  
2.  A Desertion of God's Anointed . 
For both these are , as the School speaks , Volitum in Causa , a consequential consent , or a consequential guilt . 

First , It is a Consequential Consent and guilt to do that which provoketh God to inflict such a Judgement : so that in our provocation of God to permit this Murder , we have contracted enough to call for our Tears : For , if gracious and good Kings be the Blessings of God upon a People , certainly the Removing of such must needs be upon a provocation , and nothing can be so , but our sin . 

amongst us Men , we justly accounted Him a partaker , who is a Provoker unto sin ; He that provokes a Man to Anger , provokes a Man to Drunkenness , provokes a Man to Steal , he is doubtless a partaker even in his sin : Had Job cursed upon the provocation and instigation of his Wife , She , as well as He had been guilt : Not Amnon alone , but Jonadab who promoted and provoked was guilty in his lust , 2 Sam. 13.  Now look what is the provoking of a Man to sin , proportionably the same , is the provokeing of our God to Judgement : A sin undoubtedly , for only sin can do it , and sin can do it , even to as sad a Judgement , as to permit the Murder of a good , and a precious KING . 

2 Sam. 12.  When the Child gotten by David in Adultery was delivered , the Lord sent him word , v. 14.  That , Because thou hast given Occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme , the Child that is born unto Thee shall surely die . The sin of the Father it had an influence even upon the death of the Child ; because thou hast given occasion , therefore shall the Child die . And even so , because we provoked the Lord , therefore did God suffer His Anointed to be thus smitten . And indeed , the School very well observes , there is Volitum in Causa , as well as Directe Voluntarium : There is an indirect consent , and a consequential willing of a Thing , as well as a downright , and voluntary consent , insomuch that many a Man gladly and willingly consents unto the cause , who perfectly abhors and abominates the effect ; and yet where there is an inseparable coherence , He who directly will's the one , he doth consequentially will the other ; As for instance , The Men of the first World , Gen. 6. 5.  They did directly will and consent unto those abominations and wickednesses for which God threatened , yea and resolved to drown the world ; But as to the Drowning of the World , they gave no consent , nor had no will ; But , for as much as they willed that which necessarily brought on the other , therefore , they were Volitum in Causa , They were the consequential willers of their own Ruin : For , their sins provoked the Deluge , Gen. 18. 20.  Even so , the Men of Sodom , they had no will to have had Them and theirs destroyed with Fire and Brimstone : But , being they continued to Act and do that , whose cry clamored to Heaven for vengeance , and for this Vengeance : Therefore even they were Volitum in Causa , they were the consequential cause and provoker of their own destruction : And this you shall find is gathered , even from the very language of God Himself , for the Lord by his Prophet Rebuking Israel , Thus saith , Why will you die , OH House of Israel ? Alas ! Israel had no mind , no will in the world to die ; They would never have given suffrage or consent to their own death ; And yet , for as much as they willed that , which would infallibly bring death upon them , God lays their death even to their own charge , and makes their destruction an act of their own will , saying , Why will ye die , OH House of Israel . 

Now , as the Men of the old World , the Deluge ; as the Men of Sodom their Fire and Brimstone ; and as Israel their Destruction , so were all we the cause of the King's death , who continued to commit those sins , and to act those wickednesses , for which God was resolved to deprive the Nation of so great an Happiness . 

2 Chron. 35.  We read how Josiah going out to Battle was slain before Necho King of Egypt : Now Josiah was so good a King , so right-hearted toward his God , so Religious , and so zealous of his Honour , that it is generally concluded , He was slain not for His own , but for the sins of His People , insomuch that some conceive Jeremiah made his Lamentations with Order unto him . 

That Sovereign , whose Murder we this Day Commemorate , He was never so much Charles le Grand , as He was le Bon. He was never so Great as he was Good , He was ( to say no more ) as Gold tried in the Fire , exact and pure ; or , as Saul for height , even so , He for Piety was far above his brethren : and yet even He could not stand before His Enemies ! The Lord went not out with His Armies , He fell , as did good Josiah before the Uncircumcized : And why so ? Was it for want of Valour ? or Prudence ? or Skill in Feats of War ? no , He had all these ! what then ? Truly it was , because the Sins of His Party fought stronger against Heaven , than their Arms could do against the Rebels ! The loud Volley of Oaths discharged against God Himself ! The Drink Offerings of the Mighty ! The Rapine , Plunders , and abominable Exactions done in his Name ! This made our King miscarry , this prevented God , from going out with our Hosts ; These Achans' so troubled our Israel , that as God the Son , King of the Jews , was smitten , wounded and slain for the Transgressions of His People ; Even so the Transgressions of His People , the sin of his Three full , and flourishing Kingdoms , these were the Provocations , and these a great cause , why God took away so great a blessing , and delivered into Bloody Hands so innocent a KING . 

1 Sam. 12. 25 , If ye shall do wickedly , ye shall be consumed , both ye and your King. It is not said if ye and your King do wickedly , then shall both be destroyed ; but it is only said , If ye shall do wickedly , yet both ye and your King shall be consumed . 

Whence it clearly appears to me , that the provocation of a people , and the sins of a Nation they may , and oft have a great influence upon the death of a King , and that a King may be taken away , not so much for his own , as for their Transgressions . 

And therefore I beseech you all in the name and fear of God ; if it only be that you may live peaceably and plentifully , and every man sit quietly under his own vine , and comfortably eat the fruit of his own labours , let us therefore forbear any longer to provoke our God : Forasmuch as swearing , and whoring , and drinking , profane and ungodly Riots ; Forasmuch as doing wickedly may again provoke God to consume both us and our King : let us upon this day of solemn Humiliation and Fasting , for the glory of our God , for the safety of our King , for that sad share which we contributed toward this so foul a murder : let us sow in tears that we may reap in joy : let us henceforth abhor , at least those sins which gave the Rebellious an advantage ! those sins which gave occasion to the Enemies of the Lord for to blaspheme and to say , the King's Friends they were only Libertines , Papists , Atheists , horrible Swearers , and Blasphemers , Enemies to God and the power of Godliness . 

I beseech you for God's sake , that all who profess Loyalty , may profess piety ; that Fear God and honour the King may be as close in our hearts , as we find they stand together in the Book of God ; and then I am sure we shall ever prevent this first guilt , the provoking of God to take away , or to permit the murder of our King.  

Secondly , A second consequential Consent , or previous disposition to the destruction of Gods Anointed , it was The deserting of him . Non obstans , the not preventing , the not bindring of it , whilst yet it was in our power . And this is an undoubted way of contracting guilt from the sin of others : he who hinders not what he may , and where he is bound , doubtless he is volitum in causa , of what effect followeth upon this culpable neglect . As for instance , he who stands or sits before a window , thorough which the wind blows and the snow or rain beats , if he will neither remove thence , nor pull to the casement , he is undoubtedly a consenter to his own wetting , and a consequential willer of his own cold-taking : for he both might and ought to have prevented it . That Father or Mother , who by a timely and seasonable correction might have kept their children from lewd and vile courses , and have not endeavoured it ; such parents they have a guilt even in their transgressions , even in the misdemeanours of such children . 

For , 1 Sam. 3. you shall find God threatens a judgement upon old Eli , because his sons made themselves vile , and he restrained them not : because old Eli hindered not when he might , the Lord imputeth a portion of his son's sin even unto him : Now to apply this to our present purpose . 

First , Had the people of this Nation kept close and conscientiously to their Allegiance and their Oaths , there had been no Rising ; had they kept those cazements as they were , close shut , the Tempest of War and the Storms of Blood had never broken in ; yea , had they clapped them to , when they first opened there had been an end . For , ( to speak in the phrase of our Royal Martyr ) When the Devil of Rebellion first turned himself into an Angel of Reformation : Whilst yet the Religious Mask of the Godly Party had but one Presbyterian Face to cover , the Vizard might easily have been knocked off , before numerous Faces , and many Factions appeared under at first but one godly Hood , before the Prince of Darkness transformed himself into an whole Firmament of New Lights , the King ( in the right sense ) might have been secured : For at first what Elisha said to his Servant , was with us most true ; There was more for us than was against us , more for than against the King. But with a Non Obstante ; for not using the means and power they had , for not preferring a public and Royal Interest before their own ; by omitting the duty , which Oaths and Allegiance obliged to , we betrayed our Sovereign , and by not restraining and Helping when we might , we became Volitum in Causa , even upon this account consequentially guilty even of our Sovereign's Blood.  

We cannot but know , how it was the common Alarm of every factious Trumpet , the Vulgar Theme of every Rebellious Pulpit ! Curse ye Meroz , saith the Angel of the Lord , curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof , because they come not to the Help of the Lord , to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty . Judg. 5. 23.  

Now if our Adversaries Judges ( to speak in their own words , and out of one of their Catechisms ) Neuters are Directly under that fearful Curse , which the Angel of the Lord denounced against Merosh , Rom. pag. 7.  I say then , if they who came not out and defended their Rebellious Cause ; if the Mighty for not fight against the Almighty in the Cause of His Anointed , deserved a Curse , and were ( as they affirm ) Directly under that fearful execration which the Angel of the Lord denounced . 

Certainly then a fortiori ; Those who were wanting in a far better Cause ; Those who deserted their Sovereign , those who came not out to the Help of Him , whom by the Oath of God they were bound to succour , those who to save their own Penny , cared not to see him lose his Crown ! These for not using the power and means they had , though they did not spill , they betrayed his blood ; and though they were not direct Consenters , yet they were direct strengtheners of their Hands who did it . 

Now if it be so , That the Son of Man , when in the Person of a King sitting upon his Throne of rich Glory , He shall pass an everlasting curse upon the sins of Omission , that is , upon such who Relieved him not , no not in His poorest Members : if for not seeding the Hungry , for not clothing the Naked , for not visiting the imprisoned , if for omitting Acts of Charity Christ shall Denounce the sad Sentence of everlasting Fire ; certainly then , Subjects omitting Acts of Justice , Subjects not doing their bounden duties , Subjects neglecting the King of Glory in his Chief , and most immediate Deputy , the Lords anointed : they have a great deal of cause to fear , and grieve , and pray , that even this Grand Omission , and this great failing may be forgiven to Them : For , he who hinders not when he may , and when he is bound , cannot but be guilty of the Blood he might have saved , and of that sin , which he both should and might have prevented . And therefore , whether we respect our Provocations of God Almighty by our Personal misdoing , or the Omission of our Duty by our not doing , in both respects the most of us have been consequential Consenters , and contradicted guilt enough to be this day humbled , and beg God's pardon , though not for the Murder , yet for the slaughter of our King. And so I have done with the first Proposition , to wit , How a Man may be guilty of that sin in which he was no actor , by being ( as you have heard ) a consequential Consenter to it . We shall now therefore pass to the Second . 

II That is , to prove and show , How a guilt may be postnate unto a Fact , for after the stoning of Saint Stephen it is observed , and not before , That Saul was consenting to His Death . 

In the last Verse of the preceding Chapter it is written , when St. Stephen had kneeled down and prayed for his Enemies , He fell asleep , so that Dead he was before these words were added , And Saul was consenting , etc.  

Now , Two Ways I shall observe how Gild may come in at the back Door , and be postnate unto the Fact. 1.  By applauding the Deed , by commending , liking and joying in it . 2dly . By partaking in the Advantages , and by a Tacit Desire rather the Act should be done , than they want the Benefit and the Rest they have got by it . 

First , He who applauds , commends , likes and joys in a foul Transaction , he is a Consenter to it . 

Qui laudat obscoenum , perpetrat illud . He who praiseth a piece of obscenity , he acts it , saith the Arabians . And indeed Consent and Commendation they are so nigh Related , that we never heartily commend what we like not , and so alike , are Consent and Liking , that they are not easily distinguished ; for as He who frowns , or turns his Ear from a seeming witty piece of lewdness , in so doing checks it ; even so He who laughs , and smiles , and seems pleased with it , so far as he is pleased , so far he is a Consenter to it . And therefore St. Paul condemns the impure Gnostics even upon This account , that they were not only vile themselves , but they also took pleasure in them that did such things , Rom. 1. 32.  And indeed Saint Paul's sin here , according to the Original , it seems only a complacency and a liking , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and therefore as in lust , even so it is in point of Blood ; He who applauds the Murder , He who is glad 't is done , He who praises and honours the Doers of it , ( though he had no Hand in the doing of it ) hath a Consenting Heart to the Deed done , and is in the Eye of the Just God , Guilty of it ! For indeed there is no Body joys , and praises , and is glad to hear any Thing is done , but if he durst , even he himself would have done it . Doubtless Saul in my Text , though casually he was only a Consenter , he could as willingly have been an Aider or Assistant to St. Stephen's death . 

In the Case of King Ahab and poor Naboth , we do not read that Ahab had any intelligence or inkling given him of Jesabel's bloody design ; all was acted and done , the High Court of justice had sped their villainy , and dispatched the Innocent before he knew it ; and yet for all that , the Prophet is sent to arrest and charge him guilty of plain Murder , Occidisti , thou hast killed . Now I pray how could he be guilty of a death he knew not of , of a Murder done altogether unknown to him ? Truly if you search the Story , you shall find it only was by a postnate Consent , by a liking , and approving , and joying what Jesabel had done . There is a Story of one Lucius Carpentus who having killed Nicanor , by running him thorough , his Page who deadly hated him , after his Master had dispatched him , he to show his well-liking of the fact , thrust in his Master's Sword deeper into the dead Heart . Now though the Page could not possibly kill him again , yet he by thus doing , and thus confirming and approving what his Master had done , he became a Murderer as well as his Master . 

It is very well known the Lord of Glory , Christ Jesus our Spiritual King , He can die no more , Death can have no more Dominion over him , Heb. 6. 6. and yet Saint Paul expressly saith , They who fall away , that is , such as fall off from the Faith of Him , They crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh : So that at this very day to say as the Jews did and do , That Christ was an Impostor , that He was a Deceiver , that He was justly arraigned , condemned , and crucified ; This is by a postnate Consent to render us guilty of his Blood , and to crucify asresh the Lord of Glory : This is to Thrust the Nails into his Hands and Feet again , this is ( as the Page did his Master's Sword ) to run the Soldier's Spear into his Heart again ! 

Now as Ahab by approving what Jesabel had done ; The Page by confirming what his Master Carpentus had acted , the Apostates by owning and commending what the Jews did ; Are all by postnate Consents , guilty of the several Murders acted to their Hands ; even so , of the cruel and barbarous Murder of our King ( our King of most blessed and happy Memory ) they must all be as was Saul to the Death of Stephen , Consenters ; who either rejoiced at his Death , applauded the deed , or so far countenance the Villainy , as to slander the Foot steps of Gods anointed , to justify his arraignment ! or who dared in their Hearts to say He suffered as a Tyrant , a Traitor , and a Murderer . 

Psalm . 10. 3.  The vulgar Latin thus renders it . Quoniam laudatur peccator in Desideriis Animae suae , & iniquus benedicitur , etc.  Because the sinner is praised in the desires of his Soul , and the unjust Man is blessed , therefore is God exasperated . 

To call evil good , to praise the desires of the wicked , to bless the unjust , this is a ready way to contract a share in their Iniquity . 

Acts 12. 22.  When Herod making a blasphemous Oration had the People's applause for it ; this their praise was a sinful consenting to , and an owning of his Blasphemy . 

Verse 3.  The Jews being pleased that Herod killed James , by this became involved in the blood of James : and Saul in my Text , by Countenancing the Executioners , and such as did , became himself a guilty Consenter to St. Stephen's Death . 

Those then , who when our blessed King was Murdered , stuck not to say , now was our Achan , the troubler of Israel taken out of the way ; those who to blind the indisputable Villainy , Perjury and Treason of those desperately wicked , who dared to Murder the Lords Anointed : Those ( I say ) who to palliate and justify their abominations , laid all the Blood and Gild and mischief upon the Innocent , upon their suffering and Martyred King ; those who cried him down , as Caput Malignantium , the head of Tyranny ! but cried up his Persecutors as the Saints of the Earth ! Those who laid His Honour in the Dust , but advanced theirs to the Highest Heavens , those who did thus justify the wicked , trample upon and condemn the righteous ; they did more than Saul in my Text : for he only kept what Clotheses they had ; but these , they clothed the Murderers with Majesty and Honour , and therefore if Saul for suffering the Clotheses of the Executioners to lie at his feet was a Consenter to St. Stephen's death : these who did dare to trample upon their Dead Sovereign , and to put His Robes and Righteousness upon the King-killers ▪ those who did dare to call the Usurper , David ; and his Son , Solomon : their lawful Sovereign , Tarquin , or Charles Stewart ! But the Seed of the Rebellious , His Highness , the Joy of the Nation , and the Healer of our Breaches ! They must needs be deeper in guilt than was Saul , and therefore Consenters , because such Countenancers of his death ! amongst us Men , we doubt not for to say , he who really intends , but is prevented for acting , is for all that guilty of his designed mischief . 

Those 40. who bound themselves under a Curse , not to eat or drink till they had killed the Consenter in my Text , Acts 23. 12. till they had killed Paul , though Paul was rescued , yet they were guilty ; for they had already committed Murder in their hearts . The Husbandmen who said among themselves — This is the Heir , come let us kill him ? Math. 21. 28.  They were guilty even from that very moment ; and doubtless that ungracious Son , Patrios qui inquirit in Annos — who wishes his Father's death , that he may have his Lands , he hath already killed him as far as he dares . 

Now as an Intention before the act , even so , a Complacency , and well-liking of the Thing done , are proportionable guilts , both Consenters , one to the doing , the other to the deed done ; both guilty before the just God. They who wished the King's death , but did nothing toward it ; They who were glad it was done , but had no hand in doing of it , In Uno Tertio Conveniunt , they both meet in this guilt , they are Consenters to his death . 

Acts 3. 15.  Though the people of the Jews did no more But only consent unto the Sentence and Judgement of their Magistrates , St. Peter charges the whole Nation , saying , Authorem Vitae interfecistis , ye have killed the Prince of Life . 

After his Sentence and Condemnation , some ( who perchance were not at his Trial ) were at his Passion or Execution . Now if they who gave no consent toward his death , did , whilst yet dying , or dead , revile , mock or deride him , if they were in their number who when he was dead , said to Pilate , Sir , This Impostor , or this Deceiver , said thus or thus ; This derision , this scornful joy , and this reviling of him dead , made them also Consenters , and guilty of his death . 

Those then , whose foul Hearts have yet an evil Eye , those who call Murderers , Martyrs ; and Unrighteous Judges , The Beloved of the Lord ! Those who love to detract , and to hear Him Lessened who was the greatest Loss that ever Our Three Kingdoms suffered ! Such , because they cannot wash their Hands in innocence , they ought to wash their Hearts in penitence ; for what Subject soever doth not perfectly abhor , he is in some measure a liker , and and so a kind of Consenter to his death ; either by applauding the Doers , or by a tacit commending , liking , and joying in the deed . 

Lastly , As by applauding the Actors , commending , liking , or joying in the Act , there is a culpable Consent contracted , Numb . 16. 26. even so by partaking in the Advantages , in the Rapine and ill-gotten goods issuing from that death , there is a sinful and wicked Consent involved . Cui prodest scelus is fecit . 

1 Kings 21.  When Jesabel had dispatched poor Naboth , had Ahab abhorred the Vineyard , had Ahab took no possession , had not Ahab entered upon his Inheritance , we might then have justly thought Naboths death had been wholly Jesabels' , not at all his william But when we find that he who was Sick while Naboth lived , was instantly Recovered when Naboth was dead ; when we find how that Ahab as to an Inheritance new fallen , hastens to possess what Blood and Murder gave him Title to : This is a clear demonstration his content was full , and he must needs be a Consenter to his death . 

In the crucifying and murdering of the Son of God , the first Motive to a Consult or Consent , it was the Inheritance , Matth. 21. 28.  This is the Heir , let us kill him that the Inheritance may be ours . Now as he who killeth for an Inheritance , continues on him the guilt of that Blood so long as he enjoyeth that Inheritance , that being the design and compliment of his Murder . Even so , Qui Ratum habet factum , He who approves a Murder done in his Name , and manifesteth that approbation by sharing in the prey , and the advantages of that Murder , he by Ratification makes the deed his own ; and as oft as he makes a beneficial use of that Blood , Blood toucheth Blood , and he is a Consenter in that Blood.  

Now the Murder which at This Time we are to be humbled for , the execrable Beheading of Gods Anointed , it was done in Our Name , the Cursed and Illegal Indictment it was drawn up in the Name of The People of England . Now if in Law , Qui ratum habet factum Mandanti aequiparatur . If he who approves a mischief done in his Name , and for his Interest , is looked upon as a Commander of it : Certainly then whosoever hath not disowned , or is so far from disowning , that he shall make a beneficial and glad use of this Murder , he thereby so ratifies , that he owns the Mischief , and as Ahab at Naboths death , is very well pleased and content the deed was done . 

amongst us men we cannot measure Intentions but only by outward proofs ; but the Seer of all Secrets , He who shall judge the World even for the abstrusest Crimes , He shall judge according to the Bosom , and the hidden Influence , according to those like and thoughts of heart which we have , but perchance fear or shame to discover . 

As for instance , They who would rather a King should lose his Head , than they the Crown Land ; loose all His Majesty and Honour , than they their present Justiceship and Power ; they who would rather the Son of God should be crucified a fresh , than they part with their sins : Such in the sight of our Just and Allseeing God , they are liable to these deaths , and shall be sadly accountable for the guilt of them . 

It is not yet so long , but we may very well remember those who did this foul deed , they made it their work to draw in as many Consenters as possible . For , first there was a Subscription , than there was an Engagement , than a Recognition , all tending to the Ratification of this Murder . A Sanhedrim or Council there was of Forty , a Readmission to the House ; but none might have this Privilege or Honour , but he must first subscribe ; places of Trust , Pensions , other men's good livings , Promotions , and Offices of profit , none might have without an Engagement against King and Lords : Yea the Capital Head of this Mischief , He for whose Rise the King was Ruined , must have a Recognition . 

Now put the Case thus . Suppose the Great Sultan , the Grand Signior , the Turk , had made a Conquest of this Nation , and would admit no Man to any place of Trust or Profit , no , nor to enjoy his own , unless he would subscribe that the Jews did well in putting their King and Sovereign to Death ! I beseech you lay your hands upon your hearts , and seriously judge , if this subscription were not ( let the mental Reservation be what it may ) a sensible Ratification , or a Consenting to his Death . 

Now if so , how shall they avoid , the being at least seeming Consenters to the death and blood of our dread blessed Sovereign , who merely to feed their ambition , and to become what they were never bred nor Born to , Lord's over their brethren , and Controulers of all about them , subscribed the guilt , and greedily shared , either in the power , authority , or revenue , which was all his ; for if we justly charge the Pope for being a guilty Consenter to stews and Brothel-houses , because he takes a Salary and Revenue from them ; or , if we justly say , they who eat of the Sacrifice , though they never come at the Shrine , are guilty Consenters to the Idolatry ! certainly in like and equitable proportion , those who have been partakers in any of the Royal Ruins ! Those who have cemented their Fortunes with the King's Blood , and have secretly deprecated and prayed against the Return of any of His ; these , though they may and have avoided the Law , they have yet a God to reckon with , before whom such a Consenter shall not dare to pled net guilty , but how deep in guilt that must be our last considerable , in which I promised to show . 

III Consent may contract so deep a guilt , that without hearty confession , and an unfeigned contrition , it may hale the vengeance of an actor upon the Consenters head . 

The Senses , the Members , and all the Natural actions and performances of the Body , they are indeterminately considered indifferent ; they are in themselves nor good nor evil , it is our consent that makes them morally all they are , Rom. 6.  't is our consent that makes our members , as St. Paul speaks , servants either to uncleanness or holiness ; The eye of man it may be the instrument either of admiration or of lust ; yea , the very heart itself it may be the seat , either of Charity or Uncharitableness . 

If so be then we would apprehend how our state stands in Forobosco Interno , in the Court of Conscience and the eye of God , we must begin at Heart , and look within . 

David a good King could tell us , he had Subjects , the Words of whose Mouth were smother than Butter , Psal . 55. 21 , even then , when Warr was at the Heart ; their words were smother than Oil , yet were they drawn Swords . 

Men may appear , ( and our Martyred King sadly found it so ) like Saints and Angels , talking of nothing , but of Reformation , Religion in Purity , and the power of godliness ; when God knows within , their hearts were full of malice ; God not in all their thoughts , nor did they aim at any thing more , than Interest and Destruction ! 

Now albeit it so is , that Figg-leaves , and Sheep's clothing may blind the Eyes of Men , God will not , God cannot be so mocked ! Look what we are at heart , look what we are within , look what is consented to agreed on and concluded in the most secret Recesses of the Soul , by that God judgeth , and to that we shall stand or fall . 

Actus exterior nihil Malitiae addit interiori . The School well observes , though the outward act may be the Executioner , it cannot be the Author of any more mischief than what in the Soul is contrived and consented to ; so that consent is a complete guilt , and therefore I have showed you , Consent may make an Adulterer , and yet the body , not touch a Woman ; Malice may make a Murderer , and yet the hand do no Violence ; Soul may be guilty of the death of Stephen , and throw never a stone at him . 

The Point than is , how deep a guilt consent may be , and we shall find it deep enough to carry an impenitent soul to eternal sorrows . Psal . 50. 18.  When thou sawest a Thief than thou consentest with him . To consent but to a piece of Thievery ; it is guilt enough , yea guilt in such a measure , that it is numbered among those sins , for the which God threatens to Tear in Pieces without Deliverance : Now if a consent in theft may amount to this , certainly a consent in blood , and that blood heightened by the greatest circumstances incident to Blood , to wit , Majesty and Innocence ! A consent ( I say ) in the shedding of such blood , it must needs be aggravated , and indeed cannot be extenuated , but by the weakness , and the little measures of consent . 

1 Epist . of St. John , changed . 3. v. 15.  The beloved Disciple had no sooner said , Whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer ; But than he immediately adds , and no Murderer hath Eternal Life abiding in him . 

no Murderer . A learned Neoterick well upon that place observes Murder is committed — Non tantum occident is Manu , sed etiam odient is Animo — Homing n●● only by the Hand , but by the Mind ; so that even a mental Murderer ; a consenter , but no actor : a willer , but no doe● : he may be even fo● it in the state of damnation ! a Person in whom ( he so continuing ) the hope of Eternal Life is not . Evidence enough that Consent alone may involve in a deep guilt . 

What then Remains ? Truly this only , that where consent Once was , Contrition may for ever be . 

Saul in my Text , ( whilst yet Saul , whilst yet a Persecuter ) he made nothing of consenting , no not of putting a Saint to Death . But when he became a Convert , one of the first signal Testimonies he gives , is , the confession of his guilt contracted even at St. Stephen's death . 

Acts 22. 20.  Lord , when the Blood of thy Martyr ▪ Stephen was shed , I also was standing by and consenting to his Death , and kept the Raiment of them that slew him . When of a Saul he became a Paul , when his Soul was softened , and his Heart changed , behold him Vir Dolorum , a Man of Sorrows ; a Man whose very Soul is troubled for looking on , for standing by , for consenting , yea for that little countenance he gave in keeping the Raiment of them that stoned him . How much then , in the Name of God , ought every of us to be humbled and grieved for the Provocations by which we have moved God to permit this Villainy ! For our not doing in time what might have stopped this Blood ! For applauding the Doers ! For liking the Deed ! Or when for our own Interest and Advantage we have secretly rather wished it so than otherwise ! Did Time or Place serve , I might now do well to enforce this Argument from a bare Consent , to such a Full Consent as includes and implies Plotting , Counselling , Commanding , Contributing and Acting . For if a weak postnate and bare Consent may ( as ye have heard ) contract a guilt , certainly then as Consents have been heightened , so must needs the guilt . Those who have made it their work to prepare the way for so foul a Murder , those who preached and printed down their King for a Madman or a Fool , comparing him to a Pilot whose endeavour was to sink his Ship , and to a General who planted his Ordinance against his own Army , that so he might be ( as he was ) first disarmed . Those who made it their work to run about with slanders , and spread lying disparagements throughout the Nation , only to weaken the Repute , and make their King despicable . Those who to save themselves , laid all their own guilt upon his shoulders . And those , who when He had for peace-sake owned the Debts which he never contracted , and was content to preface a Treaty of Peace with his own Infamy : Those I say who took this advantage for a Confession , and grounded all their closer Machinations of his Death upon this Bottom . 

These , and every of these , are Actors in so sad a guilt , that it behoves such , not only as did David ( for the murdering of a Subject only ) go mourning all the day long ; but they ought to do so all their lives long , praying and praying again , yea they ought to importune others to pray both with them and for them , that their foul Hearts may happily be cleansed in That KING'S Blood which is only able to wash off This Kings Blood.  

In a word to close all . It is observed of St. Paul , that after he became a Convert , and of the Right Side , after he was truly sensible of the Dishonour done to his King then in glory ; None of all his most Faithful Adherents outdid him in Pains and Diligence for the Recovery and Advance of the Glory of his Master : for now we find him at that pitch , that he professeth to value Nothing like to it , saying , God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ , Gal. 6. 14. and , I determined not to know any thing among you , save Jesus Christ and Himulco crucified , 1 Cor. 2. 2.  

All then I shall add , is , That we also express our Penitence , as St. Paul did , by a most loyal and double diligence , that so our King who died a Martyr , may be found a Prophet also , for in those excellent Meditations ( fit to be read and perused upon this Day ) He tells his Son ▪ His penitent Rebels , Those that Repent of any Defects in their Duties toward him , them should he find truly zealous to repay with Interest their Loyalty and Love : and the good God grant they may ; and that not only they , but even all we , duly considering whose Authority the King hath , may so faithfully serve , and humbly obey him in God , and for God , that God may be a God of peace to us , and to our Children , even from Generation to Generation ! 

These , OH God , and all other Blessings in thy Wisdom known expedient even for our Eternal Welfare , we humbly beg , even for His sake who was a King murdered by His Subjects , even Jesus Christ the Righteous : To whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost be all Honour and Glory now and for ever . AMEN . 

Deo soli sit omnis gloria . 

FINIS . 

