Humours Heaven on Earth ; With The Civil Wars of Death and Fortune . 

As also The Triumph of Death : Or , The Picture of the Plague , according to the Life ; as it was in Anno Domini . 1603.  

By john Davies of Hereford . 

O! 't is a sacred kind of Excellence , 
That hides a rich truth in a Tales pretence ! 


Printed at London by A. I 1609.  



¶ To the right Noble , Algernon , Lord Percy , son and heir apparent to the right Honourable Henry Earl of Northumberland . 

Thrice Noble , and more hopeful Pupil I 
( Who learns thy Hand to show thy Heart's conceits 
Would make thy heart , before it Vice doth try , 
To know her Lures , to shun her sly deceits . 
But , in the Prime but of thy Pupillage 
Before the joints of judgement can be knit , 
( Although for Wit thou may'st be Wisdom's Page ) 
Vice throws her Lures above thy reach of Wit. 
But yet when Time shall throughly close thy Mould , 
Wherein all rare Conceits still cast shall be , 
then shalt thou ( with clear eyes ) dark lines behold , 
That lead thee to all knowledge fit for thee . 
And , sith that Childhood more in Tales delights 
then saddest Truths ; I 'll tell thee merry Tales , 
Of Lords and Ladies , with their merry Knights , 
Their merry Blisses , and their sorry Bales . 
The outside of these Tales are painted o'er 
With colours rich , to please thine eager sense ; 
But , lined with naked Truth ( yet richly poor ) 
more fit for thy more rich Intelligence . 
When thou canst crack this Nut , within the Shell 
thou shalt a Kernel find will please thy Taste ; 
The Palate of thy Wit will like it well , 
When thou shalt swallow it , for joy , in haste . 
then make this Nut a whirligig the while , 
To make thee merry ( if thou canst be so ) 
To see the turning of our Sports to toil , 
Wherein observe how pleasures come and go : 
For , as a whirligig doth turn so fast , 
That sharpest sights the fruit do scarce perceive : 
So can no Palate fruits of Pleasure taste 
When they are come , so soon they take their leave ! 
Read● little Lord , this Riddle learn to reed ; 
So , first appose ; then , tell it to thy Pecres : 
So shall they hold thee ( both in Name and Deed ) 
A perfect Pierc-ey that in darkness clears . 
A Pierc-ey , or a piercing Eye doth sh●w 
Both Wit and Courage ; and , if thou wilt learn 
By moral Tales sins mortal to eschew , 
thou shalt be wise , and endless glory earn : 
That so thou may'st , the meanest Tutors praise ; 
So , Percies fame shall pierce the Eye of Days : 
then , by those Rays my Pen ( inflamed ) shall runn● 
Beyond the Moon , to make thy Moon a Sun ! 
Mean while , and ever , I rest pressed to honour thee with my poor uttermost , john Davies . 

To the good Knight , and my much honoured Scholar , Sir Philip Carey . 

Sigh Death ( dear Sir ) hath lately been so fell , 
To reave that life , than dear life dearer far ; 
This record of his greater rage may quell 
The less ( perhaps ) in your particular . 
fain would I ( if I could ) beguile your grief , 
With telling you of others heavy harms : 
But ( ah ) such guile gives Grief too true relief , 
In your true human heart , that Pity warms . 
Life is a Plague : for , who doth live , must die ; 
Yet some that have the Plague , do scape alive , 
So life more mortal than Mortality : 
then sith that life ( like death ) doth life deprive , 
You may rejoice , sith your Adolphus lived , 
True Virtue's life , which cannot be deprived . 
Vivat post funera virtus . 
As much grieved for your loss , as glad any way to show his love . john Davies . 

To the right worshipful my dear Scholar Sir Humphrey Baskervile of Earsley , Knight : And the no less lovely than virtuous Lady his Wife . 

Sigh I am Lecturing my noblest Scholars , 
( You being two ) this Lecture deign to read ; 
For though it treats of naught but death & dollars , 
Yet it with pleasure may your passion feed : 
For , plagues to see ( unplagued ) doth Nature please , 
Although good nature ( gladly ) grieves thereat ; 
As we are well-ill pleased to see at Seas 
The woefull'st wrack , while we are safe from that . 
In health to tell what sickness we have passed , 
Makes us more sound ; for , Gladness health defends : 
OH than your eyes on this Plagues-picture cast 
To glad and grieve you for glad-grievous ends . 
But my sole End by this poor Mean to ye , 
Is but to tie your Ears , and Hearts to me , 
john Davies . 

To my dear , meek , modest , and entirely beloved Mistress Elizabeth Dutton , Mistress Mary , and Mistress Vere Egerton , three Sisters of hopeful destinies , be all Grace and good Fortune . 

Sigh on my worthiest Scholars I do muse , 
How should my Muse to mind you once neglect , 
sith you are such ? Than , such she should abuse , 
Should she not use you with all dear respect . 
thou virgin Widow ( elder of the Three ) 
( That hold'st thy widow's state , of Death in chief ) 
Death in thy youth ( being fast ) hath made thee free ; 
Free from thy joy , & fastened thee to Grief . 
But he that is the Lord of lordly Death , 
Reserves thine honoured Sires most honoured Sire 
From Death's despite ; & while he draweth breath , 
thou ( lowly Soul ) art likely to aspire . 
Thy Sisters ( like in Nature , as in Name , 
And both in Name and Nature naught but good ) 
( Beloved Pupils ) well may hope the same , 
sith of like grace there is like likelihood . 
Yet in the height of Earth's felicity , 
A meek regard unto this Picture give , 
To mind you so of life's mortality , 
So shall you live to die , and die to live . 
Mean while I hope , through your clear Stars to spy 
A Trinity of Ladies ere I die . 
He which ( for the exercise of your high humility ) you please to call Master john Davies . 

To my worthy , and worthily beloved Scholar , Thomas Bodenham Esquire , son and heir apparent of Sir Roger Bodenham of Rotherwas , Knight of the Bath . 

And , if among them that are dear to me , 
( Remembered by my Pen , my Muse's Tongue , ) 
I should forget to show my love to thee , 
Myself , but much more thee , I so should wrong . 
Nay , wrong the right which I to thee do own : 
But never shall my love so guileful prove , 
As not to pay thee so deserved a due ; 
For , I confess thou well deservest my love . 
thou wert my Scholar ; and if I should teach 
So good a Pupil such a Lesson ill 
( By mine example ) I might so impeach 
Mine honest fame , and quite disgrace my skill : 
But when I learn thee such detested Lore , 
then loathe my love , and learn of me no more . 
Yours , as what 's most yours , john Davies . 

The last Book ( being a Picture according to the Life ) dedicated To the no less high in Birth , then honourable in Disposition ( right noble in either ) the Lady Dorothy , and Lady Lucy Percies . 

Great-little Ladies , greatly might you blame 
My little care of doing as I ought , 
Should I neglect to set your noble Name , 
First of those Principals whose hands I taught . 
Yet , the more high your Birth and Places are , 
The more ye ought to mind the blast of Breath : 
As Philip's Page did show his Master's care , 
When most he flourished , most to think on death ! 
then , with most bliss , when you transported be , 
Look on this Picture ; so , perceive ye shall , 
We fall , like Leaves , in Autumn from the Tree , 
When Heaven puffs at Excess in general : 
But from all woes excess I wish ye may 
( Through Heaven on Earth ) to heaven the easiest way ! 
Your Ladyship's unworthy Tutor , john Davies . 

To my beloved Master , john Davies . 

When I thy Reasons weigh , & meat thy Rhymes , 
I find they have such happy weight and measure , 
As makes thy Lines extend to Aftertimes , 
To lead them to a Mass of Wisdom's Treasure . 
With weighty Matter so thou loadest thy Lines , 
As to dim sights they oft seem dark as Hell ; 
But those clear eyes that see their deep designs , 
Do joy to see much Matter couched so well ! 
But these thy Numbers most familiar be ; 
Because strange Matter plainly they recount : 
For which Men shall familiar be with thee 
That know thee not ; and , make thy fame to mount . 
I know no Tongues-man more doth grace his Tongue 
With more material Lines , as straight as strong ! 
Edelbert : Sharphell . 

To mine entirely beloved , Master john Davies of Hereford . 

IN all thy writings thou hast such a Vain , 
As but thyself thy self canst counterfeit ; 
Which , lying far beyond the vulgar strain , 
Is harder well to open , then to get . 
Few idle words thou hast to answer for 
In all thy works ; but , thou dost merit much 
( Nay supererogate ) who dost abhor 
Superfluous words , though thine be over-rich ! 
Both Words and Matter do so well agree , 
To glorify themselves in either kind , 
That we must needs renown both them , and thee , 
Who nearly sought ( for us ) the same to find : 
Thy Numbers flow from such a Minds excess 
As all seem Raptures , in all happiness ! 
Ro : Cox.  

To the Reader in praise of the Author . 

IN every Tale which scarffed Truth contains , 
We must that Truth unmask to see her face : 
Else see we but the half the Tale retains ; 
then such ( how ever well told ) lose half their grace . 
But these are Tales , which ( though their truth be masked ) 
Tickle the itching'st Ears with witching Touches ; 
And so such Ears to listen still are tasked , 
By subtle clawing , that such Ears bewitches . 
Canst thou but Riddles read , and not aread ? 
These Riddles high ( well read ) stoop to thy reason : 
That though they fat not Wit , yet Will they feed 
With Wits pure Salt , that Wits fresh-sweetes doth season : 
The Fiction is for gladdest Will as fit , 
As is the Moral for the saddest Wit.  
Anth : Greys . 

Humours Heaven on Earth . 

1 

Upon a time ( thus old wife's Tales begin , 
then listen Lordings to an old wife's Tale ) 
There were three men , that were , & were not kin , 
( Reed me this Riddle ) at the Wine or Ale , 
Did strive who most should grace the dearest Sin , 
For which the daintiest Souls are set to sale : 
For Souls that are most delicate for Sense , 
'Gainst stings of honeyed sins have least defence . 
2 

The first ( for first I 'll tell you either's name 
To show their natures ) height Poliphagus : 
A greasy guts , of most unweldie frame ; 
The second named was Epithymus : 
Light as a feather , apt to lightest game : 
The third and last , height Hyselophronus ; 
That still looked on himself , as if he saw 
That which the Gods did love , and Men did awe . 
3 

Nor is it utterly impertinent 
Unto the matter subject , to describe 
The Weeds they beware , which were as different , 
As was their Names , their Natures , & their Tribe ; 
The Habit showeth how the heart is bend : 
For , still the Heart the Habit doth prescribe : 
And no external signs can more bewray 
The inwardest Affects then garments may . 
4 

Poliphagus a Suit of Satin ware , 
Made wide and side ; and yet his sides did swell , 
So that his Truss did coverscarse the bare , 
And so his Panch ( an homely Tale to tell ) 
Was filled with filth , that every stitch did stare 
Of that which cased it ; and of grease did smell : 
Which so re-glosst the Satins gloss , that it 
Was varnished like their veils that turn the Spit . 
5 

His Buttons and the Holes , that held them fast , 
His brestmade still to strive which best could hold 
But yet that breast made one another braced , 
And so itself did swell as burst it would ; 
Who was some two else compass in the waste , 
And had not seen his knees since two days old : 
no Points he used ; whose bum and Belly burst , 
Held up his Slops , as straight as they were trusst . 
6 

A pair of buttoned Buskins cased his Legs , 
Which were all Calf from Hams unto the Heel ; 
And after him ( like clogs ) the same he dregss : 
His Shoes were lined , that he no cold might feele● 
The Soles whereof thick Cork asunder gegs , 
Made broad ( without Indents ) lest he might reel : 
And over all , he beware a slabberd Gown , 
Which cloaked his Buttocks hugely overgrown ! 
7 

Thus have we cased the Sloven , save the Head ; 
And wittingly we do the same forbear ; 
Because his Shoulders stood in his Heads stead , 
Which hardly did above their pitch appear : 
The lump of flesh was all so overfed , 
As he no man , but some Behemoth were : 
For they whose joy is all in drink and meat , 
Though mean they be , they needs must be too great 
8 

Epithymus ( the wanton ) on his Crown , 
A Crown of Roses beware lasciviously ; 
A falling Band of Cutwork ( richly sown ) 
Did his broad Shoulders quite ore-canopy : 
A waistcoat wrought with flowers ( as they had grown ) 
In coloured silk , lay open to the eye : 
And , as his Bosom was unbuttoned quite , 
So were his Points , untrusst for ends too light ! 
9 

His Doublet was Carnation , cut with green 
Rich Taffetas , quite through in ample Cuts ; 
That so his Waistcoat might , each where be seen , 
When lusty Dames should eye this lusty Guts : 
And many Favours hung the Cuts between , 
And many more , more light , in them he shuts ! 
So that a vacant place was hardly found 
About this Fancy , so well-favoured round . 
10 

His Hose was French , and did his doublet suit , 
For Stuffe and Colour ; to which sowed there were 
Silk-stockings , which sat straight his thighs about , 
To make his leg and thigh more acquaint appear : 
Their colour was , as was the upper Suit , 
Save that the quirks with gold and gaudy gear 
Were so embosst , that as the Gallant goes , 
The gloss did light his feet to save his toes . 
11 

His Shoes were like to Sandals , for they were 
So carved above with many a curious Cut , 
That through the same the stocking did appear , 
And in the Lachets were such Ribbons put , 
As shadowed all the foot from Sun well near , 
Though , in Rose-forme , the ribbon up was shut : 
And to make up aright this Woman-man , 
He at his face still fenced with a fan . 
12 

But Hyselophronus unlike to him , 
Was richly clad , but much more grave it was ; 
For , he could not endure such colours trim , 
Yet used trim colours to bring drifts to pass : 
A Back too bright , doth argue Brains too dim : 
For , no such Ass as is the golden Ass : 
But he that State to catch , doth know the knack , 
Hides all his haughty thoughts in humble black . 
13 

His Hat was Beaver of a middle size , 
The Band , silke-sipers fourfold wreathed about : 
A shallow Cambric Ruff , with Sets precise , 
Closed with a buttoned string , that still hung out ; 
Wherewith he played , while he did Plots devose ; 
To gull the Multitude , and rule the Rout : 
His Suit was Satin , pinked , and laced thick , 
As fit , as fair , without each peevish trick . 
14 

His Cloak cloth-rash with velvet thoroughly lined , 
( As plain as Plainness ) without welt , or guard , 
To seem , thereby , to be as plain in Mind ; 
For , he to seem good , still had good regard : 
His rapier hilts were blacked , which brightly shined , 
A velvet Scobbard did that weapon ward : 
The Hangers and the Girdle richly wrought , 
With Silk of poorest colour , dear bought . 
15 

His Stockings ( suitable unto the same ) 
Were of black silk , and crosse-wise gartered : 
The Knot whereof a Roses form did frame , 
Which near the ham the sable leaves did spread : 
His Shoes were velvet , which his foot became , 
Thus was he clad , from foot unto the Head : 
Who still was still , as one of judgement stayed , 
Before he heard , and poised , what others said . 
16 

While first ( puft-panch ) Poliphagus bespoke , 
( But panted as he spoke for want of wind ; 
And at each word his fat for fear did quake , 
lest that winds want that fat should melt , or bind , 
OH that ( quoth he ) then reached to perbrake ) 
Man's Neck were like a Cranes , than should we find 
more pleasure in our meat & drink , because 
'T would longer pass , with pleasure to our maws . 
17 

Eating and Drinking sweetly eats up Time 
That eats up all ; then , feeding most of all 
We ought to love ; for , we are made of Slime ; 
then should we feed ( lest we to slime should fall ) 
That so our flesh , by fat , to fat should climb ; 
Fat Capons , Turkeys , Fezants we may call 
The Ladders to Perfection , and t' ascend 
By such Degrees , is man's perfections end . 
18 

Dear Taste ( quoth he ) the life of all my joy ) , 
Can they be blessed that say thou bredst our curse , 
When thou dost sweeten all our lives annoy , 
That else were Hell itself , or rather worse ? 
For my part , I esteem that Tale a Toy ; 
And think that Taste alone doth Nature nurse : 
If thou be Nature's Nurse , then say I dare , 
thou nursest That that makes us what we are . 
19 

Who are by nature Demigods at least ; 
Gramercies Taste , that mak'st us so to be : 
Man , but for thee , were far worse than a beast ; 
And , beasts were worse than nothing , but for thee : 
For , man , and beasts do toil but for the taste ; 
then if our taste should fail us , cursed were we : 
sith both are born to labour but for food ; 
That rather would offend ; then do us good . 
20 

The mouth , & Maw are Pleasures blissful Bowers , 
Where she lies dallying with her love Delight : 
The Maw ( Charibdis' which Delight devours ) 
Takes from the mouth what gives the members might ; 
Is That an Idol which such good procures ? 
Or should it not be served by Nature's right , 
That keeps frail Nature in her vital heat , 
That else would pine for want of tasting meat ? 
21 

O! taste , and see how sweet the Lord ; but why 
Do I enforce what forceless I esteem ? 
Yet , sith it 's held for written-veritie , 
I 'll suck sweet from that weed , and holy seem : 
The sou'raign'st sense , enthroned is in the Eye ; 
Yet Taste , this Truth ( if truth ) doth better deem : 
For , taste , and see , first taste , and after see , 
Implies that Taste , of Sight hath sovereignty . 
22 

OH 't is the Well from whence the Senses draw 
Their summum bonum ; sweetest , though short , delight : 
The right highway to Mirth , lies to the Maw ; 
The way to mirth that cheers the flesh , & spirit ; 
That warms the blood , & frozen hearts doth thaw , 
In spite of Nature , foiling Nature's spite : 
then , who distastes these sweet Lauds of the Taste , 
His Taste is senseless , and his Wits are waste . 
23 

Ask Proof , how all the Veins do flow with joy 
When as the Mouth takes in confected Sweets ; 
Or when the Palate doth her Powers employ 
To meet sweet Wines , which she with smacks regreets : 
What hart so faint , that them can fear annoy , 
Though Hell itself with all the Senses meets ? 
Give strong drink to the damned , & they 'll sustain , 
In Paines despite , with ease , the spite of Pain . 
24 

What Care can once but touch a merry hart , 
that 's merry made with precious blood of grapes ? 
And , who can choose but play a frolic part , 
That by strong Sack , from Sorrows sack escapes : 
Smart , them annoys that feel , or think on smart , 
But not those that with Wine are Pleasures rapes : 
For , while they gape to let in , out to run , 
They feel , & think on naught but Healths begun . 
25 

Thus did this gormandizing Epicure 
Insist in praise of That which Taste commends ; 
And , ( for wind labouring ) laboured past his power 
To make Man's gorge his god , for godless ends : 
When lo , Epithymus ( to make it sure ) 
In part approved his reasons ; yet he bends 
His power to prove the wenching practice part , 
To yield the joy which most affects the hart . 
26 

These Girls ( quoth he ) so they be fair , and young , 
Are they alone that most do ravish Sense ; 
For which , no less then for our food we long ; 
The Touch , being furthest from th' intelligence , 
With much more liberty , and joy among , 
Doth play her part to prove her excellence : 
It tickles all our veins with lustful pleasure , 
Which the mean while , hath neither mean nor measure . 
27 

What heart 's so cold that is not set on fire , 
With a trans-lucent beaming sunne-brightface ? 
But , of that face to have the hearts desire , 
The Heart cannot desire a greater grace : 
Who covets not bright Beauties golden wire , 
His Spirit is abject , and his thoughts are base : 
sith those wires wind about the turning thought , 
And tie it to rich pleasures dear bought . 
28 

Who meets with flesh that melts with tenderness , 
And melts not in Desires ay-burning flames ? 
Whose kisses , steeped in Sucket , Heaven do press 
From lips divine , too worthy for such names ; 
Can any Eyes look into Beauty's Press , 
And with her trimmest trinkets make no games ? 
no human Eyes ( I ween ) if crystalline , 
But joy to see themselves in Eyes divine . 
29 

To see a Body more than Lily-white , 
With azured veins embroidered here and there , 
To see this blissful Body naked quite , 
And to behold Loves Hold some other where , 
What Thing , with joy , can more entrance the sight , 
sith to the sight loves Heaven doth appear ? 
then add to this , a Look that saith approach , 
It will the Vessel of all Sweetness broach . 
30 

O! to embrace her that embraceth all 
That Beauty can embrace , is to enfold 
In mortal Arms , Arms supernatural , 
Of power both Gods and Men ( ensnared ) to hold ; 
And make them , as they please , to rise , or fall , 
Serving Loves Sovereign as Vassals should : 
For , Gods , and men do most obsequiously , 
By nature , serve divine Formosity . 
31 

He that o'erthrew what ere his strength withstood , 
And underpropt the weight of Heaven's frame , 
Love , made to spin in weak unmanly mood : 
And He , for wisdom , that had greatest fame , , 
Love so , with Lust , inflamed his coldest blood : 
That He a thousand had to quench the same 
For , no Age , Wisdom , Power , or Policy , 
Have power t' impugn divine Formosity ! 
32 

Ask Mars the stern and stubborn god of war , 
How much frail Beauty made him ( crouching ) bow : 
Nay ask ( if men may ask ) the Thunderer 
The highest of gods , by lordly Love brought low ) 
Why he did make his mansion in a Star , 
Yet fell from heaven an earthly Dame to know , 
But that both Gods and Men , most lowlily , 
By nature , serve divine Formosity ! 
33 

Give me a Wench that hath the skill , and wit , 
To let me ( lovesick ) blood in Lusts right vain ; 
And can , with pleasure , ease me in the fit , 
Yet ease me so , that Love may still complain 
Of heat , that is for Lust's life only fit , 
Which to the life of Love yields pleasant pain ; 
That can so humour me , and what I feel , 
That she may hurt me still , my hurt to heal . 
34 

Such a Crafts-mistris , in the Art of Love , 
Doth crown the Touch with an imperial kiss ; 
For , she makes Touching taste joy far above 
The reach of Art to tell men what it is : 
For feelinglie , she can both stay , and move 
About the Centre of Love's boundless bliss 
then boundless is the Touches excellence 
That , by a Lass , can so beheau'n the sense . 
35 

Thus did this Orator of Lechery 
Dilate the shortsweete of his life's delight ; 
Which , Hyselophronus did not deny , 
( As though quite opposite ) but bend his might , 
To prove highest bliss was born of Majesty ; 
begot by Potency , right or unright : 
The greatest joy to Greatness appertains 
For joy doth reign ( quoth he ) in that which reigns . 
36 

A royal Robe , a Sceptre , Mound , and Crown 
Are the true Signals of the truest joy : 
They need not fear the threat of Sorrows frown 
That can confound , all causers of annoy : 
The hand of Majesty puts up , and down 
The means of mirth , and those that mirth destroy : 
he 's a rare Clerk that R●gnum can decline 
And Meus , Mea , Meum ad in fine . 
37 

What Hart is not enlarged , with joy , as much 
As it can hold , when power is more enlarged 
Than Earth can hold ; or , on the same none such , 
When all by him , and he by none , is charged ? 
no not so much as with the smallest touch , 
Touching his life , lest such be life-discharged : 
It is the greatest glory of Man's state , 
When man , like God , doth reign in spite of Hate . 
38 

To eat and drink , and do the acts of lust , 
Is common unto Beasts , as well as Men ; 
What praise get they that do what needs they must ; 
But such as shames the praised now and then ? 
For , so may men be praised for deeds unjust , 
sith Men , by nature , wrong their brethren : 
But , to correct Men , with directing Rods , 
Is proper unto none but Demigods . 
39 

The Sphere of Greatness ( like the highest sphere , 
That turns the nether with resistlessesway ) 
Is the highest step to his Throne without Peer ; 
And , to the Sun that makes eternal day ; 
Where Bliss abounds an everlasting year , 
For which the most devout do inly pray : 
then , Greatness is the greatest good under heaven , 
Which unto none but Gods on Earth is given . 
40 

O! how it rapts the Eye of Majesty , 
To see all downcast underneath her feet ; 
That may , if please her , march upon the High , 
Till she with none , but with the Lowly meet : 
then , Wisdom's reach doth tend to Empery ; 
And none but fools neglect it as unmeete : 
It is the highest Note that Art can reach , 
To rule the voice when Sovereignty doth preach . 
41 

And what a glory is 't to mortal Man , 
That when he bends his high-erected front , 
Death in the folds doth play the Artezan , 
And kill , but with alooke , the highest Count : 
Yet , with a word ( like Him that all things can ) 
To create others , making them to mount ; 
then , who hath power all men to mar or make , 
Must be a God , that life doth give , and take . 
42 

A Seepter's Circe's Rod ; which Men and Beasts 
Doth easlie tame , how wild so ere they be : 
For , Birds that in the Stars do build their nests , 
far , far above all Birds , of prey do flee : 
To which pitch if they mount , they scorch their crests ; 
For , heat so high is in extreme degree : 
Highness is sacred , and the sacred High , 
With their powers wing above all perils fly ! 
43 

O! 't is a blissful glitt'ring glorious state , 
Able to make Mortality divine ; 
Which , with inspection , binds the hands of Fate , 
And , like the Sun , among the Stars doth shine , 
Till Nature doth the Flesh inanimate ; 
And in the mouths of Men men's fames enshrine : 
then , if in Earth be any divine thing , 
it 's more than God , if it be not a King.  
44 

Poliphagus , though he his Entrailss served , 
As if they were his Fancies Sovereigns , 
Or rather Gods , by which he was preserved , 
Yet he allowance to their fancy feigns ; 
That so fraternity might be conserved , 
Which concord , in conceit , together chains ; 
And , thus immod'rately doth moderate 
The difference of the doubtful Questions state . 
57 

But now , as wak'ned from a tedious sleep , 
* Logus , chief guide of * Psyche , their chief guide 
( While they were plunged in all pleasures deep ) 
Thus 'gan their sensuall-senslesse Souls to chide : 
whither , OH whither run ye , ye lost sheep , 
Not weighing in what danger ye abide ? 
The Blind eats many a fly ; and so do you , 
That chew sweet poison , which ye should eschew . 
58 

But ere we further prosecute her speech , 
We will describe their Garments ( as we may ) 
For as we said the Coat and Cut do teach . 
Sight to discern what mood the mind doth sway : 
Logus was clad , as could no State impeach , 
sith she was clothed with mean , though clean array : 
For , she with Garments far more fit , then fair , 
But safeguard sought from Passions of the Air . 
59 

But , Psyche ( whom she guided ) like a Qu●●ne 
Was richly decked , with ornaments divine : 
Who lived so closely that she scarce was seen , 
Yet through her Palace did her glory shine , 
As if at least she had a Goddess been ; 
Whose virtues were apparent to the Eine : 
Her Ornaments were Wit , Will , Memory , 
Which richly robed her with Regality . 
60 

Upon her sacred Head she beware a Crown 
( Like that of Ariadne's ) all of Stars , 
To light her feet in dark ways , and unknown , 
And keep the safest way in Passions wars ; 
Those Stars were royal virtues of her own 
( Which some call Cardinal ) her guard in jars : 
Who was decked inly with Power , Grace , and Art , 
Being wholly in the whole , and in each Part.  
61 

Her Understandings Power that Power did line , 
Which Heaven and Earth religiously adore ; 
And in her Will she beware Grace most divine , 
But in her Memory she Arts did store ; 
That made the Whole most gloriously to shine , 
But most divinely did those three decore ! 
Affects and Fantasies her Servants were , 
Which were all cloaked with Good , how ill so ere . 
62 

Her princely train , which was of works well wrought , 
Was born by judgement her chief Officer : 
then , Contemplation held her , as she ought , 
By the right Arm , so that she could not steer 
Fron those right ways , whereon before she thought : 
And double-diligence before did clear : 
The outward Senses her Purueiours were , 
To whom the Commonsense was Treasurer . 
63 

Thus were these two attended and arrayed , 
Which I have thus described by the way ; 
And now to prosecute what Logus said 
From thence where I before did make him stay ; 
Quoth he , what mean ye thus to be betrayed 
By sinful Sense , which seeks but your decay ? 
You are to seek to know her Fallacies , 
But know them not by seeking in this wise . 
64 

How near to temporal and eternal death 
You are ( God wot ) ye wot not , ne yet care ; 
Not weighing how worlds weal wastes with your breath , 
And that your breaths within your nostrils are ; 
Which to the Air you must of force bequeath , 
Perhaps forthwith , at least ere ye beware : 
If temp'rall death attach ye in this plight , 
Your temp'rall days will turn t'eternall night . 
65 

To young and old Death is indifferent ; 
The Court and Cottage he frequents alike : 
Yet , of the twain , he Court's doth more frequent ; 
And loves those , that do mind him least , to strike : 
He wounds the lustful , vain , and insolent 
With their own weapons , quickly to the quick : 
For , ever he doth envy life's delight , 
And makes the same most subject to his might . 
66 

How can vain pleasures please men , having sense 
To feel the sweet and sour of sin , and grace ? 
For , if they feel the sting of Conscience , 
All pleasures of the flesh will give it place : 
That grieves the Will , that grieves th' intelligence , 
Which take no pleasure in their own disgrace : 
But still the lusts offraile flesh to fulfil , 
Is to disgrace Intelligence , and William  
67 

The object of the Will is perfect Good ; 
Which , the Intelligence to her presents ; 
That never yet was found in royal food , 
In dainty Dames , or regal governments ; 
By Understanding these are understood 
To yield but short , and counterfeit Contents : 
If so they do , how mad are they the while , 
That give their precious Souls for things so vile ? 
68 

The wisest yet that ever breathed this Air 
( Of sinful race ) who in his wisdom's might 
Made proof of all that was sweet , great , or fair , 
Yea of all pleasures which the sense delight , ) 
Said of them all ( like Wisdoms truest Heir ) 
They were than scum of Vanity more light : 
If such great Wisdom found them to be such , 
They are much more them fools that love them much . 
69 

Ask every sense what pleasure they do prove 
In all their objects : they must needs reply , 
( sith conscience knows it ) naught to gain our love ; 
For , we love naught but what we good do try : 
But , Proof these pleasures do , in fine , reprove ; 
sith they no sooner live , but sooner die : 
For , Trial knowing them to be but vain , 
Kills their delight ere we it entertain . 
70 

And , Crowns are Hives , where stinging cares do swarm ; 
Pomp's but the White whereat fell Envy shoots : 
which are as trees , whence grows their owner's harm ; 
Harms are the fruit ; crowns , flours ; & kingdons , roots : 
The Arm of flesh , is but a feeble Arm ; 
And , in such strong Extremes it little boots : 
He knows not yet the nature of a Crown , 
That knows not none may call the same his own . 
71 

What boots a purple Robe , when purple blood 
Doth issue from the woeful wearers hart ? 
And , of such issue there 's more likelihood 
Than issue of his loins to take his part ; 
For , oft such issue doth him little good , 
Who conquer Nature , by the aid of Art : 
They learn by Art weak Nature to command , 
When Crowns betwixt the Sire & Son do stand . 
72 

Sovereign's , are subject to extreme despite , 
For lo , a Dog , sometimes , supplied their place : 
A King of Norway , conquering in fight 
The King of Swethland , for the more disgrace , 
Did make a Dog their King , to show his spite , 
And made them near him , that were near as base : 
then are they worse than dogs that damn their souls 
To catch a kingdom , that a dog controls . 
73 

What joy can be accompanied with fear , 
sith that companion doth all joy confound ? 
But terrene joys about with them do bear 
An hell of fear , wherein true Hell is found : 
For , where 's unsuretie , fear must needs be there ; 
And all 's unsure that surgeth from the ground 
Of this vast Sea of extreme misery , 
True Antitype of true felicity . 
74 

Besides , no pomp ( how ever glorious ) 
no joy or pleasure , if sublunary , 
But brings satiety soon with their use , 
As they best know that have best means to try ; 
And none have right joy but the righteous ; 
For , ne'er doth saciate their felicity , 
Which doth content Desire , and Fear exclude , 
Which is the sum of true Beatitude . 
75 

then , if my power o'er your Sovereign , 
If my words ( rules of Reason ) can persuade , 
Vain pleasures fly ; through which ye fly to pain ; 
Which still have marred , but never any made : 
Contain yourselves , and you shall joy contain ; 
If you be good , then glorious is your trade : 
For , naught is great on Earth , but that great hart , 
That scorns all joys by Nature bred , or Art  
76 

Rouse up yourselves , shake off this sloth of spirit ; 
Put on the mind that men of mind becomes : 
Away with all effeminate delight , 
That none but worse than women overcomes : 
Show yourselves men of strength in Frailties spite ; 
For , graceless joys possess but graceless grooms : 
OH , 't is Dominion in the highest degree , 
When men to Reasons rules obedient be . 
77 

Hereat their Conscience touched to the quick , 
Began , half fainting , inwardly to bleed : 
no prick more mortal than the conscience prick ; 
It makes our faith to faint , and kills our Creed : 
Yet , frozen in their dregss , therein they stick , 
Without all feeling that which must succeed : 
And , with hard hearts ( though said for their behoofs ) 
They Logus thus reprove , for his reproofs . 
78 

What wight art thou ( presumptuous that thou art ) 
That comest to Council , year thou called be ? 
By what power dost thou this ? by what desert 
think'st thou we all should be controlled by thee ? 
We know no power thou hast , nor wit , nor Art 
To take the guidance of our actions free ; 
Being a mere stranger to us and our state , 
Yet dost from either more than derogate . 
79 

thou wouldst be taught ( that thus presum'st to teach ) 
To know good manners , persons , time and place ; 
These circumstances they should know that preach , 
Or else they may disgrace their Sermons grace ; 
And those that live by preaching do beseech , 
Not sharply check , which tendeth to disgrace : 
then think we o'er our passions have great power , 
That give thee sweet advice for cheek so sour . 
80 

You may be gone , we need no councillors , 
That breathe out worse them wormwood with their words ; 
We are twice seau'n , and our own governors , 
Your proffered service no good sent affords : 
We are the highest Powers Compettitors , 
And fight for pleasure with our sense , and swords : 
We are resolved to satisfy desire 
With all the comforts that it can require . 
81 

Doth Love ( quoth Logus ) with ourselves begin ? 
It seems not so , for with yourselves it ends : 
Foes to yourselves , sith you are fold to sin ; 
Yet will not see whereto that purchase tends : 
To lose your Souls , and all the world to win , 
Is the worst fortune , that fell Fortune sends : 
OH be indulgent to your Souls , for why , 
Life died itself , that so they might not die . 
82 

I am that Logus , which your Sovereign 
( Great sovereign Psyche ) gave you for your guide : 
Which you would ne'er vouchsafe to entertain , 
Though , unimploied , I still with you abide : 
I pray you then ( for your eternal gain ) 
That now at last I may with you reside , 
To do you service , which if you will use , 
I 'll make your life and death most glorious . 
83 

Let not my plainness with you , make ye plain 
Of my stern Course ; for , sith I am the Stern 
That rules the Mind , I must her so restrain 
( When Passions rise ) that she , by me , may learn 
The way to weal , which she seeks to attain , 
Which she , by my direction shall discern : 
Now , if the Stern resist repugnant winds , 
The Bark , to which she 's bound , to her she binds . 
84 

Ye oft have heard , that Sores quite mortified , 
( If ever they be cured as they ought ) 
Must have sharp Corrasives thereto applied , 
Else one sore part may bring the whole to naught : 
then leave your Gluttony , your Lust , and Pride ; 
Be sober , chaste , and meek , in deed , and thought : 
This must you do ; and I must needs say this , 
Except I should both say and do amiss . 
85 

Should I , your Guide , wink when ye go astray ? 
Or see you run in by-paths of offence ? 
Else draw ye further on , out of the way , 
And by all ways sooth up your erring sense ? 
So should I , like a traitor , you betray ; 
Which would , in time , your Souls to hate incense : 
OH then let me have leave your Souls to love , 
Which lest I do , when least I you reprove . 
86 

Repentance oft ( too oft ) comes too too late , 
( Though , better late than never to repent ) 
But ne'er too soon can Grace it animate ; 
For , Men , beyond their birth , are evil bend : 
So , year they sin , they are in sinful state ; 
For , sin in their conception's resident : 
then sith your men Be ( whole ) it Is ( in part ) 
Repentance should take Being your the Hart.  
87 

Time past , is gone , in it none can repent , 
If in that Time they did the same neglect : 
The Time to come ( although incontinent ) 
Is as unsure , as is that rare effect : 
Therefore the present Time for it is lent , 
Which straight is gone , then do it not reject : 
sith so small time may all your time engross , 
The loss of it may be your utter loss . 
88 

But , what avails an Angel's tongue to move 
A fiend to goodness , that by kind is ill ? 
From which he is resolved ne'er to remove ; 
no more can Reason their desires fulfil , 
( Though with all reason he doth seek their love ) 
For , they desire to live corruptly still ; 
And thus , with bitter taunts they do requite 
His love , that ever loves to guide them right . 
89 

What ere thou art ( quoth they ) we know thee not ; 
Nor will we know thee , sith we know thou art 
Repugnant to us ; and , thou seem'st a Sot , 
To seek to gain love by contention's Art : 
thou never knewest , or else thou hast forgot , 
That manners like , do still like love impart : 
Therefore farewell , except thou worse will't far , 
We are resolved , in what resolved we are . 
90 

So they to excess fell excessively ; 
Sinning , with grief , that they could sin no more : 
Now , they enlarge their Bounds of liberty , 
Although it were but too too lose before : 
Like Water they lap up iniquity , 
Which , through them , overflows both Sea & Shore : 
A cauterised Conscience being checked , 
Becomes far worse , in Cause , and in Effect . 
91 

Logus thus cast from their society , 
Waxed passing pensive ( as one desolate ) 
Because his Council was no more set by , 
And , with their mother Phusis fell at bate ; 
As being assured in her the fault did lie , 
That they from him so much did derogate : 
Yet , knew one Praxis , Phusis follower , 
Had made them worse , than she them made , by far . 
92 

But by the way we should not do amiss , 
To show how Lady Phusis was arrayed , 
( sith she the mother of each matter is ) 
Year we do prosecute what Logus said : 
For , so her nature may be known by this , 
As outward , inward Things have oft bewrayed : 
For , though it seem the Tale , by force , to part , 
it 's recompensed with Descriptions Art  
93 

Upon her Head she beware a Crown of Corn , 
Like that of Ceres ; saving that the same 
Was mixed ( like Achelous his plenteous Horn ) 
With fruits of every kind , which her became ; 
Her Hair by her was still disheuled worn , 
Who naked was , yet her hand hid her shame : 
Or if a Veil she beware , it was but when 
She was to come among licentious men . 
94 

About her Neck she beware a Carcanet 
Of every gem as it created was : 
About her Wrists , in Bracelet-wise , were set 
The oars of Gold and Silver , Led , and Brass : 
Thus have we made this Ladies Counterfeit , 
Who being bare , as barely must it pass : 
And now return we eft to Logus speech , 
Who thus to Phusis chidingly did preach . 
95 

Phusis ( quoth he ) I speak with grief of hart , 
I needs must chide , sith your fault it procures ; 
Because you have not played a mother's part 
Touching the breeding of these Sons of yours : 
I know you have , by nature , so much Art , 
As might make them obey their Governors : 
And , that you do not , it is your disgrace , 
That kill your Children with a kind embrace . 
96 

You may , perhaps , suppose yourself you clear 
By saying , Praxis hath abused you much ; 
In altering of their natures , which were dear , 
For that from you they all received such ; 
Which could not be , if you not faulty were , 
For , you might have restrained them with a touch : 
If then you had corrected Praxis lore , 
They would have been far better than before . 
97 

Little do Mothers know what hurt they do , 
By their indulgence , to their saucy Sons ; 
They make them wanton and rebellious too ; 
For , let loose Nature , it to looseness runs ; 
Till Soul and Body it doth quite undo ; 
For , Custom ill good nature over-runnes : 
But , if the Mother be as Mothers ought , 
She will by Use amend what Use hath wrought . 
98 

Phusis , not being used such checks to take , 
Began to kindle with disdainful ire ; 
And , like a doting mother , she doth make 
A stiff defence , for her sons lewd desire : 
Alas ( quoth she ) should they all joys forsake , 
Which both their years , and natures do require ? 
Or should they wear their days in wasteful thought 
To bring themselves , and me with them , to naught ? 
99 

You are no friend of theirs , if so you would ; 
And , if not theirs , than mine you cannot be : 
For , me and them in one Love's Band doth hold ; 
Whom factiously you seek to disagree : 
I take their part but as a Mother should , 
That her dear children's good desires to see : 
For , it a tender Mother doth become , 
As life to love the Children of her womb . 
100 

And , are they not of flesh and blood composed ? 
then can such mixture be aught else but frail ? 
Or would you have them otherwise disposed 
then Adam's heirs , that hold but by the Tail ? 
And flesh and blood to strength are still opposed ; 
Yet strength , in weakness , 'gainst it doth prevail : 
sith so it is , my Sons may be excused , 
That have in weakness powerful pleasures used . 
101 

Now well I see ( quoth Logus ) thy fond love 
Makes thee unapt to judge what 's requisite ; 
But , how if their loose lives the monster move 
( Monstrous Gehenna ) to devour them quite ? 
For , he loves such to eat , as such do prove ; 
May you not thank yourself for such despite ? 
If Babes do burn them in a Candle's flame , 
Are they , or those that give it them , too blame ? 
102 

These heavy words sunk deep in Phusis mind , 
Who ( as astonished ) at the same did muse ; 
Breathed short , in passion , as if wanting wind , 
Yet at the last , hi● Spirit she up did rouse , 
And asked of Logus , in the kindest kind , 
What practise she to save her Sons might use : 
I hate , as Hell , that Monster , and I would 
My Sons ( quoth she ) from him , by force , withhold . 
103 

Now Logus , glad her nature had such grace , 
Said , for mine own part , I will but advise , 
Not deal with them ; sith they did me disgrace ; 
Therefore I council , that in any wise 
You high you to the Lady Aletheias Place , 
And there invoke her aid , with careful Cries ; 
Who is endued with power , will , and skill , 
To tell them of their miss , and mend their ill . 
104 

Entreat her , who will soon entreated be , 
( For , she doth love to satisfy Goodwill ) 
To go unto thy Sons of each degree , 
And tell them of this Monster , made to spill 
All those that live secure in Pleasure's glee , 
And greedily their hungry lusts fulfil ; 
I will ( said Phusis ; ) but where doth she dwell ? 
thou knowest ( dear Logus ) but I cannot tell . 
105 

She wont was ( said he ) to neighbour me ; 
But since that Fraus and Dolus ( wicked Twins ) 
The World produced , I do her seldom see ; 
For , she from my sights reach so slily rinnes , 
As though to her I were an enemy , 
Or made prodigious through my subject's sins : 
Who prosecute her with extreme despite , 
That now she even loathes to see the light . 
106 

Shall I ( quoth Phusis ) on the Earth her find ? 
Hardly ( quoth Logus ) being chased from thence . 
In th' air , or Water then , or in the Wind ; 
Or else within the Fires Circumference 
Is she ( quoth she ? ) said Logus , these by kind 
Are mutable , and full of difference ; 
Which she cannot abide , for she is one , 
And rather will , then with such , live alone . 
107 

Is she to Heaven returned ( quoth she ) again ? 
that 's like ( said Logus ) but th' u'rt ne'er the near : 
For , without her , thou canst not Heaven attain ; 
For , all by her must come , that must come there . 
Alas ( said she ) how shall I her obtain , 
sith I must have herself herself to clear ? 
For , as without the Sun , none sees the Sun , 
So , without her , none wots where she doth won . 
108 

This once ( quoth Logus ) I will thee direct 
The best I can , but cannot as I could ; 
I oft have heard , and find true , by effect , 
That she is seen about the Mansion old 
Of father Chronus , which he did erect 
For him , and her , ( his daughter dear ) to hold ; 
Or , Thanatus , his Man , who rids away 
That which his Master bringeth to decay . 
109 

Which Man , and Masters habits we might paint , 
Though we but Chalk , & Coals , and Ashes had : 
For , Chronus clad is like a mortal Saint 
In skins of Beasts , to show how life doth fade ; 
( Which of their age did seem to make complaint ) 
Gird with an Halter , or with Girth as bad : 
Upon whose Head , in stead of Hat , there stood 
An Hourglass , as an Emblem of his mood . 
110 

His Hair was white as was the driven Snow , 
And from his Head it seemed to hang , by drifts 
Turned up again ; e'en as the same doth show 
When it doth hang , so driven upon Cliffs : 
His Beard , beneath his girdlestead did grow , 
Which , plaited , in his bosom oft he shifts : 
Whose right hand did a Scythe , still moving wield , 
And in his left , an Horologe he held . 
111 

His Man height Thanatus , bare to the bones , 
Was more than naked from the top to toe : 
All haireless , toothless , eyeless , stocks , or stones , 
Are all as quick , though he much more can do : 
And all he said , I was as you are , once ; 
Which was in sullen silence spoken to : 
Upon a Spade he leans , as if he did 
By his day-labour live , called Wink , all hid . 
112 

To these did Logus Phusis wish to wend 
Which were to her the loathsom'st wights alive ; 
And hardly thought that Logus was her friend , 
( Although she could not otherwise believe 
sith her and hers she sought still to defend ) 
That would to her such woeful council give : 
And , with the water swelling in her eyes , 
She thus to Logus mournefully replies . 
113 

Alas ( quoth she ) and to them must I go ? 
To their most hateful houses must I high , 
That are the greatest workers of my woe , 
And fain would have me utterly to die ? 
What words can please a proud insulting foe , 
That holds in scorn his foes humility ? 
then , what hope have I with them ro prevail , 
Who , though I kneel to them , will me assail ? 
114 

What shall I say ? alas , what shall I do ? 
To win their favour , that will not be won ? 
To go to them , I shall myself undo ; 
For , though I kiss their feet , they 'll me o'errun : 
If not , they 'll pain me , and compel me to ; 
Both which , if I do go , I cannot shun : 
I am amazed , I know not what to say , 
If go , I die ; if no , my Son's decay . 
115 

What shall I do ? dear Logus , tell me what ? 
OH happy were I , if this fear were passed : 
There is no cause ( quoth Logus ) to fear that 
That no wight living can avoid at last ; 
The Stag , the Raven , and the nine-liued Cat 
Must know those houses , then be not aghast , 
But go on boldly with erected Front , 
Where you shall see her live in high account . 
116 

If at the first you cannot see her face , 
Their Porter Nosus will you soon direct 
Unto her privy chamber , where her grace 
Will talk with you , in secret , in effect : 
But , see you bribe the Porter of the place 
With Calor naturalis , most select : 
So may you pass securely through each Gate , 
That leads to this obscured Ladies State.  
117 

This Nosus was a true Anatomy 
( Though Thanatus be truly called the same ) 
Of mortal grief , or cureless malady , 
Whose Head was hamp'red ( which him ill became ) 
With homely clouts ( tie as unhansomly ) 
And with a staff he went as he were lame : 
A Gown ( with Potions stained ) he , girded , ware , 
Who panted as he went , and went with care . 
118 

Four pair of Stockings did his Legs comprise , 
And yet his Shancks ( God wot ) but little were , 
Although the upper Stockings were of Freeze , 
Thick Freeze , or Ruyg , or else of warmer gear : 
Whose Slippers were with Cotton lined likewise ; 
And yet of taking cold he still did fear : 
Who looked as he had not an hour to live , 
And every step he trod , his Soul did grieve . 
119 

His Face was of the colour of that clout 
That did his head involve , save that his Face 
Did look more white : his Eyes both seemed out , 
For , they were sunk , & shrunk out of their place : 
His Nose was sharper than an Adder's snout ; 
His Tongue , & Teeth were furred , in loathsome case ; 
His Lips were chapped , his Beard was driveld o'er , 
And ever breathed as he should breathe no more . 
120 

And therewithal he was so wayward still , 
That none might please him , but he fault would find 
With the best words & deeds of mere goodwill ; 
His body's pains so perverse made his mind : 
His wozen whezed when his breath it did fill , 
As , through the straitest passage doth the wind : 
And when he spoke , his tongue was furred so thick , 
That oft his words within the same did stick . 
121 

Yet ne'rthelesse , to these must Phusis high , 
For , Logus held her to 't by strong persuasion , 
Which thus she pressed ; Go , or thy Sons must die : 
thou needs must do it , there is no evasion : 
Herein their life , or death alone doth lie ; 
then , of their peril if thou have compassion ▪ 
thou must to These , that they may be secure , 
then lively go ; for , Love can Hell endure . 
122 

Phusis , though while-ere somewhat weakened , 
( By reason of these uncouth Accidents ) 
Yet thus , by Logus , being comforted , 
To his direction and advice assents : 
And now ( all heart ) she holdeth high the Head , 
Scorning her wont dread , and dririments ; 
And , in her love to her Sons , thither goes , 
Their case to Aletheia to disclose . 
123 

A weary journey had she , and a foul , 
But , what pain is 't a mother's love will shun ? 
Who almost will forsake her dearest Soul , 
Year once forsake her deere-bought dearer Son : 
By Logus help , she doth her fear's control ; 
And to these houses goes not , but doth run : 
And as she hies , she more and more doth learn , 
This Lady's Lodging rightly to discern . 
124 

When to the House of Chronus near she drew , 
( Which was a Cave in Rock of Flint cut out ) 
It , to the sense more horrid was in show ; 
For , it with Moss was inlaid all about , 
And o'er the Gate , Harts-tongue , & Brambles grew ; 
As on the top , did Okes , old , stiff , and stout : 
Which rocks rogh sides huge mossy Beech's bare , 
As if the Flint the weather's threats did fear . 
125 

This antique Top , where these trees did not shade 
A kind of Moss ore-sprad , as hard , as whore ; 
Which ne'rthelesse , did softly seem to vade , 
And grew far shorter than it was before ; 
o'er which strange vermin pretty Paths had made , 
Which there did still increase in needless store : 
For , in those Places where men least frequent , 
There vilest vermin are most resident . 
126 

About the groundsills of this hideous house 
( Without ) grew Nettles , Hemlocks , and the like ; 
Amongst whom were Snakes and vermin venomous ; 
Which unawares th'unwary foot do strike : 
Within the Cave was naught for Nature's use , 
Save water , which there leakt through many a creek : 
Where naught was seen but Darkness , naught was heard , 
But hollow Echoes , making Noise afeard . 
127 

Near to this uncouth Cave is situate 
( As 't were a vault digged underneath the same ) 
The House of Thanatus , which all do hate ; 
For , none came ever thence that thither came : 
then Chronus house it 's much more desolate ; 
more deadly too , in nature , and in name : 
For , flesh doth faint , when but b'imagination 
She sees this fearful ugly Habitation . 
128 

The Roof whereof , with Skulls is seeled quite ; 
Whereon ( in frets ) hang shinbones here & there : 
The walls are hung with Mantles of the night ; 
Which , all with vermin vile , imbrod'red were : 
If it , through any Chink , received light , 
' was soon stopped up with feet which it did bear : 
It paved was with joints and Knuckle-bones , 
Set in no order , but like scattered stones . 
129 

The Gate whereof is made of man's just size , 
Which yet receives all men that ever were ; 
Upon whose Pavement all flesh rotting lies ; 
And , to the sense most odious doth appear : 
For , here lie Arms , and there lie Legs , and Thies ; 
Hete rotten Teeth , and ragged jawbones there ; 
Within whose pores , the worms do keep their hold 
Until they all convert to perfect mould . 
130 

no one here keeps this grim Lord company , 
But sullen Silence , dust , and nasty mud ; 
And , yet he seeks all men's society , 
For , still he feedeth on their flesh and blood : 
Hard at the Gate do mournful mourners cry , 
And tear their hair , too like the Fury-brood : 
Which yet is never heard that house within , 
For , Thanatus is deaf , and hears no din.  
131 

Rotten Corruption here doth revel keep ; 
Where Worms ( her Minions ) out of measure dance : 
For , all about they trace , they turn , and creep , 
And merry make with Flesh's fowl mischance ; 
Who all the while lies drowned in puddle deep , 
As full of Soil , as full of Sufferance : 
Where Irksomeness sits on a dusty Throne , 
As if he were Lord of that Earth alone . 
132 

For , Beauty comes no sooner to the Gate 
Of this true earthly Hell , but she doth look 
As if she were in worse than damned state ; 
And all her Graces had her quite forsook : 
The Lures of Love , here turn to Hoods of Hate ; 
Hate that no Love ( though Love itself ) can brook : 
For , Love itself , which once three days lay there , 
Fled from the same as if it hateful were . 
133 

Here Zijm and Limb do love alone to be , 
( Grim Desolations stern Consociates ) 
The vale of Visions this doth seem to me , 
Where Sense may see what Sense quite ruinates : 
Whose Organs here , lie in variety 
Of transformation ; which Sense deadly hate's : 
Where lie all Objects which the sight annoy , 
Yet 't is the entrance to all grief , or joy . 
134 

Here Sense ( saith Sense ) lies in a Lethargy ; 
Whose powers are quite suppressed with Earth and Stones : 
Here Rest of Labour hath the victory : 
And , Sorrows here surcease their sighs and groans ; 
Where lasting sleep beguiles Calamity : 
For , Flesh feels not , if rotten to the bones ; 
This is the Lake , which Men most loathe , and yet , 
It is the Lethe where they grief forget . 
136 

Down a dark stair ( the passage to this house ) 
On every step sits all the imps of Fear ; 
Confronted with Chymaeraes' hideous , 
Which makes all men to hate their coming there ; 
Save such as daily do that passage use , 
And with feete-mortifide those steps do wear : 
To them it seems not strange , how ever strange , 
Those Monsters do their ugly fashions change . 
137 

The Elements , whereof all Flesh is made , 
Do , with their Children , the four Humours , lie 
Confused there , in Death's confused Shade , 
That no Eye can the one from the other spy ; 
But His that saw them ere they Being had , 
On whom alone , they all do still rely : 
This is the Picture of Not-beings Pit , 
Where it doth seem ( but doth but seem ) to sit . 
138 

Sometimes , for pride , or praise , or both , some do 
Bestow a stately Cover on this house ; 
For , worldly pomp doth press them thereunto , 
To make the glorified more glorious ; 
But Chronus spite that Cover doth undo , 
Which cannot brook the pomp of Thanatus : 
It is but vain the dead to honour then , 
With other honour then with Tongue , or Pen.  
139 

Hard at the door of this confused den 
Sat ravenous Ravens , watching for their prey ; 
Which door if Chronus opes , they enter then , 
And with the Relics , there , they pray , or play : 
This Rooms description , no Pen well can pen 
But such as marks the measure of Decay : 
O! 't is a Heaven to hear Hell well set forth , 
And Heaven , if ill described , seems nothing worth . 
140 

The Room is little , this description great ; 
And yet too little , for so great a Room , 
Where all mankind have , and do find a Seat , 
Until they have received their later doom : 
Let Aletheia then make it complete ; 
sith all descriptions true , come from her womb : 
Sufficeth me to show but e'en a glance 
Of Thanatus his House's countenance . 
141 

The Porter of this Place ( as erst was said ) 
Is hundred-headed Nosus ; much more stern 
Than Hell's grim Porter , with his threefold head ; 
The sight of whom made Phusis hart to yearn ; 
But , Logus said , she , by him , should be led 
The Lady Aletheia to discern : 
In hope whereof she did the better brook 
The horror of his most detested look . 
142 

Now , by this time , she was within his touch , 
Who , to him trembling came submissively ; 
And gave him of her Calor ( though not much ) 
That she might be the better used thereby : 
Nosus , whom though diseases made to grutch , 
Yet , through that Calor looked more cheerfully : 
And gently , with familiar aspect , 
He opens the Gate , and straight did her direct . 
143 

For , he denieth passage unto none 
That makes much of him , or doth love him well ; 
But , had he well the Lady Phusis known , 
Perhaps he would have been to her more fell : 
For , when she gave him Calor , she did groan , 
To think how soon he would the same expel : 
And , Phusis by no means can well endure , 
That Nosus should her any good procure . 
144 

But he to her is most officious , 
He tenders her his guidance , and what not ? 
But yet the odds 'twixt her and Thanatus , 
( Although by Him 't was more than quite forgot ) 
Made Her entreat this Porter courteous , 
To call that Lady forth , whom Chronus , got : 
And gave him some more Calor in a Box , 
Which gave him strength to open the Lady's Locks . 
145 

Herewith he went to Aletheias Bed , 
Who over head and ears lay covered quite ; 
And being naked , yet thus covered , 
He could not have , of her , an open sight : 
But , he aloof his errand uttered ; 
Wherewith she rose , yet came within the night : 
For , she being naked Darkness seeks to hide her ; 
For , men without a Mist have seld espied her . 
146 

But , out she ( masked ) comes to Phusis late , 
Who knew her not , because she came concealed : 
But , asked who she was , who did relate , 
Both who , and what , and straight herself revealed : 
It me behoves ( quoth she ) to hide my State , 
For , most men have with me like Monsters dealed : 
Who , like to devils , authors of untruth , 
Would force erroneous sense into my mouth . 
147 

I go thus masked ( quoth she ) sith men like fiends , 
Of my destruction make no conscience : 
Statesmen seek for me , but for subtle ends ; 
Some Churchmen would have me Non residence , 
But where their pleasure , or their profit tends ; 
And , fond Philosophers pervert my sense : 
Strong thiefs , & Lawyers , wound my tender hart , 
The one by force , the other by their art . 
148 

The Merchant and the sly Artificer 
Will , for a penny profit stifle me 
With Falsehoods cloak . The biting Usurer 
Doth use me better , though but cruelly ; 
And , hath a will to use me worse by far , 
So he a farthing might the better be : 
But , of all men , that seem me most to pain , 
Upon poor Poets I can least complain . 
149 

For , though they hide me from the vulgar view , 
With robes ( as they suppose ) that sumptuous be , 
Yet give they me my right , with more than due ; 
As they best know , that have best eyes to see : 
They are my friendly foes , false-lovers true ; 
Which hate , in show , but do , indeed , love me : 
Whom I will one day feed with more than praise , 
Which Manna makes them look lean now adays . 
150 

All those that Offices , by coin , come by , 
( To come by coin , by buying Offices ) 
In Church or Commonweal , do me defy , 
For interrupting their by-passages : 
no , not so much as Summoner's but can spy 
The way to wound me on advantages ; 
In sum , all sorts are resolute herein , 
To lose me quite , so they thereby may win . 
151 

Have I not reason then , concealed to go , 
To shun these Hellhounds , having me in chase ; 
Who study , by all means , to work my woe , 
And with their craft transform my constant face ? 
I were unlike myself , and mine own foe , 
If I went like myself in such a case : 
By nature , I the Ignorant do hate ; 
then should I loathe , if I knew not my State.  
152 

But , wherefore Phusis art thou come to me ? 
Who told thee where I lay ? who found'st me out ? 
thine eyes are dim , too dim me well to see ; 
then though thou see me , thou thereof mayst doubt . 
Quoth Phusis , that full well I did foresee , 
By Logus , therefore brought I this about ; 
Who told me truly who , and where thou wart , 
Whose sayings , touching thee , I conned by hart . 
153 

And I am come to thee for thine advice , 
Touching my children ; who ( as I am told 
By my friend Logus ) are in love with Vice ; 
Or rather to that strumpet they are sold : 
Who , with fair words doth sweetly them entice 
To think , and say , and do , but as she would : 
Who , as it 's known to all that knoweth aught , 
( In fine ) doth bring her Lovers all to naught . 
154 

They being bound to Thanatus his house , 
Are bound likewise ( ah woe is me ) from thence 
On the left hand , to the land tenebrous , 
Whereas Gehenna holds his residence , 
Which Monster , being more than ravenous , 
Will quite devour their Bodies , Souls , & Sense ; 
The manner of whose house , no tongue can tell , 
But such as can describe the lowest Hell.  
155 

here , by the way , we will awhile digress , 
And prosecute the rest of Phusis plaint , 
When as we have described this little less 
Than more than hell , which colours cannot paint : 
For what so black as depth of all distress , 
Where utter darkness reigns without restraint ? 
then sith we colours want , as all do see , 
Our too light shadows must excused be . 
156 

There lie two ways from Thanatus his house , 
( That still are two , sith they still disagree ) 
One on the right hand lies , scarce now in use , 
The other on the left , used commonly : 
That , on the left , is full of all abuse , 
And leads unto a world of misery ; 
Wherein Gehennaes' Hold is situate , 
Which , without Pattern , thus we figurate . 
157 

A ruinous Room , whose bottom's most profound ; 
A Pit infernal full of endless dole ; 
A loathsome Lake where choking damps abound ; 
A dungeon deep , a dreadful darksome hole , 
Where naught but howl , shriks , & grons do sound , 
And human flesh still makes a quenchless Cole : 
The common Burse , where none but Bugs repair , 
An Harbour full of horror and despair . 
158 

who 's light is dark , which dark is palpable ; 
Whose pleasure 's pain , which pain no pen can tell : 
Whose life is death , which death is damnable : 
Whose peace is strife , which strife is discords well : 
Whose ease is toil , which toiles unthinkable : 
Where most obedience , learns most to rebel : 
Where all confusion reigns in endless date , 
In a tumultuous State-disord'ring State.  
159 

Where toads , and vipers , snakes , and vermin vile , 
( Whose hissing make an hellish harmony ) 
With slimy gleere , the place do clean defile , 
Swimming in Sudss of all sordiditie , 
While one on others back themselves they pile 
To touch the top of topless misery : 
Where heat , and coldness , are in their extremes , 
And frozen hearts do float in sulphred streams . 
160 

The walls are hung with Cobwebs , which contain 
Soule-catching hellhounds , clad in Spider's shape ; 
The Roof , of burning Brass , which drops like rain ; 
Fron which no one below could ere escape : 
The pauement's full of groundless gulfs of pain , 
Which though they still devour , they still do gape ; 
Whose glowing Maws cannot concoct the meat 
Which there lies boiling in an hell of heat . 
161 

Here , weeping warbleth notes that anguish show ; 
And , gnashing Teeth tunes jigs untuning joy : 
Here , Seas of boiling Lead their Bounds o'erflow , 
To make a boundless deluge of annoy : 
The Sands whereof are Souls o'erwhelmed with woe ; 
Which though destroyed , yet death cannot destroy : 
For , endless lords of death still life do give 
To those that in that death there still do live . 
162 

From whose wide open Throats great flames they cast , 
Which thunder forth with sense-confounding noise ; 
The din whereof makes Horrors heart aghast , 
Which in that den no other bliss enjoys : 
Such Gall of Gall affords no better taste , 
Which still doth feed , with that which still annoys : 
Such boisterous Bugs can yield no other glee , 
But mirth is moan whereas such Monsters be . 
163 

who 's soul blasphemos mouths are fraught with spite , 
That boils with heat of baneful poison there ; 
Which spite they spit against the Cause of Light , 
Such is the envy which to It they bear : 
Yet , from their glowing eyes fly sparkles bright , 
As they no eyes but Vulcan's Forges were : 
The sight whereof the sight doth so annoy , 
As though that sight that sense would quite destroy . 
164 

Imagine now you see , ( as there is seen ) 
Million of Legions of this foul mouthed crew , 
With fangs more huge than Elephants , more keen 
Than Crocodiles chief grinders , to pursue 
Souls diving in those deeps to be unseen ; 
Which , ouergorged , them up again do spew : 
While these dog's watch to take them in the rise , 
With teeth to tear , & fear them with their cries . 
165 

Here may you see a Goblin , grisly grim , 
( With hook and line ) stand fishing for a Soul ; 
Which , in those boiling Seas , do sinking swim ; 
Baiting their hooks with Salamander's foul : 
Which , being hanged he hales it to the brim , 
And , all the while , as hunger-band , doth howl : 
Which fingered , forthwith , in the devil's name , 
In go the fangs , that inchmeale tear the same . 
166 

then others watch ( as Spiders for a Fly ) 
In obscure Nooks , to catch a flying Ghost ; 
That to those Nooks to hide itself , doth fly ; 
Which caught , they bind it , lest it should be lost , 
And , to their webs of woe , with joy they high ; 
Where the poor Soul is still in torment tossed : 
In whom they all their deadly poison pour , 
Which more than kills them , sith they it endure . 
167 

Now , sullen Silence reigns as all were dead , 
then , suddenly a world of Clamour rings ; 
Whereby the much more horror still is bred ; 
For , sudden fear with it most horror brings . 
no heart so heavy as the hart of Lead ; 
Yet sudden fear doth start it when it stings . 
The Lightnings flash doth fear more than the flame 
That still is seen , and still is seen the same . 
168 

here , in a Chimney , all of burning Bricks , 
Sits Grimnesse , and a red-hote Spit doth turn ; 
Whereon a human Creature , melting , sticks ; 
Whose grease doth make the fire the more to burn ; 
Which Turnspit , oft , his filthy fingers licks , 
And , with this liquor , doth his lips adorn : 
Basting the roast with what most torment gives , 
whiles the poor Creature dies , because he lives . 
169 

But , that which is most horrid to be heard , 
But much more hateful to be felt , or seen ; 
These Cooks oft gash their flesh , to interlard 
The same with sulphur , with woe waxen lean : 
lest the soft marrow the hard bone should guard , 
From feeling woes incomparable keen : 
So bone , and marrow , sinew , nerve , and vain 
Do there endure pains , far exceeding pain ! 
170 

In other Coasts of this infernal Realm ; 
( Confusions Land , Gehennaes' lording place , 
True Antitype of new jerusalem ) 
It freezeth flesh , which pines in starving case ; 
Where , some do , naked , stick amid a stream 
To ice congealed ; whom cold winds frieze apace : 
Yet draw they breath , more cold them coldest frost , 
To frieze their entrailss , and congeal their ghost . 
171 

If any spit ( for rheums cold places breed ) 
it 's blown , in Ice-cicles , into their face : 
For , those keen winds do forthwith do the deed , 
And hail , of drops , make in a moment's space : 
On icy morsels there the mouth must feed , 
sith mouths to icy morsels turn apace : 
Here is cold comfort where is naught but cold , 
That all congeals , on which it taketh hold . 
172 

Here some ( but new arrived ) while blood is warm , 
Attempt , by motion , so to keep the same ; 
But straight they cannot stir , nor Leg , nor Arm ; 
For , in the offer , they frieze stiff , and lame : 
Yet hold they vital heat ( the more their harm ) 
For Ice , like Oil , doth feed their vital flame : 
If such a foe to life , as such a cold 
Keeps life in being , life hath hateful hold . 
173 

Who are so mad with pain that they do cry , 
OH what is this we feel ! we feel , OH what ! 
Is 't limbs of Flesh that brook this agony ? 
All they have raged with pain ; but this , to that 
Is like the Ocean to a fountain dry : 
This flesh , nerves , joints , once Racks did lacerate , 
Yet that with this compared , was Heaven to Hell , 
OH what is this we feel ? Sense die , or tell . 
174 

it 's but a moment since we hither came , 
Yet feel what pain Eternity inflicts ; 
And though eternally we feel the same , 
Yet us with what we ne'er felt , it afflicts : 
Proteus like still pains new fashons frame ; 
And one another ever interdicts : 
Is this the Soul we thought with flesh should die , 
Which feels these mortal plagues immortally ? 
175 

Here , some with hands fast frozen to their mouth , 
Do seek to thaw them with their warmest breath ; 
But lo , the frost that breath so fast pursuth , 
That it doth frieze in coming from beneath : 
So , hand and mouth thereby the faster growth ; 
Yet live they still , though frozen quite to death : 
For , like to Alabaster Tombs they stand , 
Frozen to death , yet live at Death's command . 
176 

Here , boisterous Bugbears do at football play 
With a still-tost and tumbled groaning Ghost , 
To catch them heat ; which done , they dance the Hay 
About it ( breathless ) being overtost ; 
So , with transmuted forms , it to dismay 
With fear that may afflict the seeing most : 
While that poor Soul lies panting like an Hare , 
Among foul hounds that seek the same to share . 
177 

Now Matacheyns they dance , with visage grim , 
And at each change they change their horrid shapes : 
And at each turn , they torture life and limb 
Of this tormented Soul , that , gasping gapes , 
As if the Ghost were yielding at the brim 
Of deep Not-beings Pit ; which yet it escapes : 
At point of death to live immortally , 
Is still to live , and living , still to die ! 
178 

Now comes a chased Ghost that fly's , for life , 
Before a foul-mouthed cry of hellish hounds ; 
And being caught , 'twixt them is deadly strife , 
Which of them all shall give it deadliest wounds : 
Each of whose teeth is like an Hangman's knife , 
Which torments , if not utterly confounds : 
O! think then what an hell of fear that hart 
Must hold , that such infernal Hounds do start . 
179 

Here winds , that whistle while they freezing are , 
( As if they merry were for freezing so ) 
Bring , with their working , pitchy clouds of Care , 
Wherewith they are involved that thither go ; 
Those biting frosts do , there , make all things bare , 
Which make the same a naked world of woe : 
Where naught but nipping frosts are felt , & seen , 
Ne'r-vading griefs do flourish ever green . 
180 

Here stands a Fowler , fowl , with Nets of Wire , 
To take a flight of Souls that starving flee ; 
Late fled from whence they never can retire ; 
So , when in that fast-holding Net they be , 
He drags them to the frost , or to the fire , 
Where either are in the extremest degree : 
This is the welcome which they first receive , 
That of their life misspent have ta'en their leave . 
181 

This flight thus caught , the Legions of the North , 
Fill all those Regions with their hellish howls ; 
And , with their ugliest forms , come roaring forth 
To share among them those feare-shaken Souls : 
The worthiest takes the Soul of smallest worth 
To execute thereon the greatest doles . 
Quake flesh to hear what frail flesh here doth feel , 
For endless plagues turn here still like a wheel . 
182 

Here may you see , for anguish , some to tear 
Their flesh from bones , yea bones and flesh to gnaw ; 
That so they may no more those torments bear , 
Which make them burst , with choler , in their Maw : 
Some grate their teeth , as teeth they grinding were , 
To cut the flesh which they before did saw : 
And all , and some , are so with tortures tired , 
That they seem quietst , when they most are fired . 
183 

Here Bugs bestir them , with a bellowing roar , 
( As at a Scamble we see Boys to stir ) 
Who for Souls scamble on a glowing floor ; 
Biting and scratching , like the Cat and Cur ; 
whiles with their Talons they their prey do gore , 
And though they strive , they do , therein concur : 
Within whose gripes the Soul , in silence groans , 
For fear of feeling thousand hells at once . 
184 

Here , in a corner sits an ugly form , 
That on the matter of a living Corpse 
Finds matter of much mirth ; which is , t' inform 
Himself of all the sinews , and their force ; 
Who , with a knife , the flesh doth all deform , 
To pull out nerves and sinews in their course : 
Which like strings , broken , hanging at a Lute ; 
So hang these nerves the Body all about . 
185 

Here may you see some others driving nails , 
Under the nails of endless sorrow's slaves ; 
Some others , threshing them ( like flax ) with flails ; 
Than moow them up , in groundless gulfs by thraves : 
Some , playing on their heartstrings with their nails ; 
Some others , broaching them on ragged staffs : 
And all and some more busy far then Bees , 
To gather honey from the gall of these . 
186 

If Pain her utmost power awhile for bear , 
( As seld she doth ; for , there she 's still in force ) 
It is supplied with fear , surmounting fear , 
For lo , in Azured flames , with voices horse , 
far off approaching grisly Forms appear 
Which fear far off , & near at hand , much worse : 
For , Fantasy with pain is more o'ercome , 
When it is coming , then when it is come . 
187 

And , all about in darkness , thick as dark ; 
Are seen to shine ( like Glowworms ) ugly eyes ; 
Which ( like a Partridge sprung ) each soul do mark ; 
So , that to scape no Souls power can devose : 
For , should they mount ( as doth the nimble Lark ) 
A ghastly Griphon doth them straight surprise : 
Or should they sink into Pits bottomless , 
There should they meet the like , with like distress . 
188 

In mortal life ( though mortal be men's woes ) 
Three things their utmost rage do qualify ; 
that 's Comfort , Hope , and Rest ; but , none of those 
Come near this place of pains extremity : 
men's Rackers , here , being tired , do let them lose ; 
But , they are Spirits that men , there , crucify ; 
Who can endure all labour , without pain , 
While they do Spirits ( that is for ere ) remains . 
189 

But , if men's plaguers here immortal were , 
And were of power , untired , to plague them still , 
Yet would they them , year long , to nothing wear ; 
Or them with lacerating torments kill ; 
But all , so plagued , are made immortal there , 
Who though they still are spoiled , yet naught can spill : 
Than , though Time wears that on Time doth depend 
Yet they wear not , for Time doth them attend . 
190 

Yea , though their Plaguers & themselves were such 
Yet , in this life , the Instruments of pain 
To naught would waste , with using long , & much ; 
But , that same fiery Lake doth still remain , 
Which though it quite confounds , but with a tuch , 
Yet , it confounds but to torment again : 
And , lest the fire should out , prepared there is , 
A Sea of Sulphur , which still feedeth this . 
191 

These present pains the Wit do ( pining ) waste ; 
But those to come the Will do martyr most : 
The Memory is plagued with pleasures past , 
And Understanding with the pleasures lost : 
Which on the Soul the Soul of Sorrow's cast ; 
For , endless joys to lose , crosse-wounds our Ghost : 
To have been well , doth but increase our curse , 
But , to lose endless being well , is worse . 
192 

then , what remains to ease the wounded spirit , 
When Hope , that keeps it whole , becomes Despair : 
For , in that dungeon of eternal night 
That most doth ruin , that should most repair : 
For , Immortality right good , by right , 
The Soul and Bodies powers doth most impair : 
then , having but one good thing natural , 
Yet that made worse than Ill , how ill is All ? 
193 

There , reigns what not ? ( that is not to be told 
With tongue , nor pen ) that sense afflicts with grief ; 
There is Perditions home , Damnation's Hold ; 
Which gives death life , & death , gives life relief : 
It is the utmost reach of Hot and Cold , 
And of Despair the habitation chief : 
In sum , it is the sum of all distress , 
Which subdivided makes it nothing less . 
194 

These are Gehennaes' Consorts ; these are they 
That still associate those that thither go : 
This is the Place of that fell Monsters stay ; 
The Place where pain is infinite in woe : 
The way thereto is plain , broad , green , and gay , 
All strewed with flowers , to 'tice men thither so : 
All which to Phusis , erst by Logus , told , 
On Aletheia made her fasten hold . 
195 

Now , to return to Phusis , and her plaint , 
Quoth she , ( and her embraced all the while ) 
Dear Aletheia , help me , for I faint ; 
To think my Sons are near this monster vile ; 
Who , with his Tusk , will tear , and all to taint 
Their tender flesh , which filthy Lusts defile : 
Which to prevent , I fain would learn of thee , 
For , thou best knowest , what 's best for them , & me . 
196 

And , for I know thou canst aright persuade , 
( For all thy words are held in reverence ) 
ay thee beseech from Vice them to dissuade , 
And from this Land ; sith none returns from thence : 
OH bid them leave their idle wand'ring Trade , 
And tell them of this inconvenience : 
Go , Lady go ; the way thou canst not miss , 
To all their homes , and tell them home of this . 
197 

I would ( quoth Aletheia ) gladly go , 
But that , I fear , they will entreat me ill 
For Logus sake ( near kin to me , they know ) 
But thy desire I will herein fulfil : 
For , I will go , though I myself forgo , 
To bar their course , and break them of their will ; 
For , life is won , though lost , in those Assays , 
Wherein the loser gains immortal praise . 
198 

Go , gracious Lady , glory be thy guide 
( Quoth Lady Phusis , to this hardy Dame ) 
And I , mean while , will at this Gate abide , 
With my friend Nosus , Porter to the same . 
So , on this journey Aletheia hied , 
For , she , though wounded oft , was never lame , 
In all her Actions she 's most upright still ; 
For , she will never halt , how ever ill . 
199 

This while sat Phusis at this narrow door , 
Talking with Logus , who came to her there ; 
Because she did as he her willed before ; 
Who told him all her hope , and all her fear ; 
How Aletheia did her case deplore , 
And went to school her Children every where : 
For , Hearts are eased when Tongues unfold at large , 
The griefs , or joys , which do them overcharge . 
200 

Logus her course , herein , did much commend ; 
And cheered her , as she could , with heu'nly words : 
Prayed her , with patience , to expect the end ; 
And comfort every way to her affords : 
Strengthening her hope that now her sons would mend ; 
sith Aletheias sayings would ( like swords ) 
Subdue all rank rebellion of the sense , 
For , powerful words win more than violence . 
201 

They had not thus sat reas'ning there awhile , 
But Aletheia they far off might see 
Flying to them-wards over stop and Style , 
oft looking back , as those that chased be ; 
Than well they knew hope did their hopes beguile , 
Which they , till they had tried , could not foresee : 
For , that which is contingent who doth know , 
Are only wise , and none but ONE is so . 
202 

But coming near them ( almost breathless quite ) 
She , panting , told them ( windless as she could ) 
How she had been ( by virtue of her might ) 
About the whole world , and , with courage bold , 
( For which , she said , she was in painful plight ) 
All Phusis children of their errors told : 
To whom ( quoth she ) in divers forms I came , 
Yet kept my nature , though I changed my name . 
203 

Some took me for gross Error , some for mad ; 
Some , superstitious ; some , heretical : 
Some , for Deceit ; and some , for Vice , as bad : 
Presumptuous some ; some , hypocritical : 
But , the most part , most malice to me had ; 
For they , at first sight , drove me to the wall : 
Some seemed to take my part with Tooth & Nail , 
That did ( indeed ) me most of all assail . 
204 

The Curious rent my Mask to see my face ; 
The Proud , o'er looked , nay , trod me underfeete , 
The Learned , graced themselves with my disgrace ; 
Th'vnlerned ( gravelled ) filled my mouth with Greet ; 
Which made me fain , and speak as one in chase , 
So , all I met withal , with me did meet : 
Truth gets but hate , but Adulation love : 
That this is truth , unto my pain I prove . 
205 

So , when I saw the peril I was in , 
Away I fled , thus wounded as you see ; 
I held it base to keep unscared my skin , 
sith mine adventure might bring ease to thee : 
But Phusis , this I did thy love to win , 
Whom I do love , how ere thou lovest me : 
no dearer love can Love bewray then this , 
To venture that , for Love , that dearest is . 
206 

Ah , woe is me ( quoth Phusis ) that thou shouldst 
For my poor Love ( which thou dost well deserve ) 
Venture that jewel , which thou dearest hold'st , 
Yet that rare hazard , not my turn to serve : 
Thy will I see , in that I see thou wouldst 
Venture thy life my son's lives to preserve : 
And that thou shouldst for that be wounded so , 
And they the worse for that , the worse my woe . 
207 

Can neither Caveats of Mortality , 
( Which flow from thy mouth with almighty force ) 
Nor my persuasions , more than motherly , 
Give them some feeling of their senseless course ? 
Are their Souls seared with impiety , 
That they for it , therein , feel no remorse ? 
then what shall I a woeful mother do , 
But wish I Were not , and my children too ? 
208 

But what , I pray , did Princes say to thee , 
When thou didst mind them that they once must die ? 
They said , & therewith stabbed at me ( quoth she ) 
I , like a devil , in my Throat did lie : 
These , of all others , av-s_d I sought to flee ; 
And yet I honour royal Majesty : 
Without my hand sustain , Thrones reeling stand ; 
For , all stayed Thrones are stayed by my hand . 
209 

And how ( quoth Phusis ) do the judges live ? 
Many of them ( replied she ) doomed me death , 
Because I would not ( as did others ) give 
Them golden Scabbards , justice Sword to sheathe . 
How Lawyers ? They by others losses thrive , 
And oft ( quoth she ) on all sides sell their breath . 
Physicians how ? They reason doubtfully 
Till Fees they finger past recovery . 
210 

Poor Poets how ? while they ( quoth she ) do fill 
The world with Fables , feed themselves with hopes 
more fabulous ; so hold they but at will 
Their term of life , of some great Lord that opens 
His Mouth , more than his Purse , their Ears to fill 
more than their Maws ; which greedy Famine grops : 
Whose biting stomaches still do stomach it , 
The while they starve for want of wealth and wit.  
211 

Ah these dear Hearts I pity in my hart , 
Who live by sweet Lines , which do end their life ; 
For , to live long , they hang themselves by Art ; 
Or kill themselves with sharp Inventions knife : 
sith they , to live , thus die , without desert , 
Long may they live where glory is more rife : 
For , greater glory no flesh can attain , 
then die for glory , so to live again . 
212 

And do my sons ( quoth Phusis ) fare but thus ? 
OH then advice me ( Lady ) what to do : 
Who said , sith they no better are for us , 
thou must Astrea ( my dear Sister ) woo 
To rule them with the Rod of Summum ius , 
Before themselves they utterly undo : 
And woo thyself to take it patiently , 
For , better thou shouldst bear , than they should die . 
213 

For , if she rule them not when wild they be , 
She will o'er rule them being truly tamed , 
If , in their life , she do them not oresee , 
She , in their death , will see they shall be damned : 
Though she be blind , she with mine Eyes doth see , 
And I do see how life and death are framed : 
And thus , the best advice that I can give , 
Is them to mortify , that they may live . 
214 

Which having said , she Logus with her took 
( To dress her wounds ) and hied her to her Bed ; 
So Phusis , being of them both forsook , 
Sat at the door of Thanatus , near dead , 
And fell asleep till Logus her awoke , 
Who came again to her as if he fled : 
Whom when she saw , her hart received cheer , 
And in her face the same did soon appear . 
215 

Logus advised her straight to take advice 
Of Thanatus , and Chronus , what to do : 
Which to perform , she seemed somewhat nice , 
Because she thought they sought her to undoo : 
Yet , her love to her sons did her entice , 
Her enemies , in this behalf , to woe : 
And , thus resolved , she boldly rushed in 
Those Gates , which erst to her had fearful been . 
216 

who 's slipp'ry thresholds had near made her fall 
Into the Lake of Lethe , hard at hand ; 
But , Logus held her up ; yet , therewithal 
She grew so fearful , that she scarce could stand ; 
But held by Logus , and a lomy Wall : 
then Logus her besought ( that might command ) 
That she no more that passage would attempt , 
For , 't is not good the Fates too much to tempt . 
217 

But I ( quoth she ) will Chronus call outright ; 
Who forthwith came , on her sweet sounding call ; 
Holp by two wings , one black , the other white ; 
And in his hand a Scythe , to cut down All : 
Who seemed behind but low , and poor in plight ; 
But yet before , most precious , trim , and tall : 
Thus came he forth , and to these Ladies said , 
Who calls ? and spoke with motion most unstaid . 
218 

'T was I ( quoth Logus ) knowest thou not my voice ? 
Or wilt not , sith thou wilt become unkind ? 
The time hath been when It did thee rejoice ; 
Though now ( it seems ) to thee it seems but wind : 
wilt be unconstant , so to change thy Choice ? 
And shall I making thee , thee fickle find ? 
But , if I shall , of this thou shalt be sure 
thou shalt the lesser while , for that endure . 
219 

Thus Logus Chronus did reprove , because 
He would not know that voice which well he knew ; 
But , Chronus he himself , from them , withdraws ; 
As one that feared worse chiding to ensue : 
But , Logus bade him stay , or show a cause , 
Which shows to Logus are all only due ; 
Without whose help , old Chronus doth but dote , 
And cannot sing or say , right Word , or Note . 
220 

On this Injunction , Chronus mute did stand ; 
Yet stood as one that still on Thornes had stood ; 
While Logus seemed his service to command , 
And gave his Tongue pour to be understood : 
Quoth he , let Phusis have thy helping hand , 
To make , if so thou canst , her children good : 
For , they that hurt must heal , or make amends , 
then ( hurting them ) on thee their help depends . 
221 

Here Phusis , hearing how he thus was chid , 
Was at the point , at him , likewise to ra●●e , 
But Logus bade her ( in her Ear ) take heed ; 
For , fair words would with Chronus av-s_d prevail : 
Wherewith her headstrong Will she bridle did , 
For Logus love , and for her son's avail : 
But yet she said , he did great havoc make 
Of her dear children in that Lethe Lake . 
222 

In which respect she meekly him besought 
( By way of satisfaction ) that he would 
Prevent her children's go all to naught ; 
And , with Examples , them from that withhold : 
For I their Mother , ( quoth she ) still have sought 
To make them live as toward children should : 
And if they perish , it shall be their blame , 
For , I 'll leave naught unsought , to let the same . 
223 

I will , quoth Chronus ; and away he flew ; 
And , in one instant , made ( the world throughout ) 
Babes , youths : youths , Men : Men , Old : Old , Babes anew ! 
Ph●sis , mean while , with Logus talked , about 
The hope she had that Chronus would subdue 
Her sons to Logus rule ; which He did doubt : 
For , no man of a rational discourse 
Can think they 'll mend that still wax worse and worse . 
224 

While thus they talked , they on the sudden saw 
Chronus , upon his wings , returning fast ; 
Which in her smoothest hope did make a flaw ; 
For , so he fled as he had been aghast : 
What news ( quoth she ) as he near them did draw , 
Fearing , ere she had spoken , he would be passed : 
What do my Children ? Chronus say , OH what ? 
Speak , speak , OH speak , I long to hear of that . 
225 

They are ( quoth he ) I know not what to say , 
Following their pleasures ; and , do think of naught 
But how they may shifted me with ease away ; 
Yet I thereby the sooner them have caught : 
OH what a world it is to see them play 
( Like Apes ) with each vain toy too dear bought , 
He is no man that cannot do what not ? 
That wise men never knew , or have forgot . 
225 

Aim therefore ( quoth she ) but didst not thou 
With thy Scythe menace them , to manage them ? 
Didst thou not tell them thou their Backs wouldst bow , 
And that this mortal life was but a dream ? 
O! couldst thou not , with all this , cast them low 
To mount them more to high jerusalem ? 
What , have they sense , and cannot use the same , 
That have no kind of sense of sin , and shame ? 
226 

When night was come ( quoth he ) I told each one 
The day was passed : and when the Sabbath came , 
I said a week was fully passed , and gone : 
A month expired , I told them of the same : 
And when the Sun his complete course had run , 
I said a year was past , and spent , with shame : 
But ▪ they that take delight to run awry , 
Learn so to run by Sols course in the Sky . 
227 

In Childhood , I did teach ; in Youth , did threat : 
In Manhood , I reproved : and in Age , 
With their own bones , their bones I sore did beaten : 
And in Decrepitenesse , I worse did rage ; 
For , I did even quench their vital heat : 
And to the gripes of death did them engage . 
Yet for all this , they worse and worse became , 
Still spoiling me , till them I overcame . 
228 

What life then do my Younglings live ( quoth she ? ) 
The life ( said he ) of wanton skipping Roes : 
What the Youngmen ? Of Goats , in Lechery : 
And what men grown ? Of Cocks , proud , prone to blows : 
What aged men ? Of wolves that greedy be 
And what old Age ? Of crafty Foxes those : 
But , most of all , do most of all transgress , 
And all , and some offend , some more , some less . 
229 

Ah out alas ( cried she ) what then remains 
To me , or them , but miserable woe ? 
But , I will try if yet my care and pains , 
Can move them their wrong courses to forgo : 
Logus and Chronus to you it pertains 
To take my part herein , as friends should do : 
Not I ( quoth Logus ) for , against their will , 
I can save none , that long themselves to spill . 
230 

So , Logus left them , and away he hide 
To seek Astrea ; ( who , the earth had left ) 
That she of Phusis sons might take the guide ; 
While Phusis ran about ( of Logus rest ) 
And on her sons , with tragic voice , she cried 
Pity , OH pity , me , she cried est : 
Grief , wanting vent , the Heart ( tormented ) breaks , 
And pain 's not sad , while she at pleasure speaks . 
231 

Whereat Poliphagus ( whose hearing was 
All for the Belly ) said , me think I hear 
( Yet Ears the Belly wants , but let that pass ) 
The voice of Phusis , our kind mother dear : 
The other two said , How comes this to pass 
That she is come ? wherewith she did appear , 
And to them said , Dear Sons , how do ye far ? 
Exceeding well ( quoth they ) and frolic are . 
232 

But , do ye not consider ( Sons ) quoth she ) 
How near ye are to be devoured quite 
By that Gehenna , which I loathe to see , 
( Damned hellish monster headsman of Delight ) 
Except you change your course , and wary be 
To shun him and his hardly shunned spite ? 
For , that spit's hardly shunned that hath both force 
And will , to make her Object worse and worse . 
233 

Alas ( quoth they ) we live , as live we should , 
Prolonging Life with life's immunities ; 
Except the overthrow thereof you would , 
Do not persuade us to live otherwise : 
What though our Souls to pleasure quite are sold , 
Are they not sold thereby to Paradise ? 
The Sale is good , as Reason's law maintains , 
When both the Buyer and the Seller gains . 
234 

Phusis ( too fond , as too kind Mothers are ) 
Seeing them well ( for well they seem to be 
That live , how ever ill , without all care ) 
Was pleased with what she did both hear & see ; 
Who said , that Logus sed , they ill did far , 
And were in more than mortal ieoperdy : 
But sith she saw they were in perfect plight , 
She would ( she said ) partake of their delight . 
235 

Indeed ( quoth they ) that solemn Sage we saw ; 
Who ( algates ) would have drawn us from our sports : 
But , whilst he drew us , we made him withdraw 
Himself from us , with many mortal hurts : 
He would ( forsooth ) have had us keep his Law ; 
And done our Suit and Service to his Courts : 
then , sith he would needs Lord it over us , 
We as free men have served his Lordship thus . 
236 

Would that ( quoth she ) ye had forborn , because 
Many obey him that do rule aright ; 
For , Equity doth limit all his Laws ; 
And they are held for mad , that with him fight : 
Hereat , as loathe t' offend , she made a pause , 
For , in their Fronts she saw the face of night : 
When men look black , then if you peace desire , 
Look white , for Blackness is the child of fire . 
237 

Here , with a smiling , and indulgent look , ( sweet ) 
( To change their sour look with looks more them 
She told them Aletheia undertook 
To show them what was for their safety meet : 
For , her ( quoth they ) we never yet forsook , 
Because we never yet with her did meet : 
Yet have we heard that she is too precise , 
To live with us in Pleasure's Paradise . 
238 

Butt doubtless ( quoth she ) Chronus was with you ; 
What said he to you ? what was his advice ? 
He to and from ( quoth they ) about us flew , 
Yet to stay with us seemed more than nice : 
He coldly sought our lust's heat to subdue , 
But year we wist , we lost him a trice : 
Yet , year he went , with him we merry made , 
And made him most familiar with our Trade . 
239 

wherefore , we pray you , when you go away , 
Leave him with us ; For , we do well agree : 
I will ( quoth she ) so left them at their play , 
And Chronus sent to bear them company : 
With whom they revelld out the night , and day ; 
Though He from them still sought away to flee : 
For Chronus weareth not his Wings for naught , 
sith he doth far out fly the swiftest Thought . 
240 

While they thus gamesomely with Chronus toyed , 
( Deceiving him with Fancies fallacies ) 
They heard a voice ( which sorely them annoyed ) 
That summoned them to leave their luxuries ; 
Herewith by Thanatus , they were destroyed ; 
To satisfy Gehennaes' gourmandize : 
At whose approach , old Chronus fled away , 
For he could never yet , with neither stay . 
241 

Chronus thus leaving them to be devoured 
By fell Gehenna ( their foe capital ) 
( Of whom , by Thanatus , he was assured ) 
He fled to Phusis , and so , told her all : 
Who was within the Earth's womb then immured , 
Providing food for her Brood great and small ; 
Assuring her He schooled them as they ought , 
Till Thanatus had them past schooling brought . 
242 

Phusis herewith tormented in the Soul , 
Ran ( as distracted ) where sick Fancy pleased ; 
Till , at the last , she heard her Sons to howl , 
As those that were most damnably diseased : 
Exclaiming on their lives , and follies fowl , 
That pleased the Sense with all that now displeased : 
But such compunction never comes but where 
The penitent doth desperate appear . 
243 

So , when she had well weighed their agonies 
Which they endured in that Monsters jaws , 
And , having viewed the like extremities , 
Proceeding from the like , or worse cause , 
Of cruel Kings , that of Blood make but Size 
To glue together their most bloody Laws : 
Of corrupt judges ; and Priests negligent , 
The three that raise , or ruin Government . 
244 

The working woes of th'idle-curious ; 
Of the Rich-covetous ; and the Poore-prowde ; 
Rebellious Subjects ; Courtiers vicious : 
Lascivious Dames ; damned Bawds ; the cursed Crowd : 
Erroneous Teachers ; Poets Libellous : 
Cau'ling Philosophers , ( by fools allowed ) 
Of crafty Merchants ; lying Advocates : 
And swearing Seamen ; roving Runagates . 
245 

In few , when she had seen the many woes 
Of all that in Gehennaes' Hold abide , 
She was , by Phobus , ( who attended those ) 
Brought to the place where she did erst reside ; 
Where she did many Prayers sweet compose 
Unto Astrea , ( whom the Heavens did hide ) 
That she would digne to teach , and to correct 
The rest of her wild Children of each Sect.  
246 

So , at these holy Prayers her I leave , 
( sith they are never left that so do pray ; ) 
Now , Poets say ( that all in all perceive ) 
Is this a Fiction ? or a true Essay ? 
If both , than both are ready to deceive 
Those that would pick this Lock without a key : 
But , be it what it will , it is the same 
That is in earnest true , how ere in game . 
Bene cogitata , si excidunt , non occidunt . 
Mimi . Publiani . 
THE SECOND TALE : Containing , The Civil Wars of Death and Fortune . 

1 

There was a Time ( as I have heard it said , 
By those that did , at least , in Print it find ) 
A certain Marriage was solemnised 
Between a mortal Pair of noble kind ; 
And , for the love of those whom Love doth wed , 
Immortal Gods the company refined 
●ith their pure presence ; who , the Feast to grace 
●id revel ( as did all the rest ) a space . 
2 

Among the rest of that immortal Crew , 
Danced Death and Fortune , whose Masks were so like , 
That none , that danced , the one from other knew ; 
So , in their choice of them they were to seek : 
For , some that soght for Fortune , Death outdrew ; 
And some that soght for Death , did Fortune strike● 
T●me was their Minstrel , who did ever play , 
Aswell when they did dance , as they did stay . 
3 

Fortune delighted most to dance with those 
That best could flatter , and the time observe ; 
But Death still loved to foot it with his foes ; 
Or else with such as he saw best deserve : 
When Fortune danced , she turns , she comes , and goes , 
And kept no time , though Time her turns did serve : 
But , when death danced , he did those Mesures tread , 
Whose times were long , & short , & tunes were dead 
4 

So , Fortune used Lavoltaes still to dance 
That rise , and fall , as Time doth either play : 
And Death the Measure of least dalliance , 
that 's Passing-measure , and so straight away : 
Or else the shaking of the Sheets ( per chance ) 
Which he would dance , untired , night and day : 
Wherein he put them down , so that he did 
Drive them from dancing unto Winck-all-hid . 
5 

The dancing done , while yet their bloods were hot , 
Fortune and Death began on terms to stand ; 
Which , for their dancing , had most glory got ; 
And , who their actions did best command : 
From which dispute ( with choler overshot ) 
They fell to urge their powers by Sea and Land ; 
The while the Gods stood most attentively , 
To hear their more contentious Colloqui . 
6 

When lo Death ( Lord of all that breathe this air ) 
Thus 'gan t' inforce his power , beyond compare ; 
I know ( saith he ) their honours they impair 
That strive with those that their inferiors are : 
Yet Foulness is not made a whit more fair 
By being compared with Beauty , much more rare ; 
But , Foulness takes the greater foil thereby , 
And Moles are foils to set forth Beauties die . 
7 

Wert thou not blind ( bold baiard ) thou wouldst see , 
A mighty difference 'twixt thy might and mine ; 
sith among those that most almighty be , 
I do admit no power more divine : 
For Empire large , who can compare with me , 
sith Earth and Aire the same cannot confine : 
Nay , in Earth , Water , yea , in Air , and Fire 
( that 's all in all ) I rule as I desire . 
8 

What breathes , or hath a vegetative Soul , 
But pays me tribute , as unto their King ? 
Nay , do I not the host of stars control ? 
then Heaven and Earth I to obedience bring : 
And Kings , as Beggars , are in my Checke-role ; 
Nay , Kings more oft then Beggars do I sting : 
As far as any thing hath motion , I 
Play Rex , for , all that live , do live to die . 
9 

And therefore testify thy modesty 
( For error to defend is impudence ) 
In granting that which thou canst not deny , 
And to be true , thou knowest in conscience : 
thou sure wouldst blush , if thou hadst but one eye , 
To stand on terms with mine omnipotence : 
But sith thine Eyes are blind , and judgement too , 
thou canst not blush at that thou canst not do . 
10 

Thy reasons seem ( quoth Fortune ) strong to such , 
As do but slightly weigh them ; but to me , 
( That seeth more than thou , at least as much , 
For , thou wanst Eyes , as well as I , to see ) 
They are too base , to brook my Trials Touch , 
For , Tyranny is no true Sovereignty : 
And , Empire large , consists not of large Parts , 
But in the free subjection of whole Hearts . 
11 

Can any King be happy or secure 
That drawing bodies , clean withdraw the hearts ? 
Or is it like that Kingdom should endure , 
That is , by Hate , divided into Parts 
And Hate a cruel Prince must needs procure , 
That seeks his weal by all his Subject's smarts : 
The Will is free , and will not be constrained , 
How ere , for it , the body may be pained . 
12 

As universal as the Universe 
Extends ( I grant ) thy grand authority : 
And that thy Takers ( more than most perverse ) 
Sickness , Mischance , Disgrace , and Destiny , 
Thy tribute take from Man , Beast ( tame or fierce ) 
To fill thy still-consuming Treasury : 
But , their untimely taking , with high hand , 
Makes thy rule odious on Sea and land  
13 

Such Officers , in each crazed commonweal ; 
( That under colour of their Offices , 
Do , with the Sovereign's favour badly deal ) 
Great Mischiefs cause , & Inconveniences ; 
Which though they touch the Subjects , kings do feel 
Who often smart for suffering that disease : 
When Princes tend their private , and neglect 
The common good , they cause this sore effect . 
14 

But balance , on the other side , my might 
In th' upright Schools of true Indiffrencie , 
And , thou shalt find I have their heart and spirit 
Freely obeying mine authority : 
For , thou compellest , but I do invite : 
I Favours give , whose use thou dost deny : 
I do promote all those that rise to me , 
But thou subvertest those that fall to thee . 
15 

then , though that universal be thy power , 
Think not , therefore , Love must to thee be such : 
For Wit and Courage may high place procure , 
But Love and Bounty ampler power by much ; 
then of my currant 'Cause I am so sure , 
That I dare rub it hard on Trials Touch : 
And , for my part , to end this Civil War , 
I 'll put it to judicious jupiter . 
16 

Although I justly may ( quoth Death ) deny 
To put a question , without question , 
Unto the judgement of selfe-equity , 
( For so I hold just jupiter alone ) 
Yet ( not affecting Singularity ) 
I 'll make him judge in this Contention : 
Now Fortune , prove thy power , as I will mine , 
And then let jupiter judge both in fine . 
17 

So , when they were ( to play this master's Prize ) 
Entered this round world's spacious Theatre , 
Fortune adorned herself with Dignities , 
With Gold , & gems which made All follow her : 
These did she fall , to make her followers rise , 
To gather which , they did themselves bestir : 
Kaiser's and King's , that usherd her the way , 
oft caught much more than they could bear away . 
18 

Here might you see ( like Beggars at a dole ) 
Some thronged to death , in scambling for her alms ; 
He oft sped best , that was the veriest fool ; 
Some took up Come , some Crowns , and others Palms 
For which they pulled each other by the Pole , 
While othersome , for them , found precious Balms : 
Some found odd ends to make their States entire , 
And all found some thing that they did desire . 
19 

But , that which was most notable to see , 
Was the poor Priest , who still came lagging last , 
As if ( God wot ) he cared not rich to be , 
To whom kind Fortune livings large did cast 
( As 't were to guerdon his humility ) 
Which , in the name of God , he still held fast : 
And still looked down to find more , if he might , 
For , well he found , he found well by that sleight . 
20 

Philosophers ( that gold did still neglect ) 
Looked only but ( wise-fooles ) to find their Stone ; 
Which toy , in truth , was nothing , in effect , 
But to get all the world to them alone : 
For , with that Stone they would pure gold project 
Worth all the world by computation : 
But , whiles they sought a Stone so rich and fair , 
They perfect gold but turned t'imperfect air . 
21 

Thus , at the heels of Fortune all attend , 
Whom well she feëd for attending so : 
On th' other side , Death to and from did wend 
To seek one that with him would gladly go : 
But , none he found ; which made him those to end 
He overtook , in going to and from : 
For , those which are unwilling Death to meet , 
He is most willing soon them to greet . 
22 

Nor could those Officers that him foreranne 
( Sickness , Mischance , Disgrace , and Destiny ) 
Affect , with his affection , any Man ; 
For , none they found that willingly would die , 
sith all , before , with favours , Fortune wan , 
And , such desired to live eternally : 
For , it is death to think on Death with such , 
That Fortune makes too merry with too much . 
23 

Through Camps , & Hosts he travelled with a trice , 
( For , soldiers needs must meet death by their trade ) 
At last he came where some were throwing dice , 
Who first a Breach should enter newly made ; 
Lord how some chafed ( through Glories avarice ) 
For missing that which they would not have had : 
And , he that won , to lose his life did strive , 
Yet so , as fain he would have scaped alive . 
24 

Among the roving Crew , at Sea , he sought 
For one that willing was to go with him , 
Who , though they valued all their lives at naught , 
And oft for trifles ventured life & limb , 
Yet when their worthless bloods were to be bought 
They sold them dear , and in blood did swim 
From bloody death , as long as they could move , 
For though they feared not death , they life did love 
25 

Through the Turks Galleys , among the Slaves he went 
To seek some desperate slave that longed to die ; 
But lo , not one to die would yield consent , 
For , all , through hope , still looked for liberty : 
Hope doth the hart enlarge that Grief forespent ; 
And Faith keeps Hope and Life , in charity . 
Despair can never seize that hopeful hart , 
That can , through Faith endure an hell of smart . 
26 

At last he to a Monastery came , 
( Where mortified life is most professed ) 
And sought for one to meet him in the same ; 
But , all therein from sudden death them blessed : 
And pra●ed to jesus so their lives to frame 
That suddenly Death might not them arrest : 
A Pater noster , Aue , and a Creed , 
They thought right well bestowed , so well to speed . 
27 

Thence went he to an holy Ancrets Cell , 
Who seemed to be quite buried there alive ; 
He Death embraced , but yet the fear of Hell 
Made him with Death , for life ( in love ) to strive : 
He knew himself ( old Fox ) perhaps , too well 
Straight to presume that God would him forgive : 
So , was most willing , and unwilling too , 
To do as present Death would have him do . 
28 

In fine , Death doubting in his Cause to fail , 
Entreated Sickness such an one to find , 
That would not flinch , though Death did him assail , 
And scorned the favours of that Godddesse blind : 
So , Sickness went , through many a loathsome jail ▪ 
And found , at last , one mortified in mind : 
Who though he were but poor , yet held it vain , 
To follow Fortune that did him disdain . 
29 

On whom seized Sickness , with resistless force , 
And , pulled him down so low , he could not stand ; 
To whom Death came , to make his corpse a Corpse , 
Yet , as his friend , first shaked him by the hand ; 
And by persuasions , would him fain enforce 
With willing mind , to be at his command : 
Which if he would , Death promised faithfully , 
He should die sleeping , or most easily . 
30 

This forlorn wrech thanked death for his good will , 
But yet desired one happy hour to live , 
Which ended , he would Deaths desire fulfil , 
Who from him with a Purge , did Sickness drive , 
Which shortly did one of his Kindred kill , 
From whom , as heir he did some wealth receive : 
And being well in state of health , and wealth , 
He followed Fortune more them Death , by stealth . 
31 

Now , he betook him to a Furriers Trade , 
And having Stock , he multiplied his Store ; 
then Death did mind him of the match he made , 
But , him he answered as he did before : 
Quoth he , OH mar me not ere I am made , 
But let me get ( kind Death ) a little more : 
Content ( quoth Death ) thou shalt have thy desire , 
So I may have thereby what I require . 
32 

Sables and Ermines Death for him did kill , 
And made his wealth thereby , by heaps , increase ; 
Who having now ( death thought ) the world at will , 
He asked him if now he would decease : 
Who yet desired life , of Dearh , to fill 
His coffers to the top , them would he cease : 
Death yet seemed pleased , and brought all those to naught 
Th'reuersions of whose States he erst had bought . 
33 

then , when he had a world of wealth obtained , 
Death came again for his consent to die ; 
But now he told Death , his mind more was pained 
With thought , and care , than erst in poverty : 
Therefore he prayed his death might be refrained 
Till he had gotten some Nobility : 
And then he would go willingly with Death , 
And ( nobly ) yield to him his dearest breath . 
34 

Death yet agreed ( sith his good will he sought ) 
And gave him leave to compass his intent ; 
Who , of a nobleman , decayed , bought 
Both Land & Lordship , Honour , House , & Rent ; 
then He turned Courtier , and with Courtiers wrought 
( By Death's assistance , & with money lent ) 
That he , in time , became a mighty King ; 
And all his Projects to effect did bring . 
35 

then , Death ( not doubting of his will to die ) 
Unto him came , to know his will therein ; 
But , he did Death entreat ( most earnestly ) 
That sith to him he had so gracious been , 
He yet might gain imperial Dignity 
Before his Death , which soon he hoped to win : 
And then he would most willingly resign 
His life to Death , although a life divine . 
36 

Death , hoping , that the greater he was made , 
The greater glory he , by him , should gain , 
( Which might the umpire jupiter persuade 
That Death in power , was Fortunes Sovereign ) 
Made neighbour Kings each other to invade , 
To whom this King a Neuter did remain ; 
Who when they had by wars themselves consumed , 
He all their States , as Emperor , assumed . 
37 

Now being Caesar , Death came straight to him , 
As most assured of his company , 
But to the Emperor he seemed more grim 
Than erst he did , which made him loath to die ; 
Come on ( quoth Death , & therewith held a limb ) 
no odds there must be now , 'twixt you and I : 
To jove I 'll bring you , then with goodwill go 
To him , with me , and see you tell him so . 
38 

Alas ( said he ) I am but newly come 
To honour's height , and wilt thou throw me down 
E'er I be warm , or settled in my Room , 
And so my Brows scarce feel th'●mperiall crown ▪ 
OH suffer me to live , to tell the sum 
Of the Contentments , from my Grandeur grown ; 
For , better had it been still Low to lie 
then , being at the Highest , straight to die . 
39 

Either ( quoth Death ) come willingly with me 
Or thou shalt die a death thou most dost fear : 
He hearing this , from Death did seek to flee , 
And cried on Fortune to assist him there , 
Peace villain then ( quoth Death ) I conjure thee , 
Or lower speak , that Fortune may not hear : 
Yet Fortune ( which he followed ) was at hand , 
And laughed for joy to hear him Death withstand . 
40 

But by this Time , the Time prefixed by jove 
Expired was : and Fortune with her brought 
A world of people , following Her in love , 
Who , willingly , for Fortune long had sought : 
These , as she moved , with her still did move , 
Because she raised them higher than she ought : 
In which respect she had more followars 
Than Sol ( that lights Heavens lamps ) had waiting Stars . 
41 

Lord● how some ( sweeting ) dropped in foll'wing her , 
To whom she dropped that which be dropped them more ; 
For , they were laden so , they scarce could stir , 
Who underwent the same with labour sore : 
And othersome , themselves did so bestir , 
That they in each man's Boat would have an Ore ; 
But , seeking to gripe more than well they could , 
Were forced to lose that which they had in hold . 
42 

Among the rest , there was an Usurer , 
( Whose Back his Belly did , for debt , arrest ) 
Who being fearful of just jupiter , 
Made nice to go with Fortune , and the rest ; 
sith well he knew , He was a Thunderer , 
In , and from whom , he had no interest : 
For he did never deal with such , perhaps , 
That gave for interest naught but Thunderclaps . 
43 

The Soldier came , and gave them much offence , 
That stood between his Breast , & Fortunes Back : 
So , Soldiers have backe-fortune ever since , 
For they , for others good , go still to wrack ; 
And for their wracks have wrackful recompense ; 
For , they are sacked , if they chance not to sack : 
And if they do , the Public Purse must have , 
That which must keep them as a public Slave . 
44 

They , with right Swords , do balance kingdom's rights ; 
( A glorious office they perform the while ) 
The worths of Kings appears by those their weights ; 
Which prove them to be valorous , or vile : 
Yet they gain naught but blows , in bloody fights , 
So , store they get without , or fraud , or guile ; 
The while the gown-man keeps unscarred his skin , 
And with his Pen ( in peace ) the world doth win . 
45 

OH thou true jove , bow down thine upright Ear , 
To hear thy lowest Servants Orisons , 
Which , in the love which he to them doth bear , 
He makes for them ( that wrack still over-runnes ) 
Incline the hearts of Princes far and near , 
As Mars' Minions to love Mars' * son's : 
And , make this little Land yield great increase , 
To stay their stomaches great , in war and peace . 
46 

A Soldiers sword , from sheath , here Fortune took , 
To knight all those that her had followed well , 
Now every man did for a Knighthood look , 
That scarce had found an house wherein to dwell : 
Yet some did much their betters overlook , 
And thrust in for it , while their looks did swell : 
So , Fortune seeing them to look so big , 
Possessed them knights , without or Turf or Twig 
47 

Sois Chevalier ; Arise sir Knight , ( quoth she ) 
then up he spring's , for fear lest Fortune would 
Recall her word for his debility ; 
Now Knight he is , for naught but being bold ; 
For Fortune favours Squires of low degree , 
If they be more audacious than they should : 
Now Honour hath He , get Grace where He can , 
Yet Fortune gave him grace to keep a man  
48 

Some laid on all which they , by Fortune , got 
Upon their backs , that bravely sought to bear 
The Sword upon their shoulders , yet could not ; 
For , it fell in the sheathe ere it fell there : 
fell luck it was that so they were forgot ; 
Yet they forgot themselves , as did appear ; 
But when they saw they missed of what they sought , 
They barred their backs , to line their guts , for naught . 
49 

Which jupiter himself did laugh to see ; 
For , these so much were moved with this disgrace , 
That they were at the point to Death to flee , 
And Fortune leave , for such their fortune base : 
Yet followed her ( most malecontentedly ) 
Beceuse they followed her unto that place : 
To cast away long service on a spleen , 
Is not to foresee , but to be o'erseen . 
50 

O! ' was a world to see what shift was made 
To hold up Greatness with a little stay ; 
'T were sin to say some used the Cheater's trade , 
To borrow with a purpose ne'er to pay ; 
And get all , howsoe'er , that might be had , 
no , no , they did not so , I dare well say : 
But this I say , perhaps , they lived by wit , 
And so to live , some great ones think it fit . 
51 

Now , in these knightly times ye might have seen 
( If you , for pleasure , had but ta'en the pain ) 
Each one ye met withal , a Knight in green ; 
And so the world , b'ing old , grew green again ; 
As if the same but in the Blade had been ; 
For , each one did his Hanger on , sustain : 
Now , Time stood still , to sport himself in May ; 
For , all was Green , and at that state did stay . 
52 

Some shuffled for some Office : some to gain 
Some Monopole , which then could not be got : 
For , Fortune did those Monopoles restrain , 
Because she thought 't was to her Rule a Blot 
To pleasure One by all her Subject's pain , 
Though oft they made them seem , as they were not : 
Some cried for war , and othersome for peace , 
But Fortune , though they cried , still held her peace . 
53 

Now , some , for Coin their Offices did sell , 
As if they had been cloyed with Fortune's grace ; 
And those that bought them , others did compel 
To pay for them , when they were in their Place : 
And some , in seeking somewhat , did rebel ; 
But Fortune brought them soon to wretched case : 
Some strong , sent long men to jerusalem , 
Out of the way , to make a way for them . 
54 

Now , for Truth's Matters , there was much ado ; 
Some this , some that , some none of both would have : 
And yet all three did ( restless ) Fortune woe , 
To yield to neither , that did either crave 
In world's behalf , or flesh's fixed thereto ; 
But all , in show , did seek but Truth to save : 
For , all seemed to solicit Zions cause , 
Which they would have confirmed by the Laws . 
55 

Some said they lied that only Truth did teach ; 
Some envied them that lived by teaching so : 
And at their lives , and livings sought to reach , 
Which they forgave , but would not so forgo : 
Sums Tongues defended Truth , which they did preach , 
Whose actions gave her many a bitter blo : 
Some lived , as dying , while they sought to live ; 
And some died living ; yet did most relive . 
56 

Some , Liars called Carnall-libertie 
The glorious Liberty of Truth's dear Sons ; 
And her they urged to prove that verity ; 
But , truth 's betrayed by such untrustie ones , 
That Sacrilege do gilled with Sanctity ; 
Yet , for that , look for high promotions : 
OH 't is a world of mischief when Pretence 
Doth shroud a world of Inconvenience ! 
57 

When Truths sons play the Politicians , 
Heaven help thee Truth , in Earth thy case is hard : 
truth 's hardly matched with Machiavelians , 
That her will wound so they themselves may ward : 
For , pious Politicians are black Swans ; 
And , blessed are Realms that they do ( ruling ) guard : 
But whereas Statesmen mere Earth meditate , 
There Heavenly matters squared are by the State.  
58 

Some others followed her , by following others ; 
Upon great men these greatly did depend , 
All those , for likeness , might have been my brothers , 
Who then began to live , when life did end : 
Or if before , they were blessed in their mothers ; 
For , those they tended that themselves did tend : 
It is absurd that Lords should tend their men , 
Yet some Lords ( Gods fools ) do it now and then . 
59 

Some of these Servants were so fortunate , 
That they came forward , while their Lords went back : 
For , Love beginning with ourselves , we hate 
Ourselves ; if we by Service go to wrack : 
Their Lords they loved for their own estate ; 
And loved to have that which their lords did lack : 
OH they are careful Servants that will keep 
Their lords estate , while they , with Pleasure sleep . 
60 

And some of this sort thrived , not by their Lords ; 
Yet by their Lords ; for , by their leave , they sell 
Their favours , nay their honours , deeds , and words , 
And care not who do ill , so they do well : 
Whose Clarkeship so much Art to them affords , 
That for an Inch , aloud , they took an Ell : 
So mere Cliffs made they of their Lords to climb 
To some high note , by keeping Tune , and Time.  
61 

These Climbers in each Clime are highest of all 
In their conceit ; for , they conceive they can 
The round world bandy like a Racket-ball ; 
And make a mere fool of the wisest Man : 
They ween the world without them were so small , 
As Ladies well might wield it with their Fan : 
OH there 's no measure in the pride of such . 
That from too little , rise to reach to too much ! 
62 

Some others thought they Fortune gracious found , 
Genus and Species throwing in their way ; 
Which they took up , and them together bound , 
To stay with them to be to them a stay : 
But in the binding did them so confound , 
That they proved fools in specie to betray 
Genus and Species to such bitter Bands , 
For which they lost both honour , goods , and lands . 
63 

Lord , how some cloistered up themselves like Friars , 
To find out These , whom thus they did betray ; 
And lay in ambush for them many years , 
Watching , by Candle-light , oft night and day ; 
Spending much money of their friends , or theirs , 
And all ( God wot ) but to abuse their prey : 
OH Genus , Genus , Species , Species , ye 
Be most accursed , that thus still coursed be ; 
64 

Some others looked for Euclids Elements , 
Whereof , they thought , the whole world did consist ; 
Which found , they found therein such sweet contents , 
That Euclid carried them which way he list ; 
They looked for nothing less than Regiments , 
But held themselves in Euclid only blessed : 
Who blessed them so , that if for lands they sought , 
They got no land , but measured land for naught . 
65 

others there were , that sought to find a Spell , 
And needs would rise to Fortune by a Fiend ; 
Whom they would raise , for that intent from hell ; 
These tended fiends too much , good Fate to tend : 
Who whiles they soght the gods themselves t' excel , 
They died , like damned Beggars , in the end : 
So , they that needs would rise through devil's aid , 
Down to the devil were , at last , conveyed . 
66 

Some others looked for Spirits , not Spirits of hell , 
But spirits of sack , and liquors of that kind ; 
Wherewith they thought ( if once they could excel ) 
They could the hands of Fortune loose or bind : 
This made them ( like poor Crickets ) still to dwell , 
In , or about the fire till they were blind : 
And then , like Bats , that still do loathe the light , 
They keep the dark conversing with that spirit . 
67 

others there were that sought to find the way 
T'annatomize the Corpse of Reasoning , 
With Logical Conclusions ; these would play 
As jugglers play with Boxes , or a Ring ; 
Make men believe what ere they please to say ; 
And to a Nonplus Reas'n herself to bring : 
On these , indeed , too oft would Fortune smile , 
To see how they the fond world did beguile . 
68 

Some wordy-men , by words , sought worthiness , 
These reached at Rhetorics Rules to rule thereby ; 
And they that found the same , found little less 
Than greatest Rule , for they ruled wordily : 
These men , for need , could make some men confess , 
They Treachers were , and yet themselves belie : 
These still were Fortune's Minions ; for they could 
With wind of words o'erthrow wits strongest hold . 
69 

others there were that still gazed on the Stars , 
As if by Stars , they should the Sun transcend : 
These told of future weathers , woes , and wars , 
Of the beginnings of them , and their end : 
Of Prophets that should rise ( to kindle jars ) 
And of I wot not what , which they defend : 
But while they blabbed out Fortune's Secrets , she 
Made them but poor , and liars held to be . 
70 

Some sought for Notes , so to be notable , 
Not Notes to rule themselves , but Notes in Rule ; 
To rule the voice by those Notes tuneable , 
Yet many did themselves the while misrule : 
Who while their Heads held points commendable , 
In many points they erred from Reason's Rule : 
So , this gift Fortune gave their Heads : they should 
Still hold more Crotchets , than their Purses Gold.  
71 

Some others sought for Tongues as if they would 
Have stopped their flight , as they from Babel fled , 
By catching them in nets ; so them to hold , 
For themselves only , till themselves were dead : 
These rich in Tongues , were not still so in gold ; 
For , their Tongues tasted oft too much of Lead : 
So , these wel-tonged men tied were by the Tongues , 
oft to be authors of their proper wrongs . 
72 

As some sought Tongues , so others Hands did seek ; 
Italian , Roman , Spanish , French , and Dutch , 
With Letter Frieze among , and Letter Creek ; 
Those with their ha●dss , did Fortune seldom touch ; 
For , they would needs teach those hands in a week , 
So , sold for little , that they sold for much : 
For it is much to give a Crown for naught ) 
But only to mar hands , too evil taught . 
73 

These pasted up , in each place where they came , 
( And no place was there where they did not come ) 
Bills ( & those Hands they held were oft but lame ) 
That they would give their Hands , for some small sum ; 
To those that would but trust them for the same 
So , in a week , they cozened all and some : 
For , in a week , and some odd hours beside , 
They promised that which they could not abide . 
74 

Their occupation brought thus to disgrace , 
They , though they would with all aforehand be , 
Yet ran behind hand still , from place to place : 
So , with their Hands they caught but A , B , C : 
Which by interpretation of the place , 
Is , a all b base c Cheaters are , that so do flee : 
I wish those Handmen their hands well had used , 
For , I know Penmen that are so abused . 
75 

But some of Fortune's followers were her foes , 
And Death's true friends ( who for him swords unsheathe 
But showed it not , lest she should them dispose 
Where , if they would , they could not meet with death : 
These followed her for nothing but for blows , 
For they , with fencing , kept themselves in breath : 
And , for they could but breath by that their trade , 
They still were willing Fortune to invade . 
76 

Some followed her by acting all men's parts , 
These on a Stage she raised ( in scorn ) to fall : 
And made them Mirrors , by their acting Arts , 
Wherein men saw their faults , though ne'er so small : 
Yet some she guerdoned not , to their deserts ; 
But , othersome , were but ill-action all : 
Who while they acted ill , ill stayed behind , 
( By custom of their manners ) in their mind . 
78 

If manners make men's fortunes good , or bad , 
According to those manners , bad , or good , 
then men , ill-mannered , still are ill bestead ; 
Because , by Fortune , they are still withstood : 
Ah , were it so , I muse how those men had 
Among them some that swam in Foizons flood ; 
Whose manners were but apish at the best ; 
But Fortune made their fortunes but a jest . 
79 

There were knights-arrant , that in Fortune's spite , 
( Because they could not king it as they would ) 
Did play the Kings , at least proud kings in sight , 
And oft were prouder than a Caesar should : 
Yet Nature made them men by Fortune's might , 
And Fortune made them Nature's Zanee bold : 
So those , in nature , Fortune flouted so , 
That though she made them Kings , she kept them low . 
80 

But some there were ( too many such , there are ) 
That followed Fortune in more abject kind ; 
These matches made between the Hound & Hare , 
I would say whore ; for , men hunt such to find : 
These faithless beastly Brokers of cracked ware 
Had too too often Fortune in the wind ; 
Who followed so the sent , that oft they did 
find her where she , from those they spoiled , lay hid . 
81 

Some others followed her by badging Land , 
Or beastly grazing ( yet made men thereby ) 
For , they that did those myst'ries understand 
Caught hold of Fortune in obscurity ; 
To whom she ( strumpet-like ) lay at command , 
Who , lusting for her , gripped her greedily : 
Till they grew great by her : OH monstrous birth , 
Where She the He makes great with Grass and Earth ! 
82 

The Lawyers went with these , with hands as full 
Of Deeds , and Manuscripts as they could hold ▪ 
But , Fortune from the same those Scripts did pull , 
And in exchange filled either fist with Gold : 
For , whiles they had but Papers their were dull ; 
But being wel-mettled they were blithe and bold : 
For , gold 's a sovereign Restorative , 
And makes men more than dead , much more than live . 
83 

Aurum potabile is of that power 
( If store thereof be powered in out of hand 
Like jupiters' prevailing Golden Shower ) 
That it will make Death lie at Life's command : 
It is the Aquavitae which doth cure 
All sore Consumptions that our weal withstand : 
Nay 't is the Aqua fortis which will eat 
Through leaden Breasts , Cares , fretting , thence to fret . 
84 

OH give me Gold , and I will do , what not ? 
And let but store of Angels wait on me , 
I 'll make myself a God , with Thunder-shot ; 
Nay , I will make the Earthly Gods to flee 
To Hean'n , or Hell , where they shall be forgot , 
sith there no God but I will minded be : 
But God , thou know'st , the Age is iron the while 
That hammer can a God of thing so vile ! 
85 

O! gold , the god which now the world doth serve , 
( This Midas-world that would touch naught but gold 
Gild her body while her soul doth starve ) 
How glorious art thou ( held fast ) to behold ? 
thou mak'st a Beast a Man , and Man to swerve 
more than a Beast ; yet thou dost all uphold : 
For , whom thou tak'st into thy Patronage , 
It matters not what is his Title-page . 
86 

Men value men according to thy weight ; 
For , be their value ne'er so valorous 
it 's held but base and made , by nature , sleight ; 
Nor can it be nor good , nor glorious , 
Without thy virtue do it over-freight ; 
And so remain they without Grace , or Use : 
But , if thou list to lad a leaden Ass , 
( While thou rid'st on him ) he o'er gods doth pass . 
87 

Come Gold : them come ( dear Gold ) & ride on me , 
I 'll be thine Ass , or Packhorse , which thou wilt ; 
Although thou heavy art , I 'll carry thee ; 
Albeed thou art much heavier through thy guilt : 
Lad me ( good Gold ) till my back broken be : 
sith , thou again canst make me , being spilt : 
For all men now may use me like a Sot , 
( That bears abuse ) because I bear thee not . 
88 

then foot it not whiles Copper rides on me , 
Base Copper dogs , being made themselves to bear 
But logs and faggots ( for a starving fee ) 
And in a Chimneys end away to wear : 
then up ( fair Gold ) I'll so mount under thee , 
As if no ground should hold me , when I rear : 
For , by how much the more thou mak'st me bend , 
So much the more thou mak'st me to ascend . 
89 

Ride on me Gold , and I will ride on those 
( If so I lust ) of men , or womenkind , 
That shall be great , or fair , or friends , or foes , 
Until I ridden have them out of wind : 
But Heaven my Heart still otherwise dispose , 
For , riding so , I blister should my mind : 
Which still would run with matter of annoy , 
And Soul , and Body so , perhaps , destroy . 
90 

then , gold , sith thou wouldst tempt me to this spoil 
Farewell ( dear Gold ) I 'll not buy thee so dear ; 
I am content , without thy help , to toil 
For so much Silver as will arm me here 
' 'Gainst wounding Wants , which there do keep a coil , 
Where nothing is but care , and grief , and fear ; 
My Back and Belly kept , in rest I 'll sleep , 
( Through conjuring Books ) from gold , that devils keep . 
91 

The Fox will eat no Grapes : well , be it so ; 
I 'll eat no Grapes that set my teeth on edge , 
To eat such bits as bane where oft they go , 
And Heart and Mind do all alike besiege : 
Who gathers golden fruits in Hell that grow , 
Do for the same oft put their Souls to pledge : 
But in that state that stands with little cost , 
Is found the golden life that Adam lost . 
92 

Touching this World ( to my blame be it said ) 
I think of nothing , but what nothing brings ; 
And yet no thing more musing then my head ; 
And yet my Muse my head with nothing mings : 
Both feed on Aire , wherewith is nothing fed 
But dead , or dull , or else mere witless things : 
For sure that wit ne'er came near wisdoms schools 
That weenes' mere Air fat's any thing but fools . 
93 

I would , and would not , have , what I have not : 
I would not have , that had , the Hart inflates : 
Yet would I have my Luck light on that Lot 
That mends the drooping Mind , & Bodies states : 
In too much , Nature oft is overshot ; 
And oft too little , Art disanimates : 
then , in this life , that seek I , for my part , 
That Nature keeps in life , and quickens Art  
94 

To bury Living thoughts among the dead , 
( Dead earthly things ) is , ere Death comes , to die : 
For , dead they are that lie in Gold , or Led ; 
As they are buried that in Earth still lie : 
The thoughts are most relieved when they are fed 
With Angel's food , or sweet Philosophy : 
But , some seem on this Manna still to live , 
Whom Quails and Woodcoks most of all relieve . 
95 

Well , let these some outlive as many years , 
As they have hairs , they do but living die : 
If so ; their Souls must needs be full of fears , 
Whose Hopes in this dead life alone do lie : 
For , they wear ever double as Time wears ; 
In Soul and Body wear they double - die : 
OH then , how painful is that pleasant life , 
Wherein all joy , with such annoy , is rife . 
96 

Bear with me Readers ( that 's the recompense 
I ask for telling you this merry Tale ) 
For running out of my Circumference , 
I 'll come in straight , before a merry Gale : 
But , yet a word or two , ere I go hence , 
And then have with you over Hill and Dale : 
Nothing shall let me to relate the rest , 
For , commonly behind remains the best . 
97 

This world ( me seems ) is like , I wot not what : 
that 's hard ; for , that is no comparison : 
Why that 's the cause I it compare to that ; 
For , who 's he like to , that is like to none ? 
't is not like God ; for , 't is too full of hate : 
Nor like the Diu'l , for he fears God alone : 
It is not like to Heaven , Earth , nor Hell , 
Nor aught therein , for , they in compass dwell ! 
98 

then what is 't like ? if like to any thing , 
it 's like itself ; and so it is indeed : 
Or , if you will , like to the oldest Ling , 
That limbs their fingers that on it do feed : 
So that , all things they touch , to them do cling , 
And let them so , from doing purest deed : 
If so it be , how mad are men the while 
To cleave to that which do them so defile ? 
99 

Now , this most noghtie thing , or thing of naught , 
I cannot skill of ; though but bade I am ; 
Therefore by me it least of all is sought , 
Though oft I seek for pleasure in the same ; 
Which yet ( I hope ) shall not be over-bought , 
For , I will give but goodwill for my game : 
And if goodwill will me no pleasure bring 
I 'll buy therewith ( I hope ) a better thing . 
100 

Now from myself , I eft to Fortune fly , 
( And yet I fly from Her , and She from me ) 
Who came thus followed with this Company , 
That jupiter did envy it to see : 
There did she muster them , in policy , 
That jove of all might well informed be : 
For , when an heap confused are called by Poll , 
The many parts do make the number whole . 
101 

Amongst whom Philosophers and Poets came , 
( Last of the Crowd ) and could not well appear ; 
To whom blind Fortune gave naught else but fame , 
Whereof they fed ; but looked lean with their cheer : 
So , they in Heaven deified this Dame , 
sith they ( poor souls ) could not come at her here : 
And ever since a Goddess called she is , 
Poets thank her for That , She you for This.  
102 

Who , though they be ( perhaps ) but passing poor , 
Yet can they deify whom ere they will ; 
then Demigods should cherish them therefore , 
That they may make them whole gods by their skill : 
'twixt whom there should be interchange of store , 
And make of Wit and Wealth a mixture still , 
That may each others woeful wants supply ; 
For , men by one another live , or die . 
103 

Vain fools , what do ye mean to give her heaven , 
That gives you nothing but an earthly hell ? 
that 's only air , which she to you hath given , 
To make ye pine , whilst ye on earth do dwell : 
Ne'er speak of Wit , for ye are Wit-bereau'n 
To lie for naught , and make Naught so excel : 
For , now , who for him self 's not wise alone , 
Is vainly wise , though wise as Solomon . 
104 

By this time Death came with his Emperor , 
Who followed Death , far off , which jove did see ; 
To whom Death said , Lo upright jupiter , 
This Kesar ( though a Caesar ) follows me : 
He doth indeed ( said jove ) though somewhat far 
( But kept in off , to show indiffrencie ) 
For , though the judge do judge aright ( sometime ) 
Before both Tales be heard ) it is a crime . 
105 

How sayest ( quoth he ) Lieutenant ▪ didst thou come 
With Death to us of thy mere own accord ? 
Whereat the Emperor was strooken dumb , 
For , he feared death , as slaves do fear their Lord : 
Yet , with desire of glory overcome , 
At last he spoke , yet spoke he but a word , 
Which was , save I the shortest word of words , 
For , no a letter more than I affords . 
106 

Which he with submiss voice ( scarce audible ) 
Uttered , as one that would not well be heard ; 
But jupiter ( although most sensible ) 
took on him not to hear , and pressed him hard 
To speak ( through fear ) not so insensible ; 
For , my vice joves ( quoth he ) are ne'er afeard : 
Therefore , on thy allegiance unto me , 
I charge thee speak , as thou from death wert free . 
107 

then , with a princely death-out-daring look 
He said , Dread jove , I had been worse than mad , 
sith your Lieutenancie to me you took , 
If I so great a grace neglected had ; 
Which so I had , if so I had forsook 
Without your notice , that which made me glad : 
Nor would I have with Death come now to you , 
But that he threatened me to bring me low . 
108 

Wherewith the judge ( just jove ) did sentence give 
On Fortune's side ; which made Death rage so sore , 
That at the Emperor he amain did drive , 
Whilst jove looked on , and Fortune fled therefore : 
Short tale to make , he did him life deprive , 
And ever since Death rageth more and more : 
That now all men false Fortune do prefer , 
Before just Death ; nay juster jupiter . 
109 

And , thus with Death ( that All in fine doth end ) 
We end our Tale , and , if a lie it be , 
Yet naked Truth dares such a lie defend ; 
Because such lies do lie in verity : 
But though loud lies do lie , they will not bend 
So low as most profound Morality : 
then , be it lie , or be it what it will , 
It lies too high , and low for Death to kill . 
Bene cogitata , si excidunt , non occidunt . 
Mimi Publiani . 
Finis . 

The Triumph of DEATH : OR , The Picture of the Plague : According to the Life , as it was in Anno Domini . 1603.  

SO , so , just Heavens , so , and none otherwise , 
Deal you with those that your forbearaunce wrong 
Dumb Sin ( not to be named ) against us cries 
Yea , cries against us with a tempting tongue . 
And , it is heard ; for , Patience oft provoked 
Converts to Furies all-consuming flame ; 
And , foulest sin ( though ne'er so cleanly cloaked ) 
Breaks out to public plagues , and open shame ! 
Ne'er did the Heaven's bright Eye such sins behold 
As our long Peace and Plenty have begot ; 
Nor ere did Earth's declining props uphold 
An heavier plague , than this outrageous Rot ! 
Witness our Cities , Towns , and Villages , 
Which Desolation , day and night , invades 
With Coffins ( Cannon-like ) on Carriages , 
With trenches rammed with Carcases , with Spades ! 
A shiu'ring cold ( I sensibly do feel ) 
Glides through my veins , and shakes my hart and hand , 
When they do prove their virtue , to reveal 
This plague of plagues , that overlades this Land ! 
Horror stands gaping to devour my Sense 
When it but offers but to mention it ; 
And Will abandoned by Intelligence 
Is drowned in Doubt , without her Pilot Wit ! 
But , thou , OH thou great giver of all grace , 
Inspire my Wit , so to direct my Will , 
That notwithstanding either's wretched case , 
They may paint out thy Plagues with grace , with skill , 
That so these Lines may reach to future times , 
To strike a terror through the heart of Flesh ; 
And keep It under that by Nature climbs , 
For , Plagues do Sin suppress when they are fresh . 
And fresh they be , when they are so expressed , 
As though they were in being seen of Sense ; 
Which divine Poesy performeth best , 
For , all our speaking Pictures come from thence ! 
The object of mine outward Sense affords 
But too much Matter for my Muse to form ; 
Her want ( though she had words at will ) is words , 
T' express this Plagues unutterable * Storm ! 
Fancy , thou needst not forge false Images 
To furnish Wit t' express a truth so true ; 
Pictures of Death stop up all Passages , 
That Sense must needs those obvious objects view . 
If Wit had pour t' express what Sense doth see , 
It would astonish Sense that hears the same ; 
For , never came there like Mortality , 
Since Death from Adam to his Children came ! 
Scarce three times had the Moon replenished 
Her empty Horns with light ; but th' empty Grave 
( Most ravenous ) devoured so the Dead , 
As scarce the dead might Christian burial have ! 
th' almighties hand that long had , to his pain , 
Offered to let his Plagues fall , by degrees , 
And with the offer pulled it back again , 
Now breaks his Vial , and a Plague out-flees , 
That glutts the Air with Vapours venomous , 
That puttrifie , infect , and flesh confound , 
And makes the Earth's breath most contagious , 
That in the Earth and Air but Death is found ! 
A deadly Murrain , with resist less force , 
Runs through the Land and levels All with it ! 
The Coast it scoured , in uncleanlie Course , 
And thousands fled before it to the Pit ! 
For , ere the breath of this Contagion , 
could fully touch the flesh of Man , or Beast , 
They on the sudden sink , and straight are gone , 
So , instantly , by thousands , are decreased ! 
no Physic could be found , to be a mean , 
But to al●aie their Pain , delay their Death ; 
In this Physician's Harvest , They could glean 
But corrupt Air and Danger by that Breath . 
All Arts and Sciences were at a stand , 
And All that lived by them , by them did die ; 
For death did hold their heads , & stayed their hand , 
sith they no where could use their Faculty . 
The nursing Mothers of the Sciences 
Withdrew their Foster-milke while wit did fast ; 
For , both our forlorn Universities 
Forsaken were and Colleges made fast ▪ 
The Magistrates did sly , or if they stayed , 
They stayed to pray , for if they did command , 
Hardly , or never should they be obeyed ; 
For , Death dares all Authority withstand . 
And , where 's no Magistrate , no Order is ; 
Where Order wants , by order doth ensue 
Confusion straight , and in the neck of this 
Must silent Desolation all subdue ! 
For fear whereof , both king , & kingdom shakes , 
sith Desolation threatens them so sore ; 
All hope of earthly help the Land forsakes , 
And Heaven powers plags upon it more & more ! 
Now , Death refreshed with a little rest 
( As if inspired with the Spirit of Life ) 
With fury fly's ( like Air ) through man and beast , 
And makes eftsoons the murrain much more rife ! 
London now smokes with vapours that arise 
From his foul Sweat , himself he so bestirs ; 
Cast out your Dead , the Carcasse-carrier cries , 
Which he , by heaps , in groundless graves interres ! 
Now scours he Streets , on either side , as clean 
As smoking showers of rain the Streets do scour ; 
Now , in his Murdering , he observes no mean , 
But tag and rag he strikes , and striketh sure . 
He lays it on the skins of Young and Old , 
The mortal marks whereof therein appear : 
Here , swells a Botch , as high as hide can hold , 
And , Spots ( his surer Signs ) do muster there ! 
The South wind blowing from his swelling cheeks , 
Sultry hot Gales , did make Death rage the more , 
That on all Flesh to wreak his Wrath he seeks , 
Which fly's , like chaff in wind , his breath before ! 
He raiseth Mountains of dead carcases , 
As if on them he would to Heaven ascend , 
T' assuage his rage on divine Essences , 
When he of Men , on Earth , had made an end . 
Nothing but Death alone , could Death suffice , 
Who made each Mouse to carry in her Coat 
His heavy vengeance to whole Families , 
Whilst with blunt Botches he cuts others throat ! 
And , if such Vermin were thus all employed , 
He would constrain domestic fowls to bring 
Destruction to their haunts ; So , men destroyed 
As swiftly as they could bestir their wing ! 
So , Death might well be said to fly the field , 
And in the House foil with resistless force , 
When he abroad all kind of Creatures killed 
That he found living in his lifeless Course ! 
Now like to Bees , in Summer's heat , from Hives , 
Out fly the Citizens , some here , some there ; 
Some all alone , and others with their wives : 
With wives and children some fly , All for fear ! 
Here stands a Watch with guard of Partezans 
To stop their Passages , or too , or from ; 
As if they were nor Men , nor Christians , 
But Fiends , or Monsters , murdering as they go ! 
Like as an Hart , death-wounded , held at Bay 
Doth fly , if so be can , from Hunter's chase , 
That so he may recover ( if he may ) 
Or else to die in some more easy place . 
So , might ye see ( dear Heart ) some lusty Lad 
Struck with the Plague , to high him to the field , 
Where in some Brake , or Ditch ( of either glad ) 
With pleasure , in great pain● , the ghost doth yield ! 
Each Village , free , now stands upon her guard ; 
None must have harbour in them but their own : 
And as for life and death all watch , and ward , 
And fly for life ( as Death ) the man unknown ! 
For , now men are become so monstrous 
And mighty in their power , that with their breath 
They leave no ills , save goods , from house to house , 
But blow away each other from the Earth ! 
The sickest Sucklings breath was of that force 
That it the strongest Giant overthrew ; 
And made his healthy corpse a carrion Corse , 
If it ( perhaps ) but came within his view ! 
Alarm , alarm , cries Death , down , down with All ; 
I have , and give Commission All to kill : 
Let not one stand to piss against a wall , 
sith they are all so good , in works so ill . 
Vnjoint the body of their Commonweal , 
Hue it in pieces , bring it all to naught ; 
With Rigours boisterous hand all Bands conceal , 
Wherein the heavens stand bound to Earth in aught . 
Wound me the scalp of human Policy , 
sith it would stand without the help of heaven 
On rotten props of all impiety ; 
Away with it , let it be life-bereau'n . 
With plagues , strike through Extortions loathed loins , 
And rivet in them glowing pestilence : 
Give , give Injustice many mortal foins , 
And with a plague , send , send the same from hence . 
Wind me a Botch ( huge Botch ) about the Neck 
Of damned disguised , man-pleasing Sanctity : 
And Simony with self same Choler deck , 
Plague these two Plagues with all extremity . 
For , these are Pearls that quite put out the eyes 
Of Piety in Christian Commonwealths ; 
These , these are they , from whom all plagues do rise , 
Than plagues on plagues , by right , must reave their healths . 
Dash Vengeance vial on the cursed brow 
Of Zodomy , that ever-crying sin ; 
And that it be no more whole Pelions throw 
Of plagues upon it both without , and in ! 
Through black Avernus ( hell's mouth ) send the same 
Into the deepest pit of lowest hell ; 
Let never more the nature , nor the name 
Be known within the Zones , where men may dwell , 
Oppress Oppression , this Lands burning-fever , 
With burning sores of feavers-pestilent ; 
And now or never , quell it now and ever , 
For , it doth quell the Poor and Innocent 
Bring down damned Pride with a pure pestilence 
Derived from all plagues that are unpure , 
Extracted to th' extremest quintessence , 
For Pride all Sins , & plagues for sin , procures . 
In Atheisms breast ( instead of her cursed hart ) 
Set an huge Botch , or worse plague , more compact ; 
That it may never convert , or pervert , 
Nor have power to persuade , much less coact . 
Beblaine the bosom of each Mistress , 
That bears her Breasts ( lusts signs ) guests to allure ; 
With a plague kiss her , ( that plagues with a kiss ) 
And make her ( with a murrain ) more demure . 
Our puling puppets , coy , and hard to please , 
My too straitlaced all-begarded Girls 
( The scum of Niceness ) London Mistresses ) 
Their skins embroider with plagues orient Pearls . 
For these , for First-fruits , have Fifteen to spare 
But to a Beggar say , We have not for ye : 
then do away this too-fine wasteful Ware 
To second death ; for they do most abhor me . 
then scour the Brothel-houses , make them pure , 
That flow with filth that wholsomst flesh infects ; 
Fire out the Pox from thence with plagues unpure ; 
For they do cause but most unpure effects . 
Plague carnal Colleges , wherein are taught 
Lusts beastly lessons , which no beast will brook , 
Where Aratine is read , and nearly sought ; 
And so Lust's Precepts practised by the Book . 
Who knows not Aratine , let him not ask 
What thing it is ; let it suffice he was : 
But what ? no Mouth can tell without a Mask ; 
For Shame itself , will say , OH let that pass ! 
He was a Monster , Tush , OH nothing less : 
For , Nature monsters makes ( how ere unright ) 
But Nature ne'er made such a Fiend as this , 
Who , like a Fiend , was made in Nature's spite ! 
Therefore , away with all that like his Rules , 
Which Nature doth dislike as she doth Hell : 
Break up those free ( yet dear & damned ) Schools , 
That teach but 'gainst kind Nature to rebel . 
Rogh-cast the skin of smooth-faced glozing Guile 
With burning blisters to consume the same , 
That swears to sell cracked wares , yet lies the while , 
And of gain , by deceiving , makes her game . 
Who , but to utter , but a thing of naught , 
Utters all oaths , more precious than her Soul : 
And thinks them well bestowed , so it be bought 
So , utters wares with oaths , by falsehood foul . 
This foul offence to Church & Commonwealth , 
Sweep clean away with Wormwood of annoy : 
For , it consisteth but by lawful stealth ; 
then , let the truest Plagues it quite destroy . 
Of Taverns , reaking still with vomitings , 
Draw , with the Owners , all the Drawers out ; 
Let none draw Air , that draw on Surffetting , 
But Excess , and her Slaves , botch all about . 
sith such by drawing out , and drawing on 
Do live ; let such be drawn out on a Bear : 
For , they with wine have many men undone , 
And famished them , in fine , through belly-cheer . 
Brown-paper Merchants ( that do ven● such trash 
To heedless heirs , to more wealth born then wit , 
That 'gainst such Paper-rocks their houses dash , 
While such sly Merchants make much use of it ) 
Use them as they do use such heirs to use , 
That is , to plague them without all remorse : 
These with their Brokers , plague ; for they abuse 
God , King , and Law , by Laws abused force . 
then , petti-botching-brokers , all bebotch 
That in a month catch eighteen pence in pound ; 
Six with a Bill , and twelve for use they catch , 
So , use they all they catch , to make unsound . 
That they may catch them , and still patches make , 
Which in the pound do yield them eighteen pence ; 
Forced , like sheep trespassing , the Pound to take , 
Leaving their Fleece , at last , for recompense . 
hang in their hangman's wardrobe plagues to air 
That all may fly , or die that with it mell ; 
And so , when none will to their rags repair , 
They must forsake their lives , or labour well . 
Briefly , kill cursed Sin in general , 
And let Flesh Be no more to harbour it ; 
Away with filthy Flesh , away with all 
Wherein still-breeding Sin on brood doth sit . 
This was Death's charge , & this charge did he give , 
Which was performed ( forthwith ) accordingly ; 
For now the dead had wasted so the live , 
( Or wearied so ) that some unburied lie : 
For , All observed the Pestilence was such 
As laughed to scorn the help of Physics art ; 
So that to death All yielded with a touch , 
And sought no help , but help with ease to part . 
An hell of heat doth scorch their seething veins , 
The blood doth boil , and all the Body burns , 
Which raging Heat ascending to the Brains 
The powers of Reason there quite overturns ! 
then , 't is no sin to say a Plague it is 
From whence immortal miseries do flow ; 
That makes men reason with their rest to miss , 
And Souls and Bodies do endanger so . 
Here cry the parents fot their children's death ; 
There howl the children for their parent's loss ; 
And often die as they are drawing breath 
To cry for their but now inflicted cross . 
Here goes an husband heavily to seek 
A Grave for his dead wife ( now hard to have ) 
A wife there meets him that had done the like , 
All which ( perhaps ) are buried in one Grave . 
The last suruivor of a Family , 
Which yesterday ( perhaps ) were all in health , 
Now dies to bear his fellow's company , 
And for a Grave for all , gives all their wealth . 
There wends the fainting Son with his dead Sire 
On his sole shoulders born , him to inter ; 
Here goes a father with the like desire , 
And to the Grave alone , his Son doth bear . 
The needy , greedy of a wealthy Pray , 
Run into houses cleansed of Families , 
From whence they bring , with goods , their bane away , 
So end in wealth their lives and miseries . 
no Cat , Dog , Rat , Hog , Mouse , or Vermin vile , 
But ushered Death , where ere themselves did go ; 
For , they the purest Air did so defile , 
That whoso breathed it , did his breath forgo . 
At London ( sink of Sin ) as at the Fount , 
This all-confounding Pestilence began . 
According to that Plagues most woeful wont , 
From whence it ( flowing ) all the realm o'reranne . 
Which to prevent , at first , they pestered 
Pest-houses with their murraine-tainted Sick : 
But , though from them , & thence the healthy fled , 
They , ere suspected , mortified the Quick . 
Those so infected , being ignorant 
That so they are , converse with whom soe'er , 
Whose open Shops and Houses all do haunt , 
And find most danger , where they lest do fear . 
And so not knowing sicke-folke from the sound 
( For , such ill air 's not subject to the sense ) 
They One with Other do themselves confound ; 
And so confound all with a pestilence . 
Out fly's one from the Plague , and bears with him 
An heavy Purse , and Plague more ponderous ; 
Which in the highway parteth life from limb , 
So plagues the next of his coin covetous . 
In this ditch lies one breathing out his last , 
Making the same his Grave before his death ! 
On that Bank lies another , breathing fast , 
And passers by he baneth with his breath . 
Now runs the Rot along each bank & ditch , 
And , with a murrain strikes Swine , Sheep , and all 
( Or man , or beast ) that chance the same to touch , 
So , all in fields , as in the City's fall . 
The London Lanes ( themseluet thereby to save ) 
Did vomit out their undigested dead , 
Who by cart loads , are carried to the Grave , 
For , all those Lanes with folk were overfed . 
There might ye see Death ( as with toil oppressed 
Panting for breath , all in a mortal sweat ) 
Upon each bulk or bench , himself to rest , 
( At point to faint ) his Harvest was so great ! 
The Bells had talked so much , as now they had 
Tired all their tongs , and could not speak a word ; 
And Grief so toiled herself with being sad , 
That now at Death's faint threats , she would but board . 
Yea , Death was so familiar ( ah ) become 
With now resolved London Families , 
That wheresoever he came , he was welcome , 
And entertained with joys and iolities . 
Goods were neglected , as things good for naught ; 
If good for aught , good but to breed more ill : 
The Sick despised them : if the Sound them sought , 
They sought their death which cleaved to them still ! 
So Sick , and Sound , at last neglected them , 
As if the Sound and Sick were near their last ; 
And all , almost , so fared through the Realm 
As if their Souls the judgement day were passed . 
This World was quite forgot ; the World to come 
Was still in mind ; which for it was forgot , 
Brought on our World this little day of Dome , 
That choked the Grave with this contageous Rot ! 
no place was free for Freemen ; ne for those 
That were in Prisons , wanting Liberty ; 
Yet Prisoners frëest were from Plagues and Woes 
That visit Freemen , but too lib'rally . 
For , all their food came from the helthy house , 
Which then would give God's plags from thence to keep ; 
The rest , shut up , could not like bounty use , 
So , woeful Prisoners had least cause to weep . 
The king himself ( OH wretched Times the while ! ) 
From place to place , to save himself did fly , 
Which from himself himself did seek t'exile , 
Who ( as amazed ) not safe , knew where to lie . 
it 's hard with Subjects when the Sovereign 
Hath no place free from plagues his head to hide ; 
And hardly can we say the King doth reign , 
That no where , for just fear , can well abide . 
For , no where comes He but Death follows him 
Hard at the Heels , and reaches at his head ; 
So sinks all Sports that would like triumphs swim , 
For , what life have we , when we all are dead ; 
Dead in our Spirits , to see our Neighbours die ; 
To see our King so shift his life to save ; 
And with his Council all Conclusions try 
To keep themselves from th' insatiate Grave . 
For , hardly could one man another meet , 
That in his bosom brought not odious Death ; 
It was confusion but a friend to greet , 
For , like a Fiend , he baned with his breath . 
The wildest wastes , and places most remote 
From Man's repair , are now the most secure ; 
Happy is he that there doth find a Coat 
To shroud his Head from this Plagues smoking shower 
A Beggar's home ( though dwelling in a Ditch 
If far from London it were situate ) 
He might rend out , if pleased him , to the Rich , 
That now as Hell their London homes do hate . 
Now , had the Sun the Balance entered , 
To give his heat by weight , or in a mean , 
When yet this Plague more heat recovered , 
And scoured the towns , that erst were cleansed clean . 
Now , sad Despair ( clad in a sable weed ) 
Did All attend , and All resolved to die ; 
For , Heat & cold , they thought , the Plague would feed 
Which , like a jerffe , still sin ; d in gluttony . 
The heavenly Coape was now ore-canopide , 
( Near each one's Zenith ( as his sense supposed ) 
With ominous impressions , strangely died , 
And like a Canopy at top it closed . 
As if it had presaged the judge was nigh , 
To sit in judgement his last doom to give , 
And caused his cloth of State t' adorn the Sky 
That All his near approach might so perceive 
Now fall the people unto public Fast , 
And all assemble in the Church to pray ; 
Early , and late , their souls , there take repast , 
As if preparing for the later day ! 
Where ( fasting ) meeting with the sound and sick , 
The sick the sound do plague , while they do pray ; 
To haste before the judge the dead and quick , 
And pull each other so , in post , away . 
Now Angels laugh to see how contrite hearts 
Encounter Death , and scorn his Tyranny ; 
Their judge doth joy to see them play their parts , 
That erst so lived as if they ne'er should die . 
Up go their hearts & hands , and down their knees , 
While Death went up & down , to bring them down ; 
That up they might at once ( not by degrees ) 
Unto the Highest , that doth the humble crown● ! 
OH how the thresholds of each double door 
Of Heaven , and Hell , were worn with throngs of ghosts 
Ne'er since the Deluge , did they so before , 
Nor ever since so polished the side-posts . 
The Angels , good and bad , are now all toiled 
With entertaining of these ceaseless throngs ; 
With howling some ( in heat and horror broiled ) 
And othersome in bliss , with joyful Songs . 
th' infernal Legions , in Battallions , 
Seek to enlarge their kingdom , lest it should 
Be cloyed with Colonies of wicked ones ; 
For now it held , more than it well could hold ! 
The Angels , on the Crystal walls of Heaven , 
Holp thousands o'er the Gates so glutted were ; 
To whom authority by Grace was given 
( The press was such ) to help them over there . 
The Cherubin eie-blinding Majesty 
Upon his Throne ( that ever blessed hath been ) 
Is compassed with unwonted Company , 
And smiles to see how Angels help them in . 
The heavenly streets do glitter ( like the Sun ) 
With throngs of Sons but newly glorified ; 
Who still to praise their Glorifier run 
Along those streets , full fraught on either side . 
Now was the earthly Mammon , which had held 
Their Hearts to Earth , held most contagious ; 
A Beggar scorned to touch it ( so defiled ) 
So , none but castaways were covetous . 
Now Avarice was turned Cherubin , 
Who naught desired but the extremest Good ; 
For , now she saw she could no longer sin , 
So , to the Time she sought to suit her mood , 
The loathsome Lecher loathed his wont sport ; 
For , now he thought all flesh was most corrupt : 
The brainsick brawler waxed all-amort ; 
For , such bloodsuckers Bane did interrupt . 
The Pastors now , steep all their words in Brine , 
With woe , wo , wo , and naught is heard but woe ; 
Woe and alas , they say , the powers divine 
Are bend Mankind , for sin to overthrow . 
Repent , repent , ( like jonas ) now they cry , 
ye men of England , OH repent , repent ; 
To see if so ye may move Pities Eye , 
To look upon you , ere you quite be spent . 
And oft whilst he breathes out thess bitter Words , 
He , drawing breath , draws in more bitter Bane : 
For , now the Air , no Air but death affords ; 
And lights of Art ( for help ) were in the wane . 
Nor people praying , nor the Pastor preaching , 
Death spared aught ; but murdered one and other ; 
He was a walm , he could not stay impeaching , 
Who smoked with heat , & choked , all with the smother . 
The babe new born hempt straight in the head 
With air that through his yet unclosed Mould 
Did pierce his brains , & through them poison spread , 
So left his life , that scarce had life in hold . 
The Mother after hies , the Father posts 
After the Mother ; Thus , at Base they run 
Unto the Goal of that great Lord of Hosts 
That for those keeps it , that runs for his Son . 
The rest Death trips , and takes them prisoners ; 
Such loose the Goal without gainesaying-strife ; 
But , all , and some , are as Death's Messengers 
To fetch both one and other out of life . 
The Sire doth fetch the Son , the Son the Sire , 
Death , being impartial , makes his Subjects so : 
The Priuate's not respected , but entire 
( Death pointing out the way ) away they go . 
The ceremony at their Burials 
Is Ashes but to Ashes , Dust , to Dust ; 
Nay not so much ; for , straight the Pit-man falls 
( If he can stand ) to hide them as he must . 
A Mount thus made , upon his Spade he leans 
( Tired with toil ) yet ( tired ) pressed to toil ) 
Till Death an heap , in his inued Harvest , gleans , 
That so he may by heaps , ●ft seed the Soil . 
Not long he stays , but ( ah ) a mightier heap 
then erst he hid , is made straight to be held ; 
The Land is scarce , but yet the Seed is cheap , 
For , all is full , or rather overfilled . 
The Beer is laid away , and Cribbes they get 
To fetch more dung for Fields and Garden-plots ; 
Workmen are scarce , the labour is so great , 
That ( ah ) the Seed , unburied , often rottes . 
It rottes , and makes the Land thereby the worse , 
For , being rotten , it ill vapours breeds , 
Which many mortal miseries do nurse , 
And the Plague ( overfed ) so , overfeedes . 
Here lies an human Carcase half consumed ; 
And there some fow or beast , in self same plight ; 
Dead with the Pestilence , for so it fumed , 
That all it touched , it consumed quite . 
Quite through the host of Nature's Animals 
Death like a Conqueror in Triumph rides ; 
And ere he came too near , each Creature falls , 
His dreadful presence than no flesh abides . 
Now man to man ( if ever ) fiends became , 
Fear of infection choked Humanity ; 
The empty Maw ( abandoned ) got but blame 
If it had once but sought for Charity . 
The Poor must not about , to seek for food , 
And no man sought them , that they might be fed ; 
Two Plagues , in one , invaded so their blood , 
Both Famine , and Infection strikes them dead . 
Some stayed , in hope that Death would be appeased , 
And kept the towns , which them & theirs had kept ; 
Till their next neighbours were ( perhaps ) diseased ; 
Or with Death's fatal Fan away were swept . 
Than , fain would fly but could not ( though they would ) 
For , will they , nill they , they must keep their house , 
Till through some chink , on them Death taketh hold , 
And used them , as he did their neighbour's use . 
If any at some Postern could get out , 
As good they stayed , sith sure they stayed should be ; 
For , all the Countries watched were round about , 
That from the town , none might a furlong flee . 
then , who from Death did fly , the fear of Death 
Made Freemen keep the fliers in his jaws ; 
Where ( poisoned with his fowl infectious breath ) 
Their flesh and bones he ( ne'er suffized ) gnaws . 
Now might ye see the Plague devour with speed 
As it near famished were , lest in a while 
It might be so , and want whereon to feed ; 
So fed , the future hunger to beguile . 
Now doth it swell ( hold hide ) nay , break , or die ) 
Till skin doth crack , to make more room for meat 
Yet meat , more meat it ( never cloyed ) doth cry , 
And all about doth run the same to get . 
The Graves do often vomit out their dead , 
They are so ouergorged , with great , and small ; 
Who hardly , with the earth are covered ; 
So , oft discovered when the Earth did fall . 
Those which in high - ways died ( as many did ) 
Some worthless wretch , hired for no worthless fee , 
Makes a rude hole , some distance him beside , 
And rakes him in far off ; so , there lies he . 
But , if the Pit-man have not so much sense 
To see , nor feel which way the wind doth sit 
To take the same , he hardly comes from thence , 
But , for himself ( perhaps ) he makes the pit : 
For , the contagion was so violent , 
( The will of Heaven ordaining so the same ) 
As often struck stone-dead incontinent , 
And Nature's strongest forces straight o'ercame . 
Here lieth one upon his burning breast , 
Upon the Earth's cold breast , and dies outright ; 
Who wanting burial , doth the Air infest , 
That like a Basaliske he banes with sight ! 
There reels another like one deadly drunk , 
But newly struck ( perhaps ) then down he falls , 
Who , in the Streets , or ways , no sooner sunk , 
But forthwith dies , and so lies by the walls , 
The Haycocks in the Meads were oft oppressed 
With plaguy Bodies , both alive , and dead ; 
Which being used , confounded Man and Beast , 
And used they might be ere discovered . 
For , some ( like Ghosts ) would walk out in the night , 
The City glowing ( furnace-like ) with heat 
Of this contagion , to seek if they might , 
Fresh air , where oft they died for want of meat . 
The Traveler that spied ( perhaps his Sire ) 
Another far off , coming towards him 
Would fly , as from a flying flame of fire 
That would , if it he met , waste life and limb . 
So , towns feared towns , and men each other feared ; 
All were ( at least ) attainted with suspect , 
And , sooth to say , so was their envy stirred , 
That one would seek another to infect : 
For , whether the disease to envy moved , 
Or human nature's malice was the cause , 
th' infected often all Conclusions proved 
To plague him that from them himself withdraws ! 
Here do they Gloves , and there they Garters fall ; 
Ruffs , Cuffs , & handkerchiefs , and such like things 
They strew about , so to endanger all : 
For , Envy now , most pestilently stings ! 
So , heaven and earth , against Man did conspire , 
And Man against Man , to exrirpe his Race ; 
Who Bellowss were t' augment Infections fire , 
And blow abroad the same from place to place . 
Sedition thus marched ( with a pestilence ) 
From town to town , to make them desolate ; 
The Brown-bill was too short to keep it thence , 
For , further off it reached the Bill-mans' pate . 
Nor walls could keep it out ; for , it is said 
( And truly too ) that Hunger breaks stonewalls : 
The plague of Hunger with the Plague arrayed 
Itself , to make way , where ere Succour calls . 
For , hungry Armies fight as Fiends they were : 
no human power can well their force withstand : 
They laugh to scorn the shaking of the Spear : 
And 'gainst the gods themselves , themselves dare band 
Some ran as mad ( or with wine over-shot ) 
From house to house , when botches on them ran ; 
Who , though they menaced were with Sword , and Shot , 
Yet forward ran , & fear nor God nor man ! 
As when a Ship , at Sea , is set on fire , 
And ( all on flame 's ) wind-driven on a Fleet , 
The Fleet doth fly , sith that Ship doth desire 
( Maugre all force opposed ) with it to meet : 
So fly's the Billman , and the Muskettire 
From the approaching desperate plaguy wight , 
As from a flying flame of quenchless fire ; 
For , who hath any life , with Death to fight ? 
At all , cries Death , than down by heaps they fall : 
He draws in By , and Maine , amain he draws 
Huge heaps together , and still cries , At all : 
His hand is in , and none his hand withdraws . 
For , look how Leaves in Autumn from the tree 
With wind do fall , whose heaps fill holes in ground ; 
So might ye ( with the Plague's breath ) people see , 
Fall by great heaps , and fill up holes profound . 
no holy Turf was left to hide the head 
Of holiest men ; but , most vnhall'wed grounds 
( Ditches and Highways ) must receive the dead , 
The dead ( ah woe the while ) so oreabounds ! 
Here might ye see as 't were a Mountainet 
Founded on Bodies , grounded very deep , 
Which like a Trophy of Death's Triumphs set 
The world on wonder , that did wondering weep : 
For , to the middle Region of the Air , 
Our earthly Region was infected so , 
That Foules therein had cause of just despair , 
As those which over Zodome dying go ! 
Some common Carriers , ( for their own behoof , 
And for their good , whose Souls for gains do 
Fetching from Londo packs of Plags , & stuff ( groan ) 
Are forced to inn it , in some Barn alone . 
Where , lest it should the Country sacrifice , 
Barn , Corn , and Stuff a Sacrifice is sent 
( In Aire-refining Flames ) to th' angry Skies , 
While th'owners' do their Faults & Loss lament . 
The Carriers , to some Pest-house , or their own , 
Carried , clapped up , and watched for coming out , 
Must there with Time or Death converse alone , 
Till Time or Death doth free the world of doubt : 
Who though they Carrier's were , yet being too weak 
Such heavy double Plagues as these to bear , 
Out of their houses some by force do break , 
And drown themselves , themselves from plags to clear . 
These are revenges fit for such a God , 
Fit for his justice , Pour , and Majesty ; 
These are right jerks of divine Furies Rod , 
That draw from Flesh the life-blood mortally . 
If these are but his temp'rall Punishments , 
then what are they surmounting Time and Fate ? 
Melt Flesh to think but on such Languishments , 
That Soul and Body burn in endless date . 
His utmost Plagues extend beyond the reach 
Of comprehension of the deepest Thought ; 
For , he his wisdom infinite doth stretch 
To make them absolutely good for naught . 
then , OH what heart of sensible Discourse , 
Quakes not , as if it would in sunder fall , 
But once to think upon such Fury's force , 
As doth so far surmount the thoughts of all ? 
If human Wisdom in the highest strain , 
Should yet stretch further Torments to devose , 
They would be such that none could them sustain , 
Through weight of woes , and raging agonies : 
then ( OH ) what be they that devised are 
By Wisdom that of Naught made all this All , 
That stretch as far past speech , as past compare , 
Surmounting Wonder ; supernatural ! 
They be the judgements of that Trinity , 
Which ( like themselves ) are most inscrutable ; 
then can man's heart , but either swoon or die , 
To think on anguish , so unthinkeable . 
And can our Sense , our Sense so much besot , 
To think such worlds of woe no where exist , 
sith in this sensual World it feels them not , 
And so in sin ( till they be felt ) insist ? 
then happy That , that is insensible , 
Since we employ our happiness of Sense 
To feel and taste but pleasures sensible ; 
And see no Pain that at their end commence . 
To break the Belly of our damned Desires 
With honeyed Sweets that soon to poison turn ; 
And in our Souls enkindle quenchless fires , 
Which all the frame thereof quite overturn . 
To please itself a Moment , and displease 
Itself for ever , with ne'r-ending pains ; 
To ease the Body with the Souls disease , 
To glad the Guts , to grieve the Heart & Brains . 
To make the Throat a Thoroughfare for Excess , 
The Belly a Charybdis for the same ; 
To use Wit still but only to transgress , 
And make our Sense the Sponge of Sin & Shame : 
then happy are sweet Flowers that live and die 
( Without offence ) most pleasing unto all : 
And hapless Man that lives unpleasingly 
To Heaven and Earth ; so , lives and dies to fall . 
The Rose doth live a sweet life , but to please , 
And when it dies , it leaves sweet fruit behind ; 
But Man in Life and Death doth none of these , 
If Grace by Miracle ne'er mend his mind . 
Blush Man , that Flowers should so thyself excel 
That waste created to excel what not ? 
That on the Earth created was to dwell ; 
then blush for shame to grace thy Beauty's blot . 
Art thou Horizon made ( unholy one ) 
Betwixt immortal Angels , and bruit beasts ? 
Yet wilt 'twixt beasts and fiends be Horizon 
By that which Angels grieves , and God detests ? 
then Plagues must follow thy misguided Will , 
So to correct thine ill-directing Wit ; 
Such as these are , or others much more ill , 
The worst of which Sin ( ill of Ills ) befit . 
And lo , for Sin ; how yet the Plague doth rage 
( With unappeased fury ) more and more , 
Making our Troy-novant a tragic Stage 
Whereon to show Death's power , with slaughters sore . 
Great Monarch of Earth's ample world he is ; 
And of our little Worlds ( that world's content ) 
He gives ill Subject's Bale , good Subjects Bliss ; 
So , though he reigns , just is his Regiment . 
Our sins ( foul blots ) corrupt the Earth and Aire ; 
Our sins ( souls botches ) all this All defile ; 
And make our Souls most foul , that were most fair ; 
For , naught but sin we all , all naught the while ! 
When sharpest wits are whetted to the point , 
To pierce into all secrets , but to sin ! 
And all the corpse of Luxury unjoint , 
To see what sensual joy might be therein : 
Whenas such tricks as no Sun ever saw 
Devised are daily by the Serpent-wise , 
To cram all Flesh into the Devil's maw 
By drifts , as scarce the Devil can devose ! 
Can God ( most just ) be good to men so ill ? 
And can the Earth , and Air , wherein such live , 
Keep such alive ? OH no , all Plagues must fill 
That Air , and Earth , that do such plagues relive . 
What are those men but plagues , that plague but men ? 
All men are such , that teach sin in effect ; 
And all do so , that sin but now and then , 
If now and then they sin , in overt act . 
What can contain us , if these plagues cannot ? 
If neither these we feel , nor those we shall , 
Be not of force to keep our lives from blot , 
What then remains but plagues to scour us all ? 
Till we wax less , and they so multiplied , 
That we be nothing less , than what we are ; 
Converted , or confounded we abide 
In , or without God , with , or without care ! 
If when his iron Rodriguez draws blood from us , 
And is upon our backs , yea breaks our bones , 
We cease not yet to be rebellious , 
What can convert us but plagues for the nonce ! 
For Nature's heart doth iron with extreme grief , 
When well she weighs her children's strange est●● , 
Subject to sin , and so to sorrows chief , 
For both in counterchange renew their date : 
For now we sin ( yea with a witness sin , 
Witness our conscience ) than we plagued are , 
Plagued with a witness , ( witness plagues that 
With fury on us ) then , when so we fare 
Fall we to pray and creep to Grace for grace , 
Which being got , and ease , and weal at will , 
We fall to sin , and so our soul's disgrace : 
Thus sin and plagues run round about us still 
This ever-circling Plague of plagues and sin , 
Surroundeth Mankind in an hell of woe , 
Man is the Axis standing still therein , 
And goes with it where ever it doth go : 
For since he fell , who at this Centre stays 
By Nature ( most unnatural the while ) 
Here moves man movelesse as the Axis plays , 
And Times turns ( turning with him ) doth beguile . 
And yet this Plague ( if Griefs tears quench it not ) 
Is like a spark of fire in flax too dry , 
And may , if our Lusts cool not , burn more hot 
Than erst it did ; so waste us utterly . 
We see it will not out , but still it lies 
In our best Cities Bowels like a Coal 
That threats to flame , and still doth fall and rise , 
Wasting a part , thereby to warn the whole . 
None otherwise than when ( with grief ) we see 
Some house on fire , we straight , to save the town , 
Watch , fast , and pray , and most industrious be , 
With hook and line to pull the Building down : 
So doth this fire of heavens still kindling ire 
Blister our Cities public Body so , 
As we are blistered , but with so much fire , 
As we may quench with tears if they do flow . 
〈◊〉 if it should break forth in flames afresh , 
( As ( ah ) what stays it but unstinted Grace ? ) 
What thing should quench it but a world of Flesh ? 
Or desolation it away to chase ? 
Time never knew since he began his hours , 
( For aught we read ) a Plague so long remain 
In any City , as this Plague of ours : 
For now six years in London it hath lain . 
Where none goes out , but at his coming in , 
If he but feels the tenderest touch of smart , 
He fears he is Plague-smitten for his sin ; 
So , ere he 's plagued , he takes It to the heart : 
For , Fear doth ( Loadstone-like ) it oft attract , 
That else would not come near ; or steal away ; 
And yet this plaguy-feare will scarce coact 
Our Souls to sin no more , this Plague to slay . 
But thou , in whose high hand all hearts are held , 
Convert us , and from us this Plague avert : 
So sin shall yield to Grace , and Grace shall yield 
The Giver glory for so dear desert . 
Too dear for such too worthless wicked Things , 
At best but clods of base Infirmity ; 
Too dear for sin that all this murrain brings ; 
Too dear for those that live but twice to die . 
In few , what should I say ? the best are naught 
That breathe , since man first breathing did rebel : 
The best that breath are worse than may be thought , 
If Thought can think the best can do but well : 
For , none doth well on Earth , but such as will 
Confess ( with grief ) they do exceeding ill ! 
The best is but a Briere , and none doth good , 
But He that makes Us blameless in his Blood.  
FINIS . 





 Kinne , as they were of the seve● deadly sins , no kin as they were different sins .  The Glutton .  The Lecher .  ●he proud , vain , and ambitious man  A description of the Gluttons habit . A description of the Wantoness Apparel . The Prowd-ambitious man's apparel described .  Black .  The wish of Philoxenus a philosopher .  Genes . 3.15 .  The Scale of Gluttony , for the p●nch to climb by .  Taste , the sense wherein Men-beasts do most delight .  Gene. 3.6 .  All the labour of man is for the mouth , etc. Eclesiast . 6.7 .  Adored .  Psal . 34.8 .  Epicures believe not the Souls immortality , and so no scripture .  Good food comforts the hart , cheers the spirit .  Which the tongue makes against the Palate .  They that drink much , must every way evacuate much .  What we most love of that we gladly hear and speak . Epithymus . The praise of Touching .  Touching being furthest removed from the Understanding of all the senses , makes it the more brutish .  Heroic spirits soon enthralled with love .  Wanton Lovers most profane .  This Object makes the Soul most abject .  A glancing alluring look .  no passion more violent in the Soul of Man or Beast .  Hercules .  Solomon .  700 wives , and 300. concubines .  Danaae .  With Love-tricks to make Lustinsatiable .  A lascivious kiss bewitching wantoness , known best to such .  The wicked conspire in evil , though they vary in circumstances .  Sovereign authority can silence all , under heaven , that inveighs against her inordinate pleasures .  What man shall say to the Sovereign , What dost thou ? without incurring his ire , which is the precursor of Death . Prou. 16.14 .  Where the word of the King is , there is power , and who shall say ta him , What dost thou ? Eccles . 8.4 .  That which men & Beasts by the provocation of Nature only .  To rule men well is proper to God and men only .  Few or none so mortified , but can be contented to live , rather ruling then ruled .  Human wisdom .  The looks of sovereign majesty doth either kill , or quicken .  The indignation of a prince is most mortal .  Ars d●minabitur Astris : Wise kings much more .  The concord of the Evil condemns the discord of the Good.   World's weal uncertain in our life , but determines utterly in our death .  Death is most familiar with those that are most strange to him .  The sting of Conscience kil● our liveliest pleasures of the flesh .  Daily proof tells our understandings , ●hat all worldly pleasures are as ●hort , as vain , and unsure .  Solomon .  Eccles . 1.2 .  Good is the object of love   Our Crown saith the Sovereign .  The love of a Crown oft makes the son to hate the father .  Robert Cou●tesse , Edward the second , Richard the second , Edward the fifth , Rich. the third , Henry the sixth .  His Counsellors .  Fear betrayeth the comforts and succours which Reason offereth .  True joy contents the desire and excludes fear , which worldly joy doth not .  The joy of the Soul is incident to good and ghostly livers only .  Glory attends upon God & his only .  Vain pleasures do effeminate the mind .  To obey reason is to rule kingly .  Reason is thought to be most unreasonable by the sensual .  Philem. 9   Mer● u●t●●nea putet .  Not to see our sin , is to live and die in sin .  Christ Lord of life .  Reason , the eye of the soul .  Human creatures are reasonable , though many live brutishly .  Human reason assisted by divine grace , true guide to perfect felicity   3. sins most familiar with men's nature .  We hate our evil Councillors , when we are plagued for following them .  All men are conceived in sin .  Repentance .  The present time is sure to repent in , which is no sooner thought on , but gone for ever .  They are enemies to reason that desire to live sensually .  The jay sits with ●he lay . Eccles . 17.9 .  A true mark of reprobation .  job 15.16 .  Nature .  Custom . Phusis her habit described .  As it is said of the Ape .  Custom is another nature .  Custom is overcome by Custom ▪ if Nature be willing .  Nature's looseness must be restrained by Reason's steadfastness .  Ouer-kinde mothers make unkind Children .  Though fire be good , yet fire in flax is not good : so , though pleasure be good , yet in you● hi● is not good .  A good pretence for a fault makes the fault the fouler .  Founts of Frailty .  Strength of pleasures .  Affection transports judgement into partiality .  Reason is very prevalent with the attentive .  When Reason is rejected , men are lest to all brutishness .  Truth .  Hell made for torment . Esa . 30 33.   Deceit and Guile excluded Truth from the Earth ,  Truth is one , but Error is manifold .  As without the Sun none can see the Sun , so without Truth none can come at the Author of Truth .  Time.   Death . The description of Chronus and Th●natus .  Nature cannot abide ▪ Death , nor Time running thereto .  A well tuned tongue cannot please an ear utterly out of tune .  The choice is miserable where the best is misery .  In case of distress we willingly embrace the advice of Reason .  Sickness .  Natural heat sustains the vital powers in sickness . Sickness described .  Reason begets in us resolution to die courageously .  True love deems no pain intolerable endured for the beloved . The description of the house of Time.   The upper Crust of a Rock unfrequented .  Noisome Plants produced from Man's more noisome offence .  Death's house described .  The Grave is irksome to flesh & blood   If Graves' open by reason of the earth's hollowness , they soon are closed again with feet that tread on them .  The Grave and Destruction can never be full : Prou. 27.20 .  Nothing more noisome to the Nose and Eye than a rotten Carcase .  Friends of those that are in burying .  no sense enjoyed in the Grave .  The earthly ▪ Carcase .  Christ the Lord of Love.   Isa . 34.14 .  Death is the beginning of ●oy , or misery .  The Grave is the re●t of the restless .  The mortified in conversation most familiar with Death .  The Humours are the Children of● be Elements .  Tomb or Pyramed .  Time ruins all monuments how ever substantial .  In a Grave lies the Anatotomy of Ruin .  Truth . True descriptions are able to quicken things dead .  Sickness is manifold : for , we are born one way , and die an hundred ways .  Nature is ●ed by reason to the knowledge of Truth .  Gifts get favour , but not with Death , or Sickness : saving that Sickness is the better born by the gift of natural heat .  Who tenders sickness shall have his company .  Sickness extinguisheth our vital flame .  Nature can not endure to be bettered by Sickness .  An inbred hate 'twixt Nature and Death .  Truth is hid with clouds of mysteries that she is hard to be found .  Truth being masked we must use the more diligen●● to discover her .  Many of them measure truth by their present worldly profit .  Poets which all men tax for lying , do least lie of any , the moral of their fictions considered .  Their souls abhor that light food , for feeding , it doth but famish .  Nature's eyes are dimmed by Adam's transgression .  Whether I be myself , or no , because every like is not the same .  Vice's persuasions are most forcible with the Sons of Nature .  Hell is much more horrible than can enter into the think or understanding . An ample description of Hell.   Revel . 20.3 .  Ma●th . 8.12 . & 25.30 . job. 10.21 , 22.   Isai 30.33 .  Reve. 20.14   Reve. 16.11 .  Mark 9.44.48 . Isa . 66.24   Reve. 16.11 .  Revel . 6.8 .  Reve. 16.13 .  Hell , and the Grave are insatiable .  The damned still are dying , and never dead .  Math. 24.51   And men boiled in great heat , & blasphemed the name of God which bath power over these plagues , and they repented not to give him glory . Reve 16.9   Devils .  Revel . 16.9   Revel . 20 ▪ 3.   Revel . 20.10   So fares the Fly with the Spider .  The light of Lightning is much more horrible than comfortable .  Revel . 17.16   Flesh of the tormented . A prudent man seeth the plague , and hideth himself : but a fool goeth on still , and is punished . Prou. 22.3 . Frigida Gehenna .  Revel . 16.21   Revel . 16 . 2●  Reward her as she hath rewarded you , and give her double , according to her works : and in the Cup which she ha●h filled to you , fill her the double , Revel . 17.6 . Deliver thyself as a Do from the hand of the hunter , and as a Bird from the hand of the Fowler . Prou 6.5 . They shall pass from the waters of the snow to over much heat . job.   The greate● the devil the worse .  Psal . 83.13 .  And they gnawed their tongues for sorrow . Reu. 16.10 .  And they gnawed their tongues for sorrow . Reu. 16.10 .  Math. 24 . 5●   In tormenting .  Revel . 20.3 .  Matth. 8.12 .  The pains of the damned are without end , mean , or measure .  Nothing in this world that is violent , is permanent .  Immortal .  Revel . 19.20   isay 30.33   In this world   In heaven .  The more our loss , the more is our grief .  The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity , but a wounded spirit , who can bear it ? Pro. 18.14 .  Wert not for Hope , Heart would break   Immortality naturally is good .  The pain of the damned are as great as the wisdom of the Creator could devose , which is infinite , and unutterable .  The way to Hell is heavenly in show .  All the earth calleth for Truth , and the Heaven blesseth it : and all things are shaken , & tremble , neither is there any unjust thing in it . 1.  E●dr . 4.36 .  In He●l is no redemption .  Truth , and Reason near of kin .  Truth is the strength , and kingdom & the power , and majesty of all ages , 1.  Esdr . 4 40.   Nature is greatly grieved till her sons be reform .  Reason doth cheer the hevinesse of our nature in case of distress .  Patience a daughter of the Heavens , the best companion of a forlorn fortune ,  Contingent Accidents are hid from the eye of Reason .  God.   Reprehension unwelcome to all resolute in evil .  Truth is like herself in unlike subjects .  This guileful world is mortal enemy to Truth .  Made Truth to speak most for the maintenance of earthly matters , etc.   The wine is wicked , the King is wicked , women are wicked , & all the children of men are wicked , and all their wicked works are such , & there is no truth in them , but they perish in their iniquity , But Truth doth abide , and is strong forever , & lives and reigneth for ever and ever . 1.  Esdr . 4.37.38   Truth is in extreme peril of depravation among the unclean .  The Soul that hath no feeling of sin , is dead in sin .  They that lack least worldly things most lack friends that will tell them the truth .  Verity and justice supports the Thrones of Princes .  Ever since Astrea forsook th' earth whosoever offers justice a golden Scabbard she will sheathe her sword therein ,  That life is worse than death that depends on a min●ers' pleasure .  Immortal lines in Poesy , are worse than mortal lines that end our misery ▪ for the first make us labour for our travel , the last make us labour for heaven , if we die well .  justice .  justice sees with Truth● eyes .  The countenance bewrais how the heart is affected .  Time and Death enemies to Nature .  Body of clay   Day & night are the wings of Time.   When men die , their years seem but so many days , & before they die all their days so many years : The time future seems long but that past , extreme short   Time's ever in motion .  Before man's fall .  Time , made by God , the fountain of Reason .  Iniquity shall shorten Times continuance .  Reasons are yielded by Reason .  Still moving .  The office of Reason .  Our Nature is apt to insult upon the least incoragement   A forcible mean to reduce the evil to good .  Every moment seems an Age to ●ne that longs to hear that which his soul desire's to know .  Foolishness is joy to him which is destitute of understanding , etc.  Prou. 15.21 .  Vanity holdeth nothing too dear , for things ne'er so worthless , that may any way tend to her pleasure .  job 7.6 .  no warning will prevail with the wilful .  The Sun runs an oblique course in the heavens which measures time , and in time men learn to do amiss .  Men lewdly living make a sporle of time , till 〈◊〉 spoil them . The vices familiar with our natures in the several ages of our life .  There is none that doth good , no not one . Psal . 17.   In time , by reason , & experience we reform our manners , if we be not utterly void of grace .  Leaving her last footsteps among the men which n●w are least acquainted w●th her or her steps , Husbandmen   Venture auribus caret .  no graceless wretch so unnatural but knows the voice , and law of nature , because it is written in all man's hearts .  Satan winnoweth us like wheat . Luke 21.31 .  They live ill that think to live ever .  It is an abomination to fools to depart from evil . Pro● . 13.19 .  To have heaven in this life , is to hold hell in the other .  We measure our friends well-doing altogether by the line of worldly prosperity .  A scorner loves not him that rebukes him , neither will he go to the wise . Pro. 15.12 .  Reason is ever impugned and impeached by carnal Libertines .  This makes so many miseries by reason of flatterers in the world , for every one covets to please for fear of frowns .  Vicious livers are strangers ▪ or rather enemies to Truth ●nd her doctrine .  These are the last , and there fore the worst times , which rather seek to reform by windy , than explanary doctrine , which persuades coldly .  All times apt to Vice then Virtue .  They that live without thinking of their end , do commonly die ere they think of Death .  The first death , to the wicked , is the entrance into the second .  Repentance may be too late , but never too soon .  Tyrants .  If good , ●hey raise ▪ if bad , they ruin it .  A great torment , in the life to come , is due to those that can , and will take such an immortal revenge for any mortal in●urie .  Fear .  None are forsaken of God that cleave to him by humble & hearty praiee .  The Key of Intelligence . 

 The Son of God's first miracle he wrought at the marriage , joh. 2. honouring the feast with his personal presence .  The wisest men are oft thus mistaken for not being able ●o foresee perfectly future events .  The best men Death soon ●akes away , because this wicked world is unworthy of them .  Fortune is ever in that m●●ion like a wave moved with the wind .  A sport so called .  The contentious take small occasion to contend .  Yet mighty men of our present times think otherwise , as appeareth by their actions . Oppression .  All elemental Bodies subject 〈◊〉 death .  Which shall have an end .  All that hath motion is subject to dissolution .  The Eye is said to cause our blushing , etc.   justice , Fortune , & Death are eyeless sith they have no respect of persons .  A kingdoms divided , is at point to be dissolved .  Untimely , as well as unreasonable taxings withdraw the loves of the Subjects .  Prince's often become odious to their subjects thorough the fault of those whom they put in trust to govern under them .  The readiest way to win hearts .  Love and Bounty the best Baits to catch men .  Captare benevolentiam .  Men are honoured and followed in this world , only for their fortunes .  They got Territories which they could not hold .  Fortune favours fools ,  Surgeons .  The way to thrive in that function .  Elixir .  A little thereof multiplies infinitely , as Alchemists affirm .  Life is sweet .  OH Death , how bitter is thy remembrance to a man that hath pleasure in his riches ? Ecclus. 41.1 .  Fron●●●ullae ●ides .  Hope of future good , in this life , makes men fear death as an intolerable e●ill .  1.  john 5.4 .  None so mortified but fears death in point of dying .  The fe●re of final or particular judgement makes Death unwelcome .  Fortune .  Death's eloquence is harsh to the ear of flesh & blood   That which cures one may kill another .  covetousness is l●ke the Dropsy the more it drinks the more 〈◊〉 may .  The more interest we have in this world , the more loath we are to leave it .  ●hen life is at the best , th●n Death i● better .  A custom among the Germans .  Which had , makes death the more irksome .  Men in fortunate estate had rather go with life to the Dive● then by death to God.   it 's a double death to die when we have attained the highest happiness of life .  Death yieldeth double terror .  Where the Carcases are the eagle resort . Matth. 28.   Gaine take away the thought of pain .  All cove● all lose ▪   lest he would plague him , for plaguing others with racking .  Wracked for those that will rather rack then any way relieve them .  The soldiers sword cuts out the Portions of Kings   Of blows .  Audac●s fortuna iwat .  A Squire of low Degree is a Squire of no degree .  Not remembering who , or what they were .  A venial sin at most as these ●imess esteem it .  A Hangerblade in a green scabbard   Changed their Countenance with artificial complexions .  That which is dear bought , must be dear sold .  All is not gold that glisters .  The injurious offer .  They had Jacob's voice and Esau's hands .  Truth .  For their rarity .  Such dependencie is as full of difficulty as uncertainty : Enuying among the servant's cause of the first , mutability of those great men's minds occasioneth the last .  In their own not in their Lords right : for many get money in their Lord's service , to buy their Lords lands to do them service .  London measure .  Who are wise in their own eyes , there is more hope of a fool then of such . Prou. 26.125   Mere Scholars .  Men learned , without iugement , whom the Proverb , The greatest Clerks are not the wisest men , concerneth .  Genus and Species .  Misuse that little learning they catch .  Mathematicians .  The Mathematics are most pleasing and alluring knowledges ill rewarded , yet , they steal the studier● thereof from themselves .  ●or little .  Magicians .  Conjurers and Witches are always Beggars .  Distillators & Extracters of Quintessences .  Of liquours .  Subtle Sophisters . Orators .  Fortune doth well most commonly by men that do speak well  Astronomers , Prognosticators . Musicians . Linguists .  Many golden Linguists have leaden invention .  Penne-men , or fair writers . It is a bad bargain to give aught for naught .  They shame the 〈…〉 utterly .  For their recompense .  Fencers .  In straight prison .  Stage players .  Showing the vices of the time .  W.S.R.B.  Sui cuique m●r●s fingunt fortunam .  When men have gotten wealth they are said to be made . Panders .  They live like flesh fly's upon the sorts of men . Land-badgers Drovers . Lawyers . Gold sets an edge on an Orator's tongue , and makes it cut like a razor .  Gold is the God of this world th●t ruins and winds the same as it listeth .  Hire Mercenary Switzers and Soldiers to maintain all unjust quarrels even with monarchs .  So saith the rich miser . riches gather many friends , but the poor is separate from his neighbour . Prou. 19.4 . The world in his unjust Balance weighs men accordidg to their Wealth & not by any other worthiness .  no wiseman comparable to the golden Ass . But it is mere madness not to b●●re with insensible creatures : & blessed are those that in this in●●●ious world , possess their Soule● in patience . Better is a little with the fear of God , then great treasure , 〈◊〉 trouble 〈…〉 15 16.   The touchstone trieth gold and gold trieth men . Be●rer is a dry morsel with peace than an house full of sacrifices with strife . Prou. 17.1 . That that is to be desired of a man , is his goodness , P● . 19 22. which seldom is found among much goods .  Head , and Muse ▪   Praise .  As far from want as from too much .  Minds always conversant with these metals are dull , & make the bodies dead to all goodness wherein they are .  Divinity .  Die eternally in both  The world is like nothing : sith by sin●● 〈◊〉 was m●rre● after it 〈◊〉 made : & 〈◊〉 is nothing , because● he 〈◊〉 that made a●l things made it not . Simile .  Every ●●nger as good as ● lime twinge . Proverb   Harmless recreation .  It makes the number appea●e as it is . Philosophers and Poet's furthest off Fortune .  They affect misery much more than Divinity .  Flesh-pineing Praise   Men , like the devil great and naught .  If thou be wise , thou shalt be wi●e for thyself . Prou. 9.12 .  The more we love the world the more we fear death .  ●●are is a stranger to great hearts .  no courage 〈◊〉 the desperate Cowards . jupiters' Sentence .  Scripture Parables contain truth in their morality , though not in the Letter . 

 Therefore ha●h the curse devoured the Land , and the inhabitants thereof are desolate . Isai . 24 6.   Who among you shall hearken to this , and take heed and hea●e for afterwards . Isai . 42.23 .  Now go & write it before them in a Table , and note it in a book , that it may be for the last day for ever and ever . Isai . 30.8 .  I am the man that hath seen affliction in the rod of his indignation . Lament 3.1 .  Hear , ye deaf , and ye blind ▪ regard that ye may see . Isa . 42 ▪ 18  thou hast for saken me , saith the Lord , and gone backward : therefore will I stretch out mine hand against thee , and destroy thee : for I am weary with repenting . jerem. 15.6 .  Fear , & the pit , & the snare are upon thee , OH inhabitant of the earth . Isai . 24.17 .  Physicians .  Universities .  then said I , Lord , how long ? and he answered , until the Cities be wasted without inhabitant , and the houses without man , and the Land be utterly desolate . Isai . 6 11   And the Cities that are inhabited shall be left void , the land shall be desolate , & ye shall know that I am the Lord Ezech. 12.20 .  Zephon . 2.2   Even the mouse shall be consumed together , saith the Lord , Isa . 66.17 .  Tame Pigeons , Cocks , Hens , Capons , etc.   Arise and depart , for this is not your rest , because it is polluted , it shall destroy you even with a sore destruction . Michah 2.10 .  And he that flieth from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit , etc. Isa . 24.18   Ye shall conceive chaff , & bring forth stubble , the fire of your breath shall devour you . Isai . 33.11 .  Ask now among the Heathen , who hath heard such things ? the virgin of Israel hath done very filthily jerem. 18 13.   A mountain in Thes●al●e .  Avernus' a lake in Italy , where they say this sin is frequent .  Pride , the cause of Adam's fall , and so of all sin   They are waxed fat , and shining , they do overpass the deeds of the wicked , etc. jere 5 . 2●   Strawberries , Cherries , etc. when they first come in .  Shillings , Crowns , or Pounds .  then will I turn mine hand upon thee , and burn out thy dross , till it be pure , and take away thy Tin . Isai 1.25 .  And every one will deceive his fried and will not speak the truth : for they have taught their tongues to speak lies , and take great pains to do wickedly . jerem . 9 5.   ●s a Cage is full of Birds , so are their houses full of deceit , thereby they are become great & waxen ●ich . jerem. 5.27 .  For all their Tables are full of filthy vomitings : no place is clean . Isai . 28.8 .  Their Bill of Sale.   And they lie down upon clothes laid to pledge by every Altar , and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God. Amos 2.8 .  And death shall be desired rather them life of all the residue that r●ma●n of this wicked family . jere 8 3.   Thy Sons have fainted , & ●e at head of all the streets , as a wild Bull in a net , and are full of the wrath of the Lord , and rebuke of thy God. Isa , 51.20 .  I will d●sh them one against another even the ●atherss and the sons together , saith the lord , I will not spare I will not pity , not have compassion upon them , but destroy them . ●erem . 13.14 .  ●herefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth , and to the house of juda as a rottenness , Hosea 5.12 .  Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the lords wrath , etc Zepha . 1.18 .  Her filthiness is in her ski●●ss : she remembered not her last end , therefore she came down wonderfully : she had no comforter . etc. Lament . 1.9 .  The mir●h of tab●etss ceaseth : the noi●e of them that rei●●ceendeth : the joy of the harp ceaseth . Isa● 24.8 .  Libra September .  A Beast never but feeding , and when he hath eaten as much as his 〈…〉 hold , go , to a for●ed t●ee , and there strains out his fond undigested betweane the twist of the ●●ee , and so ag●ine presently falls to se●ue , and being full , again to the tree , and so eftsoons to feed .  Isai . 57.15 .  The world is divided into twelve parts , and ten parts of it are gone already , and half of the tenth part : & there remaineth that which is after the half of the tenth part . 2.  Esd . 14.10 , 11   Nevertheless saith the lord , at those d●ys I will not make a full end of you . jer 4.18 .  For it is the day of the Lords vengeance , and the ve●e●● re●●rence for the i●dgement of 〈◊〉 Isai . 34.8   Dung-cribs .  They shall die of deaths and diseases , they shall not be lamented , neither shall they be buried , but they shall be as dung upon the earth , etc.  jer. 16.4 .  They have compassed her about , as the witchmen of the field , because she hath provoked me to wrath , saith the Lord jere. 4.17 .  If the botch break not , the Patient lives not .  It kills others with breaking .  They that feed delicately perish in the streets , they that were brought up in scarlet , embrace the d●●g Lament . 4.5 .  And their corpses shall lie in the streets of the great city , etc.  Revel . 11.8 .  Because of their pride the Cities shall be troubled the houses shall be afraid , men shall fear . 2.  Esd . 15.18 .  Destruction upon destruction is cried , for the whole Land is wasted etc. jere. 4.20 .  job 41.20 . Simil.   Plagues are sent unto you● and who can drive them away . 2.  Esd . 16.4 . Simil.   Many dead Bodies shall be in every place , they shall cast them forth with silence . Amos 8.3 .  This no fiction , nor inserted by poetical licence : But this verily was performed in the borough of Leominster in the county of Hereford : the one at the commandment of sir Herbert Crossed knight , one of the Council of the Marches of Wales : the other by the instigation of Satan , and prococation of the disease .  Torments , devised by infinite wisdom , are infiite in pain .  Mortal life is no more ( at the most ) compared to Eternity .  So fares it with sensual Epicures and Libertines .  The conversion of a sinner is most miraculous .  Man is Microcosmos .  As appeareth by the Plague bills every week . Simil.   Micah 7.4 .  Psal . 14 2.4   Ephes . 5.12 . 