A DIALOGUE Between a Blindman and Death . 

Blindman .  The more men see , the lesle they do inquire ; 
The worse they see , the more they do desire 
Others to grant what Blindness cannot give , 
And for Intelligence grow inquisitive . 
They ask to be informed , who cannot see ; 
I know 't by sad experience , Woe is me ! 


Death   Where are you , Sir ? What sitting all alone ? 
I did suppose 't was you by that sad moan : 
Coming this way to gather what 's my due , 
I thought it not amiss , to call on you . 


Blindman .  I do not know that voice ; 't is sure some Stranger ; 
And by his words , he seems to bided me danger . 


Death .  You guests aright , Sir ; and before I go , 
I 'll make you know me , whether you will or no.  


Blindman .  Why what are you ? Pray tell me what 's your Name , 
And what 's your business , and from whence you came . 


Death .  I will declare what no man can deny , 
there 's none so great a Traveller as I : 
Yet you must know , I am no wand'ring Rover , 
For my Dominion lies the World all over ; 
I march through Court and Country , Town and City , 
I know not how to fear , nor how to pity . 
The highest Cedar , and the lowest Flower , 
Sooner or later do both feel my Power : 
The mightiest Emperor doth submit to me , 
Nor is the poorest tattered Beggar free ; 
In Peace , I glean here one , and there another ; 
Sometimes I sweep whole streets , both one and tother . 
In time of War , thus much I can divine ; 
Whoever gets the day , the Triumphs mine . 
I am a potent and a high Commander , 
'T was I that conquered the Great Alexander , 
Though mighty Nations under 's foot he trod , 
And had th' Ambition to be thought a God ; 
Yet , after all the Victories he had wone , 
I made him know he was but Philip's Son. 
Were you Goli●●h great , or Sampson-strong , 
Were you as wise , as rich as Solomon : 
Were you as Nestor , Old ; as Infant , Young ; 
Had you the fairest Cheeck , the sweetest Tongue ; 
Yet you must stoop , all these will naught avail : 
For my Arrest does not admit of Bail ; 
And to deal plainly , Sir , my name is Death , 
And 't is my business to demand your Breath . 


Blindman .  My Breath and Life shall both go out together , 


Death .  And on that Errand 't was , that I came hither . 
I 'll have both Breath and Life without delay : 
You must and shall dispatch ; come , come , away . 


Blindman .  What need such Posting haste ? Pray Change your mind ; 
't is a poor Conquest to surprise the Blind . 


Death .  You may not call it Posting , nor Surprise ; 
For you had warning when you lost your Eyes . 
Nor could you hope your House could long be free , 
After the Windows were possessed by me . 


Blindman .  But Life is sweet ; and who 'd not , if he might , 
Have a long day , before he bid good Night ? 
OH spare me yet awhile ! slight not my Tears . 


Death .  Hard Hearts and hungry Bellies have no Ears . 


Blindman .  I am not yet quite ready for the Table . 


Death .  all 's one to me ; I am inexorable . 


Blindman .  Yet , by your favour , I may step aside . 


Death .  Be not deceived , for 't is in vain to hide : 
My forces are dispersed through all places ; 
And act for me without respect of Faces : 
I have a Thousand ways to shorten Life , 
Besides a Rapier , Pistol , Sword , or Knife : 
A Fly , a Hair , a splinter of a Thorn , 
A little Scratch , the cutting of a Corn , 
Have sometimes done my business heretofore , 
So to the full , that I need wish no more . 
Should all these fail , enough of humours lurk 
Within your Body , Sir , to do my work . 


Blindman .  Well then , let some one run to my Physician , 
Tell him I want his aid in this Condition . 


Death .  Run , Boy , and fetch him ; call th' whole College , do : 
For I intent to have them shortly too . 
I value not their Portions and their Pills , 
Nor all the Cordials in the Doctor's Bills : 
When my time 's come , let them do what they can , 
I 'll have my due , so vain a thing is man 
Should Galen and Hypocrates both join , 
And Paracelsus too , with them Combine , 
Let them all meet to Countermand my strength 
Yet shall they be my Prisoners at length . 
I grant that Men of Learning , Worth and Art , 
May have the better of me at the Start ; 
But in long Running they 'll give out and tire , 
And quit the field , and leave me my des●●● 
As for those Quacks , that threaten to 〈◊〉 me , 
They are my Friends ; and speed some Patients to me . 


Blindman .  Well , If I must , I 'll yield to you the day 
't is so Enacted , and I must Obey : 
Henceforth I count myself among you 〈…〉 rs , 
For 't is , I see , the measure of my Bet 〈…〉 
But tell me now , when did your Power 〈…〉 ce ? 


Death .  My Power began from Adam's first Offence . 


Blindman .  From Adam's first Offence ! OH base beginning ! 
Whose very first Original was Sinning . 


Death .  My Rising did from Adam's Fail begin ; 
And ever since , my strength and sting's 〈◊〉 Sin.  


Blindman .  To know wherein the Enemy's strength doth lie , 
In my Conceit is half a Victory : 
Have you Commission now for what you do ? 


Death .  I have Commission : what 's all this to you● 


Blindman .  Yes very much ; for now I understand 
I am not totally at your command : 
My life 's at his who gave you this Commission ; 
To him I 'll therefore make with my Petition : 
I 'll Seek his Love , and on his Mercy trust ; 
And when my Sins are pardoned , do your worst . 


Death .  That you may know how far my Power exterds 
I will divorce you from your dearest Friends 
You shall resign your Jewels , Money , Plate : 
Your Earthly Joys shall all be out of date . 
I will deprive you of your dainty fare ; 
I 'll strip you to the skin , naked and bare . 
Linen or Woolen you shall have to wind y 〈…〉 
As for the rest , all must be left behind y 〈…〉 
bound hand and foot , I 'll bring you to my D●●● , 
Where constant dreadful Darkness reigns , and then 
Your only Dwellinghouse shall be a Cave ; 
Your Lodging-room , a little narrow Grave ; 
A Chest , your Closet ; and a Sheet , your Dress ; 
And your Companions , Worms and Rottenness . 


Blindman .  If this be all the mischief you can do , 
Your Harbingers deserve more dread than you . 
Diseases are your Harbingers , I 'm sure ; 
Many of which , 't is grievous to endure ; 
But when once dead , I shall not then Complain 
Of Cold , or Hunger , Poverty or Pain . 


Death .  there 's one thing more , which here to mind I call , 
When once I come , then come I once for all : 
And when my stroke doth Soul and Body sever , 
what 's left undone , must be undone for ever ! 


Blindman .  that 's a great Truth , and I have learned to know 
That there 's no working in the Grave below . 
To be before hand therefore I will try , 
That then I may have naught to do but die . 
But tell me , Sir , do all men die alike ? 


Death .  To me they do ; for whom God bids , I strike ; 
Look how the Foolish dye , so die the Wise ; 
As do the Righteous , so the Sinner dies . 
there 's afterwards a difference , though , 't is true ; 
But that 's a thing with which i  naught to do . 
That I to some prove better , to some worse ; 
To some a Blessing , and to some a Curse ; 
that 's none of mine ; I may not undertake it ; 
't is God's appointment , and men's works , that make it . 
Hence 't is that Sinners Trouble's never cease , 
And that the End of th' Upright Man is peace . 


Blindman .  There now remains but only one thing more ; 
Will not thy power be one day out of door ? 


Death .  Yes , I must needs confess 't is very true ; 
There is a Death for Me , as well as You ; 
And mine 's the worst , for I must die for ever ; 
You may revive again , but I shall never . 


Blindman .  By all that hath been said , I now do see , 
You needed not have been so rough with me . 


Death .  Come , let that pass — The kinder to appear , 
I will reveal a secret in your Ear. 
The Death of Christ upon the painful Cross , 
Which seemed to be my Gain , turned to my Loss . 
As in his Hair , the strength of Samson lay , 
And with his Hair , went Sampson's strength away . 
So i  no strength , but what I had from Sin ; 
Nor have I Sting , but what lies hid therein : 
Christ Suffering Death , to put this sting away , 
Hath made me his , whom I supposed my Prey . 
My Strength is now decayed , my Sting rebated : 
My Boldness Checked , and my Dominion mated ; 
And I am now both faint and feeble grown , 
Much like poor Samson , when his streagth was gone : 
In my own Craft I was Completely routed , 
My Jaws are broken , and my Holder's outed . 
What now I catch , I have no power to keep ; 
My very Name is changed , from Death to Sleep : 
I seized on Christ indeed , that I did do ; 
Nay more , I bound him in my Prison too ; 
But all my strongest Doors , Bars , Bolts , and Bands , 
Were but mere Nothing in his mighty Hands : 
He broke them all , and left my doors wide open , 
And all his Servants Prisoners of Hope : 
For though they die , yet with devout Affection , 
They do expect a joyful Resurrection ; 
And with their Master to be brought again , 
That they with him for ever may Remain . 
Thus Christ by dying , did become Victorious : 
And from his Bed of Darkness rose more glorious : 
And I by Binding Him , made myself fast ; 
And His , I know will prove my Death at last . 


Blindman .  These words give Comfort and Instruction too ; 
Henceforth I shall be better pleased with you . 
Decreed it is for all men once to die ; 
After that Judgement , than Eternity . 
To Prayer therefore will I join Endeavour , 
So to live here , that I may live for Ever . 
And seeing they that have , and keep Christ's words : 
Whether they live or die , be all the Lords ; 
Repentance , Faith , and New Obedience shall 
Fit and prepare me for my Funeral . 
From whence I trust , my Saviour will translate me , 
In Season due , beyond their reach that hate me ; 
Even to that place of Life and Glory too , 
Where neither Death , nor Sin , hath aught to do 
This hope in me , that Word of his doth cherish , 
He that believes in Me , shall never perish . 
Now welcome Death , upon my Saviour's Score ! 
Who would not die , to live for Evermore ? 


Death .  Sir , I perceive you speak not without Reason : 
I 'll leave you now , and call some other Season . 


Blindman .  Call when you please , I will await that Call ; 
And while I stand make ready for my Fall ! 
In the mean time , my constant Prayer shall be , 
From Sudden and from Endless Death , Good Lord deliver me . 


The Conclusion . 

Judge not of Death by Sense , lest you mistake it ; 
death 's neither Friend nor Foe , but as you make it . 
Live as you should , you need not then Complain ; 
For where to Live , is Christ ; to Dye , is Gain . 
FINIS . 

LICENCED , According to Order . 

LONDON : Printed by George Larkin , at the Coach and Horses without Bishopsgate , a little beyond Old Bedlam . 1686.  

