DEATH'S DVELL , OR , A Consolation to the Soul , against the dying Life , and living Death of the Body . 

Delivered in a Sermon at White Hall , before the KING'S MAJESTY , in the beginning of Lent , 1630.  

By that late learned and Reverend Divine , JOHN DONNE , Dr. in Divinity , & Deane of S. Paul's , London . 

Being his last Sermon , and called by his Majesty's household THE DOCTORS OWN FUNERAL SERMON . 

LONDON , Printed by THOMAS HARPER , for Richard Redmer and Benjamin Fisher , and are to be sold at the sign of the Talbot in Alders-gate street . M.DC.XXXII . 

To his dearest sister Mrs . Elizabeth Francis of Brumsted in Norff.  

Dearest Sister , for any so mean as myself to prefix a Dedication to so worthy a man's work as this is , is a boldness little inferior to presumption itself . But the Copy being bestowed upon me by a worthy Friend of mine ( far more able ) who would not himself take that office upon him ; Principally to let you know , how fain I would show my gratitude to you , whose debtor I have ever been ; & well knowing your well known zeal to devotions of this strain , To you I dedicate ( before all others ) this sacred Tractate ; Of your acceptation of it , I doubt not ; But my desire is that you would accept also the love of him that can no ways else ( as yet ) give your deservings better satisfaction , then by remaining . 

Your ever truly loving and devoted Brother , RICH. REDMER . 

To the READER . 

THIS Sermon was , by Sacred Authority , styled the Authors own funeral Sermon . Most fitly : whether we respect the time , or the matter . It was preached not many days before his death ; as if , having done this , there remained nothing for him to do , but to die : And the matter is , of Death ; the occasion and subject of all funeral Sermons . It hath been observed of this Reverend Man , That his Faculty in Preaching continually increased : and , That as he exceeded others at first ; so , at last he exceeded himself . This is his last Sermon ; I will not say , it is therefore his best ; because , all his were excellent . Yet thus much : A dying Man's words , if they concern our selves ; do usually make the deepest impression , as being spoken most feelingly , and with least affectation . Now , whom doth it not concern to learn , both the danger , and benefit of death ? Death is every man's enemy , and intends hurt to all ; though to many , he be occasion of greatest goods . This enemy we must all combat dying ; whom he living did almost conquer ; having discovered the utmost of his power , the utmost of his cruelty . May we make such use of this and other the like preparatives , That neither death , whensoever it shall come , may seem terrible ; nor life tedious ; how long soever it shall last . 

R.  PSALM 68 vers . 20.  In fine . 

And unto God the ( LORD ) belong the issues of death . i e. From death . 

BVILDINGS stand by the benefit of their foundations that sustain and support them , & of their butteresses that comprehend and embrace them , and of their contignations that knit and unite them : The foundations suffer them not to sink , the butteresses suffer them not to swerve , and the contignation & knitting suffers them not to cleave ; The body of our building is in the former part of this verse : It is this , he that is our God is the God of salvation and salutes ; of salvation in the plural , so it is in the original ; the God that gives us spiritual and temporal salvation too . But of this building , the foundation , the butteresses , the contignations are in this part of the verse , which constitutes our text , and in the three diverse acceptations of the words amongst our expositors . Unto God the Lord belong the issues from death , for first the foundation of this building , that our God is the God of all salvations ) is laid in this ; That unto this God the Lord belong the issues of death , that is , it is in his power to give us an issue and deliverance , even then when we are brought to the jaws and teeth of death , and to the lips of that whirlpool , the grave . And so in this acceptation , this exitus mortis ▪ this issue of death is liberatio à morte , a deliverance from death , and this is the most obvious and most ordinary acceptation of these words , and that upon which our translation lays hold , the issues from death . And then secondly the butteresses that comprehend and settle this building , That he that is our God , is the God of all salvation , are thus raised ; unto God the Lord belong the issues of death , that is , the disposition and manner of our death : what kind of issue and transmigration we shall have out of this world , whether prepared or sudden , whether violent or natural , whether in our perfect senses or shaken and disordered by sickness , there is no condemnation to be argued out of that , no judgement to be made upon that , for how soever they die , precious in his sight is the death of his saints , and with him are the issues of death , the ways of our departing out of this life are in his hands . And so in this sense of the words , this exitus mortis , the issues of death , is liberatio in morte , A deliverance in death ; Not that God will deliver us from dying , but that he will have a care of us in the hour of death , of what kind soever our passage be . And in this sense and acceptation of the words , the natural frame and contexture doth well and pregnantly administer unto us ; And then lastly the contignation and knitting of this building , that he that is our God is the God of all salvations , consists in this , unto this God the Lord belong the issues of death , that is , that this God the Lord having united and knit both natures in one , and being God , having also come into this world , in our flesh , he could have no other means to save us , he could have no other issue out of this world , nor return to his former glory , but by death ; And so in this sense , this exitus mortis , this issue of death , is liberatio per mortem , a deliverance by death , by the death of this God our Lord Christ jesus . And this is Saint Augustine's acceptation of the words , and those many and great persons that have adhered to him . In all these three lines then , we shall look upon these words ; First , as the God of power , the Almighty Father rescues his servants from the jaws of death : And then as the God of mercy , the glorious Son rescued us , by taking upon himself this issue of death : And then between these two , as the God of Comfort , the holy Ghost rescues us from all discomfort by his blessed impressions before hand , that what manner of death soever be ordained for us , yet this exitus mortis shall be introitus in vitam , our issue in death ( shall be an entrance into everlasting life . ) And these three considerations ? our deliverance à morte , in morte , per mortem , from death , in death , & by death , will abundantly do all the offices of the foundations , of the butteresses , of the contignation of this our building ; That he that is our God , is the God of all salvation , because unto this God the Lord belong the issues of death . 

First , then , we consider this exitus mortis , to be liberatio à morte , that with God the Lord are the issues of death , and therefore in all our death , and deadly calamities of this life , we may justly hope of a good issue from him . In all our periods and transitions in this life , are so many passages from death to death ; our very birth and entrance into this life , is exitus à morte , an issue from death , for in our mother's womb we are dead so , as that we do not know we live , not so much as we do in our sleep , neither is there any grave so close , or so putrid a prison , as the womb would be unto us , if we stayed in it beyond our time , or died there before our time . In the grave the worms do not kill us , we breed and feed , and then kill those worms which we ourselves produced . In the womb the dead child kills the Mother that conceived it , & is a murderer , nay a parricide , even after it is dead . And if we be not dead so in the womb , so as that being dead we kill her that gave us our first life , our life of vegetation , yet we are dead so , as David's Idols are dead . In the womb we have eyes and see not , ears and hear not ; There in the womb we are fitted for works of darkness , all the while deprived of light : And there in the womb we are taught cruelty , by being fed with blood , and may be damned , though we be never born . Of our very making in the womb , David says , I am wonderfully and fearfully made , and such knowledge is too excellent for me , for even that is the Lords doing , and it is wonderful in our eyes ; Ipse fecit nos , it is he that hath made us , and not we ourselves , nor our parents neither ; Thy hands have made me and fashioned me round about , saith job , and ( as the original word is ) thou hast taken pains about me , and yet , says he , thou dost destroy me . Though I be the Master piece of the greatest Master ( man is so , ) yet if thou do no more for me , if thou leave me where thou madest me , destruction will follow . The womb which should be the house of life , becomes death itself , if God leave us there . That which God threatens so often , the shutting of the womb , is not so heavy , nor so uncomfortable a curse in the first , as in the latter shutting , nor in the shutting of barrenness , as in the shutting of weakness , when children are come to the birth , and no strength to bring forth . 

It is the exaltation of misery , to fall from a near hope of happiness . And in that vehement imprecation , the Prophet expresses the highest of God's anger give them o Lord , what wilt thougive them ? give them a miscarrying womb . Therefore as soon as we are men , ( that is , inanimated ) quickened in the womb ) though we cannot ourselves , our parents have to say in our behalf , wretched man that he is , who shall deliver him from this body of death ? for even the womb is a body of death , if there be no deliverer . It must be he that said to jeremy , Before I form thee I knew thee , and befored thou camest out of the womb I sanctified thee . We are not sure that there was no kind of ship nor boat to fish in , nor to pass by , till God prescribed Noah that absolute form of the Ark . That word which the holy Ghost by Moses useth for the Ark , is common to all kind of boats , Theball , and is the same word that Moses useth for the boat that he was exposed in , That his mother laid him in an ark of bulrushes . But we are sure that Eve had no Midwife when she was delivered of Cain , therefore she might well say , possedi virum à Domino , I have gotten a man from the Lord , wholly , entirely from the Lord ; It is the Lord that enabled me to conceive , The Lord that infused a quickening soul into that conception , the Lord that brought into the world that which himself had quickened , without all this might Eve say , My body had been but the house of death , and Domini Domini sunt exitus mortis , to God the Lord belong the issues of death . But then this exitus a morte , is but introitus in mortem , this issue , this deliverance from that death , the death of the womb , is an entrance , a delivering over to another death , the manifold deaths of this world , we have a winding sheet in our Mother's womb , which grows with us from our conception , and we come into the world , wound up in that winding sheet , for we come to seek a grave ; And as prisoners discharged of actions may lie for fees ; so when the womb hath discharged us , yet we are bound to it by cords of hestae by such a string , as that we cannot go thence , nor stay there ; we celebrate our own funerals with cries , even at our birth ; as though our threescore and ten year's life were spent in our mother's labour , and our circle made up in the first point thereof ; we beg our Baptism , with another Sacrament , with tears ; And we come into a world that lasts many ages , but we last not ; in domo Patris , says our Saviour , speaking of heaven , multae mansiones , there are many mansions , diverse and durable , so that if a man cannot possess a martyrs house , ( he hath shed no blood for Christ , yet he may have a Confessors , he hath been ready to glorify God in the shedding of his blood . And if a woman cannot possess a virgin's house ( she hath embraced the holy state of marriage ) yet she may have a matron's house , she hath brought forth and brought up children in the fear of God. In domo patris , in my father's house , in heaven there are many mansions ; but here upon earth the son of man hath not where to lay his head , says he himself . Nun terram dedit filijs hominum ? how then hath God given this earth to the sons of men ? he hath given them earth for their materials to be made of earth , and he hath given them earth for their grave and sepulture , to return and resolve to earth , but not for their possession : Here we have no continuing city , nay no cottage that continues , nay no persons no bodies that continue . Whatsoever moved Saint jerome to call the journeys of the Israelites , in the wilderness , mansions ; The word ( the word is Nasang ) signifies but a journey , but a peregrination . Even the Israel of God hath no mansions ; but journeys , pilgrimages in this life . By what measure did jacob measure his life to Pharaoh ; the days of the years of my pilgrimage . And though the Apostle would not say morimur , that , whilst we are in the body we are dead , yet he says , Peregrinamur , whilst we are in the body , we are but in a pilgrimage , and we are absent from the Lord ; he might have said dead , for this whole world is but an universal churchyard , but our common grave , and the life & motion that the greatest persons have in it , is but as the shaking of buried bodies in their grave , by an earthquake . That which we call life , is but Hebdomada mortium , a week of death , seven days , seven periods of our life spent in dying , a dying seven times over ; and there is an end . Our birth dies in infancy , and our infancy dies in youth , and youth and the rest die in age , and age also dies , and determines all . Nor do all these , youth out of infancy , or age out of youth arise so , as a Phoenix out of the ashes of another Phoenix formerly dead , but as a wasp or a serpent out of a caryon , or as a Snake out of dung . Our youth is worse than our infancy , and our age worse than our youth . Our youth is hungry and thirsty , after those sins , which our infancy knew not ; And our age is sorry and angry , that it cannot pursue those sins which our youth did ; & besides , all the way , so many deaths , that is , so many deadly calamities accompany every condition , and every period of this life , as that death itself would be an ease to them that suffer them : Upon this sense doth job wish that God had not given him an issue from the first death , from the womb , wherefore hast thou brought me forth out of the womb ? OH that I had given up the Ghost , and no eye seen me ? I should have been as though I had not been . And not only the impatient Israelites in their murmuring ( would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt ) but Eliah himself , when he fled from jesabell , and went for his life , as that text says , under the junipertree , requested that he might die , & said , it is enough now , OH Lord , take away my life . So jonah justifies his impatience , nay his anger towards God himself . Now o Lord take , I beseech thee , my life from me , for it is better to die then to live . And when God asked him , dost thou well to be angry for this , he replies , I do well to be angry , even unto death , how much worse a death then death , is this life , which so good men would so often change for death ? But if my case be as Saint Paul's case , quotidiè morior , that I die daily , that something heavier than death fall upon me every day ; If my case be David's case , tota die mortificamur ; all the day long we are killed , that not only every day , but every hour of the day some thing heavier than death fall upon me , though that be true of me , Conceptus in peccatis , I was shapen in iniquity , and in sin did my mother conceive me , ( there I died one death , ) though that be true of me ( Natus filius irae ) I was born not only the child of sin , but the child of wrath , of the wrath of God for sin , which is a heavier death ; Yet Domini Domini sunt exitus mortis , with God the Lord are the issues of death , and after a job , and a joseph , and a jeremie , and a Daniel , I cannot doubt of a deliverance . And if no other deliverance conduce more to his glory and my good , yet he hath the keys of death , and he can let me out at that door , that is , deliver me from the manifold deaths of this world , theomni die and the tota die , the every day's death & every hour's death , by that one death , the final dissolution of body and soul , the end of all . But than is that the end of all ? Is that dissolution of body and soul , the last death that the body shall suffer ? ( for of spiritual death we speak not now ) It is not , though this be exitus à morte ; It is introitus in mortem : though it be an issue from manifold deaths of this world , yet it is an entrance into the death of corruption and putrefaction & vermiculation and incineration , and dispersion in and from the grave , in which every dead man dies over again . It was a prerogative peculiar to Christ , not to die this death , not to see corruption : what gave him this privilege ? Not Joseph's great proportion of gums and spices , that might have preserved his body from corruption and incineration longer than he needed it , longer than three days , but it would not have done it for ever : what preserved him then ? did his exemption and freedom from original sin preserve him from this corruption and incineration ? 't is true that original sin hath induced this corruption and incineration upon us ; If we had not sinned in Adam , mortality had not put on immortality , ( as the Apostle speaks ) no , corruption had not put on incorruption , but we had had our transmigration from this to the other world , without any mortality , any corruption at all . But yet since Christ took sin upon him , so far as made him mortal , he had it so far too , as might have made him see this corruption and incineration , though he had no original sin in himself ; what preserved him then ? Did the hypostatical union of both natures ? God and Man , preserve him from this corruption and incineration ? 't is true that this was a most powerful embalming , to be embalmed with the divine nature itself , to be embalmed with eternity , was able to preserve him from corruption and incineration for ever . And he was embalmed , so embalmed with the divine nature itself , even in his body as well as in his soul ; for the Godhead , the divine nature did not depart , but remained still united to his dead body in the grave ; But yet for all this powerful embalming , his hypostatical union of both natures , we see Christ did die ; and for all his union which made him God and Man , he became no man ( for the union of the body and soul makes the man , and he whose soul and body are separated by death as long as that state lasts is properly not man ) And therefore as in him the dissolution of body and soul was no dissolution of the hypostatical union ; so is there nothing that constrains us to say , that though the flesh of Christ had seen corruption and incineration in the grave , this had been any dissolution of the hypostatical union , for the divine nature , the Godhead might have remained with all the Elements and principles of Christ's body , aswell as it did with the two constitutive parts of his person , his body and his soul. This incorruption than was not in Joseph's gums and spices , nor was it in Christ's innocency , and exemption from original sin , nor was it ( that is , it is not necessary to say it was ) in the hypostatical union . But this incorruptiblenes of his flesh is most conveniently placed in that ; Non dabis , thou wilt not suffer thy holy one to see corruption , we look no further for causes or reasons in the mysteries of religion , but to the will and pleasure of God : Christ himself limited his inquisition in that ita est , even so Father , for so it seemeth good in thy sight . Christ's body did not see corruption , therefore , because God had decreed it should not . The humble soul ( and only the humble soul is the religious soul ) rests himself upon God's purposes and the decrees of God , which he hath declared and manifested not such as are conceived and imagined in ourselves , though upon some probability , some veresimilitude , so in our present case Peter proceeds in his Sermon at jerusalem , & so Paul in his at Antioch . They preached Christ to have been risen without seeing corruption , not only because God had decreed it , but because he had manifested that decree in his Prophet , therefore doth Saint Paul cite by special number the second psalm for that decree ; And therefore both Saint Peter & S. Paul cite for it that place in the 16. psalm , for when God declares his decree and purpose in the express words of his Prophet , or when he declares it in the real execution of the decree , than he makes it ours , than he manifests it to us. And therefore as the Mysteries of our Religion , are not the objects of our reason , but by faith we rest on God's decree and purpose . ( It is so o God , because it is thy will , it should be so ) so Gods decrees are ever to be considered in the manifestation thereof . All manifestation is either in the word of God , or in the execution of the decree ; And when these two concur and meet , it is the strongest demonstration that can be : when therefore I find those marks of adoption and spiritual filiation , which are delivered in the word of God to be upon me , when I find that real execution of his good purpose upon me , as that actually I do live under the obedience , and under the conditions which are evidences of adoption and spiritual filiation ; then so long as I see these marks and live so ; I may safely comfort myself in a holy certitude and a modest infallibility of my adoption . Christ determines himself in that , the purpose of God was manifest to him : S. Peter and S. Paul determine themselves in those two ways of knowing the purpose of God , the word of God before the execution of the decree in the fullness of time . It was prophesied before , say they , and it is performed now , Christ is risen without seeing corruption . Now this which is so singularly peculiar to him , that his flesh should not see corruption , at his second coming , his coming to judgement , shall extend to all that are then a live , their Hestae shall not see corruption , because as th' Apostle says , and says as a secret , as a mystery ; Behold I show you a mystery , we shall not all sleep , ( that is , not continue in the state of the dead in the grave , ) but we shall all be changed in an instant , we shall have a dissolution , and in the same instant a redintgeration , a recompacting of body and soul , and that shall be truly a death & truly a resurrection , but no sleeping in corruption ; But for us that die now and sleep in the state of the dead , we must all pass this posthume death , this death after death , nay this death after burial , this dissolution after dissolution , this death of corruption and putrefaction , of vermiculation and incineration , of dissolution and dispersion in and from the grave , when these bodies that have been the children of royal parents , & the parents of royal children , must say with job , Corruption thou art my father , and to the Worm thou art my mother & my sister . Miserable riddle , when the same worm must be my mother , and my sister , and myself . Miserable incest , when I must be married to my mother and my sister , and be both father and mother to my own mother and sister , beget & bear that worm which is all that miserable penury ; when my mouth shall be filled with dust , and the worm shall feed , and feed sweetly upon me , when the ambitious man shall have no satisfaction , if the poorest alive tread upon him , nor the poorest receive any contentment in being made equal to Princes , for they shall be equal but in dust . One dyeth at his full strength , being wholly at ease & in quiet , and another dies in the bitterness of his soul , and never eats with pleasure , but they lie down alike in the dust , and the worm covers them ; In job and in esay , it covers them and is spread under them , the worm is spread under thee , and the worm covers thee , there 's the Mats and the Carpets that lie under , and there 's the State and the Canapye , that hangs over the greatest of the sons of men ; Even those bodies that were the temples of the holy Ghost , come to this dilapidation , to ruin , to rubbish , to dust , even the Israel of the Lord , and jacob himself hath no other specification , no other denomination , but that vermis jacob , thou worm of jacob . Truly the consideration of this posthume death , this death after burial , that after God , ( with whom are the issues of death ) hath delivered me from the death of the womb , by bringing me into the world , and from the manifold deaths of the world , by laying me in the grave , I must die again in an Incineration of this flesh , and in a dispersion of that dust . That that Monarch , who spread over many nations alive , must in his dust lie in a corner of that sheet of lead , and there , but so long as that lead will last , and that private and retired man , that thought himself his own for ever , and never came forth , must in his dust of the grave be published , and ( such are the revolutions of the graves ) be mingled with the dust of every high way , and of every dunghill , and swallowed in every puddle and pond : This is the most inglorious and contemptible vilification , the most deadly and peremptory nullification of man , that we can consider ; God seems to have carried the declaration of his power to a great height , when he sets the Prophet Ezechiel in the valley of dry bones , & says , Son of man can these bones live ? as though it had been impossible , and yet they did ; The Lord laid Sinews upon them , and flesh , and breath into them , and they did live : But in that case there were bones to be seen , something visible , of which it might be said , can this thing live ? But in this death of incineration , and dispersion of dust , we see nothing that we call that man's ; If we say , can this dust live ? perchance it cannot , it may be the mere dust of the earth , which never did live , never shall . It may be the dust of that man's worm , which did live , but shall no more . It may be the dust of another man , that concerns not him of whom it is asked . This death of incineration and dispersion , is , to natural reason , the most irrecoverable death of all , & yet Domini Domini sunt exitus mortis , unto God the Lord belong the issues of death , and by recompacting this dust into the same body , & reanimating the same body with the same soul , he shall in a blessed and glorious resurrection give me such an issue from this death , as shall never pass into any other death , but establish me into a life that shall last as long as the Lord of life himself . 

And so have you that that belongs to the first acceptation of these words , ( unto God the Lord belong the issues of death ) That though from the womb to the grave and in the grave itself we pass from death to death , yet , as Daniel speaks , the Lord our God is able to deliver us , and he will deliver us.  

And so we pass unto our second accommodation of these words ( unto God the Lord belong the issues of death ) That it belongs to God , and not to man to pass a judgement upon us at our death , or to conclude a dereliction on God's part upon the manner thereof . 

Those indications which the Physicians receive , and those presagitions which they give for death or recovery in the patient , they receive and they give out of the grounds and the rules of their art . But we have no such rule or art to give a presagition of spiritual death & damnation upon any such iudication as we see in any dying man ; we see often enough to be sorry , but not to despair ; we may be deceived both ways , we use to comfort ourself in the death of a friend , if it be testified that he went away like a Lamb , that is , without any reluctation . But , God knows , that may be accompanied with a dangerous damp and stupefaction , & insensibility of his present state . Our blessed Saviour suffered coluctations with death , and a sadness even in his soul to death , and an agony even to a bloody sweat in his body , and expostulations with God , & exclamations upon the cross . He was a devout man , who said upon his death bed , or dead turf ( for he was an Heremit ) septuaginta annos Domino seruivisti , & mori times ? hast thou served a good Master threescore and ten yeaes , and now art thou loath to go into his presence ? yet Hilarion was loath , Bartaam was a devout man ( an Heremit too ) that said that day he died . Cogita te hodie coepisse seruire Domino , & hodie finiturum . Consider this to be the first days service that ever thou didst thy Master , to glorify him in a Christianly and a constant death , and if thy first day be thy last day too , how soon dost thou come to receive thy wages ? yet Bartaam could have been content to have stayed longer forth : Make no ill conclusions upon any man's loathness to die , for the mercies of God work momentarily in minutes , and many times insensibly to bystanders or any other than the party departing . And then upon violent deaths inflicted , as upon malefactors . Christ himself hath forbidden us by his own death to make any ill conclusion ; for his own death had those impressions in it ; He was reputed , he was executed as a malefactor , & no doubt many of them who concurred to his death , did believe him to be so ; Of sudden death there are scarce examples to be found in the scriptures upon good men , for death in battle cannot be called suden death ; But God governs not by examples , but by rules , and therefore make no ill conclusion upon sudden death nor upon distempers , neither though perchance accompanied with some words of diffidence and distrust in the mercies of God : The treelyes as it falls its true , but it is not the last stroke that fells the tree , nor the last word nor gasp that qualifies the soul . Still pray we for a peaceable life against violent death , & for time of repentance against sudden death , and for sober and modest assurance against distempered and diffident death , but never make ill conclusions upon persons overtaken with such deaths ; Domini Domini sunt exitus mortis , to God the Lord belong the issues of death . And he received Samson , who went out of this world in such a manner ( consider it actively , consider it passively in his own death , and in those whom he slew with himself ) as was subject to interpretation hard enough . Yet the holy Ghost hath moved S. Paul to celebrate Samson in his great Catalogue , and so doth all the Church : Our critical day is not the very day of our death : but the whole course of our life . I thank him that prays for me when Quid apertius diceretur ? says he there , what can be more obvious , more manifest than this sense of these words . In the former part of this verse , it is said ; He that is our God , is the God of salvation , Deus salvos fariendi , so he reads it , the God that must save us. Who can that be , says he , but lesus ? for therefore that name was given him , because he was to save us. And to this lesus , says he , this Saviour , belongs the issues of death ; Nec oportuit eum de hac vita alios exitus habere quam mortis . Being come into this life in our mortal nature ; He could not go out of it any other way but by death ? Ideo dictum , says he , therefore it is said . To God the Lord belong the issues of death ; ut ostenderetur moriendo nos saluos facturum , to show that his way to save us was to die . And from this text doth Saint Isodore prove ; that Christ was truly Man , ( which as many sects of heretics denied , as that he was truly God ) because to him , though he were Dominus Dominus ( as the text doubles it ) God the Lord , yet to him , to God the Lord belonged the issues of death , oportuit eum pati more can not be said , than Christ himself says of himself ; These things Christ ought to suffer , he had no other way but by death : So than this part of our Sermon must needs be a passion Sermon ; since all his life was a continual passion , all our Lent may well be a continual good Friday . Christ's painful life took off none of the pains of his death , he felt not the less than for having felt so much before . Nor will any thing that shall be said before , lessen , but rather in large the devotion , to that which shall be said of his passion at the time of due solemnisation thereof . Christ bled nor a drop the less at the last , for having bled at his Circumcision before , nor will you a tear the less then , if you shed some now . And therefore be now content to consider with me how to this God the Lord belonged the issues of death . That God , this Lord , the Lord of life could die , is a strange contemplation ; That the red Sea could be dry , That the Sun could stand still , that an Oven could be seven times heat and not burn , That Lions could be hungry and n●t bite , is strange , miraculously strange , but supermiraculous that God could die ▪ but that God would die is an exaltation of that . But even of that also it is a superexaltation , that God should die , must die , & non exitus ( said S. Augustin God , the Lord had no issue but by death , & oportuit pati ( says Christ himself all this Christ ought to suffer , was bound to suffer ; Deus ultionum Deus says David , God is the God of revenges , he would not pass over the son of man unrevenged , unpunished . But then Deus ultionum libere egit ( says that place ) The God of revenges works freely , he punishes , he spares whom he william And would he not spare himself ? he would not : Dilectio fortis ut mors , love is strong as death , stronger , it drew in death that naturally is not welcome , Si possibile , says Christ , If it be possible , let this Cup pass , when his love expressed in a former decree with his Father , had made it impossible . Many waters quench not love , Christ tried many ; He was Baptised our of his love , and his love determined not there . He mingled blood with water in his agony and that determined not his love ; he wept pure blood , all his blood at all his eyes , at all his pores , in his flagellation and thorns ( to the Lord our God belonged the issues of blood ) and these expressed , but these did not quench his love . He would not spare , nay he could not spare himself . There was nothing more free , more voluntary , more spontaneous than the death of Christ. 't is true , libere egit , he died voluntarily , but yet when we consider the contract act that had passed between his Father and him , there was an oportuit , a kind of necessity upon him . All this Christ ought to suffer . And when shall we date this obligation , this oportuit , this necessity ? when shall we say that begun . Certainly this decree by which Christ was to suffer all this , was an eternal decree , and was there any thing before that , that was eternal ? Infinite love , eternal love , be pleased to follow this home , and to consider it seriously , that what liberty soever we can conceive in Christ , to die or not to die ; this necessity of dying , this decree is as eternal as that liberty ; and yet how small a matter made he of this necessity and this dying ? His Father calls it but a bruise , and but a bruising of his heel ( the serpent shall bruise his heel ) and yet that was that , the serpent should practise and compass his death . Himself calls it but a Baptism , as though he were to be the better for it . I have a Baptism to be Baptised with , and he was in pain till it was accomplished , and yet this Baptism was his death . The holy Ghost calls it joy ( for the joy which was set before him he endured the Cross ) which was not a joy of his reward after his passion , but a joy that filled him even in the midst of those torments , and arose from him ; when Christ calls his Calicem , a Cup , and we worse ( can ye drink of my Cup ) he speaks not odiously , not with detestation of it : Indeed it was a Cup , salus mundo , a health to all the world . And quid retribuam , says David , what shall I render to the Lord ? answer you with David , accipiam Calicem , I will take the Cup of salvation , take it , that Cup is salvation , his passion , if not into your present imitation , yet into your present contemplation . And behold how that Lord that was God , yet could die , would die , must die , for your salvation . That Moses and Elias talked with Christ in the transfiguration , both Saint Matthew and Saint Mark tells us , but what they talked of only S. Luke , Dicebant excessum eius , says he , they talked of his decease , of his death which was to be accomplished at jerusalem , The word is of his Exodus , the very word of our text exitus , his issue by death . Moses who in his Exodus had prefigured this issue of our Lord , and in passing Israel out of Egypt through the red Sea , had foretold in that actual pprophecy , Christ passing of mankind through the sea of his blood . And Elias , whose Exodus and issue out of this world was a figure of Christ's ascension , had no doubt a great satisfaction in talking with our blessed Lord de excessueius , of the full consummation of all this in his death , which was to be accomplished at jerusalem . Our meditation of his death should be more viscerall and affect us more because it is of a thing already done . The ancient Romans had a certain terdernesse and detestation of the name of death , they could not name death , no , not in their wills . There they could not say Si mori contigerit , but si quid humanitus contingat , nor if , or when I die , but when the course of nature is accomplished upon me . To us that speak daily of the death of Christ , ( he was crucified , dead and buried ) can the memory or the mention of our own death be irksome or bitter ? There are in these latter times amongst us , that name death freely enough , and the death of God , but in blasphemous oaths & execrations . Miserable men , who shall therefore be said never to have named jesus , because they have named him too often . And therefore hear jesus say , Ne scivi vos , I never knew you , because they made themselves too familiar with him . Moses and Elias talked with Christ of his death , only , in a holy and joyful sense of the benefit which they and all the world were to receive by that . Discourses of Religion should not be out of curiosity , but to edification . And them they talked with Christ of his death at that time , when he was in the greatest height of glory that ever he admitted in this world , that is , his transfiguration . And we are afraid to speak to the great men of this world of their death , but nourish in them a vain imagination of immortality , & immutability . But bonum est nobis esse hic ( as Saint Peter said there ) It is good to dwell here , in this consider ation of his death , and therefore transfer we our tabernacle ( our devotions ) through some of those steps which God the Lord made to his issue of death that day . Take in the whole day from the hour that Christ received the passover upon Thursday , unto the hour in which he died the next day . Make this present day that day in thy devotion , and consider what he did , and remember what you have done . Before he instituted and celebrated the Sacrament , ( which was after the eating of the passover ) he proceeded to that act of humility , to wash his disciples feet , even Peter , who for a while resisted him ; In thy preparation to the holy and blessed Sacrament , hast thou with a sincere humility sought a reconciliation with all the world , even with those that have been averse from it , and refused that reconciliation from thee ? If so and not else thou hast spent that first part of his last day , in a conformity with him . After the Sacrament he spent the time till night in prayer , in preaching , in Psalms ; Hast thou considered that a worthy receiving of the Sacrament confists in a continuation of holiness after , aswell as in a preparation before . If so , thou hast therein also conformed thyself to him , so Christ spent his time till night ; At night he went into the garden to pray , and he prayed prolixious he spent much time in prayer , how much ? Because it is literally expressed , that he prayed there three several times , & that returning to his Disciples after his first prayer , and finding them a sleep said , could ye not watch with me one hour , it is collected that he spent three hours in prayer . I dare scarce ask thee whither thou wentest , or how thou disposedst of thyself , when it grew dark & after last night : If that time were spent in a holy recommendation of thyself to God , and a submission of thy will to his , It was spent in a conformity to him . In that time and in those prayers was his agony & bloody sweat . I will hope that thou didst pray ; but not every ordinary and customary prayer , but prayer actually accompanied with shedding of tears , and dispositively in a readiness to shed blood for his glory in necessary cases , puts thee into a conformity with him ; About midnight he was taken and bound with a kiss , art thou not too conformable to him in that ? Is not that too literally , too exactly thy case ? at midnight to have been taken & bound with a kiss ? from thence he was carried back to jerusalem , first to Annas , then to Caiphas , and ( as late as it was ) than he was examined and buffeted , and delivered over to the custody of those officers , from whom he received all those irrisions , and violences , the covering of his face , the spitting upon his face , the blasphemies of words , & the smartnes of blows which that Gospel's mentions . In which copasse fell that Gallicinium , that crowing of the Cock which called up Peter to his repentance , how thou passedst all that time thou knowest . If thou didst any thing that needed Peter's tears , and hast not shed them , let me be thy Cock , do it now , Now thy Master ( in the unworthiest of his servants ) looks back upon thee , do it now ; Betimes , in the morning , so soon as it was day , the jews held a counsel in the high Priests hall , and agreed upon their evidence against him , and then carried him to Pilate , who was to be his judge ; didst thou accuse thyself when thou wakedst this morning , and wast thou content even with false accusations ( that is ) rather to suspect actions to have been sin , which were not , then to smother & justify such as were truly sins ? then thou spentst that hour in conformity to him : Pilate found no evidence against him , & therefore to ease himself , and to pass a compliment upon Herod , Tetrarch of Galilee , who was at that time at jerusalem ( because Christ being a Galilean was of Herod's jurisdiction ) Pilate sent him to Herod , & rather as a madman then a malefactor , Herod remaunded him ( with scorns ) to Pilate to proceed against him ; And this was about eight of the clock . Hast thou been content to come to this Inquisition , this examination , this agitation , this cribration , this pursuit ofthy conscience , to sift it to follow it from the sins of thy youth to thy present sins , from the sins of thy bed , to the sins of thy board , & from the substance to the circumstance of thy sins ? that 's time spent like thy Saviour's . Pilot would have saved Christ , by using the privilege of the day in his behalf , because that day one prisoner was to be delivered , but they choose Barrabas , he would have saved him from death ; by satisfying their fury , with inflicting other torments upon him , scourging and crowning with thorns , and loading him with many scornful and ignominous contumlies ; But they regarded him not , they pressed a crucifying . Hast thou gone about to redeem thy sin , by fasting , by Alms , by disciplines and mortifications ? in way of satisfaction to the justice of God ? that will not serve , that 's not the right way , we press an utter Crucifying of that sin that governs thee ; & that conforms thee to Christ. Towards noon Pilate gave judgement , and they made such haste to execution , as that by noon he was upon the Crosse. There now hangs that sacred Body upon the Cross , rebaptised in his own tears and sweat , and embalmed in his own blood alive . There are those bowels of compassion , which are so conspi●●ous , so manifested , as that you may see them through his wounds . There those glorious eyes grew faint in their sight : so as the ●un ashamed to survive them , departed with his light too . And then that Son of God , who was never from us , and yet had now come a new way unto us in assuming our nature delivers that soul ( which was neu●r out of his Father's hands ) by a new way , a voluntary emission of it into his Father's hands ; For though to this God our Lord , belonged these issues of death , so that considered in his own contract ' he must necessarily die , yet at no breach or battery , which they had made upon his sacred Body , issued his soul , but emisit , he gave up the Ghost , and as God breathed a soul into the first Adam , so this second Adam breathed his soul into God , into the hands of God. There we leave you in that blessed dependency , to hang upon him that hangs upon the Cross , there bathe in his tears , there suck at his wounds and lie down in peace in his grave , till he vouchsafe you a resurrection , and an ascension into that Kingdom , which he hath prepared for you , with the inestimable price of his incorruptible blood . 

AMEN . 

AN ELEGY , On Dr. Donne , Deane of Paul's . 

TO have lived eminent in a degree 
Beyond our loftiest flights , that is , like thee ; 
Ort'haue had too much merit is not safe ; 
For such excesses find no Epitaph , 
At common graves we have poetic eyes 
Can melt themselves in easy Elegies ; 
Each quill can drop his tributary verse , 
And pin it , like the Hatchments , to the hearse . 
But at thine , poem or inscription 
( Rich soul of wit and language ) we have none . 
Indeed a silence doth that tomb befit , 
Where is no Herald left to blazon it . 
Widowed invention justly doth forbear 
To come abroad knowing thou art not there , 
Late her great Patron , whose prerogative 
Maintained and clothed her so , as none alive 
Must now presume to keep her at thy rate , 
Though he the indies for her dower estate . 
Or else that awful fire , which once did burn 
In thy clear brain , now fallen into thy urn , 
lives there to fright rude Empirics from thence , 
Which might profane thee by their ignorance . 
Whoever writes of thee and in a style 
Unworthy such a theme , does but revile 
Thy precious dust , and wake a learned spirit , 
Which might revenge his rapes upon thy merit . 
For all a low pitched fancy can devose , 
Will prove at best but hallowed injuries . 
thou ( like the dying Swan ) didst lately sing 
Thy mournful dirge in audience of the King : 
When pale looks , and weak accents of thy breath 
Presented so to life that piece of death , 
That it was feared and prophesied by all , 
thou thither camist to preach thy Funeral . 
O hadst thou in an Elegiak knell 
Pung out unto the world thine own farewell ; 
And in thy high victorious numbers beaten 
The solemn measure of thy griewd retreat : 
thou mightst the Poet's service now have missed 
Aswell , as than thou didst prevent the Priest , 
And never to the world beholding be 
So much as for an Epitaph for thee . 
I do not like the office , nor is it fit , 
thou who didst lend our age such sums of wit , 
Shouldst now reborrow from her bankrupt mine 
That o'er to bury thee , which once was thine : 
Rather still leave us in thy debt , and know 
( Exalted soul ) more glory'tis to own 
Vntothy hearse , what we can never pay , 
then with embased coin those rights defray . 
Commit we then thee to thyself ; nor blame 
Our drooping loves , which thus to thy own fame 
Leave thee executor . since but thy own 
no pen could doe'thee justice , nor bays crown 
Thy vast d●sert , save that we nothing can 
Depute to be thy ashes Guardian . 
So jewellers no art nor mettle trust , 
To form the Diamond , but the Diamonds dust . 
An Epitaph on Dr. DONNE . 

I Cannot blame those men , that knew thee well , 
Yet dare not help the world to ring thy knell 
In tuneful Elegies . there 's not language known 
Fit for thy mention , but was first thine own . 
The Epitaphs thou writt'st , have so ber●ft 
Our pens of wit , there 's not one fancy left 
Enough to weep thee , what hence forth we seo 
Of art and nature , must result from thee . 
There may perchance some busy gathering friend 
Ste●le from thine own works , and that varied lend 
( Which thou bestowd'st on others ) to thy hearse ; 
And so thou shalt live still in thine own verse . 
He that will venture further , may commit 
A pitied error , show his Zeal , not wit. 
Fate hath done mankind wrong ; virtue may aim 
Reward of consciense , never can of fame , 
Since her great trumpets broke , could only give 
Faith to the world , command it to believe . 
He then must write , that would define thy parts 
here lies the best Divinity , all the Arts.  




Of  A morte , in morte , per mortem . Foundation , butteresses and contignation . I Part.  Exitus a morte uteri . Psal. 115. vers . 6.  Psal. 139. 6.  Ps ▪ 118. 23.  100 3.  esay 37.  Rom. 7. 24.  Exo. 23.  Gen. 4. 1.  Exitus a mortibus mundi . joh. 14. 2.  Mat. 8. 20.  Heb. 13. 14  Exo. 17. 1.  Gen. 47. 9  2 Cor. 5. 6.  Io. 18.  Exo ▪ 16● 3  rev. 19 4. 4. 3.  Apoc. 1. 18.  Exitus a morte Incinerationis . 1 Cor. 15. vers . 33.  Psal. 16. 10.  Mat. 11. 26.  Acts 2. 31. 13. 35.  Vers. 10.  Vers. 24 20  job. 23. 24.  Vers. 14. 11.  2.  Part. Liberatio in morte . Heb. 11.  Mat. I 21 : Luk. 24. 26  Psal : 91  Cant. 36.  Vers. ●  Gen. 3. 15.  Luk. 12 40.  Heb. 12. 2.  Mat. 22. 22.  Ps. 116. 12.  Mat. 17. 3.  Mar. 9 4.  Luke 9 31.  Conformitas , Luk. 22. 24.  Mat. 26 40.  