A TREATISE UPON DEATH : 

First publicly delivered in a funeral Sermon , anno Dom. 1630.  

And since enlarged By N. C. Preacher of God's word in Scotland at Kilmacolme in the Barony of Renfrew . 

Hebr. 9 27.  

For it is appointed for men once to die , etc.  

EDINBURGH . 

Printed by R. Y. for J. Wilson , Bookseller in Glasgow . 

Anno 6●5 . 

Christian Reader , 

IN this changeable vicissitude of decaying time , and continual succession of dying ages , there is nothing more certain than death , which is painted forth in the face of all living creatures , Man not excepted , the noblest of all , who in all sexes , ranks , and conditions must once die , and then enter into judgement . For this radicate moisture must dry up , and this natural heat must grow cold , this soaring breath must fly up , and this surmounting soul must flit out of this earthly tabernacle , that it may return unto its native soil , where it shall rest eternally in these heavenly mansions , stately habitations , and most pleasant paradise of God : Whereunto Christ the spoiler of principalities and powers , our captain , forerunner and perfect Saviour is victoriously and triumphantly gone before us , and now ( according to his comfortable promise ) is preparing a sure place , a royal palace , for all those , who with a godly sorrow groan under the unsupportable burden of their grievous sins , and with assurance of faith believe in , and long after his saving and glorious appearance . So that we need not sorely and immoderately lament , for the absence of those whom we once dearly loved in this sour valley of tears and wearisome pilgrimage of many stations , every hour whereof is more dangerous than another ; Seeing they have joyfully and happily arrived at their journey's end , heaven , and at last are crowned with incomprehensible glory , strengthened with never ▪ fading immortality , replenished with exquisite joys of Gods favourable presence , and drowned with overflowing pleasures at his right hand for evermore . These points with many others in that kind I have handled in this subsequent meditation , first publicly delivered by me in a Sermon at the burial of an honourable Baron with his religious Lady both laid in their grave at once , whose names of blessed memory I conceal from thee , for such reasons as I thought good . Which meditation surely I had buried with them , or at least closed up in my study , if not the good opinion of conscionable and zealous hearers had raised it up again from the grave of oblivion , by their diligent search and lecture of manuscripts here and there dispersed far from my expectation & former intention . So that I was forced to review and enlarge the original copy by the advice of my learned and much respected friends ; such as reverend prelates , doctors and pastors of our church , who have best skill in such matters of spiritual importance . For I have ever been of that mind , that every wise man should make choice of some entire and trusty friends , who will be so far from flattering and fostering him with a self conceit , that by the contrary they will plainly admonish him of his errors and infirmities , and give him sound and ripe counsel , when there is any business in hand that may especially concern his credit and estimation . amongst the which the operations which flow from the gifts of the mind have the first place : & seeing none , how capable so ever , is fully adorned with them , he should seek help of others . For God hath not given all gifts to every one ; and he who is shorter-sighted than I , may see a spot in my face which I cannot see myself ; and it were to be wished that there were more premeditation in this age , so fertile of invention , wits and writs . Did the Greek orators and Poets go to their Athenaeum , and the Latin to their Aedes palatinae , for to consult with the most learned of their time about the divulgating of their monuments ; and we who have more divine documents then ever any paganish Writer could dream of , bring forth so abortive fruits ? As for myself , I will not answer for others , but if I had had no other to take counsel by , surely this lucubration should never have seen the face of the sun , or come unto the hands of these censuring and critic days : where there is nothing so good , but it hath its own carpers and enviers , nothing so bad , but it hath its own favourers and embracers . In it I meddle not with curious and fruitless questions , new doctrines , dangerous tenants , accompanied with variety of ostentative and sophisticate learning , and farded with the abused colours of prattling and adulterate eloquence , wherewith too many seek their own praise , by disgracing their sincere profession , by venting their lofty presumption , by scandalising their holy mother the church , by defiling the white robe of Christ's righteousness , laid abroad to us in the gravity , integrity , simplicity , and majesty of divine scriptures , which ought to be the only square and rule of our actions , the touchstone of our speculations , and the sovereign judge of all our controversies . Which controversies alas , to the unspeakable grief of the better sort , to the pitiful seduction of some miscarried simple ones from the purity of truth to the impurity of error , to the inevitable destruction of many obdurate ones to fearful and damnable inconveniences , what by sects , schisms and heresies this long time ago , what by oppressions , murders , massacres , as bloody consequences , have troubled the peace of this Christian world . Neither did I suffer this sermon to come to open light , because it was my own brood , and first issue upon that grave purpose , which requireth more years , deeper learning , sounder judgement , longer experience , than I , a youth , can attain to for the present , but because of two reasons which I add to the former : The first is , because there is no meditation more familiar to me then that of death : Out of the country , many thousands did fall on every side of me : and in my country , since my admission to this painful and dreadful cure of souls , one special point of my charge is to visit those good Christians ( over whom I watch ) at their last farewell to this world , that I may render a joyful and comfortable account of them to my Master the great shepherd of the flock . The second reason is , because of two men , whom I highly honoured during their pilgrimage here ; The one was a principal nobleman of my paroch , who in his journey to heaven took such pleasure in reading this meditation , that he himself did dict it to one of his servants a little before his death . And I dare say , without flattery , that his generous and religious soul did even in this life in a singular manner taste of the glory to come . OH what divine sentences ! OH what comfortable speeches did he utter to us who attended on him ! OH what ravishing contemplations and private soliloquies had his soul with God on his deathbed ! These , as so many antidotes , preservatives & corroboratives he used against that last agony : By these , as so many scales he climbed up to the heavens . The other was my dear & honourable father , who before his departure out of this mortal life delighted much in reading , hearing & meditating on this discourse , and hoping that others should get instruction , direction and consolation thereby , commanded me to publish it . So that I could not disobey him , who was God's instrument to bring me unto this world , to train me up in the fear of the Lord , and who both in , and out of the country , did prosecute me with his tender & fatherly affection in my painful travels , and dangerous expeditions for the golden fleece of virtue , & whose life was a clear mirror of Christian charity , yea above his power oftentimes , which he did recommend to his children : for the Lord blessed him with abundance to the end , and in the end crowned his former favours with a pleasant and peaceable death , which he oft craved at God's hands , and which was a matter of greater contentment to me , then if he had left me heir of whole territories , which with the rest of the toys of this perishing world have but transitory joys , like clouds rising in the morning , but dissolving ere night without any memory of them at all . Nevertheless , honourable birth , good education , the pattern of worthy acts , and the immortal fame of renowned ancestors , either in church or policy , communicated to the emulous posterity for imitation , is not the least portion of human inheritance : and he who follows their famous examples , engraven with letters of gold in chests of cedar , or in tables of marble , in the never-decaying temple of sacred memory ; he ( I say ) is not only in the way to worldly honour and preferment , but also their footsteps lead him from grace to glory , which is the most precious purchase a Christian can acquire . Without the which all is but dung and dross : for one drachma of goodness is better than a whole world of greatness ; even as a little pearl is of greater worth , than a big rock of flint ; or as the sun is higher esteemed than the whole body of the firmament spangled with stars , every one striving with another in beauty . 

To be short then , it is no inbred opinion of myself , who an conscious of many infirmities in this body of death , that maketh me to acquaint thee ( OH Christian Reader ) with this funeral meditation , which perhaps may live when I am dead . In the mean time I wish it may teach thee , me , and other mortal men , our Christian duty in this point , rest with us familiarly at home , warn us in our journey , remember us of our present mortality , guard us against our last enemy , prepare us for that future immortality and full happiness of soul and body conquered to us by the victorious death , and meritorious passion of the only son of God our only Saviour : In whom I rest ever , 

thine to power , N. C.  

Ad Lectorem . 

SI procul obscuri tenebris ab inertibus Orci 
Sit tibi propositum succinctae stamina vitae 
' Ducere per virtutis iter ▪ dum fata diesque 
Suppeditant ; animam ne mors inopina labantem 
Auferat incauto , new formidabile Lethi 
Imperium quod cuncta domat , terrorve sepulchri , 
Vltricesve mali furiae , aut quascunque sinistro 
Nox genuit faetu pests , quodve horridus Orcus 
Spirat inexhaustum flagranti pectore sulphur , 
Solicitent miseram trepid â formidine mentem : 
Huc ades , en Campbellus opem tibi praebet anhelo 
Ante ferens gressus . Vt quae ( velut orba carina 
Remige ) Jactatur variis impulsa procellis 
Fortunae instabilis , tandem mens edita coelo 
Assuescat patriam paulatim agnoscere sedem . 
Ille etenim ingenii nixus pernicibus alis , 
Judicioque nitens memori , quae docta vetustas 
Naturae ê tenebris hausit ratione sagaci : 
Et quae sancta cohors patrum ( quos inclyta virtus 
Reddidit aeternos ) veriquoque fontibus hausta 
Mandavit scriptis ; & quae ter maximus orbis 
Conditor indulsit divina oracula terris , 
Hoc except a tulit tenui comprensa libello . 
Ex quibus instructus triplici penetralia Ditis 
Agmine perrupit saevi , mortisque ferocis 
Spicula contundens , vinclis dare colla coêgit . 
Qud tu magnanimo superat â morte volatu 
Aethereas subeas sedes , lautaeque Deorum 
Accumbas mensae , factus novus incola coeli . 
PATRICIUS CAMPBELLUS . 

A preface before the Sermon . 

ye are all here conveened this day to perform the last Christian duties to a respected and worthy Baron , with his honourable Lady , who both have lived amongst you in this land , and whose embalmed corpse , both ye now honour with your mourning presence , and happy farewell to their grave . I am here designed to put you all in mind by this premeditate speech , that the next case shall be assuredly ours , and perhaps when we think least of it . Therefore that I may acquaint these who need information in this point with the nature and matter of such exhortations , let them remember with me that there are two sorts of funer all sermons , approved and authorised by our reform churches in Europe : The first whereof , I call , for order's sake , Encomiastic , or Scholastic , because it is spent in the praise of the defunct , and only used in schools , colleges , academies , and universities , by the most learned ; And this is ordinarily enriched with pleasant variety of strange languages , lively lights of powerful or atorie , fertile inventions of alluring poesy , great subtleties of solid Philosophy , grave sentences of venerable fathers , manifold examples of famous histories , ancient customs of memorable peoples and nations ; and in a word , with all the ornaments of human wit , learning , eloquence . Which howbeit I might borrow for a while , yet I lay them down at the feet of Jesus , and being sent hither not by man , but by God , whose interpreter and ambassador I am , I prefer before them the smooth words of Moses , the stately of esay , the royal of David , the wise of Solomon , the eloquent of saint Paul , and the ravishing of saint John , with the rest of divine writers , Gods penmen , out of whose inexhausted treasury of heavenly consolation , and saving knowledge , I wish to be furnished with the secret preparation of the sanctuary , and to be accompanied with the full power and evidence of the spirit of my God. For there is another second sort of funeral sermons , which I call Ecclesiastic , or popular , viz. when the judicious and religious preacher , only for the instruction and edification of the living , frequently assembled at burials , and earnestly desiring at such doleful spectacles to be rejoiced in the spirit of their minds , taketh some convenient portion of scripture , and handleth it with piety , discretion , moderation , to his private consolation , the edification of his hearers , and the exaltation of the most high name of God. So that having no other ends but these three , and taking God to be my witness that I abhor all religious or rather superstitious worship given to the dead , and being naturally obliged to come here , and oftentimes requested by my near and dear friends , yea abundantly warranted by these who have the priority of place in church government above me , and as it seemeth by your favourable silence , and Christian attention , invited to speak , I have purposed by the special concurrence , and assistance of the spirit of my God , to deliver unto you a brief meditation upon death . Pray ye all to God to engrave it by the finger of his allpearcing spirit in the vive depth of my heart , that again by way of spiritual communication , I may write it upon the tables of your hearts ( as it were ) with a pen of iron , and the point of a diamond , that both preacher and hearer may lay it up in their memories , and practise it in their lives and conversations . And I entreat you all ( and most of all these who are of a tender conscience ) I entreat you I say , in the tender bowels of mercy , not to misconstruct my coming hither , which ought rather to be a matter of singular comfort , then of prejudged censure ; a matter of profitable instruction , rather than of envious emulation ; a matter of pious devotion , then of repining contention . I think not shame , with the glorious apostle to preach in season , and out of season , for the converting , winning , and ingathering of souls . I do not say this , That I consent to these who contemn and condemn altogether such meetings ; for albeit I would confess unto them , that the time , place , and persons were extraordinary ( as indeed they may seem to these who have not travailed out of their paroch churches , or seen foreign countries ) yet the customs of the primitive church ( see Nazianzen , Ambrose , Jerome , etc. ) and of our reform churches in France , Genevah , Germany , upper and lower , in great Britain , and elsewhere , maketh all three ordinary ; and the subject of this present meditation , viz. Death , proveth the same to be common . 

THE SERMON . 

Hebr. 9 27.  

For it is appointed for men once to die , etc.  


This is a short , a memorable , a grave assertion . Short , because few in words , but full of substance . Memorable , because a remembrance of death . Grave , because the vive representation of it before our eyes should teach us our frail and transitory condition in this world . But that I may proceed with a clear method , without the which there is no solid discourse , mark these points : 1 The logic analysis of these words : 2 The grammatical and critical expositions : 3 The doctrines , conform with their several uses inferred upon them : 4 And lastly , the conclusion of this whole action by way of application to these two dead corpse . 

As for the analysis , I shall not be curious in it . ye see only the subject of this sentence is , Men once to die . The attribute , Appointed ; The sentence itself is general , because the appointment is general , Death general ; The subject of death , Man , general ; The number of death , Once , if unity can be a number . 

As for the exposition ; There are three words which need to be cleared . The first whereof is appointed , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , expounded by worthy Suidas , Laid up as a reward ; and so indeed death is the wages of sin . Phavorinus following that most learned Hesychius , turneth it 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , it is prepared ; and so indeed it is prepared for all men once to die : But our Greek and Latin , ancient and modern writers translate it , ordained , decreed , established for all men once to die . I embrace their orthodox versions ; yet they will suffer me to explain this word by others in scripture , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , it is foreseen ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , it is foreknown ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , it is fore-purposed ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , it is predestinate that all men must once die . I confess all these four words are to man divers , modo percipiendi ; yet to God , they are all one ; who howbeit he be the first and the last , yet in him there is neither first , no● last . So that the meaning is this ; It is the irresistible will , eternal decree , unchangeable purpose , unsearchable counsel of the wise and everliving God , That all men and women living upon the face of the earth , must once die . Obj. But this may be called into question by two or three instances taken out of the old and new testaments : In the old , Genes . 5. we read , That Enoch was no more seen by man , but taken by God. And 2 King. cap. 2. that Elias was caught up in a fiery chariot unto heaven , so that they were both translated not to see death . In the new we read , 1 Thess . 4.  That these who shall survive at the day of judgement , they shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye , and caught up into the clouds for to meet with the Lord in the air , and to be ever with him ; so that these also shall not taste of death . I answer first , That some few extraordinary instances do not altogether break the band of ordinary courses once set down by God , who is without shadow of turning or changing . Secondly , I answer , That Enoch and Elias , in so far as they were men , they were mortal , but in so far as they were such men , they were immortal , that is , In so far as they were types of the resurrection and of the prototype Jesus , the immortal , coeternal , coessential Son of God the Father . And as for those , who shall remain alive upon the earth on that great day , their death will not be real , but analogical , not actual , but virtual or equivalent , that is , They shall not die as their predecessors , a natural death ; but their extraordinary change shall supply or be in stead of an ordinary death . So that ye may manifestly perceive , the appointment of God is surer than the centre of the earth , or the foundation of the heavens : for these two are grounded upon it , and it upon none , except itself , the centre and fundament of all , whose appointment is himself , in whom there is no composition , no accident ; Quicquid enim in Deo , Deus est ; that is , whatsoever is in God , is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 very God , him very self , one and the same ; yesterday , to day , and for ever . And thus far of the exposition of the first word , appointed . 

The second word is , Death : Suidas by a periphrase , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that is , a refuge from evils , and as it were a most safe haven after some storm . Phavo●inus , who wrote after the rest of Greek authors , giveth four short descriptions of death , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that is , A separation of the soul from the body ; A disjunction of the four elements , whereof our bodies are made ; The losing of the life ; The chase away of cares . Scripture calleth it a losing , not a losing , or dissolution , not a destruction . Our Theologues they commonly make three sorts of death : First , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Natural death ; not that nature is the cause of it , for it is sui conservatrix , a defender of itself ; but that it is made common to all things in nature , and under the sun : things also above ( the divine nature only excepted ) have their own changes , as well as their influences . Secondly , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Violent death , when the course of nature is interrupted , by some strange event ; common also to all living creatures : And the Pagan's themselves without any contradiction acknowledged these two sorts . The third is called , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , The death of deaths , called spiritual death ; and it is twofold ; either first , when a man is dead in his sins , through desertion , occoecation , obduration , impenitence , or last , when a man because of his continuance in the same is cast away from God's presence and union as a reprobate , and consequently is adjudged to the hells without any recovery , delivery , mercy . God preserve us from this estate , and happy shall we be , if we die , before we die , for so we shall not die , when we die ; that is , if we die to sin , before our body die , for so when it dieth , we shall not die spiritually ; and he that will live when he is dead , must die while he is alive , that whether we live , we live to the Lord ; or whether we die , we die to the Lord , Whether we live therefore , or die , we are the Lords , Rom. 14. 8.  For Christ to us in death and life is advantage , Philip. 1. 21.  For Christ therefore died and rose again , and revived , that he might be Lord both of the dead and living , Rom. 14. 9  And thus far of the exposition of the second word , Death . 

The third word is Man I know the naturalists , being blindfolded , intoxicate , and infatuate with self-love , and self-conceipt gave innumerable glorious titles to man ; and amongst the rest , they called him the monarch of heaven and earth ; the midst betwixt the Creator and the creature ; the Lord , compend , and picture of this world , a little world , the delight and miracle of nature , the miracle of miracles , yea , a mortal God , and ( as the Stoics say ) in one thing less than God. But it is to be remarked , that the most solid Philosophers did call man amongst other disparagements , the pattern of imbecility , the prey of time , the pastime of fortune , the portrait of inconstancy , the subject of envy and calamity : Or ( as Diogenes saith ) rottenness in his beginning , a beast in his life , the food of worms in his death . But to leave all exotic observations , let us speak of him , in the language of Canaan . There are three words , which in the original signify man ; The first word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Isch , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , noble , strong , worthy , excellent man : for in the estate of innocence and integrity , he was created perfectly holy in body and soul ; in which sense Philo Judaeus calleth God 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the pattern ; and man , God's 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , image ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , effigy ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , workmanship . But alas , OH man , thou hast made a great change , and hast lost infinite treasures , for earthly toys ; of holy thou art become unholy ; of perfect , imperfect ; and art metamorphosed from the image of God , to the image of Satan . The second word is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Enosch , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , painful , sorrowful , miserable man : for by his vile apostasy from his Lord and King , from his Master and Father , he hath brought shame and punishment upon himself , and through him to his whole posterity , as water is derived through the channel to the streams ; or as the sap of a tree is sent up from the root to the branches . The third word is , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Adam ; and this word is almost one with Enosch ; for it signifieth weak , feeble , impotent man , and so it is distinguished from Isch : As in greek , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 differs from 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Psalm 49. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 been Adam ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 been Isch ; that is , the rich , and the poor , the noble , and the ignoble , potent , and impotent . But this third word , Adam , signifieth most especially , the matter whereof we are made , clay , earth , dust . And in this sense Moses , Deut. 32.  Jer. 22. 29. say , OH earth , earth , earth , hear the word of the Lord ; that is , OH man , man , man , earth by constitution , earth by disposition , earth by dissolution ; set down in the Latin well ; terra quam terimus , terra quam gerimus , terra quam quaerimus . And Chrysostome saith more , it is our country , ournurse , our mother , our board , our house , our sepulchre : Augustine terms it , our strange land ; and Nazianzen , our stepmother : and this is God's own conference with man in that terrestrial paradise , Gen. 3. 19  Dust thou art , and unto dust thou shalt return ; confessed by Abraham , Gen. 18. 27.  I am but dust and ashes : and by Job , ch . 10. 9  OH Lord thou hast made me as a pot of clay , and wilt bring me unto dust again . And this is amplified by Solomon , Siracides : yea the Turks and Pagans' , who affirm , that we were once made of earth , & must return to it again , as waters to the sea . And this is God's own voice to Isaias , ch . 40. 6. repeated in 1.  Peter , 1. 24.  All flesh is grass , and all the glory of man is as the flower of grass ; the grass withereth , and the flower thereof decayeth . Where first , mark the matter of man , in the word , flesh , that is , a senseless dead lump , till that the Lord , and Prince of life breathe into his nostrils the breath of life , and so he become a living soul . Secondly , the continuance of man , and that very short , represented first by grass , which the mower cutteth , the wind withereth , the frost consumeth : secondly , by a flower , which the hand plucketh , the wind shaketh , the rain walloweth , both of small endurance ; for one winter taketh away both . Even so man may in the pleasant flower of his age , bud , flourish , fructify ; but when the smiting wind of God's decree blows on him , he withereth , decayeth , dieth . And when he is gone , were he ever so glorious in this life , there is no more memory of him , then of a beautiful flower in a mown meadow ; his loyal wife , his loving children , his near friends , his dear companions , all forget him : and howbeit in the vanity of their ambitious spirit , and pride of their lofty heart , they would erect sumptuous tombs , speaking trophies , gorgeous monuments ( only times prey ) upon him , he is not sensible of such things ; for , esay 63. 16.  Abraham is ignorant of us , and Israel knoweth us not : and after this life he must be in one of these two estates without a third , either in hell sempiternally confined ; and if he be there , what comfort can he receive of funeral preparations , multitudes of convoy , bearing of branches , and such like superfluities , which reach not beyond the span of this life ? or if he be triumphing in heaven , no earthly pomp , no human magnificence , no worldly pre-eminence can add any thing to that superexcellent weight of glory , no more than a drachma to the weight of the whole earth , or the dust to the balance , or a spark to the bucket , or a bucket to the boundless , bottomless Ocean ; or a candle can add to the matchless sun in his pride at the midday . And thus far of the exposition of the third word , Man  

The assertion , It is appointed , etc.  

Now I come to the doctrines . The first is general , and it is the pillar whereupon I prop the rest , viz. The demonstration of the invincible truth of this assertion , It is appointed for men , etc. by these strong and forcible reasons . 

The first reason is taken from the mother of all things , and especial handmaid of God , Nature : for it hath appointed that all flowers , from the stinking weed to the fair lily ; that all trees , from the Hyssop upon the wall , to the Cedar in the forest ; that all herbs , from the green grass , to semperviva ; that all minerals , from the iron to the gold ; from the rough stone to the precious pearl ; that all the fishes , from the greatest Leviathan , to the least minime ; that all fowls , from the Eagle to the midge ; that all the creeping creatures from the Elephant or Crocodile to the basest worms , have their own beginnings , progresses , ends . Because the very four elements whereof they are made , are naturally subject to their combined transmutations , the earth being subtilised to the water , the water unto the air , the air unto the fire , and these unto their prima materia , their chaos , and it unto nothing . And this nature is so pregnant , sedulous , and wise , that it keepeth its own appointed time , as the wise man saith , Ecles . 3.  There is an appointed time for every thing under heaven . If time , then there must be a prius and a posterius , a last as well as a first . As for example , the crane , the swallow , the stork , the woodcock , the cuckoo with her titling , know the seasons of the year , according to the course of sun and moon , from which proceedeth the beauty of the spring , the heat of summer , the fruitfulness of the harvest , and the cold of winter , one following after another ; and as one cometh , so the other goeth , by an alternative vicissitude of time , which at the last ( seeing now it consumeth all things ) must be consumed by itself , when it shall find nothing to feed upon . For now we may say , Where are those ancient works made of brick and stone ; yea , of flint , brass , adamant , by the most cunning artificers ? are they not redacted unto their original inform , disforme dust ? Where is the tower of proud Babel , the church of Ephesian Diana , and that glorious one of Solomon ? Where is the Capitol of Rome , and the invincible Byrsa of Carthage ? where Thebes , with her hundred ports , spacious Nineve , and beautiful Jerusalem ? Hath not time devoured all , and much more , with their builders , indwellers , upholders ? And shall not London , Paris , Rome , Constantinople , Cairo , Quinsay go that same way ? Yes assuredly : for things artificial , as well as natural have their own periods , which they cannot outreach , otherwise they were infinite ; a property , which cannot be attributed to any thing created properly . 

The second reason is taken from experience , the schoolmistress of fools : for it is the surest that ever man got ; and it appoints and teacheth , that our life is a dying life ; and that the first step to it , is the first step to our death ; and that the longer we live , the nearer we are to death , and our being here is equally divided between life and death . 

Na scentes morimur , finisque ab origine pendet . 
Quidquid habens ortum , finem timet , ibimus omnes . 


So that the continual work of our life , is a building of death in us : for we die daily ; and if we live but one day , we see all ; so all days are alike , it is that same day and night , that same sun and moon , these same elements and heaven which our forebears have seen before us , and there is no new thing under heaven . But to repeat things from the beginning ; doth not experience teach us , that where there is one come to fifty years , there are ten not come ; but to see a man pass his climacterick , and then 80. years , it is rara avis in terris . Never man yet lived a 1000 years , which are but one day in the sight of God ; for one age is the death of another : childhood the death of infancy ; youthhood the death of both ; manhood the death of these three ; old age the death of these four ; death the death of all : even so one generation is the death of another . To the Hebrews succeeded Babylonians , Chaldeans , Assyrians , Medes , Persians , Egyptians , Sycionians , Greeks , Romans , and to them we who live in this deficient and vicious age : and as they have transferred the lamps of their lives to us ; so we by continual succession of time must lay down the same without any contradiction to our posterity . That sun which ye see setting over your heads , the ebbing and flowing of the sea , which environeth us , that earth whereupon we walk , lately renewed , now growing old ; and to come nearer , these graves whereupon ye trod in your entry , this Churchyard , these through stones , that dead bell , that beir , that doleful convoy , these two corpse , and that wide opened sepulchre , telleth us , that we must die . And as Catullus saith , — Ostentant omnia lethum . 


Death is painted with the net of a fowler : and with this ditto , Devoro omnes , I devour all . All things above us , beneath us , about us , within us , and without us , tell us that we must die . Do not all the creatures summon one another to it ? the least is swallowed up by the most ; the weakest by the strongest . And such is the gluttony and insatiable appetite of man , that he hath not spared one of them , but from the tame to the wild beasts , from the fowl of the air , to the fish of the sea , his womb is become the tomb , or rather filthy retract of them . So that seeing he is nourished with perishingthings , he cannot according to the maxims of Philosophy but perish himself too , being corruptible in his conception , of frothing sperme ; corruptible in his mother's belly , of excrementitious blood ; corruptible on her breast , of vaporous milk ; corruptible in his whole life , of earthly food ; but most of all corruptible in his death , from the which he is called in Greek 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , in latin mortalis , that is , subject to death : and this is so experimented by man , that one premonisheth another , our forebears our fathers , and they us , and we our posterity , to our journeys , pilgrimages , warfares' end , Death . 

The third reason is taken from GOD , whom the Egyptians call Theut ; the Persians , Syro ; the Arabians , Alla ; the Magicians , Orsi ; the Latins , Deus ; the greek , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; the Hebrews , Jehovah , Elohim , Adonai , all in four letters , to let you see that he is the God of all nations , the God of gods , who appointed all things to come to pass according to his good will & pleasure ; whose appointment is the Cardinal , supreme , architectonick cause of these two former subordinat appointments ; for it is the cause of causes ; and without damnable curiosity , we ought not to go further ; it is a precipice , and we must not cast ourselves headlong off it ; it is a great gulf , too deep for our shallow wits ; let us admire , adore it . But to leave the infinite names which Lullists , Rabbins , Caballists , Pagans , Divines give to God , he is termed 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the best deviser ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , goodness itself ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , of most free will ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , him very self : and so his appointment must be holy , righteous , perfect , irresistible , whose appointment is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 for whatsoever God ex voluntate beneplaciti , hath first concluded within himself , or acted in the parliament , or secret counsel of himself before all time , that ex voluntate signi must be execute by nature , and taught by experience in time ; seeing these two are his loyal and faithful servants , who must not , nor cannot , nor will not control their masters uncontrollable will , who even trystes with them for the real and effectual accomplishment of all actions . Therefore because it is ratified from all eternity in that supernal throne of God's justice , that for sin all men must once die , then for the execution and exhibition of the same on earth , nature must play its part , and experience its part ; for of necessity , the severe sentence of a sovereign and inappellable judge must be reverently obeyed . But so it is , Job 14. 5.  All the days of man are determined , and the number of his months is with God , and he hath set him bounds that he cannot pass . And 7. 1.  There is an appointed time to man upon earth . The poet saith well , Stat sua cuique dies . Hence it is that Deut. 30. 20.  God is called by Moses , the length of the people's days : and David , Ps . 31. 15. saith , that his time is in God's hands ; who as he hath begun to spin the thredof man's life , so he is only able to spend it . And this is it which the fabulous Poets forge of their three fatal sisters , Clotho , Lachesis , Atropos , the spinster , twister , and cutter of the small thread of man's life . We acknowledge no Chaldaic fates , no poetic sisters , no blind fortune , no coactive necessity of destiny : but the wise , just , good , Almighty providence of God , which not only extends itself ad vermiculos in coeno , but also , angelos in coelo , and man who was made a little inferior to the Angels ; and alas now by his default he is lower than the worms . Indeed Naturalists may know , that there is a God in nature , forming , reforming , performing , confirming , perfecting all things ; without the which they could not stand one moment : & this is only a Theoretic knowledge , and it may be without sanctification . But we who are enlightened with the light of grace , and the sunshine of the Gospel , and taught and inspired by God's Spirit , have a practic and saving knowledge : whereby we not only admire his power in the creation , his wisdom in the administration , his constancy in the conservation , his beauty in the decoration , his bounty in the augmentation of all things ; but also are particularly informed , and fully persuaded , Deum esse vitae necisque arbitrum . Vtramque vero ( saith Tertullian ) disponendo praescivit , & praesciendo disposuit , that God is the commander of life and death , who in disposing foreknew , and in foreknowing , hath disposed of them both . The Lord saith , Deut. 32. 39  I kill and make alive . God is not careless of us , as the Epicures have dreamt , but by his special providence he hath such an extreme fatherly regard to us , that one hair cannot fall out of our head , one cubit cannot be added to our stature , with it ; without the which a little sparrow cannot fall to the ground . So that ye may evidently perceive , that nature , experience , and God himself prove the truth of this assertion , It is appointed , etc.  

The uses of this general doctrine are especially these two . 

The first use is of instruction , It is appointed , etc.  

then let not us be so foolish as to fret against nature ; so stubborn as to grudge against experience ; so profane , as to dispute against God : Why hast thou made us thus ? for esay 45. 9  Wo unto him that striveth with his Maker ? shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it , What makest thou ? That threefold appointment is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the bottomless deep of the unsearchable ways of God. It is a labyrinth , we may well find the entry , but never get the outgate of it ; it is a steep rock , we may well climb up , but the downfall is great ; it is an Ocean , and our boat is too light and shallow for it ; not unlike the head of that great river Nilus , which could never be found out . So that seeing our days are short , let us say with Moses , Psal . 90.  Lord teach us so to number our days , that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom . And with that notable pattern of patience , that excellent doctor upon this point , Job 14. 14.  All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come : always in much humiliation and reverence , prostrating our souls before the sacred and dreadful Majesty of our God , who rideth upon the heavens , and dwelleth in that inaccessible light , clothed with ravishing glory , armed with innumerable legions of angels , crowned with unspeakable blessedness ; at whose presence the Cedars of Lebanon are thrown down , the forests denuded , the earth trembleth , the sea roareth , the mountains melt like wax ; and all the inhabitants of the earth are as stubble before the fire ; the sun and moon obscured , the stars darkened , the powers of heaven weakened , the Cherubims and Seraphims cover their faces , not able to behold the brightness of him , whom the angels adore , the throne's worship , the devils fear . So that we must confess , whether we lie or stand , we run or walk , we sleep or awake , or whatsoever we do , we can neither by force , subtlety or request recall his irrevocable decree , by whose unsearchable wisdom , and unchangeable providence , and almighty power , all befalleth us , that doth befall us . Is it then God's ordinance to day to deprive our king of a valiant subject , the nobles of a peer , the country ▪ of a baron , the house of a head , the obedient son of a dear father , and ourselves of a well-beloved and worthy friend ? Let us be taught , that the rarest and highest spirits live shortest , and have the swiftest course , and that these whom God tendereth most , are earliest taken to himself : and let us not be so ignorant as to lay the blame upon second causes , such as the influence of heaven , the air , the diet , the complexion , untimely disease , the company , the mediciner ; but let us look higher to the cause of causes , GOD ; who is as the first wheel of the horologe , which leads the rest : as the primum mobile , which draweth about with it all the inferior spheres . To be plain , what are we but clay in the great potter's hand ? GOD make us pitchers of mercy , and not of wrath ; vessels of honour , and not of dishonour : What are we ? not idle spectators , but real actors in the scene of this world ; and God is the great playmaster and ringleader : what ever habit or person he commands us to take , that we must play well . Let us enact a comedy , and not a tragedy : for this hath a joyful beginning , but a woeful end : Lord make us wise actors , and not formalists , temporizers , verbalists , hypocrites , that in the last act of our lives ( which either is the most joyful , or the most doleful ) we may prove good , solid , and persevering Christians , that so we may receive the crown of life . 

The seconduse is of consolation . 

Is it God's appointment to take from us by death these whom we love in their life , as our other selves ; such as a dutiful wife , an obedient child , a kind friend : then let us say with Job , chap. 1. v. 21.  The Lord hath given , the Lord hath taken , blessed be the name of the Lord Let us not burst out into womanish complaints , OH dear father where art thou ! OH sweet son where art thou ! OH loving husband where art thou ! shall I see you no more ! Nor unto heathenish and comfortless exclamations in cursing the elements , or in blaspheming their false gods , thirty thousand in number : nor unto the excessive , or immoderate lamentations of some Pagans , as these of China , who bury themselves quick with their dead : nor unto the barbarous , & savage custom of Scythia , who bury their dead in their stomaches by eating them ; nor unto the vain supper fluities of Indian or Egyptiack lustrations , or denicall festivities , viscerations , funeral plays , and banquets called Silicernia , invented by the old Romans : nor unto the sottish and blockish stupidity , apathy , or indolence of the Stoics , who had no more sense than if they were stocks or stones , and defined man to be 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , id est , well wrought clay , who with Epictetus thought no more of the death of their trusty and best friend than of a pitcher , fallen & broken upon the ground : but we ought to keep a laudable sobriety , & golden mediocrity , having warrant of God , instinct of nature , practise of Christ , examples of the Saints . 1.  Warrant of God , who commands us , mourn with those that mourn , for we shall be comforted , Mat. 5. 4.  And if he be moved in the very bowels of his compassion for the sins of his people , how should we be moved for our own sins , which procure our death , and the death of our best beloved ? for the Christian heart should not be a marble , but a melting ; not a stony , but a fleshy ; not a hardened , but a contrite heart ; and godly sorrow is one of the passions thereof . 2.  Instinct of nature : not only the tender hearted Pelican , but the irony hearted Ostrich will love her young ones : the cruel Lioness , the fierce Tiger , the fiery Dragon , the venomous Serpent , Viper , Basilisk will bring up , and nourish their wicked brood ; and shall a reasonable mother forget her child , or when it is dead before her , not let a tear fall ? or can the son here present , see his loving father , and compassionate mother lie cold and stiff , and not sigh , sob , groan , weep , to testify his inward , howbeit inutterable grief ? in such case where the eyes are dry , the heart must be of stone , flint , adamant . 3.  Practise of Christ , who wept over dead Lazarus ; he might have quickened him at the first instant , yet to express his natural affection he wept : but we , seeing we cannot restore these two unto life , let us mourn for them , for fear the God of nature think us unnatural , who if we shed moderate tears , he will seal them up in the bottle of mercies , till at length he wipe all tears from our eyes , that we may see clearly these quos praemittimus , non amittimus ; quos non absumptura mors , sed aeternitas receptura est : that is , whom we loose not , but send before us ; whom death will not consume , but eternity resume , as saith Ambrose . So that we ought to glory in this , that in them as arrha's and pledges , and forerunners , one part of us is already glorified . 4 Examples of the Saints , as of Abraham , Gen. 23. 2. who mourned for his wife Sarah . Of Jacob , Gen. 37. 33. who mourned exceedingly for Joseph , whom he thought a wild beast had rend in pieces . Of Joseph again , Gen. 50. 1. who fell upon Jacob his father's face , and wept upon him , and kissed him . Of David , 2 Sam. 1. who lamented with his lamentation over Saul and Jonathan . Of Judah and Jerusalem , with Jeremy and the singers , who mourned greatly in the death of their good king Josiah , which is called the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon . Zech. 12. 11.  Object . But ye will say , What ? may we not weep exceedingly at funerals , being grounded upon that same public example of the Israelites , 2.  Chron. 35. 24 ? I answer . Indeed all occasions are not alike , by reason of the diverse qualities of the defunct , who being all one to God , to man are not so . Therefore if at any time great lamentation should have place , and if the nobility , ministry , commonalty , should utter their inward grief , with outward gesture-of clothes or speeches ; than it should be especially at the death of good , godly , and virtuous pr inces , who because they are Gods lieutenants , deputies , and vicegerents , and vive representations on earth , God himself calleth them gods , and will have them to die like men . Now as in their lives and reigns we ought them for conscience sake , worldly respect , and civil honour : so in their death we should be affected towards their happy memories as it becometh Christians ; because oftentimes by the sins of the people many princess' reign : for our sins , alas , our sins they remove the light of God's favourable countenance with the best men in church and policy ; who because we are not worthy of them , such as Heroic kings , well-affected nobles , wise counsellors , great officers of state , inferior judges , religious prelate's , & zealous preachers , who are as so many lamping lights and beautiful stars in the right hand of Christ , fixed by God in the firmament of his militant Church , are often taken from us in judgement ; and if they be once eclipsed , like the sun , they breed darkness upon the horizon of this inferior world . Did ye not deeply consider , when that God from the heavens did frown upon us , in taking away the only Solomon of our time , our gracious Sovereign King JAMES of thrice happy memory , two of our special peers , two props of our commonwealth ; with two great divines , two pillars of our church , followed a little thereafter , and yet we had greater occasion to mourn for our sins then for them ? for they were taken away , that they might not see the judgements to come . But not to digress overmuch upon this discourse , receive these two wholesome instructions . The first is out of Ecclesiasticus , a wise , though not a canonic book , chap. 38.  Let tears follow the dead , and cover his body according to the custom , and neglect not his burial , and then comfort yourselves for your heaviness , for it cannot do him good , but hurt you . I remember of the Epitaph of one of the kings of Assyria , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : Looking upon me , learn to lead a holy and gody life . And if the dead would speak , they would teach us this , Videte quod sumus , eritis quod sumus , fuimus quod estis ; See what we are , ye shall be as we are , we were as ye are . To this effect have two eyes in burial , one cast upon the dead , and so there will be none of us so unnatural , but he will be touched as he who feeleth not the loss , but the absence ; not the captivity , but the liberty ; not the death , but the change of his friend to a better estate . And if we do so , our carriage cannot but be decent , modest , circumspect , wise , charitable ; in a word , Christian , another eye fixed upon God , who is all eye , and not only beholds the things of this great universe , but also the very inward reins , and most latent corners of the hearts of men . And if we do so , there will be none of us but will bridle his natural affections & secret passions in such fashion , that they carry him not beyond the bounds of right , reason , moderation , religion . The second is out of St. Paul , 1 Thess . 4. 13 , 14.  I would not have you ignorant , brethren , concerning them which are asleep , that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope : for if we believe that Jesus died , & rose again , even so also them who sleep in Jesus , will God bring with him , that we may all meet where our last rendezvous , heaven , is ; and there be united to God , who is the centre of all , yea all in all . And thus far of that general doctrine with the uses thereof . Now let me come to some special doctrines which are as so many necessary consequences of it . 

The first doctrine by way of consequence is this , [ It is appointed ] then there is nothing in this world able to save a man from the piercing stroke of death ; beauty cannot keep Absalon , nor strength Samson , nor valour Josua , nor wisdom Solomon , nor policy Achitophel , nor court Haman , nor the crown Saul , nor an hundreth and twenty seven provinces Ahasuerus , nor the palace Nabuchadnezzar , nor nine hundred sixty and nine years Methusalem : What ? the best things could not keep the godliest from the same . Righteousness could not keep Noah , nor faithfulness Abraham , nor meekness Moses , nor integrity Samuel , nor patience Job , nor a blameless life Zacharias , nor the heart of God David . The bark defendeth the tree , the feather the fowl , the scale the fish , the feet the Hind and the Hare , and armour one man against another . And as saith Epicurus , against all other things we may arm ourselves , but against death there is no armour , for it consumeth armour itself : in which sense Alexander the great said to the Gymnosophists , he could not give them immortality . And the wise man affirmeth this , prov. 30. 16.  The grave , the barren womb , the earth , and the fire , they never say , Enough . As the barren womb cannot be filled with seed , nor the earth with waters , nor the fire with fuel , so the grave is never satisfied with the dead . Death is rigorous , inflexible , inexorable , irrevocable , irreparable . This is verified in the worthy Patriarches , or Genearches , before and after the flood ; in the religious judges and kings of Israel , in the divine Prophets , Evangelists , Apostles , in the reverend fathers , doctors and preachers of the primit●● and reform churches , in all the Martyrs , with the rest of Gods elect , two being extraordinarily excepted . Yea , it behoved Christ Jesus , God and man in one person , hypostatically united , albeit he was the prince of life , to lay down his precious life for man , dead in sins and trespasses , and so take away the guilt of sin , and the sting of death . So that unhappy is that man who seeks and sues by all means to flee from death ; for wheresoever he go it will meet him , either soon or late , or whosoever places his chief felicity here , where there is nothing but misery , or thinks of a brittle and transitory cottage , to make a sure and permanent city : for as long as we are in the flesh , we are absent from the Lord , debarred and sequestrate from our elder brother , who even now is preparing a place for us , that shall never be taken from us . And by the contrary , happy is he that prepareth himself timously , that when death's doom is execute upon him , he may be found ready for those heavenly mansions , so glorious by creation , so beautiful in situation , so rich in possession , so commodious for habitation ; Where the king is Christ ; the law , love ; the life , eternity ; life without death , light without darkness , mirth without sadness , health without sickness , wealth without poverty , credit without disgrace , beauty without blemish , bounty without measure , felicity without any mixture of misery . OH Lord take us from ourselves to thyself there , where thou shalt be life to our souls , health to our bodies , sight to our eyes , music to our ears , honey to our mouths , perfume to our nostrils , meat to our bellies , truth to our wits , good to our wills , peace to our consciences , delight to our affections : in a word , as saith Bernard , where thou shalt be the soul of our souls . We say with Augustine , Fecistinos , domine , ad te : inquietum erit cor nostrum donec requiescat in te . thou art the centre of our souls , we cannot be at rest till that once we see thee , that in seeing thee , we may know thee ; in knowing thee , we may possess thee ; in possessing thee , love thee ; in loving thee , live with thee and in thee ; in living with thee , and by thee become one with thee , receive that palm of victory , the garland of triumph , that crown of immortality from thee . O feign would we be at thee ! but our sins cloy and clog us , and pull us down by the neck and shoulders . OH Jesus who art our valiant and unconquerable captain , take thy al-piercing sword from thy thigh , and cut the fetters of sin , & the bands of Satan , that our souls , like so many soaring Eagles , may flee out of these base and corruptible prisons of our bodies , to those royal palaces of that free , new , supernal Jerusalem , the mother of us all . 

Use of admonition : Is death inevitable , and the stroke thereof irreparable ? then let us in time think upon it . This is the day of salvation , if this sunshine of grace once set , it will never rise again ; and we are either wone or lost here ; and there is no repentance , no preaching , no conversion , no church in hell . In the mean time , this our natural life is but a broken reed , a cobweb to lean unto , which because of the inconstancy , uncertainty , shortness , naughtiness of it , is justly compared by profane and divine writers , to a passenger , to a walking , to a pilgrimage , to a race , to a post , to a chariot , to a whirligig , to a warfare , to a tabernacle , to the flitting of a tabernacle , to a turning wheel , to a stage-play , to a table-play , to dice , to counters , to a tale , to a tennice-court , to a weaver's shutle , to the days of a hireling , to the months of vanity , to the wing of an eagle , to an eagle in the air , to a span , or hand-breadth , to a smoke , to a blast , to a breath , to wind , to a passing cloud , to a vanishing vapour , to a bell , to a space , to a tide , to an ocean of waters , to a ship sailing through the sea , to a gown soon put off or on , to a sleep , to a night watch , to grass , to hay , to a fading flower , to a leaf , to a thought , to a dream , to a shadow , to the dream of a shadow , to vanity , to vanity of vanities , to nothing , to less than nothing . This Epicharmus alludeth unto , while he calleth man 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a blown bag . Aristophanes , and Plutarch 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , like the fly's of Aristotle at the river Hipanis , which appear in the morning , are in their full strength at noon , and die at night ; like Jonah his gourd which sprung in one night , and withered in another ; we are like a blast , and away with us as ye say in your trivial proverb . And this we shall see more clearly if we look more narrowly to our life ; Euripedes 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . This Augustine expoundeth , I know not whether to call this a mortal life , or a vital death : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , saith one , is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , our life is a violence or trouble , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , our body , a sepulchre : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , our beauty and colour , a carrion : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , our frame and shape , a band : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , our generation is a casting of us unto earth ; & another , funus est fumus , our burial a rieke . So that this is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a life not a life . And this shall be more manifest if we take a view of our ages . First , our infancy is full of infirmity and tears ; when we are in our mother's bellies , the least fall of her may crush us into pieces , the smoke of a candle may smother us , and she is so ashamed of our birth , that no honest matron desireth to be delivered of us in public ; And are we once come to light , we creep in our own filth when other creatures take them to their feet or wings to feed themselves . Secondly , our childhood is full of wantonness and foolishness , we hunt after toys and trifles , not able to govern ourselves ; wearisome of the instruction of our parents and masters ; and when they have much troubled themselves with us , we are not worthy perhaps the pains taking on . Thirdly , our youth-hood is full of vain , idle , and rash pleasures , leading us to debauchery , lulling us asleep in their bosom for to cut our throat , like so many pillules of gold , which under their outward beauty , keep an inward sourness ; like so many Dalila's to betray us to our enemies ; or like so many Sirens to devour us ; or like so many Judass to kill us with a kiss . Fourthly , our manhood is full of pride , emulation , ambition , with thousands of carking , irking , and pricking cares : so that in this life we walk upon briers , and he who hath the crown on his head , his heart is full of thorns , and neither his purple , nor his precious stones , nor the magnificence of his fare , or his court , can keep him from traitors , flatterers , and assassinate's . So that some princes have thus spoken of their purple , OH cloth more glorious than happy ! Fifthly , our old age is full of sickness , complaints , miseries ; for when a man hath done what he can to make himself honourable , rich , learned , wise , than it cometh to the which few win ; many wish to come to it , but they are no sooner arrived , but they would be far from it : for with it are catarrhs , colic , gravel , gout , fever , etc. till that death give the stroke ; so that we begin in tears , and end in miseries . Astrologers , such as Proclus , Ptolemee , and Aliben , have more subtly then solidly compared our ages ( looking to the perfection of the seventh number ) to the seven planets , in this manner : First , our infancy , humid , movable , to the moon , in the which having none , or very little use of reason , we live and grow like plants : and in this only we differ from them ( as Philo Judaeus saith ) that other plants have their root on earth , but ours is in the heaven . Secondly , our childhood to Mercury , wherein we are taught and instructed . Thirdly , our youth-hood to Venus , the days of love , dalliance , and pleasure . Fourthly , the Zeni of our youth , the prime of our beauty , to the sun in his goodly array . Fifthly , our ripe and full manhood to Mars , when we bend our desires , intentions , determinations towards preferment , honour and glory . Sixthly , our raw old age , to jupiter , when we begin to number our days and to apply our hearts unto wisdom . Seven , our rotten and decrepit age to Saturn , when we are overclouded with sorrow , tending to the door of death , which lieth wide open at all times to all persons , when the tide of our days shall have a perpetual ebb , without a full plemmura , & our leaf once fallen , shall never spring up again , till that the world be no more . So that ye see , howbeit the spaces of our short time be compared to the heavens above , yet they make us not immortal . For as they have their own courses , which begin and end according to their proper motions : even so we are wavering and wand'ring planets , till that our first mover God settle us with eternal rest . In the mean time , we may say with Job , ch . 14. 1  Man that is born of a woman is of few days and full of trouble . And with Jacob , Few and evil are the days of my pilgrimage . Therefore let us live as sojourners , aiming at our journey's end ; as runners , looking for the prize ; as fighters , sweeting for the crown : for this is a strange land , and this world is a banishment , and heaven is our country , and paradise our native soil , and GOD our Father , and Christ our Brother , and the Spirit our comforter , and the spirits justified our kindred , and the holy angels our companions . Why do we not long for them ? But alas , poor miserable wretches that we are , we fix not the eyes of our souls upon that life which is hid in Jesus , otherwise we would be willing to lay down this transitory , uncertain calamitous life , for to regain that permanent , secure , and glorious life . O , if we could see with the eyes of faith the things that are not seen by the eyes of a natural man , and which wait for us ! then ten thousand worlds would not hold us back from them ; for if there were so many , they would not be able to content our illimited desires , and infinite appetites . What is then able to fill them ? I answer ; the sovereign good , the great GOD , with the superabundant treasures of his free grace , and undeserved favour , and bottomless ocean of the multitude of his medicinal compassions . OH Lord , drown us therein , that the deep of our uncurable miseries may be swallowed up , by the deep of thy restaurative , and preservative mercies : for this is the life of thee our everloving , everliving God in Christ Jesus . Sweet hearts , pray that ye may be once inspired by this ; and surely heaven shall be your home ; God your portion , strength , salvation , with whom if once ye dwell there , ye shall lack nothing . What would ye have ? Is there a better than eternal life ? it is there . Would ye have a crown ? Is there a better than an incorruptible crown of uncomprehensible glory ? it is there . Would ye have a kingdom ? Is there a better than that which cannot be shaken ? it is there . Would ye have an inheritance ? Is there a better than an immortal , undefiled , that fadeth not away ? it is there . And where ? where the poorest beggar of you shall be richer than all the kings of this earth ; for putting a way his clouts , he shall put on the glorious robe of Christ's righteousness , and receive that crown of justice , weightier than the whole mass of this earthly globe , because it is the eternal weight of glory , and so is more precious than all the diadem's and sceptres of Alexander , Caesar ; with the mightiest princes , who now are turned into muddy dust , filthy stink , dreadful horror , perpetual oblivion : for death is able to make us know ourselves one day . It will tell to the proud , that he is abject ; to the rich , that he is a beggar ; to the beautiful , that he is evil favoured ; to the ambitious , whom now territories , and dominions will not content , than seven foot of ground shall cover him , with these two short words , hic jacet ; here he lieth ; & quem terra non cepit , urna capit : He whom the universe could not contain , his ashes lie in a little pitcher . 

The second doctrine by way of consequence is this ; ( Is it appointed , & c ? ) then man should prepare himself not only for the end of this decrepit world that is come upon us , but also for his own end , with a generous and masculous courage , saluting and inviting that which he cannot shun . The thing that makes us so negligent is our not preparation at all : for the day of our dissolution is assuredly at hand ; death is at the door , where it knocks it must enter , no iron or brazen gates are able to resist it ; it will take the man whom God hath pointed out with his finger ; with its flooked arrow it wounds him to the heart , and like a rigorous sergeant layeth hold upon him , and imprisoneth him , till that his life , which is our debt for sin , be paid . This is the King of kings great taxation , from which there is no redemption , exception , exemption , from Caesar to the cotter . For how think ye death will reason with all and every one of us ? whatsoever part of argument we hold it will overcome us , for our obligation is personal or individual , & none can sit the summons . Come OH king from thy throne ! come OH counsellor from thy counselhouse ! come OH courtier from thine attendance ! come Oswaggerer from thy clotheses of silver and gold ! come OH nobles from your pastimes ! come OH prelates & preachers from your chairs ! come OH husbands from your wives ! come OH merchants from your shops ! come OH craftsmen from your trades ! come OH beggars from your brats ! come Caesar , come cotter , sleep all in the dust ! And howsoever ye differ in ranks , qualities , sexes , conditions , there is no distinction of persons ; king and subject , rich and poor , noble and ignoble , young and old , all are equal here . Juvenal saith , Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat , Death equals the mace with the mattock . And Horatius , Pallida mors aequo pede pulsat pauperum tabernas Regumque turres , — Pale death levelleth the country cabin and the kingly palace both alike . Ambrose more clearly , Nulla distinctio est inter corpora mortuorum , nisi forte , quia gravius foetent divitum corpora luxuriâ distenta ; There is no difference betwixt dead corpse , but that rich menscorps stink worse than others . Chrysostome more pathetically , Proficiscamur ad sepulchra ; ostende mihi patrem , ostende uxorem tuam ; ubi est qui purpuram induebat ? nihil video nisi putrida ossa & vermiss , differentiam nullam video : Let us go to the sepulchers ; show thy father , show thy wife ; where is he who was clothed in purple ? I see nothing but rotten bones , and worms ; no difference can I perceive . Therefore laying all worldly considerations aside ; the king his sceptre , the counsellor his robe of justice , the courtier and swaggerer their roaring shows , the nobles their sword , the scholar his pen , the labourer his spade , the merchant his purse , the tradesman his instruments , the beggar his bag : Every one of them promiscuously and indifferently must conclude thus , OH rottenness thou art my father , OH worm thou art my mother , and my sister . Believe me saith Augustine , in opened sepulchers have been found in dead men's skulls , earth-toades ; in their nerves , serpents ; in their bowels , worms . This is a grave meditation , and profitable contemplation to thee , OH man ; and I pray thee consider it deeply with me . I am assured to die ere it be long , but thou art hewn out of that same rock , thy mother's belly with me ; and art made of that same stuff , dust and ashes with me . I am conceived in sin , so art thou ; I am born in sin , so art thou ; I am fostered in sin , so art thou ; I am in the prime of my years , but alas , in the strength of sin ; I know not if thou be in the first , I know well thou art in the last and worst estate . God immortal pity us mortal men , and prepare us in time to redeem our misspent time , and to number our days one by one , for fear , when the decretorie day of death is come , we have not oil in our lamps , and our loins girded towards our Masters coming . And again we beseech thee , OH gracious Father , who delightest not in the death of sinners , prepare us , of all sinners the most : for endless and unspeakable are the torments of an unprepared man before , at , and after death ▪ OH dissolute and desperate sinner , then make no more delay , and let thy conscience be troubled at this , let thy spirit tremble at it , let thy heart smart for it , and let all the faculties of thy soul be afraid of it , that when it is come , ye need not to fear at all . 

Use of exhortation . Therefore let us not be so foolish and sluggish , as those who only learn to die upon their deathbed , as if it were an easy and momentanie lesson . Augustine , Sero parantur remedia , cum mortis imminent pericula . It is no time to prepare remedies , against imminent death . Foreseen dangers , harm least . But let us study it in the morning , that the evening of our days may be calm and peaceable . Yea , let us gather ourselves together before the supreme decree of death pass out against us at unawares , that so we may meet it with as much readiness of mind , as it is willing with greediness to receive us , who should not be drifters off of repentance , like Salomon's sluggard ; or any more supersede , flatter or foster ourselves with vain and deceitful conceits of the immortality of this melting mortality , or admire this dying carcase , which the worms must feed upon ere it be long , or be ravished with the astonishing fabric of our bodies which are but clay tabernacles , and death at our flitting will dissolve the pins thereof . Therefore OH young man , remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth . OH strong man , go not a whoring from the living God OH old man , who haste one foot in the grave already , let death be set before thy eyes ! And think not , OH beastly drunkard , OH devouring glutton , but as thou insultest over thy companions in the excess of meat and drink , so thy liver will fail thee , and the powers of death , and of the grave shall triumph over thee ere it be long ! OH lecherous man , who sowest where thou darest not reap , deflowering virgins , defiling the honourable bed of marriage ; the fiery heat of thy concupiscence shall be quenched in the floods of oblivion ere it be long ! OH avaricious extortioner ! OH ambitious worldling , howbeit now thou canst pledge whole monopolies , devour widows houses , eat up the poor , rob the altar , yet thou shalt get one morsel that thou canst not digest ere it be long ! OH generous man , howbeit thy heart now erected in thy breast inthe form of a restless pyramid be the fountain of thy life , it shall be dried up like a summer stripe , ere it be long ! And as it was primum vivens , so it shall be ultimum moriens , ere it be long . OH brave man , thy noble and strait face , which now contemplates the heavens , shall be defaced in the slimy valley ere it be long ! OH wise man , who knowest the estates of kingdoms , the secrets of princes , the mysteries of nature , and hast made up a store-house within thee of all commendable virtues ; thou and they shall perish together ere it be long ! OH eloquent man ( whom of all men I think to be most complete ) thy tongue which now floweth like milk and honey , and poureth Nectar , and Ambrosia upon the famished and thirsty souls of thy hearers , and drowneth as it were the soil of their hearts with a soft-silver running river , shall lick the dust ere it be long ! OH thou comely Rachel , beautiful Bethsheba , alluring Dalilah , thy pampered and well covered skin , in the grave shall be like that of a drudge , or vile kitchenmaid ere it belong ! OH young gallant , who art enamoured with thy beauty , thinking thyself another Adonis , Nereus , Narcissus , thou shall be like Aesop , or Thersites ere it be long ! And whatsoever thou be , OH man , hear what I say , Thy force once must languish , thy sense fail , thy body droop , thine eyes turn in thine head , thy veins break , thy heart rend , and thy whole frame like an old rotten oak shall fall to the ground , or like a leaking ship , shall sink into the harbour of thy grave . The wise man compares thee to a ruinous house , which decayeth piece and piece ; but that comparison is familiar to those who are acquainted with scripture . The certainty whereof should wean and spean our affections from the base things of this earth , and should work in us an ardour of mind , a vehemency of spirit , a serious and sedulous endeavour to be delivered from the prison of this body , the red sea of the miseries of this life , the captivity of sin , the thraldom of our corruption , the tyranny of Satan . Ye know , if a courageous man be many years in a stinking , solitary , and dark prison , he would be glad to change his infamous life , with a glorious death : But if the judge command the jailor to bring him forth to be set at liberty , I pray you , when he seeth the brightsome light of the sun , and tasteth of his wont joys in meat , drink , apparel , company , is he not ravished within himself ? Even so it is with us , while we are in Mesech , in the Egypt of sin , under our spiritual Pharaoh the devil , being compassed about with robbers on the land , pirates on the sea , heretics in the church , few or no godly men , we cannot but be plunged in a deep dungeon of grief and sorrow . But when it will please that unappealable judge , that high possessor of heaven and earth , to command the jailor , Death , to lose us from the prison of this body , than we shall behold the glorious face of the Son of righteousness , and eat and drink of him , who is the bread and fountain of life , and be clad with the robe of his justice , and enjoy the blessed company of Saints and Angels in the highest degree of happiness . This heavenly meditation so possessed many godly ones of old , that long beforehand , not hating their natural , but longing after a supernatural life , welcomed and invited death . This made Moses to prefer the reproach of Christ before the court of Pharaoh . This made Elias to cry out , It is enough , OH Lord , take my soul , for I am no better than my fathers . This made David to say , Into thy hands , OH Lord , I commend my spirit , because thou hast redeemed my soul . This made Polycarpus to say , Receive me Lord , and make me partner with thy Saints of the resurrection . This made Ignatius , Paul's disciple , Bishop of Antioch to say , I care not for things visible or invisible , so that I may win Christ . And in another place , fire , gallows , beasts , breaking of my bones , quartering of my members , crucifying of my body , all the torments of the devil together , let them come upon me , so that I may enjoy my Lord Jesus , and his kingdom . This made Hilarion to say , Departed my soul , why fearest thou ? why tremblest thou ? thou hast served CHRIST now almost seventy years , and art thou afraid to depart ? This made Jerome to say , Let us embrace that day ( viz. of death ) which shall assign every one of us to his house , which shall free us of the snares of this age , and restore us to paradise and the kingdom of heaven . Which made Gregory Nazianzen to say , That that day shall make us partakers of that fruition and contemplation of the sovereign good , and place us in the bosom of Abraham , and shall unite us to the assembly of Saints and congregation of the just : where , saith Epiphanius , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , viz. The garners are sealed , and the time fulfilled , and the combat ended , and the field empty , and the crowns are given . This made Augustine to say , I desire to die , that I may see Christ , and I refuse to live , that I may live with Christ . This made Ambrose to say , I am not afraid to die , because I have a good master . This made the Apostle St. Paul to say , I desire to be dissolved , & to be with Christ , for that is the best of all : and , That all otherthings are but dross and dung in respect of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ . God work this desire in us , for while we are at home in these bodies , we are absent from the Lord , and ground it upon the assurance of the remission of our sins , and our perfect union , and plenary reconciliation with our God in Christ Jesus . The Lord give us grace to be persuaded with the Apostle , that if the earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved , we have a building of God , an house not made with hands , eternal in the heavens , 2 Cor. 5.  But alas , here is our misery , that every one of our bodies is a remora to hinder the ship of our souls to stretch sail within the saving harborie of Gods crowning mercies . God fasten the anchors of our faith and hope therein , that after the tempest of this life we may enjoy peace , and everlasting happiness . 

The third doctrine by way of consequence , is this , It is appointed . then let no man fear death : for it is inevitable , and whether we fly from it , or go to it , it ever followeth us at the heels ; it hangs over our heads , as the rock doth Tantalus his head , which cannot be removed . There are , who desire not to hear tell of it at all , and if the preacher urge this point , he becometh odious . To the old Latins this word was so ominous , that they periphrased it by another ▪ for when they should have said in plain terms , Mortuus est , He is dead ; they said , Vixit , He lived : Abiit ad plures , He went to more : for there are more dead than living . As for the vulgar sort , they are so besotted with a bruitall stupidity , that they think not on death at all . But a generous heart should make it its object , its butt , acquainting itself with it at all times , representing it before its eyes ; even in the least occurrences it may seize upon us . A king of France died of a small skelfe of a spear in the midst of his pastime ; An Emperor , of the scratching of a pin ; Anacreon , of one grain of a raisin ; Aeschylus , of the shell of a snail , which fell from the claws of an Eagle in the air ; Milon , with both his hands in the cleft of an oak ; Charles of Navarre , of the fire of a candle in aquavitae ; Philemon , and Philistion , of laughter ; Dionyse Tyrant . Diagoras and others , of joy . OH what a feeble creature is man , that the very lest vermin , spider , gnat , doth kill him , and yet feareth death , which the Hart , the Elephant , Phoenix , and longest living creatures must yield to , without any grudging or reluctance . Certainly there is no passion more violent in man then fear , and produces more strange effects ; but of all fears the fear of death is the most foolish , mad and desperate , for it may well hasten & aggravate , but never stay or diminish the dint thereof , Multi ad fatum venere suum dum fata timent , Many precipitate their end in fearing it . Seneca in OH Edip. Optanda mors est sine metu mortis mori : the most desirable death is to die without fear of death , Idem . Aristotle the chief of Philosophers , calleth it 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , most fearful , because as it cannot be eschewed , so it killeth the man Yet this is a maxim , that no sound naturalists will go from , that good and valiant citizens ( such as Pericles praised in his funeral oration ) should undergo it , for the defence of their wives , children , friends , city , country , gods . And the Stoics themselves defend their Philosophy to be a continual meditation upon death , because the motion of the soul being ravished out of the body by contemplation , is a prenticeship or resemblance of death . And they deemed him to be the best Philosopher , who gave the surest precepts against the fear of death . So in my opinion , he is the best divine , who teacheth himself and others to do well , to die well . Would we die well , let us first do well . Qualis vita , finis ita : such life , such death . August . Non potest male mori , qui bene vixerit ; he cannot die ill , who lived well ; for a godly life hath a happy death . The very Pagans of old , the Romans , Greeks , Egyptians , who howbeit they became vain in their imaginations , and their foolish hearts were darkened , Rom. 1. 21. and ignored the resurrection of the dead , yet they might have taught many of us now adays , by a spotless life before the world to die well , because they esteemed , an easy death should follow after a reproachlesse life . But alas , men live now , as if there were no death to follow , no hell to swallow , no count to render , no judgement to be executed , no soul to keep , no God to fear , no devil to torment : or else they lull themselves asleep on the devil's pillow , the cradle of carnal security : And with the Epicure , Sardanapalus , and the rich glutton , they never think upon death till it surprise them , and they either care not , because they conclude , there is no pleasure after this life , or else they despair , casting themselves headlong into horrible agonies , and inextricable perplexities . In the mean time ye may wonder , that Pythagoras , Socrates , Anaxarchus , Codrus , Cleombrotus , Curtius , Seneca , Cato , Cleopatra , died resolvedly , and yet they knew not where they were going . Why then are we pultrons and cowards , seeing we are assured to go upon the wings of angels to the bosom of Abraham . Their natural courage made them to disdain it , Mors non metuenda viris , Manhood is not daunted with death , Lucanus . Shall not then our spiritual knowledge persuade us that our death is nothing but a passage to life , a passport to immortality , a door to paradise , a seizure of heaven , a chartre upon glory ; or , as saith Bernard , a passage from labour to rest , from hope to reward , from the combat to the crown , from death to life , from faith to knowledge , from pilgrimage to our long home , from the world to our father . And as another saith , It is a change of the cross , unto the crown ; of the prison , to the palace ; of captivity , unto liberty . Scripture is more pithy , it calleth it , A sleep , a rest of our flesh in hope , a going to our fathers , a gathering to our people , a recommending of our spirit to God , a rendering up of the ghost , a walking with God and the Lamb . Object . But some may say here ; Why should we not fear , seeing worthy persons , yea reverend churchmen who led a godly life , and exhorted sundry not to fear , were mightily troubled at their death , and when they should have had most peace , they were most disquieted ? I answer . Their fear was a diligent , not a diffident ; a holy , not a hellish ; a filial , not a servile ; a godly , not a devilish fear ; because they feared God as a judge , and they hoped in him as a Saviour ; they feared him , and so they sued for him , appealing from the tribunal of his justice , to the throne of his mercy ; ab irato Caesare ad placatum , from an offended God in the height of his justice , to a pacified God in the depth of his mercies . And I would have the simple ignorant people to ▪ know here , that outward disturbances in fits , of heavy , exasperated , inveterate sickness , are not evident and infallible tokens of a total or final desertion : for the godly patients may have inward joy , glorious and unspeakable , which the standers by see not . And by the contrary , some who have led a lewd life , without any remorse of conscience , or compunction , or contrition of heart , may seem to have a peaceable death , and say that they are ready for their God , when in the mean time their heart giveth their mouth the lie . Others desire to die , because of great poverty , or intolerable pains , or loss of goods , good name , friends , etc.  But God make us not to fear death ; because we are assured of his favour in the pardon of our huge , and manifold transgressions , and imputation of Christ's righteousness , for that is only the thing which justifieth us before God.  

Use of encouragement . then why should we fear death ? Agathias calleth it 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the mother of tranquillity , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the stayer of sickness : Euripides , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : the greatest remedy of evils : Aeschylus , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the medicine of incurable diseases : Anacreon , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a delivery from travels ; which after trouble , giveth us rest , heals our sickness , taketh away our poverty , endeth our greatest fears and cares . It is the way of all flesh , and it is common to kings and beggars , as well to die , as to be born . And one of the seven sages , Thales , saith , that they are both indifferent . But to Christians they are both profitable , for Christ in life and death is advantage : Philip. 1. 21.  If it please the Lord we live , let us employ our life well , for it is a talon given to us for the use of our Master ; if to die , what need we to fear ? for all these who are gone before us cry out , Come , come after us ; there is no danger in death ; all the hazard we incur , and jeopardie we run into , is in our lives . Is not this life a continual misery , a perpetual tempest , a 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a common hostage , and receptacle of all calamities , and our death is an issue of these miseries , the harbrie mouth , leading us to the most sure haven , the heaven of heavens , the bridegroom's chamber ? 1 Object . Death is most dangerous , and so most fearful , because it is the way to hell , from the which there is no regress . Answer . To the wicked indeed it is such , but to the godly it is the gate to heaven , and hither you must make your progress . 2 Object . It takes away my life , which is so near and dear unto me . Answer . Upon a condition to give a better which shall never be taken from thee . 3.  Object . But my losses are great . Answer . Let me never hear that of thee again , that it is a great loss of such a man's life , or that thou losest any thing in death ; that is an idle querimony , to the which Socrates answereth , OH dii boni , quantum lucri est emori ! OH what great gain is it to die ! for ye may leave an earthly possession , for an heavenly patrimony ; uncertain goods , for a certain treasure ; the company of the wicked , for Saints and Angels ; earth , for heaven ; baseness , for glory ; unsufficiencie , for alsufficiencie . 4.  Object . But there are pains in death . Answer . There is nothing without pains , and the better the thing be , the greater pains : but to speak properly , it is the remnant of thy life that tormenteth thee , and not thy death : for what is it but a not being in this world ? for when we are , death is not : and when death is , we are not . Now a not being hath no dolour : for as when we were not at all , we found no dolour , so when we shall not be , we shall find none . wherefore then fearest thou the day of death ? for every day of thy life is a preparation to it ; and that last period of days is not properly thy death allenarly , for every day contributeth to it . And as the last drop emptieth not , nor filleth the bottle , and the last path wearieth not , nor the last stroke cutteth down all the trunk of the tree , but every one helpeth another : so every day we go to death , and the last , we arrive at it . So that it boats with us , it rideth behind us , and leaveth us no more than the shadow of our bodies , till at last it cut the thread of our desires and lives , and take us from the world , and from ourselves . So that we die at all hours , and all moments , and if we desire to live long , we enjoy a languishing death victorious in many assaults . So that Epictetus answered well to Hadrian , demanding this question , Which is the best life ? he answered , The shortest . And Solomon saith , That the day of our death is better than the day of our nativity : for this is the beginning of our dolours , and that is the end , and our access to supreme happiness : for then this body shall return to the dust , and the spirit to God the giver , with whom we shall enjoy a full life , and our passions shall be buried , and our reason enlarged , and the whole man placed in his own element , the heaven his country , from the which he was banished . 

Furthermore , did not Cicero , Seneca , and before them Theophrastus , Crantor , Xenocrates , leave rare monuments and documents , against immoderate dolour in death , as also against the fear thereof ? but thou art better taught then those , that death is the very entry to that eternal day , nunc stans feast , Sabaoth , with the Ancient of days , and that the separation of the soul from this body , is nothing but an union and communion with God. And shall naughty soldiers under their temporary captain , hazard their misspent life at the mouth of the canon in a furious skirmish for the pennie-pay , and thou not lay down this tedious life for the kingdom of heaven , whereunto thou hast undoubted right , by thy triumphing general , the captain of thy salvation , the Lord Jesus , the Lord of Hosts ? 5.  Object . But the pangs of death are insupportable , who can abide these cruel and deadly wounds ? Answer . That same Jesus by his glorious and meritorious death , hath sweetened , seasoned , sanctified them to thee in such fashion , that they shall be unto thee like the launcet of a Chirurgeon , which pricketh and heals together like wormwood ; or the potion of a skilful mediciner , which is sour , but wholesome . 6.  Object . But the fear of judgement after death , maketh me afraid . Answer . That same Lord Jesus , judge of judges , thy elder brother shall be thy judge , in that great day of retribution , and remuneration , and he cannot but look upon thee with compassionate eyes , seeing he is flesh of thy flesh , and bone of thy bones , and thy cause is his cause , for he is thy advocate , and intercessor daily . 7.  Object . But the pains of hell , which are unspeakable , universal , eternal , are very fearful , and much affright me . Answ . That same Jesus thy redeemer , as he made the grave his bed , so he keeps the keys of hell , and the gates thereof cannot prevail against thee . To conclude then , let us all resolve courageously to attend death , laying aside all fear , ever hoping that the Lord shall be with us , to the end and in the end . 

Blessed shall we be if we die in him , for so we shall rest from our labours , and in death celebrate three solemnities . First , our birth day : for we shall revive . Secondly , our marriage day , which shall be accomplished with Christ . Thirdly , our triumph day : for through Christ we shall triumph over the world , our own flesh , sin , death , the grave , hell , the devil , principalities and powers whatsoever , and receive that crown of glory . So that through Christ we are more than conquerors , who saith , I will redeem them from death : OH death , I will be thy death : OH grave I will be thy destruction , Hosea chap. 13. 14.  Are we gods in Christ ? let us not fear death . Lethum non omnia finit , Propertius : Death puts not a period to all things . I say more , death maketh us endless . Cicero affirmeth , that after death he shall be immortal . Horace , that the best part of him shall live . Ovid , that the best part of him shall be carried above the stars . The Egyptians , Brachmanes , Indians , Thracians , Persians , Macedonians , Arabians , Americanes , and all polished nations have consented to the immortality of the soul . But here we surpass them , that after death and resurrection , our bodies shall live for ever . This is an essential and fundamental point of our belief . 

THE SUBJECT . 

Men once to die . 

Now let me speak of the subject of this assertion , Man once to die . It is not said in the original 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , to all men ; but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , to men ; because indefinite propositions in matters necessary are universal . The meaning is , All men and women must once die . Ovid , Tendimus huc omnes : we tend all to death , and that once . Horace saith very well , Omnes eodem cogimur : Omnes manet una nox , & calcanda semel via lethi . This is a passage common to all ; and let it be so , we should live again , we must run over the same race . Catullus , and Epictetus say , That as our life is but one day : so our death is but one night . 

The doctrine upon the subject is this : As there is nothing more certain than death , so there is nothing more uncertain than the time , place , and manner thereof . This doctrine hath two points . 

I prove the first , that there is nothing more certain than death , leaving the former reasons . First , from the word fatum , which expresseth the nature of death ; so called , a fando , because the Lord hath spoken it ; his word is his work . And seeing he hath uttered this sentence , That all men must once die , it cannot but come to pass . So that there is a fatal , infallible , inexpugnable , necessitant necessity laid upon man , once to die . Man is termed 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the end of all , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , nature perfected , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a visible God , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a compend of this great world ; and as the heavens and earth wax old and perish , so he , the resemblance of both , must follow the pattern . I confess with Zoroaster and Trismegistus , that he is an admirable piece of nature , because both natures , superior and inferior , uncreated and created do meet in him . And if these visible creatures be as so many scales , to climb to that invisible Creator , man must be one of the most curious steps of that ladder . If we look within the entrailss of the earth , we may see there rich mines of silver , gold , and precious stones . If we behold the face of it , we shall find there such a variety of herbs , flowers , fruits , trees , creatures , which may breed admiration in the dullest spirits . And is the sea less admirable , by reason of the flux and reflux thereof , the quantity of fishes and monsters therein nourished ? And is the air any thing inferior to these two : full of fowls , clouds , reins , snow , hail , lightnings , thunder , and innumerable meteors ? But when we lift up our eyes to the astonishing vault of heaven , whose curtains are spread over these , enlightened with the sun and moon , and twinkling stars , with their towers , retowres , aspects , effects , influences , we cannot but be ravished with a more singular and divine contemplation . Yet here is a greater wonder , that all these things are abridged in thee , OH man , of seven foot-length ? And as the world is a book in the which God may be read in capital letters : so both the world and God , may by the most ignorant , easily be read in thee as in a written table , seen in thee , as in a clear glass . Thy flesh represents the dust ; thy bones , the rocks ; thy liver , the sea ; thy veins , rivers ; thy breath , the air ; thy natural heat , the fire ; thy head , the heavens ; thy eyes , the stars ; thy joints , moving so actively , sinews stirring so nimbly , senses working so quickly , like the secret resorts of nature , But I pray thee enter within thy inward parts so excellent ; thy spirit so supernatural , thy reason so divine , thy appetite so infinite , thy soul 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the engraven image of God : thou mayst justly say , that thou art ultimus naturae foetus , the last essay and effort of nature , and the theatre whereupon God may be seen with mortal eyes , representing the four corners of the world : thy face , the east ; thy back , the west ; thy right side , the south ; thy left , the north . And whereas other creatures have their countenance downward towards their natural mother the earth , thine are upward , toward thy spiritual father , God ; that thou mayest raise thyself from all earthly vanity , to a serious contemplation of the divinity , wherein are placed thy unchangeable comfort , thy unspeakable contentment , thy unconceivable felicity . Whence I infer this ; Whatsoever of us is like to the creature , must die ; but that which hath received the indelible character of God , is perpetual . So that our souls are immortal , our bodies are vassals and slaves of death , in which respect we are all said to die . 

And that this doctrine may be the more clear , I shall prove it in the second place by way of induction . Look to the virtues ; the stout as well as the rash , or the coward ; the temperate , as well as the untemperate or stupid ; the liberal , as well as the prodigal or avaricious ; the magnificent , as well as the niggard or vainglorious ; the magnanimous , as well as the proud or pusilanimous ; the modest ; as well as the ambitious or base minded ; the meek as well as the angry , or angerlesse ; the courteous , as well as the flatterer , or churlish ; the sincere , as well as the dissembler , or bragger ; the civilised man , as well as the rustic , or the scoggen , or the officious pleasant ; the just as well as the unjust , must all once die . The stout man may fight against death ; the temperate man keep a sober diet to prolong his life ; the liberal propine it ; the magnificent make expenses ; the magnanimous disdain it ; the modest smile at it ; the meek embrace it ; the courteous cherish it ; the civilised welcome it ; the just man execute judgements upon others ; but none of them can overcome death . Look to the superior faculties . The religious divine in foro poli ; the curious lawyer , in foro soli ; the skilful mediciner in his shop , must all once die . The first of these may teach of it ; the second may make a testament after it ; the third may prescribe a recipe against it , but none of them can cast off its yoke . Look to the arts and sciences ; the experimented Grammarian may find out sundry significations of the word Death in diverse languages ; the dainty Poet may make an Epitaph or Epicede ; the flowing orator , a funeral Sermon ; the subtle Logician may dispute pro , & contra ; the ingenuous moralist may discourse trimly upon it ; but what can these do , but what mortal men can do , after all that they can do , die ! Therefore let not the beaten warrior think , that all his stratagems can defend him , or the polished politician dream that all the maxims of Matchiavel , or the counsel of Achitophel can preserve him . Let not the Geometer be so busy , as to search out the place ; or the Arithmetician , number the day ; or the Astrologue , tell the manner of his death : let not the profound naturalist wade into the deep thereof ; nor the transcendent Metaphysician flee from it : for there is no art nor science under heaven which will learn a man not to die . Look to the ages ; the embryo in its mother's belly , the babe on its mother's breast , the wanton child , the rash young man , the strong man , the witty man , the old man , the decrepit man ; all must once die . Look to the conditions of men : Prince , pastor , and people , all must once die . And to compendize that which I thought to enlarge , both elect and reprobate , all must once die ; they for the abolition of their miseries , and position of their happiness : these for the position of their miseries , and remotion of all happiness . They to be glorified in soul and body : these to be damned in both . So that the godly die , that they may live to God , and with God in heaven ; the ungodly die , that they may live to the devil , and with the devil in hell . God preserve us from hell , and reserve us to heaven . 

I prove the second point of this doctrine , which is this ; There is nothing more uncertain , than the time , place , and manner of death , as a poet saith , Nemo novit mortis tempusve , locumve , modumve : The time , whether in the spring , summer , harvest , winter of the year , or of man's years ; whether at the point of the day , morning , midday , evening , night , midnight , it is uncertain . He that dieth early in the morning , is the babe ; he that dyeth at the third hour , is the young man ; he that dieth at the sixth hour , is the strong man ; he that dieth at the ninth hour , is the old man ; and he that dieth at the eleventh hour , is the decrepit man And therefore the Greek poet compareth man to an apple , which is either pulled off before the time , or else in time falleth off on the ground . And Epictetus to a candle , which is exposed to wind ; it may shine a little , and then goeth out . The place , whether in thy house , or in the temple ; in thy bed , or at the table ▪ in the mountain , or in the valley ; in the wilderness , or in the fields ; on sea , or by land ; in or out of thy country , it is uncertain . The manner , whether by sword , famine , pestilence , sickness , heat , cold , hunger , thirst , rack , rope , by peace , or war , by a natural or violent death , it is uncertain . Of all these I might bring both exotic and domestic examples , but I leave them to your daily reading , and hearing of divine and profane histories . Only I infer these uses upon the precedent doctrine , by way of direction from the dead , and consequently from these two dead corpse lying before us . 

Receive first then three directions upon the first point , viz. The certainty of death . 

The first direction is , Vive memor lethi , fugit hora , Persius . In thy life remember of thy death , for thy hour slippeth . Time is precious , but short ; and this is a hard lesson , Memento mori . This was accustomed to be said to the Emperors in that great triumph at Rome , Memento mori , homo es , mortalem te esse memineris , Remember to die , man thou art , and remember that thou art mortal . All these did follow Philip , Alexander the greats father , who commanded his chamberlain thrice every day to round the same sentence in his ears . To this effect , when the Egyptians did solemnize their natall days , they had a dead scull upon their table , to put them in mind of their mortality . One Churchyard in Paris , I remarked , hath more sculls , than there are living heads in Scotland . St. Jerome was wont to have in his study before him , a dead man's scull with a running glass . But alas , such is our folly , that scarcely can we remember of death , when we see the same painted upon the mort-cloath : we may lose a leg to day , an arm to morrow , an eye the third day , and these will not teach us to prepare ourselves towards it . Consumption in the lights , a stone in the bladder , the gout in our feet , the palsy in our hands , 2000 known sicknesses in our bodies , ( to omit unknown , for every member of our body is subject to divers diseases ) will not advertise us . Our house is ruinous , but we cannot flit out of it . Chance telleth us , that death is latent ; infirmity , that it is patent ; old age , that it is present , as saith Hugo . What ? for all this we cannot be enough admonished . And this is it that Jerome findeth fault with , Quotidie morimur , quotidie commutamur , & tamen aeternos esse credimus : We die daily , we are changed daily , yet we think ourselves eternal . In the mean time , in our most lively life we may perceive the very print and footstep of death . For we do see continually , and hear the cries of mothers for their children ; of spouses , for their husbands ; of servants , for their masters ; visitation of sick , mediciners , preachers , in our houses , at our bedheads , all warning us , that we are besieged by death . 

The second direction is , Fac hodie , quod moriturus agas : so lead thy life as if thou wert even now dying . Every day that we live ( complaineth Anselmus ) we come from our country to our banishment ; from the sight of God , to darkness ; from the pleasure of immortality , to the corruption of death . Petrarcha affirmeth , that he had not a morrow to look to ; and that to day he was prepared to die . Seneca , a divine Philosopher to this purpose : Dic dormitanti , potes non expergisci ; dic experrecto , potes non dormire ampliùs ; dic exeunti , potes non reverti ; dic redeunti , potes non exire : id est , Tell to him that sleepeth , it may be that he awake not ; and to him that is wakened , that perhaps he shall sleep no more ; and to him that goeth forth , that he shall not return ; and to him that returns , that perhaps he shall not go back . 

Quis scit an adjiciant hodiernae crastina vitae , 
Tempora dii superi . etc.  


Sera nimis vita est crastina , vive hodie . 


Both did borrow it from Euripides , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : It is too late to morrow , live to day . Happy is the man whose way , journey , time , business , breath goeth together , walking before GOD as Abraham , with God as Enoch , in God as Paul Happy is the man , who is ever ready , like a ship to lose with a fair wind ; like a horse for the bell , not standing still as Joshuas sun , or returning back as Ezekias' sun , but running its race as David's sun . Provident is he who maketh this testament aforehand , and calculats this year to be his climacterick year ; this day , this hour , this moment , this breath to be his last . 

Omnem crede diem tibi diluxisse supremum , 


Imagine every day to be thy last day ; for this life is a lead , and not a property ; a farm , and not an heritage ; an hostage , and not an abode ; if God warn thee to remove , thou canst not suspend his summons . 

The third direction is , Respice finem : Remember thy end ( saith the wise man ) and whatsoever thou takest in hand shall prospero : thou mayst well propone , God dispones . thou mayst entitle thyself with Alexander the conqueror , the son of Jupiter Hammon ; and with Sapor king of Persia , brother to the sun or moon , copartner with the stars , king of kings : and exalt thyself with the titles of the king of Spain , Prester John , the Turk , the king of China ; thou mayst sail over the mountains with Antiochus , dry up the rivers with Sennacherib , and bridle the seas , as the Monarches in their pride have attempted ; who with Edom have lift up themselves above the clouds , as the eagle , and builded their nest amongst the stars . But if thou have not builded upon the rock of Zion , thou hast erected but a Babel , a mass of confusion , and death shall cross , crush , and cut all thy designs , and harbour thee in the place of silence , where thou shalt neither see , nor be seen any more . thou shouldst then meditate on these three : 1.  Respice , Look back to that which thou wast , Earth : 2.  Aspice , Behold what thou art , Earth . and 3 prospice , Consider what thou must be , Earth . There thy beginning , continuance , end . Lord teach us to begin well , to continue better , to end best of all : for the end crowneth the work . 

These are the three directions upon the certainty of death : receive also three other directions , upon the uncertainty of the time , place , manner . 

The first direction is upon the Time. Howbeit it be certain to God , yet to man it is uncertain : yea to Christ as he is the son of man , who cometh as a thief in the night . Therefore let us have oil in our lamps , and our loins girded toward our masters coming : let us watch and pray , not knowing the day nor the hour . The preterite time is gone , the present is a moment ; and the future is uncertain . The day is short , the work is great , our Master is at hand , therefore let us be busy , saith Rabbi Simeon . And if Apelles the painter , thought every day lost wherein he drew not a line : So we Christians , with Bernard , should think every moment of time lost , which we have not consecrated to God. Seneca affirmeth that a great part of our life slideth away with evil doing , the most part by nothing doing , the whole by doing that which we should not do ; and in the mean time death cometh upon a suddentie . Doth not one complain that he hath left his house half builded ; the other that his victory is not crowned ; another , that his meditations are not printed ; another , that he hath not married his daughter ; another , that he hath not paid his debts ? And why ? because we are improvident , and have not in time thought upon our last time , which God in his wisdom hath not revealed unto us , for fear we be holden in continual inquietude . Augustine saith well , Vnus dies ignoratur , ut multi observentur : which Gregory expoundeth , The last hour is uncertain , that we may suspect it , and hasten to it . David's child died an infant , Eutychus a youth , Samson a strong man , David an old man , Methusalem a decrepit man God teach us to be ready at all times , for death is a fixed point which we must touch . 

The second direction is upon the place . Because we know not in what place death will seize upon us , let us wait upon it in all places ; for there is no corner in nature , but death reigns in it , subduing all things under itself , as an implacable tyrant . The babes in Bethlehem died in their swaddling clouts , Jacob in his bed , Eglon in his summer house , Saul in the field , Sennacherib in the temple , Joab at the horns of the altar , a Marquesse of Mantua , Speusippus a Philosopher , and one of the Popes of Rome , in the arms of whores . Let us send short and pithy ejaculations to God in all places , that he who is omnipresent , may be powerfully present with us , where death encountereth us , and in what estate we meet it , in that same we shall compear in judgement . 

The third direction is upon the manner . This is a saying repeated by many , ad vitam unus est exitus , ad mortem paenè infiniti : There is one passage to life , viz. our mother's belly , but to death , are almost infinite . Raman hanged Jobs sons , smothered the mothers of Jerusalem , with their younglings starved to death ; Herod wormeaten , those of Sodom burned with fire and brimstone , those of the old world drowned with an uncomparable deluge of waters . Divers are the kinds of the Saints death ; esay was cut through the middle with a saw ; Peter , James , Paul and John , beheaded ; Steven , Philip of Bethsaida , and Mathias stoned ; Bartholomew his skin pulled off him ; Thomas thrust through with a spear ; Luke hanged ; Andrew , Simons brother , and Christ himself crucified : of the Christians under the Emperors of Rome , some pricked , some roasted to death , some devoured by cruel lions , some by ravenous wolves , some by fierce tigers , some with one or other exquisite torment pained to death . Our lesson is , who are here present , to lead a sanctified , and renewed life , serving God without fear , in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life , that we may obtain a pleasant , easy , and precious death in the eyes of the Lord ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; an happy death is immortality to soul and body : for every manner of death , how execrable soever , shall be sanctified on the tree , whereon Christ was crucified . And thus far of all the points of my text . 

Now my Noble , Honourable , Reverend , and well beloved Auditors , lest I should omit any circumstance of this action looked for by you , I come to these two dead corpse lying at the lip of the grave , from which ye have received six directions , and if they could speak any more , they would make up the seventh , which is the most perfect number , that is to say , Learn of us to die , for ye must follow after us ; and we cannot come back unto you . So their mouths are stopped , and we need not to speak unto them any more , for they will not hear us , therefore we must speak something of them . To pray God for them , we should not , for it will not avail them ; to praise them ( howbeit praise worthy ) I am assured that critics and censurers would take to themselves larger matter , than perhaps were given them , all consenting with one voice and mind , that I a friend were driven by the violent stream of affection , and the tempestuous storm of passion , either upon the Scylla of ostentation , or the Charybdis of assentation . But I hope the sail of my sincerity shall carry the ship of my mind from these two rocks , to the safe harbour of your favourable audience , and sparing censures ; and that my mouth shall utter nothing , but that which the carper himself , a framed friend , an impartial judge , a charitable christian ought too say , to wit , That this rare spectacle of one husband and spouse which cannot be severed in death , would seem in the eyes of a natural man pitiful and deplorable , but to us who see with spiritual eyes , joyful and comfortable : for they are with God. And this is remarkable , Their joy was one , their grief one , their love one , their life one , their death one , their burial one , their tomb one , their grave one , their glory one . And great is our union with them , howbeit we be separate for a while : for charity biddeth us say , That our baptism is one , our faith one , our hope one , our love one , our reward one , our pilgrimage one , our race one , our warfare one , our country one , our commonwealth one , our city one , our religion one , our church one , our spirit one , our Christ one , our God one , the father of us all , above us all , in us all , all in all . 

These are straight bands betwixt them and us , for that same golden chain of mercy which hath pulled them unto heaven is fastened to our souls , that we also in our own time may be drawn hither . In the mean time we are banished and strangers , they gone home and citizens ; we in Sodom , they in Zoar ; we in OH Enon , they in Salem ; we in a terrestrial cottage , they in a celestial paradise ; we in clayie tabernacles , they in glorious pavilions ; we are on this border of the sea , they on the other ; we drowned in the sea , they in the ark ; we in the desert , they upon the top of mount Pisgah ; we in Egypt , they in Canaan ; we tossed to and from , they in the harbour mouth . Again , we in a labyrinth , they in the fortunate Isles and Elysian fields ; we hunt after shadows , they enjoy the substance ; we amongst Bears and Wolves , they with the Lamb ; we fight , they triumphing . And what more ? we sick , they whole ; we blind , they enlightened with that inaccessible light ; we see through a glass , they face to face ; we know in part , they fully ; we poor , they rich ; we naked , they clothed ; we wear clouts and rags , they bear crowns and sceptres ; we hungry , they satisfied ; we feed upon the fruits of the earth , they upon that quickening Manna , the bread of Angels ; we imprisoned , they set at liberty ; and that which the ignorant would think a wonder , we dead , and they living . Why go we then with mourning apparel , seeing they have white robes ? Why weep we any more , seeing all tears are wiped from their eyes ? Why do we lament , seeing they sing songs of triumph upon golden harps and viols , with the melodious , harmonious sweet-singing-chorestrie of Angels ? Surely if it were possible that glorified souls were subject to grief , they have greater occasion to mourn for us , than wefor them , whose bands amongst themselves are so unseparable , that death cannot break them ; and greater love we read not of any two then of these : for it is stronger than death . OH happy couple above the eloquence of man and angel ! Many a loyal husband and chaste spouse would be glad of such an end . And what an end ? Let the envious Momus , and injurious backbiter hold their peace , and let me who stand in the presence of God , and in the face of his people , and in the chair of verity , tell the truth : to wit , That honourable Baron whose corpse lieth there in the flower of his years , in the strength of his youth , in the prime of his designs , even when young men use to take up themselves , is fallen , and mown down from amongst us , like a may flower in a green meadow . 

His virtuous Lady who having languished a little after him , howbeit tender in body , yet strong in mind , and full of courage , took her dear husband's death in so good part , that she did not give the least token of hopeless and helpless sorrow . Yet wearying to stay after her love , she posted after him , and slept peaceably in the Lord , as her husband before her . 

This , Noblemen , Gentlemen , and men of account amongst us have assured me . So then , as neither the husband's ancient house , nor his honourable birth , nor his noble ally , nor his able and strong body , nor his kind , stout , liberal mind , nor the rest of the ornaments which were in him alive , and which recommend brave gentlemen to the view of this gazing world , could keep him from a preceding death . So neither the spouses noble race of generous and religious progenitours , nor a wise carriage in a well led life , nor the rest of her womanish perfections , could free her from a subsequent death , both due to them and us for our sins . God hath forgiven theirs ; God forgive ours also . They have done in few , all that can be done in many years ; They have died well : God give us the like grace . In the mean time , their relics and exuvies , terrae depositum , shall lie there amongst other dead corpse , of their forebears and aftercommers , all attending a general resurrection : And their souls the best part of them , coeli depositum , have surpassed the bounds of this inferior world , and are carried upon the wings of Cherubims and Seraphins , to the bosom of Abraham , for to change servitude with liberty , earth with heaven , misery with felicity , and to be made partakers of that beatific vision , real union , actual fruition of our God , in whose presence is fullness of joy , and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore . How shall we then conclude , but with a hopeful and eternal farewell , till it please God , that we all meet together on that great day , on Zion hill , and go into these everlasting tabernacles of the temple of the most High , in the holy city , supernal Jerusalem , amongst the Hierarchies of that innumerable company of Angels , the general assembly and church of the first born , written in heaven by the finger of God , and the blood of the Lamb ? When and where they with us , and we with them , and the whole multitude of the militant and triumphant Church , reunited under Christ the head , shall be fully and finally glorified . 

OH fools that we are , we long with a vehement desire , to see our earthly princess' coronation in this earthly kingdom : I pray you let us wish with an holy impatience , redoubled sighs , unfeigned groans to be dissolved , and to be with Christ , that we may see our own glorious coronations in that kingdom of glory ? For , OH what solemnities ! OH what festivities ! OH what exultations ! OH what exclamations ! OH what triumphs shall be there ! when the heavens and earth shall clap their hands for joy . Why do these base minds of ours creep any more like worms on earth , and soar not with the wings of heavenly contemplation , that our conversation may be in heaven ? Why do we not fly with the golden feathers of faith & hope , to embrace in the arms of our souls our gracious redeemer , who is at hand , & stretcheth forth his powerful hand unto us ? OH let us lift up our heads , & open the everlasting gates of our souls , that the king of glory may enter in , and find room therein , howbeit the heaven of heavens is not able to contain him ; who is the joy of the heavens , the hope of the earth , the light and life of the world , the ease of the oppressed , the comfort of the afflicted , the advocate of sinners , the reward of the just , our only Saviour . OH let us set our affections upon him , and behold him , whose love shed abundantly in our hearts , should swallow all other love , who is the wisdom of God , and ours before the world , set as a rose of stars upon our head , when others shall be confounded . 

Therefore bow down the knees of your hearts , with your voices , your hands and eyes unto heaven , saying , OH come thou ( whom our souls both love and long for ) Lord Jesus , yea come quickly , and tie us unto thyself by the band of perfection , the coards of thy unspeakable love . We die , we divine after thee , OH sweet life , OH dear love ! Tarry not while we are ready , but take us to thyself , and cover us with the banner of thy love , and present us holy , harmless , acceptable before thine heavenly father , that we may dwell with thee , and in thee eternally , and through thee possess the things which neither eye hath seen , nor ear hath heard , nor the heart of man was ever able to conceive . 

Now to this Jesus our redeemer , to the Father our Creator , to the holy Ghost our comforter , one GOD in three persons , let us render from the bottom of our souls , all Honour , all Praise , all Glory , for ever and ever , AMEN . 

AMEN . 

VIRI NOBILIS JOANNIS CRAFORD TWO , D. KILBURNII , aeternae memoriae sacravit hoc epicedium Ninianus Campbellus . 

Siccine Kilburni , florentis stamina vitae , 
Ante diem rupit Parca severa tuae ▪ 
Attamen exultas , quoniam mens inscia fati , 
Praepetibus pennis caelica templa subit ▪ 
Haurit ubi puros latices , & Nectaris uvas , 
Caeleftis diâ vivit & Ambrosiâ . 
Ponite luctificos gestamina tristia cultus , 
Ponite funereas vos pia turba faces . 
Vivit quem fletis , votum super omne vigetque 
Despectans oculis inferiora suis . 
Non est mortalis , ( quantum mutatur ab illo ? ) 
Qui colit aetherei culmina celsa poli : 
Atque Dei vitam degit felicibus ausis , 
Humano major nomine , voce , vice . 
Idem hoc nati , patris , & matris , qui uno eodemque mense obierant , Epitaphium . 

Post natum Genitor , post hunc dulcissima Mater ; 
Hoc gaudent tumulo corpora trina simul . 
Natus praecessit Genitorem , funera Mater 
Tertia subsequitur , Mensis & unus erat . 
Felice's animae ! quibus his excedere terris , 
Sic datur , & vitâ jam potiore frui . 
VIRI CONSULTISSIMI SCAEVOLAE SAMMARTHANI Galli memoriae sacravit hoc carmen NINIANUS CAMPBELLUS . 

Vmbrosas Heliconis inter oras , 
Pimplaei & nemoris sacros recessus , 
Me jam Pierio calore raptum 
Cerno : dum me ditor polire carmen 
Cultum , nobile , molle , delicatum , 
Indictum ore alio , beatiori 
Venâ progenitum , sinuque Phoebi . 
Quo te prosequar omnibus canendum 
Seclis , magne senex , tuique dotes 
Vrbani genii facetioris , 
Docti judicii politioris , 
Aequem Sceptrigeri polo Tonantis . 
Si fas sit numeris phaleuciorum , 
Te laudare virum disertiorem 
Phoebo , Mercurioque , gratiisque . 
Quem circumvolitat novena turba , 
Longaeva & Themis , & severa Pallas , 
Testes aetherii tui caloris . 
Cujus fama vigens virûm per ora 
Doctorum advolat aureis quadrigis . 
Astella nobis cadis ah tuis ademptum 
Lumen ! proh dolour orbi & universo , 
Extinctum jubar aurei nitoris ! 
Ni jam stellifero polo micares , 
Despectans humiles soli jacentis 
Tractus , ut simul omnibus renatus , 
Es lux fulgidior priore luce . 
Quâ nostros oculos rapis sequaces , 
Et totos animos sereniori 
Perfundis radio tui decoris , 
Fulgens clarior hespero recenti , 
Multò & pulchrior imminente lunâ : ▪ 
Vt diam nequeam videre lucem , 
Quam praebes tremulis meis ocellis , 
Et toti patriae tuae decorae , 
Ex quâ nasceris alma fax futuri 
Secli , gloria & orbis universi . 
Cui tu perpetuum diem reducis , 
Aut mentis faculâ benigniori , 
Dicatae sophiâ secretiori , 
Sermon aut nitidam indicante mentem . 
Cui cedunt veneres Catullianae , 
Et limphâ liquidâ suaviores 
Melliti latices Terentiani . 
Cum vis vincier aspero Cothurno , 
Et cedunt lyrici canora plectra , 
Et grandes numeri Maroniani , 
Et fervens genius Lucretianus . 
Quicquid Gallia parturit decori , 
Quicquid Graecia protulit venusti , 
Et quicquid Latium dedit politi , 
Id vincis . Licet invidae Caemaenae 
Certent , ambiguam facis coronam , 
Cunctis vatibus , & stupente Phoebo , 
Cingis tempora Laureâ perenni . 
Vt corpus jaceat licet sepultum , 
Fatali tumulo , OH beat vivas , 
Auctor maxim carminis tenelli , 
Limati , sapidi , aurei , politi ! 
OH quantum tibi nominis paratur ! 
Dum cantaberis orbe note toto , 
Nullis Scaevola conticende linguis . 
Sed quò tendimus alta musa ? Siste 
Gressum . Quove rapis nouâ tumentem 
Laude ? aut insolito furore plenum , 
Sustollis modo vitreo daturum 
Ponto nomina ? caetibusque centum , 
Misces Mercurialium virorum ? 
Quos mens ardua vexit ad bicornis 
Montis culmina , Pegasique celsos 
Pennis vestiit . Astella apis sagacis 
Jnstar , libo rosas amoeniores , 
Et gratas violas , Thymumque dutce , 
Propter flumina , roscidasque ripas 
Formosi Ligeris , libentiusque 
Fingo carmina manibus litandis , 
OH divine senex , tuis dicata ! 
Nam nunquam mihi te silere fas est , 
Totam qui meritis tuam beasti 
Dilectam patriam , entheaeque linquis 
Mentis pignora docta , rara , diva , 
Vt te dicere nemo posset unum 
Praeter te , OH niveae parens loquelae . 
Parisiis prius edita . Anno , 1629.  Cal. Sextileîs . 

IN OBITUM VIRI COLENDISSIMI archiepischopis , de civitate , Academiâ & ecclesiâ ibidem meritissimi . 

Ad civitatem Glascuensem . 

Almaquid incedis funesto Glascua cultu , 
Et faedata modis tristibus ora geris ? 
An quod vester amor vitâ jactatus acerbâ , 
Praesul post longae taedia dura morae 
Suspiret potiore frui ? qui gaudia laetae 
Carpat , & innocuis concelebratajocis . 
Sentiat ac purum divini numinis haustum , 
Atque nouá multùm luce triumphet ovans , 
Nonquae sublimis transcendit culmina mundi 
Celsa triumphatrix mens modò plena deo 
Tangitur immodico luctu . Quid inania vota 
Fundis ? divino vivitur arbitrio . 
Illum flere nefas , cujus pars optima vitae 
Nil aliud docuit quam didic isse mori . 
Si mors dicenda est , per quam prope numenamicum 
Inque serenati degitur arce poli . 
Ad Academiam Glascuensem , & doctos qui ad funus exornandum eò confluxerant . 

AH prima coelicura , virtutum parens , 
Lumen juventae vividum , 
Phoebi supellex , diamond nutrix artium 
Sedes honorum splendida , 
Quid nunc jaces afflicta curis acribus 
Et mersa patris funere , 
Praeluxit olim qui tibi ? nunc additus 
Caelo jubar fulget novum . 
Lugesne ademptum coetibus mortalium , 
Qui gaudet aulâ caelicá ? 
Nec non beatus , totus & plenus Deo , 
Portum salutis appulit ? 
Astella heu miselli volvimur nos fluctibus , 
A patriâ ostraprocul . 
Non hic querelis mollibus , non planctibus 
Vrgendus heros amplius . 
Tradux olympi nam soluta ergastulo , 
Mens fessa terrae ponderis , 
Miscetur albo coelitum , qui concinunt 
Laudes dicatas numini . 
Quod gloriosâ luce perfusi vident , 
Mirantur , & fixi stupent . 
Non est quod ergo prosequaris Nenia , 
Manes quietos praesulis , 
O turba vatum , quae pia in fletum fluis , 
Moerente lessu personans . 
Cunctis terenda est haec semel lethivia , 
Nos proximi fato sumus : 
Quos continenter distrahunt moeror , pavor , 
Et mortis atrae vulnera , 
Donec peractâ , fata quam cernent , vice 
Clemens Deus nos uniat ; 
Qui gestiamus libero & vero bono , 
Per tota laeti secula . 
Anno 1632.  Nonas Novembris . 

IN OBITUM VIRI INTEGERRIMI GULIELMI BLARI , Pastoris vigilantissimi fidissimique apud Britannodunenses . 

Postquam pastors divos tot lumina mundi , 
Condidit obscuro mors inimica peplo , 
Tune etiam , pie Blare , jaces ereptus amicis , 
Et comitom tantis nox dedit atra viris ? 
Heu rerum ingenium , probitas , doctrina , pudorque 
Vnius hâc plagâ suneris icta cadunt . 
Nec non pullato squalens ecclesia cultu 
Luget ▪ et hoc feretro triste levavit onus . 
En nos , quos sophiae junxit tibi sacra cupid● 
Coelestis , tessu tangimur usque tuo . 
Sed de siderium , lachrymae , gemitusque dolorque 
Nil prosunt , nusquam conspiciendus a●es . 
Hins no●●e●tendi , non tu , qui laeta capessis 
Gaudia , justitiae sole nitente mieans . 
Nam certe in tenebris vitae , vitiique stupore 
Degimus hoc avitur●● misella hominum . 
Aliud in Nobilissima ejus verba suavissimae consolationis plenissima . 

Qvale melos cantat sinuoso flumine Cygnus , 
Instantis praeco funeris ipse sui ; 
Tale canis nuper , dum coeli gaudia cernis ; 
Pendet ab ore pio lecta corona tuo . 
Dumque Deo raptus contendis in aethera nisu , 
Mox novus ex ipso sunere factus olor . 
Laetus ut aeterno moduleris carmina plectro , 
Quéis summi resonant fulgida tecta patris : 
Vtque leves temnens curas , & vota gementûm 
In cassum , vero jam potiare bono . 
Anno 1632. pridie Cal. Decembris . 

Viri Nobilissimi Domini Gulielmi Coninghami , Glencarniae Comitis illustrissimi , apotheosis . 

OH Te beatum luce fulgentem nouâ 
Gemmantis instar sideris ! 
Vîxti soli lumen , polo nunc adderis 
In templo amaeno , lucido , 
Plenus deo , sublimior multo meae 
Venae faventis numine . 
Quamvis calorem sentiam mox entheum 
Qui pandit alas ingeni , 
Per cuncta rerum , non potest attollier 
Me●s pressa vinclo corporis . 
Quò tu volasti plurimum fretus Deo 
Heros stupendis ausibus , 
Vltrà minaces spes , metus omnes leves , 
Vitae & fugacis toedia : 
Et degis heroum choro mixtus pio , 
Caelesti raptus gloriâ . 
Nec tu jacebis diutius terrae in specu , 
Qui nos egenos excipit . 
Eheu misellos patriá dulci procul 
Quid non piget nos exilî ? 
Vt te sequamur qui praeivisti lubens , 
Pars illa nostri nobilis , 
Astella tantulum salve , & vale nostri cape haec 
Desiderî nunc pignora . 
Nonas Novemb. 1631.  

In obitum viri clarissimi Guilielmi Strutheri , Ecclesiae primûm Glascuensis , deinde Edinburgensis Pastoris fidissimi & facundissimi . 

Facunde praeco melle quovis dulcior , 
Aut melle si quid dulcius ; 
Qui me solebas poculis rorantibus 
Suadae potentis me gere , 
Demergis eheu lach ymosi funeris 
Me fluctibus nunc obrutum . 
Quam semper altis imminent virtutibus 
Parcae ferocis vuine a ! 
Quaesensit aevi lumen , & noster soli 
Nestor Britanni Bodius . 
OH quantus heros ( judicet Phoebus licet ) 
Toti canendus seculo ! 
Nulli secundus Camero aeternùm silet ; 
Nec sensa prudens eruet 
Caelestis almi , conspicandi oraculi 
Mirante doctorum choro . 
Succedis illis qui voves morti nihil ; 
Nam posthumae laudis satur , 
Transmittis orbi scripta tot vivacia 
Quot nullus expunget dies : 
Struthere claras qui colis diuûm domos , 
Vitâque gauds caelicâ , 
Felix perenni qui refulges otio , 
Liber caduco tempore . 
Qui terra tanti muneris compos fuit ? 
Cui vasta coeli machina 
Arridet ultrò , cuique supremus favour 
Stellantis aulae militat . 
Huc advolasti gloriae actus curribus , 
Et vectus alis ingenî . 
Sic functa fato redditur natalibus 
Mens , nomen in terris manet . 
Dum sol corusca luce diffundet jubar 
Caeleste cunctis , siderum & 
Volventur orbs , laudibus cresces novis , 
O fax futuri seculi . 
Anno 1633. idus Decembr . 

IN OBITUM JOANNIS ROSAE , oratoris , poetae , Philosophi & Theo logi eximii , & Pastoris Mechlimensis facundissimi . 

OH Coeligermen , charitum flos , veris ocelle , 
Gloria musarum , dulcis amice Rosa , 
Carperis heu parcae funesto policy , nunquam 
Culmine Parnassi conspiciende Rosa . 
Cunctis anteferende rosis , quèis gaudet & Hybla , 
Saltus & Idalius , littus & O Ebalium , 
Etpraedives Arabs , & Paestiroscidatempe , 
Atque Paphos Tmolus , Gnosia terra , Cilix . 
Vtlicet aeterno jam decantere triumpho 
Mox vatum numeris concelebrande Rosa , 
Luxerunt obitum Muse , Suadela files●it 
Vocalis , mundae cui labra picta rosae . 
Amissum queritur longê pulchrima Cypris , 
Qui modo vernabat lumina bina , Rosam . 
Nec myrtus placuit divae , nec vitis laccho , 
Nec Pani pinus , nec platanus genio , 
Mellea nec quercus grataest devota Tonanti , 
Nec lauro cinxit tempora Phoebus ovans ▪ 
Ex quo decideras lethali vulnere carptus 
Ah Rosa jam nobis , raptus & ante-diem , 
Aegide non gestit Pallas , ralaria nedum 
Interpres diuûm nectere vuli pedibus . 
Quip diique deaeque omnes hoc funere maerent , 
Quod tibi jam faciant debita justa , Rosa . 
Non compus bellus , non flumina viva Lycet , 
Non Jovis aurifluae plurimus imber aquae , 
Non tristes lachrymae , non Castalis unda supernê 
Fonte fluens liquido te refovere queunt ; 
Quô minus arescas Pimplaei gratiaruris , 
Nec non Pierii sedula curae soli . 
Numte lacteolo gestabit pectore Musa 
Amplius ? aut Phoebus candidiore sin●e 
Excipiet posthac ? certê melioribus horis 
Crescis ubi zephyrus' lenia flabra movet . 
Nec sentis calidos aestus , nec frigora brumae , 
Neveprocellosi flamina saeva noti . 
OH Rosa ter felix , de quo vel Jupiter ipse 
Certet , & ardenti captus amore tui . 
Qui te plantavit cognati semen Olympi , 
Afflat ubi Ely siis aura beata rosis . 
Quid multis ? Rosa non intermoriture perennas 
Clara tuae stirpis gloria , rara poli . 
Sit tibi perpetui veris , sit floris origo 
Caelica , sitque liquor dius , odorquetibi . 
EPITAPHIUM ROSAE ad viatorem . 

Quid stupeas qui prata vides defesse viator , 
Quod pereat nostri gratia tanta Rosae ? 
Namque rosâ nil est brevius , properantius aevi , 
Nil , ut mane viret , sole cadente perit . 
Pulchralicet durat sugitivo tempore , Nun 
Nutrit & una dies , tollit & unarosam ? 
Haecque tuae formae species , haec lucis imago 
Viva docet vitam sic properare tuam . 
Vt qui pubescis primo nunc floor juventae , 
Moximproviso curva senecta premat , 
Sis niveâ rutilâque rosâter pulchrior , ora 
Inficiet pallor , funereusque colour . 
Anno 1634. idus Octobr.  NINIANUS CAMPBELLUS . 





The division . The exposition . The appointment of death . The description of death . Man the map of misery . General doctrine . All men must die . Reason 1.  Whatsoever hath natural original tendeth to dissolution . Reason 2 Experience daily teacheth us the necessity we have to die . Manil. Statius . Reason 3 What God decreeth , nothing can disannul . Use 1 of instruction . When God decreeth , man ought not to repine . Use 2 of consolation . Death of friends to be entertained with patience . Doct 1.  Death's stroke is inevitable . Use of admonition . This life should be a preparation to the other . Doct 2 ▪ What must be oncedone necessarily , should be done courageously . Use of exhortation . Timely preparation surest provision . Doct 3.  It is bootless to fear what we cannot avoid . Use of encouragement . Death is an enlargement from thraldom , a delivery from troubles . Doct Death is certain in uncertainty . Three directions touching the certainty of death . Direct . 1.  In life remember death . Direct 2.  So live as thou wert presently dying . Horace . Martialis . Horace . Direct 3 ▪ Look always to thy end . 3 Directions touching the uncertainty of death . Direct . 1 Think everyday thy last day . Direct 2 What we expect somewhere , let us wait for every where . Direct 3.  An uncertain death requires a prepared life . The conclusion . 