A GARDEN OF GRAVE AND GODLY FLOWERS : SONNETS , ELEGIES , AND EPITAPHS . Planted , polished , and perfected By Mr. ALEXANDER GARDYNE . 

Et sacer & magnus Vatum labour . 

EDINBURGH Printed by THOMAS FINLASON . 1609.  With Licence . 

TO THE MOST NOBLE LORDS OF HIS MOST EXCELLENT Majesty his most honourable Privy Council , and College of justice.  

Most powerful Peers , chief Pillars of th' Empire , 
Strong Pedestals , whereon the State does stay , 
Ministering Mercurs , to the Sacrat Sire , 
Our Jove Great JAMES and our Agustus aye : 
Those lurid , sad , and those Thanatik Themes , 
I consecrat to your most Noble name 's . 
Your Lo. Most humble Orator M. Alex. Gardyne . 

TO THE TRVELIE RELIGIOUS , RIGHT HONOURABLE , AND VERY LEARNED ALEXANDER GORDON of Clunie . S.  

Look for no lively lyn's that may allure , 
Or verse of worth , that will provok to view , 
They want all power Poetic to procure , 
And frame a lovely liking unto You , 
My minor Muse , no ne'er a draught she drew , 
From Helicon , or Aganippe well , 
Bot ever still a lower flight she flew , 
Nor Pindus' height , where Delius does dwell : 
no such a friendly fortune Her befell , 
For to be plunged in Parnassus spring's , 
Or see the Sisters in their Sacrat Cell , 
Whence Poets all , their brave inventions brings : 
Bot she her growth got in Garden whair , 
Nor Pallas , nor Apollo doth Repair . 
2.  

That gallant Greek , cognominate the Grand , 
Who sometime All the Mundane Monarchy , 
By Martial might did conquesse and command , 
Voutchafed with a lovely looking eye : 
all 's well to view , and with desire did see , 
An halting Vulcan , as an Venus' fair , 
His Royal Father Philip likewise He 
To take ( though a Potentat ) did not spair , 
( A Grace I grant in such a Roy bot rair , 
And from a Peasant , in a public place ) 
A Globe of Graips , and what I mark was mair , 
He took them friendly but a frowning face : 
Swa if this small ( Sir ) you shall accept also , 
You shall make up a ternarie of two . 
3.  

The Persians' kept a custom with their King , 
To give him gifts , mean , or magnificent ; 
Amongst those One , did for Oblation bring , 
A water Coup , and did his Prince present : 
He gracious Lord , as it had excellent , 
And Royal been , respected the Propine , 
As if there had been from some Sengȝeour sent , 
A Gem or Jewel , of the Isles of Ind , 
Remarking much the meaning , and the mind 
Affected well , he in that fellow found , 
more nor the worth , the quality and kind , 
Of that he held into his Hienes hand : 
then Gracious more , prove nor the Persian Kings , 
That made so much of light and little things . 
4 

Bot Sir , if to , my will , or to your Worth , 
My worthless verse they war equivalent ; 
I should not fear , to send them freely forth , 
To bid the Braish , of each Arbitrament , 
Yet if my travels ta'en can but content , 
And move thy mind , my labours to Allow , 
My pains Jmploid , are profitably spent , 
If that they bot , do help to honour you , 
Bot had I born , the Bays above my Brow , 
Or been circunded with the Laurel green , 
I should more largely notefie it now 
How much t' augment thy Greatness , I am ge'ine , 
And make the world and this Se-circled I 'll , 
Amazed t' admire , Thee in moir stately style , 
Aberden the 25. of August . 1609.  Your Hon. bounden and devoted , Mr. Alex. Gardyne , 

TO THE DISCREET READER . 

I Publish naught , nor put I to the Press , 
Their Poesies , to purchase me an praise , 
Nor , is my drift , nor my device to dress , 
Elabrat lines , upon Respects to raise , 
And mount my Muse , upon the front of Fame , 
To get me Gain , or t'eternize my Name . 
Nor do I on , self-confidence or skill , 
For price , or place , presumptuously aspire , 
My meaning much , you do mistake : my will , 
Is to get done , my Distitch lasts desire , 
Slip all the Smooth , sleik what you see unfound , 
Help whair they halt , Abreage when they abound . 
thine if you merit , Alex. Gardyne . 

CERTAIN ENCOMIASTIC Poesy's to the Author . 

I Seem like Cynthia while thou shines I swear , 
I am mistuned whairas thou sweetly sings , 
And barren too , whair thou begins to bear , 
Whose Rustic Muse bot Bastard brats forth brings : 
Yet what I can , I 'll do it in thy sight , 
Wart but to len , a lustre to thy light . 
I will not press , to prattle of thy praise , 
Thy work bears witness of thy wondrous worth , 
Bot while I live and when I end my days 
I must entreat thy favour this far forth : 
About thy Garden place me near hand by , 
That I may smell thy flowers whair e'er I lie . 
So shall I rest contented In thy favour , 
Graced , while I grow , In such a glorious Ground , 
Whair Virtue , Wit , and worth so sweetly favour , 
Whair Eloquence and Art so much Abound : 
Whair I shall prove part of thy sweet Reposes , 
Surpassing sugared Myrrh and musced Roses . 
Anonimos . 

AS Beauty still desire's to be in sight , 
Of saddest Sable and mishapen Statures , 
The more to grace their admirable light , 
By the default of such deformed Creatures : 
As Cynthya be day can give no glance 
While bright Apolo shows his Radiance . 
So gracious Gardyne wonder of thy Age , 
thou gains a world of praise for every verse , 
Thy Country's honour thus thou does agraige , 
All Nations thy , Jnuentions shall rehearse : 
Poor petty Poems now your heads go hide , 
While greater light here stains your glistering pride . 
Ane light that shows be shining every whair , 
What Lamps are lost in British learned brains , 
For lack of Patrons to maintain the rair , 
And royal spirits that the Earth retains : 
Live Garden then , and love thy Patron best . 
I 'll praise you both , and pray for all the rest . 
P. G.  

With Pyrameids , of Polized Pophir proud , 
Great Princes Toumbs , are beautified we see , 
And with the gold of Ophir fortunes Good , 
Their palaces stand pointing at the sky : 
Thus while they live their glory they maintain , 
Thus while they die , they make it live again . 
Yet all that life , is bot a living Death , 
And all this death , a dying life , and All , 
Their Trains , and honours , that attend their breath , 
Are but Rich marks , ye more to frame their fall , 
And after life , that painted honours stone , 
With flying Time , consumed is and done . 
Live than , that life , come not unto decay , 
And if it come , yet that it shall naught die , 
Into this Garden gather up thou may 
How still thy Name , may still eternal be : 
For be those fruits of Alexander's lore , 
thou dies in Virtue for to live in Gloir . 
Mr. W. Bar.  

SONNET . 

Two sorts of men be bound to love thy lyns , 
Two sorts therefore aught to proclaim thy Praise , 
Their several sorts , themselves shows and defines . 
The Dead , and all 's the Living in their days , 
The Dead they should ascent to thy Assays 
Since by thy Lines , Resussitat and sure , 
Their Fame revived , and immortal stays , 
And by thy Deed , eternal shall endure . 
The Living too , unless they thee injure , 
Into whose praise , thy Poesies thou penned , 
Should in Thy Cause , at Critics hands procure , 
And spair no pains , thy Fame for to defend : 
wherefore I judge , ( and justly ) all engines , 
Alive and Dead , be bowed to love thy lines . 
Green Garden great , and gallant is thy glore , 
And happy thou , that such a troup contains , 
A comely Court , a rich and stable store , 
Hemmed here within thy heavenly hedge remains : 
Great Delius , dishanting Parnass uses , 
And with him all , these Maids admired the Muses . 
That tripill Tryn have here transferred their seat , 
And here Apollo hes his Palion pitched , 
Whereby no Ween , Invention nor conceit , 
Is not thy Muse attempted not , nor touched : 
wherefore I think condinglie thou may claim 
One leaf out of the Laurel Diadem . 
Since in thy Breast boils those inspiring springs , 
From whence does flow that livelie liquor sweet : 
Wherein thou baths thy Virgin Muses wings , 
And at thy pleasure in those fonts does fleet : 
From whence thy Muse exceeding store extracts , 
That through the Mundan Map thee famous makes . 
W. T.  

IN Good or Bad , the work bewrays the Man , 
And by the fruit we clearly know the Tree , 
How cunning and , how great a Gardener than 
Declares thy gallant Garden thee to be ? 
For therein thou makes blind and senseless see , 
Thy worthy work , unto myself a sight , 
That stupefacts my sense , delud's my eye , 
And yet it lens unto my life a light : 
For while with Reason I do reckon Right , 
And see such store do from one stock Proceed , 
Fruits fresh and fair , diverslie dressed and dight , 
Yet discrepant in sapor , shape and seed : 
I must say then , thou by a thousand ways , 
Thy practice and Poetic power displays . 
Mr. I Lesl.  

Whose pleasure is into his Paradise , 
And Adam like his Eden hath advisd , 
Relent thy course by Gardens grave advice , 
Whose Muse divine this sweetest Subject choosed , 
Inspired hereby , he hes profoundly infufd , 
Rare Recipies thy Soul for to renew , 
Read with remorse , and rightly if thou use , 
thou shall rejoce , that in our Ground there grew 
A Garden whence springs Cedars to subdue : 
Soul-killing soars resulting from thy sin , 
then wand'ring worldling , hold this in thy view , 
lest if thou stray , thou enter not therein 
This Gardens-flowrs : had Alexander seen , 
His heart had not half so ambitious been . 
Alex. Ste.  



UPON HIS MAJESTY'S Arms quartered . 

LORD be thy boundless bounty from above , 
The British Great , long tripartited Throne , 
United now , in pleasure , peace and love , 
To thee and thine ( Great james ) shall Al-be-on 
Distractions , griefs , and grudges all are gone , 
Competitors , that pressed thy Crowns to claim , 
hes ceased their suits , and leave 's to thee Alone , 
The Irish , French , and th' English Diadem , 
Out of all doubt impertinent to them ; 
And be all Laws belonging unto thee , 
As lo my sacred Sovereign supreme , 
Behold here with thy Royal eyes , and see 
The Leopards , and Flowers of France they bring 
The Harp , to sport their Lord , thee Lion King.  
TO HISSACRED MAJESTY PROCLAIMED KING OF Great Britain . 

Most magnanime , and high imperial Prince , 
Whom JOVA just , undoubtedlie ordains , 
In peace be A , fore-pointed providence , 
Of Al-be-on all , to rule the royal reinss , 
The bloody broils , where but th'vngodlie gains , 
Great jove , sweet Time , and sacred Sovereign you , 
Have brought to end , and every strength constrains , 
Before your feet , debased like to bow , 
The threatening storms of bold Bellona's brow , 
To pleasant peace long entertained shall turn , 
As may be noted evidentlie now , 
while all your bounds , with blazing bonfires burn : 
Amid this mirth , and those triumphiug things , 
Give GOD the glore , the Creator of Kings . 
CONGRATULATION FOR HIS MAJESTY'S DELIVERY FROM THE SULPHUROUS Treason in the Parliament house . 

Sonnet . 1.  

Lift up your hearts and hands unto the Lord , 
Applaud , give praise , and with the Psalmist sing , 
Unto his Majesty Misericord , 
For saif conserving of thee Sovereign King : 
Give glore to God , and thank him for this thing , 
Laud we the Lord , with heavenly hymns on high , 
That by that bloody boutchrie did him bring : 
Devisd for him with secret subtlety . 
Extend the Truth , tell this eternally , 
With merry minds conjunctlie all rejoes , 
JEHOVA just , Almighty , magnify , 
That fred him from the fury of his foes . 
Triumph and sing for this deliverance sweet , 
Praise to the Father , Son , and holy Spirit . 
Sonnet 2.  

IT is not flamm's of artificial firs , 
That thou the Lord craves for a recompense : 
Nor is it pomp ostentive thou requjr's , 
For wondrous preservation of the Prince , 
It is not Mundane vane magnificence , 
Nor sliding shows , that momentary be , 
Bot it is zeal , thanks , and obedience , 
With gladness of the mind to glorify , 
Thee thee the Lord , that hes so lovingly , 
Even from a fore-decrited death , out-drawen : 
Thy servant that , sinceirlie serves Thee , 
To cause on him , thy love , and care , be knawne . 
A paill of prayer , not artificial firs , 
The Lord for this , deliverance desir's . 
TO THE CITY OF ABERDEN at the death of that excellent D. DAVID Bishop of Aberd.  

The Prince of preaching Pastors in their parts , 
Thy Archidoctor dearest and divine ; 
The light of learning in the liberal Arts , 
Thy signior sage , in every Science sine , 
Thy faithful Father , and informer fine : 
Thy dearest David in the Lord is lost , 
Thy Cypr'an Ambrose , and thy Augustine , 
The Earth for Heaven thy Cunninghame hes cost : 
while as Religion with her loud laments , 
For his departure poureth out her plaints . 
To Church and King , what detriment and skaith , 
The breaths-abridging Burrio does bring : 
Here in this death , is eminent to baith , 
For lo the Church , a Column ; and the King 
A Consul grave , inlaiks in every thing 
The people a Platter of their public pace , 
Ane Symbol sure , and an assured sign , 
Of some approaching peril to the place : 
Where he was wont divinlie to indite 
The mysteries of holy sacred write . 
THE OPINION OF THE worldly estate of the honourable and learned Mr Walter Steward Principal of the King's College of Aberdon at his death . 

Life , Lordships , friends , all ease and earthly glore , 
Pomp , Pleasure , Pride , Renown & worldly wealth , 
Spirit , manhood , strength , estate , and treasures store , 
Blood , beauty , clan , and honour here but health , 
Like dying lamps into the longest night , 
Are false deluding dainties but delight . 
Pre-eminence , soveranitie , and place , 
Great dignities , and transitorious joys : 
Promotions high , descents from royal race , 
Time turns to naught , Death altars and destroys : 
As water-bell's with little blasts are blown , 
So with less breaths they are again ou'r-throwen . 
Wit , learning , skill , sweet Eloquence and vene , 
In faculties , intelligence profound : 
Solidity , and quickness of the brain , 
And in all Earthly blessings to abound : 
Are always vain , and foolishness in fine , 
Without that Wisdom heavenly and divine . 
Men are not made for ever permanent , 
In Mein , nor monarchs is no steadfast strength , 
Men are no more , here bot a trau'ling tent , 
And they shall leave this lingering life at length : 
Remove and wend out of this vale their ways , 
For they the part of posting Pilgrims plays . 
What they in their Inventive brain have bred , 
Be means of their imagination vain : 
And with expense perfectly have exped , 
By ill governing is disgraced again : 
And that which Fame and Fortune highest bure , 
oft lies full low , inglorious and obscure . 
Why do we then in fragill flesh confided , 
And boldly builds our aspirance and trust ; 
Since nothing breathes that here is born to bide . 
Of Nothing all , all unto Nothing must : 
Revert and turn , Death will in end devore , 
And flesh transchange to filth , as a before . 
Disdain those base and lowest earthly things , 
Fly through the skies unto his burning throne ; 
Whose blessed sight to the beholders brings , 
( Be mere affection , and his love alone : ) 
Those sacred , holy , benefits and blessed , 
Peace , wealth and ease , content and quiet rest . 
Abandon then those all alluring baits , 
Which to the Soul frams ruin and decay ; 
Be not infected with those frivole fraits , 
That are in heavenly happiness a stay : 
So in the earth your Names shall be renowned , 
And in the heavens with Christ coheird & crowned . 
Non est mortale quod opto . 

Not mortal , no , nor earthly is my aim , 
Nor points it to , great Powers or empirs 
To Favours fraill , nor to officious Fame , 
Nor is it sworn , to sensual desires : 
Nor would I wish what worldlings covet most , 
Glore got with ease , and with less labour lost . 
no tracking trash , nor transitorious things , 
Not Mammon's muck , that Mundans most on muse ; 
Impeds my Spirit , which still aspiring springs , 
That only and Eternal good , to choose : 
Which Spirits bad , nor Angels blessed above , 
Not in a point can alter , change , or move . 
no , bot it is that pure impassive Spirit , 
That ere all time was , shall , and only is : 
Good , just and wise , immortal , infinite , 
God all in all , all only is my wish : 
For in the same excessivelie I shall , 
Have infinite , and what I would have , all . 
UPON THE HONOURABLE the Laird of Tolquhon . 

Attend , come view , behold here shall you see 
Into this grave , as in a stealed glass , 
The sudden change of men that mortal be , 
Now men , now metamorphosed in a mass , 
Now paill and wan , that even now vital was , 
Now brave , now blithe , now body but a breath , 
Now flesh and blood , now are we dust and ass , 
Now like to live , now subject unto death , 
Now fiery is , now frozen heard our faith , 
Now faithful friends , now false and feigned foes , 
Now patient , now angry full of wraith , 
Now filthy weighed , now fragrant like the rose : 
Now pampered up like painted pots are we , 
And dross again , in twinkling of an eye . 
2.  

Religion laiks out of this land a lamp , 
thou Publict-well weep for thy member may , 
thou Virtue wants the Captain of thy camp , 
thou Country him that did thee honour aye : 
You Poor have lost , that seldom said you nay , 
You Friends your best , and only permanent : 
Unto you sex , the damnage done this day , 
What pithy pen in paper can imprent , 
Truth , Virtue , Friends , Well , Country , Poor , lament , 
His death to you that duty did discharge , 
And wrought with wit and wisdom to invent , 
But others loss , your limits to enlarge : 
then sex in one , come honour now his death , 
A live who to dishonour you was loath . 
To the Country where he lies . 

OF Buchan ground thou hes in grave thy glore , 
And of thy Lairds the light within thee lies : 
thou keeps his corpse that best could thee decore , 
And was be vote ( amongst the wisest ) wise , 
thou does depress that caused thee to arise , 
And made thy Fame in every Firth to flee , 
His Trophy then Eternal makes thee twice , 
First that thou bred one worthy such as he , 
Next that his bones should in thee buried be ; 
And though thou Earth , his earthly joints enjoy , 
Devised , made , and destinate to die , 
Yet doubtless death dough never his deeds destroy : 
For thought ye both do your devour in this , 
Fame and Remembrance shall amend your mis.  
Prosop . to his living friends . 

Cease mortal men , for me mourn ye no more , 
You grieve your God , and craibs him but a cause , 
ye follow fast , though that I go before , 
Death for thee last , be course each of you knows , 
The daily dead you sure example shows , 
You weep in vain , your mourning Me dismays , 
ye get no wrong , God shears bot where he sow's : 
Your childish plaints , your weakness lo bewrais , 
Think after Death what state still for you stays , 
Pray with S. Paul for dissolution sign , 
Think not by Death the better part decays , 
Bot think that death men worldly makes divine : 
The Scripture says , we shall dissolve , not die , 
then wait the hour , and mourn no more for me . 
Upon his dear friend Mr. A. M.  

Giflosse of friends , if damnage great , or skaith , 
May move to mourn , to waill , or to lament : 
The first I think the greatest of them baith , 
Yneugh for me , and a fit argument , 
Too much for those not touched with such intent , 
For friends or Fortune , once to moan or move , 
To all I say , this is sufficient , 
Agreing to all harmed Mens behoove , 
Prick with the spur , and force of onfold love , 
To such a one as by a just desert , 
Sold longer lived , bot ( weerds ) I you reprove , 
And cursed be thou death with thy dreadful dart : 
That in the spring and prime time of his year , 
Hath from his being brought him to his Beer . 
Upon the virtuous and worthy Virgin Helen Chein . 

Injurious Death , thy rage is but regard , 
no reason revels where once thou gets a rest : 
With reprobats the right reap's like reward , 
The godless , good , the mein , and mightiest , 
Thy dart to dust , does ready bring the best , 
And aye thou wretch , the worthiest invyes , 
As on this Maid thou hes made manifest , 
That here interred into this Temple lies , 
The wisest wight that Nature could device , 
Whose Fame thy force and fury shall confound , 
When from each pen her praise proceid thou spies , 
then Death all shall , to thy disgrace redound : 
And where she rests shall be enrolled thy rage , 
For marring her in morning of her age . 
Upon the honourable the Laird of Corss . 

The glorious Gods , o seldom wonder strange , 
Dressed in their dole , convoied all with cair , 
Wrath for thy wrack , all willing to revenge , 
Thy wrong , down from the watery voulted Air , 
hes left the Heavens , their habitations their , 
Thy dolent death to quite it , if they can : 
The thundering jove to magnify thee mair , 
hes voued to venge upon the Sprit's that span 
Thy threid so thin ; the mighty Mars , says than 
The spoils of death shall grace the grave above , 
In spite of death , in witness that thou won 
Of all the Gods , the favour , grace , and love . 
Apollo last , laments thee with the lave , 
And vow's t'ingraph thy glore above thy grave , 
Upon the honourable I Iru. of Pet.  

Like as the Date , or silver plumed Palm , 
That planted is upon an open plain , 
But help of hedge , to keep it close and calm , 
From v'olent winds , and from the rapping rain , 
Does upright rise , and level like a rash , 
And blooming bears her fruit , and flourish fresh . 
So he that back , as to his mother's womb , 
This quiet Caverne , and this silent Cell , 
Returned is , into this terrene tomb , 
Against those foes , the World , the Devil , and Hell : 
He stoutly strove through force of faith & strength , 
And jacob-like , here Victor-lyes at length . 
DIALOG UPON THE DEATH OF P. F. Baillie of Aberden . 

CIVES .  Stay stranger thou , that so preceislie spies 
With earnest eyes , and on those Graves does gaze , 
Look here below , where thou shalt see there lies 
Mater to make thee both to mourn and maze : 
For years a youth , dead in his tender days , 
Enriched with graces reasonable , and rare , 
As thou shalt see all those lamenting lays , 
And dulefull ditons cunningly declare : 
then thou hes to dilat an other day , 
Of such a man thou red into thy way . 


PEREG .  The mourning of so many modest men , 
The Deads' deserts , does evidently show , 
And causeth all inquisitive to ken 
What was his worth , that here is laid so low , 
Through dint of death , and destanies ov'rthrowe , 
And what his parts were , by their plaints appears , 
Which surely serves him for to sound to blow , 
And put his praise in all the honests ears : 
And for myself , I would enlarge the same , 
And further eik a feather to his fame . 
Brethring in brugh , and ye his brether born , 
And all that hes of his acquentance been : 
Do what ye can , his death for to adorn , 
And mourn no more , it will not mend to mein , 
Set forth the Fame of the defunct your friend : 
ye Poets kith , your cunnings , craft , and can , 
To cause his fame , still flourish , fresh , and green , 
And be ȝour Muse , immortal make the man : 
So ȝow's be Partner of the praise , and be , 
Remembered both , and honoured as Herald  
Give ȝit no partial nor a sparing praise , 
Pen only that , that reason we 'll , may crave , 
It buits naught much , above all bounds to blaze , 
Superfluous praises , graces not the Grave , 
Rander the right , and let alone the leave , 
Extend the Truth , and surely so you shall , 
Allot him all the honour he would have , 
Both in his life , and his last funeral : 
Wouchaif to write , and lend him lin's thairfoir , 
That be ȝour means , he may live evermoir . 


Remors and sorrow for sin . 

Lord lend me light , for to lament my life , 
And sharp my fight , to sorrow for my sin ; 
Restrain the fury , and the mortal strife , 
Of spreit , and flesh , that I am entered in : 
Permit me not , without recourse to rin , 
Nor walk the ways , of the vnchastized child , 
Bot give me grace , and grant me to begin , 
For to refuse , the follies that defyld , 
My sinful soul , and all my senses syld , 
With shows of worldly vanities , and wealth , 
And those inglorious glosis that begyld , 
And did with hold , me from my heavenly health : 
Lord be thy spreit , make me perceive & spy-them , 
And then renounce , and utterly deny-them . 
2 

God grant me grace , for to digest my grief , 
And for the spreit , of patience I pray : 
Lord send my Soul , that long desired relief , 
And now convert , my Carioune to clay ; 
Contract the Time , Lord thraw the threid in twa , 
And let me murne my miseries no moir , 
Dislodge this life , and do not long delay , 
To enter me , in Thy eternal gloir , 
Whair I may live Thy loving face befoir , 
Thair with thy Saints , uncessantly to sing , 
Thy perfect praise , and but all end adoir , 
Thy holy name , high Prophet , Priest , and King : 
Untie my tongue , that I may sing , and say , 
OH holy God , all holy , holy , aye . 
Invocation for seasonable weather . 

OH Puissant Prince , and King Cunctipotent , 
Whose body rend , was on the rack , or Rude , 
For man's great good , OH Lord thyself was shent , 
Of that intent , the Devil to denude ; 
Us to seclude , from that fierce fiery flood , 
Whilk ready stood , to drink upî and demain , 
That thou had then , boght with thy blissed blood , 
The heavenly food , that fed thy Isra'l fain , 
Lord send again , to Nurish us thy awne , 
Since floods of Rain , downfalls out from the Aer , 
That we despair , to reap the fruits , and grain , 
Whairwith the plain , is now ore'spread alwhair , 
My suit then Lord , with spreit depressed receive , 
Grant I may have , that heir I humbly crave . 
A PRAYER FOR THE ESTATE of the Church . 

OH Lord that art the strength and steadfast rock , 
Let thy out-streatched arm fry and defend , 
That now in danger be , thy faithful flock , 
Which was , which is , and shall be to the end : 
cause now thy care upon the Church be kenned , 
When Reprobats uprises to rebel , 
And with their tricks and treasons does intend , 
To wrist thy Word , thou dictat hes thy sell , 
Thought of the truth , no thing themselves can tell , 
Bot boasts us with the strength of stranger's sword , 
Apostate Papists , from all parts expel , 
Or turn them truly to avow thy word . 
Imped their Platts , their mintings make amîsse , 
That aught bot well to thy Evangell wiss . 
Comfort for my innocent afflicted friend . 

Let not blasphemous barking beasts bereave , 
Nor causeless thy accustomed courage quail , 
For guiltless states the keenest courage crave , 
And most does in adversity availl : 
Though raging Rogs , without all reason raill , 
And wicked wretches at thy worth envy , 
Yet all their falset in the sin shall faill , 
When every one thine innocence shall try : 
To their eternal infamy and shame , 
And to the lewd and honour of thy Name . 
None bot the worthy are envied worst , 
And few traduced bot of the best estate , 
The finest oft we find unfriendlie forced , 
And with the beastly born at greatest hate ; 
Fools only at their Betters fortune frait , 
And swells to see their credit to encresse , 
Their malice yet should not thy mind amait , 
Nor make thy private pleasures prove the Less : 
Bot rather move thee mirthful more to be , 
And flout thy foolish foes that frouns on thee . 
A Passion . 

What grief , what anguish great , 
What black and bitter baill , 
So hurts and harms my heavy heart , 
And never makes to hail ? 
What huge misfortunes me , 
Confounds , defaits , and foils , 
What daft desire , like flamm's of fire , 
Within my bowels boils ? 
What subtle slight desaits , 
What trains my soul to trap ? 
What wicked wiles my will invents , 
Me Wretch in woe to wrap ? 
What lubric pleasant shows , 
With false empoisoned baits , 
My fond fantastic fancy finds , 
To sensual conceits ? 
What wild corrupted thoughts , 
As from their rute and stock , 
Out of my heart , like armies huge , 
About my brain do flock ? 
What hundredth thousand ill 's , 
From that first sinful seeds , 
Into my mind immured alas , 
All bad abuses breeds ? 
What willingness to vice ? 
What forwardness to fall ? 
What prompnes to trespass is nurced in my natural ? 
What readiness to stray , 
What rage from right to rin , 
A beastly bygate to embrace , 
The sink of shame and sin ? 
What inward foolish force , 
What inclinations ill , 
Into my endless errors aye 
Makes me continue still ? 
Or what a madness is 't , 
That but remorse or fear , 
I with my God almost , his Word 
And will revealed I weir . 
Who in his Wisdom hes 
All Natures made of naught , 
And ilk a Creature and kind , 
Their several courses taught . 
The Bodies all above , 
The spheir and cirled Heaven , 
He makes rin restless round about , 
As violently drawn . 
The sure and solid Ground , 
Just placed like a prick , 
In mids alike unmoveable , 
Does still and stable stick . 
With both the sorts of Seas , 
Embroidered about , 
That still does brash and beaten their banks , 
With many roar and rout . 
He all above the Earth , 
The Region of the Air , 
Right properly appointed for 
His Palace did prepare . 
Although the Heaven of Heavens , 
Most polished perfect , 
His Grace and Godhood not contains , 
Full glorious , and grite . 
For in the Earth and Deeps , 
And Firmament most fair , 
His blessed Spirit and Essence is , 
O'er all and everywhere . 
He all and every thing , 
H'apointed hes and placed ; 
And what his Providence performed , 
Is nothing void nor waist . 
The third and highest Heaven , 
Great GOD he did ordain , 
For Angels , and the blessed Band , 
A mansion to remain . 
The subtle Air below , 
And Firmament for Fowls , 
The deadly Deep , and black Abyss , 
For damned spirits and souls . 
For fleeting finned Fish , 
Fresh Waters , Floods and Seas : 
For savage , wild , and bloody Beasts , 
He planted Parks and Trees . 
Yet of those all the use , 
As Nature taught , weken . 
He hes appointed for supply , 
And nourishment to men , 
And sapentlie hes set 
In season ilk a sort , 
And all things as he thinks it good , 
Provides for their support . 
All forms of Fish the Floods , 
Her eating Flesh the Field , 
All healthsome Fowls for food , the Air , 
He hes ordained to yield . 
The Glob etherial , 
And close compacted spheir , 
He peopled he's with lightsome lamps , 
The streaming star's , and cleir . 
Some of those litler Lights , 
But steiring steadfast stay , 
And some their circled courses change , 
And alter erring aye . 
And such like He hes set 
These ornaments among , 
That through the voults of Crystal skies , 
Full gleglie glancing gang . 
Twa-glimsing golden Globes , 
With bodies broad and bright , 
The Greater for to guide the day , 
The Less to rule the night . 
The silver Cynthia , 
Doth both incresse and wain 
Into a Month : and Phoebus' course 
A year concludes again . 
The twice two Elements , 
And every other thing ; 
Abers not by their limit bounds , 
Be th' All-creating King. 
Bot onl ' unthankful man 
Thomas to his use alone , 
Great good and gracious God did all , 
Befoir expressed , compone : 
ȝit all the Creatures , 
That He hes made among , 
Man only knows the right and ȝit , 
Does walk awry , and wrong , 
Fortis est falsam infamiam contemnere . 

ALL they that love , and lives be the law , 
And they that stir , her statutes to trangres , 
All they of God , that his commands do knaw , 
Than lewd Reports , they nothing count of less , 
All they in life , who purity profess , 
Than sland'ring tongues , they nothing more detest , 
Wha seiks to smoir , while they the more increase , 
The guiltless Fame , the pure , and perfect best , 
The Scripture shows , the wiser sort , expreems , 
Detracting tongues , a vice unworthiest , 
Which God most vile , and odious esteems , 
Of falls infamous lies , than think no mair , 
Bot as words lost , and Echoes in the air . 
Ane prayer for the faithful . 

OH Lord whose force , and righteonsnes do reach , 
From Monarchies , unto the meinest Mote , 
OH Lord whose Regal staitlines does stretch , 
O'er all not passing once the smallest iott , 
OH Lord that saved , unlost thy servant Lot , 
And for distrust , strake up his wife in stone , 
OH Christ that cured , by touching of thy cott , 
The blind , the lame , and all , with griefs , begun , 
Look Lord , I pray , down from thy thundering throne , 
And view us wratches with thy eyes divine , 
Guide us with grace from danger every one , 
Whom thou elects , and chooses to be thine , 
Bliss us on Earth , and give us perfect pace , 
And in the Heaven's fruition of thy face . 
UPON THE REVEREND AND Godly M. N. H. Commissar of Aber.  

Here lies enclosed , within this Cave of clay , 
His bloodless bones that boldly did embrace , 
In Christ , the Truth , unto his dying day , 
Whose like now few , are liveand left , alas , 
Pereit to Poise , with piety , the place , 
That upright He , did but a spot preserve , 
By guide governing , godliness , and grace , 
Which now to sound , ( that surely cannot swerve ) 
Thy public praise , OH happy Soul shall serve , 
Though thou be dead , and death thy dross , devoir , 
Thy laud shall not , inlaik , that does deserve , 
For to remain , immortal evermoir , 
Thy Name , by Fame , into this land shall live , 
Though seasons slide , it permanent shall prive . 
DIALOGUE UPON THE VIRTUOUS and Right honourable Sir Thomas Gordon of Clunie Knight . 

Interlo . Resp. Fame . 

Pub. Weal .  Whair fly's thou Fame , so frantic-like , and fast ? 
What chance , or change ? what may thy murning move ? 
What grieus thee thus , how goes thou so aghast , 
What news in Earth , what in the Heavens above ? 
thou Tongue of Time , thou wingd-foote Herold stay , 
T' impart th'imployments unto us we pray . 


Fame .  The force of my , Affairs and woes scarce can , 
Permit a pause muchlesse to bide , and breath , 
Bot wit thou we 'll , the World it wants a Man , 
By the untimous , Tyranny of death . 
Whose worthiness , to sound out I am send , 
Unto the Heaven and to the World's end . 


Pub.   Whom have I lost ? Fa. A manful member you , 
That loved the Lord , and held Religion dear , 
Alas removed , and transported now , 
From you , the faithsull , that are fechtand here . 
Unto his Home , the high and stately Heaven , 
That God unto , the glorified hes given . 
And hes thee left , as Orphan to bewail , 
And wept his want , with tears and tragic toone . 
That from this woeful and this wratched vail , 
His shining virtues Sun hes set so soon , 
By whose eclipsed and declined light , 
This day is dark , like the Cymmeriane night . 
His sanctified Soul celestial , 
From whence it came , to God again is gone , 
Up to the highest heaven imperial , 
th' appointed Palace of the Lord , where None , 
Bot Souls of Saints , and blessed Angels be , 
Elect to life , from all Eternity . 
His Name , Remembrance , and his Memory , 
The Earth up to , the firmament , shall fill , 
The mouth 's of men , shall minister with me , 
To cause them uncorrupt continue still , 
And grasse-like grow , great , glorious , and green , 
As if they were , substantially seen . 
How greatly than , thou graced are , OH grave , 
( A seven foot Cell , ) made of the marble mould , 
His knighted Corpse , with honour thou shall have , 
Whose Fame , scarce can , the universal hold , 
Whairbe the age , succeeding , this , shall see , 
How rair a Man , heir buried lies , in Thee . 


To his loving friends . 

Prosop . 

You Honourable , Dear , and loving , Friends , 
To whom God gives , his graces great , and guide , 
Mark this Mort-head , and your ensewing ends , 
See how it stands , think sometime how it stood , 
Now bot bare bones , and hes beines , but their blood , 
no worldly wit to Kingdoms , Crowns , nor kin , 
Brings with them blessings or Beatitude , 
Nor will they Heaven unto the wicked win , 
All Earthly pomp , if not divod of sin , 
Shall turn to this wherein my bones are born , 
A trimmed Tomb , with rotten waires within , 
Brought forth to day , and buried on the morn : 
Live therefore godly , virtuous , well and wise , 
Such happiest , and only blessed dies . 
2.  

GOD gave to me of friends sufficient , 
Of worldly wit , a reasonable store ; 
Of Thesaure too , until I was content , 
And honour here , yea , while I craved no more : 
Yet all is naught , and bot a gloss of glore , 
Like the Sol-sequium , a fading flower , 
That with the Sun does all the day decore 
The Gardens green ; sine setteth in an hour . 
Bot Christ my King , and Souls-sweet Saviour , 
My comfort is , my honour , health , and all , 
Everlasting life , and never tracking treasure , 
That permanent shall be perpetual : 
Leave then dear Friends , wealth vanishing & vain , 
Make Christ with me your God , your goods , your gain . 
A strong Opiniator . 

For Fortune's favour or her feed , 
I nether eik nor pairs my trind ; 
Though misreport of me be made , 
I nether vex nor move my mind : 
For who to misreport pretend , 
Dismakes their malice in the end . 
I pance not on no present things , 
Nor covets those that are to come : 
I sturt not for Cupido's stings , 
Nor am I driven to do as some . 
For private pleasure to prescrive , 
The day of death , or term of live . 
I fash me not with Court effairs , 
I suit not for a seat supreme : 
I am not cloyed with Country cares , 
Nor hunt I for renown of Name : 
For I find sooth that wise men says , 
Fame conquest soon , all 's soon decays . 
To gather gear is good I grant , 
Bot godly naught therein to glore : 
then sometime have , and sometime want , 
I for myself , I would no more : 
It surfeits oft , and seemeth sore , 
To want , or to be still in store . 
With faithful Friends I do not fash , 
no ended bargain back I bring : 
I waste me not in vain to wash 
The woeb I wait that will not wring : 
For folly is to enterprise 
That not into my power lies . 
I do not hate no others hap . 
And am content here with my own : 
I strive not to mount up a stap , 
To be two grease again down-throwne . 
Bot I employ me in that place , 
Where glore I gain not , nor disgrace . 
Th'vnpleasant Proud I plain despise , 
From Fools I flee as from my foes , 
I love and honour aye the wise , 
And still I do mislike of those , 
As Sancts that bears a Sanct-like shoe , 
And yet in deed are no ways so . 
For doubtsome changes that may chance , 
I nether glade , nor yet I grieve : 
For hope of things that may advance , 
I nether like to die nor live : 
For worldly thing is not can 
One live , once make an happy man  
For swelling rage of sorrow's showrs , 
As unassaulted sure I sit : 
And for unconstant stormy showrs , 
As fixed fast , I'fotch no foot : 
So as a Bulwark on the strand , 
Rebeatting Fortunes blows I stand . 
For coming storm 's , I do forecast , 
Of greatest ill 's I choose the best : 
I set no sail , I hue no mast , 
no vehement I know can jest . 
And as no Pilate unexpert , 
I view the Compass and the Cart.  
For instant grief , for gladness gone , 
Believe I nether heat nor cool , 
At all events I still am one , 
For aught I nether joy nor doole : 
So both in peace and in debate , 
I still remain in one estate . 
Upon the death of the honourable Lady D. H. B. L. Essel . 

The defunct La. to her living friends . 

You yet that brukes this breath , 
By birth who ever you be ; 
Descend duwn deeply in yourself , 
Consider , search , and see 
From whence thou came , when , how , 
And whither thou must go , 
What strength thou hes , what stuf thou art , 
Learn careless man and know . 
thou art but momentare , 
And not immortal made , 
Your flesh though fair , , it fragill is , 
And like a flower shall fade . 
What is thy Idol wealth ? 
What is estate or strength ? 
And what be these thy pleasures all . 
which thou shall leave at length : 
They are like shooting stars , 
That make a shining shoe , 
Or like to these strait running streams , 
That but regress do go . 
All flesh is grass , and grass , 
Be course it does decay , 
So shall the glory of the flesh , 
Evainish 〈◊〉 once away . 
th' unhappy Heir of Sin , 
The Son of ire forlorn 
And guilty banished from thy bliss , 
By Nature thou art born , 
OH then whence spring's thy Pride , 
Conceived in Sin since ȝe , 
Be born in bail , in labour lives , 
And out of doubt must die . 
Vane is the trust in men , 
Thar glory vain , and than . 
Amongst all vanities , most vain , 
The vainest Vain , is Man 
When passing pleasures off , 
This posting life most please , 
ȝit they , they pass , and fade , they fly , 
And perish does all these . 
To vermin ȝe convert , 
From worms to dust ȝe do . 
Dissolve and all your pomp departs , 
To Earth , and ashes too . 
Bot OH vain glorious worm , 
In pleasure , pride , and pomp , 
That lives thy life look here below 
To me a liveles lump . 
Wha while I played my part , 
On the unstable stage , 
And in this woeful worldly veil , 
Past o'er my pilgrimage , 
My Nature framed me fair , 
My Fortune gave me wealth , 
And many days my gracious God , 
With honour gave me health , 
Preferment , Pleasure , wit , 
Contentment , and delight , 
thou wretched world saw me possess , 
With solace in thy sight : 
Yet honour , beauty , birth , 
riches , renown , and rend , 
Nor kingdoms can relieve the life , 
When here her space is spent . 
For Prince nor Peasant poor , 
The Libertine , and slave 
The Monarch and the Miser meine , 
Shall all go to the Grave . 
Wit worldly , nor vain wealth , 
Nobility , nor blood , 
T'exeme the one day , from thy death , 
Shall doubtless do no good , 
th' ambitious haughty head ? 
What helps his honour him , 
When dreidful death , that ghostly Groom 
Lean , Meagre , Pale , and grim , 
Fierce , and inflexible , 
To pierce him shall appear ? 
Shall lordships then prolong his life , 
Or honour hold him heir ? 
no not one hour , although , 
He did possess all that , 
Great Caesar , Cyrus , Solomon , 
With all their glory got . 
I nane , and futill was , 
And like a flower , fast fled , 
The pleasures all , that they possessed , 
And honours which they had ; 
A Sar'cine Salaedine , 
Once Emperor of the East , 
When death did him attach , and with , 
That rigrous rod arrest , 
Through Askalon sometime , 
In Palestine a Town , 
That proud and pagane Potentat , 
'Cause carry up and down , 
Upon his lance , his linen shirt , 
And thus caused cry : no moir , 
hes now deid Saladine of all , 
His treasures , wealth , and stoir . 
All pleasure so shall pass , 
Gold treasure is but trash , 
And as the Sun dissolves the snow , 
So wealth away does wash . 
And what while we are here , 
Seems to the sense ▪ most sweet , 
Or best does please , it is naught but , 
Vexation of the spreit , 
This world than it is naught , 
That only worthy wars ? 
That suld the Christian Conscience cloy , 
Nor too much clag , with cares ? 
no no that is it naught , 
Since every thing , and all , 
That earthly is , shall have an end , 
And is but temporal , 
we 'll since this world within , 
We no thing firm can find , 
And what this life , most large does len , 
Shall all be left behind , 
Goods , children , kin , and friends , 
And which more dear , we love , 
Our life we leave , there 's no remeid , 
But from this Monde remove . 
Here honour keeps no hold , 
Nor does delights endure , 
ȝone heaven , this Earth , the Aer , that Sea , 
From shifting are not sure : 
Nor no thing on the Earth , 
( That helps to human use , ) 
From alteration quite exempt , 
Did th' All-divine produce . 
For man , beast , fish , and foul , 
Plant , metal , stones , and Trees , 
Once widders , wracks , once rots , or rusts , 
Decays , departs , or dies . 
Than thou art mad OH man , 
Into those toys to trust , 
That temp'rall are , ȝea transitore : 
And naught but dross and dust . 
Herefore what is but dust , 
And what thou deems most dear . 
This grassy glore forget , and think 
On Heaven while thou art here . 
There lay thy count a Crown 
To conquesse , and atchyve : 
Here throughly think that there the life , 
Aye lasting thou must live . 
Here guide thee so , atlest 
To grow in grace , begin 
From hollow of thy heart , to hate 
Iniquity and sin . 
Prepare provision here , 
And make thee in some measure , 
There only there for to extruct , 
A never tracking treasure . 
And there to dwell here must 
Th'endevours be addressed ; 
Where ever , and perpetuallie 
Is pleasure , peace and rest , 
And where in full of joy 's 
The just and blessed byds , 
But change beyond all date of day's , 
All terms , all times , and tide 's . 
Where Mourning shall in Mirth , 
Loss be exchanged in Gain ; 
And where Mortality refined , 
Immortal shall remain . 
EIDEM . 

Since Death , distress , wrack , wretchedness , and woe , 
Since mourning , and since misery to Man , 
Peculiar are , and thy adherents , O! 
Why should thou start , and strange esteem them than , 
Since Policy nor power carnal can , 
Divert , remove , nor in a point preveine , 
Thy danger , or Misfortune fatal , when , 
To seize on thee , too sharply they are seen : 
no Kingdoms , Crowns , no Kin , nor Consobrein , 
Nor nothing here that being he's nor Breath , 
Not Tyrants with their Terrors can retain , 
The vildest worm , from dying once the Death : 
Since naught can Death , nor sorrows saif from thee 
Lamenting live , and living learn to die . 
In what a Labarinthian sink of sin ? 
In what a Maze , in what a misery ? 
Into what grief , and with what grons begin ? 
The Dulfull dait of Man's Nativity , 
Woe , weeping , Care , and cries continually , 
Are at his Birth , and at his Burial both , 
In sickness sore , or sorrows suredlie , 
The Time 'twixt Life and Death , he groaning goes , 
So silly Man , does bot lament and mourn , 
while to the ground , his Grandam he return . 
He weeps when from the belly he is born , 
And enters first ( the stage ) distilling tears , 
So to the world , he mourning gives gud-morne , 
And as he liu's , so to lament he lears , 
His lewd-led-life , occasion gives of fears , 
Fear breeds complaints , perplexities , and pain , 
So thus his life , it vanishes , and wears , 
He comes in grief , and groaning goes again , 
Lamenting first , he looks upon the light , 
Lamenting last , he gives again good-night . 
To the same honourable Lady . 

Melpomine all Murners Tragic Muse , 
Some unknown kind of saddest sable choose , 
T' invest thyself therewith whereby , thou may , 
Expressly more , divulgat , and bewray , 
Thy care and cause , all Creatures to ken , 
Thy grieu's more great , nor 's ordinar to men , 
Convene thy wits , use all thy Airt and skill , 
For words thou wont to write , now Tears distil , 
And unto Tritone that the Trident bears , 
Pay triple tribute , of salt brimmish tears . 
Desire thy sweet and sacred Sisters fine , 
To trim their Harps , to tragic toons like thine , 
And pray your Prince , Apollo for to borrow 
Some of Neptunus' tears , to show your sorrow . 
Th'arrabick gulf , the East nor Ocean seas , 
Shall b'insufficient to suffice your eyes . 
Although ye should , yea recolect the rain , 
And gathered all in drops disgorged again , 
Yet all this should not plenty , prove , nor store , 
Thy departure , dear Lady , to deplore , 
no thought they all , that live of human line , 
Celestial signs , and Deities divine ▪ 
And all that care can know , or sorrow see , 
Should too tear-wash , this terren Tomb with me , 
Though th' Echoing Air it murmur should and moan 
Thomas lightfoot winds should whissel their grifs & groan , 
And though the fire ascend be Nature light , 
As sorrowful to see so sad a sight , 
And th' Earth aggrieud her Entrels huge should tear 
Most discontent thy burdenn dead to bear , 
Although the shining Sun himself should shroud , 
Most careful for thy cause within a cloud . 
And though the Clouds lamenting look and lower , 
And tears for rain upon the planes should pour . 
Though brutish Beasts should brey , burst , rage & roar , 
And schools of Fish seem t'ambiset the shore : 
All mourning in their manner to the end , 
Their heaviness to have us apprehend . 
Though Creeping things , and flights of Fowls alwhair , 
Deive with their din , the deiphs , the earth , the Air , 
And though that Monster many mouthed Fame , 
Thy only praise should publish and proclaim ; 
Still elevat above the Rounds , and rear-it , 
And blazed abroad all 's far as Fame can bear-it . 
And it in Diamonds indent and mass , 
It into Marble , and in books of Brass . 
And last , though Men in numbers infinite , 
Should in complaints , consume , and spend their spirit : 
And be so sad as never seen was such , 
Murne what they may , they can not murne too much . 
Although their backs the black doole bages bear's , 
Though mournful minds too testifies their tears . 
And though with lines lugubrious and sad , 
Thy Coffin they have covered and spread . 
Yea though they should conglomerat and join 
All th' earthl ' - ingens , with those the best abone . 
And then draw from the Thesaurie of Arts , 
On perfectly perfect in whole and parts . 
Yet should he not ineugh deplore and praise 
Thy Death and thy Deserving in thy days . 
Upon he honest and virtuous , Ag. Chal.  

These be the treasours that this Tomb contains , 
Earth , dust , and ash , much pampered in our pride , 
Now but a band , of boss , and bloodless bannss , 
That but short time , here in their beauties bide , 
Flesh is most frail , and suddantly does slide , 
no durance is nor certainty of days , 
no mortal men , he's wherein to confided , 
But in the Lord , through Christ , the Scripture says , 
So while each one , their part like Stagers plays , 
Upon this worlds , vain Theatre I would , 
They learnt to die , unto the Lord always , 
So for to rest , enregistered , and rolled , 
Amongst the happy , company of those , 
To life elect , be mercy , love , and choice . 
Upon the Right honourable A. I of Drum.  

Fame . 

Come me ( the Herold of the heavens ) behold , 
Remembrance mouth , and never dying Fame , 
Tongue unto Time , and Trenchman uncontrolled , 
Reporter chief , and Publisher supreme , 
In joyful Thesis , or in tragic Theme , 
What be above , or in the Earth , belaw , 
By Providence , preordained to proclaim , 
In swiftest sort , to signify and shaw , 
The will , decrees , Occurrents , now , and then , 
Of God's eternal , and of mortal Men.  
Truth , Virtue , Love , Faith , Piety and Peace , 
Pressed with complaints , importuned , and oppressed ; 
Their Synod set , this Sepulture the place , 
This Death , their Dolour , to dilate a dressed , 
In mourning manner for to manifest , 
What all the living , and this Land hath lost , 
A Baron bold , of blood , an of the best , 
A mundane Mirror but a Match almost , 
A perfect Pattern plenished withal , 
The excellent , and virtues Cardinal . 
Each one of these , are damnified by daith , 
Each one of these , are wounded with this wrack , 
Each one of these , are justly wronged and wraith , 
To each of these , an Lover is in lacked , 
Each one of these , with Death their band , shall break , 
To honour him , and in Remembrance have , 
And each of these , hes sworn this for his sake , 
For to engross , his graces on his grave , 
And hang on high , above , his honour's Hearse , 
His worthiness , and virtues into verse . 
Receive then Earth , and in thy bosom lay , 
This fragill frame , in substance like thy cell , 
A Man of mould , converted into clay , 
Whose Truth and whose , jntegritie to tell , 
Leave unto Me , the restless ringing Bell , 
Time Death , nor Age , shall in Oblivion bring , 
Nor from my Troumpe , his passing praise , expel , 
Although that death , or'threw the earthly Thing , 
The heavenly half is hence to heaven again , 
Which both by me , remembered shall remain . 
UPON THAT HONOURABLE AND worthy Gent. M. Patrick Cheyn of Rainstone . 

What both thy worth , & what thou was to wriet , 
What happiness , and honour here thou had : 
What providence , and prudencie of spreit , 
And what a life , beloved thou hes led ; 
Needs not be pens , of Poets be expressed , 
That of itself , is so made manifest . 
Thy love to friends , and to thy country we 'll , 
Who could not know , thy constancy , and Cair , 
Unto this City , sign and Common-weell , 
Of all an most , affected evermair , 
Deserving we'll , of both , thou was I wait : 
Since for thy grave , their grief is now so great , 
An jeme , an jewel , and a chosen Cheyne , 
A Chain , both be , thy Nature , and thy Name : 
Unto this Burgh , thou evermair hes been , 
But death , alas , soon sundered the same ; 
And from all common cummers hes conuoied , 
Thee thee to heaven in whom we justly joyed 
THE CONTENTS AND SUM of the Authors his Christian Knight 

Translated . 

Permit , and let , thy loving looks alight , 
And with welwilling eyes vouchsafe to view ; 
The young unwise , and wilful wand'ring Knight , 
Dressed in apparel and an habit new ; 
Which in a ground , and barren Garden grew , 
Almost unworthy , to be worn , and ȝit : 
The Portrat right , the Type , the Figure true , 
And very vive Anatomy of wit : 
To monstrate these , the Misses we commit . 
And make them all , be sensible , and seen , 
Yea th' image and , the Idea is it , 
That represents , most Efauld to the eyes : 
The natural man , imprudent and profane , 
Be grace of God , regenerate again . 
2 

OF Satan's snares , that souls incites to sin , 
Here is detected the undoubted Truth , 
And all that may , inveit to vice , whairin , 
oft falls th'undaunted and rebellious youth , 
Here are the sins , deciphered of sloth . 
Of Misbelief , of Malice , and Envy , 
And heir of sin , also to drench the drought , 
The Well divine , and spring of verrue spy , 
Heir is the Touch where thou may truly try , 
If thou hes fully faithful been , befoir , 
And here are perfect plasteres to apply , 
To salve the soul , and to heal sound her soar : 
And here as in , a mirror markthou may , 
To life or death , the right or radie way . 
At the death of the right honourable Sir J. Wisehart of Pettarro Kn.  

The world it is , a Theatre and Men , 
The Actors are , upon this stately stage ; 
Whereof some young , some midling , now , and then , 
Some in the very Evening of their age , 
Presents themselves , prepared to play their page ; 
Yet in a moment , suddenly , and soon , 
As posting Palmers , post a Pilgrimage , 
They dryving o'er , we dow , decern , have done . 
And glyds into the Grave , the Den of Death , 
That each one for his place retering hath . 
Yet Death , nor this the Grave unto the good , 
Nor should affright , no nor dismay them must , 
Albeit the boulke , the marrow , bons , and blood , 
They reconvert in Ashes , Earth and Dust. 
For jesus Christ , th'omnipotent and just , 
From both he struck the sting , and stayed that strife , 
To all that in his mercies truly trust , 
And plainly made them Ledders unto life : 
Whereby to Heaven , that glorious Scene t' ascend , 
Triumphand Actors ever more but end . 
Men should not then , too much bot measure mourn , 
Nor for their Friends , impatientlie deplore ; 
Who as they take , long ere their Time return , 
And go to grave , their hours prefixed before , 
Wherein they do their Maker move the more , 
while thus at his appointments they repined , 
And with their groaning derogats his glore , 
Which in his great Synedrione divine , 
H'apoints that all , that ever breathed , and be , 
Should ere they live , taste the first death , and d' ye . 
Death is the Port of Peace , Restrent from strife , 
Place of Repose , Conclave of all Content : 
The gate to Glore , the Line that leeds to Life , 
The way of flesh , that worldlings ever went , 
It was the battering Bombard jesus bend , 
To break and bruise the Serpent and our Sin. 
It was the Ram , that Heavens-strong Ramperds rend 
To make Men mount , and easily enter in : 
In Zion sure , saif sanctified for Them , 
The heavenly , holy , new jerusalem . 
To his very loving friend Mr. T. M.  

A Mortal man , Immortalised now , 
This earthly Urn , this compond caskat keeps 
Called from the Cares that cross and cumber you , 
Content in Christ here sound and softly sleeps , 
Flesh , blood and bones ( the slouches and truly typ's 
Of the restrained and imprisoned spirit , 
Wherein oppressed , as from a Pit it peeps . ) 
Jmmast , are now , in mould , a Mansion meet , 
Preordaind for the very best , albeit , 
They by their birth , be of Basilik blood , 
For Death , that all devours , thus does decreit , 
All flesh shall to , the creeping fry be food : 
And men howsoe'er in pleasures Seas they suom , 
Once shall confined be in a terrene Tomb.  
TO A COURAGEOUS YOUNG MAN William Keith , who for his Country's honour slew an Englishman and suffered for the same . 

Would not the Ghost of that great Greek be glade , 
That pained so much to pen a Pagans' praise , 
If he the happiness , or honour had 
To be a live , now dead into their days , 
To make his tongue a trump t'impen and blaze 
Through all the Anguls of the Universe , 
Into most lofty , and most learned lays , 
And in more than his wont wondrous verse , 
To cause courageous Keyth thy praise to pierce , 
all 's well the Spheirs , as that low place of pain , 
And in thy honour here upon thy Hearse , 
To leave their lyns for ever to remain : 
Here lies a youth , who for his Country's cause 
A Saxon slew , sine suffered be the Laws . 
2.  

TO silence time , thy praise shall never put , 
Nor once Envy thy venturous worth shall wrong , 
no though the grave upon thy gore do glut 
while man is man , thy laud shall live so long , 
Thy fact to Fame sure shall become a song , 
And valiant Will'am thou shall ever more , 
Be memorised , and mentioned among , 
Those Gallants that have gained and gotten glore , 
Thy famous friends for fensing a-before , 
Their Native Soil , from fierce and faithless foes , 
As Chronicles , their kind , for to decore , 
And Kamus Cross , their upset Trophies choes : 
So with thy Friends , thy Fame shall flee stout Keith , 
Although thou boght it dearlie with thy deith . 
3.  

What was his kindness and his courage keen , 
Belgic thy broils , a Record best can bair , 
Where he brought up near from his Birth hes been , 
Naught bot to make his martial mind grow mair , 
wherefore thou justly should erect , and rear 
To Mars his Man , a martial Monument , 
Since that he as a sojour serving their , 
Into thy quarrel willing , and content , 
His Blood oft-tims in thy employments spent . 
And this more too , to grace and do thee good , 
Upon thy foes , thy praises he did prent . 
In Crimson red , and Characters of blood . 
To honour him , than thou hes mater much , 
And of our Soil full many thousands such . 
To the City Aberden at the death of Jho . Fo. Ba.  

Fair Virgin Mother , Widow-like lament , 
Thy Martial Son , and Lamblike lover lost , 
Peirs every ear , and place , with thy complent , 
while they admire , that are remotest most , 
Apend thy plaints , to every Pole and post , 
Chalcographized , with Characters of woe , 
And let thy grief 's upon thy Goun b'ingrost , 
That every eye may see thy sorrow so : 
OH silent sad , and grieved , may thou go , 
Since to thy wracks , this wrack is joined the worst , 
For dreadful Death hes by one bitter blo , 
One of thy firmest , forts unfreindly forced , 
And maind the of , an of thy members strong ; 
That boor thy burden lovingly , and long . 
To the defunct his spouse . 

Dear fruitful vine , alone to languish left , 
Let not thy clusters , through thy care decay , 
Though raging Death hes by all reason reft , 
And out of time , hes hint thy heid away , 
Take thou on Thee , to be the staff and stay , 
And bear their birth , and all , the load alone , 
That both alive , in love togidder ay , 
You to this hour , have gladly undergone , 
Through mourning much ; and out of measure move , 
no not thyself , nor put in peril those , 
To whom thou must , be All , and th' only one . 
( Except the Lord , ) to place in the repose , 
wherefore praise God , and take in patience this , 
Thy husband's death , from bail brought to his bliss . 
To his courteous friend , T. B.  

Give quick engines , that trusting to attain , 
The height of Honour and a living Fame , 
With penning of , their Poesy's profane , 
Should purchase praise , and win a noble Name , 
What then brave Buck , should be thy part , herein , 
That shawes the sortow of the Soul for sin . 
For while as forth , some busied be to bring , 
The bad inventions , of their boiling Brain , 
thou happy thou , harps on an higher string ; 
And shows a Man , regenerate again , 
wherefore we should , Thee thanks most grateful give , 
Because a woeb , much worthier thou wive . 
While worldly Writers witless and unwise , 
Be full of follies , and of frivole fraits , 
Thy pen and pains , to profit moir tho'applies , 
And both divine , and worthily thou wraites , 
Than since thou such , a sacred subject sings , 
Fly with the pens , of praise and honours wings . 
UPON The DEATH OF THE Worshipful M. Alex. Cheyn Commisser of Aber.  

Now now , at last , and naught , while now have I , 
Put a Catastroph , to this course of cair , 
World , Flesh , and Fiend , your forces I defy , 
Your works are wrought , your mights may now no mair , 
Now I am quit , and from your cummers clair , 
Grave , Hell , and Sin , your powers I despise , 
Death is the door , through Faith ye step , and stair , 
That makes my soul , mount , sore , and skall the skies , 
Albeit the bones , left here consuming lies , 
Yet certainly , I am assured they shall , 
To rest and ring , in their Redeemer rise , 
Since Satan , Sin , the grave , death , hell and all , 
That Lion strong , and yet a loving Lamb , 
Triumphantly , upon the cross o'rcame . 
An description of the World.  

What is this World , a Theatre of woe ? 
A gulf of grief , that still the greater grows , 
A Fair where fools , are flitting to and from , 
A Sea of sorrow , that still ebbs and flows , 
A Forge where Belial the bellowss blows , 
A Ship of sensual Souls , near sunk for sin 
Whair ramping Rage , is Ruther-man and rows , 
A wratched Veil , full of all Vice within , 
A Booth of business where restless rin , 
To wrack himself , the wicked worldly worm , 
A deadly Den , of dolour , and of din , 
An onstaied stage , of state , a strife , a storm , 
Th'vnquiet Court , of discontent and Cair , 
The Place of Pride , and wellspring of Despair . 
A desire of an Repentant spirit . 

Would God my Soul , for sin such sorrow felt , 
As could cause Me spend all my time in Tears , 
Would God my Heart , would every moment melt , 
And for my faults , be fraughted full of fears , 
Would God my flesh , that fights , and battle bears , 
Against the powers , of the spreit , would spair , 
And rest from wrestling and their jnward wears , 
That does augment , and bot increase my cair , 
Would God my Plaints , could penetrate the Air , 
To purchase Peace , to my perplexed Spreit , 
And never cease t'assend , nor rest ; but whair , 
They face for face , might with th'almighty meit , 
To pray him for , a pardon , and a place , 
Unto Repentance , godliness , and grace . 
An admonition to the Soul to watch . 

Poor silly Soul , thou sees not how are set , 
Thy fatal foes , about the in a Ball , 
The Fiend , and Flesh , Thee in the gyves to get , 
Of loathsome Lust , and pleasures sensual , 
They will object , All what , may frame thy fall , 
And cast before , the Beauty for a bait , 
Opinions strange , falls , and heretical , 
Promotion , riches , Honour , and Estate , 
All what they can , find out for to defait , 
And with thy God , to get the in disgrace , 
They will essay , each secular conceit , 
To hold the from , thy heavenly Father's face , 
Heirfore on him , prepare the to depend , 
He only may , the from thy foes defend . 
Invocation to the Lord jesus to save the wounded soul . 

OH Son of God , Silo sweet saviour , 
thou that my shield , and my assistance art , 
The precious ointments of thy pity pour , 
Into my Soul , and woeful wounded heart , 
I 'll prostrate , Me in public , and in part , 
My former fowl offences to confess , 
My secret sins sore makes my Soul to smart , 
And I am woeful for my wickedness , 
With highest up hands , and heartily humbleness , 
I pray the pardon my impiety , 
Thy word divine , my God grants me regress , 
And bids me seek the sweet society : 
For thou art aye , says the Apostle Paul , 
At hand to help , the woeful wounded Saull . 
A Prayer for apaising of the Plague . 

Our wicked liu's hes wakened Lord , thy wrath , 
In kindling it for our iniquity , 
It makes thee blow , this thy devouring breath , 
To punish us , for our impiety . 
Our falls and faults , hes forced thee to let flee , 
At the Noon day , thy Arrows Pestilent , 
Yet in thy mercy's Lord , remember : We 
Are thy own Sons , on whom the same is sent , 
Albeit thy Bow , against our breasts be bend , 
And thou the Rod , does hold into thy hand , 
We hope thou will inspire us to repent , 
And from th' Infection last relief the Land , 
That in the greatness of her grief does groan , 
Looking , OH Lord , for thy relief alone . 
Upon the Death of a virtuous young man Wm. Ke.  

Withhold thy haist , spair Passenger thy pace , 
And mark amongst , those Marble Monuments , 
This Grave , yet green , and little ludge alas , 
And thereon spend , some part of thy complents , 
Mourn . mourn with Me , a Myriad of laments , 
And on th' Interred streams of thy tears distil , 
who 's want the Wise , both pities . and reputes , 
And while They live , the Virtuous all , they will 
Their plaints pour out , disperse , effund and fill . 
The Continent her Caverns with their cries , 
For never shall their Sorrows cease ; not while 
They deave the Dead , into those lairs that lies : 
For trust thou me , this terren Tomb contains , 
A Relict rare , a godly Youngman's Bains . 
PROSOP OF THE DEFUNCT TO his lamenting friends . 

2.  

A Poise your plaints , since Fortune , Fate , nor Chance , 
Was not the cause , nor framers of my fall , 
Bot be a pre-apointed Ordinance , 
The Lord hes thus concluded me to call : 
For Men are naught one weigh Attached all , 
Nor by one kind of Death ordained to die , 
no , no , but this Privation temporal , 
hes different , and diverse sorts we see : 
From Prison some depart , and some flit free , 
And some be force , be butchery or blood , 
Yea , some be every Element there be , 
That does , we know , this corrupt course conclude , 
Yet dies thou this , I that , he so and so , 
Die we in Christ , the manner matters no.  
3.  

Die ye in Christ , ye die well dying so , 
For Fire nor Sword , the Water , Earth nor Air , 
They have no power , nor the Puissance , no , 
But special permission to impair , 
Nor for to harm into thy head an hair , 
Unless the Lord , pass , suffer , or permit , 
For he hes aye , a kind , and constant Cair , 
And o'er his chosen still continues it , 
His favours are not fragill , fraill , nor flit 
This way or that , like worldlings now and than , 
no , no , bot with his kindness kind is knit , 
Protection too , each constant Christian : 
then die , departed , or howsoever ye go , 
Die ye in Christ , ye die well dying so . 
DIALOGUE . A new year's gift . 

Interl . Charites , and the Author . 

Author .  This Mornings as I from my rest araize , 
And went to walk into the open Air , 
I peradventure met whereon I gaize , 
Thrie minȝard Maids , all wonderfully fair : 
Their Robs a like , replendant rich and rair , 
Whereat I was more moved to admire , 
Who they should be , whence from they came , & whair 
They at that time , intended to retire : 
while thus on them , like one but life I look , 
One forward came , and be the sleif Me shook . 


Gra.   Where by thy mind , when thou art musing thus ? 
Why astonished stands thou ? we entreat thee tell ? 
Quod one , what wonders he's thou seen on us , 
That makes thee so , for to forget thy cell , 
Art thou enchanted be some Magic spell ? 
Or thinks thou us of that accursed crew ? 
With Lucifer , that from the Heaven down fell , 
And now art come to vex and weary you : 
Or why is it , so stupefact thou stands , 
Without so much as moving head or hands . 


Auth.   I misregarde , not such thrie fair , so far 
Nor do I think , the form of those and thine : 
For to be such , as you have said , that are , 
Appeirandlie , Immortal and Divine , 
Swa that sweet Saints , this musing is of mine , 
A mouldy grossness , in my mortal eyes , 
Which can not see , nor suffer for to shine , 
Your glory great , for their infirmities : 
And with myself , I am debaitting who 
Thyself should be , and thy Companions two . 


Gra.   Recall thy spirits , thy musing then remove , 
Debar all doubts , and wit thou this that we 
Are called Faith , strong Hope , and constant Love , 
Of JOVA just , th' undoubt Daughters three , 
Come of Intention for to talk with thee , 
And give thee some directions thou must do , 
For thou of us , art the appointed he 
To bear Embassage , or our blessing too , 
A much respected honourable Pair , 
Thus it in few , deliver and declair . 
I Love , the first , and greatest of the Graces , 
Salutes them say , conjunct and several , 
And promies them with all my friendl ' embraces ' , 
Prosperity and Peace perpetual , 
And I , quod Faith , adds to the former All , 
A working quick , and justifeing Faith. 
And I quoth Hope , my Anchor sends , which shall 
Sustain them surely , in the Seas of Death : 
For be it , and , with what , their two have given , 
Their Ancring shall , be happy into hevin . 
Now Friend we deem , dissolved is thy doubt , 
Since thou of us , hes got a knowledge cleir , 
And we ( because , th' Anuall course is out , 
And this day enters the succeeding ȝeir , 
Have purposed unto Thee to appeir , ) 
And choosed The to , make manifest our mind , 
Unto that two , that we do hold so deir , 
And hes their Hearts , into one breast combined , 
Who mutually , shall linked live , and die , 
Full of our Hope , our Faith , and Charity , 


An Confession of sins and Incalling of the Lord  

OH God which art , great , good , and gracious , 
Most holy powerful , and glorious , 
We that are ashes of the Earth , and dust , 
When we fall down before the feet , ( we must , ) 
Of thy high Majesty confess , that we , 
Are Sinners vile , born , and conceived be , 
In sin , and that , by Nature we , no less , 
Are nor a lump of Vice and wickedness , 
Whose Natural and property , appears , 
To grow in sin , as we increase in years , 
And in the works of wickedness , and wrong , 
Waxes and grows , aye more , and more , more strong , 
As does the body , and the mind , their strength , 
And force receive , through tract of time and length . 
Thair is in us , no good affection found , 
no knowledge cleir , wholesome , sincere nor sound , 
Nor manner how thy bidding to obey , 
Nor how aplease thy majesty we may , 
Last Lord their bids , into our flesh , and blood , 
Nothing that is , or can be called good , 
And thought our state , accursed doth herein , 
Yea wratched most , appear : yet is , our sin , 
more sinful much , and out of measure maid , 
By the exceeding grace , thou Lord hes laid , 
And offered us , in the Evangell cleir , 
Of thy undoubted divine Son most deir . 
Wharby from profiting , so much , we are , 
That of ourself , we should wax , war and war.  
For moir the light , of knowledge is made plain , 
We would alas , the blinder more remain , 
The more t' obey , thee we are taught , we would , 
Be froward moir , moir stubberner , and bold , 
Give that by mighty power of thy spriet , 
It were not fruitful made and mollifeit , 
And thought that this , corruption Natural , 
We have togidder , and in common All , 
With Adam's putrified , and rotten race , 
That fell from God , through misbeleif alas , 
Yet we confess , in us , it buds much moir , 
Nor into uthers , it hes done befoir , 
And so much moir , set forth , increst , and grew , 
Though we mother ways , the same had to subdue . 
And we we had , yea much more means to kill , 
Than others had , this wickedness and ill . 
Whair first of all , the offer gracious , 
Of that great treasure of thy word to us , 
Does make us faulty , into many parts , 
Of th'adamantine , hardness of our hearts , 
For passing uther Nations thou hes lent , 
And trusted us , that jewel excellent . 
And yet it he's , ( with no small number bot , 
A slender and , a small entreatment got , 
And felt as great , resistance obstinate , 
As at those gates it never knocked at . 
For in this land , a Portion is ( OH Lord , ) 
That partly ne'er , would yield unto thy word , 
And partly when , they had confessed the same 
Defection made , and Apostates became , 
So proudly as , it wear , stands at defence . 
( In their conceits , ) Lord with thine excellence 
The rest which makes , thereof profession , 
And seems t'assent and gives thereto submission , 
They do it not , accordingly , bot scant , 
Of zeal they are , in their profession fant , 
For first their , many of our people be , 
Which through affection fond , to Papistry , 
So blinded are , miscarried and led , 
That straying still , in ignorance they tread , 
Yea of the Truth , itself thought faithfully , 
The word is preached in abundancy , 
Yet in thy Service true , and knowledge they , 
Are now more raw , and inexpert always , 
Nor they before , have been , be many fold , 
When blindly they , idolatrized of old . 
And whair a kind , of knowledge is , the which , 
To any of sufficiency is such , 
Yea requisite , as is and should evin , 
Sufficient for th'inheritors of heavin , 
It is yet seen , for the most part , to be , 
Conjoind in league , with such hypocrasie , 
As makes Thee that , does searse , the secret raen , 
Detest , abhor , more hate , them and disdain , 
then if they had , in all their Errors ill , 
And in dark ignorance continued still , 
Now for that few , of us and remanant , 
Which truly still , ( of grace participant , ) 
And faithfully in thee believed haith , 
It is with such , infirmity of faith , 
And with so small correction of our 
Forepast trespasses and behaviour , 
That our profession , that notorious , 
Should be of thy great Gospel glorious 
Supported is , and born , with so few stuites , 
And so small shaw , of good , and godly fruits , 
Whose dignit ' and excellency alone , 
requireth more than we can mind upon . 
So that this makes , our Enemies , and Foes , 
Condemn us , and some also are of those , 
That are our own , which doubtingly suspect , 
Give we , or no , be thine , and thy elect , 
The cause of this , our state , we grant whairin , 
We stand it is , the hudgenes of our sin . 
That being put , in trust , for to possess , 
This treasure of , infinite worthiness . 
Thy Gospel great , and be preferred thus , 
Before our neighbour's Christians with us , 
And yet in grait Obedience , to Thee , 
Behind them all , ( we will confess ) are we 
In knowledge first , bot we are last in zeal , 
In Doctrine far before them , bot we faill 
To practise what , is preached , and aye we find 
In Discipline , we ever are behind , 
The bands aod holy ȝock Lord of thy Law , 
Full heavilie we suffer , thoill , and draw : 
Whereby our lives too vicious and vain , 
We should amend , correct , reform , and strain 
Our fond affections all , and every thing , 
In us enorm , we should in bondage bring . 
The Gospel that unto us did aduce , 
Of honours and , of pleasure's friar use ? 
It welcome was , and we did it embrace 
Bot that same Gospel that our wickedness 
Reproved , and did threatten punishment , 
We was therewith , no thing so well content . 
It that did our Ambition rebuke , 
We skarcelie heard , or lent thereto a look : 
And that thereof , that does most neerlie touch , 
Salvation of , the Soul , we make of much . 
Bot that again , that doth directly more , 
Seem to respect , OH Lord , thy heavenly glore ; 
And to the profit of our Neighbours all , 
We make no count , nor care for it , bot small . 
And though the treasure of thy Word hes been 
A precious gift , as like was never seen . 
th' assured sign of our Salvation , 
Which to us bairlie came not , nor alone , 
Bot with abundance , plentiful , and peace , 
And permanent , so long , and large a space . 
As surely never this ( little thankful Land ) 
Before in many passed ages found : 
Which benefits our neighbour Nations long , 
Have looked for , and wished ( their ) them among . 
This makes us Lord , herefore accursedlie , 
A great deal more , in fault and guilty be ; 
Because we have still proven ourselves so plain , 
Ungrateful for those thy great gifts again . 
There is likewise , an other Leather heir , 
Whereon our sins they seem , and they appeir 
To mount and climb more high , in that , that We 
Surmount into , this life commodity . 
Our old Ancestors , that professed with us , 
Even this thy holy Gospel glorious : 
And yet we are , yea every day be day , 
A great deal worse , and wickeder nor they . 
In blessings outward we be far above , 
Our Nightbours yet , far less to Thee in love , 
And grants we fault , even in the gross offence , 
Of th' outward tokens of Obedience . 
SCOTLAND HER GRIEF AT HIS Majesty's going into England , 

OH England now exult , 
And sing a cheerful sang , 
Now may thou joy , since such a Roy , 
Ne'er over thy Regions rang . 
Our Sovereign sweet , our Gem , 
josias and our james , 
The only Star that guides thy state , 
And brights thee with his beams . 
thou now posseids with peace , 
And hes with Love at length ▪ 
That never could be win with war , 
Nor yet constrained be strength . 
Faits , Time and Right hes made 
Thee , to triumph into , 
That not thy Martial minded Men , 
Nor active deeds could do . 
The only Ornament , 
And Sunshine of the Earth , 
By destinies ordained , to bruke 
All Britain , or his Birth . 
thou hes , and now enjoi's 
Our very Soul and Sark , 
A Dy'mond in thy Dial set , 
The height of Honour's wark , 
These Royal virtues hail , 
That thou to fore hes found 
In thy preceding Princes all , 
Even from his birth abound : 
And gloriously into 
His Princely person shine , 
OH England to thy comfort now , 
And Scotland unto thine . 
In deed thou should rejoice , 
And be appleased since , 
But grudge thou saw with glore the great 
Preferment of thy Prince . 
For now thou may behold 
His Hienes Head to hem , 
( Beside the old unconquest Crown ) 
A Triple Diadem . 
All men may clearly know 
What God his wisdom wrought , 
And by thy Prince , his patience , 
Beyond beleif is brought 
Unto an happy end , 
For in the British Throne , 
Religion reign 's , Peace there is placed 
And justice joined in one . 
There Majesty does move , 
There Fortitude is fixed , 
And there with Rigour or Revenge , 
Is marvellous Mercy mixed . 
There may thou view from East , 
And from the setting Sun , 
Elected Legates send , and from 
Remottest Regions run , 
T' applaud thy Prince his praise , 
Their Precious presents brings 
From Europe , Afric , Asia , 
And from Amerik Kings . 
Not that thy Lord inlaiks , 
For his great state , such store , 
no , no , his Highness hes his own , 
In infinite before . 
Bot yet because they see 
Him blessed from above , 
Thus they resort , to signify 
Unto thy Lord , their love . 
So Inely thou may joi's , 
To hear his Name renowned , 
Since from his boundant benefits , 
Some back to thee rebound . 
And yet I grant thy grief , 
Is greater than thy gain , 
For but thy Head unhappy thou , 
Dismembered moan remain . 
And now shall hear his will , 
Bot be commission that , 
He from his mouth mellifluous 
Want to communicate , 
Most patiently and as , 
Thy Parent and thy Prince , 
Divulgating his Laws with love 
And divine Eloquence . 
thou must solicit be , 
And careful now t' inquire , 
What credit bears the spurring Posts , 
To the Synedrion heir . 
Poor Orphan widow like , 
Be thou in sable seen , 
While as thy sister England goes , 
Now gallantly in green . 
And like pale Lnna louvre , 
When her Apollo's light , 
Is in eclipse , or with a cloud , 
Secluded from her sight . 
For lo thy golden Sun , 
Into the South he shines , 
While thou Solsequium-like , for thy , 
Abstracted Titan tynes , 
A body huge thou are , 
Exhibit but a Hart. 
Upon the world's inconstant stage , 
To play the Monster's part . 
Poor Lady now , thy Life , 
Thy Lord , and thy Beloved , 
And next that mighty Mobile , 
Thy Mover , is removed , 
Yet for thy great King james , 
His jubilee reioyes , 
Since he above the British blood , 
Thy old , now friended foes , 
thou to his honour high , 
Dilucidlie decerns , 
With measure how , he moderates , 
And like a God governs , 
For whose long happy life , 
Prosperity , and Peace , 
His royal Reign , his gracious , Queen , 
And for their hopeful Race , 
Jncall , protest , and pray , 
( From whose blised spreit all springs , ) 
jehovah , Eli , Elohim , th' almighty King of Kings . 
An humble confession of Sinne.  

IN Reverence , on bare , and bent kneiss , 
Debast I bow , ( if I dare be so bold , ) 
My soul most sad , with weeping watery eyes , 
Before thy feet , upon my face I fold , 
My eyes , my heart , my hands , jehove I hold , 
To heavin , to Thee , and prostrate will display , 
My Misles made , but measure manifold , 
And all the words , I wairt in vain , bewray , 
None will I hide , but open Lord , shall lay , 
My Sin both seen , and secret to my shame , 
And my delicts , done all unto this day , 
I in thy public Presence shall proclaim , 
And to my Turpitud sound out , I shall , 
My Sins committed , and omitted all . 
Upon his loving , dear and Courteous friend , Pa. Q.  

Who do of chance , or utherwise that , hath , 
An deep desire , and earnest care to know , 
This Trophy sad , of still triumphing death , 
Whair liveles lies , an earrhly lump bot lo , 
How rair a live to signify and sho , 
Nor Maro's Muse , would an more cunning crave , 
To wreit his want , what worketh it , of woe , 
T'ingraph each , grief by gazing on his Grave , 
To not the noy when men look on the leave 
His Commorads , and Consorts Christian 
To count the care , his kin for him conceive 
To dyte the duile , of wife and Orphans whane , 
Their father they , and sho does miss her Mane. 
An man , whose make , here hardly may be haid ? 
What can ? what shall ? what is ? or rests thane , 
To say bot this , that safely may be said , 
Lo where a youth , on Beirtrees brought to bed , 
Aye faithful fast , traist , virtuous , and wise , 
Deir to his friends , and of his foes aye dread , 
Here underneath , to be lamented lies 
And shall , aye while , the latter day constrain , 
The Earth to raise , and render him again . 
Sighs of an sorrowful soul . 

Sigh , sadly sigh , sob for thy Sins and sound , 
Weep wail , and woe , mourn mirthless Man , and moan , 
Redouble thy dolour , till each Den redound ; 
With noisome notes , thy accents every one , 
Cry careful cry , while every senseless stone , 
Pierced with thy plaints , for pity pled , and pleane , 
With tragic tears , toone out thy griefs , and groan 
While marble mazed at thy moans remain , 
thou writes thy woes , thou weeps , thou vows in vain 
Give not anon , from straying thus , thou stay , 
Thou's drive thy days , in dateless deep disdain , 
then sadly sigh poor Soul , and sighing say , 
Sad be each sigh , moir noisome every note , 
That treads the tracture of my troubled throat . 
A description of the fragility of man  

What be we wratches but , 
Amasse of putrid mould , 
Which ugly worms and wild devours , 
When we are dead , and cold , 
Born in this woeful vail , 
In moments , are naught Men , 
And in a period , departs ? 
What are we nothing then , 
Learn then to die , and let , 
Not hope of youth , nor years , 
Delude the least , the Fates , aye fierce , 
That Man nor Beast forbears , 
Come on thee sudden shall , 
And warn thee un-a-ware , 
For mortal none , though near so wise , 
From those excemed are . 
Times flees , your gilt does grow , 
Death at your doors does call , 
then take your time , and learn in time 
To live Perpetual . 
For you are naught , bot like 
Dust driven with wind away , 
And like unto a brittle glass , 
Or shadows fleing aye . 
Or Roses redolent , 
That in the morning shines , 
And when the night draws near anon , 
Their pleasant tincture tines . 
Now lively-like anon , 
Feasts for the creeping fry , 
Now strong and fair , and now anon 
A lump but life we lie . 
T'accumulat great goods , 
or what does profit us 
Jemm's , Jewels , Silver , Gold 
And all apparel precious ? 
What Sceptres , Crowns , Estats , 
Or Kingdoms great to guide ? 
And what in Princely Palaces 
Shall buit us to abide ? 
And others in our pride , 
What helps it to despise ? 
Or to accounted ourselves like to , 
The Lord alone most wise . 
If dreadful Death shall come , 
Most horrible and haw , 
And with her Sith , ( that here you see ) 
All which GOD made shall maw . 
Or if like earthly dust , 
Or sliding shadows , we 
OH wretched misers miserable , 
Shall fall away and flee . 
And all the pride of flesh , 
And this small glance of glore , 
Shall in the day of Death depart , 
Without returning more . 
Idem . 

Mark mortal Man , and surely thou shall see , 
What in short space it shall become of thee : 
And then thou shall desist , for to desire 
The worldly Pleasures , that so soon expire : 
By no device , engine , nor craft can thou , 
Fearful to flesh , Death certain , once eshew . 
thou should not then s'exult nor joifull be , 
Because perhaps to morrow thou shall d' ye : 
And in a little ludge , a cave or cott , 
Thy flesh and bones shall soon consume and rot . 
THE AUTHOR HIS REPENTANCE from writing Poesies profane . 

Could I or this my scattered skrols recall , 
Or my dispersed Poesy's repeit , 
Most willingly I would revock them all , 
And sound from singing of such Toys retreit , 
I would envy against wanton verse and writ , 
Invectivelie of all inventions vain : 
For it infects the well disposed Spirit , 
For to peruse such Poesy's profane : 
They breed abuse , and brings into the brain 
Fantastic follies , and phanatik frets , 
Which are in deed not bot presumptions plain , 
Or at the most ( but profit ) poor conceits : 
Wherhfore , were those else published to pen , 
I should assume some sadder subject then . 
A PROFITABLE ADMONITION , if wisely followed . 

Loose not the Garlant of eternal Glore , 
For things that here , bot for a time shall tarry : 
Officious Fame , goods , or unstable store , 
That facile Fortune both does bring and carry : 
Endanger not , nor do in peril put 
th' immortal mark , whereat the Soul does shut . 
Thomas precious pearls thou purches , what suppose ? 
And gain more gold nor Croesus' got , what than ? 
If thou the Heaven , and heavenly Soul shall lose , 
For all thy wealth , thou's miserable Man 
And truly loses in a moment more , 
Ten thousand fold , nor thou could find before . 
I give and grant , that thou enlarge thy rooms , 
For to cotaine thy infinite incresse : 
And that secure in Honour's Seas thou soums , 
Yet thou in fine , must needs of force confess . 
If that thy soul shall suddenly be ta'en , 
What thou possessed , was wealth , for naught in vain . 
Though thou be made , and create were a King , 
And supreme Emperor inaugurate : 
Or at thy wish had every earthly thing , 
Of Monument most , with Mundans estimate : 
If that the Soul her heavenly life you loss , 
Cursed is with those , corruptible thy cross . 
Although thou have both health and honour here , 
And pleasure past the compass of compare : 
And that thou previlegiat appeir , 
Above the world , and worldlings everywhere 
Want thou a sanctified Soul , what shall 
Availl thy Pleasures and Promotions all ? 
OF THE ESSENCE , WISDOM , and Power of God.  

GOD only great , he guideth and governs , 
The restless Rounds , that rules above , and all 
Th'invirond Earth , with Seas that each decerns , 
Just circular , and perfect Spherical , 
His blessed Being built the double Ball , 
And did appoint fit places for the Spheres , 
From th'earthlie Orbs destinct , and several . 
Which we gross Mortals marvels and admirs , 
His Providence and Power plain appears , 
In th' artificial forming of this Frame , 
Whose various works , dilucidats and cleirs , 
Into the sure concerving of the same : 
His wondrous wit , exceeding all engines , 
Of Seculars , and of the best Divins . 
Upon the certainty of death and the uncertainty of the hour . 

Nothing then death more certain is we see , 
Yet nor the hour , incertain nothing more : 
Than if as thou , were every day to die , 
Govern thyself , and learn to live therefore , 
So shall thou not , need for to count , nor cair , 
Whence death shall come , how when , nor whair . 
It is this life , here well , or lewdly led , 
That this first Death , makes dreidfull , now or no , 
If in misdeeds , thy days thou drive , then dread , 
And full of dolour is , this Death , and OH ; 
Perplexed so , and so annoyed that None , 
can we 'll the passions of the spreit expone . 
For all that thou , hes done unto that day , 
Thy secret sins , thy seen , and public shall , 
Dismasked all , arryve into array . 
T' accuse the in , thy Conscience , and call ; 
The to accounted , so spacious and large , 
That Livers lewd , can scarcely scarce discharge . 
Man his Immoderate care for transitorious things . 

Our labours , studies , exercise , and Pain , 
And for this corpse , is our continual cair , 
For why t' acquire , thairto some gloir , or gain , 
no peril nor impiety , we spair . 
Wenever leave , bot labour's late air , 
And for t' attract , vile trash , we never tire , 
Like frantic fools , and furious we fair , 
While we possess , that whereunto w'aspire , 
Through perilous paths , salt seas , and flashing fire , 
But Providence , we pass , we post , we Ply , 
For to enjoy , the depth of our desire , 
no naught the night , in quiet can we lie , 
Bot puts unto , all hazards but a Host , 
The Soul to Christ , that did so dear cost . 
Means how to bridle the carnal desires of men . 

Nothing so fit , to danton the desires , 
And appetites , of fragill fleshly Men ; 
That so much reigns , and over them empires , 
Nor with considered , Conscience to ken : 
And wisely weigh , what is this Body that , 
They fierce so full , and dress , so delicate . 
Would they consider , and bot sight the same , 
And but self love , these circumstances see ? 
What is their kind ? whairof compound they came ? 
And then how short , here their abydings be : 
Or at the least ? how much incertain since , 
One hour they are , and or an uther hence . 
Or would men mortal meditate , and mark , 
Of Nothing how , the great Creator choosd , 
To frame so fair , the world's most wondrous wark , 
And from no monstrous mass , but form confused ; 
As Fablers fain , into their wanton verse , 
Created He the boundless Universe . 
And how of th' Earth , the grossest Element , 
He all the kinds , of Creatures compones , 
And how th' Artificer most Excellent , 
Their fragill flesh , their Bodies , blood , and bones : 
Did make , of mater most despised , and base , 
The Earth her dust , her excrements , and ash , 
Thus that they are , ( would they bot well advise ) 
Dung , dust , and ash , which so alive , they love , 
And look again , when dead , but life , one lies , 
How putrid and , unpleasant soon they prove , 
These would they weigh , view , warlie , and adart , 
They should not then , so primp the Earthly part . 
Comparison hetwixt the bed and the Grave . 

The bed , which most , for our repofe we have , 
Whairin the natural night we softly , sleep , 
May fitly be , compared to the grave , 
That these our corpse , when they are cold , does keep , 
And not unto , that Den , or Dreadful deep , 
Whairin the damned shall dying never die , 
Bot their , in ever scalding lead , shall sleep , 
And evermoir , eternal Torments try , 
Into our Couch , we senseless seem , and lie , 
As if no braith , were in our breasts , nor brain , 
Bot once our sleeping terms expired we spy , 
And cleirly knows , we lively grow again , 
So in the grave ( that of the dust is dressed , 
A little time , and then to rise ) we rest . 
Of the brevity and miseries of man his life . 

This transitorious time , 
And present passing life , 
The Scripture calls , an Pilgrimage , 
A travel , way , a strtfe , 
Because continually , 
It but all resting rins , 
And plies unto an end fra once , 
It enters and begins , 
For like as they , whom ships , 
Or wheeled coaches carry , 
Although they either sit , or sleep , 
They tine no time , nor tarry , 
Bot as with wings , and wind , 
Supported they proceed , 
( Though they their passage cannot spy , ) 
And spurring , posts with speed . 
So every one , of us , 
Albeit we busied be , 
With worldly works , and plainly so , 
Cannot perceive , nor see , 
Our life of little length , 
Like waxen tapers spend , 
Yet but dignoscing , drives our days , 
And we draw to our end . 
The Posts and passengers , 
As many gaits they go , 
So much they see , and having seen , 
They seek no more , and so , 
What in their way they view , 
Before them what they find , 
They gaze upon , then goes and leaves 
What they beheld behind . 
As forward than they fair , 
Before them set , they see 
Most wondrous worthy works t'invit , 
the most envious eye : 
Which for a while th'admire , 
As glorious , rich , and rare , 
Yet they return to travel on , 
And may not tarry there . 
Thereafter Middows , Fields , 
And Pastures plain they spy ; 
Whereat they wonder and they gaze , 
And gazing they go by . 
then in their progress they 
They obviate , and meet 
Sometime with silver Sanded Streams 
Some sour , some sharp , some sweet 
Sometimes with Fountains fresh , 
And Conduits cristalene , 
And oft with Orchards full of fruit , 
And Forests grassy green . 
Which for a time content , 
They visie and rejoes , 
Bot shortly satiat with the sight , 
They take their gaits and goes . 
Where they before them find , 
A wild unpleasant way , 
Of thistles , thorns , and brears , where they 
Constrained are to stay : 
Yet with great grief and pain , 
Woe and vexation sore : 
These perilous paths , they over pass , 
then mind's on them no more . 
Suchlike some one will be 
Incarcerat , and cast 
In firmance , or in prison put , 
And therein fettered fast . 
Vexed , and afflicted too , 
Or to the torment ta'en : 
Yet all these griefs , he will forget , 
If he b'inlargd again . 
Even so with us it is , 
One moment we do meet , 
With many most delightful things , 
All pleasant to the Spirit . 
An other while we find , 
Displeasant Griefs , most gross , 
And Sorrows , that excedinglie , 
Our chief Contents , does cross , 
Yet all our griefs and game , 
Into an hour , OH nay , 
Into a moment , they shall melt 
And vanish will away . 
In public paths we see 
A new imprinted pass , 
Anon an other with his foot , 
That foor-step doth deface . 
An other comes , and with 
His dust-depressing dint , 
Incontinent he does cancel , 
His Predicessours' print . 
And thus our natural life . 
Whereof we make so much , 
And mainly muses to mentaine , 
Is it not see you such ? 
saith Basile , ask and speir 
At these thy grows and grange , 
Unto thy days how many Names , 
They use to chop and change . 
Sometime they did belong 
To such a one , and sine 
An other did possess the same , 
And lastlie they are thine . 
Perhaps some other yet 
Shall in thy place succead , 
And occupy the place , when thou 
Art dispossesd , or dead . 
Or lastlie those now thy 
Possessions present shall 
Be called , pertaining to such one , 
Whose scarcely none can tell . 
And why ? because this life 
Is like a walking way ; 
Wherein one passenger expels , 
By course an other way . 
Bot lo , a little look , 
more high , to higher things , 
And mark the mutabilities 
Of Monarchies and Kings . 
How many every age 
We see aims , points , aspires , 
And covets Crowns , Swords , Scepturs , Thrones , 
Great Kingdoms and Empires , 
And when ofttimes they have 
With troubles , travels , toil ; 
De-population of the land , 
Impiety , and spoil : 
And ofttimes too with death , 
Of innocents' obtained , 
All their ambitious bold desires 
they are forced and constrained : 
And to give place compelled , 
Not obstant their Estates , 
To their Successors , or them selves , 
Be satled in their seats . 
This day one rules or reigns , 
To morrow he is dead , 
Yet others shortly shall ascend , 
And in his seat succeid . 
Departed , buried , dead , 
And to the grave once gone , 
Fairwel , they are well away , soon shall 
Be repossessed their throne . 
Like Maskars on a stage , 
They pass their time , and play , 
Some sits , salutes , ascends , descends 
They come and go away . 
Consider this we should , 
That man his life is bot 
A journey , or seducing way , 
And time that tarries not . 
Bot specially to those 
Most doubtless dangerous , 
That they be here but Passengers , 
Which be oblivious . 
And who too much does stand 
Upon occurrent things , 
The which occasion , represents , 
And oft for object brings , 
For know the night will come , 
And quickly it will come , 
When many shall be fast asleep , 
Whairof , there shall be some , 
Whose negligence , and sloth , 
shall be a bar to them , 
To bear them back , from the most holy high jerusalem , 
Whairby they shall become , 
( A fearful sorry sight , ) 
An pray unto th' infernal Wolves , 
That wander be the night . 
To his Majesty's great Commissioner G. E. Martial Lo. K. and Altrie . 

Great Fabius , far famous for his facts , 
Be long delays , he did restore the state , 
Naught greatest haste , the gravest Actions acts , 
Nor are they lost , although adoing late ; 
So generous , and thou most worthy Than , 
Walk with that wise and Inclite Fabian . 
Alex. Rupeo . Suo , S.  

Kjnd , Cunning , Crag , I can naught bot commend , 
Thy wondrous wit , thy Judgement , thy Engine , 
For thy attempts , brought to so brave an end , 
Betrays thee for , none worldly , bot divine , 
And if thou list , from Men to lead thy Line , 
Or brwik , that they , thy first forbears beware 
Then'cording too , this Judgement mean of mine , 
Thee to no Craig , nor Petra , I compare , 
Bot I avow , proclaim , and does declare , 
Thee , ( th' only he , that sol'deserues the same , ) 
That learned old , the great Petrarchas hear , 
He was the Craig , of whom , thou ( sandy ) came . 
For with thy works , that worthy thou reuiu's , 
And by thy lines , his Lady Laura lives . 
Upon thee honourable gentleman john Da. and john Sibalds of Kair . 

Look here below , into this judge , whair lies , 
Dead in the Lord , the father , son , and Oyo , 
By name , and Nature , SIB-BALD both and wise . 
Honest , discreet , and sotiall also , 
Whose spreits above , in mouths of men Remains , 
Their fame , their flesh , this Terren Tomb contains . 
To the Ghost of the most noble Lady , Lad e Elizabeth Gordon Countess of Dunbar . 

IF Virtue , wit , and if discretion do , 
With piety expostulat a praise , 
If th' outward shape , may be collauded to , 
Than thou adorned with those into thy days , 
Must notched ( Madam ) expect nor look for less , 
Nor all that Art or Poesy can express . 
Thought all that Art , or Poesy can express , 
About thy pale imprinted war , and penned : 
Yet should thy praise ( great Lady ) I confess 
Permit no point , no period , nor end : 
Bot be a solemn subject to be sung , 
In th'after age , with each Poetic Tongue . 
Of changing Fortune and her effects into This age . 

HE first that did a Fortune fain to be , 
And but her eyes upon a Rolling Round , 
Shuip her to sit , in my opinion , He , 
May pass for an , both famous , and Profound , 
For lo as she , unsatled seems to sit , 
So flowing aye , all her affairs does flit . 
Behold each day , and see a sundry change , 
The Proud depressed , and simple Spreits ptomoued 
The skilful scorned , and what is yet more strange , 
The Fool preferred , and loiterers beloved : 
And all things known , come of contrarious kind , 
Turned topsy turvie be this fortune blind . 
TO THE MOST ACCOMPLISHED and most noble Earl George Earl of Anzie . L. G. etc.  

Great gallant Youth , thy Bogie-valley , wails , 
And lovingly , laments thy absence long , 
Thy Bogie bursts , and as enraged she rails , 
And waries all the world for this wrong : 
Mourning she moves the Montanes all among , 
And as she slides , she soughs , she shouts and sings , 
With weeping voice , a sad and sorry song , 
Wailing thy want , her watery eyes she wrings , 
While spaits of Tears , that from those fontains spring's 
The Valies low , like furious floods o'er flows 
And all her banks , in their disdain down dings 
And with a thought , like thunder all o'er throws : 
Yet noble Lord , haist home and you shall see , 
Both Bog and Bogie-waill be blithe of Thee . 
EPITAPH UPON THE HONOURABLE young Gentleman of singular expectation prevented by death Walter Vrquart apeir . of Cragstoun . 

Convert ȝour eyes unto this Voult and view 
This Sepulture , or this spelunck espy : 
Whair ( woe is me , ) Wit , worth , and valour true , 
Apollo's friend , and Pallas love does lie , 
Of such deserts , while both those God's disdain , 
That such a man , amongst mortals should remain . 
TO THE MOST HONOURED Lady , The Lady Clunie . 

When I revolve , or reckons , or recounts 
All favours fond , from my affected friends . 
Above those all so high Thy merits mounts , 
That my conceit , them scarcely comprehends . 
So boundless be , thy benefits but ends , 
While I ashame , for surely I must say 
If naught my Muse , were mindful of a mends , 
For very woe , I vanish would away : 
Bot since in part , She preeses to repay , 
And gladly yields , her endeavours as yours , 
then I protest , I repotest , and pray , 
That these the labours of her idle hours : 
In part for payment of my depts , receive , 
And hope at least ( good Lady ) for the leave . 
Deus unita protegat Sceptra Mag. Brit.  

Those Crowns conjoind and now united , Lord , 
Into thy mercy with thy power protege : 
And keep thou them , at quiet , and accord , 
Each with their old , and princely privilege : 
And let no Wrong : nor no attempt betid , 
Those royal Realms united to divide . 
What greater joy , nor see two Kingdoms knit 
Togither-chained , and locked into Love , 
And for two Kings , to see on Caesar sit , 
And both with Majesty and Mercy move : 
Two royal Sceptres with one happy hand , 
And o'er two Countries quietly command . 
no greater Grace nor richer blessing be , 
Imparted to , no Prince his Subjects then . 
thou loving Lord ( of thy benignity , ) 
Bestows on Britan's , Scots and Englishmen , 
For OH we have : from heaven a happy Head , 
And from the same , a Son for to succead . 
FJNIS . 

¶ To such as shall peruse this Book . 

POETRY is so every way made the Herald of wantonness , as there is not now any thing too unclean for lascivious rhyme ; which among some ( in whose hearts God hath wrought better things ) hath been the cause , why so general an imputation is laid upon this ancient and industrious Arte. And I , to clear ( as I might ) verse , from the soil of this unworthiness , have herein ( at least ) proved that it may deliver good matter , with fit harmony of words , though I have erred in the latter . The way to Do well , is not so doubtful , as not to be sought ; neither so dark , but it may be found . I confess , I have , touching my particular , been long carried with the doubts of folly , youth , and opinion , and as long miscarried in the darkness of unhappiness , both in mention and action . This was not the path that led to a contented rest , or a respected name . In regard whereof , I have here set forth the witness that may testify what I desire to be . Not that many should know it , but that many should take comfort by it . And ( kind Reader ) this is my request , that faults in Printing may be charitably corrected ; that the sense of the matter may be wisely ( and herein truly ) construed , and so shall ye both approve your own judgements , and right the Author in his hopes . 

Farewell . 







( ⸫ ) ( ⸪ ) 

( ⸫ ) ( ⸪ ) ( ⸪ ) 

( ⸫ ) 

( ⸪ ) ( ⸫ ) 

( ⸪ ) ( ⸫ ) 

( ⸫ ) ( ⸪ ) ( ⸫ ) ( ⸫ ) 