THE TEARS OF LOVE : OR , CUPIDS' Progress . TOGETHER WITH the complaint of the sorrowful Shepherdess ; Fair ( but unfortunate ) CANDIDA , deploring the death of her Deare-loued CORAVIN , A LATE LIVING ( AND AN ever to be lamented ) Shepherd . In a ( passionate ) pastoral Elegy . 

COMPOSED By THOMAS COLLINS . 

Quot campo flores , tot sunt in amore dolores . 


LONDON , Printed by George Purslowe for Henry Bell , and are to be sold at his shop without Bishopsgate . 1615.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE : AND rare accomplished Lady , the Lady ELIZABETH , Vicountesse Hadington , wife to the Right Honourable and renowned , JOHN Lord RAMSEY ; Viscount Hadington . 

T. C. wishes health , and happiness with the increase of much Honor.  

Right Honourable : 

IT hath been both an old and an usual custom amongst those that have clymed Parnassus' Mount , and had community with the Muses , to dedicate their endeavours to some Honourable and Art-affecting personages . Whose example I thought it fit to follow in this my plaine-suted Pastorals dedication , which presumption I ( hope ) will be held pardonable : By reason that every Penman of the Muses , desire's to have a worthy Maecenas , and never more need then now , in this our Art-contemning age , wherein Poesy is unrespected , and almost despised : because ( by some such paltering Poets as Cherillus was ) 

To those Readers that can and will conceive Reason . 

MY Muse ( of late ) divinely did indite , 
But ( Poetlike ) I now a Pastoral write : 
I am a Libertine , and love to range : 
His Music dulls , whose tunes do never change . 
Should I be tied to one vein , Momus would 
Say , that I 'd change my method , if I could : 
wherefore to eat his scandalous report , 
I task my Muse in a fantastic sort ; 
And when I grow dull in divine conceit , 
( To please myself with ) I turn Poet strait . 
And may this change of tunes , your ears content , 
I 'll think my studies , and my time well spent . 
If not , ( henceforth ) ever I 'll offend your ear , 
What I shall write , I will conceal , or tear . 
Yours ( as you affect him , ) T. C.  

To my most esteemed friend Master THOMAS COLLINS . 

From Newports bloody battle ( sung by thee ) 
With Yaxley's death ( the flower of Chivalry ) 
And from thy well-penned Publican , to be 
Transported thus to fields of Arcady , 
Shows that thy Muse is apt for all assays , 
And thou a man that meriteth renown . 
Divine , Poetical , and Past'rall Lays , 
Do all concur , thy Brows with Bays to crown . 
Collins , live ever , in thy lines live ever , 
Live ever honoured by the Trump of Fame : 
And let all those that in these Arts endeavour , 
In their praiseworthy works , still praise thy name : 
Who ( in all Subjects ) dost so sweetly sing , 
Envy herself to touch thee hath no sting . 
Io. B.  

To his affected friend Master THOMAS COLLINS . 

Thy well written Poem , Sweet composed lines , 
Delightful subject , and right modest pen , 
With just applause , even desertful shines 
In clear-eyed censure of best judging men , 
Like to thy Shepherd's flocks , as white as clean , 
Partaking nothing , sordid or obscene . 
Thy Lovers-teares , show Lovers doleful fashion , 
( As sable habit suits a mournful heart , ) 
A sprightly live hath power to move compassion , 
And such a lymmer to the life thou art , 
Let Momus breath , vanish like pipe of smoke , 
All wisemen know , Detractions credit broke . 
Samuel Rowlands . 

THE TEARS OF LOVE : OR , CUPIDS' Progress . 

When bright faced Phoebus was in Cancers line , 
And from his highest house did most hotly shine : 
When Lucifer rose soon in the morn , 
And fair Aurora early'st did adorn 
Th'azurd sky with purple-coloured blushes ; 
And ( sore abashed ) from Tythonis rushes , 
Leaving his old , and all-abhorred bed , 
To meet her younger Lover hastened : 
then rose I early ( as sometimes I use ) 
To recreate my melancholy muse : 
And forth I went , ( not caring much which way , ) 
Towards the fields , where frolic Shepherds lay : 
And as I walked o'er those fertile plains , 
( Which then were scorched ) I saw a sort of swains , 
Each with his bag , his bottle and his hook , 
Sat on a bankside near a Crystal brook , 
Viewing the skaly fish skud in the deep ; 
The whilst their yaping dogs did tend their sheep , 
Some Garlands made , and cast into the stream ; 
Others did angle for Roach , Dace and Breame ; 
Some Sonnets made , and to their Garlands tied , 
then prayed to Nayis for to let them slide , 
With swift-sure pace upon the silent River , 
Where their true loves sat , and them there deliver . 
A pretty space ( with much content ) I stood , 
To view these pastimes and the pleasant flood ▪ 
At length I left them , and walked longest the bank 
( O'er many a winding and short-turning crank ) 
Close by the river as the Garlands swom , 
'Cause I would see what should of them become . 
But lo , the Sun ( which then grew somewhat hie ) 
began to burn and parch exceedingly , 
So that a while I was constrained to stay 
Under a broad Beech spreading o'er my way , 
Where Zephyrus , with many a gentle blast , 
Cooled my hot face ( with sweat and dust o'ercast . ) 
then up I rose ( though loath I was to go 
From that sweet seat where I was shaded so : ) 
And on I went still by the river's side , 
Almost an hour , ere I the Garlands spied : 
For Nayis ( Lady of that lovely Lake ) 
Did so much pity on the Shepherds take , 
That she compelled the silent sliding waves , 
( Whose goodly path the glitt'ring pebbles paves ) 
To glide apace , and not make any stays , 
'Cause ( she knows ) Lovers cannot brook delays . 
I sighed and grieved , to think I had forsaken them : 
But ( going fast ) at length I overtook them ; 
And then I vowed , I would not lose their sight , 
Until I see into whose hands they light . 
Each step I took , I cast mine eyes upon them , 
Being much delighted with the flowers were on them ; 
And viewing them , the more that I did view them , 
The more mine eyes were eager to pursue them : 
For therein were a sort of pretty flowers : 
Sure they that made them , sought all Flora's bowers . 
Roses there were of the most rarest kind , 
red , white and Damas●● ( to delight the mind ) 
Lilies and Daffodils stood on the top , 
And Honny-dew upon the rest did drop . 
Next stood Rosemary mixed with gilded Bays , 
Carnations , Pinks , and Lavenders sweet sprays , 
then Gilly-flowres ( free from defective spots ) 
And Margerum , full fraught with True-love knots . 
Next Time and Mary-golds together stood , 
then Bachelors buttons ( which maids hold so good ) 
Pancyes , and double Pagles , Sops in wine , 
Sweet Honny-suckles , and blue Collembine ; 
And twenty more , whose names I cannot tell , 
And yet ( me thought ) they pleased me wondrous well . 
Thus whilst I gazed on these Garlands gay , 
I saw how prettily the stream did play , 
With th'osier twigs that grew upon the banks , 
Acting a sort of sundry wanton pranks . 
Sometimes they 'd stoop , and slyly steal a kiss ; 
Sometimes skip up , as if they scorned that bliss ; 
Sometimes again ( the fit being come upon them ) 
they 'd jump into the stream , let her run on them : 
Who ( like most women having men in thrall , ) 
Insulted o'er them , and grew proud withal . 
And when she 'd made them slaves unto her will , 
she 'd wend away , and let them weep their fill . 
Lo here ( thought I ) these silly twigs may teach me , 
To eat Love's snares , lest woman's wiles o'erreach me : 
For by these twigs I see ( o flinty hard ! ) 
A doting Lover they do least regard : 
When flattering wooers with fair speaking speed , 
Whilst they are rejected that love dear indeed . 
Narcissus-like , the poor twigs sought to kiss : 
But their own shadows yet were drenched for this . 
So he that seeks his goddess to embrace , 
May have ( like Ixion ) but a Cloud in Chase : 
And when he thinks fast in his arms to fold her , 
find her so eyrie , that he cannot hold her . 
And yet this lighter than a Shuttlecock , 
Her dearest Lovers will delude and mock : 
And ( Cyren-like ) though she doth them enchant , 
What most they seek , they most of all shall want : 
For some there are allure men to desire , 
then laugh to see them frying in love's fire , 
( Like foolish flies in Candle flames that play . 
Till they be scorched , and scarce can creep away ) 
But still the Garlands swom , and on went I , 
Till in the river ( lo ) I did espy 
( Hard by a Groves side , which I then drew near ) 
A sort of goodly water-nymphes appear , 
Naked as the Graces upon Ida were , 
Having no cowering but their comely hair , 
Which dangled down their dainty bodies so , 
That naught was seen that was not fit to show . 
Nayis herself was foremost of this Crew , 
On whom the rest did give attendance due ; 
Bathing she sat ( like Diana ) in the brook , 
Whilst I , ( as Actaeon ) upon her did look . 
Soon was I spied , yet did she bathe her still : 
For o ( she knew ) I did intend no ill : 
And therefore no exceptions taken at me , 
Nor grudged that I , her and her Nymphs did see . 
But now the river ( which of late was proud ) 
Drawing near to her ( me thought ) lowly bowed , 
And having done all reverence it could do her , 
Humbly presented all the Garlands to her : 
Which Nayis taking , to each Nymph gave one , 
And charged them instantly to get them gone , 
Alongst the stream , till they got past the Grove , 
Where they should see each of these shepherd's love , 
And of these Garlands , there delivery make , 
And see that each one did her True-love's take , 
And then return , and tell how they accepted 
These friendly favours , and whose was neglected . 
Forthwith they went to do as she commands , 
Holding the Garlands in their ivory hands ; 
Whose shadows ( through the splendour of the sun ) 
Did both on banks , and in the bottom run . 
Whereat the fish ( amazed ) skud thence for fear : 
But when they saw there were no mortals there , 
They did retire , and seem for to adore them ; 
then skud behind , then skip again before them . 
Even as the Dolphins on the sea do dance 
Before a storm : so did these fishes prance , 
As thinking these were some celestial powers , 
That could produce some soone-ensuing showers : 
And therefore played thus prettily to sport them , 
And all the way presumed to consort them . 
But now being come unto their journey's end , 
These lovely Nymphs their looks to shore did bend 
And there espied a sort of most sweet creatures , 
That passed comparison for comely features : 
One was a combing of her golden hair , 
Another dressed ( yet did not seem so fair , 
Though fair she was ) sat singing of a ditty , 
Which others praised , and said ' was very pretty . 
Some with silk Ribbons did knit true-love knots , 
Others sat making posies and fine spots 
In handkerchiefs , some working flowers in gloves , 
And all for favours for to send their Loves . 
One was commending of a comely swain , 
Which she loved well , ( & would be loved of fain ) 
Height Pamelus , of person exquisite , 
Fair , affable , and of an excellent wit : 
Him she extolled unto the Heavens above , 
And held him worthy of a Prince's love . 
Another ( sitting by ) said , Coravin 
Surpassed him , and all that ere hath been . 
Paris ( quoth she ) though he was Priam's son , 
And first fair Oenone , than Queen Helen won , 
With comely Coravin might not compare , 
For beauty , wit , and personage most rare . 
But all this while , his dear love Candida , 
( Fairer than Egypt's Queen Cleopatra ) 
Nor smiled , nor frowned , nor would she utter aught 
Of her affections ( whatsoe'er she thought ) 
That she did love him , she 'd have none to know ; 
Yet was she pleased to hear him praised so . 
But now they spied the Nymphs upon the river , 
Holding the Garlands ready to deliver , 
Up now they start , and ( as o're-ioyd thereat ) 
They laid their works by , and left off their chat , 
And towards the Nymphs did speedily repair . 
Hard ' was for me to judge which was most fair , 
Of them , or these ; the Nymphs or mortal Creatures . 
Both were so excellent for their outward features : 
Each beheld other with a blushing face . 
" Blushing doth ay give beauty better grace . 
Rare ' was to see how their sweet cheeks were died . 
But now being come unto the river's side , 
One foremost stepped a foot into the flood . 
( So fond she was ) she cared not where she stood 
For to receive a favour from her Lover , 
Who ( like a flatt'rer ) did but faintly hover : 
Yet would he send her tokens now and then . 
" Such sly dissembling is in a sort of men . 
" Till they ( like jason and false Demophon ) 
" Have got their wills : and then farewell , they are gone . 
She took the Garlands one by one , and read 
To whom each was to be delivered . 
One was directed unto fair-faced Phillis , 
Another was to lovely Amarillis ; 
One to young Mopsa , mistress of his heart , 
Whose looks ( he said ) did Poetry impart , 
And Numbers true taught Dorus to rehearse , 
Who till he knew her , scarce did know a verse . 
One was to Celestina fair and bright : 
And one to her that Galatea height : 
And now to fairest Candida came one , 
Who stood aloof , as if he looked for none . 
then came another , and another to her ; 
For almost every worthy Swain did woe her : 
She had more Garlands , then half they had , sent her , 
And Sonnets too : but that did not content her : 
For she unwilling was for to receive them , 
Nor did she care neglectfully to leave them , 
Because she knew her Coravin never used 
To send her aught that should be thus perus'de . 
But lo , the Nymphs were loath she should forsake them ; 
And all the rest entreated her to take them , 
Affirming that by reading o'er the lines , 
She might ( perchance ) be pleased with some designs . 
So them she took with seeming-gratefull hart . 
The rest ( rejoicing ) do with her depart . 
Back went the Nymphs , ( as ea'rst they had in charge ) 
For to relate each circumstance at large , 
To lou'ly Nayis , who thought long to hear , 
After what sort these things accepted were . 
But still stayed I , as one vnsatisfi'de 
Of the Events , that after might betid : 
And glad I was to feign occasion too , 
As thousands more ( besides myself ) would do , 
Only to see those goodly Girls again , 
In whom such rare perfections remain : 
But most of all , her that is beauty's Queen ; 
And o ! ( me thinks ) can never enough be seen , 
Fair Candida , the glory of them all , 
Worthier than Venus of the golden ball , 
Which fell from Heaven : for ( o ! ) she doth excel 
All those three fair ones betwixt whom it fell . 
Perseus' brave purchase , fair Andromeda , 
Was never comparable to Candida ; 
Nor is there any like her can be named : 
For she 's the fairest that ere nature framed : 
Her hair is like unto fine threads of gold , 
Her eyes like sparkling Diamonds to behold , 
Her forehead high , her veins ( like Saphires ) blue , 
Her blush unborrowed , all her beauty true , 
Her cheeks like Roses , which by Lilies lie , 
Her lips like Rubies , teeth like ivory , 
Her nose is comely , and her neck is white , 
Her chin is dimpled , ( and that breeds delight ) 
Her breasts ( like Snowy mounts ) are fair & soft ; 
The Sun to touch them hath descended oft : 
Her hands are little , and her fingers long , 
Her middle slender , ( I the rest much wrong ) 
Her leg is pretty , and her foot is small ; 
And by these few parts you may guess at all . 
She wore a Chaplet of fine flowers and Roses . 
( Beauty to beauty still her best discloses . ) 
O'er nature's ornament , her golden hair , 
Which ( as ' was tressed ) seemed exceeding fair . 
About her neck ( whiter than Snow or milk ) 
She worè a scarf of Seagreen coloured silk ; 
Her gown was pure wool , yet but plain ( God wot ) 
Of purple colour , and her Petticoat 
Of watchet Kersie , and her Kirtle was 
Of grass-green Chamblet , without guard or lace : 
Her Iu'ry arms were clothed ( with Lawn ) so thin , 
That through her sleeves a man might see her skin ; 
no amber bracelets on her wrists she wore , 
Yet upon one wrist what she prized more , 
Which was a silk point Coravin gave to her , 
When as the kind Swain courteously did woe her . 
Upon her legs she silke-soft buskins wore , 
( Of Murry colour ) which she set by store , 
And on her feet she did fine Sandals wear , 
Made of a pure Felt , or a Minivere . 
Thus was she decked ; and well it did become her , 
To be attired thus in the time of Summer : 
For in a manner thus fair Daphne went , 
And with like habit Diana was content . 
But now b'ing come unto their former places , 
These dainty damsels with delicious graces , 
Each of them put her new-come Garland on , 
Save Candida , who would be crowned with none . 
And by th' other's being demanded why 
She would wear none ? She made this wise reply , 
Say that I would ( quoth she ) wear one of these , 
The sender , I ( but not myself ) should please : 
For none of them that sent these Garlands to me 
Until this instant , ever did seem to woe me : 
And therefore , how is 't possible to know , 
Whether they love me , or but make a show 
Of love to me , to see if I will take 
That , which ( perchance ) the worst of you 'll forsake ? 
But put the case ( as who can rightly tell ? ) 
Each of these Swains did love me wondrous well : 
How should I know which of them merit's best , 
To be beloved above all the rest ? 
then being ignorant in each degree , 
For to wear any , were a fault in me . 
then to herself she muttered secretly 
( True Love is always full of jealousy : ) 
Since no one more than other merit's Grace , 
I should but wrong one that is not in place : 
then said ( to please you since I must displease ) 
Upon my head I will put none of these . 
Which words of hers made all the rest to muse , 
That one so fair , such favours should refuse , 
Scent her by chiefest of th' arcadian Swains ; 
And she ( unkind ) to quite them with disdains . 
" But still the fair ( o that it were not so ) 
" Respect their own wills , not another's woe , 
" And when they are offered well , cannot perceive , 
" But take the worst ( oft ) and the better leave . 
Ah Love , thou strangely dost affected stand , 
And ( like a God ) wilt stoop to no command , 
Nay prayers and tears can hardly penetrate 
The hearts of some , they are so obdurate . 
For as love 's powerful , so 't is pitiless , 
Afflicting many , but doth few redress . 
Why should the strong unto the weak be subject , 
Or mighty ' r ones be to the meaner abject ? 
" But Love and Fortune are agreed with Fate , 
" To wrack men's weal , and them excruciate ; 
" For , he that hope's by either of the two 
" TO atttaine to happiness , may unhappily do . 
But now these fair ones ( for their more content ) 
began to read the Sonnets that were sent : 
Phillis first showed what her Amintas wrote , 
Who long had loved , but little reaped ( God wot ) 
He pleads his love ▪ long service and true faith , 
Proff'ring them all and all that else he hath 
To lovely Phillis , whom he much commends , 
And ( so in passion ) the poor Shepherd ends . 
then Amarillis showed Alexis lines , 
Who pleads for pity , and tells how he pines . 
then Mopsa showed what her Dorus written , 
Who ( like some Cockneyes ) hath more wealth than wit : 
He brags that he sent farfetched strains unto her , 
And ( except he ) no Swain could quaintly woe her ; 
And that his lines ( though all not worth a fly ) 
Were th' only Quintessence of Poetry . 
then Celestina she began to show , 
What Melebeus would on her bestow ; 
A thousand Lambkins snow-white , fat and fine , 
I 'll give thee ( quoth he ) so thou wilt be mine : 
And more than that , I will maintain thee so , 
As not a Shepherdess shall like thee go : 
then Galatea showed old Thirsis Sonnet , 
Which made them all laugh that did look upon it : 
For he did term her whiter than the jet , 
And held her more worth than Agenor's Neat. 
then Candida did will them look upon 
A Sonnet , sent her by old Coridon , 
Who praised her eyes to be of Coral hue , 
Her lips like Crystal : but it was not true , 
Love had so blinded him he could not see . 
Which were like Coral , which like Crystal be . 
then showed sh'another that Dametas sent ; 
Which they no sooner read , but strait she rend . 
And then another of young Thenots sending : 
This but not he ( quoth some ) is worth commending . 
Yet surely this is not of his inditing : 
For he 's a wildbrain , hath no skill in writing . 
Some witty Swain , ( t' express his love ) hath wrote it , 
And now this madcap ( by ill hap ) hath got it . 
then threw she forth some three or four more : 
For ( as I erst said ) she had sent her store , 
Which being read , bid whose would entertain them : 
For she protested , that she did disdain them . 
Now whilst they thus sat trifling time away , 
loves blind god , Cupid , got abroad to play , 
Vvith's bow and arrows from his mother's sight , 
And to th' earth flew for his own delight , 
Where ( unawares ) he met his mortal foe , 
" ( Minds set on mirth , are oft encountered so . ) 
Envious death : to whom Love's god said thus , 
't is strange in one place to see both of us : 
But since I have met thee ( my old enemy ) 
Setting aside all former enmity , 
Let 's make a truce , and for this night agree 
To lodge together , and bedfellows be . 
Meager-faced Death soon condescended to it , 
And was as willing as Love's god to do it : 
then did they both vow , that no mortal Wight 
Should feel of Love's force , or of Deaths that night : 
But as themselves disposed were to rest , 
So they 'd do nothing others to molest . 
Thus ( like two travellers that walk together ) 
They took their Inn ( Inns scarce well used by either : 
" For lust ( in Love's shape ) oft to Inns doth come , 
" And death ( untimely ) there destroyeth some : 
" But Loves too blame to be a Bawd to lust , 
" And death 's a Villain to betray men's trust ) 
And there they two were jovial awhile , 
Love upon death , and death on Love did smile : 
And first the one , than did the other boast 
Their mighty Conquests made in every coast , 
And laughed outright in their relating how , 
Both rich and poor must at their pleasures bow : 
For from the King that sits upon the Throne , 
Unto the meanest and most wretched one , 
Love made his brags none ( past their Infancy ) 
The power of his Godhead could deny : 
For with his arrows he had wounded all , 
Made strong ones stoop , and stoutest minds most thrall ; 
Nor wise , nor foolish , Nobly born nor base , 
But first or last , Love hath had all in chase , 
And made them all for to confess , that he 
Had as great power as in a God could be . 
then Death began : ( quoth . he ) Love brags too much 
Before stern Death , whose strength and power is such , 
That all the earth doth tremble at my name : 
For young and old , the lusty and the lame , 
All stoop to death , who is impartial 
And pitiless , not caring who doth fall , 
Nor how , nor when , nor in what sort I take them ; 
If once I strike , I ever conquered make them . 
Whom Love doth hit , in passions long may languish , 
But whom I strike , I do set free from anguish . 
Loves but a child , and wanton tricks doth use : 
But Death is dauntless , and doth none excuse . 
Folly blinds Love , so that he cannot see , 
But shoots at random , and let's some go free ; 
When some with often wound are perplexed . 
Whilst they laugh at them for whom they are vexed . 
O partial Love , unjust and cruel too , 
thou dost more harm , than ever Death did do ! 
thou mak'st men love those that do not affect them 
And seek and sue to those that do reject them 
thou mak'st the strong to stoop unto the weak ; 
The weak insult , and seek their hearts to break ; 
thou dost besot the wise with woman's looks , 
And workest their bane with beauties baiting hooks ; 
thou dost the fool with wits conceit inspire , 
And ( Phaeton-like ) thou setst the world on fire . 
thou dost deprive men of their sweetest sleep ; 
thou murthrest mirth , and mak'st the masker weep ; 
Into fool's Paradise , thou bringst wretched ones : 
then sittest and smil'st , to hear their sighs and groans : 
And when they pule , ay me , what shall I do ? 
Cupid's glad of it : so 's proud Venus too : 
then unto me the weake-made woodcocks cry , 
And say ( sweet Death ) come end my misery . 
Death never doth thus indirectly deal , 
Nor through the eye into the heart doth steal . 
But like a Giant ( though I seem not so ) 
I defy all , and do no favour show . 
The young , as well as old , my name do fear ; 
Kings quake & tremble , when of me they hear ; 
I rid the world of those thou mak'st despair ; 
I kill the rich ▪ and I destroy the fair ; 
Beauty and gold ( which all the world affects ) 
Death doth disdain , and both as dung rejects , 
And ever did so from the first beginning 
Of my own birth , which was at Adam's sinning . 
Adam was first : and I the last shall be . 
All were his offspring ; all shall end in me . 
But I ( quoth Cupid ) can do more than thou ; 
My Bow doth make the very Gods to bow : 
I made Alcides leave his Lion's skin , 
And ( to gain I-o'ls love ) to sit and spin . 
I made Apollo wear a shepherd's weed , 
To court fair Daphne ( yet he could not speed . ) 
I made the God of war forsake the field , 
And ( as my vassal ) to my mother yield : 
Yea I made jove to lay aside his shape , 
And ( amongst mortals ) commit many a escape . 
Is Love a child then , all-abhorred Death , 
That canst do nothing but stop mortals breath ? 
In this ( vild ) world Death only doth remain : 
But Love in heaven lives where the gods do reign . 
then can thy power be compared to mine , 
When thine is hellbred , and mine most divine ? 
But whilst they two contended in this wise , 
Death's sister , sleep , ceased on their sightless eyes : 
And lo , by this , fair Venus missed her Son , 
And to inquire him out to Vulcan run , 
Who ( with his Cyclops ) was at work so hard , 
That he nor Love , nor Love's god did regard : 
And therefore told her , if she meant to find him , 
She might go look him ; for he did not mind him . 
then unto Mars the fair Queen made repair , 
And asked him for her young son and heir : 
Who by his godhead and his sword did swear , 
He neither saw him , nor of him did hear : 
But for thy sake ( quoth he ) I 'll take some pains 
To seek him out , and see where he remains . 
Indeed I will : I will indeed ( my joy ) 
I 'll do my best to help thee to thy boy , 
Thy pretty little wag , thy curld-pate boy , 
That fills the world with weal or with annoy : 
I would be loath my Love should lose her child : 
For he 's her best boy ( though the wag be wild . ) 
This said , he coled , and clipped , and kissed her too , 
And made an offer th' other thing to do : 
( For Mars with Venus seldom times did meet ; 
But he did dally with his dainty sweet , 
Which made the limping god to chase and fret , 
And seek to entrap them in an Iron net . ) 
But Venus ( now ) said , that should not be done 
By Mars , nor any , till she found her son , 
Nor would she smile , nor let him kiss her more , 
But flung away , and would to jove ( she swore . ) 
" Mars sighed at this : ( but vainly sighs are spent , 
" When as a woman to her will is bend . ) 
then mounts his chariot , and away goes he , 
To search abroad where her young son should be . 
His whirling wheels do rattle in the streets , 
And breed amazement amongst all he meets : 
To field he gets , and there commands his drum 
Should strike t' enquire where Cupid was become . 
Whilst Venus past heavens-christall-pointed gates , 
And to great jove her grievous loss relates , 
Who was exceeding wroth thereat , and swore 
By Styx and Phlegeton and many more ; 
That heaven , and earth , and hell and all should rue 
The loss of Love's Queen ( if this tale were true ) 
Vowing to search their Centres every one : 
And therewith ( starting from his stately throne ) 
He called for Aeolus , and bid him send 
Stiffe-blowing Boreas to the wide world's end , 
Charging him throw down Castles , Courts and Tow'rs , 
And search for Cupid in their secret bowers : 
But if he could not find him quickly out , 
Himself would throw his Thunderbolts about . 
Away goes Aeolus and out Boreas fly's , 
But finds not Cupid , nor learns where he lies : 
then back returns ( with grief and shame ) to jove , 
And tells how much , he ( to no purpose ) strove . 
The god ( being angry ) sets the Crystal sky 
Upon a burning fire instantly : 
Whose lightning strangely terrified the Earth , 
And ( on a sudden ) marred all mortals mirth ; 
then took he Thunderbolts , and them he hurled 
Into each corner of this cankered world , 
Which struck astonishment in all creatures ears . 
( Who doth not tremble that jove's Thunder hears ? ) 
It made Rome's Emperor hide his haughty head , 
( Great Heliogabalus ) underneath his bed . 
It struck a King ( that did it counterfeit ) 
Into a Salmon fish ( all bloody yet ) 
It cleaveth Clouds , rents Rocks and Trees asunder . 
" nothing 's more dreadful than all dreaded Thunder . 
This wakened Cupid ( that with death did lie ) 
Who else ( perhaps ) had slept eternally . 
" ( For if the God● should Love from Heaven exile , 
" 'T would sleep on earth , or die in little while . ) 
Up did he start , and trust his trinkets on , 
And in great haste did hurry to be gone : 
But being blind ( as o , would Love were not ) 
Deaths quiver up in stead of 's own he got , 
And thence be trudges , leaving Death behind , 
Who ( when he rose ) did Cupid's quiver find , 
Yet marked it not , but girts it on , and goes 
Abroad the world , to fill the world with woes . 
" For death on Earth ( like Cesar in a field ) 
" Foes to their Foe , perforce doth force to yield , 
" And where he cometh , tears they need not borrow : 
" For he comes sild , but where he breedeth sorrow . 
Now Cupid ( seeking how himself t' excuse ) 
Doth bend his bow , and Death's black Engines use , 
Determining great store with Love to wound : 
But whom he hitteth , straightways dead are found . 
Lo , thus the blind boy ( when he thought no ill ) 
( For want of eyes ) did many a mortal kill : 
And thus ( ah thus ) he murdered Coravin , 
( The sweetest Swain that ever yet hath been . ) 
And thus fair Phillis he did make away 
( Whom young Amintas mourned for many a day ▪ 
And after tears and groans , and grievous cries , 
Expressed his sorrows in sad Elegyes . ) 
And thus Laceno and a number mother , 
Love killed outright : ( 't is shame he should do so ) 
then up to Heaven the wanton wag did fly , 
And told his mother ( o egregious lie ! ) 
That he had wounded such and such with Love ; 
Which ( to his foul shame ) otherwise did prove . 
Glad was fair Venus she had got her Son , 
And much more glad to hear what he had done : 
Yet notwithstanding she began to chide 
For his departure ; and would fain have cried : 
But he so prettily did wantonise , 
She could not weep , though tears stood in her eyes : 
Which wiping thence , she smiled to see him play . 
" Love oft makes Sunshine in a show'rie day , 
" And when unkindness doth the heart annoy , 
" Love doth expel it , and proclaimeth joy . 
But now ( awhile ) let 's speak again of death . 
Who seeks abroad to suffocate men's breath : 
To Court , and city , and t'each country town , 
He ( like a Tiger ) travels up and down , 
And here and there throws forth a thrilling dart , 
Intending's own , but acting Cupid's part : 
Yet lo , he keeps one custom he did use , 
All suppliants prayers proudly to refuse : 
For those that were oppressed with misery , 
th' envious slave ( though cried to ) would pass by ▪ 
At length ( remembering he did naught last night ) 
Strikes rich and poor , and doth respect no wight : 
But ( o ) in stead of his own Ebon darts , 
He with Love's arrows wounds their wretched hearts , 
And makes some love that weary are of life , 
( Their woes and troubles are so wondrous rife ) 
Who feeling loves force grievously complain , 
And to the powers divine do cry amain , 
ye gods ( quoth they ) must we with love be wounded , 
Whose joints are numbed , & joys ( long since ) confounded : 
Hear us , o heavens , and be propitious , 
And o ye gods , be you auspicious : 
For death and fortune both injurious be , 
And our woes will not , or else cannot see : 
And therefore ( o ) do you vouchsafe to hear us , 
And let fell death no longer time forbear us : 
For we are wronged , oppressed & pinched with grief , 
And ( but in you ) have hope of no relief . 
jove hearing this , doth strait commiserate 
These wretched worldlings miserable state , 
And by his messenger , swift Mercury , 
Summons a Parliament of the Deity , 
( With expedition ) in the high house of heaven , 
And also charges warning should be given , 
That all their plaints , that erst were mentioned , 
Should at that Session be exhibited . 
Away went Mercury , and performed his charge . 
The gods appeared , men's griefs were heard at large ; 
And by the inferences of their bills , 
( With the scarlet evidence of Cupid's ills ) 
It did appear how idle Love had been , 
T' associate Death , and kill sweet Coravin ; 
Who was a Swain of all so dear loved , 
That for his death the gods were highly moved , 
And sent for Cupid from his mother's side , 
And him ( in th' open Court ) did rate and chide . 
thou blind-eyd and besotting boy ( quoth jove . ) 
mak'st thou no difference betwixt Death and Love ? 
Art thou a god , and wilt from heaven descend , 
And on the earth consort a hellish Fiend , 
And put his black darts and thy Bow together , 
then ( like a vagrant ) range , thou know'st notwhither ? 
And when thou hast done a deal of villainy , 
( T' excuse thy folly ) tellest us many a lie . 
thinkst thou , the gods ( by thee ) will be deluded ? 
no : it were better thou wert heaven excluded ; 
For with thy deeds thou daily dost offend us. 
But wherein is it , that thou canst befriend us , 
Unless it be in acting idle things , 
Such as vain pleasure , but no profit brings ? 
And yet dar'st thou ( fond fool ) audaciously 
Displease this Synod of the Deity ? 
Love , I am vexed at this vild deed of thine . 
" ( All murder's hateful in our heavenly eyes . ) 
For Antidotes dost thou rank poison give . 
Daring to kill whom we desire should live ? 
But ( since thou hast offended in this sort ) 
we 'll clip thy wings ( boy ) and we 'll keep thee short : 
The son of Venus ( though his mother love him ) 
Shall well perceive , jove fears not to reprove him : 
For why should men their sad oppressions paint , 
And find no remedy where they make complaint ? 
" Are we not gods ? ( and gods should justice do ) 
" One fault unpunished soon produceth two . 
then let us now ( great gods ) make a decree ▪ 
How Cupid's fault may fitly'st punished be . 
There stayed his speech : whilst Cupid ( standing by ) 
To 's accusation was bid make reply , 
Who ( childishly ) his progress did recite , 
And how he lay with ugly Death one night : 
But for the rest he vowed it was unknown , 
Whether he used Death's engines or his own ▪ 
At this lame Vulcan laughed in his sleeve , 
" ( Some never laugh heartily , but when others grieve . ) 
To whom Apollo ( with great wisdom ) said , 
Deride him not , nor do you him upbraid : 
he 's your wife's Son , and she will fit you for 't , 
If you abuse him here in any sort : 
And for mine own part , be you sure ( quoth he ) 
In blind boy's matters I 'll no meddler be . 
Saturn sat by , but ( like a sullen god ) 
spoke never a word , yet now and then did nod 
At th' other's speech : especially when they 
Rebuked Love , or did against Death inveigh . 
then Mars stood up ( b'ing friend to Cupid's mother ) 
And thus ( with reverence ) spoke before the other : 
Ye mighty gods , this fact of his ( we see ) 
Most heinous is : yet take thus much from me , 
Since done on earth , and 't is unfit Death should 
Enter heaven gates our glory to behold , 
It fittest is that Cupid should descend , 
Where shame ( for 's guilt ) upon him may attend , 
And there endure the clamour and the cry 
Of the murther'ds friends and those in misery : 
And ( as he 's author of their endless woe , ) 
Sat , and condole them whom he injured so . 
Which being done , let him go seek out Death , 
And ( changings quiver ) bid him stop the breath 
Of those weak wights , whom he with Love did wound , 
Or else ( untimely ) time shall him confound . 
This Death may do : but those whom Love hath slain 
With Death's dart , cannot be revived again : 
For Love ( in this ) without commission went : 
But whom death slays , 't is with the fate's consent . 
Death hath authority for to destroy : 
But Love should not kill , but procure men's joy ; 
And therefore Love was too too blame in this , 
To use Death's engines , and give bale for bliss . 
" ( Great faults deserve no favourable meed , ) 
Yet b'ing thus checked and punished for the deed , 
Since ( though a god ) he 's but a child ( good sooth ) 
And ( being blind ) he sees not what he doth ; 
At his return let our displeasures end : 
For I 'm persuaded heel no more offend . 
To this , great jove , and all the gods agreed , 
And ( being confirmed ) adiornd the court with speed . 
Cupid departed , and to earth he goes , 
To sit and hear the sorrows , sighs and woes 
Of the sad Swains , for those whom he had slain ; 
But most for Coravin they did complain : 
And every one of them exclaimed on Death , 
Not thinking Cupid had reft him of breath , 
Until the time that he was clad in clay , 
Which ( woe is me ) was on Saint Peter's day ; 
A day of dread . O had it never been , 
T'intombe in clay the comely Coravin , 
The comely Coravin ( the more grief 's mine . ) 
In th' earth ( that day ) the shepherds did enshrine , 
Enshrine ( ay me ! ) they did , and I must say , 
When I name that , I name a weeping day , 
A weeping day . Yea , so it was indeed : 
For then heaven wept , and th' hearts of men did bleed , 
Did bleed , 't is true : their hearts did bleed , and they 
Did naught but weep upon that woeful day , 
That woeful day , the clouds of heaven distilled 
A world of water , wherewith they were filled , 
Were filled , yea filled , and so let fall away , 
As if they 'd meant t' have drowned the earth that day . 
That day the Sun a sable weed did wear , 
And with a black hood hid his golden hair ; 
That day the sky put on a mourning cloak , 
And showed no vapours , but what seemed like smoke . 
That day the earth was all as black as jet , 
Only with tears ( wherewith 't was over-wet . ) 
That day a sort of most sweet silver bells 
Did nothing sound , but sad-tuned doleful knells . 
That day there was a world of weeping eyes . 
" sorrow 's no niggard of sighs , tears , and cries . 
That day each Shepherd wore a Cypress wreath 
Upon his head , and all black Say beneath . 
That day was Coravins sad funeral , 
Which still is lamented , and for ever shall . 
A goodly troop did on his hearse attend , 
And more had done , if they his death had kenned : 
For Candida never knew that he was dead , 
Until she heard that he was buried : 
And then ( too soon ) 't was known , and she did go , 
Whilst Cupid was there , that did breed her woe . 
Lo , now my Muse is come to naught but mourning : 
Her joys are past , and hopeless of returning . 
O you that ever felt the force of Love , 
Or know what powerful pass'ons it doth move ; 
You that have wept , and sighed , and grieved and groaned , 
When ( but yourselves ) none knew for what you moaned : 
You , you ( o , you ) you that know love indeed , 
You whose souls melt , whose very hearts do bleed , 
At the remembrance of the sweet sweet name 
Of sacred Love ( the sovereign King of flame ) 
't is you I call to , you that I implore ; 
If yet you have or sighs or tears in store , 
O lend me them , or some of them at least . 
" Much he hath need of makes a liberal feast . 
One Muse ( unless inspired from above ) 
Can never express the passions of true love . 
One man 's too weak in judgement and in wit , 
T'explane the force and the effects of it . 
O help me then , help both my Muse and me , 
That ( by your aid ) it may described be . 
The little streams of water ( small brooks give her ) 
Do quickly make a full-veined flowing River . 
So every accent , every sigh or tear , 
That you lend me , my work will help 't upreare . 
" Hard is the heart that will no help extend ; 
" Especially ( for Love's sake ) to a friend . 
Come then and aid me , and ( in hope you will ) 
In Love's deep passion now I 'll dip my quill . 
Candida hearing of these heavy news , 
Doth sigh , sob , sound , and all sad actions use . 
O heavens ( quoth she ) why do I live thus long , 
Or why hath Death and Time done me this wrong ▪ 
Why have they got my Coravin away ? 
Why have they lapped his comely corpse in clay ? 
Why hath heaven let that fowl Fiend Death have power , 
To crop the blossom of that scarse-bloomed flower ? 
Why have the Fates so fair a Shepherd slain ? 
Why have they robbed me of so rare a Swain ? 
Why have they stolen the lustre of my life ? 
Why got a hoped-for husband from his wife ? 
Why dimmed the Sun that shined upon me here , 
And left me neither Love , nor friend , nor fere ? 
Why ( unsuspected ) hath time him betrayed ? 
Why made m'a widow , whilst I am a Maid ? 
Why hath he reft me of all joys in one ? 
And why left me to wail , now he is gone ? 
O what did move the gods to be so cruel , 
As to deprive me of my dearest jewel ? 
As to deprive me of my dearest jewel , 
And leave me like a fire without fuel ? 
Fire without fuel ( soon ) will fade and die : 
And without Coravin even so must I : 
Even so must I Yea , ( and great reason too ) 
For want of his life doth my life undo . 
What else had I wherein I took delight ? 
What joy had I , but only in his sight ? 
What comfort had I , but in Coravin ? 
What hearts content , but whereas he hath been ? 
What pleasure to me did this world extend ? 
What other solace , but that one sweet friend ? 
What did I love , or what did I hold dear , 
But only him , my Love , my life , my fere ? 
And is he gone ? is he untimely slain 
By Love ? or Death ? or by my own disdain ? 
O , which of us three hath the Murderer been ? 
Which of us was it that killed Coravin ? 
Love , was it thou ? o ( if thou didst it ) speak : 
For if Love killed him , grief my heart will break : 
'T will wound my soul even to the very death , 
If Love hath reft my deare-beloued of breath . 
I know he loved me , and that wondrous well : 
And I loved him more dear than tongue can tell . 
But ( o ) 't was long before that I could do it , 
And much ado he had to bring me to it : 
He sued , he served , and often sought unto me , 
By prayers , plaints , tears , and all that else might woe me : 
But I relentless was , and slinty hard , 
And his great griefs but little did regard . 
I was too young to feel the force of Love : 
Tears , plaints , nor prayers could me to pity move , 
then would he write , and as he wrote , he 'd weep ; 
Blood was his ink which he in tears would steep : 
The pen showed pure love , and the paper zeal , 
Wherewith the poor Swain did his plaints reveal : 
Pity he pleaded for with 's soul and heart , 
And ( with much weeping ) prayed me ease his smart : 
( For by the paper I might easily see , 
That he did weep much , when he wrote to me . ) 
Love , thou art powerful , I confess it now , 
Though of thy laws I did not late allow : 
But if thy might to murder did extend , 
thou hast wronged him , and also me his friend : 
For I must think , if he by love was slain , 
Though thy hand did it , 't was through my disdain . 
Disdain ( said I ? ) yea , yea , I did disdain him , 
Else I had pitied , when he first did plain him : 
And therefore , Love , I must hold thee excused ; 
For Love not me , but I have Love abused . 
then let me never think , that Love did ill him , 
But rather yield , that my disdain did kill him . 
'T was so indeed : in very deed 't was so , 
'T was my own self , that wrought myself this woe : 
For had I been kind ( as I might have been ) 
Still had I kept my comely Coravin : 
Still had I kept my comely Coravin , 
Had I been kind ( as o , would I had been ) 
But ( wretched ) I would not be won to 't then . 
Ah ( foolish Females ) why should we wrong men ? 
Why should a self-willed woman work his death , 
That loves her dearer than his deare-lifes' breath ? 
Why should we prise Virginity so high , 
That ever we 'll lose it , let our Lovers die ? 
When th' one is an Idol that is but good in name , 
And nothing else ( how ere we prise the same ) 
th' other is the rarest frame on earth , 
From whose fair being first ourselves took birth : 
But I 'm unwise ( as women ay have been ) 
And have both wronged myself and Coravin , 
Not only in this , but many other things , 
Which now much sorrow by remembrance brings : 
For had he sometimes proffered me a kiss , 
( Why should a true friend such a favour miss ? ) 
I 'd frown , and say he was too peremptory . 
then he ( poor soul ) would straightway say I 'm sorry : 
If I offend you , I 'll no more assay . 
Yet ( as one injured ) I would fling away , 
And scarce come near him of a good while after , 
To make him grieve , whilst I grew fat with laughter : 
But weighing ( at length ) how heinously he took 
My sharp rebuke , I with a smiling look 
Would comfort him , and say , Come , Coravin , 
Too much unkindness for one kiss hath been ; 
To make amends with , take thee two or three ; 
Though I seemed coy , I 'll not be so to thee : 
And therefore come ( sweetheart ) and take enough . 
" Maids ( though they are squeamish ) loved as well as you . 
" what 's hardly gotten , men most highly deem : 
" But what 's soon purchased , slightly they esteem . 
then blame me not , although I seemed coy . 
" Lovers ( like babes ) must beg for every toy , 
And in th'obtaining think they are happy too , 
By getting that which others cannot do . 
But whither am I carried with this vein 
Of my conceited ( sergeant ) disdain ; 
Since to be coy , and something seeming nice , 
Is not disdain ? disdain is as cold as Ice . 
But my affection ( like to coals of fire 
In ashes wrapped up , lest they should aspire ) 
Was inly hot with fervency of zeal , 
Though to myself I did the same conceal . 
" Fire hid in ashes , hardly is contained , 
" But love enveloped , more hard restrained . 
then since I inwardly did hold him dear , 
" And inward passions penetrate most near , 
I must needs think my sorrow-tyred tongue 
Hath been o'er apt to do my own self wrong , 
In saying , my disdain should work his woe , 
Who was not loathed , but beloved so , 
That I esteemed him dearer than my life , 
And only hoped to have been his wife : 
And well I might ; for he deserved no less , 
But to enjoy the bravest Shepherdess : 
For o , he had such worthy qualities , 
And was so fair , well-favoured , and so wise , 
That every Shepherdess did like and love him , 
Although their beauties had no power to move him ▪ 
Only myself sweet Coravin affected ; 
The rest he loved not , nor their loves respected . 
I know he loved me ; and for ever will 
Resolve myself , that he doth love me still , 
loves me in death as dear as in 's life . 
And o , ( me thinks ) I hear him call me wife . 
Wife was his word : Wife would he ever call me . 
O , that no other title had befall me : 
For then , ah then , ( I need not tell ye how ) 
I 'd been as happy , as I 'm hapless now : 
For now I 'm neither Widow , Maid , nor Wife ; 
And yet all three : and so I 'll end my life . 
I 'll end my life : o , that it now were ended : 
For then by Death I should be much befriended , 
And with my Coravin should quickly be , 
Whose hou'ring ghost now seems t' appear to me , 
And looks as grimly as if some were here , 
That were the means to make away my Dear : 
Or that his passage Charon hath denied 
To th' Eliz'an fields ( for Lovers purified ) 
Until the world takes notice of his wrongs 
By my complaint , ( to whom it most belongs . ) 
If it be so , ( sweet Coravin ) be sure , 
thou shalt not long thy wand'ring course endure . 
I 'll do thee all the right that I can do : 
Which being done , I will come to thee too : 
But yet ( ah wretched and unhappy I ) 
Though die I would ( as yet ) I cannot die . 
Those that would live , Death quickly takes away : 
But those that would die , them he doth delay . 
Injurious Fates , why should your Factor Death 
So forward be , to suffocate the breath 
Of jocund Shepherds , and of Iou'all spirits , 
And fly from them that wretchedness inherits ? 
But ( o ) I now perceive wherefore he fly's me , 
And why ( although entreated ) he denies me 
To end my days . O , 't is because that he 
Murdered my Coravin for loving me . 
For if nor Love , nor my disdain did slay him , 
Surely 't was Death that did from hence convey him . 
Death , yea 't was Death , and none but Death did do it . 
( Yet gods , nor men , never gave consent unto it ) 
Meager faced monster , most envious slave , 
With Nature's best gift why didst fill a grave ? 
thou unseen shadow , ghastly and most grim , 
Why hast thou filled a vasty vault with him , 
With him that was Earth's all-admired Creature , 
And did surpass all Shepherds for sweet feature ? 
With him that graced th' Arcadian Plains , 
And was the glory of their goodly Swains : 
With him that was the Mirror of all men 
That ever was seen , or ever shall be again : 
With him that was endued from above , 
With all the gifts that gods and men do love : 
With him whose youth was virtuously inclined , 
And ( as the Sun doth lights ) all Swains outshined 
With him that was beloved of all ( save thee ) 
And therefore slain t'extract these tears from me . 
Accursed Death , most cruel and unkind , 
Having slain him , why leav'st thou me behind ? 
Why may not I ( that am his only Wife ) 
Associate him as well in death as life ? 
Why should I live , and draw a loathed breath , 
When my dear Love lies in the laws of Death ? 
We read of Women throw themselves in fire , 
When as their loving husbands lives expire . 
Portia took burning Coals and swallowed , 
Hating to live , her husband being dead . 
Cleopatra ( for Love of Anthony ) 
With sting of Aspics did most stoutly die . 
And shall not I ( although a Shepherdess ) 
Resolve like them , since in the like distress ? 
Shall I be timorous ( and not imitate 
The worthy'st women for a worthy mate ? ) 
no : I 'll not be divorced from my Dear : 
Since he is gone , I 'll not sit grieving here . 
Sweet Coravin , I 'll come to thee ' ere night , 
And give my life , to gain my Lover's sight . 
But then ( ah then ) who shall thy death deplore ? 
These my laments do make thy loss seem more : 
Therefore I 'll live , and let the world to ken , 
How much I prized thee more than other men , 
Who although dead to others , yet ( in me ) 
thou shalt live still , and still my True-love be : 
For so thou art ( in deed , loh so thou art ) 
thou only hold'st possession of my heart , 
Possession of my heart thou hold'st in deed , 
And shalt for ever ( none shall thee succeed . ) 
then why should I imagine thou art slain ? 
And why inveygh against Love and Death ( in vain ? ) 
Come , Candida , 't is folly thus to do : 
thou injur'st them both , and thine own self too . 
They did not kill sweet Coravin . Ah , no. 
Some uncouth accident hath bred this woe : 
Some qualm o're's heart , or else some ecstasy , 
bred by conceit ( begot by jealousy ) 
Of grief , might kill him , seeing many seek me , 
lest some of them ( as well as he ) might leake me . 
Yea sure 't was so , so did he die ( no doubt ) 
" no death's untimely , but time brings it out : 
" Heaven will not have a murder to be hid , 
" But first or last betrays the homicide . 
But if grief killed him , 't is in vain to weep : 
" For 't will kill all that do 't long company keep . 
then Candida ( awhile ) lay tears aside , 
And tell what love-tricks did in 's life betid : 
Tell how he 'd sit , and pipe so prettily , 
That all Swains joyed to hear his harmony : 
Each Nymph and Shepherdess , that now remains 
In any of these neighbouring Groves or Plains , 
From Fountains and from fields would flock with speed , 
To hear him play upon his Oeten Reed : 
And as they daily used for to do , 
So would the Satyrs and the Dreiads too . 
How oft have I my milk-white flock forsook , 
And slily stolen down to a silent brook , 
My Coravins sweet Songs and Oads to hear , 
When he ( poor soul ) thought little I was there ? 
amongst the Reeds ( o wherefore did he hide him ? ) 
At unawares I oftentimes have spied him : 
There would he sit , and sometimes sing and play , 
And sometimes weep , and many woes bewray : 
Sometimes his music did delight mine ear ; 
Sometimes I 'd sigh his sad complaints to hear , 
And to myself say ( Lo ) I can relieve him : 
But I 'll not do 't , 'cause purposely I 'll grieve him . 
Tut , let him languish , pule , and pine awhile . 
" Who sighs for love , makes his beloved smile : 
For as the Adamant doth Diamonds draw , 
Or little jet extracts the longest straw : 
Even so my beauty binds him to obey , 
To seek to sue , and serve me every way . 
" Fair women ( always ) specially the witty , 
" Love to be loved , but love not to show pity , 
Though fair-faced foolish ones that do not know , 
How to esteem the beauties that they owe , 
May ( like a Puppy that is played withal ) 
As oft as touched , be apt to take a fall ▪ 
But we that know what power our beauties have 
Can at out Altars make them creep and crave , 
And think they are happy too , and if they may 
But get a kiss , for courting us all day : 
For we do use to try , before we trust : 
How should we else distinguish Love from lust ? 
" Men are deceitful , and will swear they love us , 
" ( Calling to record gods , and heaven above us ) 
" When they intent no love at all unto us , 
" But only lust ( wherewith they lay t' undo us ) 
" Seeking to undermine by subtle Arts , 
" The weak made fortress of our feeble hearts ▪ 
" For what is (null) , wit , or Art , or gold can do , 
" But they will use ( if not abuse them too ? ) 
" Only to gain their wicked wills of us , 
" Whom they 'll soon cast off , if they conquer thus . 
" Ah beauty , born to multitudes of troubles , 
" How many ways thy misery redoubles ! 
" Subject thou art unto suspicion still , 
" And art condemned , though thou committest no ill : 
" Fear and foul jelouzie thy attendants be , 
" Sickness and age do each hour threaten thee . 
" Besides all this , men ( both with gold and wit ) 
" Seek beauty's ruin , and lay siege to it . 
" Nay more than thus , it doth itself betray , 
" And to our foes our weakness doth bewray . 
" no marvel then though fair ones feel much woe , 
" When all these enemies assail them so . 
But in this case I wrong my Coravin , 
Who guiltless was of such gregious sin : 
For why , his love was most immaculate , 
As free from folly , as 't was far from hate : 
For when upon his pipe he did sit playing , 
Or his sad passions seriously bewraying , 
He did desire his Candida might hear , 
Both what his pastimes and his plain were : 
His heart and tongue concurring both in one , 
Made him wish audience , when he was alone : 
" For Lovers that do no dissembling use , 
" Can make no faults , but what Love may excuse . 
But flattering fellows that come cogging to us , 
" ( Surely they loves not , that with slights do woe us ) 
" Their praise and proffers are like lime-twigs laid , 
" Wherewith t' ensnare an unsuspecting maid . 
But Coravin did love unfeignedly ; 
Free were his thoughts from fraud and flattery : 
For ( with his tongue ) his heart did speak to me , 
" ( Happy were maids might all so wooed be . ) 
Nothing but pure thoughts which proceeded still 
From true affection and entire good will , 
Which made me love him , and oft times go look , 
" ( Love teacheth Lovers to search every nook ) 
Whether he were in flowery field , or Grove , 
Or to some fountain had his fair flock drove ; 
Where , if I found him , ( as perhaps I did ) 
" ( For Love may lie close , but not long be hid ) 
Like pretty Lambs we 'd sport and play together . 
" Wooers are wags , or wantoness , choose you whether . 
then though my Dear ( to my great grief ) be dead , 
Yet let our meetings be remembered : 
Much good pastime had we two alone , 
And ( o ) most pleasing , 'cause 't was seen to none . 
" Love takes no liking where strange eyes may see 't : 
" But where most secret , there 't is still most sweet . 
O , how the kisses and the kind embraces , 
Which passed betwixt us twain in private places , 
Now ( being remembered ) ravisheth my sense , 
And with my sorrows seemeth to dispense ! 
Bidding me leave my sad Laments awhile , 
And with ( then ) amorous talk this time beguile ▪ 
Which ( for my Love's sake ) I am loath to do . 
" But weak's our sex , and wandring-minded too . 
" We ( like the Moon ) our minds must often change ▪ 
" All women used , and therefore 't is not strange . 
then if one passion can expel another , 
Love ( for a while ) Deaths sad designments smother , 
Whilst I relate ( in this lamenting time ) 
Our pretty pastimes in Love pleasant prime , 
This is my lip ( kind ) Coravin would say , 
When on my soft lip his sweet finger lay . 
This is not Thenots , nor doth Thirsis owe it : 
But 't is my lip ; Love did on me bestow it . 
then would he kiss it , and ( in kissing ) cry ▪ 
here 's Heaven on earth , and th' only joy that I 
Desire to have : for with a touch of this , 
Me thinks , I feel a taste of all true bliss . 
then would he kiss , and kiss it o'er again . 
( " Such sweets as those never satiateth men . ) 
And then ( in passion ) feeling what he spoke , 
From his sweet tongue these sugared speeches broke : 
If ever Balsamum did cure a wound , 
If ever comforts did man's cares confound , 
If ever excellence did breathe on earth ; 
Here ( I protest ) it first of all took birth : 
For here I find the Fountain of delight , 
By day to comfort , and content by night . 
Here find I Nectar and Ambrosia too , 
For which the gods strive ( as we mortals do ) 
here 's Hibla's honey , and Himettus' dew , 
Desired by all , but ( ah ) enjoyed by few : 
Here is the sum of all my souls desire ; 
Here spring's the fuel that inflames love's fire ; 
Here sweet Aromatics and odours flow , 
Rarer than ever did in Egypt grow ; 
Here is the place surpasseth Helicon , 
( Which all the Muse's sport and play upon ; ) 
here sits the Graces on this ( sacred ) lip ; 
here dance the Fairies , here they finely trip ; 
The Shag-hayred Satyrs , and the Dreiads all , 
here ( only ) keep their solemn Festival ; 
here is the Latmus Phebe light upon , 
To kiss her deare-loued young Endymion ; 
here is the Crimson-coloured Coral door , 
Wherewith Love locks up his delicious store ; 
here are enclosed Portcullises of Pearl , 
( Given by the gods t' adorn my dainty Girl ) 
Whiter then Ivory , and of far more worth , 
then all the pearls that Taprobane brings forth ; 
here lies ( entrenched ) the organ of her heart , 
Which never moves , but music doth impart , 
Sweeter than that which god Apollo played , 
When he to win fair Daphne's love assayed . 
O , how my soul is ravished , when I hear 
That most mellifluous tongue sound in mine ear ! 
For then ( me thinks ) some sacred Angel sings , 
Whose voice my senses in a slumber brings , 
And all my cares and corrasives expels , 
By hearing her , whose harmony excels : 
For Candida can tune her sweet tongue so , 
That when she speaks , her words extirps my woe . 
And here ( ah here ) besides what is recited , 
Is one thing more wherewith I am delighted , 
And that 's her dulcet and delicious breath , 
Able to sweeten the sour face of Death , 
And purify the most infectious air : 
What it perfumes , no poison can impair . 
Odours and Incense ( offered to the gods ) 
Are not so sweet , as her sweet breath ( by odds : ) 
For when she speaks , the Sun seems to exhale , 
And draw that vapour from this earthly vale , 
Up to the clouds , which ( sweetened there withal ) 
Shall henceforth none but honey drops let fall : 
Which drops distilling from fair heaven to earth ▪ 
Shall give her glory that first gave them birth . 
Thus would my deare-loued lou'ly Coravin 
Sir and discourse , when we alone have been . 
then would he clasp me in his comely arms , 
Whose pleasant touches were as powerful charms , 
To bind me with , more fast and firmer too ▪ 
Than chains of Ir'n or Adamant can do : 
And b'ing impris'nd in that Ivory Gayle , 
( From whence sweet kisses only were my bail ) 
he 'd set him down upon the green-leaued grass , 
And ( having me in 's arms ) would say , Sweet lass , 
here we may sport us on these pleasant banks , 
And use a thousand pretty wanton pranks ; 
here we may sit , and clip , and college , and kiss , 
Dally , do what we will , taste all Love's bliss : 
For here 's no envious Ill-suspecting eye 
Near to this place : we here in covert lie : 
Time proffers here from foul reproach to free us : 
For why , here 's none ( save heavenly power 's ) can see us. 
" Lo , thus the place with th' opportunity 
" Moves many a chaste mind to immodesty , 
And brought my Coravin ( there furtherance having ) 
For what 's unfitting thus to fall a craving . 
Sweet Candida ( quoth he ) thou knowest I love thee , 
And for Love's first fruits now I mean to move thee : 
thou seest the all-discrying light of day 
Is almost fled , and vanished away , 
And sable coloured night ( which all things covers ) 
Spreads her black Curtain to befriend kind Lovers . 
Lo , all is whist , our flocks are close in fold ; 
And we alone : why should we not be bold ? 
It were a shame that I so long should woe thee , 
And never offer Love's delights unto thee . 
then blame me not , though now I move that suit . 
" ( Maid's should be marred , if men were ever mute . ) 
It is our part to make the proffer still : 
But 's your acceptance makes it good or ill . 
then be propitious ( like the time and place ) 
" they are happy lovers have kind loves in chase . 
Come , Candida , thou knowest what I desire . 
" no sea 's more boundless than Love's burning fire . 
Dear Sweet , delay not ; but let me possess 
That which I seek : thou shalt have never the less . 
then yield to me without resisting long . 
" 't is vain for weak ones to contend with strong . 
With that I sighed , and wept , and struggled too , 
And thus cried out , ( o God , ) what shall I do ? 
Shall I be injured by my only friend , 
And will he rob me , that should me defend ? 
what faith 's in men , when friends do traitors prove 
And let their lusts gain sovereignty o'er Love ? 
This said ( quoth he ) Why weepest and wayl'st thou thus , 
Since time and place seek both to pleasure us ? 
My Faith and Troth ( thou knowest ) are plight to thee , 
That true and constant I will ever be . 
What though we are not ( as I wish we were ) 
Married together ? let that be no bar : 
For in the heavens , He that doth sit most high , 
Knows all our vow 's , and knows I do not lie . 
We two are linked ( though not with Hymen's band ) 
With heart in heart , and also hand in hand ; 
And whilst in me remains a spark of life , 
I will accounted sweet Candida my wife ; 
And at the instant I resign my breath , 
I 'll call thee so , and seal it with my death . 
For thou art my wife , and there lives none but thee , 
That any right or interest hath in me . 
( Sweet Candida ) then why shouldst thou resist me ? 
And having thus spoke twenty times he kissed me : 
" For kissing's oil , which ( cast upon love's fire ) 
" Doth aggravate and make it more aspire . 
But words , vows , kisses ( though too strong all three ) 
All wanted power to prevail with me : 
For though these agents did all plead delight , 
Yet still I dreaded , lest some danger might 
Ensue thereof ; besides the hideous shame 
That might detect me , whereso're I came . 
And therefore thus replied ( Sweet Coravin ) 
O do not 'tice me for to taste that sin , 
That odious sin , which ( with my soul ) I do 
Hate , even as hell , and all hell's torments too : 
I yet am clear , my flesh is free from taint 
Of filthy lust ; then seek not thou to stain 't , 
But rather lend me thy keene-edged knife , 
Wherewith to end this my unhappy life : 
For I protest , ten thousand deaths I 'll die , 
Ever lose mine honour , shipwreck chasttiy . 
He hearing me thus resolutely bend , 
First fetched a sigh , than prayed me be content ▪ 
And to appease my anger , fell to kissing ▪ 
" ( Love's chiefest delight , when th' other thing is missing . ) 
But whilst he kissed , I strived and struggled so , 
We both grew breathless , than he let me go . 
Yet oft we met there : But my Coravin 
Never ( after that ) enticed me unto sin , 
Nor any kindness would presume to crave , 
more than myself thought good to let him have : 
For since he held a glance to be a grace , 
And kissing , favour in the highest place . 
" Whereby we see , lewd suits must be controlled , 
" Or th' hand of lust will soon make love's heart cold . 
" Maid's must not let men have their minds of them , 
" Chastity's precious like a Diadem , 
" And hardly kept ( as Crowns are kept by Kings . ) 
" So many seek for to subvert such things : 
But leaving that , which ( o too well ) is known . 
" ( For few there are that can defend their own ) 
Let me cease talking of it , and return 
To where I left my dear Deer loss to mourn : 
For ill it fits me , whom sad woe hath ceased , 
To speak of aught wherewith I ear'st was pleased . 
" joys are no joys that do in sorrow end . 
" Misery ( most commonly ) doth come unkend : 
" And when we think , we are in safest estate , 
" Mischief stands nearest the main to ruinate : 
For lo , when I beheld those happy days , 
Which e'rst I spoken of , and I once might praise , 
I little feared that ( which now I find , 
To quench my hopes in this unhappy kind . ) 
Grief ( the only issue of unhappy creatures , 
The bane of beauty , and best-formed features ) 
Should have brought me into th' estate I 'm now , 
For to sit thus , and sigh and grieve with you , 
For loss of Coravin , whom you loved dear : 
Yet only me his death concerns most nearly : 
For he was mine , my best and chiefest part , 
The only joy and comfort of my heart : 
And therefore I have the most cause to mourn , 
( Though your loves will not let me weep alone ) 
Yea it is I , and none but only I , 
That for his death have cause to sit and cry , 
To cry , complain , to sorrow , sigh , and moan , 
Till like to woeful Niobe ( now a stone ) 
I be transformed ; from the form I bear , 
And have no sense t' afford or feel a tear : 
For Coravin , when he resigned his breath , 
Gave me this gift , his death should be my death , 
My death indeed : for ( o ) why should I live , 
To whom my Love this Legacy did give ? 
Why should I live , and sit lamenting here 
Upon the earth , when heaven doth hold my Dear ? 
It is unfit ( since we two were as one ) 
That I should live , now my dear Love is gone . 
Ah time , why art thou now so slowly paced , 
That wontest to flit more swift then th' heart' that 's chased ? 
Why in my sorrows dost thou seem to leave me , 
That of all joys so lately didst bereave me ? 
For having done the worst that thou couldst do , 
In kill him , why dost not kill me too ? 
Why bring'st not Death ( urged by this occasion ) 
On my life's kingdom to make stern invasion ? 
Hast thou took all from me that thou couldst take , 
Saving myself ( that now is sorrows make ? ) 
And leav'st thou me distressed ( as in scorn ) 
To be times abject , that did time adorn ? 
For I was held the only Paragon 
That ever th' Arcadian Shepherds looked upon . 
Made they not Odes and Sonnets every day , 
Which to the world my beauty did bewray ? 
Who was 't could pipe , and did not sound my praise , 
( Whose name adorned all their Roundelays . ) 
Was I not th' only object of their eyes , 
At whom they would ( as at the Suns arise 
The Saluadge people do ) stand in a maze , 
Worshipping that whereon their eyes did gaze ? 
What argument did any of them hold 
So confident , ( it could not be controlled ) 
As of my beauty , person , and rare wit , 
Which oft made multitudes to muse at it ? 
Each Shepherdess envied my excellent parts , 
As th' only Adamant to attract men's hearts , 
And said , that I was honoured of each Swain , 
As Cynthia is of all her starry train . 
This time I had , and thus I was reputed . 
But what I was , is now ( by woe ) confuted , 
And with my woe , the wretchedness of time 
Vpbraydeth me , as guilty of a crime , 
For letting slip occasions that were offered . 
And losing time , when love ( in time ) was proffered , 
Telling me now ( ah that no time could tell me ) 
What I forsook , and what hath since befell me , 
Saying I had ( o that I had so still ) 
A time , wherein I might have wrought my william 
I had a time wherein I lived content , 
I had a time of sport and merriment , 
I had a time , wherein I took delight , 
I had a time , when time was worth the sight , 
I had a time , wherein I might have been 
more kinder than I was to Coravin , 
I had a time ( ever time took him from me ) 
Which joyed my heart that happy time to see . 
But now ( ah now ) that time 's untimely past , 
And where weal was , there wretchedness is placed . 
Ay me , most miserable of all maids alive ! 
more tyranny no Tyrant can contrive , 
then time hath showed to take all did content me , 
And now to mock , and with much grief torment me . 
" But still it falls out ( o disastrous Fate ! ) 
" That the most fair are most unfortunate : 
" For as we are blessed with beauty from above , 
" So we are accursed by being crossed in Love ; 
" Which makes the meanest , and most black of all , 
" Despite our fairness , and desire our fall , 
" Glorying to see the ruin of our state : 
" For whom men love most , them most woman hate . 
" It grieves our Sex to see a supreme fair , 
" To live unblemished , breathing in the air , 
" And ever they shall unscandalized live , 
" ( Most shameless ) they will them shames liu'ry give . 
But why against this huge-made monster , many , 
Do I inveigh , that never was wronged by any ? 
Never wronged by any ? yes , yes , and envied , 
If not ( by some ) too palpably belied . 
But ah , I reck not what reports they make . 
I 'll suffer all for my sweet Lover's sake : 
For if in Coravins behalf they speak , 
They shall do well their wraths on me to wreak . 
Too much blame cannot upon me be laid : 
For I deserve the worst that can be said . 
Just are the heavens in punishing me thus , 
And yet I 'm wronged . ( O , who can right discuss ? ) 
None but the gods my injuries do know : 
Each mortal's ignorant how my griefs do grow . 
Would I had never lived to have felt Love's force , 
Envious Death than had not made divorce 
So ( unexpectedly ) 'twixt him and me . 
Thus to provoke my sorrows ( as you see . ) 
Ay me , it is for Coravin that I 
Now sigh , and grieve , and weep thus woefully . 
Dead is my Dear . ( O would he were not so ) 
joy , heaven , thou hast him ( he did thither go ) 
On earth he could not , no , he could not stay . 
Heaven got him hence ( like Ganymede ) away . 
None but my dearest deare-loued Coravin , 
Coravin ( only ) could jove's favour win . 
Up to the heavens the gods have got my Love : 
Royally robed , he there attends on jove . 
Would I were with him , and coequally 
In heaven established in eternity . 
no doubt I shall : but ( ah ) I cannot yet . 
" Angels seats are most difficult to get . 
Retire then , thoughts : for ( till my death's day ) I 
Cannot attain to immortality : 
And die I would not , till the world doth know , 
" ( no flatterers tongue can true affection show ) 
Directly how my Coravin was lost . 
Injurious Fates , how are we wretches crossed ! 
Death doth deprive us of our Dearest friends ; 
And yet conceals the causes of their ends . 
Are we so much despised of heavenly Powers , 
Not what they gave us , we may keep as ours ? 
Did heaven not ( once ) give Coravin to me ? 
Can they revoke it , I not injured be ? 
O no , no , no , ( I know ) they cannot do it ? 
" Rob'ry's unjust whose're adds aid unto it . 
And therefore heavens ( I say ) and gods are cruel , 
Unjustly to deprive me of my jewel . 
If I do wrong you , ( heavens and gods ) I pray , 
Now , now , ( o now ) o take me now away , 
Take me away ; yea , yea , so let it be . 
And ( whose're killed him ) lay the guilt on me : 
Say , my unkindness killed the flower of Swains , 
( The comely'st Shepherd that ever kept these Plains ) 
Yet 't was not I , my coyness , nor unkindness ; 
But 't was this Boy-god , Love ( misled my blindness ▪ ) 
For ( on my soul ) I ne'er intended aught , 
That wronged my Dear , in word , or deed , or thought . 
But , Love , 't was thou , 't was thou , and none but thou . 
That murther'dst him , and mak'st me mourn here now : 
'T was thou that didst bereave me of my joy , 
And now dost drench me in this dire annoy : 
'T was thou that didst my youths fair hopes delude , 
And all my comforts cruelly exclude , 
'T was thou that didst destroy my Dearest friend , 
With whom my love , and dearest delight did end : 
'T was thy hand gave my heart this cause of woe . 
And made these eyes ( like raging streams ) overflow : 
'T was thou that mad'st these Shepherds fall a weeping , 
And leave their fair flocks ( careless ) without keeping ▪ 
'T was thou didst all whereof I do complain : 
Thy cursed Bow my best-beloved hath slain , 
And in that act thou hast performed all ill , 
" ( For who can do a worse deed , then kill ? ) 
Ah , Cupid , Cupid , thou hast stained thy name : 
Both heaven , and earth , are full of thy defame , 
And more shall be : there stayed , and sighed , and groaned . 
( Such woeful wights are worthy to be moaned . ) 
then turned herself , and wistly looked about , 
Till she spied me ( that still paints passions out , ) 
Whom she desired , as ever I loved a Woman , 
( Which powerful speech can be withstood by no man ) 
That I would write her wrongs , and woes at large . 
At whose request I undertook this charge ; 
And thus replied : thou subject of my verse , 
If ( silly ) I , thy sorrows must rehearse , 
Deign ( thou Divinest of creatures ) to infuse 
A fluent spirit into my feeble muse , 
That unborn Issues ( in my work ) may see , 
What thy perfections could perform by me . 
thou art my Subject , and my Sweet Muse too , 
From whom flows all , of all I wish to do . 
Three days and nights I have already spent , 
Of thy sad sorrows , for to see th' event . 
And ten times three more ( willingly ) I 'll spend , 
To make thy woes unto the wide-world kenned . 
Thanks she returned me , and requital vowed . 
" True beauty ( like true virtue ) is not proud : 
But him that merit's , still it will affect , 
Though witless Dowdies do all worth neglect . 
then unto Cupid turned her speech again . 
" ( Women are more impatient than men ) 
't is thou ( quoth she ) that makest me forlorn ; 
't is thou that mak'st me hold my life in scorn ; 
't is thou that hast of all contentment reft me , 
And naught but woe and wretchedness now left me ▪ 
Ah woe is me , that ever I knew Love , 
Since thereby I thus miserable prove : 
Since thereby I thus miserable prove , 
Woe to the time that ever I knew Love. 
Was it for this Dame Nature did her best , 
To frame my face more fairer than the rest ? 
Was it for this I did reject so many , 
And ( but that one ) could love or like of any ? 
Was it for this , that I would go so trim , 
To gain his love , then be beguiled of him ? 
Was it for this , that I did trick my hair , 
And sought all means to make me supreme fair ? 
Was it for this , that I so carelessly 
Forsook my flocks , to keep him company ? 
Was it for this , that I took no delight 
In any thing , but only in his sight ? 
Was it for this , nor wealth , nor wit could win 
My flint-hard heart to let love lodge therein , 
( Though many a sweet and worthy Swain did woe me ) 
Till he did come , whose death doth quite undo me ? 
Ah Love ( blind Love ) how blindly dost thou lead us , 
And ( like a false friend ) badly dost bestead us ? 
Is this the guerdon thou didst promise me , 
To pay with death my Love's long-looked for fee ? 
Is this the comfort I did hope to have , 
For Bride-grom's bed ? my Bridegroom in his grave ? 
O eyes ( henceforth ) be you no longer eyes : 
But ( having seen these sad calamities ) 
Turn into rivulets of running tears , 
And as small drops of rain the Marble wears : 
So dig you channels , and indent deep creeks 
In my ( now ) cloudy and discoloured cheeks , 
And let your lights ( which e'rst did shine as clear , 
As heavens bright lamps ) no more to men appear : 
But be you dim , nay , dark and shaded ever : 
Keep your close Cells , and be disclosed never . 
And thou my face , fair beauties late-loued field , 
( Such as Arcadian Swains have seen but siled ) 
Never seem amiable in man's eye : 
But let thy Roses and thy Lilies die . 
And now let wrinkles ( mixed with morphew ) grow , 
Where their acquaint colours made a curious show . 
And you , my lips , ( much praised by many a man ) 
Be ( as you are now ) ever pale and wan , 
Rivell , chick , pill ; and let my sighs consume ye : 
As odorous breath wont ( balme-like ) to perfume ye . 
And thou , my skin , ( the lou'ly lawny veil ) 
That keep'st my corpse within an ivory Gayle , 
Turn to a yellowish or Tawny hue , 
And be unpleasing to all people's view . 
And likewise you , my Saphire-colourd veins , 
In whom my lives ( yet purple ) blood remains , 
Whither , dry , cling together , and ( henceforth ) 
Stop my blood's course , till it turn nothing worth . 
And you my breasts ( too Snowy appenynes ) 
more prized by many , than th' indian mines , 
With all the rest of my admired parts , 
( Wherewith I conquered a world of hearts ) 
Waste and consume , fade , and fall quite away : 
For life I loathe , and now for death I stay : 
For life I loathe , and now for death I stay . 
And ( for my Loves-sake ) now wish life decay . 
Which said , the poor wretch ( with much woe confounded ) 
Gave a great sigh ; and having sighed , she swooned . 
Whereat the Shepherds ( which did weep before ) 
Now wrung their hands , and wailed , and wept much more , 
And stood awhile amazed at this chance . 
then wrought they means to wake her from her trance : 
One rubs her temples , and another , he 
Doth clap her cheeks , till crimson red they be : 
Another wrings her Nose , until the blood 
( Enraged ) starts out , to see if he were wood : 
One wrenched her pretty fingers in his hand : 
Another whooping in her ear , doth stand . 
Thus as they grieved , to see what did befall her : 
So each of them endeavoured to recall her , 
And did at length : but faint she was , and weak , 
And still she sighed ( as sighs her heart should break ) 
Anon said thus , ( but more she could not say ) 
Cupid killed Coravin : woe's me for ay ! 
Cupid killed Coravin : woe's me for ay ! 
For loss of him , thus makes my life decay ; 
And so sunk down unto the earth again . 
The whilst the Shepherds did on Love complain 
And cursed his Bow , his arrows , and his quiver , 
And him the Wag , that was their woes contriver . 
Cupid at this , put finger in the eye , 
And ( whilst they chid him ) wept most childishly ; 
then babe-like said : ( for Babes can do no other : ) 
How you have used me , I will tell my mother . 
By this , fair Candida ( whom all thought dead , 
Till the kind Swains did elevate her head ) 
began to stir , and roll her radiant eyes . 
( Beauty dwells there even when the body dies . ) 
And when she 'd sucked breath from the solid air , 
Away from thence the Shepherds did convey her . 
With whom I 'll leave her , till she do recover , 
And learn to leave lamenting for her Lover . 
Lo now , young Cupid , seeing all were gone , 
( With many tears ) her woeful state did moon , 
And to himself ( the silly god ) did say , 
Kind Coraum I cruelly did slay , 
And was the Author of her woes , and cries 
Not willingly , but through my want of eyes : 
Yea , it was I , and none but only I , 
That was the cause of her calamity : 
And now it grieves me , ( when it is too late , ) 
Love should ( so lucklesly ) gain Lover's hate , 
And with his folly make the gods offended , 
And mortals mourn thus : but the Scene b'ing ended , 
In which my fact was punished with defame , 
( To the impeachment of my honoured name , ) 
I 'll get me gone from th' Arcadian Plains , 
And come no more amongst these mourning Swains , 
Till Candida her Coravin forget , 
And love another whom she knows not yet : 
Which to effect , I 'll leave expostulating , 
And now go seek where Death's negotiating , 
To do the wretched and weak worldlings wrong , 
With the golden arrows that to Love belong ; 
Which I 'll take from him , ( as I 'm charged to do ; ) 
And give him 's own , with all that longs thereto . 
Therewith departs . But ( o ) not far goes he , 
" ( A foes found sooner , than a friend can be . ) 
Ever he met Death , who ( like an envious slave ) 
Exclaimed on Love , and him ill speeches gave , 
Saying , he was a cozening cheating mate , 
" ( O cruel Death , thou art full of cankered hate ) 
To take his Ebon Darts , and stead thereof , 
Leave him loves squilkers ; whereat old folks scoff 
The young make songs on , and the wise reject : 
For ( but with foundlings ) Loves in no respect : 
And therefore ( quoth he ) I ( in scorn ) deliver 
Thy babble Arrows , and thy boyish Quiver : 
here take them ( Infant ) and give me mine own , 
Wherewith to heaven thou ( like a fool ) hast flown , 
And there hast done my engines so much grace , 
As make show of them in that sacred place ; 
Whilst I have born thine all about the world , 
And at the bosoms of the basest hurled , 
By which ( of Death ) this slight thy shafts have got ; 
they 'll kill sometimes , though they by Love be shot , 
then shall I laugh at Lady Venus' child , 
To think how Death the Boy-god hath beguiled , 
Making him help me fill vast Graves and Tombs , 
That should make fertile barren woman's wombs . 
This said , changed Quivers , and away went he , 
Leaving young Cupid to complain to me , 
Of 's punishment for his rash oversight , 
To steal from heaven , and stay on earth one night : 
From whence the death of Coravin did spring , 
Which all this woe unto the world did bring , 
And shame to him ; on whom fell Death did rail ; 
And Shepherds likewise ( though it naught avail ) 
With bitter execrations did reject , 
As if his godhead were of no respect ; 
And thus he said : I do perceive ( quoth he ) 
thou must the Penman of my Progress be : 
Fair Candida hath chose thee , and desired , 
Not as a mercenary ( basely hired ) 
But as a true friend , that compassionates 
All Loyal Lover's lamentable states ; 
That thou wouldst in some sad-tunde Elegy , 
Tell how her Deare-loued Coravin did die 
By my o'resight , or rather want of sight : 
( For Love would not kill Lovers , though he might ) 
How she laments , and how the Shepherds weep , 
And what a sorrowing for one Swain they keep : 
How gods ( enraged ) have punished my offence , 
And mortals here ( with too much insolence ) 
Exclaimed on me , and cursed me to my face . 
( Why should a god endure so much disgrace ? ) 
How Death abused me , yet ( all this while ) I 
Did naught but weep , and durst not make reply ; 
Because the gods thought fit I should be shent , 
And ( for m'offence ) ordained this punishment . 
But as th'would'st have my mother be thy friend , 
So let this Story sparingly be penned . 
Condemn not Love much ( cause thou seest he 's blind ) 
As ever th'would'st favour of a female find : 
But write of him as th'would'st have him to be 
( In Venus' Court ) a friend , or foe to thee . 
With that the Boy betook him to his wings , 
( Love when he list , can soar ' 'bove earthly things ) 
And up to heaven did make his towering flight . 
I than returned these accidents to write ; 
Which ( as you see ) I have expressed here , 
Though other Pastorals it comes not near . 
Yet let the world vouchsafe me this report , 
My will is good , although my wit comes short . 
Sidney and Spencer , be you ay renowned : 
no time hath power your Pastorals to confound . 
Drayton , and all the rest that wrote of yore , 
Adorning time with your delicious store , 
Be ever honoured , and ( till th' end of times ) 
On Fame's pert tongue be praised for your Rhymes . 
You worthy ones , o , do not you disdain 
My mournful Muse , that in this humble vain 
Dares for to sing , considering these are days , 
In which some Critics will the best dispraise : 
But pardon me , should all be silent ; then 
Who should praise Virtue , or check Vice in men ? 
I know , fair Candida's complaint affords 
Matter enough , had I but proper words , 
T' express her griefs , whose woes , sighs , tears , & wrongs , 
Might task all pens , and almost tyre all tongues . 
But I ( alone ) do of her sorrows sing , 
Till better wits thereof be warbling : 
For ( su●e ) the work deserves a worthy wit , 
Though I ( the weakest ) doe first emblazon it . 
Amintas likewise told a sad-tuned Tale , 
For loss of 's Phillis , ( long since set to sale ) 
And for Laceno , and for all the rest , 
Much sorrow by the Shepherds was expressed : 
But I ore'slip it all , for her sweet sake , 
For whom too much pains I can never take . 
And now I will conclude her mournful song , 
To whom , I 'll sing a sweeter note ever long : 
For whilst I live , I will tune all my Lays , 
To comfort Candida , and in her praise . 
FINIS . 

