The epitaph of a godly man , especially a man of God : or , the happiness by death of holiness in life . Delineated in a sermon preached at the funeral of mr Adam Pemberton late minister of the parish of st Fosters Foster-lane : who ended this mortal , April the 8th , 1655. and was buried in hope of an immortal life the 11th of the same month . 

By nath : Hardy m. a. and preacher to the parish of st dionis back church . 

revel. 14 13.  

and i heard a voice from heaven , saying unto me , w•ite , blessed are they which die in the Lord , from henceforth , yea , saith the spirit , that they May rest from their labours , and their works do follow them . 

aug : de discipl : Christ : tract : 1. c. 12.  

prorsus confirmo , audeo dicere , credidi propter quod locutus sum , non potest malè mori qui bene vixerit . 

chrysost : in psal : 114.  

{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

London . printed by j. g. for Nathanaell Webb and William Grantham at the black bear near the little north-door of s. Paul's church , 1655.  

To the reverend Mr. John Pemberton , minister of Charleton in Kent : contentment here , and enjoyment hereafter . 

Reverend Sir , 

i am very sensible that this dedication will revive the memory of your great loss , and thereby renew your grief , but withal , this publication will perpetuate the memory of your dead son , and that May be your comfort . indeed , this ( As i conceive ▪ was the chief cause why it was so earnestly ▪ desired by many of his friends , and this ( I am sure ) was the only reason why it was at length yielded to by me . 

But truly , so precious is his name , that i am abundantly assured it will live though he be dead , not only in the inky characters of this paper , but the tender affections of many hearts : the truth is , Might prayers have prevailed with God for his life , he had not yet died ; and would tears have brought him back from the dead , he had again lived . what the name of the place was where the angel of the Lord spoke to the children of Israel , so that they lift up their voices and wept , Might justly have been given to that church upon the day of his interment , it was Bochim , a place of weeping ; every eye almost bedewing his grave with tears . and though in respect of him they were as needless , so fruitless ; the case being ( As holy Job observeth ) far different between a withered root , and a dead man ; yet as the Jews said of Christ weeping for Lazarus , it Might well be said of them , behold how they loved him : and doubtless , he cannot but be remembered by them to whom he was so much endeared . 

this i have thought fit to mention ( good Sir ) as for his honour , so your joy ; at least the mitigation of your sorrow for him , who lived so beloved , and died so lamented , and though he is buried , will not be forgotten . yet still , that which is , and aught to be , your greatest consolation , is the good hope you have of his eternal salvation , on whom , having finished his short course , in keeping the faith , and fighting the good fight , ( I trust ) the crown of righteousness is already in part , and shall be in that day fully conferred by the Lord the righteous judge . 

And now ( worthy friend ) i cannot but take notice of that whereof ( I am confident ) you are not unmindful , the various dispensation of divine providence towards you and yours . Both your hopeful sons he was pleased to take away in the morning of their youth , and you have lived to the evening of old age . Both their years put together could not make up much above two thirds of those you have already lived to , and ( if it be God's will ) May you see many more , for the sake , as of your surviving children , grandchildren , so especially the church ; that having expended a long life in God's service , you May at last exchange it for an eternal life in his glory . 

So prayeth Your truly loving friend , nath : Hardy . 

The epitaph of a godly man , especially a man of God . 

phil. chap. 1. ver. 21.  

to me to live is Christ , and to die is gain . 

 've both short and sweet , brief and pithy , few in expression , and large in extension . that of Solomon is an ample epitome , summing up the whole duty of man in these two , fear God , and keep his commandments . that of our blessed saviour is a comprehensive compendium , comprising the whole law of God in these two , thou shalt love the Lord thy God , and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself . but lo ! in this abridgement we are taught both how to live , and how to die , quantum in quantillo , how much is here folded up in a little ; what counsel for life , what comfort in death doth this scripture afford ! Happy is he who so readeth this copy as to write after it , vieweth these steps as to tread in them , being able to say , if not with the same measure , yet at least with the like truth of affection and confidence in Christ : to me to live is Christ , and to die is gain . 

I find among expositors a double version of this verse : 

1.  Some modern , both Protestant and popish interpreters ; and one among the ancients , read this verse as if it were one entire proposition , whereof Christ is the subject , and gain the predicate : Christ is to me gain both in life and death . according to this sense there is a double truth contained in them . 

first , that both life and death are gain to a good man : in the former verse , our apostle expresseth his confidence , that both his life and death should be Christ's glory : and here , that they would be his gain , utraque mihi conducibilia , is Theodoret's note , both shall conduce to my benefit . ostendit sive vitam , sive mortem , sibi censuram in salutem , so Estius : he showeth that whatever happened , whether the continuation of his life , or the acceleration of his death , it should work for his good ; in which respect he seemeth to say , nec mori timeo , nec vivere recuso , as lapide well glosseth , i neither refuse to live , nor fear to die . in how happy an estate is every holy man , to whom no condition cometh amiss , prosperity or adversity , wealth or want , health or sickness , life or death . lucri bonus odour ex re quâlibet , saith the worldling , gain is sweet out of any thing . the saint finds truly sweet gain in every thing . 

secondly , that it is Christ who maketh both life and death gain to a good man . it was s. Paul's hope , first , that Christ should be magnified by him : and next , that he he should be comforted by Christ , both in life and death : unus est christus qut tam in morte quam in vita nos facit beatos , saith Calvin upon the place . Indeed , Christ is the Christians all in all Estares ▪ as David said concerning God , whom have i in heaven but thee ? and there is none on earth i desire in comparison of thee : so saith a Christian in this case concerning Christ , whom have i in death but thee ? and there is none in life i desire in comparison of thee . the comfort of life is in the knowledge , and the profit of death is in the fruition of Christ : if we be without Christ , it is hard to say whether is better to live or die : the truth is , both are hurtful , whilst life will prove an increase of sin , and death sends to torment ; but if Christ be ours , both will be to our advantage , according to that of the apostle , all things are yours , whether life or death , things present , or things to come , all are yours , and you are Christ's , and Christ is God's . 

2.  But because all Greek copies divide the verse into clauses , and ( As Zanchy well observeth ) it is not safe to recede from the plain reading of the text unless necessity compel , ( Whereas here the verse being read according to the original , is more full , and no less true ) i shall adhere to our last as the best translation , and so much the rather , because in this construction it holds well in connexion both with what precedeth and followeth : therefore his expectation was , that Christ should be magnified and he not ashamed whether he did live or die , because if he lived it should be Christ if he died it should be gain ; and so no cause in either of shame to himself , but from both there would accrue honour to Christ . again , therefore he did not wot what to choose , whether life or death , because to him on the one hand to live was Christ , and on the other to die was gain . 

To look upon the words in themselves , you have in them some things supposed , and some things proposed : the things supposed are {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as a presence of life , so a certainty of death : the things proposed are the dedication of his life to Christ , and the advantage of death to himself . of the former more briefly : of the later more largely . 

1.  to live , to die , are the things supposed ; the one common to all others with s. Paul : the other common to s. Paul with all others . 

first , s. Paul lived , so do all men , so do all animals : what our apostle saith of bodies , i May of life : there is a natural body , and there is a spiritual body ; so there is a natural , and there is a spiritual life ; this is an hidden , but that a manifest life ; this an enclosure , but that a common ; it is common to heathen with Christians , to beasts with men ; the little ant , the crawling worms have a share in life as well as we ; so that these May say as well as s. Paul , to me to live : why should we be so much in love with , or dote upon this life , which we have no more interest in than the meanest living creature ? indeed , it is a mercy for which we ought to be thankful , it is a talon which we are to improve , but it is no privilege wherein we should glory , whereof we should boast , or wherewith we should be too much affected . 

secondly , as s. Paul lived , so he made account of dying : others live as well as he , and he must die as well as others . the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} is as certain as the {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as sure as we live we must die : man is no less subject to perishing than the beast ; yea , the good man hath no more exemption than the bad ; for so the prophet Esay asserts , the righteous perisheth . indeed , our apostle elsewhere calls righteousness a breastplate , but it is not death-proof ; and though it delivereth in , yet not from death : it is true , death is the wages of sin , but still , it is here the lot of a saint : perfect innocency should not have known mortality , but grace in the best is mixed with that sin , which bringeth death ; Christ ( I grant ) hath taken away death , but so as he hath taken away sin for the present , only in part , not fully : sin is taken away ne praesit , death ne obsit ; the power and guilt of the one , the sting and venom of the other ; but neither ne sit ▪ not the being of either . 

And indeed , it is not without manifold reason that divine providence hath so ordered it : 

1.  that the members May be conformable to their head , & we May follow Christ the same way of death in which he hath gone before us to glory . 

2.  that by the pulling down of the wall , the moss May be fully-plucked out , and by the dissolution of the body , its infirmity and frailty wholly purged away . 

3.  that the power of God May appear the more glorious in raising us up after death hath laid us in the grave , and the grave turned us into dust . 

4.  Finally , that the strength of our faith Might appear the more in believing we shall live though we die : for these reasons the wise God hath appointed his own children to walk through the valley of the shadow of death . 

To carry it yet one step further , and that in a few words , it is no other than s. Paul ( Who was not only a Christian , but an apostle ) who taketh it for granted , that he must die ; neither the word nor the work of righteousness can secure from death ; prophets , apostles , ministers , as well as others , are mortal , and must die . indeed , they are ( According to our saviour's metaphor ) the lights of the world ▪ but such as after a while May be blown out by a violent , however must go out by a natural death . clouds they are from whom the rain of instruction falls upon the persons , but at length they themselves vanish away . finally , angels they are in respect of their office , but still they are men in regard of their nature , and must die like men . s. Paul himself hence supposeth it as a thing which sooner or later would befall him . And so i have given a dispatch to the first , pass we on to the 

next and principal part of the text , the things that are proposed , concerning the things supposed , which accordingly are two : namely , Christ the scope of the one , and gain the attendant on the other ; which when i have viewed severally , i shall look upon them jointly , and so put a period to my discourse on this scripture . 

to me to live is Christ : ] is the first propsition to be discussed . It is that which according to that twofold life a Christian leads ; namely , spiritual , and temporal , is capable of a threefold interpretation : 

1.  Many of the fathers understand this [ to live ] in a spiritual sense , and so this phrase , to me to live is Christ , is made synonimous with that of this very apostle elsewhere , Christ liveth in me : to this purpose is that paraphrase of devout Anselm upon this text , that by which i live is Christ , i live not the old but the new man . and of eloquent Chrysostom , i live not a common life , but Christ liveth in me : and going on in his rhetorical strain , he puts the question , why o blessed apostle dost not thou breathe in the air , and tread on the earth as we do ? Art not thou nourished by food , and refreshed by sleep as we are ? Yes , but this life he despised , looking after another ; he did not lead a sinful , but a spiritual life , and so to him to live was Christ . thus Origen occasionally speaking of these words , saith , in quibusdam vivit Jesus , in quibusdam defunctus est : Christ is as it were dead in some Christians , in some he liveth , to wit , in those who can say to me to live is Christ : in this sense it is that Christ is the efficient cause of a Christians life , and as the head communicateth motion to the members , and the root sap to the branches , so doth Christ life to all Christians . 

2.  one upon this text expounding it of natural life , rendereth the sense thus , to me to live is Christ , that is , the only reason why i am content to live is Christ's pleasure : if Christ will have me to live longer , i am willing ; what seemeth good to him is so to me . consonant to this is that of s. Ambrose , to an holy man to live is Christ , quasi servus enim non refugit vitae obsequium : since as a faithful servant he doth not refuse the work of life : if it May be an opportunity of advancing his Master's glory , or like a good soldier he is willing to stay in the field as long as his captain commandeth . 

3.  But lastly , and as i conceive most rationally we are to interpret this to live of s. Paul's natural life , and Christ as the final cause of it ; so that we May best render the meaning of these words in Estius his paraphrase , vitam meam christo & evangelio consecravi : to me to live is Christ , that is , i have consecrate my life to Christ and his gospel . 

This is that which was true of Paul under a double notion , the one special , as an apostle ; the other general , as a Christian . 

1.  Consider him as an apostle , and so it lets us see what ought to be the chief aim and scope of every ministers life ; namely , the honour and glory of Christ . indeed , what other is the work , to which a minister is called , and about which he is to be employed : but ( To use s. Paul's expression in the very next chapter ) the work of Christ ? what is it we are to publish but the gospel of Christ ? and therein the love of Christ to lost sinners : in this respect we are compared to ambassadors , and as the ambassador's business is to declare his Master's message , so is this our work to make known the glad tidings of salvation by Christ , as being the great errand about which he sends us . What is it we endeavour by publishing the gospel , yea not only by preaching but praying , and all other religious means , but the gaining of souls to Christ ? upon this account we are called the friends of the bridegroom ; and as the friend's office is to speak a good word in the bridegroom's behalf , and to conciliate the bride's favour and affection towards him : so is this our employment to woo your souls that they May be married to Christ . indeed , as saint Bernard hath piously observed , that purity of heart which especially aught to be in a Bishop and pastor of the church , consists in two things ▪ to wit , in seeking the glory of Christ , and the good of the persons : it behoving him in all his words and works to seek not himself , but either Christ's honour or the people's profit , or both ; so doing , implebit nonsolum pontificis officium , sed & etymologiam nominis pontem seipsum faciens inter deum & proximum : he shall , according to the etymology of the Latin word , make himself ( As it were ) a bridge between God and his neighbour , whereof the one part reacheth God by advancing his glory , and the other extendeth to his neighbour by furthering his benefit : ( Oh that all we who undertake this sacred function would take out this lesson ! ) far be it from us to live to ourselves , either only or chiefly aiming at our own emolument : we are among other resemblances compared to eyes , and eyes which see all things else , see not themselves , no more should we look at ourselves in any thing we do . It is said of Ignatius , that the name Jesus was ( As it were ) engraven upon his heart . Oh let our heart be fixed on , and then our life cannot but be devoted to him , we are in a more special manner servants of Jesus Christ , it is that character which the apostle s. Jude giveth of himself , and whose work should we employ ourselves about but his ? we are the soldiers of Jesus Christ ( According to s. Paul's character of Timothy ) and whose commands should we observe if not his ? finally , we are as so many stewards entrusted by Christ with his glory , his gospel , and what an odious thing is it for a man not to discharge his trust ? oh my brethren ! if we should not live to Christ , who should ? our relations to him are nearer , our obligation greater than any others , and therefore as we have opportunity let us lay out our abilities in the service and for the glory of Christ . 

2.  But further consider him as a Christian , and so it is a pattern for all to follow , and instructs us all what is the genuine character of a sincere saint : to him to live is Christ , as Christ is the alpha or beginning of his spiritual , so he is the Omega or end of his temporal life ; the life of grace he deriveth from him , the life of nature he devoteth to him ; and indeed by the one he is enabled to the other ; it is only a principle of supernatural life which inclineth a man to order his conversation aright , and steer the course of his life so as May best redound to Christ's honour . In this respect it is that s. Paul saith in the name not only of himself , but all believers ; both negatively , none of us liveth to himself ; and affirmatively , we live unto the Lord : that memorable saying of the Emperor Jovinian is the motto of every saint , scopus vitae christus , Christ is the Christians scope , and whatever he is , or hath , or doth , it is all in reference to Christ . what the end is to the agent , that is Christ to a saint : the end is that which doth both excitare , and commensurare , stir up the agent to act , and according to which he ordereth and squareth his actions ; so it is with a Christian , in respect of Christ that which both moveth and squareth him in all that he goeth about is the glory of Christ ▪ what the centre is to the circumference , that wherein all the lines which are drawn from every part of it do meet , that is Christ to the saint , all the lines of his thoughts , and words , and works tend to , meet in him . 

And truly , good reason it should be thus , since all Christians are Christ's , such to , and over whom he most justly layeth a claim , and challengeth a right . it was David's acknowledgement to God , upon which he groundeth a prayer for protection , i am thine , save me . it is every Christians acknowledgement to Christ , upon which he groundeth a resolve of subjection , i am thine , o blessed Jesus ! I will serve thee . I am thine , and therefore my health , my strength , my life , all i am , have , or can do , is thine . it is the character by which s. Paul describeth believers , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , they that are Christ's , and so they are ( As for other causes so ) chiefly , because they are redeemed by him . it is the reason alleged by the apostle himself writing to the Corinthians , ye are not your own , for ye are bought with a price : and now , since we are not our own , but his , and that by so strong an engagement ; it is but equal that we should live to him , quicquid es , debes creanti , quicquid potes debes redimenti , saith saint Bernard , thou owest what thou art to thy creator , yea whatever thou art able to thy redeemer . whom should a captive live to , but him that ransomed him ? A slave but to him that bought him ? A Christian but to Christ who hath delivered him from the slavery and captivity of sin ? Indeed , this is the end which Christ intended in purchasing us by his death : he gave himself for us , ( Saith the apostle ) that he Might purify us to himself a peculiar persons : and more appositely to our present purpose , he died for all , that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves , but unto him which died for them and rose again : thus than the case stands , Christ hath bought us by his blood for himself : being thus bought by him , we owe ourselves and lives to him : no wonder if every believer upon this consideration saith , with this holy apostle , to me to live is Christ . 

But if this be the inseparable character of a Christian , alas ! where shall we find him ? it was the complaint of God , concerning Ephraim , by the prophet Hoseah , Ephraim is an empty vine , he bringeth forth fruit to himself . and May not Christ take up the same complaint of us ? none of us liveth to himself , saith s. Paul : nay , none of us but liveth to himself , May we say . Gregory Nyssen speaking occasionally of these words , thus comments , the apostle saying to me , to live is Christ , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , intends thus much , no carnal affection liveth in me ; not pleasure , nor grief , nor anger , nor pride , nor envy , nor revenge , nor covetousness , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , but to him only i live , who is none of all these . but , my brethren , which of us can excuse ourselves from living to some one or other of these lusts ? doth not the ambitious man say , to me to live is honour ? the voluptuous , to me to live is pleasure ? the envious , to me to live is revenge ? the covetous , to me to live is wealth ? but where , oh ! where is the man can truly say ▪ to me to live is Christ ? we call ourselves Christians , but we are christiani sine christo , no better than the Ephesians in their heathenish condition , of whom the apostle saith , that at that time they were without Christ : only this is the difference , heathens are without any knowledge of Christ , and loose Christians are without the effectual knowledge of Christ : and so their condition worse than heathens , who , though they have Christ in their ears and mouths , yet he is not in all their thoughts , or affections , or actions . 

Oh that the setting of this pattern before us Might serve to shame us out of our inordinate living to ourselves , and quicken us in our endeavours to live to Christ ; as Peter said in another case to Christ , Lord , whether should i go ? thou hast the words of eternal life . let us say in this , Lord , to whom should we live ? thou hast the command of our natural life ; yea , thou art the life of our life , and soul of our soul : oh that all our oil Might empty itself into this golden candlestick ! that all our water Might run in this channel , all our actions be leveled at this mark Christ , and his honour : to this end , let us get our hearts both enlarged with apprehensions of Christ's love to us , and inflamed with love to him . The love of Christ ( Saith the apostle Paul ) constraineth us : a phrase which May be construed both ways ; either actively , the love of Christ to us ; or passively , our love to Christ : both of which have a sweet , yet strong influence . 

1.  meditate we seriously on the love of Christ to us . how truly Might our blessed saviour say , whilst on earth ; yea , now he is in heaven , to me to live is man ? he lived here to die , he liveth there to intercede for man ; his father's will ( Which was our salvation ) was not only his work , but his food ; and ( As he saith himself ) his meat and his drink : so much content he took , and delight he had in our redemption . indeed , what was there from first to last which had not a reference to us ? he was born for us , lived for us , died for us , rose again for us , is ascended , sitteth at God's right hand , and shall at last come again for us . Who can think on this exceeding love of Christ , and not acknowledge himself obliged to this duty by way of gratulation , it being most consonant to the law of thankfulness and retaliation , that since to Christ to live ; nay to die was man : to man at least to live should be Christ . 

2.  Let the consideration of Christ's love inflame thee with love to Christ , and that love will enable thee to live to him . it is a known saying , the soul is not where it liveth , but where it loveth : and it is no less true , whom the soul loveth , to him it will live . it is by faith that Christ liveth in us , it is by love that we live to Christ : let him be the sole object of thine affections , and then he will be the chief end of thy actions . 

That expression of the spouse in the canticles , my beloved is mine , and i am his ; is very considerable to this purpose : my beloved is mine , in that she expresseth her sense of Christ's affection towards her : and , i am his , in that she insinuateth her love towards Christ . and ( Which was the fruit of it ) the resignation of herself to Christ . excellently doth s. Bernard illustrate these words , ille mihi , & ego illi . Ille mihi , quia ben gnus & misericors . Ego illi , quia non sum ingrata . Ille mihi , gratiam ex gratiâ . Ego illi gratiam , progratiâ . Ille meae liberationi , ego illius honori . Ille saluti meae , ego illius voluntati . He is mine , and i am his . He mine , because he is merciful . I his , because i am not unthankful . He conferreth on me , grace for grace . I return him praise for his grace . He is for my deliverance , i for his honour . He for my salvation , i in subjection to his will . thus it was with the spouse , and thus will it be with every Christian , who duly pondreth upon the mercy of Christ towards him , and hath his soul affected with love and gratitude to Christ . to end this , if there were not in us any spark of love to Christ , yet even self-love cannot but strongly oblige us to live to Christ , inasmuch as this is the only honourable , profitable , and pleasurable life . 

1.  No life so honourable as this : all actions are dignified , especially by the end to which they tend ; whence , the more noble the intention , the more noble the operation : and what intention can be higher , or end nobler than the glory of Christ ? this is that which by a strange activity turneth our earthly into an heavenly , our natural into a spiritual life , which is the most excellent of all lives . to live to a man's lusts debaseth his life , and maketh it no better than bestial ; to live to Christ exalteth it , and rendereth it no less than angelical . 

2.  No life truly profitable but this ; the way to live to ourselves , is to live to Christ : whilst he hath the glory , we have the benefit : and as his name is advanced , so our good is advantaged . There is a strange riddle , and a seeming contradiction in those words of God by the prophet , Ephraim is an empty vine , and bringeth forth fruit : a vine is then said to be empty when it is fruitless , and can that which bringeth forth fruit be said to be fruitless ? but the next words [ to himself ] unfold the riddle , and reconcile the contradiction , since the fruit which is brought forth to ourselves is no fruit . what he said of the day wherein he had done no good , diem perdidi , i have lost a day : that May we say in this case , that day and time of our life is lost wherein we live not to Christ . 

Finally , this is the most pleasurable life , free from those cares and fears , distraction and vexation , with which living to the world , and our lusts , is encumbered , full of those joys and sweet pleasures , and delights whereof all others are ignorant . He that can say , to me to live is Christ , May say , to me to live is peace of conscience , contentment of mind , and joy in the holy ghost . in one word , this is the only way to make both our life comfortable , and our death gainful . and so i am fallen on 

The other branch of this text , that which is here proposed by our apostle concerning his death , in those words , to me to die is gain . To die , whether violently , or naturally ; by sickness , or a sword ; be the manner , or means of death what it will , it is gain not only not injurious , but commodious ; no hurt , but profit , no loss , but benefit : to me , and all such as he was , whether faithful ministers , or good Christians . 

Indeed , this is primarily true of that dying to which s. Paul ( Being now in chains at Rome ) Might especially refer , ( I mean ) a violent death for the cause of Christ , by heathenish persecution : and so this is true of the death itself , and true martyrs May say the very {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , to die is gain to them . indeed , to die for Christ is both an honour , and a gain ; an advancement , and an advantage . s. Paul in this very chapter tells the Philippians , it was given to them to suffer ; as if this were a special choice gift , an extraordinary gratification conferred by God upon a man when he calleth him to suffer , and especially death for his truth ; yea , the death itself gaineth an increase of the reward , and a further accession of glory : in this respect our blessed saviour saith , he that loseth his life for my sake , shall find it : which is in effect , he that loseth , shall not lose ; yea , the very losing his life in this quarrel shall be an advantage to him , whilst he shall find that life which infinitely exceedeth this . mors quippe integriorem facit vitam , mors magis deducit ad gloriam , to use s. Cyprians expression , such a death shall not only accelerate , but accumulate the glory of that other life . 

But besides this special , it is ( According to a right construction ) true also in a general notion , not only of them that die for , but all that die in the Lord : that death is a gain to them , only with this difference , to martyrs their dying is a gain , and all Christians gain by dying . indeed , this gain is not a direct and proper , but only an accidental effect , or rather a consequent of death not flowing from , but following after it ; that which death in its own nature bringeth forth is evil , it causeth not gain but loss , depriving good as well as bad men of the sweet comforts of this present life ; but in regard of the good , Christ hath by obtaining for them a life after death , made death of a curse to become a blessing , of a punishment a benefit , of a departure an entrance , and of a loss a gain : thus , as the waters of Marah were sweetened by the tree , so is the bitterness of death allayed , the sting of it plucked out ; yea , the nature of it changed by the cross of Christ . 

This being premised , i shall entreat you to walk awhile with me in this pleasant field of death's gain , which i shall endeavour to illustrate both absolutely and comparatively , privatively and positively . 

1.  This will appear to be a truth absolutely , death is a gain to a godly man , if you consider both the evils from which he is freed , and the good things of which he is possessed . 

1.  privatively : death is a gain to true Christians in respect of those various evils from which it delivereth . 

The evils of this present life are of two sorts : to wit , temporal and spiritual , from both which death delivereth . 

Many are the miseries under which we groan in this life ; but mors pro remedio , so s. Ambrose , death is a cure for them all : in this respect it is that Seneca saith aptly , it is nullius mali materia , multorum finis , the cause of none , but the end of many evils : upon this account it was that death hath been , even by the heathens , looked upon as an advantage . when those two famous carpenters , Agamedes , and Trophonius , had built a temple for Apollo at Delphos , they begged of him a reward : to whom this answer was given by the oracle , that it should be conferred on them within nine days ; within which time they died . and when Cydippe begged of Juno a boon for her two sons , cleebis and byto , she found them in the morning dead in their beds , as if the gods could not bestow a greater benefit than death , by which men are freed from the calamities of life . In this respect Seneca's comparison is very fi• , who resembleth death to an haven , into which when the ship enters , she is past all the danger of rocks , of sands , of waves , or winds , to which she was continually liable upon the tumultuous seas . indeed , death is that which delivereth our bodies from pains and aches , our eyes from tears , and our hearts from sorrows : and in this respect s. John calls them who die in the Lord , blessed , because they rest from their labours , to wit , all labour both of mind and body with which here they are oppressed . The truth is , many are the afflictions , as of all men , so especially of the righteous in this life . They are sure to meet with persecution from wicked men for their righteousness sake ; as the tree is beaten with sticks for its fruits sake ; yea , such is the rage of persecutors , that they care not to what sorrows of hunger , cold , nakedness , imprisonment , banishment , want , they expose them : besides , almighty God is pleased to chastise them for , whilst he lets others alone in sin , to exercise their graces by adversity , whilst others enjoy prosperity : but when death comes , it sets them free from all , as being the last chastisement which God doth inflict upon , and the last mischief which wicked men can do to the godly . but these are the least of those evils from which death delivereth a believer ; there are evils of another , an higher nature : and as the sense of them is a sadder trouble , so the deliverance from them must needs be a greater gain ; such are divine dereliction , satanical temptation , the wickeds' conversation , and sins infection . 

1.  In this life the godly are ofttimes enforced to go mourning all the day long , because God hideth his face : many clouds interpose that they cannot behold the sun of righteousness shining on them , but when the wind of death cometh it bloweth all these clouds away , and puts them in such an estate wherein there shall be no interruption of their comfort . 

2.  Whilst we live on earth we must expect assaults from hell , we walk here amongst snares ; nor are we at any time , or in any place , secure from Satan's suggestions ; but death puts us out of his reach , whilst our souls soar aloft , and so are like the flying-bird out of the compass of his snare . 

3.  How we are forced to be as lilies among thorns , wheat among chaff ; and being thus mingled with the wicked , we complain with David , woe are we that we must dwell in Mesheck , and in the tents of Kedar : but when we die we shall be separated from the ungodly , so that they shall no longer be to us as the Canaanites were to the Israelites , thorns in our eyes , and pricks in our sides . 

4.  Finally , so long as we continue in this world , the burr of corruption will cleave to us ; but death rids us of it : according to that of s. Paul , he that is dead , is free from sin . in this respect , death is fitly called by s. Ambrose , vitiorum sepultura , the grave of our sins . and by Gregory Nyssen , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the expurgation of wickedness : since till the vessel be broken , the muddy water of corruption cannot be wholly poured out . consuit the experiences of the saints , and you shall find them still complaining of spiritual conflicts with their corruption . we are besieged on every side , ( As s. Cyprian observes ) and , oh how often is a breach made upon us ! if covetousness be knocked down , lust riseth up ; if lust be quelled , pride starteth forth ; if pride be subdued , anger exasperateth ; thus are we forced to a continual struggling with our sins : but when we die , the combat ceaseth ; and , as for the present , we are not under sin ; so then , we shall be without sin , or so much as the motions of sin . 

Indeed , it very observable , that as death came in by sin , so sin goeth out by death : filia devoravit matrem , the daughter destroyeth the mother ; nisi primi parents peccassent non morerentur , peccarent justi nisi morerentur , had not our first parents sinned they had not died , if we did not die we should not be without sin : sin delivereth to death , and death delivereth from sin ; and , so that which was only the punishment , becomes the period of sinful evil . And surely as s. Ambrose occasionally speaking of these words , saith , lucrum est evasisse incrementa peccati , lucrum fagisse deteriora & ad meliora transisse , it is no small gain to avoid the increase of sin : nay , our apostle uttereth these words , saith s. Cyprian , lucrum maximum computans jam seculi laqueis non teneri , jam nullis peccatis & vitiis carnis obnoxium fieri , accounting it the greatest gain no longer to be subject to the sins of the flesh , and entangled in the fetters of the world : indeed , this is as in itself , so in the estimation of every godly man the chiefest gain ; and , no wonder if accounting sin to be the greatest evil , he esteem this the chiefest privilege of death , more rejoicing that it putteth an end to his sinnings , though they were never so small , than to his sufferings , were they never so great . 

In fine , death is both a total and final deliverance from all evils , except itself , from which also we shall be delivered by the resurrection : in which respect , an ancient saith elegantly , it is unjust to call it a death , rather a recess from death ; a separation from corruption , a freedom from bondage , rest from trouble , ease of labours ; & ( ut in summa dicam ) omnium consummationem malorum ; yea , the consummation of all evils . 

And yet , in all that i have said i have told you but one half , and that the less half of death's gain : there is not only ademptio malorum , but adeptio bonorum , a removal of evil , but the presence of good ; and so positively , to die is gain : for , though the happiness of our persons do not presently follow upon death , but the resurrection ; yet there is an happiness conferred upon our souls immediately after death : and if you would know wherein this consists , i answer , 

1.  when we die our souls go to paradise : a place of rest , and joy , and comfort . Our first parents were cast out of paradise that they Might die ▪ and we die that we May go to paradise . the poet saw this when he said , parte tamen meliore mei — 

though my body rot in the earth , yet my better part shall be carried above the skies . indeed , the souls of them that depart hence in the Lord are immediately received into those celestial habitations . 

2.  when we die our souls go to God and Christ , in whose presence is fullness of joy : this is the reason why Gregory Naz : calls death a benefactor , because it presently sends us to God , our apostle ( In the next verse save one ) tells us , he had a desire to depart and to be with Christ : thereby plainly intimating , that when be did depart hence , he should be with Christ , to wit , in his soul ; and if you will know where Christ is , you shall find it by other scriptures , to be , far above all heavens , at the right hand of God . indeed , the contract between Christ and the soul is made on earth , but the marriage is consummated in heaven ; here Christ is with us by his spirit , there we shall be with him , first in our souls , and at last in our persons . it is much for a Prince to visit a poor man in his cottage , but it is far more for him to take the poor man home with him to his palace . Esse christum cum paulo magna securitas . esse paulum cum christo summa foelicitas : it is our great security while we live , that Christ is with us , but it shall be our felicity when we die that we shall be with Christ . 

3.  Finally , when we die our souls are endowed with perfect purity and spotless holiness , and grace receiveth its consummation by glory : the apostle maketh mention of the spirits of just men made perfect , that is , perfectly just and holy in their spirits . Indeed , the perfection of glory is not till the resurrection when soul and body shall be united ; but in the mean time ▪ the souls of them that die in Christ are adorned with a perfection of grace ; and if the beginnings of grace be precious , what is the completion of it ? if the first fruits be desirable , what is the full crop ? if the soul which hath but one dram of grace be more truly noble than if it had all other natural or moral endowments , how glorious shall our souls be when they shall be as vessels filled to the brim with fullness of grace ! 

By all this which hath been said , the truth of this apostolical assertion sufficiently appeareth , but that all objestions May be removed be pleased to consider it comparatively , and to weigh a while in the scales of reason both the loss and the gain of death , that we May see how much the gain preponderateth the loss , and so this doctrine will remain undoubtedly true notwithstanding whatever May be pretended to the contrary . 

It is true , death bereaveth us of a mortal and transitory , but it is an inlet to an immortal and everlasting life ; it despoileth us of our worldly possessions . ay , but it putteth us into possession of our heavenly inheritance , it taketh us from the society of our neighbours , bosom of our friends : i , but it sends us to Abraham's bosom , & makes way for our society with Christ . finally , it severs the soul from the body ; i , but it unites the soul to God : what is it for the candle to be put out whilst we enjoy the light of the sun ? for the standing-pools to be dry so long as we May drink at the fountain ? for our earthly comforts to be taken from us , when heavenly joys are conferred on us ? the truth is , death is not a privation , but a permutation : so holy Job calleth it a change , and that a blessed exchange of a cottage for a palace , a wilderness for a paradise , a house of bondage for a place of liberty , of brass for gold , pebbles for pearls , earth for heaven . and , now tell me , if upon all these considerations s. Paul had not just cause to say , to me to die is gain . 

The meditation whereof May serve as a check to those passions of grief and fear which are apt in this matter to be exorbitant , the one in respect of our friends , and the other of our own death . it is the use which Cyprian teacheth us to make of this very doctrine , ut neque charorum lugeamus excessum , & cum accessionis propriae dies venerit incunctanter & libenter ad deum ipso vocante veniamus , that we should not too much bewail the departure of our dearest relations , and when the day of our dissolution doth approach , that we readily and cheerfully obey God's call . 

1.  let the gain of death moderate our sorrow for our friends who sleep in Jesus : why should we be troubled for them who are at rest ? sit down in sorrow for them who are entered into joy ? why are we clad in black for them who walk in white ? and so many tears flow from our eyes for them who have all tears wiped from theirs ? It is storied of the Thracians , that they mourn at the birth , and rejoice at the death of their friends . Nec imprudenter , saith s. Ambrose , nor was it without reason that they should account those fit to be bewailed who are launching forth into the tempestuous sea of this world , and attend them with joy who are got into the harbour of rest . We read concerning Lazarus , that Christ rejoiced when he was dead , but wept being to raise him to life . And chrysologus his note is very apt to our present purpose , Christ us recipiens lazarum flevit , non amittens , Christ bewaileth not the losing , but restoring of his life : according to which the Greek fathers make the reason of our saviour's tears to be , that he should now call him back to a miserable life . indeed , as s. Hierome saith concerning Nepotian , we May say of every one who departeth in Christ , non tam plangendus est qui hac luce caruerit quam gratulandum ei qui de tantis malis evaserit , we are not so much to condole his loss of this life , as to congratulate his deliverance from the miseries of this life . 

Thou wilt say perhaps , it is my friend , my dearly beloved friend who is dead , and can i choose but mourn ? but , is he thy friend , and dost thou envy him his happiness ? dost thou dearly love him , and yet grieve at his welfare ? He is thy friend , and death is his benefit : and shall the benefit of another , especially of thy friend , be thy sorrow ? ay , but he is snatched from my arms , i have a great loss in his departure , and that is my trouble : true , this nature promteth to , that we should be sensible of our own loss ; yea , grace requireth that we should be sensible of such a loss as it is a cross inflicted upon us by divine providence . thus , patient Job , when the news came to him of his children's death , shaved his head , and rent his mantle : signs of that sorrow which natural affection put him upon ; yea , he fell down upon the ground and worshipped : signs , that in his sorrow he looked higher , at the hand of God which had done it . But , as with one eye we look on our loss , and weep ; so with another eye we must look on their gain , and rejoice ; as it is a chastisement to us , we must be affected with sorrow ; as a mercy to them , with joy : and thus , whilst we mingle these affections together , our sorrow will not be exorbitant . 

Indeed , when any die , to whom we have reason to fear , death is the beginning of sorrrow ; there is sad cause of bitter mourning : but not for them who die in the Lord . Scribitur David justè flevisse filium parricidam , qui alium parvulum , quia sciebat non peccasse , non flevit , David justly bewailed dead Absalon , because he died in his rebellion , and therefore despaired of his bliss ; but when the other child dieth , he drieth his eyes , as not doubting its happiness . they indeed cannot sufficiently be lamented at their death , who dying in their sins , drop into hell ; not they who are carried into those heavenly mansions , saith Isidore excellently . 

2.  let the gain of death mitigate the fear which is apt to arise in us from the apprehension of our own . when Abigail told Nabal the threatening words of David , the text saith , his heart died within him , and became as a stone . Thus is it with the most of us , when any summons of death is given ; nay , not only with the most , but even sometimes with the best . Christ cometh to the disciple on the sea , to preserve them from the storm , and they are troubled , death cometh to deliver us from all evil , and we exceedingly tremble . indeed the reason is , because we consider not that death is a deliverance , and so gain to us . What chrysologus saith of martyrs , is true of all good men , morte nascuntur , fine inchoant , occisione vivunt , & in coelis lucent , qui in terris putabantur extincti , their death is a birth , and end a beginning , they live by being killed , and whilst they are thought to be extinguished on earth , they shine in heaven ; and surely were this well pondered by them , they would not seek consolation against death , but death itself would be their consolation . those words of Job , i have said to corruption , thou art my father , to the worm , thou art my mother , are not unfitly allegorized by Origen to this purpose ; ut pueri consolatores habent parents , sic ego mortem & putredinem ; as if he therefore called corruption and worms his father and mother , because as parents are comforters to the children , so were they to him . 

It is true , the separation of soul and body is terrible , and a natural fear of it May be , cannot but be in all . I but it is as true in respect of the godly , that when this separation is made , anima absolvitur , corpus resolvitur , quae absolvitur gaudet , quae resolvitur nihil sentit , as St. Ambrose elegantly ; the soul is set at liberty , and rejoiceth , yea , the body is at rest , and knoweth no trouble ; and is such a separation to be feared ? this life , what is it but a going to death ? and death , what is it but a going to life ? little cause then sure , why we should either too much love the one , or fear the other : non est timendum , saith Tertullian , quod nos liberat ab omni timendo , shall that be the object of our fear , which freeth us from what ever is to be feared ? by death we gain glory , and shall we not glory over death ? non repuerascam , said a Roman , si deus mihi largiretur , i would not be young again , though God would grant it me , and he giveth this reason , quia ab hospitio ad domum discedam , because when i die , i shall go from my inn to my home . did ever child cry when his father's man came to fetch him home ? 

Alas beloved ( As St. Ambrose rightly ) non mors ipsa terribilis , sed opinio de morte , not death itself , but our misapprehension of death , is terrible to us ; did we look through , beyond death , at the gain which followeth , it would not be dreadful , but amiable in our eyes , and with this holy apostle , we would not fear , but desire to depart : that of the wise man , the righteous hath hope in his death , the Caldee reads , the righteous hopeth he shall die ; so far is a good man ( Upon serious meditation of death's gain ) from fearing of , that he hopeth for , his dissolution , and though he dare not rashly hasten , yet he willingly entertaineth it , whensoever sent by God to him . 

To draw to an end : be pleased to put both clauses together , since indeed they cannot be asunder , if to us to live be Christ , to die must needs be gain , to die cannot be gain , but only to them , to whom to live is Christ . if a good life precede an happy death , cannot but follow : nor is it probable , a gainful death should be the consequent , if a religious life have not been the antecedent . 

Indeed if we observe the temper of many in the world , we shall find them either inverting or separating these clauses . 

1.  some there are who would invert these words , & make gain the predicate of the former , and Christ of the latter ; thus doth every covetous man say , to me to live is gain , and to die is Christ ; vain men who will have gold to be their God , and yet Christ to be their redeemer , they will serve Mammon whilst they live , and yet be saved by Christ when they die ; but it will be just with Christ to say at death to all such mammonists , in these words of God to the Israelites , in the day of their distress , go to the gods which you have served , the gain which you have lived to , and let that deliver in this hour of your death . 

2.  more there are who would sever these clauses , whilst they would gladly say , to die is gain , but not to live is Christ : one was asked , whether he had rather be Craessus or Socrates , his answer was , in vitâ Croesus , in morte Socrates , he would be rich Croesus in his life , and good Socrates at his death ; you know whose prayer it was , let me die the death of the righteous , and let my last end be like his , and it is that no doubt , which many wish and desire ; nay hope , who yet regard not to live the life of the righteous , and that their course to that end May be like his . but what a folly , nay madness is it , for men to expect to reap what they do not sow ? to sow to the flesh , and to the world , and yet reap by Christ the gain of everlasting life after death ? as therefore we expect that one , let us endeavour the other ; and if gain by death be our hope , let living to Christ be our practice . 

So that this scripture thus considered , doth plainly put a difference between the precious and the vile , the godly and the wicked ; whilst to these who live to themselves , death is a loss ; to those who live to Christ , it is a gain . Adrian was wont to say , that death is pavor divitum , & pauperis desiderium ; the rich man's fear , and the poor man's desire . i May well apply it here , death either is or May be the bad man's fear , but the good man's wish , or to use St. Ambrose his expression , justis mors quietis est portus ▪ nocentibus naufragium , it is an haven to the just ▪ but a shipwreck to the guilty ; to those a bed of repose , to these a rack of torture : the man who liveth to the world , saith to death , as Ahab to Eliah , hast thou found me oh mine enemy ! but he who liveth to Christ , May say to it as David of Ahimaaz , it cometh with good tidings . 

And now my brethren , would you on the one hand ▪ see the reason why you are so fearful of death ? it is because your consciences accuse you , that you have not lived to Christ ; suae quisque conscientia vulnus accuset , non mortis acerbitatem , we May thank our own guilty consciences for our fears of death : it was not without reason , that St. Paul saith , the sting of death is sin , since death is only venomous and deadly to them who live in sin : on the other hand , would you see the way to a joyful end ? would you have comfort in , and gain after death ? oh let it be your study to live to Christ . it is our saviour's counsel to his disciple , take no thought for your life , let me alter it a little , take no thought for your death , but for your life ; let your care be to advance Christ in your lives , and it will be his care to confer the gain of glory and immortality upon you at your death . 

And thus i have finished the text ▪ 

time , and your expectation hasten me to the sad occasion of this sorrowful assembly . the early and unexpected death of this hopeful servant of Christ , in the work of the gospel , Master ▪ Adam Pemberton ; what s. Paul said concerning Timothy ▪ i need not doubt to say of him , that from a child he hath known the holy scriptures , being the son of such a father , who strove to instill into his tender years , both religion and learning . it pleased God to bestow upon him , many choice natural endowments of an acute wit , a ready expression , and a good memory . he wanted not acquired abilities , in the knowledge of tongues & arts , those handmaids of divinity , which none contemn but the ignorant , who because they cannot be like others , would have others like them , and so whilst darkness covers the hemisphere , they May be thought to have as good eyes as any . Besides these natural and acquired parts , i trust ( And what ever any proudly undertake , man can go farther ) he had some measure of supernatural and infused graces , and experienced those saving operations of the blessed spirit on his own heart . 

Being thus competently ( Nay far more excellently than many of his years ) furnished for the work of the ministry , he entered into holy orders , and that by the right door , preferring the beaten tract of venerable antiquity , before the untrodden by-path of novelty . and now having undertaken this sacred employment , how studious and sedulous , frequent and diligent he was in performing it , i doubt not but a great part here present can attest . commonly twice , this last half year thrice , nay , many times oftener within the compass of a week , he dispensed the mysteries of the gospel to the persons ; so that i May truly say , he exhausted himself , his strength , his health in this work , as it is reported of Archimedes : is quibus obtinuit famam , amisit vitam , he lost his life by those studies , which got him credit . so i May truly affirm of him , by labouring to gain souls to Christ , he impaired the health of his own body , and in some sense accelerated his end . 

As thus he did the work of the Lord laboriously , so in some measure sucessefully ; methinks i read in the eyes of many here present their deep sorrow for his loss , and that chiefly upon this account , the great good and comfort their souls found in , and by his labours : yea , it pleased God to give him as it were a seal of his ministry at his last sermon ; after which , one that had been seduced by the errors of the times , came to him , humbly acknowledging his own folly , heartily blessing God for his instructions , and earnestly desiring confirmation by private conference with him . 

And truly i cannot but take notice of God's great mercy to himself in this regard , that though he was but a tender plant , and so the more apt to be bended any way ; yea , though in this innovating age , the ready way to preferment ( Of which young men are usually ambitious ) he to turn novelist , or in plain terms schismatic , yet not consulting with flesh and blood , he stood firm in the faith , which was once delivered to the saints , & chose rather to side with suffering truth , then prospering error ; he owned the church of England , and that as before this last deformed reformation , to be his mother , zealously preaching her doctrine , asserting her discipline , and bemoaning her sorrows , which caused him not many days before his death to take up David's language , redeem Israel oh God , out of all his troubles . nor did he only pity her sufferings , and pray for her deliverance , but to the utmost of his power , he was ready to help her children , his fellow ▪ brethren , and labourers in the gospel , who for her sake , are reduced to extreme necessity . in this respect what St. Hierome said of Nepotian , i May of him , caecorum baculus , esurientium cibus , spes miserorum , solamen lugentium fuit , he was a staff to the blind , food to the hungry , an anchor of the afflicted , and a comfort of the mourners . 

And now whilst this young tree was thus growing up in grace and knowledge , in favour with God and man , so that they who sat under the shadow of his ministry , promised to themselves much comfort and contentment : alas ( who can mention it without tears ) in the spring of the year , i and of his age , the wind of a violent disease blasted him , and death removeth him hence , to be transplanted in the celestial paradise . having spent his life in the Lord's work , he ended it on the last Lord's day , and on that day of rest , ( Yet withal of labour to a minister ) he rested from his labours . so that quem haeredem putavimus funus tenemus , ( To use St.  Hieromes' phrase ) we are forced to bemoan his fall with tears , who ( Being elder ) hoped to have left him a remaining pillar in the church of God . some few hours before his dissolution , a reverend doctor of divinity ( His and my very good friend ) coming to visit him , and putting him upon the act of resignation in yielding up himself to God's dispose , his answer was , that if he Might do God any further service in his church , he was willing to live ; but if not , he was content to submit to God's will , saying in the words of my text , ( Which since he made use of , i made choice of ) to me to live is Christ , and to die is gain : and truly by what you have already heard , there is reason to believe , that he practised the former , and hope , that he now experienceth the latter . indeed his death in respect of us was a loss , a great loss , and that every way ; his father hath lost the staff of his age , an observant child ; his wife an affectionate husband , and his children ( Poor babes whose sorrow is yet to come ) a careful father . the church hath lost an obedient son , this parish a painful , profitable preacher , the poor , a zealous charitable advocate and almoner : nor must i leave out my self , who have lost an entire cordial friend . but whilst his father , wife , children , parish , the church , the poor , my self , May all truly say , to us his death is a loss , he said , and i hope accordingly findeth it verified ; to me to die is gain . i have only three short words with which i shall close up my discourse . 

1.  to the near relations of this our deceased brother , my word is submit , durum verbum , an hard lesson i acknowledge , but yet such as i trust you will endeavour to take forth : his aged father i cannot better counsel , then in saint Hieromes' words to Heliodorus , concerning Nepotian , non doleas quod talem amiseris , sed gaudeas quod talem habueris , you have more reason to rejoice that once you had , then to mourn that now you have lost , such a son . his dear consort i shall bespeak in Seneca's words , i dare not forbid you to grieve at all , but i would not have you grieve to excess . that knot which was tied between you , it was but till death did part you : and as if divine providence would mind you upon what terms you had him , on that day three years he was married to , he is taken from you . 

2.  to the loving parishioners and auditors of this now silenced preacher , my word is , remember , remember all those wholesome counsels , faithful rebukes , comfortable doctrines , sound truths , which you heard dropping , nay , flowing from his lips in this place , i doubt not but many of you dearly loved him , show at once your love both to him and yourselves , by endeavouring to practice what he taught you , and let your greatest sorrow be not for him , but for your selves , that you have no more profited , under his pious labours . 

3.  to all here present , my word is that of our saviour to his disciple , watch : a word which ( I hope ) will take so much the deeper impression upon you that were his auditors , because it was the last counsel himself gave you out of this place , that portion of holy writ [ what i say unto you , i say unto all , watch : ] being then the subject of his discourse , and not only on you , but us all ; because it is that which his dead corpse now preacheth to us . indeed , when we see one falling in his full strength , snatched away in the prime of his days , have we not reason to watch ? and watching , to prepare for the hour of our death . let it then be the care of us all whilst we live to live to Christ , every one of us in our station consecrating ourselves to , employing our talents in his service , for his glory ; so shall it be our comfort in , and bliss after death . and whensoever that time shall approach whether sooner or later to any of us , we shall be able to say , with this our deceased brother , in the words of this holy apostle , [ to me to live is Christ , and to die is gain . 

Finis . 

The works of Mr. Nathanael Hardy m. a. and preacher to the parish of St. Dyonis back-church . 

1 — justice triumphing , or the spoiler spoilt . A sermon preached on the 5 of novem. in the cathedral church of s. Paul's , in 4to . 

2 — the arraignment of licentious liberty , and oppressing tyranny . In a sermon preached at a fast before the Lords in parliament in the Abbey-church at Westminster , in 4to . 

3 — faiths victory over nature . A sermon preached at the funerals of mr John rushout junior , in 4to . 

4 — the safest convoy , or the strongest helper . A valedictory sermon before the right honourable Sir Thomas Bendish baronet ▪ his majesty's ambassador to the grand signior at Constantinople , in 4to . 

5 — a divine prospective , representing the just man's peaceful end . A sermon preached at the funeral of the right worshipful Sir John Gayre knight , in 4to . 

6 — love and fear the inseparable twins of a blessed matrimony . A sermon occasioned by the nuptials between mr William Christmas and Mrs Elizabeth Adams , in 4to . 

7 — divinity in mortality : or , the gospel's excellency , and the preachers frailty . A sermon preached at the funerals of mr Richard Goddard minister of the parish of st Gregory's by st Paul's , in 4to . 

8 & 9 two mites : or a grateful acknowledgement of God's singular goodness . In two sermons , occasioned by his late unexpected recovery of a desperate sickness , in 4to . 

10 — death's alarm : or , security's warning-piece . A sermon preached in st dionis back-church , at the funeral of Mrs Mary Smith the 9 of novemb in 4to . 

11 — the epitaph of a godly man , especially a man of gods : or , the happiness by death of holiness in life . A sermon preached at the funeral of mr Adam Pemberton ( Late minister of the parish of st Fosters Foster-lane ) the 11 of April , in 4to . 

12 — the first epistle general of st John unfolded and applied . The first part , in 22 sermons , in 4to . 

Printed for Nathanael Webb , and William Grantham , at the black bear near the little north-door of s. paul's-church . 1655.  





judg. 2. 5.  Job 14. 7 , 8 , 9 , 10.  joh. 11. 36.  2 tim. 4. 7 , 8.  

Eccles 12. 13.  mat. 22. 37 , 3•  theod. in loc. est . ibid. lap. ibid. calv. i• . psal. 73. 25.  1 cor. 3. 21 , 22 , 23.  zanch. ib. 1 cor. 15. 44.  isa. 57 1.  ephes. 6. 14.  rom. 6. 23.  mat. 5. 14.  Isa. 5 6.  Rev. 1. 20.  gen : 2d . part. 1.  expos. 1.  gal. 2. 20.  vide Anselm . vide Chryso . in loc. orig home 2. in iudic.  expos. 2.  velasq. in loc. ambros. de bono mortis , cap. 2.  expos. 3.  est . in loc. phil. 2. 30.  2 cor. 5. 21.  mat. 9 15.  Bern ep. 42.  cant. 1. 15.  Jude v. 1.  2 tim. 2.   . 1 cor. 4. 1.  rom. 14. 7 , 8.  psal. 119. 94.  gal. 5. 24.  1 cor. 6. 19 , 20.  bern.  tit. 2. 14.  2 cor. 5. 15.  hos. 10. 1.  Greg nyss. . i• cant. home 15.  eph. 2. 12.  oh . 6. 63.  2 cor. 5. 14.  joh.  . 34.  cant. 2. 16.  bern. in cant. s••m 68  hos. 10. 1.  part. 2d . ver. 29.  mat. 16. 25.  cypr. de laude martyr . ambr. de fi• . Resur. sen. de benef. l. 7. c. 1.  vide plut. de consol ▪ ad Apoll  sen. consol. •d polyb. cap. 28.  revel. 14. 16.  psal. 34. 19  quid aliud est haec vita nisi plena laqueis inter laqueos ambulam•… &c.  ambr. de bon . mort. cap. 3.  psal. 120. 5.  josh. 23. 13.  rom. 6. 7.  ambr. de bon . mort. cap. 4.  Greg nyss ▪ orat . in fun . pulcher . cypr. serm. 4. de morta• . ambros. de b•n• mort. cap. 2.  cypr. serm. 4. de mortal .  . Maxim.  Ovid . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , &c. greg. naz. orat . 20.  verse 23.  colos ▪ 3. 1.  ephes. 4. 10.  Bern in ps. qui bab . heb. 12. 29 ▪  Job 14. 14.  cypr. serm. 4. de mortalit . ambros. de fid. resur. chrysol. ser. 64.  is pael . l. 2. ep. 175.  cypr. in joh. l. 7. c. 21.  hieron. ep. 3.  Job 1. 20.  hieron. ep. 25.  illi deplorandi sunt in morte quos miseros infernus ex h•c vitâ recipit , &c. isid. hispal . de sum . bon . l. 3. c. ult.  sam. 25. 37.  Mark ▪ 6. 50.  chrysol. serm. 108.  Job 17. 14.  orig ibid. Ambrose de Bono mort. c. 8.  t•cert . de anim. •p . 4.  Ambrose de bon. mort. c. 8.  prov. 14. 32.  judges 2. 14.  numb 23. 10.  Ambrose de bono ▪ mort. cap. 8.  1 king. 21. 20.  2 sam. 18. 27.  Ambrose . l. d.  1 cor. 15. 56.  mat. 6. 25.  2 tim. 3. 15.  psal. 25. 22.  hierom. ep 3 ▪  the 28. year of his life . palm Sunday apr. 8.  A. d. 1655.  hier. ib. Nedoleas exigere non audeo pl•• aequore dolere volo , sen.  Ep.  Mark 13. 37.  

































