A SERMON Preached at St. Botolphs Aldersgate , At the FUNERAL OF ROBERT HUNTINGTON Esq Who DIED April 21. and was BURIED April 30. 1684.  

BY TIMOTHY HALL. , Rector of Alhallows Staining , London . 

LONDON , Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside near Mercer's Chapel , 1684.  

TO THE Worshipful , and my much valued Friends , Esquires , Sons , and Executors of the Deceased . 

ROBERT HUNTINGTON . 
JOHN FRIEND . 
THOMAS BRUMPSTED . 
And to Mr. TIMOTHY DOD . And to their Worthy and Religious Consorts : 

Mistress ELIZABETH HUNTINGTON . 
Mistress AND FRIEND . 
Mistress MARTHA BRUMSTED . 
Mistress ELIZABETH DOD . 


Fvnerals' may well be styled ( with Sacraments ) Visible Sermons , because they teach by the Eye , and outward Senses . The Dead speak aloud to the Living , and as it were in a Glass , represent to them what their condition in the circulation of a little time will be . Shortly , we shall be in the place of Silence with them . When we see others fall before us , how easily and naturally is it inferred , that our standing cannot be long after them . Yet how apt are we to flatter ourselves with the spinning out of our Thread of Life to a great length ! A man would wonder , that in the Wilderness , where so many thousands died , Moses should then pray , Lord , so teach us to number our days , that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom , Psal . 90.12 . If they who had so many dying Objects continually before them , needed to be stirred up to pray in this manner , surely much more have we to whom such spectacles ( though many ) are more infrequent . To Correct this folly and madness which possesseth the hearts of men while they live , Eccles . 9.3 . Who turn away their Eyes from their Sepulchre , and divert them with more pleasing prospects , I have ventured to comply with your Requests in Publishing this Sermon . I am equally surprised , That you should desire , and I permit so thin a Discourse to appear abroad . I expect to be Censured for distributing a Trifle amongst so many of you . I take you all jointly in the Dedication , because on this occasion to have addressed to one , might have been interpreted a disregard to the rest ; Besides , it being Preached by your Order , and by the same influence being now made Public , I engage you to be accountable with me for all the rude strokes in it . I know your design was to keep up his Memory ; but such an hasty Monument Erected to it , cannot long preserve it ; I had neither Art nor time to build one . The Errand this Discourse comes on , is not to desire you to remember your Father ; It would be a rudeness to request that he might live in your thoughts ; I am sensible , you will do that without my being your Remembrancer ; but I beg , That nothing which was Exemplary in him , be Buried with him , and sealed up in his Grave ; That you would improve what was delivered at his Funeral to the best Spiritual advantages , that you may live as strangers in this World , and persons belonging to a better ; That it may prove effectual to the furtherance and joy of your Faith , shall be a considerable part of the hearty Prayers of 

Yours to Serve you , TIMOTHY HALL. . 

Heb. II 15.  

And deliver them who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage . 



THE Apostle , in the former part of this Chapter , having asserted the nature and necessity of the Incarnation and Death of Christ ; he now in my Text , and the preceding Verse to it , acquaints us with the ends and uses of it . 

All the Host of Heaven stood amazed at this great Mystery , expecting what would be the issue of this great Trial. Men and Devils could not fathom the depths of God's design in this dismal Tragedy . They verily concluded , That the Captain of our Salvation would now be conquered , and that they should hear no more of him , when once he was humbled to his Grave . Can he save others , who cannot save himself ? Can he bring life to others , by his own death ? After this Sarcastical manner the Heathens upbraided the Christians ; and the Apostle tells us , That this Death and Cross of our Lords , was a stumbling-block to the Jews , and folly to the Greeks , 1 Cor. 1.18 , 23.  And thus indeed it well might have been , had not that Alwise God ( who brings light out of darkness , and meat out of the eater ) by his unsearchable counsel and wisdom overruled this matter so , that the Death of Christ , like to that of Sampson's , should issue and conclude in the utter rout and overthrow of his , and our greatest Adversaries . Whilst they bruised his heel , he broke their head . Thus by his wise disposal , he made Suffering , to be Saving ; Death Victorious , and the Stripes of his Son to be Medicinal and Healing to us . One end was to destroy the power of Satan , to break the head of that Serpent , stilling this enemy and self-avenger . Psal . 8.2 . Leading captivity captive , Psal . 68.18 . Binding the strong man , Matt. 12.  And dividing the spoil with him , Isa . 53.  Thus this great destroyer was quelled and conquered , and at the Sign of the Cross thus used ( by faith in his death , I mean ) we may at any time put the Devil to flight , and cast out the Prince of this World.  

The other end is mentioned in my Text , to deliver them who through fear of Death , etc.  Which words acquaint us with a double subjection of the Servants , or Children of God , ( as they are called in the foregoing Verse . ) 

1.  A subjection to Death . 
2.  A subjection to Bondage upon account of Death . From whence I gather these Propositions . 
Prop. 1.  God's own Children , those for whom Christ died , may be brought , and kept under the fear of Death . 

Prop. 2.  The fear of Death is a state of Bondage . 

Prop. 3.  The only deliverance from this fear , is by the Death of Christ . 

I shall make the first , the subject-matter of my Discourse at this time ; and in treating on that , shall comprehend the other . 

God's own Children , those for whom Christ died , may be brought under , nay , kept under the fear of death ; and this fear may be so great and pressing , that it may be a heavy burden ; it may gall them much , and deeply affect their Souls to their great disquietment ; so that they may have many uneasy hours , and doleful complaints ; it may bring them into an Estate of Slavery and Bondage : And this trouble may not only be heavy and great for its nature , but long , and continued for its duration ; it may run Parallel with the longest date of their time , and not come only by way of Paroxysm and Fit , but hold them all their life long . So that in the best , the fear of Death is not wholly destroyed and removed . Grace doth not extinguish Nature ; and the Christian doth not cease to be Man There is a double fear of Death . 

1.  Natural , and inseparable from our present condition . There is implanted in Man a desire of Self-preservation ; and this is Nature's aversation to its own dissolution . This is an innocent and guiltless infirmity , and no more culpable , than weariness , sickness , and many other natural imbecillities , inseparably annexed to the condition of Mortality . 

2.  There is a sinful fear of Death , a fear of Death more than as it is natural , viz. as it is Penal , and an issue of the Curse ; as it brings Men under the Devil's power , and may prove a dreadful inlet and passage to Everlasting burnings . 

Now the Children , ( viz. of God , and of the Promise ) in some measure have conquered this last sort of fear ; but it is impossible for them , while they are clothed with this frail and tattered Humanity , wholly to rid and divest themselves of the former . Death is the King of Terrors , and therefore may command dread and fear even in the best . Plentiful are instances of this kind , and they easily occur to us . Thus Jacob feared to die by the hand of his Brother Esau , and studied how to meet him in Peace , and prayed to God to stay his Hand , and turn his Heart . The Man after God's own heart cries , the sorrows of death compassed him , Psal . 116.3 . And tells us , how his soul came to be full of trouble , Psal . 88.3 . because his life drew nigh to the grave , and he was counted with them that go down to the pit . How industrious he was , to save his Life , will appear from his Counterplots to save himself when Saul pursued him . Good Hezekiah could not receive a summons to the Grave with dry Eyes ; the Message made him chatter like a Crane , and mourn as a Dove , Isa . 38.3 , 14.  Good old . Hilarion was frequently chiding of his Soul with an Egredere O Anima , for being so loath to leave a crazy body , in which it had been a Tenant upwards of Fourscore Years : Nay , our blessed Redeemer himself , in whom there was no Sin to embitter his dissolution to him , yet we find him greatly affected at the approach of his departure hence ; his soul was heavy unto death . He entered not the Lists with that last Enemy without a heavy Spirit : Father , if it be possible , let this cup pass from me . 

It was the saying of Reverend Mr. Greenham , ( page 15. of his Works ) I like as well of them that measurably fear death , as of them who joy at it : In another place he tells us , He never dared desire to die , however his continual Crosses did afford him small desire to live . 

It is true , we sometimes meet with Christian Heroes of St. Paul's temper , whose song ever since he had been in the Third Heavens , was to return thither again ; who are so much exalted above the fear of Death , that they court , and crave it , and make it the most desirable of desirables , Phil. 1 23.  They never sing a loath to depart , but cheerfully chant out with old Simeon their nunc Dimittis , Luk. 2.29 . Lord , now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace . With Elijah , they are satisfied , and full enough of days , and crave no further time , 1 Kings 19.4 . Nay , so fervent and earnest was the desire of the Primitive Christians after Immortal Glory , that they groaned earnestly , desiring to be clothed upon with their House from Heaven , 2 Cor. 5.2 . They seemed not only to be contented , but rejoiced with their departure ; and in the mean time , they did rather accept of Life , than affect it , and endured it , more than desired it . Great is the number of Christian Pilgrims , who ( in St. Bernard's Phrase ) desire Repatriasse , to return home , and lose from the shore of Life , and to Launch out into the Ocean of Immortality , looking for that blessed Hope , and the glorious Epiphany of the great God , and our Saviour Jesus Christ , Titus 2.13 . At the news and tidings of their Lords approach , their Faith Echoes back their hearty Amen , Even so come Lord Jesus . But here we must take notice , that our desires may be looked upon in a double capacity , either as natural and connate , or rational and elicit , according to the Principles of Reason and Grace . A man that hath a gangrened Member hath a natural desire to keep it in the Body , but his Rational desire makes him willing to part with it . Thus our Saviour told the Apostle Peter , He should be bound , and carried whither he would not , John 21.18 . To be girded and pinioned , he would not , according to his Natural will ; but according to his Renewed and Sanctified will , he was ready joyfully to go to the place of Martyrdom . 

Thus my Spirit may cry , Come Lord Jesus , Come quickly ; when the Flesh may say , Master , save thyself , and pray that the cup may pass from it . 

On the other hand , They who have the greatest reason to dread it , may sometimes defy it ; and knowing not what it is to die , brutishly seem to slight it . Thus in these low running dregss of time , an Atheistical crew of Men living in Brutish Ignorance , fall blindfold into their Pit and Grave ; they shut their Eyes , and are never awakened , till those Infernal Flames flair about them , and lend them Light to read their folly . They are not out of danger , but only without the knowledge of it : Their hardiness proceeds not from the knowledge of their good Estate , but their ignorance of their bad one , like Passengers that are asleep in a Ship that is sinking : They Revel , and Hector on the very Pits brink , and their joy is like to that of those who are stung with the Tarantula , which is not the Effect of Mirth , but Madness ; and though they have no bands in their Death , yet Death hath dominion , over them . 

Pleasant Company , Wine , Feasting , Music , divert their thoughts from that formidable prospect of their End , cozening themselves as far as they can , with that vain Opinion , That the way to escape the sting of death , is not to think of it . 

It is Risus Sardonicus , a deadly joy ; The end of their mirth is heaviness , prov. 14.13 . Like those silly fishes , which swim down the sweet stream of Jordan , into the dead Sea , where they perish . 

Some indeed there are which please themselves with vain hopes of deliverance , and flatter themselves with ungrounded presumptions , that they shall escape the bitterness of Death . O the foolish , and helpless shifts that besotted sinners cling to ! How many perish at the very horns of the Altar ? What ungrounded hopes have they from their own Fictions ? How sadly do they abuse the best Doctrines ; and suck Poison from the extent of God's Mercies , and Christ's Merits ! They suffer their own innate Light to be Extinguished , and resist all means of Conviction from that which is Revealed . Thus you see , that the Proposition is irrefragable , notwithstanding we Read some good Men have desired it , and some bad Men have not dreaded it . 

In further prosecution of this Truth , 

1.  I shall lay down some Propositions that tend to the clearing and confirming of it . 
2.  I shall inquire into the grounds and causes of this fear of Death . 
3.  By way of Application , I shall lay down some Directions as proper remedies and cures of this fear . 
1.  Propositions tending to the illustration and further defence of this Truth . 

1.  Prop. Man in his first Creation was not made Mortal or Corruptible . Adam fell into a dying condition in the day that he Rebelled against the Crown and Dignity of Heaven . I know the Question is much controverted , Whether Adam were made Immortal , or no ? This were to make Death necessary before Sin ; which the Apostle contradicts , when he writes Rom. 5.  That by one man's sin death came into the World : and Rom. 6.23 . The wages of sin is death . Death is the fruit and effect of our Disobedience , and passes upon all , inasmuch as all have sinned , Rom. 5.12 . 

2.  Prop. All men are now subject unto death , as it is penal . The first Sentence reaches all Mankind , Gen. 2.17 . Most men look on Death as the common lot and condition of Mankind , resulting from their frail condition , and the jarring and warring Principles of their composition , which for want of poise destroy one another . They think it belongs only to our Natural , and not at all to our Moral Capacity ; reckoning it to be the consequent of their Being , and not the demerit and punishment of our Gild . It is very true , though the principles of our Nature are subject to Dissolution , yet if we had not declined from the Law of our Creation , we had not inclined to the Grave or Corruption , but God had made our Life commensurate with our Holiness , and prolonged our Time with our Obedience . But alas ! Death now is not more Natural , than it is Penal . All Mankind is Condemned as soon as Born. Life is a Reprieve , and short suspension of the execution of that Sentence , which in the day of Adam's Transgression was pronounced on him , and his descendants : And o miserable we ! if we improve not this small scantling of time to sue out our Pardon , and make our peace with this incensed Judge of Heaven and Earth ; who though he be a Serene , yet withal is a dreadful Majesty ; and will infallibly Execute the severity of the Sentence on every Offender , who doth not timely accept and comply with those Terms and Articles of Peace , which in the Preaching of his Gospel are tendered to them . 

3.  Prop. Fear and Bondage are inseparable attendants on such a sinful and penal state . It cannot be avoided , but that the expectation of Death in such a condition must be very troublesome . This is a straight Yoke , and will pinch the Necks of all the Sons and Daughters of Adam , though some wear it more easily than others . This will perplex our minds , raise storms within , and sink us frequently into deep despondencies ; for we know not how to cast it off , in vain are all attempts to slip the Neck out of this Collar ; we are unable to deliver ourselves , no man can free his own Soul. We are in God's Chain , and it is impossible to break it , all our strive will contribute nothing to its Removal , but only gall and torment us more . 

4.  Prop. Whatsoever bitterness and gall there is in Death , it is from Sin , that makes it more terrible than otherwise it would be . 1 Cor. 15.56 . The sting of Death is sin . So many Sins as thou committest , so many stings thou puttest into thy Death , to render it more dreadful to thee . could a man die , and have no Sin laid to his Charge , though there might be some pain , yet there could not be Terror in his departure out of this World.  

Well may Death be called the Terrible of Terribles , when there is not only an apprehension of the dissolution and divorce between the Soul and Body , but there interposes and starts up the guilt of many Sins , which confront the Sinner , and stare him in the face ; nay , those sins that had a gaudy and tempting dress , will then be stripped of all their feigned Beauties , and appear in all their dreadful Circumstances , agitating and terrifying the Consciences of men , with the expectation and dread of future Evils . When the Sinner dare not die , yet cannot live , what Convulsions must there needs be in his Breast , which must terrify him like the cracks of a falling House . What a calm and well-natured Death might a man have , ( far beyond that Euthanasia which Augustus wished for himself ) if Sin and Hell , and approaching Judgement , and a gnawing Worm within , did not drive him into Agonies and Despair . Alas ! when nothing is in view to him but these things , and the conclusion of the whole matter will with him be nothing short of hideous Darkness , and a tormenting Fire , having Heat but no Light , gnashing of Teeth , late Remorse , incurable Wounds , Self-hatred , and all imaginable distresses , even to be hated of God , and to hate him for ever , He must needs turn away his Face in the anguish of his Soul from beholding such distracting Objects . These things our Sins procure for us , and fill our Souls with all the anticipations of Hell.  

5.  Prop. The Death of Christ applied by Faith , is the only Sovereign Remedy to deliver us out of this estate of Fear and Slavery . 

Our Heavenly Elisha hath cast Salt into those bitter Waters , and so healed them . Death to a Believer is a Serpent without a sting . He hath fortified us against these Fears two ways . 

1.  By giving us the example of his Dying . His tasting of Death before hand , keeps it from being a Cup of Trembling , and wonderfully will this animate our Spirits under all dejections , That our Lord walked in this dark Valley before us . 

2.  By affording us the merit and efficacy of his Death ; This is very operative to this purpose , to consider , That our Redeemer , and the Captain of our Salvation , undertaken our Deliverance by his own Death : so that now there is no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus , Rom. 8.1 . For being justified by Faith in the Death of Christ , they have peace with God , and in themselves , Rom. 5.1 . 

Thus has Christ changed the nature of Death , that it should be more desirable , than dreadful to a good Man , being like Josephs Chariot sent for dying Jacob , to carry us to the place of our hope and desire . This made the Apostle ring that sharp and shrill Note , in the ears of Death , and send that bold and brave Challenge to the last eneny ; 1 Cor. 15.55 . OH death , where is thy sting ? OH grave , where is thy victory ? Death is swallowed up in Victory . It is not now so much an Outlet of Temporal , as an Inlet of Eternal Life . Well might the Apostle write insultingly , as a man offering Sacrifice for Victory , and singing a Triumphant Song , while his Feet stood on the Neck of his Enemy . We know now to whom to have Recourse , when our Spirits droop at the apprehension of our Decease ; not to Saints , or Angels , not to the Blessed Virgin herself ; but to her Son , who is the Lord of Life : that Brazen Serpent we are to look upon , when that Fiery one of Death puts out his Sting ; and we are sufficiently Antidoted against all the Poison that is spit at us . 

Thus we see the Children , though they cannot escape the stroke , yet they are freed from the sting of Death ; they can play upon the hole of this Asp without danger , and welcome the grimmest approach of this Destroyer with a smile , being freed from the Venom of this Serpent , by him who is , the Captain of the Lords Hosts ; who hath abolished Death , and brought Life and Immortality to light . He has by his own Death , made Death to them , not only tolerable and easy , but desirable and gladsome . Indeed , none dared cope with this King of Terrors , but our Blessed Lord ; and he by dying , went into the Den of this Dragon , Fought it , and Conquered it in its own Territories and Dominions . 

6.  Prop. Notwithstanding all that Christ hath done to reconcile us to a view and prospect of our Dissolution ; yet so deep is the love of Life , and fear of Death implanted in us all , that Nature cannot but tremble at the approaches of it . Though this Serpent is bereft of his Sting , and the Nature of it changed to every holy man ; yet its hissing affects us at sometimes with a cold sweat and shivering , some regrets and aversation from it . The heart of that man who is most heavenly , and covetous of entering the promised new Canaan , who breathes after that happy Country , the Jerusalem above , is now and then startled at his passage through the howling Desert which leads thither ; he would be clothed with Immortality , and yet unwilling to put off the Garment of this Body . We would be blessed and happy , but wish it might be some other way than by dying . loath wear to be absent from the Lord , and yet desirous to be present here ; we may desire to be with the Lord , and yet at sometimes very loath to depart : it is often the case of many a Child of God , that he very willingly would be at his journey's end , and yet at the same time dreads the going the way of all flesh , which leads to it : thus , like little Children , we are covetous of being clothed with a new Garment , and yet may be so pained and pinched in the putting of it on , that it may force a Tear or two to distil from our Eyes , in the exchange of our Suit of Flesh , for the Robes of Glory . 

7.  Prop. This natural fear of Death frequently sinks and degenerates into a very vicious and sinful one . It is difficult in this matter , so to fear , as not to over-fear . Our Passions of this nature , are often subject , either to mistake their Object by fearing what we need not , or else to exceed their bounds by fearing more than we need , or aught . Hence it often comes to pass , That this dread of Death has proved a great snare to the best Men. What mean and unmanly shifts , what poor tricks and artifices , what unfriendly ways and methods have many used , ( even to the spilling of others Blood ) to save their own ? They have sullied their Names and Reputations , wounded their own Spirits , and grieved those of their Friends , and all to eke out an Inch of Life . Abraham though dignified with that Illustrious Title , of the Father of the faithful ; yet so unbelieving was he of God's Providence over him , that he betakes himself to sinful Equivocations , ( those Cousin-germains to a Lie ) to save his Life . While we use any indirect means to prolong our days , it plainly Reproaches us to our faces , that we fear men more than God , and Death more than Hell and Damnation ; which is very absurd and foolish , to fear the lesle , and not the greater evil ; to be afraid to die , but not to be Damned . Great reason therefore there is , to watch over this Natural Fear , lest it prove immoderate , and betray us into the hands of many foul Temptations , as it did Abraham , Isaac , and Peter . Our Saviour gives us praemonitions about it , when he instructs us not to be afraid of men who can kill the body , and after that have no more that they can do : but I will forewarn you whom you shall fear , etc. Luke 12.4 , 5.  One fear , ( like fire ) drives out another . If the fear of God more prevailed in our hearts , it would wonderfully qualify and moderate all the powers of our Souls , that there would not be such prevailing excesses and disorders in them . Our care therefore must be , that our Natural Fear be compatible with that which is gracious ; and that we never dread any thing further than it is consistent with the fear of God.  

8.  Prop. This Natural fear of Death being kept within due bounds , may very much be improved to our advantage . 

1.  It will help us to be more patient underder all penal evils . So Sentence of Death be not executed , Stripes and Imprisonment , Fines and Banishment are more easily under-gone . Skin for skin , and all that a man hath he will give for his life , Job 2.4 . A living man will not complain , Lam. 3.39 . thou art alive man , that one word encircles many Blessings , and I pronounce an hundred Good things in that comprehensive Monosyllable . Of all other evils we say , They are not so bad as Death , and therefore they may , and must be boar . 

2.  It will make us more watchful against all sinful evils . God has in his Law appointed Death , as a punishment for many Offences , that it might be a curb and bridle in our Mouths to restrain us from the Commission of those Sins ; and when men throw this aside , what wickedness is there which they will not attempt ? 

Eve was emboldened to sin by the Devils telling her , she shall not die . Men will not commit that wickedness which they know is not only against God , but against their own lives also . 

3.  It will weaken our pride . 

It will render us more low and vile in our own Eyes . This will much abate our Pride , and keep us humble . Put them in fear , OH God , ( viz. of Death ) that they may know themselves to be but men , Psal . 9.20 . 

4.  It will strengthen our Faith. We received , saith the Apostle , 2 Cor. 1.9 , 10. the sentence of death in ourselves , that we should not trust in ourselves , but in God which raiseth the Dead . While a man looks to sense , and is upheld by sensible Comforts , there is not that exercise for Faith , which otherwise there would be ; for the exercise therefore , and strengthening of his Grace so acceptable to God , and advantageous to us , God exposes his Children to this fear of Death , that when all other helps and supports are removed , they may fly to him for Refuge . The Bohemians when they lost their famous Captain Zisca , styled themselves Orphans : She that is a widow indeed , and desolate , trusteth in God , 1 Tim. 5.5 . Whereas , while she had an Husband and Children , she trusted overmuch in them . The Hemorrhoisse made not her Applications to our Lord , till all her stock was spent . A poor and afflicted people will trust in the name of the Lord , Zeph. 3.12 . 

5.  It will quicken our preparations for death . God therefore will's it , That we should have , not only some thoughts , but also some fears of Death ; that we may improve the day of Grace , and be working while it is called to day . Fear is an Affection which quickens to Action ; Noah being moved with fear , prepared an Ark , Heb. 11.7 . They that fear not Death , grow desperate , their Language is , Let us eat and drink , for to morrow we die ; but they that are armed with this well-guided and bounded fear , infer much more wisely , saying , Let us pray , read , hear , repent , believe , obey , for to morrow we die . Thus you see great advantages may be made of this Natural infirmity , and we may learn how to turn our Water into Wine ; to make those thoughts of Death , which at some times lie very cold at our Stomaches , to become very cordial and reviving against all sinful and immoderate dread of it . Grace , though it do not extinguish , yet it corrects and regulates Nature ; and by the ways above mentioned , mortifies this fear , that it prove not a Temptation to Sin. Stoicism hath attempted to do this ; but Christianity only can , and hath effected it ; In the School of Christ is best taught the right Cure of all our amazing and distracting fears . 

2.  I come now to inquire into the grounds and causes of this fear . As before I distinguished this fear itself , so now I shall the causes of it , into Natural , and Sinful . 

1.  Natural Causes . Death on this account is dreadful , because it is a future , unavoidable evil to Nature . As a future possible good is the object of hope , so a future possible evil is the object of fear ; and much more it is to be dreaded , when it is a certain futurity , as death is , which no ways can be declined . Nature looks upon Death as its Enemy , whose design is to divorce and separate Soul and Body , two ancient Comerades , no wonder therefore that it eat it , when it knows it shall one day fall by the hand of it . Memorable is the passage of that Martyr to the Executioner , driving the Staple into the Stake ; Pray friend knock it in fast , for Nature will be working . 

And that this fear is greater in some , than others , from the very constitution and temperament of the Body , is every days observation . Our very natural Complexion renders us either more bold , or fearful . This is a natural Passion , which though it may be Corrected and Sanctified , yet it cannot be totally Conquered , for Religion changes not the temperament of the Body . Good men who are of this fearful temper , and melancholy disposition , and experience the tyranny of this Natural Passion , have need to pray for the Sanctification of it . I never thought Religion did depend upon the temper of the Body , but I am sure the acting and exerting of it very much doth . But these fears , so far as they are Natural , they are Lawful ; for they are not Transgressions of any precept , and though they may be reckoned amongst our infelicities and weaknesses , yet they come not into the number of our Sins and Crimes . 

2.  There are sinful grounds of this fear of Death ; these chiefly are to be regarded , and they are very many ; some I shall name , and can do little more than in the gross produce them , leaving you to enlarge on them , and I am sure any man of thoughts may be very Copious on this Subject ; his own inward sense of things strongly will attest all to him . This sinful fear proceeds , 

1.  From the want of a holy fear , the fear of the Great God. As the fear of him is the lesle , the fear of God in our Lives , is the ready way to cast us into a slavish fear of Death . It was one of the Judgements Threatened , Deut. 28.58 , 65 , 66.  If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that are written in this book , that thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful name , THE LORD THY GOD ; then neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest , but the Lord shall give thee a trembling heart , and failing of eyes , and sorrow of mind ; and thy life shall hang in doubt before thee , and thou shalt fear day and night , and shalt have no assurance of thy life . 

2.  From the want of faith in the death of Christ spring's this fear of our own death . Even the children , holy and religious persons , who live soberly , righteously , and godly , are sometimes beset with these uncomfortable apprehensions of Death ; being now and then plagued with the remainders of an unbelieving heart , as if still Death were not subdued , as if Death had conquered Christ , and not Christ Death : The Disciples were terrified and frighted , and unbelieving thoughts did arise in their hearts , Luk. 24.37 , 38.  Fools , our Lord calls them , and slow of heart to believe , ver . 25.  We trusted that it had been he which would have redeemed Israel , v. 21.  Here their Faith flagged , and hanged , the wing extremely ; their Buckler was much battered , and stood in need of beating out again . Weakness of Faith gives strength to our Fears , and doth both greaten and multiply them upon us . Faith is not without its Conflict with sadness of Spirit , and carnal fears ; Amalek sometimes is too hard for Israel , and the House , of Saul frequently prevails over the House of David . 

3.  This Fear proceeds from want of serious meditation on Death , and due preparation for it . 

Our negligence and sloth in not finishing that Work which God has put into our hands to do , way well make us loath to come to an account with our Lord Bad Stewards are afraid of a Reckoning ; and Death coming thus suddenly , puts all into Confusion : Suddenness and fear are joined together , prov. 3.25 . Suddenness of Destruction is the description of a doleful and fearful Estate . When men have laid in no Antidotes and Cordials against Death , then , like Nabal , their Hearts die before they do . This was David's Case , Psal . 39 ult . OH spare me . Stay a little , that I may get strength to combat with this Adversary . The best are too backward in their preparations for this Encounter with this grim and ghastly Enemy , and therefore are not without their fears ; But o ! who can express that great fearfulness which needs must surprise Unregenerate men , who are clapping many Stings into their Deaths by their repeated and continued Sins ; they take pains to make their End uneasy , and with their Vices dress up Death in a terrible Vizard to affright them . What ease can they live at , whose Souls this Night may be turned out of their soft Beds where now they lie securely snorting , into a Bed of Flames ? one would think , these Men should eat their Bread with trembling , and the thoughts of their danger should keep them waking . There is no wonder , that a sinful Cause should produce a sinful Effect ; and that men's Terrors should be increased with their Offences . Every wicked man must look Death in the face , with pale cheeks . It was a Copy of Julians countenance , but not of his dying one , when he said , Vitam repescenti naturae tanquam debtor bonae fidei redditurus exulto . What Solomon speaks of Profane men's merry living , That even in laughing their heart is sorrowful , prov. 14.13 . is very applicable to their Dying condition , their heart gives their mouth the Lye.  

Indeed , sometimes like furious Gamesters , they throw up their Cards , not out of any dislike of gaming , but of their Games ; they are rather discontented with Life , than contented with Death ; but yet such reassume their Play , and go on afresh ; and so do these Passionate Fools upon second thoughts , eat their words , and unwish their wishes . Such are like to Gaal in his drink , Judg. 9.27 . He cursed Abimileeh when he was at a great distance ; speaks very contemptibly of him , brags how he would use him , if he had him in his Clutches , ver . 29.  But upon Abimeleches appearance , his courage was cooled , his heart sunk into his heels , for he fled before him , ver . 40.  men's sins will one time or other sink their spirits , and make their Death dreadful ; and that upon account , 

1.  Of the guilt that is in sin . To apprehend sin unpardoned , amazes and confounds , and therefore God's Arrest by Death , must make the knees smite , and strike one against another , Belshazzar like , who could not hold his joints still . 

2.  Of the filth in sin . The defilement of it is so great , that it makes the sinner startle . Such squalid and nasty sights , must needs occasion the turning away of our Eyes . Who can look upon them , and live ? The Sinner often sinks and drops at the view of his Lusts ; they have a kill Aspect . 

4.  Excessive love of Life , and of this World , begets immoderate fear of Death . When Mens hearts are so closely united to Creature-comforts , they cannot be torn from them without much violence and pain . What we over love in the Enjoyment , we over-fear in the Apprehensions of its loss . A Child that has tasted much of the Breast , cannot be pulled from it without much crying : Things glued together , are seldom parted , without tearing or breaking . If thy Portion is only in this Life , thou art utterly undone when it is ended , and who can blame a man for fearing the loss of his All ? 

It is a Canonical Truth , though in the Apocryphal writings , OH death , how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that liveth at rest in his possessions ! Eccles . 40.1 . How sad a sight is a Hand writing on the Wall to a Belshazzar in his Cups ? To a rich man dreaming of his goods laid up for many years , how sad and confounding must that voice be , thou fool , this night thy soul shall be required of thee ? Luk. 12.20 . It was a wise and Christian Speech of Charles the Fifth , to the Duke of Venice , who Hezekiah-like , showed him the Glories of his Throne and Palace , his great Wealth and riches ; Haec sunt quae faciunt invitos mori , These are the things that make us loath to Die . 

5.  This fear is frequently occasioned by too much carelessness about our worldly Affairs ; I mean , the neglect of a provident , timely setting our House in order , and adjourning this necessary and hard Work to the dregss of our Age. That which should be the living Man's care , is too often the dying Man's task : The ending of our Accounts with Men , and the beginning of our Accounts with God , are both of them generally put off to the inconvenient season of a Deathbed ! To reckon with God and Man at once , is too hard a Province for a sick and languishing sinner . Many more Grounds might be assigned , I shall add but one more . 

6.  The breach of former sickbed Vows and Resolutions , when we were in fear of Death , renders men more fearful when once they come in sight of it . 

The Answer is not amiss which Theodoricus , Bishop of Coleine gave to the Emperor Sigismond , upon his inquity , which way he might best get to Heaven : If thou walkest ( said the Bishop ) so as thou didst promise under thy painful fit of the Stone . Our Extremity commonly renders us holy , and our Pain is prodigal of those Vows , which our ease is niggardly of performing . We daily see desperation making those Votaries , who in their health were the losest Libertines . Were it essential to Health , thus to debauch us , it would make a good man out of love with it . It were better to be always Sick , than for our Health to makes us Irreligious . Let us pray to God to remedy this Sickness of our Health and to bless us rather with sanctified afflictions , than curse us with unsanctified prosperity . 

I now am to speak to the third Particular , and that by way of Use and Application . 

3.  To give some Prescriptions and Remedies , by way of Antidote and Defence against the Fears of Death . It was one of the defects which the Learned Verulam , ( In his advancement of Learning , ) found in our Physicians , that they do not study those Rmedies , which might procure an Euthanasy , an easy passage to their Patients ( since they must needs die ) through the Gates of Death . Such helps must be left ( saith Bishop Hall ) to the care of the skilful Sages of Nature , the use whereof must be with great caution ; lest while they endeavour to sweeten Death , they shorten Life . My work at present , is to prescribe spiritual helps to an easy and comfortable departure out of the howling Wilderness of this World , to make the Grave-bed soft , that we may lie down in Peace there , and descend to those dark Chambers with as great desire , as a weary Traveller lies down to Sleep . The neglect of looking to this while we live , is the cause why Death comes on so many as a Snare , as amongst many other , it did on Caesar Borgia ( the wicked Son of a worse Father , viz. Pope Alexander the sixth ) who meeting Death in that Cup of Poison , which he had prepared for others , cried out with great Consternation under this terrible Surprise . Adversus omnia pericula me munivi praeter quam mortem : That he had armed himself against all casualties , excepting Death , for of that he never thought . Amazing and deplorable inconsideration ! that men should find time to think of all things , but those which do most nearly concern them ! that Heaven and Hell , Death and Judgement , should then only come into men's thoughts , when they have nothing else to think of . How solicitous are we to fortify ourselves against external evils , timely engaging against Sickness and Poverty , Banishment and Imprisonment , Cold and Hunger , Shame and Scandal , but laying little or nothing up against the evil day ? Death comes and seizes most with a heavy hand , because so little is done to bear up against it . Take notice here of the excellency of the Christian Doctrine , which affords beyond all other Professions , the greatest relief in this way . Some Philosophers have essayed upon comforts of this Nature ; and Epicurus tells us , if a wise man were to burn in Phalaris Bull , he might say , Dulcae est , & add me nihil pertinet . But these were empty brags , and founded on some principles , of which we may say , ( as Job to his Friends ) ye are miserable comforters ; such as these , 

1.  Premeditation on it before it comes ; others rejected this as much , because it made a man miserable before he was so . Mere apprehensions of it to them ( who wamed the Divine Oracles ) signified little to lighten their burden . 

2.  others supported themselves with the thoughts of necessity , and inevitable fate , and many such like considerations . But alas , though Philosophy has been styled animi medicina ; yet their Precepts in reference to comfort , have been compared to the influence of the Moon , which doth rather rotten , then ripen , in respect of the Sun's influence . They were ignorant of Christ the Prince of Peace , of the holy Paraclete and Comforter , and unacquainted with the Life of Faith. They knew not how with Ignatius , to invite the Cross and Fire , Breaking on the Rack , Quartering of Members , and all the Torments that either Men or Devils could invent . When the Emperor threatened St. Basil with Death , OH that it might come , was his ready and cheerful reply . When Eudoxa the Empress threatened Chrysostome ; he sent her word , Nihil praeter peccatum timeo : he feared God's wrath , ( because of his Sins ) but not at all her . These are the men that tread on the Lion , the Asp , and the Adder . And that we may be enabled to do the like , take these following Directions ; these comforts and consolations of Gods own Prescription in the Holy Scriptures , which as far exceed all Philosophical Remedies , as the Sun doth a Glow-worm . I am constrained to be short in them , and must leave it to you , to blow every blossom into a Flower . 

1.  Direct . Rectify your Apprehensions and Opinions of Death . Is not thy fear of it grounded upon a mistake ? Fears are apt to aggravate evils . Levis est dolour si nihil opinio adjecerit . We fright ourselves with Images and Ideas of evils , and dress up Bug bears and Mormoes to Torment ourselves withal . Christ himself walking upon the Waters , was by the Disciples trembled at as a dreadful Apparition . It may be thou lookest on Death , as some utter Abolition and Extinction of thy Being . Remember it is but a departing , which thou callest a Death . See how God himself styles it to the Father of the faithful , Gen. 15.15 . thou shalt go thy fathers in peace . It is but a going away , not a perishing ; and not a going to woe and misery , but a comfortable going to our Fathers . It is hence called , the way of all the earth , Josh . 23.14 . Christ intimates his Death under this Notion ; It is expedient for you that I go away , John 16.7 . Death is a journeying from one Region to another . See in what familiar terms God conferred with Moses about his Death , Deut. 32.49 , 50.  Get thee up into this mountain , and die in the mount whither thou goest up , and be gathered unto thy people . Death itself is so embalmed and clothed in the Holy Scriptures , that there is even a sweetness and beauty in it : therefore called an uncloathing , a putting off the flesh . He that has wore his clothes long , till they are foul and nasty , will he not willingly strip himself to put on a fresh Suit ? 

Children fear their nearest Relations , and best Friends , when they appear under a disguise to them ; but when their Vizard is taken off , they rejoice at their presence . 

To sweeten our departure to us , it is called a rest and sleep . Is there any hurt in that ? Would not a man tired out with a long days work , gladly go to bed ? Under these Notions we may bury all fearful thoughts of Death . Our friend Lazarus sleepeth ; but I go that I may awake him out of sleep , John 11.11 . What more desirable and refreshing than a good night's rest ? Sleep is the Nurse of Nature , the sweet Parenthesis of all our Griefs and Cares . Clothe thy Death therefore in a Scripture dress , and this will help to allay the bitterness , and beautify the deformity of it . Sleep is a short Death , and Death is but a long Sleep . The Babylonians are threatened with death , under the name of a long sleep , Jer. 51.57 . They shall sleep a perpetual sleep , and not wake , saith the King whose name is the Lord of Hosts . It is a Judgement to be cast into a sleep like death , but a Mercy that Death is like a sleep : Nay , death is not a perpetual sleep : A good man when he has done his work , falls asleep , and awakes in the great morning of the Resurrection to receive his wages . 

Hence the Grave is called a Bed , Isa . 57.2 . It is God's Ark and Chest , wherein he keeps the Bodies of his Saints , and he will open this Cabinet in the great day of the Resurrection , and take his Jewels out ; he will scour and furbish them up again , making their vile Bodies like unto the glorious body of Christ . 

The Jews call the Grave , Beth Chaiim , i e. The house of the living ; and when they return from the Burial of their Friends , they pluck up the grass , and cast it into the Air , using those words of the Psalmist , Psal . 72.16 . They shall flourish like the grass of the earth . 

The Greeks call their Church yards , Dormitories , Sleeping places ; and the germans ( say some ) call them God's-acre , because their Bodies are sown there , to be raised again , Be not then daunted with the gloomy thoughts of a total dissolution ; no , it is but a little intermission , a disappearance for a while , a short and sweet nap in their Beds , which are warmed and perfumed for them by Christ's Body laid in the Grave , with whom also they look to Rise to Eternal Life . And this leads me forward to the 

2.  Dir. Be established in that weighty and great Doctrine of the Resurrection . Soul and Body , old Companions , part but for a while . thou art not so sure to arise in the Morning , when thou liest down at Night , as thou art to awake at that day . 1 These . 4.14 . For if we believe that Jesus died , and rose again , even so them also which sleep in Jesus , will God bring with him . What an Antidote is this against the worst of Death ? That Christ who did arise from the Dead , shall come again , and bring all his with him in Glory ? These Scripture Consolations come home to the very heart , which the Philosophical ones did not , ( being in Tully's Phrase , Medicine morbo imbecilliores ; ) well therefore might the Apostle call on them , to cheer up , and comfort one another with such words of truth , ver . ult . 

The Courage and Constancy of the Jewish Martyrs was such on this account , that they would not accept of Deliverance in their Tortures , that they might obtain a better Resurrection , Heb. 11.35 . The Resurrection they knew would recruit , and recompense them . 

Lucian called the Christians miserable Caitiffs , for being stout to the Death , in the belief of this Doctrine ; on the same account , all wise and good people must pronounce them of all men then most happy . Remember what God said to Jacob , Gen. 46.3 . Fear not to go down into Egypt : for ver . 4.  I will go down with thee , and I will also surely bring thee up again . 

3.  Dir. Remember Death is the common condition and lot of all mankind . Now what reason hast thou to be troubled when ( as Joshua expresses it ) thou goest the way of all the earth ? If all Travel this Road , art thou so foolish , as to think , there should be a by-path for thee to go alone ? None can Redeem his Brothers , no not his own Life , from Death . Monarches , Emperors , Patriarches , Prophets , Apostles , have trod this Tract ; nay , Christ himself : why then dost thou fear to follow such a glorious Company ? Grudge if thou wilt , that thou art a Man ; grudge not that being a Man , thou must die . Where are the Fathers of old ? Do the Prophets live for ever ? This is the King's highway , and the Beggars also . You tread no untrodden Tract ; You are not the first set out this way , nor will be the last . thou dost not break the Ice first . 

4.  Direct . Familiarize Death in thy thoughts . This familiarity with it , will breed contempt of it . Men little think of Dying , therefore are the terrors of Death so stinging . Plato persuading to the thoughts of Death , defined true Philosophy to be a Meditation of Death Even Tigers and Lions , which at their first sight affright , by frequent viewing abate their terror . Look it often in the Face , and thou wilt sooner be reconciled to its hard Features , and grim Countenance . Bid Death to thy Board , to thy Bed , to thy Closet , to thy Counting house , and thy Shop , walk with him in thy Garden , as Joseph of Arimathea did . Die daily in your Thoughts and Meditations , and when you come to it actually , you will die more delightfully . It is for want of these thoughts , that men's Souls are chased out by Violence , rather than yielded up to God in Obedience . 

5.  Direct . Ponder on the happy advantage of your dissolution . This is a large Cluster , and I cannot tarry to give it you Grape by Grape . 

1.  Death will give thee a freedom from all evil , Whether of Sin or Sorrow ; cure all your Diseases and Infirmities , dry up all your tears . When the stroke is once struck , adieu then to the Temptaions of Satan , the rage of Persecutors , distempers of Mind , deformities of Body , disgrace of Name , unfaithfulness of Friends , undutifulness of Children , loss of Estate , and whatever else makes life bitter . Didst never cry out , who should deliver thee , with the Apostle ? Rom. 7.24 . and art troubled when a Liberate is sent ? Art afraid to Land after such Storms and Tempests ? How many have desired Death , nay sinfullly destroyed their Lives , to deliver themselves from Griefs , Fears , Wants and Pains ? 't is true , he Sin's highly that goes away out of this World , before God calls him ; yet who would refuse to go , when once he is called ? 

2.  It will put thee into possession of thine Inheritance . I desire to depart , and to be with Christ . Who would tarry so long from his dear Lord , that might have passage to him ? When the Heathen Socrates was to die for his Religion , he was greatly comforted at his Death , with this , that he should go to the place where he should meet Orphous , Homer , Hesiod , and many other Worthies of the former Ages : Had he but known Christ , the order of Cherubin and Seraphim , Angels , glorified Saints , Patriarches , Prophets , Apostles , Martyrs , Confessors , our Fathers , Mothers , near Relations , and dear Friends , and the rest of the glorious Heirarchy of Heaven , he would then doubtless have taken down his deadly draught of Hemlock with greater relish and satisfaction . 

The Proto-martyr Stephen triumphed over Death , when he saw the Heavens opened , and the Son of man standing on God's right hand . Faith will help to the same beatifical Vision and Prospect . It is pleasant to the eyes to behold the Sun ; but the Sun is as darkness , and altogether useless in that Kingdom of Glory , rev. 21.23 . rev. 22.3 , 4 , 5.  If David in the Wilderness so impatiently thirsted to appear before the living God in an earthly Jerusalem ; how earnestly should we long to see his glory in the heavenly one ? Psal . 42.  The glimpse of his back parts was as much as Moses might behold , yet that put a shining glory on his Face ; what will it be then to see him face to face ? The glimpse of Christ in his transfiguration ravished Three Apostles who beheld it : St. Paul's Vision , that did wrap him up in the third Heavens , advanced him above the rest of mankind ; but the beatifical Vision of the Glory of the Great God , far excels all . This leads me to the next particular . 

6.  Direct . Renew your familiarity with the blessed ones above . Remember that great Army of God , ( The souls of the just from Adam till now ) are all got safe through this dead Sea , and are triumphing in Heaven already , and that there are but a few stragglers in the end of the World left behind , and then which part do you desire to be with ? But especially remember that Jesus your head is entered into the Heavens before you , and is preparing a place for you , not being willing to be there without your company . He would have you there to behold his Glory ; and do not these considerations provoke you to covet to be united to that heavenly Choir above , which incessantly Sing ( not resting either day or night ) that melodious Anthem to him that sits on the Throne , and unto the Lamb for ever and ever , of blessing and honour , and glory , and power , rev. 5.13 . Many more things might be added by way of Direction , but I shall add but this one more , though the most considerable and important . 

7.  Direct . Act faith on the death of Christ : Here is the main prop and pillar of comfort . Who would have dared to die , had not our Lord died first ? he has taken away , the Sting of Death ; what harm can there be in a stingless Snake ? He hath cut the lock of Sin , where the strength of Death lay . Hosea 13.14 . OH Death , I will be thy plagues ; OH grave , I will be thy destruction : Christ hath happily triumphed over it , both for himself and thee ; his precious Blood has altered its Complexion , and turned its pale Face into a beautiful Sanguine : Our Redeemer having unstung it , we may safely put it into our Bosoms ; It is an Enemy indeed , but a Conquered and disarmed one . Dost dread an Enemy Vanquished to thy hand , and sprawling at thy feet ? Hath David killed this great and formidable Goliath , and shall not trembling Israel recover their Spirits , and up , and pursue the Philistines ? Shall a Conquered Enemy disanimate the Conquerors ? Remember and revive , OH Christian ; The Captain of thy Salvation has not only destroyed , but sanctified the Grave to thee , and perfumed the dust thereof with his own body . What comfortable words are those , Because I live , ye shall live also , John 14.19 . The Grave that otherwise affords but a noisome smell , smells sweet ever since the Rose of Sharon , and the Lily of the Valleys lay in it . This dark hole is made lightsome , ever since that true Light , ( for a time Eclipsed ) shone out of it . Thus our Samson has found an honeycomb in the Carcase of this Lion. Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah , from whose Death , as from a plentiful Breast , we may suck abundance of sweetness . His Sepulchre is the most fragrant knot in Joseph's Garden : your thoughts cannot be died into a richer Colour than the meditation of Christ Crucified . As St. Paul always did bare about in his Body , so do you in your Minds , the dying of the Blessed Jesus : Assure yourselves , the pale face of Death will look ruddy , when you cast this blood of sprinkling on it . 

This should arm the Heirs of Life , against the fear of Death . We read Cant. 3.7 , 8.  The valiant of Israel have their swords on their thighs because of fear in the night . Night strikes men into fears ; especially , the Night of Death ; but gird this Sword on thy Thigh , get a living Faith in thy Heart , and all the fears of Death will not dead it . 

This should teach us to give Praise and Thanks to our Lord and Master . How did the Philistines rejoice , when they had got Samson in their hands ? Judg. 16.23 , 24.  then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together , for to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god , and to rejoice : for they said , Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand . And when the people saw him , they praised their god : for they said , Our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy , and the destroyer of our country , which slew many of us . 

What Lebanon is sufficient to burn ? Or what Cattles on a Thousand Hills for a Sacrifice ? What Hecatombs of Praise and Service are due to our great God and Saviour ? Who hath delivered the Destroyer both of our Souls and Bodies into our hands ; and us out of his ; who hath slain , not only many of us , but either hath , or will make havoc of us all , heaps upon heaps , and that far more and greater than ever Samson did of the Philistines . Not unto us , OH Lord , not unto us , but to our most mighty and merciful God and Saviour be all the praise and glory given , who hath translated us from under the power of sin and death , into the kingdom of his dear Son.  

Having finished one Text , it may be expected I should speak on another , viz. Our deceased Brother , who is the doleful occasion of this days solemnity I acknowledge I have not been much used to Funeral Encomiastics ; and when I consider that this kind of Work is not without much hazard , I do the more unwillingly engage in it . Relations will think too little is spoken , others too much . The task is hard , when on one hand I may be censured to give a faint and mean Character , and on the other hand I may be thought to over do it , and be Parasitical . I acknowledge it ( and shall endeavour to avoid it ) That it is too common on these occasions to Saint all at their Death , who expressed little of sanctity in their lives . It was said of Julian , Idoneus erat dicere Panegyricum diabolo . He was fit to Canonize the Devil ; and I have read that Bruno an Italian did it . This should make us wary in Discourses of this Nature : But where there is real worth , and deeds praiseworthy are to be found , to deny the scattering a few flowers on the Hearse of such a Person , would be injustice both to the living and the dead . There is a generation of men , whose eyes are mostly fixed on the dark sides and blemishes of their brethren , and choose to represent them to be such always , as possibly they once might find them to be in some particular circumstance of their lives . Concerning such , I shall say no more , than that there are in the world such things to be found , as Envy , Pride , Detraction , evil Surmising , Malice , and Rancour , which like smoke is always driven upon the fairest Faces . I am not so partial as to believe our deceased Brother to have lived without his Humanity's and Frailties ( let such who have escaped them , throw Stone's at him ) ; yet God kept him from the immoralities and gross pollutions of the times and places wherein he lived . Good and wise men have generally determined , That it is more pardonable to praise a worthy person , even beyond his merits , than to be always rakeing with the nail in the sores of others , who may justly deserve our reproof and correction . They are two equal guilts , to detract from an enemy ; and to lavish and be prodigal in the commendation of a Friend I hope there is no one here that scruples the commending of the dead , though our Age abounds with many of that humour , who little scruple the calumniating both dead and living . I am in a straight betwixt two , having much to object both against speaking , and being silent : yet I must not deny our Brother the Justa defunctorum , the rights and deuce of the dead ; I shall say but little , and that ( as near as may be ) within the compass of my own Knowledge and Observation . Sorry I am , to be an Actor in this mournful Scene ; it might better become , and better be done by some other ; but providence has made it my task to perform this last Office of love . 

We are met to solemnize the Funerals of ROBERT HUNTINGTON Esq , a Gentleman as generally beloved as known , who lived much desired , and dies much lamented . My business is not to tell you , he descended from an ancient and worthy Family , that is the work of the Herald , not of the Preacher , and those Escutcheons on his Hearse sufficiently tell that ; my task is to blazon a more noble Coat , and to give you those good grounds of hope which we have of his new and better Birth , which are these following . 

He was not only a Frequent , but a Reverend hearer of God's Word , not easily detained from the public Ordinances , as we sadly observe in this profane Age many are , who question the Gentility of that man , who goes to Church more than once on God's day , reckoning him the best bred , and most modish , who is for three Meals a day in his own house , and either none , or but one at most in Gods. OH sad and deplorable Age we live in ! that by how much the lesser any man life's like a Christian , to be reckoned so much the better Gentleman ! If this be the Character of one well bred , and well born , I am sure our Brother must not have it , for he with his , went to the Habitation of God's Holiness , and the place where God's honour dwelleth . 

He was an Honourer and Encourager of a Religious Ministry ; I have often heard him speak of such who were diligent and faithful in that sacred Office , with great Testimony of respect and veneration , as well knowing the bringing their persons and Function into disrespect , was the ready way ( already attempted by the Debauchees of this Age ) to bring their Doctrine into contempt . He valued those most , who preached most to the Hearts and Consciences of a Sinner , and never disliked a good Sermon because it did not keep time with the glass . 

With much sense he expressed his dislike of seeing the Pulpit converted into a Stage , wherein men vented their Heats and Singularities , and discovered more of Spleen , Pride and Passion , than of being inspired with the Spirit of that Holy Jesus , in whose Name they pretend to come , and whose mind they profess to Reveal and Preach . He judged that Doctrine to be good , which tended to make men so , and much abhorred gingling and quibbling , affected Cadencies of Words , and all frothiness and levity of expression , conceited , fashionable , and fantastical Phrases ; he best like those Discourses which pressed most a holy and strict life in these licentious and profane days , and Catholic and Universal Charity in these distracted , and divided times ; such which urged men to be at peace with God , and one another . It was a good sign of a spiritual Appetite , that he liked more the favouriness of the Meat , than the garnishing of the Dish . 

He was vir sine plicis , without foldings and twist , a true hearted man to his Friend , a stranger to that much studied Art of flattering and hating at the same time . 

In his Converse and Friendship , Cordial and Faithful , without baseness , or low dissimulation . 

I boldly affirm him a man free from revenge . I say not , but he had a sense of personal injuries , and especially of those that reflected on his name ; principally , when they proceeded from those who had good names themselves . What others said , he despised , but often wished he had been better understood by some ; and that he was not , he bore as his misfortune ; yet would not requite them with the like measure , but mentioned them with all due respect , being always ready to oblige them , and to do them good . Thomas he was a man naturally of a great spirit and courage , of that personal valour , as if nothing but Steel had gone to his composition , his eyes being shut against all impressions of fear and terror ; yet no man more gentle , or easy to be entreated , more yielding or desirous of reconciliation , of which I could give very pregnant instances . 

I must not omit his exemplary Charity . It was of the right stamp , constant and private , I knew it to be diffusive and large , and very far from Ostentation . As he did not rob himself , ( for I count every Miser a thief to his own Body ) , so neither did he rob the poor . Oppression , or withholding the hire of the Labourer will never come within his Indictment . What estate God blessed him with , was neither procured or enlarged by defrauding or overreaching his neighbour . Whilst he was a Housekeeper and Master of a Family , he reckoned more belonged to his Table , than they that slept under his Roof , and therefore with his own hand first divided and sent a Portion to them , before he took his own : And ( which I think was hardly known to any but myself ) , he did as duly furnish one purse with money , to distribute amongst the indigent ( though not begging poor ) , as he filled another for his ordinary Expenses , and made their Dividend equal with his own . The Age we live in , hath much of the Lamp of Profession , but little of the Oil of Charity . 't is the sin and curse of many rich Earthworms to have with a flourishing Estate , a withered Hand , which they stretch not forth to good uses . It was a startling and rousing passage of St. Chrysostome , Feed the hungry while you live , that you feed not the fire of Hell when you die . 't is sad to drink in a full Cup ourselves , and not to let one drop to fall beside , to refresh the bowels of a poor neighbour . 

What he was in his relative capacity , you his Children and Servants can bear me witness that I speak the truth , and lie not , when I affirm him to have been a tender , compassionate and provident Father ; and a worthy , kind , and gentle Master ; a good friend , and no bad enemy . Report gives him an honourable Pass . The Voice of all ( as far as it reaches my ears ) proclaims him a useful good man , a true friend , a just person , of a most obliging Conversation , having pleasantness of spirit , without levity ; freedom and affability of carriage , yet still with gravity . 

Of what use he was in his public Station , will best be discovered hereafter ; you will know how great the tree that 's fallen was , by the vacuity or void place it leaves behind it , which every slight stick of wood will not supply and fill up . 

In short , he lived to a good old Age , he came up to the Standard of Moses , Threescore years and ten , and now is gathered to his Fathers , we hope . For not only Charity , but common reason thinketh no evil , where it findeth so many Evidences of good . I close all with a word of Advice and Counsel , as knowing these Solemnities are not ad juvandas animas , as a great Cardinal upon his single Affidavit would require us to believe ; nor are they mortuorum adjutoria , as a great Schoolman would persuade us ; but they are vivorum solatia & documenta , They call upon us to read our own dissolution in this of our Brothers . 

Anatomists and Physicians advantage themselves by the Dissection of dead Bodies : So may we by this gloomy Providence improve our skill in the two great Arts , of living Godly , and dying Blessedly . Thomas the occasion of this Assembling together is Mournful , yet the fruit will be Comfortable , if we who survive are forwarded in our preparation for our change , and do something towards our cheerful repose in the Grave , without distracting Fears of that King of Terrors ; and since no ingredients in the shop of Nature , are sufficiently Cordial to fortify the heart against this ghashly Enemy , or his Harbingers ; it will be no lesle our Wisdom and Interest , than it is our Duty and Obligation to provide ourselves with them , out of that Divine Laboratory of the sacred Scriptures , where in great abundance , and on easy terms they are tendered to us , by him who is the God of all Consolations . 

FINIS . 





Mors nomen tantum fidelibus . vitae via Bern. Omnibus finis , multis remedium , non nullis votum . 