A SERMON OF Public Thanksgiving for the wonderful mitigation of the late Mortality ; Preached before his Ma.tie ; upon his gracious command , at his Court of Whitehall , Jan. 29. 1625.  

AND Upon the same command Published By Jos . Hall Deane of Worcester . 

LONDON , Printed by M. Flesher for Nath. Butter . 1626.  

Psal . 68 vers . 19 , 20.  

Blessed be the Lord , who loadeth us daily with benefits , even the God of our salvation . Selah . 

He that is our God , is the God of salvation , and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death . 



Yea , blessed be the Lord , who hath added this unto the load of his other mercies to his unworthy servant , that the same tongue , which was called , not long since , to chatter out our public mournings , in the solemn Fast of this place , is now employed in a song of praise ; and the same hand , which was here lifted up for supplication , is now lift up in thanksgiving ; ye that them accompanied me with your tears and sighs , accompany me now , I beseech you , ( in this happy change of note , and time ) with your joyful smiles , and acclamations to the God that hath wrought it . 

It is not more natural for the sun , when it looks upon a moist , and well fermented earth , to cause vapours to ascend thence , them it is for greatness , & goodness , when they both meet together upon an honest hart , to draw up holy desires of gratulation . The worth of the agent doth it not alone , without a fit disposition in the subject ; Let the Sun cast his strongest beams upon a flint , a pumice , he fetches out no steam : Even so the greatness & goodness of the Almighty , beating upon a dry & hard hart , prevails nothing : Here all three are happily met : In God , infinite greatness , infinite goodness ; such greatness , that he is attended with thousand thousands of Angels ; ( a guard fit for the King of heaven ) such goodness , that he receives gifts even for the rebellious : In David , a gracious heart , that in a sweet sense of the great goodness of his God , breathes out this divine Epiphonema , Blessed be the Lord , who loadeth us daily with benefits , even the God of our salvation , etc.  

Wherein me thinks , the sweet singer of Israel seems to raise his note to the emulation of the quire of heaven , in the melody of their Alleluiahs' ; yea , let me say , now that he sings above in that blessed consort of glorious spirits , his ditty cannot be better than this , that he sung here upon earth , and wherein we are about to bear our parts at this time : Prepare , I beseech you , both your ears for David's song , and your hearts and tongues for your own . And first in this Angelical strain , your thoughts cannot but observe , without me , the Descant , and the Ground ; The descant of Gratulation , Blessed be the Lord ; wherein is both applause and excitation ; an applause given to God's goodness , and an excitation of others to give that applause . The ground is a threefold respect . Of what God is in himself , God and Lord Of what God is , and doth to us , which loadeth us daily with benefits . Of what he is both in himself , and to us ; The God of our salvation ; which last , ( like to some rich stone ) is set off with a dark foil , To God the Lord belong the issues from death . So in the first , for his own sake ; in the second , for our sakes , in the third for his own , and ours ; as God , as Lord , as a Benefactor , as a Saviour , and deliverer , Blessed be the Lord  

It is not hard to observe that David's Alleluiahs are more them his Hosannaes' ; his thanks more than his suits . Ofttimes doth he praise God when he begs nothing : Seldom ever doth he beg that favour , for which he doth not raise up his soul to an anticipation of thanks ; neither is this any other than the universal under-song of all his heavenly ditties , Blessed be the Lord ; Praised ( as our former translation hath it ) is too low ; Honour is more than praise ; blessing is more than honour ; neither is it for nothing , that from this word ( Barac ) to bless , is derived Berec , the knee which is bowed in blessing ; and the crier before joseph , proclaimed Abrech , calling for the honour of the knee from all beholders . Gen. 41.43 . Every sleight trivial acknowledgement of worth is a praise ; Blessing is in a higher strain of gratitude , that caries the whole sway of the hart with it , in a kind of divine rapture : praise is in matter of compliment , blessing , of devotion . 

The Apostles rule is that the less is blessed of the greater , Abraham of the King of Salem ; the Prophet's charge is , that the greater should be blessed of the less ; yea the greatest of the least , God of man : This agrees well ; Blessing is an act that will bear reciprocation ; God blesseth man , & man blesseth God ; God blesseth man imparatively , man blesseth God optatively ; God blesseth man in the acts of mercy ; Man blesseth God in the notions , in the expressions of thanks . God blesses man when he makes him good and happy ; man blesseth God when he confesseth how good , how gracious how glorious he is : So as the blessing is wholly taken up in agnition , in celebration ; in the one we acknowledge the bounty of God to us ; in the other we magnify him , vocally , really , for that bounty . 

O see then what high account God makes of the affections and actions of his poor , silly , earth-creeping creatures ; that he gives us in them power to bless himself , & takes it as an honour to be blessed of us : David wonders that God should so vouchsafe to bless man , how much more must we needs wonder at the mercy of God that will vouchsafe to be blessed by man , a worm , an atom , a nothing ? Yet , both S. james tells us that with the tongue we bless God ; & the Psalmist calls for it here , as a service of dear acceptation ; Blessed be the Lord ; Even we men live not ( Chameleon-like ) with the air of thanks ; nor feed ere the fatter with praises , how much less our maker ? OH God , we know well that whatsoever men or Angels do , or do not , thou canst not but be infinitely blessed in thyself ; before ever any creature was , thou didst equally enjoy thy blessed self , from all eternity ; What can this worthless loose film of flesh either add to , or detract from thine infiniteness ? Yet , thou that humblest thyself to behold the things that are done in heaven , & earth , humblest thyself also , to accept the weak breath of our praises , that are sent up to thee from earth to heaven . How should this encourage the vows , the endeavours of our hearty thankfulness , to see them graciously taken ? Would men take up with good words , with good desires , & quit our bonds for thanks , who would be a debtor ? With the God of mercy this cheap payment is currant ; if he them will honour us so far as to be blessed of us , O let us honour him so far as to bless him ; Quare verbis parcan ? gratuita sunt : Why do we spare thanks that cost us nothing , as that wise Heathen ; OH give unto the Lord , ye mighty , give unto the Lord the praises due to his name , offer to God the sacrifice of thanksgiving : and still let the foot of our song , be , Blessed be the Lord  

This for the descant of gratulation ; the ground follows ; His own sake hath reason to be first ; God will be blessed both as jah , and Adonai ; the one the style of his Essence , the other of his Sovereignty . Even the most accursed Deist would confess , that as a pure , simple , infinite , absolute being , God is to be blessed ; for if being be good , & these two be convertible , nature must needs teach him , that an absolute & infinite being must needs be absolutely and infinitely good : but what do I blur the glory of this day with mention of those monsters , whose Idol is nature , whose religion is secondary atheism , whose true region is the lowest hell ; these damned Ethnics cannot , will not conceive of God , as he is , because they impiously sever his essence from his inward relations ; We Chrstians can never be so heavenly affected to God , as we ought , till we can rise to this pitch of piety , to bless God for what he is in himself , without the external beneficial relations to the creature ; Else our respects reflect too much homeward , and we do but look through God , at ourselves . 

Neither is it for us only to bless him as an absolute God , but as a Sovereign Lord too ; whose power hath no more limit than his essence ; the great moderator of heaven and earth , giving laws to his creature , overruling all things , marshalling all events , crushing his enemies , maintaining his Church , adored by Angels , trembled at by devils ; Behold here a Lord worthy to be blessed . We honour , as we ought , your conspicuous greatness , o ye eminent Potentates of the earth ; but alas , what is this to the great Lord of heaven ? When we look up thither , we must crave leave to pity the breath of your nostrils , the rust of your coronets , the dust of your graves , the sting of your felicities , and ( if ye take not good heed ) the blots of your memories : As ye hold all in fee from this great Lord , so let it be no disparagement to you , to do your lowliest homage to his footstool ; homage , I mean , in action ; give me the real benediction ; I am sure that is the best ; they bless God that praise him , they bless him more , and praise him best , that obey him . There are that crouch to you great ones , who yet hate you : O let us take heed of offering these hollow observances to the searcher of hearts , if we love not our own confusion . They that proclaimed Christ at jerusalem , had not only Hosanna in their mouths , but palms in their hands too ; so must we have : Let me say then , If the hand bless not the Lord , the tongue is an hypocrite . Away with the waste compliments of our vain formalities ; Let our loud actions drown the language of our words , in blessing the name of the Lord  

Neither must we bless God as a sovereign Lord only , but ( which is yet a more feeling relation ) as a munificent Benefactor , Who loadeth us daily with benefits . Such is man's self-love , that no inward worth can so attract his praises , as outward beneficence ; whiles thou makest much of thyself , every one shall speak well of thee , how much more whiles thou makest much of them ? Here God hath met with us also . Not to perplex you with scanning the variety of senses , wherewith I have observed this Psalm above all other of David's , to abound ; see here , I beseech you , a fourfold gradation of divine bounty . First , here are benefits ; the word is not expressed in the original , but necessarily employed in the sense ; for there are but three loads whereof man is capable from God , favours , precepts , punishments ; the other two are out of the road of gratulation ; when we might therefore have expected judgments , behold Benefits : And those secondly , not sparingly handfulld out to us , but dealt to us by the whole load ; loadeth with benefits . Whom , thirdly , doth he load , but us ? Not worthy and well deserving subjects , but us 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Rebels : And lastly , this he doth , not at one dole & no more , ( as even churls rare feasts use to be plentiful , ) but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 successively , unweariedly , perpetually . One favour were too much , here are benefits ; a sprinkling were too much , here is a load ; once were too oft , here is daily largition . Cast your eyes therefore , a little upon this threefold exaggeration of beneficence , the measure , a load of benefits ; the subject , unworthy us ; the time , daily : Who daily loadeth us with benefits . 

Where shall we begin to surveyed this vast load of mercies ? were it no more , but that he hath given us a world to live in , a life to enjoy , air to breathe in , earth to tread on , fire to warm us , water to cool and cleanse us , clotheses to cover us , food to nourish us , sleep to refresh us , houses to shelter us , variety of creatures to serve and delight us ; here were a just load : But now , if we yet add to these , civility of breeding , dearness of friends , competency of estate , degrees of honour , honesty or dignity of vocation , favour of Princes , success in employments , domestic comforts , outward peace , good reputation , preservation from dangers , rescue from evils , the load is well mended : If yet , ye shall come closer , and add , due proportion of body , integrity of parts , perfection of senses , strength of nature , mediocrity of health , sufficiency of appetite , vigour of digestion , wholesome temper of seasons , freedom from cares , this course must needs heighten it yet more ; If still , ye shall add to these , the order , and powers , and exercise of our inward faculties , enriched with wisdom , art , learning , experience , expressed by a not-unhandsome elocution : and shall , now , lay all these together , that concern estate , body , mind ; how can the axletree of the soul but crack under the load of these favours ? But , if from what God hath done for us as men , we look to what he hath done for us , as Christians ; that he hath embraced us with an everlasting love , that he hath moulded us anew , enlived us by his Spirit , fed us by his word and Sacraments , clothed us with his merits , bought us with his blood , becoming vile to make us glorious , a curse to invest us with blessedness ; in a word , that he hath given himself to us , his Son for us : O the height , & depth , and breadth of the rich mercies of our God ; O the boundless , to pless , bottomless load of divine benefits , whose immensity reaches from the centre of this earth , to the unlimited extent of the very empyreal heavens . O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness , and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men . 

These mercies are great in themselves , our unworthiness doth greaten them more : To do good to the well deserving were but retribution ; He ladeth us , who are no less rebellious to him , them he is beneficial to us. Our strait and shallow bounty picks out the worthiest , and most capable subject ; The greatest gift that ever God gave , he gives us , whiles we are enemies . It was our Saviour's charge to his Disciples , Interrogate quis dignus ; Ask who is worthy , that is , ( as Hierom interprets it ) of the honour to receive such guests ; Should God stand upon those terms with us , what should become of us ? See , and wonder , and be ashamed o ye Christian hearers ; God loads us , and we load him ; God loads us with benefits , we load him with our sins . Behold , I am pressed under you , saith God , as a cart is pressed , that is full of sheaves , Amos. 2.13 . He should go away laden with our thanks , with the presents of our duty , and we shamefully clog him with our continual provocations : Can there be here any danger of selfe-sacrificing with Sejanus , and not rather the just danger of our shame and confusion in ourselves ? How can we but hate this unkind , and unjust , unanswerableness ; Yet herein shall we make an advantage of our foulest sins , that they give so much more lustre to the glorious mercies of our God , who overcoms our evil with good , and loads even , Vs.  

The overlong interruption of favours loseth their thanks ; and the best benefits languish in too much disuse . Our God takes order for that , by a perpetuation of beneficence ; He ladeth us daily ; Every day , every minute renews his favours upon us ; Semper largitor , semper donator , as Hierom . To speak strictly , there is no time present ; nothing is present but an instant , and that , can no more be called time , than a prick can be called a line ; yet , how swift soever the wings of time are , they cannot cut one instant , but they must carry with them a successive renovation of God's gracious kindness to us.  

This Sun of his doth not rise once in an age , or once in a year , but every minute since it was created , riseth to some parts of the earth , and every day to us ; Neither doth he once hurl down upon our heads some violent drops , in a storm , but he plies us with the sweet showers of the former , and the latter rain ; Wherein the mercy of God condescends to our impotency , who are ready to perish under uncomfortable intermissions . Non mihi sufficit ? saith that father ; it is not enough that he hath given me once , if he give me not always ; To day's ague makes us forget yesterday health ; Former meals do not relieve our present hunger . This cottage of ours ruins strait , if it be not new daubed every day ; new repaired : The liberal care of our God therefore tiles over one benefit with another , that it may not rain thorough . And if he be so unwearied in his favours , why are we weary of our thanks ? Our bonds are renewed every day to our God ; Why not our payments ? Not once in a year , or moon , or week , but every day once ( without fail ) were the legal sacrifices reiterated ; and that , of all those creatures which were necessary for sustentation ; a Lamb , flower , wine , oil , that is , meat , bread , drink , sauce ; Why ? but that in all these we should still daily reacknowledge our new obligations to the giver ? Yea , ex plenitudine , & lachrymis , as it is in the original , Exod. 22.29 . of our plenty & tears , that is , ( as Caietan ) of a dear , or cheap year must we return ; more , or less may not miss our thanks ; We need daily , we beg daily , ( Give us this day ) we receive daily , why do we not daily retribute to our God , and act , as some read it , Blessed be the Lord daily , who loadeth us with his benefits . 

It is time now to turn your eyes to that mixed respect , that reaches both to God , and us ; Ye have seen him a benefactor , see him a Saviour , and Deliverer ; The God of our salvation ; The vulgars' salutaria , following the Septuagint , differs from our [ Salvation ] but as the means from the end . With the Hebrews , Salvation is a wide word , comprising all the favours of God , that may tend to preservation ; and therefore the Psalmist , elsewhere , extends this act both to man , and beast ; and as if he would comment upon himself , expounds 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 save , by 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 prospero , Psal . 118.25 . It is so dear a title of God , that the Prophet cannot have enough of it ; the interposition of a Selah cannot bar the redoubling of it in my Text.  

Every deliverance , every preservation fathers itself upon God , yet , as the soul is the most precious thing in the world , and life is the most precious thing that belongs to the soul , and eternal life is the best of lives , and the danger and loss of this life is the fearfullest and most horrible , chiefly is this greatest salvation here meant ; wherein God intends most to bless , and be blessed . 

Of this Salvation is he the God , by preordination , by purchase , by gift . By preordination ; in that he hath decreed it to us , from eternity , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Rom. 8.30 . By purchase , in that he hath bought it for us , and us to it , by the price of his blood , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 1 Cor. 6. the last . By gift , in that he hath feoft us in it 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , The gift of God is eternal life , Rom. 6.23 . Since therefore , he decreed it , he bought it , he bestows it , justly is he the God of our salvation : Who can , who dares arrogate to himself any partnership in this great work ? What power can dispose of the souls final condition , but the same that made it ? Who can give eternity , but he that only hath it ? What but an infinite merit can purchase an infinite glory ? Cursed be that spirit that will offer to share with his maker . Down with your Crowns , o ye glorious Elders , at the foot of him that sits on the Throne , with a , Non nobis Domine , Not unto us , o Lord , not unto us , but to thy name give the praise . Away with the proud encroachment of the merits of the best Saints , of papal largesses : Only our God , is the God of our salvation . 

How happy are we the while ? All actions are according to the force of the agent ; Weak causes produce feeble effects , contingent , casual ; necessary , certain ; Our salvation therefore , being the work of an infinitely powerful cause , cannot be disappointed ; Lo the beauty of Salomon's , Al-chum ; who hath resisted his will ? When we look to our own fleshy hands here is nothing but discouragement ; when we look to our spiritual enemies , here is nothing but terror ; but when we cast up our eyes to the mighty God , here is nothing but confidence , nothing but comfort ; Comfort ye , comfort ye therefore , OH ye feeble souls , and send your bold defiances to the prince of darkness ; heaven is high and hard to reach , hell is steep and slippery , our flesh is earthy and impotent , Satan strong and rancorous , sin subtle , the world alluring , all these , yet , God is the God of our Salvation ; Let those infernal Lions roar , and ramp upon us ; let the gates of hell do their worst ; Let the world be a cheater , our flesh a traitor , the devil a tyrant , Faithful is he that hath promised , who will also do it , God is the God of our Salvation . 

How much more than in these outward temporal occasions , when we have to do with an arm of flesh ? Do the enemies of the Church rage and snuff , and breathe nothing but threats , & death ? Make sure of our God , he shall be sure to make them lick our dust . Great Benhadad of the Syrians shall come with his hempen collar , to the King of Israel ; The very winds and waves shall undertake those Mahometan , or Marran powers that shall rise up against the inheritance of the God of Salvation ; 

Salvation is rateable according to the danger from which we are delivered ; since death therefore is the utmost of all terribles , needs must it be the highest improvement of Salvation , that to our God belong the issues from death : Death hath here a double latitude , of kind of extent ; the kind is either temporal , or eternal ; the extent reaches not only to the last complete act of dissolution , but to all the passages that lead towards it . Thus , the issues from death belong to our God , whether by way of preservation , or by way of rescue : How gladly do I meet in my text with the dear and sweet name of our jesus , who conquered death by dying , and triumphed over hell by suffering , and carries the keys both of death , and hell . Revel . 1.18 . He is the God , the Author and Finisher of our Salvation , to whom belong the issues from death . 

Look first at the temporary , he keeps it from us , he fetches us from it ; 

It is true , there is a Statutum est , upon it , die we must ; Death knocks equally at the hatch of a Cottage , and gate of a Palace ; but our times are in God's hand ; the Lord of life hath set us our period ; Whose omnipotence so contrives all events , that neither enemy , nor casualty , nor disease can prevent his hour , Were Death suffered to run loose and wild , what boot were it to live ? now it is tetherd up short by that almighty hand , what can we fear ? If envy repine , and villainy plot against sacred Sovereignty , God hath well proved upon all the Poisons , and Pistols , and Poniards , and Gun-powders of the two late memorable Successions , that to him alone belong the issues from death . 

Go on then blessed Sovereign , go on courageously in the ways of your God , the invisible guard of heaven shall secure your Royal head , the God of our Salvation shall make you a third glorious instance to all posterities , that unto him belong the issues from death . 

Thus , God keeps death from us ; it is more comfort yet , that he fetches us from it . Even the best head must at last lie down in the dust and sleep in death . O vain cracks of valour ; thou brag'st thyself able to kill a man ; a worm hath done it , a fly hath done it . Every thing can find the way down unto death , none but the omnipotent can find the way up out of it ; He finds , he makes these issues for all his ; As it was with our head , so it is with the members . 

Death might seize , it cannot hold : Gustavit , non deglutivit , It may nibble at us , it shall not devour us. Behold the only Sovereign Antidote against the sorrows , the frights of death . Who can fear to lay himself down , and take a nap in the bed of death , when his heart is assured , that he shall awake glorious in the morning of his resurrection ; Certainly , it is only our infidelity that makes death fearful ; Rejoice not over me , OH my last enemy , though I fall , I shall rise again : OH death where is thy sting , OH grave where is thy victory . 

Cast yet one glance of your eyes upon the second , and eternal death ; the issues where from belong to our God ; not by way of rescue , as in the former , but of preservation : ( Exinferno nulla redemtio ) is as true , as if it were Canonical ; Father Abraham tells the damned glutton in the parable , there is ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) a great gulf , that bars all return . These black gates of hell are barred without , by the irreversible decree of the Almighty : 

Those bold Fabulists , therefore , whose impious legends have devised Traian fetched thence by the prayers of Gregory , and Falcon●lla by T●claes ; suspending the final sentence upon a ( secundum praesentem iniustitiam ) take a course to cast themselves into that pit , whence they have presumptuously feigned the deliverance of others . 

The reseve is not more hopeless , than the prevention is comfortable ; There is none of us but is naturally walking down to these chambers of death ; Every sin is a pace thitherwards ; only the gracious hand of our GOD stays us ; In ourselves , in our sins we are already no better than brands of that hell ; Blessed be the God of our salvation , that hath found happy issues from this death : What issues ? Even those bloody issues that were made in the hands , and feet , and side of our blessed Saviour ; that invaluablie precious blood of the Son of God is that , whereby we are redeemed , whereby we are justified , whereby we are saved . O that our souls might have had leisure to dwell awhile upon the meditation of those dreadful torments we are freed from , of that infinite goodness that hath freed us , of that happy exchange of a glorious condition to which we are freed . But the public occasion of this day calls off my speech , and invites me to the celebration of the sensible mercy of God , in our late temporal deliverance . 

Wherein let me first bless the God of our salvation , that hath put it into the heart of his chosen servant , to set up an Altar in this sacred threshing floor , and to offer up this day's sacrifice to his name , for the stay of our late mortal contagion . How well it becomes our Gideon , to be personally exemplary , as in the beating of this Earthen pitcher , in the first public act of humiliation , so , in the lighting of this Torch of public joy , and sounding the Trumpet of a thankful iubilation , and how well will it become us to follow so pious , so gracious an example . Come therefore , all ye that fear the Lord , and let us recount what he hath done for our souls . Come , let us bless the Lord , the God of our salvation , that loadeth us daily with benefits ; the God to whom belong the issues of death : Let us bless him in his infinite essence , and power , bless him in his unbounded and just Sovereignty , bless him in his marvellous beneficence , large , continual , undeserued , bless him in his preseruations , bless him in his deliverances : We may but touch at the two last . 

How is our Earth ready to sink under the load of his mercies ? What nation under heaven hath not envied , and wondered at our blessings ? I do not carry back your eyes to the ancient favours of our God ; to the memorable frustrations of foreign Invasions , to the miraculous discoveries of Treasons , to the successful maintenance of oppressed neighbourhood ; That one mercy I may not forget ; that in the shutting up of blessed Queen ELIZABETH , the Pope and the then-king of Spain were casting Lots for the Crown , and palpably plotting for their severally-designed successors , as appears in the public Posthume Letters of Cardinal D' Ossat , a witness beyond exception , Three several Briefs were addressed hither by that inclement shaveling of Rome for the defeating of the Title and succession of our late Sovereign , of dear and blessed memory , and his Royal issue ; Yet in spite of Rome and hell , God brought him in , and set him peaceably upon this just throne of his forefathers ; and may He perpetuate it to the fruit of those loins , till world and time shall be no more , AMEN . 

If I must follow the times , let me rather balk that hellish Sulpher-mine , than not search it , and yet , who can look at that , any otherwise then the jews do at the Rainbow , with horror and astonishment ? What do I tell you of our long Peace , our full plenty , our wholesome Laws , our easeful Government , wirh a world of of these common favours ; it is for poor men to reckon . Those two late blessings ( if no more ) were worthy of immortal memory , The Prince out of Spain , Religion out of the dust ; For the one ; what a winter was there in all good hearts , when our Sun was gone so far Southward ? How cheerful a Spring in his return ? For the other , who saw not how Religion began ( during those purposely protracted Treaties ) to droop and languish , her friends to sigh , her enemies to insult , daring to brave us with challenges , to threaten our ruin ; The Lord looked down from heaven , and visited this poor Vine of his , and hath shaken off these Caterpillars from her then-wasting leaves ; Now we live , and it flourisheth . 

These would have been great favours of God , even to the best nation , but more to us : Who have answered mercies with rebellions . OH God , if proud disguises , if gluttonous pamper , if drunken healths , if wanton dalliances , if bloody oaths , if merciless oppressions may earn blessings from thee , too many of us have supererogated ; Woe is me , these are the measures thou hast had from too many hands ; That thou shouldst therefore enlarge thy bounty to an unworthy , unkind , disobedient generation , it is more than we can wonder at , and we could almost be ready to say with Peter , Lord departed from us , for we are sinful men . 

Yet , the wise justice of the Almighty meant not to cockney us up with mere dainties , with a loose indulgence , but hath thought fit to temper our sweets with tartness , and to strick our backs , whiles he strokes our heads , Ecce in pace amaritudo amarissima , the comfort of our peace , was allayed with the bitterness of death : He saw that in this common Plethorie it was fit for us to bleed ; he saw us Eels that would not be caught , but when the waters were troubled ; He therefore sent his destroying Angel abroad ; who laid about him on all sides ; What slaughter , what lamentation , what horror was there in the streets of our mother City ? more than twenty thousand families run from their houses , as if those had been on fire over their heads ; and seek shelter in Zoar , and the mountains . Some of them are over-taken by the pursuer , and drop down in the way , and lie there as woeful spectacles of mortality , till necessity , and not charity , could find them a grave : Others pass on , and for friends find strangers : Danger made men wisely , and unwillingly unhospitall ; The Cousin , the Brother forgets his own blood ; & the Father looks shiely upò his own child , and welcomes him with frowns , if not with repulses ▪ There were that repaid their grudged harbour with infection ; and those that sped best ▪ what with care for their abandoned houses , & estate ; what with grief for the misery of their forsaken neighbours what with the rage of those Epidemial diseases , which they found abroad , ( as it is well observed by one , that in a contagious time all sicknesses have some tincture of Pestilence ) wore out their days in the deepest sorrow and heaviness : there leave we them & return to the miserable Metropolis of this kingdom , which they left . Who can express the doleful condition of that time and place . The arms of London are the red Cross , and the Sword ; what house almost wanted these ? here was the Red-crosse upon the door , the Sword of God's judgement within doors , and the Motto was , Lord have mercy upon us , 

What could we hear but alarms of death , what could we see but Trophies of death ? Here was nothing but groaning , and crying , and dying and burying : Carts were the Beeres , wide pits were the graves , men's clothes were their coffins , and the very Exequys of friends were murderous . The carcases of the dead might say , with the sons of the Prophets ; Behold the place where we lie is too straight for us ; new dormitories are bought for the dead , & furnished ; neither might the corpses be allowed to lie single in their earthen beds , but are pyled up like faggots in a stack , for the society of their future resurrection . no man survived , but he might say with the Psalmist , that thousands fell at his side & 10000 at his right hand ; And if we take all together , ( the mother & the daughters ) surely the number was not much short of David's , though his time were shorter . It is not without reason , that from the Hebrew word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 which signifies the Plague , is derived 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 which signifies a desert ; Certainly the plague turns the most populous City into a desert . O the woeful desolation of this place , it was almost come to Herba tegit Troiam ; And if some infrequent passenger crossed our streets , it was not without his medicated Posy at his nose , and his Zedoary or Angelica in his mouth : Every room seemed a Pest-house , every scent mortal ; here should he meet one pale ghost muffled up under the throat ; another dragging his legs after him for the tumour of his groin ; another be-spotted with the tokens of instant death : here might he hear one shrieking out in a frantik distraction , there , another breathing out his soul in his last groans : What should I say more ? This glorious chamber of the Kingdom seemed no other than a dreadful dungeon to her own , a very Golgotha to all beholders ; and this proud Queen of our British Cities sat in the dust of her compassion ; howling in the rags of her sackcloth ; not mourning more than mourned for , pitied no less than forsaken ; When the GOD of our salvation looked down upon her deep afflictions and miraculously approved unto us , that unto him belong the issues from death . 

It was he that put it into the heart of his Gracious servant to command a Ninive-like humiliation , what pithy , what passionate prayers were enjoined to his disconsolate Church ? With what holy eagerness did we devour those fasts ? How well were we pleased of the austerity of that pious penitence ? 

What loud cries did beat on all sides at the gates of heaven , and with what inexpectable , unconceivable mercy were they answered ? How suddenly were those many thousands brought down to one poor unity ; not a number ? Other evils were wont to come on horseback , to go away on foot ; this mortality did not post but fly away , Me thought like unto the great y●e , it sunk at once ; Only so many are stricken as may hold us awful , and so few as may leave us thankful ; 

O , how soon is our fasting and mourning turned into laughter and joy ? how boldly do we now throng into this house of God , and fearelesly mix our breaths in a common devotion ? This is the Lords doing , and it is marvellous in our eyes ; O thou that hearest the prayer , to thee shall all flesh come ; And let all flesh come to thee with the voice of Praise and Thanksgiving . 

It might have been just with thee OH God , to have swept us away in the common destruction ; what are we better than our brethren ? thou hast let us live that we may praise thee . It might have been just with thee to have enlarged the commission of thy kill Angel , & to have rooted out this sinful people from under heaven ; But in the midst of judgement thou hast remembered mercy : Our sins have not made thee forget to be gracious , nor have shut up thy loving kindness in displeasure ; thou hast wounded us , and thou hast healed us again , thou hast delivered us , and been merciful to our sins for thy name's sake . 

O that we could duly praise thy name in the great Congregation , O that our tongues , our hearts , our lives might bless and glorify thee , that so thou mayst take pleasure to perfect this great work of our full deliverance , and to make this Nation a dear example of thy mercy , of peace , victory , prosperity to all the world . 

In the mean time , let us call all our fellow-creatures to help us bear a part in the Praise of our God ; Let the heavens , the stars , the winds , the waters , the dews , the frosts , the nights , the days ; Let the Earth and Sea , the mountains , wells , trees , fishes , fowls , beasts ; Let men , let Saints , let Angels bless the Lord , praise him , and magnify him for ever ; blessed , blessed for ever be the Lord who loadeth us daily with benefits ; even the God of our salvation , to whom belong the issues from death : O blessed be the Lord God of Israel , who only doth wondrous things ; And blessed be his glorious name for ever , and ever ; and let all the earth be filled with his glory . AMEN . Amen . 

FINIS . 

