death's alarm : or , security's warning-piece . 

A sermon preached in s. dionis back-church , at the funeral of Mrs. Mary Smith ( Daughter of Mr. Isaac colfe , formerly minister of God's word at Chadwell in Essex , and late wife of Mr. Richard Smith of London , draper ) who died the 9th . day of novemb. 1653. and was buried the 16th . of the same month . 

By nath : Hardy , Mr. of arts , and preacher to that parish . 

revelat. 16. 15.  

behold i come as a thief , blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his garments , lest be walk naked , and they see his shame . 

greg. mag. hom. 13. in evang.  

Horam ultimam dominus noster idcirco voluit nobis esse incognitam , ut semper possit esse suspecta , ut dum illam praevidere non possumus , ad illam since intermissione praeparemur . 

London , printed by j. g. for nath : Web , and will : Grantham at the sign of the bear in s. Paul's churchyard near the little North door . 1654.  

Errata . 

Page 7. line 22. read from , p. 8. l. 14. blot out the fig. 5. l. 25. for foremarning r. forearming , in marg. bl . out est . p. 12. l. 30. for souls r. skulls , p. 14. l. 2. for so r. to , l. 14. for {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} r. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , p. 15. l. 16. after readiness add consisteth , p. 24. l. 11. before sense r. high , l. 12. blot out high . 

To the reverend Mr. Abraham Colfe , minister of Lewisham in Kent : after the numbering of many years on earth , years without number in heaven . 

Worthy Sir , 

upon your first motion of publishing this sermon , i took it into a serious review , and finding the notions very common , and the expressions homespun , i adjudged it unworthy to survive ( except in the memories of the auditors ) that hour wherein it was preached : but being loath to deny your desire , i resolved to deny my own judgement , and withal , hoping it May prove useful ( though not to inform the judgement , yet ) to awaken the conscience of the reader , i am willing to hazard my own reputation , if i May advance the edification of others . 

that which ( Reverend Sir ) i conceive to be a subordinate end in your intention , is to testify your abundant ( yet deserved ) respects to your deceased niece , in taking care that whilst her body rots her name Might live ; and surely , since the memory of the just is blessed , an endeavour to perpetuate it is pious . Praiseworthy then is your regard of her memory , but much more commendable is that course which you have taken for preserving your own , by an eminent and lasting * act of charity , for which the generations to come shall call you blessed . 

indeed by this worthy work you have honoured the parish whereof you have been , and are a careful watchman ; the church of England , to which you have been an obedient son ; the gospel , of which you have been a laborious preacher ; and Protestant religion , of which ( i trust ) you are a sincere professor . and truly , both the present and future ages will be very ingrateful , if they shall not highly honour so munificent a benefactor . 

however ( i hope ) you have so learned Christ , as not to make men's applause the scope at which you aim , or mark whereat you shoot , well knowing that vainglory sullieth the splendour , and evacatueth the reward of our best actions , turning Christian charity into pharisaical hypocrisy . 

to God's merciful acceptation ▪ and gracious remuneration ( i doubt not , good Sir ) but you commend your pious and charitable design , who ( though men should ) will not be unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love . to his powerful protection and most wise direction , i commend both you and your endeavours , who will not forsake you now you are aged , but preserve you to his heavenly kingdom . To whom be glory for ever and ever . 

Amen . 

I subscribe myself ( Sir ) a cordial honourer of your virtues , nath : Hardy . 

math : 24. 44.  

therefore be ye also ready , for in such an hour as you think not , the son of man cometh . 

This chapter is a sermon , the preacher whereof was no other than rhe Lord of preachers and great prophet of his church : the theme whereabout it is conversant is his coming , and that in a way of judgement . and those two genuine parts of a sermon , explication and application divide the chapter : the former describeth the signs and manner of his advent , from the first verse to the 42.  The latter prescribeth an expectation of , and preparation for it , from the 42. to the end . the text i am now to handle lieth within the compass of the latter and most practical part of the sermon : in which , ( The design of our blessed saviour being to urge a watchful readiness for his coming ) he pursueth a double metaphor ( Couching logical reasons under rhetorical allusions ) the one in the following verses , the other in the foregoing . 

The subsequent similitude is borrowed from a servants behaviour in reference to the coming of his Lord . no topics more prevailing , especially with vulgar judgements , than those which are drawn à commodo & incommodo , from the danger or benefit , detriment or emolument that accrueth by the neglect or performance of that to which we persuade , upon which account it was that Catiline said to his soldiers , quem neque gloria neque pericula movent , nequicquam hortere , that man is unperswadable who can neither be affrighted nor alured : both these arguments Christ is here pleased to make use of , at once representing the comfortable felicity of a vigilant , and the doleful , nay dismal misery of a secure servant , when their Lord shall come . 

The precedent resemblance is seemingly very harsh , and yet really very fit , wherein you find mention made of an householder and a thief , yea ( Which is the riddle ) Christ compared to the thief , and his disciple to the householders . that those who are ( Most justly ) afterwards called servants , should here be termed householders , is somewhat strange , and yet this in some respect is very congruous ; since every man's body is an house wherein he dwelleth , his thoughts , words , and actions , are as his family , which he must govern , and his soul , more worth than a world , the treasure which he is to take care of . 

But though this part of the comparison May admit of a favourable construction , yet the other seems altogether incompatible . Methinks when i read Christ resembling himself to a thief , i am ready to say , as once s. Peter in another case , be it far from thee , Lord , this shall not be unto thee . Blessed Jesus , thou thinkest it no robbery to be equal with God , and dost thou here , as it were , equalise thyself to a robber ? thou callest thyself , and not without good reason , a little after this , Lord , and can the Lord of the house become a thief , the owner a robber ? Thou didst tax the multitude for coming against thee as a thief , and dost thou here speak of thyself as if thou wert a thief ? It was an high affront , when the Jews numbered thee with thieves , nay preferred a thief before thee , and art thou so injurious to thyself , as to clothe thyself under the appellation of a thief ? rather ( To allude to s. Paul's expression ) let Christ be true , and every man a thief . indeed , well May the thief lie at our doors ; our first parents were robbers in eating the forbidden fruit , and we , their unhappy progeny , are no less guilty , not only in their loins , but in our own persons , by uncharitableness , by sacrilege , by idleness , and profaneness : but as for the innocent Messiah , what hath he done that May deserve the title of a thief ? 

To all this the answer is easy , if we consider that it is not a charge or accusation , but only an allusion or comparison . Christ doth not make himself the same with , because he likens himself to a thief , nor indeed , is it himself ▪ but rather his advent , which is here compared to the coming of a thief . 

But it will still be objected , how can this be verified ? we elsewhere find Christ plainly opposing his to a thiefe's coming , the thief cometh not but to kill and steal , and destroy , but i come , saith Christ , that they May have life . true , but that is spoken of his first coming , which was in mercy . it May be replied , this cannot be asserted of his coming in displeasure , since the coming of a thief is to take from men their own , to do wrong , to injure the innocent ; whereas the coming of Christ is , like that of a judge , to give every man his own , to do right , to punish the nocent ; and these two are so far from being like , that they are directly contrary . 

To unfold this riddle , therefore , you must know , that this expression is parabolical ; and parables , like knives , cut only in the edge , to wit , the scope : now his aim in likening this advent•o that of a thief is only to take in the consideration of the time . excellent to this purpose is that of Simon de Cass•a , similitudo christi ad furem non est personae ad personam , nec negotii ad negotium , sed temporis ad tempus , the parallel here holdeth not between person and person , or business and business , but between time and time ; and therefore the apostles , Paul and Peter , though ( After Christ's example ) they are bold to use this allusion , yet with an explicatory addition , where they say , the Lord cometh as a thief in the night ; and thus it fitly agreeth , since as the coming of a thief in the night is unexpected , because the goodman of the house is then asleep , & thinketh not of it ; so is oft times , especially to wicked men , the coming of Christ ; and that this is the meaning of the protasis in the former , appeareth by the apodosis , or reddition of the similitude in this verse which requireth our constant preparedness , because of his sudden coming , be you therefore ready , for in an hour , &c.  

The words ( If taken in their fullest latitude ) present us with four considerables : here is , 

1.  an advent supposed in the last word come , and what coming of Christ is here intended would be a little enquired into : to clear which we must distinguish of those several comings which are attributed to him in scripture , nor can they ( In my weak capacity ) be more clearly differenced , than by considering a salvifical and a judicial advent of Christ , and each of these as both visible and invisible . 

Christ's coming to save is either in the flesh , or in the spirit ; his first coming into the world , and his daily coming into our hearts , are in their prime intention salufiicall ; his visible coming was to be the son of man , that in our nature he Might purchase salvation for us ; his invisible is by his spirit , to make us the sons of God , and thereby apply this salvation to us ; but neither of these can be here meant , since his coming in the flesh was already past , whereas he speaketh of a future advent ; nor can we make ourselves ready against his coming in the spirit , but it is the coming of the spirit which must enable us to make ourselves ready . 

pass we on therefore to his judicial coming , which is either general or special , personal or virtual , and so visible or invisible . there shall be at the end of the world , a glorious coming of Christ in person , to execute a manifest and righteous judgement upon all mankind , rewarding every man according to his works ; in the mean time , Christ cometh in his power by secondary instruments to every particular man , and sometimes to whole nations : in which respect , when by plague , famine , and war , kingdoms are destroyed , and when by casualties , or sickness , persons are cut off , Christ is said judicially to come to them : now all these , after a sort , and in some sense , May be here understood , that coming of Christ , which is literally and most properly meant , is , doubtless , his coming by Titus Vespasian against Jerusalem , to overthrow it , and thereby bring vengeance on the Jews , for their most unjust and ungrateful murder of him . But though this be the literal and primary sense , yet it will not ( I conceive ) be denied by any , but that many of the things mentioned in this chapter are , or at least , May be applied to that last coming of Christ , since we May look upon that destruction of Jerusalem as an emblem of the world's judgement ; and yet ( To draw nearer this present occasion ) the latter part of this chapter , and so this verse May morally be accommodated to the particular coming of Christ , by death , to every person : in reference to which , the counsels here given are very pregnant and apposite . 

2.  Next to the advent supposed , is observable , the person characterised , by this appellation , the son of man , a title which our blessed saviour very often giveth to himself , thereby setting us a pattern of humility , in having low conceits , and using mean expressions concerning ourselves . But that which would here be considered , is upon what account he calleth himself by so mean a title , when he speaketh of so glorious a coming . If you cast your eyes on the 42. verse , you shall there find him using the magnificent title of a Lord , a term , as most truly agreeing to him , so best fitting his advent , wherein he manifested himself as a Lord punishing his rebels ; but yet it is not without a reason , that having called himself Lord , before , he styleth himself , the son of man ; here , namely , to prevent the scandal which Might be taken at the meanness of his present condition : likely it is that the tenuity of his external aspect rendered his prediction contemptible . What need we regard the words , or fear the threats of this carpenters son ? Might the Jews say , at least within themselves . To prevent which , Christ is pleased to call himself the son of man , as if he would say , in answer to such an objection . However , i am a poor weak man , yet the day is at hand when i will come in might and power , to avenge myself upon my enemies . 

3.  The third observable is the time of this persons advent specified , and that to be both speedy , and sudden , in an hour when you think not ; speedy , because in an hour , one of the shortest dimensions of time ; it May be long before Christ come , but when he cometh he will not be long about it , and therefore he saith , not in a year , or a month , or a day , but an hour ; nor is it only speedy , but sudden , because in an hour men think not of , and by this , an addition is made to the preceding expression , in that parallel verse , there it is , you know not in what hour , and that lets us see how secret death is from , and therefore how uncertain it is to all men ; here it is in an hour you think not , which lets us see how sudden , and therefore unexpected it is to many men . 

4.  The last particular ( According to this retrograde , yet logical order ) considerable is , the inference deduced , what conclusions must be drawn from these premises , what effect these considerations of the thing , person , and time , aught to work upon us , and that is in these words , be ye therefore ready , namely , to have all things fitted before Christ cometh , that we May have nothing to do when he cometh , but to meet him . that which he calleth for in the forementioned verse , is watching , that which he requireth here is readiness ; two phrases , one whereof explains the other . On the one hand , lest the command of watching always Might seem impossible , Christ showeth , that the continual watching he expects , is only so far as to put ourselves in a ready posture , that we May not have grace to get when we should spend it . On the other , lest we should think it enough to watch , that is , think of his coming ; he calleth upon us not only to watch , but to be ready , enjoining such an expectation of , as leads us to preparation for his coming . 

5.  time will not give me leave to insist on each of these particulars , and therefore i shall contract the four to two , and dichotomizing the text , here is observable in it , 

praedictio eventus , a prediction of something to come to pass , in an hour you think not , &c.  
praescriptio operis , a prescription of something to be done , be you therefore ready : or , if you will , here is 
praemonitio periculi , a danger forewarned , in an hour you think not , &c.  
admonitio officii , a forewarning advised , be you therefore ready : yet once more , 
The two important truths of this scripture , are , 

inopinatus christi adventus , the suddenness of Christ's coming , in an hour you think not , &c.  
necessarius christiani apparatus , the necessity of the Christians preparing , be you therefore ready . 
Between these two i shall divide the following discourse , beseeching this son of man that he would in this hour , by his spirit , come into our hearts , that every one of us May be swift to hear , and ready to receive these divine lessons : and so i begin with the 

suddenness of Christ's coming , in an hour which you think not the son of man will come : this is that truth which s. Paul excellently exemplifieth , when they shall say peace and safety , then sudden destruction cometh upon them , as travel upon a woman with child ; when men say peace and safety , they little dream of war and ruin , pain cometh ofttimes upon the woman in the street , at the table , in an hour when she least thinketh on it . Such is Christ's coming , especially to careless and secure sinners : that expression of the prophet Jeremy May not unfitly be made use of to this purpose , by way of illustration , when he saith , death is come up into our windows ; the true man cometh in at the door , but the thief at the window ; coming in at the door is usual , but coming in at the window is unexpected ; so is Christ's coming to men by death in such a way , at such a time as is unlooked for ; this truth is that which our Lord himself elsewhere illustrateth by the metaphor of a snare , and that day is said so to come , for its secrecy and unexpectedness ; Agag flattereth himself , that the bitterness of death is past , and then Samuel giveth order to hew him in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal : and usually , when men think death the farthest off , it is the nearest to them . 

To enlarge this more particularly , be pleased to take notice , that there is a fourfold hour wherein men usually make no account of Christ's coming by death , and yet in which Christ frequently cometh to men , to wit , hora carnalis voluptatis , mundanae prosperitatis , corporalis sanitatis & juvenilis aetatis , the hour of carnal pleasure , of worldly prosperity , bodily health , and youthful age . 

1.  the hour of carnal pleasure is a time wherein death is scarce at all thought upon . While the ambitious statist is climbing high , he dreameth not of falling low into a grave ; whilst covetous mammonists are heaping up thick clay , they think not of being themselves made an heap of dust ; and whilst voluptuous epicures are feeding on dainties , and dallying with dallilahs , they seldom make account of conversing with , and being fed upon by worms ; in this respect , no doubt it is , that our saviour warneth his disciple , take heed to your selves , lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness , and cares of this life , and so that day come upon you unawares , thereby intimating that this day cometh unawares upon them , who are plunged into the cares and delights of this life , and yet even in this hour the son of man is pleased to come and arrest presumptuous sinners . Belshazzar is quaffing in his cups , carousing with his companions , when as in that selfsame hour came forth the fingers of a man writing upon the wall the destruction of him and his kingdoms . Herod is glutting his aspiring humour with popular applause ( Forgetting in the pride of his heart , both god and himself ) when as by a strange judgement he is immediately devoured by worms alive , and giveth up the ghost . Finally , worldly men spend their days in getting wealth , and in a moment they go down to the grave . the coming of the flood upon the old world is a little before made an emblem by Christ of his coming , and ( That as the amplification demonstrateth ) in this very particular , as the flood came upon the old world , when they were so far from fearing ruin , that they were eating , and drinking , and giving in marriage : so doth Christ seize upon sinners in the midst of their delights , whilst they are indulging to their lusts . 

2.  the hour of worldly prosperity is a time wherein men are very regardless of Christ's coming : in affliction and misery many wish for death , but in enjoyments and prosperity they scarce think of it ; when the sun shone so bright upon Sodom in the morning , they little expected to be consumed by a dismal fire from heaven before evening : when the world is flowing in upon a man , it is very hard to entertain thoughts of going out of the world . If the mountain be strong , even David is ready to say , i shall never be moved : no marvel if presumptuous Babylon being in her chair of state , say , i sit a Queen and am no widow , and shall see no sorrow . but yet very frequently , this is the hour wherein Christ cometh ; so the threatening runneth against both literal and mystical Babylon , evil shall come upon her in a moment , in one day : and so it was verified in the rich fool , who bidding his soul to take its •ase , by reason of his worldly abundance , had that very night his soul required of him , and carried to torment . 

3.  the hour of bodily health and strength is a time in which men cast the thought of death behind them , whilst they have colour in their faces , agility in their joints , appetite in their stomaches , health in their bodies , how rare are their meditations on death ? Go preach your lectures of mortality ( Say they ) to the weak , and the lame , and the sick ; as for us , we have no reason to trouble ourselves with such melancholy thoughts : what do you tell us of dying and rotting in the grave ? whilst our bones are moistened with marrow ? We feel no infirmity , and therefore fear not mortality : and yet how often doth Christ come by death in such an hour ? one dyeth ( Saith Job ) in his full strength , being wholly at •ase and quiet , his breasts are full of milk , and his bones are moistened with marrow : how many valiant and stout men hath death laid upon their backs , on a sudden tripping up their heels ? have you not sometimes seen a sturdy oak quickly blown down by a violent wind ? a strong and tall vessel presently sunk by a leak ? so are ofttimes men snatched away in the strength and vigour of their body , by death . 

4.  the hour of youthful age is a time wherein few make account of dying ; it is soon enough ( Say young men ) to think of our death in the day when desire shall fail , to look for a grave , when they that look out at the windows are darkened , and to fear the approach of both when the keepers of the house shall tremble : these gravecloths are too sad for the freshness of our life , we are young , and May see many a fair year pass over our heads before death cometh , and therefore think not that like the mad man in the gospel we will spend our life among the tombs . but alas ! how frequently , even in this hour , doth the son of man come : in Golgotha ( Saith the Hebrew proverb ) there are souls of all sizes , and our weekly bills , for the most part , afford a greater numbers of dead children than aged men . The poets have a fable , that death and Cupid lodging together at an inn , exchanged their arrows , whereby it hath since come to pass , that many times old men dote , and young men die . the truth is , death doth not summon us according to our years , even the blossom is subject to nipping as well as the flower to withering . that threat which almighty God denounceth by the prophet Amos , is very often in this moral sense made good , i will cause the sun to go down at noon ; nay , not only so , but even in the morning of youth doth the sun of many a man's life go down . 

to apply this , let it then be the care of every one of us that Christ's coming May not be to us in an hour we think not of , and to that end , let no hour , at least , day of our life pass without a serious thought of the day and hour of our death ; larks in Theocritus are called {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} because they carry the form of a sepulchre upon their heads . such should all Christians be , having permanent impressions of death , not on but in their heads and hearts . the Indian Gymnosophists were so much in love with these thoughts , that they caused their graves to be made before their gates , so as both at their going out and coming in they Might be put in mind of their death : and truly , however the most men in the days of their vanity , account a life spent in meditation of death to be a miserable life , a death rather than a life ; yet when the time of their death approacheth , they will change their note , and say as dying Theophilus did of devout Arsenius , beatus es abba arseni , qui semper hanc horam ante oculoshabuisti , they are happy men who set death daily before their eyes . 

indeed , by this means the coming of Christ , as it will not be altogether sudden , so neither terrible to us , nor can any man ( So use s. Cyprians words ) receive comfort at his death , who did not before make account of dying . A late writer hath , in this respect , piously fancied , that clocks were invented to mind us not so much of the sun 's motion in the heavens , as the passing of our life here on earth : since the sounding of the clock telleth us that the past hour is as it were dead and buried , which at some time , or hour of some day or other , must be our lot . 

Oh then , what ever our present condition is , let us still entertain thoughts of our latter end : art thou in health and strength , remember , a wise and good man , even then ( As Gregory nazian. saith ) {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} will look both upwards to heaven , and downwards to his grave . dost thou enjoy the pleasures of life ? learn of Joseph of Arimathea to make a tomb in thy garden , and season thy delights with thoughts of thy dissolution . Finally , art thou advanced to an high estate in this world ? forget not how low thy highness must come ere long , and what one was apppointed to have in his hands at the inauguration of the Grecian Emperors , namely , in the one a burning firebrand presently consumed , and in the other a vessel full of ashes , and dead men's bones , have thou in thy heart by renewed meditations of thy mortality . 

To close up this part , it is reported concerning the maids in the isle of man , that the first thing they spin is their winding-sheet , which they wear about them as a girdle at their feasts : well were it , if we would in the midst of all our enjoyments , gird ourselves about with our winding-sheets , fixing our thoughts upon our end , that so by this means we May not have cause at last to sigh forth the fool's words , non putaram , i did not think my death had been so near : blessed is that man , whom Christ , when he cometh by death , shall find , not as Jaell did Siserah , asleep , but as Jonathan's arrow came to David standing in the field , and looking for it , yea , so looking , as to be fitting himself , which leads to the 

preparedness required in every Christian for this coming , be you therefore ready . for the better and clearer dispatch of this , i shall endeavour both to unfold the nature , and press the practice of this duty . 

1.  To illustrate the nature of this preparation , be pleased to observe both the intent of the thing , and the extent of the time ; by the former we shall see wherein this readiness , and by the latter when it ought to be performed . 

1.  The duty itself being of very weighty importance , it should be a little enquired into , what things are requisite to denominate a man ready for Christ's coming . 

The several metaphors of a bridegroom , of a Lord , and of a thief , under which the coming of Christ is represented to us , May very fitly be made use of to this end and purpose . 

1.  They are ready for the coming of the bridegroom , who have on their wedding garment . and this is no other in a spiritual sense than that white raiment , to wit , of Christ's righteousness , apprehend by faith , which our blessed Lord adviseth the church to buy of him : indeed , when death ▪ cometh it will strip us of all other induments ; Job saith of himself ( And it is no more than what every man shall find true ) naked came i forth of my mother's womb , and naked shall i return thither , only of this garment it cannot bereave us ; and he alone , who is thus clothed , May , with comfort , look death in the face . 

2.  Again , he is ready for the coming of his Lord , who hath discharged the trust reposed in , and improved the stock left with him by his Lord . indeed , thus to do in reference to God exactly , is impossible , but yet this to endeavour is necessary : and he only is fit for death , who hath been careful in life to employ his talents for God's glory , and to keep a good conscience in all things . When the Lord cometh he expects an account of the servants receipts , and disbursements , and how unfit will the idle or wasteful servant be to make up his account ? That life must needs render a man unprepared for death , which is spent in doing nothing , or that which is worse than nothing , in abusing the mercies we receive , to the dishonour of him , who hath bestowed them on us . 

Finally , he is ready for the coming of a thief , who keepeth himself and his family waking , hath his door locked , bolted , and barred , and is furnished with weapons both of defence and resistance ; so must we prepare ourselves for Christ's coming , by awaking our souls out of carnal and sensual security , by keeping our hearts with all diligence , and by putting on the whole armour of God ; the condition of that man will be very sad , whom death finds asleep in sin , without a spiritual guard , and destitute of those graces , which should arm him against its venomous sting . 

If you desire a more distinct explication of this preparation , let Christ be his own expositor in that elegant scripture , where he adviseth his disciple to have their loins gird , and their lamps burning ; the work of preparation for death is both privative and positive , in removing what May hinder us , and procuring what May enable us to meet Christ at our death , with comfort . Both these we are taught under those metaphorical allusions , the former in the girding of our loins , the latter in the burning of our lamps . 

1.  To be ready , is to have our loins gird ▪ where by loins we May very well understand , our affections and lusts , which are to be gird , by repentance and mortification . the sting of death , saith s. Paul , is sin , so that we are never fit to die till we have taken out the sting by subduing sin ; he that liveth in any lust is so far from being armed for death , that he armeth death against himself ; death is a journey , called therefore a going to our long home ; but how shall he be fit to go this journey , who hath not laid aside the weight of sin , and girded up his loins , which will be a sore impediment to him ? More especially , this girding of loins May refer to the expelling of worldly love out of our hearts . To this purpose , both that action of Christ's drinking vinegar , and those words of his , it is finished , immediately before his death , are not unfitly moralised , to teach us that by despising the world as vain and bitter , we are more prepared for the finishing of our life . Oh how unwilling is he to go out of the world , whose heart is glued to it ? And therefore let it be our wisdom to hang loose in our affections from all earthly relations , that as Seneca divinely , if we be called to it ; nihil nos detineat , nec impediat quo minus parati simus , quod quand•que faciendum , statim facere , no worldly thing May hinder us from being ready to do that presently , which must be done at some time . 

2.  To be ready , is to have our lamps burning , to wit , the lamp of our soul , burning with the graces of God's spirit ; the lamp of our life , burning in the exercise of good works towards God and man . Certainly he is very unfit to die , who hath not yet begun to live ; thy condition must needs be desperate , if the lamp of thy life be put out before the lamp of grace be kindled : s. John saith of them who die in the Lord , their works follow them , to wit , those good works which have gone before their death in the course of their lives ; he only is fit to meet Christ in death , who can say to him in Hezekiah's words , remember , Lord , how i have walked before thee in truth , and with a perfect heart : a renewed nature , and a reform life are the best preparatives to a comfortable and happy death . 

2.  You see the duty itself : the next thing to be considered is , the time when we should make ourselves thus ready ; it is that which must by no means be left out , since though we all agree about the thing , yet we differ about the time , we must be ready for Christ's coming , that is acknowledged , but when we should go about it , is not so easily determined . the answer to this is not expressly given in the text , but yet manifestly employed in the context , since the householder no• knowing when the thief will come , & knowing he will come , is always expecting and providing for him : and indeed this we shall find in the •parallel scripture expressly supplied , where our saviour bids his disciple to watch and prey {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} always . it is that than which ought to be the wisdom of every Christian , always to be in a readiness for the coming of Christ : suitable to this is that resolve of holy Job , when he saith , all the days of my appointed time i will wait till my change come ; not only one , or a few , or some , but all his days were days of watching for the approach of his change , according to which is that counsel of s. Basil , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , we must every day of our life be in a posture ready to go out of this life , if our Lord require us . 

To clear this more fully in two particulars : 

1.  We must begin betimes to make ourselves ready . it is an undoubted maxim , in re necessaria non d•u deliberandum , where the matter is clearly necessary to dispute much , or deliberate long about it , is both needless and dangerous ; nothing of more needful concernment or greater importance to every one of us , than the being ready for Christ's coming : surely then , just it is we should set about it presently , and make it our first business . Almighty God in his sublime speech to Job , saith , concerning the warlike horse , that he smelleth the battle afar off ; what nature teacheth him , let grace us , to smell that encounter we must have with death afar off long before ( At least in probability ) it will come , and that is , in the days of our youth . the life of man is not without good reason compared to a night : now among the Jews there were four watches in the night , the first was called Conticinium , when all things are silent ; the second intempestum , the unseasonable time of midnight ; the third gallicinium , which began at the cock crowing ; the last antelucanum , about break of day : by these four watches of the night are morally resembled , the four ages of man's life , childhood , youth , manhood ▪ old age , and it is worth our observation , that when Christ speaketh of our being ready for his coming , he mentioneth only the second and the third watch : Thophilact's reason , i confess , is most probable , because the second and third watches are , as it were ; the dead time of night , when most men are in their soundest sleep , so that he that is wakeful in those watches , May be presumed not to sleep in the first and fourth , and so to be ready in the second and third , is as much as to be always ready ; but there May be another apt allusion to our particular purpose ; as for the first watch he mentioneth it not , because child hood is in no capacity of performing this duty ( Though even then it concerneth parents to make their children ready , by bringing them to the holy sacrament of baptism : ) and as for the fourth watch of old age , he specifieth not that neither , because rarissimi sunt qui ad extremum vitae differentes bene operari , inveniuntur ita facientes , they are very rare who are found ready at Christ's coming , and yet have not begun before the fourth watch : let it then be our care to begin at the third watch of man hood , nay , sooner ▪ at the second watch of youth , to prepare and provide for Christ's coming . Happy is that man who fitteth himself for dying , so soon as he cometh to know that he liveth , and consecrateth the beginning of his rational life to a religious meditation of his mortal end . 

2.  We must hold out to the end of our days in this ready posture , daily endeavouring greater measure ▪ of preparation . Those two excuses will be found alike invalid whensoever Christ cometh , fuisse & futurum esse , i resolved to be ready hereafter , and i was ready heretofore ; since it is neither what thou wouldst be , nor what thou hast been , but what thou art ; when death cometh unbend not then the bow of thy pious endeavour , till the string of thy life break ; cease not running the race of piety till thou art put out of breath ; be always preparing to meet Christ till he come to thee . It is to this purpose well observed , what a difference there is between the other life and this ; as to that life , it will be sufficient , bene incipere , to begin well ; if we can but enter into that joy of our Lord , it is enough ; he that is once entered into a possession of that bliss , shall go no more out , but as to this present life , the great care is been finire , to end well , since incassum bonum agitur si ante vitae terminum deseratur , that work is begun to no purpose , which is left off before it is finished ; no• can this work of preparation be finished , till life be ended . 

But it May , perhaps , and not improbably , be objected , even by good Christians : alas , the practice of this duty in this extent , is impossible ; who is there that can at all times so order his conversation , as to be ready for his dissolution ? We meet with many remoras to stop us in , many avocations to turn us aside from this work , the labour of our callings , the care of our families , lawful recreations , many worldly businesses take up our time , so that we cannot always be at leisure to think of , and so provide for Christ's coming . 

To resolve which doubt , be pleased to take notice of a double preparation for the coming of Christ , to wit , habitual and actual . 

actual readiness consists in the exercise of those spiritual graces , and practise , of those religious duties , which are fit for us to be conversant in at the time of our death , such as are self examination , penitent humiliation , believing invocation , charitable condonation , and the like ; and truly thus to be always ready , is not possible , nor requisite : it is not possible , for our natures , which at best are but in part renewed , to be wholly taken up with divine performances ; nor indeed is it requisite , since God hath given us time for secular as well as spiritual businesses , yea , for recreation as well as devotion ; and if Christ shall come by death to us when about our civil callings , or lawful refreshings , our condition were not therefore to be adjudged desperate . indeed , on the one hand , because death May come at such times , it should be our endeavour , as much as May be , to carry about us heavenly hearts in our earthly employments ; and on the other hand , because the best of us are too deficient in this kind , we May , nay ought to beg of God ( If it be his will ) that death May rather find us praying , than playing ; in our chambers , than in our shops ; about devout exercises , than worldly businesses . In this respect , that prayer of the church ( from sudden death good Lord deliver us ) which by our arrogant novelists , among other passages of the liturgy , is causelessly denied , is fit to be made , not only by the worst , but by the best of men , to whom death May be , and many times is so sudden , that they cannot be in an actual readiness for it , and therefore if it be ( As doubtless it is ) a very desirable thing to have space before our death of renewing our faith , repentance , and charity , yea , and of expressing all these for the comfort and benefit of others that belong to us , it must needs be a fit request for all Christians to put up , that they May be delivered from sudden death . 

But besides this actual , there is an habitual readiness , which refers not to the action but the disposition ; the exercise , but the state of the person ; so that he , who is by faith engrafted into Christ , and by the spirit regenerated to a lively hope , and so in a state of grace , is habitually ready for the coming of Christ , according to this sense Brugensis with others giveth the interpretation of this text , paratus est qui semper eo statu consistit , quem dominus requirit , qui semper eum vitae tenet statum qui deo gratus , he is ready , who is in that estate which is required by , and will be acceptable to Christ when he cometh to call him . And thus it is our duty to be always ready , not daring to live in a state of impenitency , yea , to give God and our selves no rest , till we have in some measure made our peace with him , through Christ : look as when we are enjoined to pray continually , the meaning is , not that we should be always upon our knees in the continue exercise of that duty , but that we should be frequent in the work , and have a mind disposed to pray upon all occasions ; so when we are enjoined to be always ready for death , it is not that we should be continually in the practice of those duties , which are proper for a dying man , but that we should every day set some time apart for those exercises , and always be in a regenerate condition , having the graces of faith and repentance really wrought in our souls . 

By this time , i hope , you see what the duty is , which here our blessed Lord calleth upon his disciple to perform , what remaineth , but that i now , after Christ's example , endeavour to press the practice of it upon you : and indeed , so much the rather , because it is that wherein i fear the most of us are miserably deficient . 

It was Tertullian's character of the Christians in his time , that they were expeditum morti genus , a sort of persons prepared for death , and that not only natural , but violent , and so in that sense which s. Paul speaks of high concerning himself , when he tells his disconsolate friends that he was ready , not only to be bound , but to die for the name of Jesus , act. 21. 13.  But alas , of how few Christians in our days can this be truly said , and that in the lowest sense , the most being so far from a readiness to lay down their lives in suffering for Christ , that they are not in a readiness to meet Christ , if he should come in an ordinary way to take away their lives . Alexander cashiered that soldier , who had his weapons to sharpen when he was to go to fight : but Lord , how many Christians ( In name ) have the work of preparation to begin , when their lives are almost at an end , never thinking of doing good , till the opportunity of doing it be past . suppose , beloved , our Lord Christ should now come against this city , as he did once against Jerusalem , to take vengeance on it and destroy it , in what an unprepared condition should he find the greatest part of the inhabitants ? some sporting with their wantoness , others burying themselves in their chests of gold , some quaffing in their riotous bowls , others belching out blasphemous oaths , the most wallowing in some wickedness or other ? Nay , to come nearer , suppose Christ should come by death to any of us here present , this night , this evening , this hour , are we ready for him ? could we give up our accounts with joy , and look him in the face with comfort ? i fear the most of our consciences tell us we should not be able to do it . 

Receive then ( I beseech you ) a seasonable word of advice , and think ( For so indeed it is ) that what Christ here saith to his disciple , he saith to all , be you ready , and ( Which should render this duty so much the more acceptable to us ) it wants not a therefore to enforce it , indeed there are many and those weighty motives , which May very well infer the performance of this duty , as not only useful , but needful to be done , and that at all times . for , consider 

1.  the son of man will certainly come at some hour or other ; be you therefore ready . in other matters we provide for those things whereof we have at most but a probability , no certainty . The husbandman plougheth , and tilleth , and soweth his ground against the next year , when yet he is not sure to reap the fruit of his labour ; parents lay up riches , purchase lands , build houses for their children , though they are not sure they shall enjoy them ; shall we provide for what only May be , or at most , is but likely to be , and take no care to prepare for what shall certainly be ? That rich man in the gospel Might well be called a fool , when as he took so much care to build large barns , and lay up goods in those barns as a provision for the uncertain years of his life , but regarded not to make ready for his grave , which he knew to be certain , and proved to be so near . Oh let not us incur this brand of folly by the like incogitancy . 

2.  at what hour the son of man will come , you cannot certainly know ; be you therefore ready ; nay , always ready . it is true , Christ will come ; nay , he hath told us he will come ( No doubt for this reason ) that being praemoniti we May be praemuniti , having notice of , we May provide for it ; but when he will come he hath concealed from us ( And doubtless for this cause ) that we Might always stand upon our guard , and be ready for him . If thy enemy shall say to thee , at such a time , in such a place , i will meet you ; it were enough to be ready at that time ; but if he say , where , or whensoever i meet you , i will set upon you , it concerneth to be always armed for him : such indeed is both the wisdom and goodness of our blessed Lord , that he hath forewarned us of the thing , not of the time , that knowing he will come , and not knowing when , we May be continually prepared . It was the policy of Julius Caesar , never to acquaint his army beforehand with the time of their March , ut paratum , momentis omnibus , quò vellet , subito educeret , that they Might be ready to March upon all occasions : such is the wise dealing of Christ with us , and that for our good , not revealing to us the time of our death , that we May never be secure . And therefore ( To use Aulus Gellius his comparison ) as a fencer not knowing at what part of his body the antagonist will aim , composeth his body and holdeth his weapon , so as he May readily defend any part ; so must we , not knowing in what day of our life Christ will come , so order our ways , that we May be fitted whensoever he shall come unto us . 

3.  there is no hour of your life wherein you can assure yourselves that the son of man will not come : indeed , as no place can exempt from death's approach , it May come to thee in the church , in the street , in the shop ; in the field , as well as in the bed ; so no time can privilege from death's arrest , in the night as well as in the day , in youth and manhood , as well as old age , Christ May send it to seize upon thee : hast thou not need then to be everywhere , and at all times prepared ? Consider this ( Oh vain man , whoever thou art ) that puttest off thy preparation in hope that Christ will delay his visitation ; thou purposest to be ready when thou art old ; i , but what if Christ come whilst yet thou art young ? thou promisest to prepare thyself to morrow ; but what if thou diest to day ? oh beware that thy promises bear not a date far longer than thy life . it is storied of ambitious Archyas , that having by fraudulent and unjust courses , at length compassed the government of Thebes ; he with his complices kept a riotous feast , in the midst of his intemperance a messenger cometh to him with a letter from a friend , importuning him speedily to peruse it , but he slighting the admonition , and putting it under his pillow , said , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} serious things to morrow , when as the thing , which the letter concerned ▪ was effected that night , to wit , deprivation at once , both of his life and dignity , by a combination of the citizens . this , this ( My brethren ) is , i fear , the doleful case of too many who purposing to be serious and pious hereafter , are snatched away before that hereafter come . Couldst thou , oh man , assure thyself ▪ the continuance of thy life for a day , a month , a year , thou Mightest with more pretence of reason defer thy preparation so long ; but cui sit exploratum se ad vesperum esse victurum , saith the heathen orator truly , who can assure himself he shall live till evening ? nay , who can justly promise to himself the next moment ? be not then so foolish , nay mad , nay brutish , as •o live an hour , a moment in the estate wherein thou wouldst be loath to die . 

4.  that hour , in which men make least account , is commonly the time of the son of man's coming , be ye therefore ready . whilst the croc•dil being asleep openeth his mouth the Indian rat getteth in and eateth up his bowels ; whilst the Theban centinel was nodding , Epaminondas came and thrust him thorough ; when men are secure in their sins , death stealeth upon them unawares . At what gate there is the least guard , smallest strength , the besieger maketh his onset , and endeavoureth entrance : oh fear , lest in that day death approach to thee , wherein thou art most regardless of death . 

5.  all the time allotted you before Christ's coming , is little enough for this great work ; be you therefore always endeavouring to make yourselves ready . Tota vita discendum est vivere , said the philosopher , we scarce learn to live well in the whole space of our lives ; nay , totâ vitâ discendum est mori , saith the divine , our whole life is scarce sufficient to learn the art of dying well . Were a short prayer , or a single sigh , a God forgive me , or Lord have mercy upon me , a valid preparation for Christ's coming , the work were easy , and a little time Might dispatch it ; but be not deceived , God is not mocked . this great work is not so facile a task . Do but ask the servants of God , who have taken much pains , and spent many years in this work , and you shall hear them complain , that to this day , notwithstanding all their prayers , tears , fastings , watchings , and strugglings , they find themselves very unready for death ; and is it not a wretched presumption in any man , to think he can fit himself for death , as it were at an hour's warning ? 

6.  when the son of man cometh , there will bo no opportunity for the doing of this work : be you therefore ready . likely it is , at the approach of death , many men w•ll be earnest suiters , in David's words , oh spare me a little , one month , one week longer ; but in vain ; their request cannot be granted , nor the time delayed . very apt to this purpose is the story of s. Gregory concerning and Chrysorius , a man as full of sin as he was of wealth , who on his dying bed , in a bitter agony of spirit , cried out , inducias vel usque mane , inducias vel usque mane , truce but till the morning , stay but till to morrow ; but with these very words he breathed his last . Christ May sometimes stay long before he cometh , but when he comes he will not stay {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} — saith s. Basil excellently , learn to be wise by the foolish virgin's example , for whom the bridegroom being come , would not stay a moment , and only they that were ready went in with him to the marriage . 

7.  your preparation for , will be no acceleration of Christ's coming ; and therefore be you ready . it is the fond conceit of many , that if they think of , and prepare for death , death will presently come to them ; upon which ground it is , that they put off the setting both their house and soul in order ; but let not vain fears beguile thee , thy death is not the nearer , but only it will be the sweeter , graemeditati mali mollis ictus , the blow will not come the sooner , but it will be the easier ; nay , indeed , by being ready to die , thou art the fit to live , and both thy life and thy death will be the more comfortable . 

8.  finally , the son of man's coming will be most dismal and exitial to all unprepared persons ; be you therefore ready . s. Chrysostom , upon these words conceiveth , that Christ representing his coming under the resemblance of a thief , checketh our •luggishness , who are less careful to be ready against Christ's , than the householders is against the thiefe's coming , whereas the housholder's danger is only the loss of his goods , or money , or jewels , but ours of our precious souls : oh , my brethren , if Christ , when he cometh by death , find us unprepared , woe to us that we were born , our case will be like that of the foolish virgins , against whom the door of heaven was shut , and no entreaty could prevail for the opening of them ; nay , like that of the man , whom when the King came in , he found at the feast without a wedding garment , who was bound hand and foot , and cast into utter darkness ; yea , like that of the evil servant in the end of this chapter , when his Lord coming , cut asunder , and appointed him his portion with the hypocrites , there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth . 

And oh that any , or all of these considerations , Might awaken our security , and quicken our industry . This son of man hath been pleased to call upon us often for the performance of this duty : perhaps he will come to some of us before the next call : oh then , delay no longer , but be we ready whilst it is called to day , and whilst this day he vouchsafeth to call upon us . It was an excellent saying of an ancient , when his corrupt heart tempted him to procrastination , i will make use of the day to repent in , and leave the morrow to God , so do thou say , Christ May come to morrow , i will be ready for him to day . thus let the remainder of out mortal life be a preparation for death , and then our death shall be a preparation of us for an immortal life . 

To close up all , with reference to this doleful occasion , the interring of our diseased sister's corpse . 

In respect of her dear friends , i May very well take up the latter part of this verse , in an hour when they thought not , the son of man came to her ; yea , even then , when they seemed to hope and say , the bitterness of death is past , the danger of her childbearing is over , death seized upon her : but though her dissolution was at this time unthought of by them , yet i have good reason to believe it was neither unlooked nor unprepared for by her , partly because as she , many months before , knew what an hazardous condition she was to pass thorough ; so charity bids me hope that she made use of that time to provide for the worst , chiefly because her foregoing life , as to the general tenure of it was unblameable & virtuous , et illi mors improvisa , cujus vita f•it provida , even sudden death cannot be a sad consequent , when a good life was the antecedent : her education , no doubt , was religious , being the daughter of a reverend minister , now with God , and her conversation every way corresponding to that education : much of her time she employed in the pious services of reading , meditation , and prayer , not neglecting the public ordinances , those duties which belonged to the relations in which God had set her , of a daughter , a wife , a mother , a Mistress , sister , neighbour , friend , she did not more intelligently know , than conscientiously perform . in a word , like good Mary , she chose that good part , whilst her adorning was not that outward adorning of plaiting the hair , wearing of gold , putting on of apparel , ( In which she only regarded decency , not affecting curiosity : ) but to use Tertullian's allusions , sericum pietatis , byssinum sauctiatis , purpura pudicitiae , the fine linen of purity , the silk of sanctity , the purple of modesty ; or to follow s. Peter's expressions , the hidden man of the heart , and the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit , which as in the sight of God is of great price ; so it was the grace wherein she surpassed most of her sex . 

Thus she both lived and died like a lamb , lived meekly , and died quietly , lived obediently ( In some measure ) to God's commands , and died submissively to God's decree . let not then her affectionate consort , and loving allies , mourn over her grave inordinately : she died young indeed , but yet not before her time , because not before she was ready for death ; she was cut down betimes , but yet not before she was ripe for the harvest . Rather than do you , nay let all of us here present , think with ourselves ( To imitate s. Peter's words to Sapphira ) that the feet of them which has brought her to her long home , are at the door of our houses , to carry us out also , and therefore every one so to lead our lives , and order our conversations aright , that at what time soever Christ shall by death approach unto us , his coming May not be unexpected to us , nor we unprepared for his coming . Amen . 

Finis . 





prov. 10 ▪ 7.  * the building and endowing a free grammar school by , and writing-school in the town of Lewisham , together with an annual maintenance for 7.  Scholars to be sent from thence to the university . hebr. 6. 10.  2 tim. 4. 18.  

Sallust . Bell. Catiline . math. 16. 22.  phil. 2. 6.  mat. 26.   . 27. 38.  rom. 3. 4.  John 10. 10.  Cass l. 6. c. 28.  1 thes. 52. 2. pet. 3. 10.  cum inferre de be•et vi•ilare •ontim ò id omi•it ne intolerabile quid praecipere videretur sed estote parati , ad significandum continuam vigilantiam esse paratam . Avendan : in math.  quod superius dix•rat {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} illud jam exponit per {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ille enim vere vigilat qui semper paratus est . Gerard ▪ Contin . 1st . gen.  1 thes. 5.   . je• . 19   . significatur inextectata & improvisa chald••orum in Jerusalem irrup•io  ▪ pot• qui n•• per portas , in quibu• sunt vigiles , fed per •urorum foenestras clan ▪ culum instar furis irrumpant Lapid in h•er . Luke 21. 35.  tanquam laqu•us •cil . propter non apparentiam & impraemeditationem . eu•h . in ma•h. Luke 21. 34.  dan. 6. 5.  Acts 12. 23.  Job 21. 13.  verse 38.  psal. 30. 6.  revel. 18. 21.  isa. 47. 7 , 8 , 9  revel. 18. 9  luk. 12 ▪ 19 ▪ 20.  •ob 21. 23 , 24.  eccles. 12. 3 , 4.  sic mo•itur juvenis sic moribundus ama• . dices •u qui  juvenis kondu•••n•c•ui , noki ergo decip• , non d••••itur mors ce•to tempore aetatis , neque •i••t co• qui sunt in ipso fine •tatis . g••g nys•ad• ▪ e•s qui ciff . Bapt. orat . bibl. patr. t. 9 ▪ ap•th•g• . nec dignus est in morte acc•p•re solatium qui s• non cogitavit esse moriturum . cypr. ep. 5 2.  chrefol . Mystagog . greg. naz. orat. 28.  2d . gen.  revel. 3. 1• . J•b 1. 21.  per primum prae••pium jubemur c•hibere nos à malo & impedimenta removere : per sccundum excitamur ad bene operandum . tole• in luc.  quid est lumbos ac incto• ? declina a malo : quid lu••rnas ardentes habere , hoc est & fac bonum . aug. serm. 39 de verb . dom . succ••gere debemus lumbos id est expediti esse ab impedimentis lasciviosae vi•ae & implicitae . tertul. contr. marc. l. 4. 29.  ut divinum illud moriendi exemplum nos admonere• , humanarum rerum contemptum & amaritudinem morti praeire debere ut consumma•i ad mortem obeundam esse videamur . velasq. in phil. c. 1. v. 21.  Annot. 3• . Sen. epist. 26.  lucernas ardentes habere , id est mentes a fide accensas & operibu• veri•atis relucentes . tertul. contr. marc. l. 4. c. 29.  rev. 14. 13.  Isaiah 38. 3.  Luke 21. 36.  Job 14. 14.  bas. home 2• . Job 39 25.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , &c. theoph. in luc.  Tolet ibid. ho• diff•rt vitapraesens ab illa quam expectamus , quo•a• totum bonum futurae vitae consistit in hoc quod est recte illam incipe•e praes•ntis vitae bonum : è contra consisti• in rect• finiendo illam , &c. Avend . in mat. cap. 24.  Greg. mag.  Brugens . in loc. qui rogat semper roge• , etsi non semper precatu• , paratum semper habeat precantis affectum . ambr. in ps. 118.  Serm. 19  Tertul ••de spectac . cap. 1.  impii runquam didicerunt bona facere , nisi c•m jam non est tempus faciendi . oh ▪ cast . multi domos aedifican• , cum tamen n•sciant an per unicum diem ea debeans colere , ad incertam vitam parantur , certam mortem non curantes . stella in lu• ▪ si inimicus tuus fic tibi minaretur in tali borá te expecto , sufficeret tibi usque ad illam horam quiescer• : tamen si sic dixisset observa me , nam ubicunque te inu•n•ro te totis viribus invadam •am tunc nullum tibi qui•tis dabatur tempus Avend . in math.  aul. Gell l. 13. c. 26.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Bas. home 13.  Plurarch . in Pelopid . ci• . de s•nect  stultum in tali •ta•u vivere in quo quis non aud•• mori . aug psal. 39 13.  Greg dialog. l. 4. c. 38.  bas. •om . •3 . math. 25. 10.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Chrys. in loc. math. 25. 7. 22. 13.  ver. 15.  hodie poenitentiam ago , craft•num deo relinquo . apothegm . in bibl. pat . m. Isaac Col•e . Luke 10. 4• .  pet. 3. 3 , 4.  Acts 5. 9  























































