Dying tears . Or , England's joy turned to mourning , for the loss of that virtuous Prince , Henry Duke of Gloucester , 3d.  Son to our late sovereign King Charles the first : who departed this life the 13. of September , in the year of our Lord , 1660.  

Prepare for death before you die , 
If you would live eternally . 
To the tune of , aim not too high . 





C••re the wonders that our god hath done , 
Great are the mercies which to us are shown 
Yet we forget to say that God is just , 
Even though he turn the living into dust . 
Now learn , oh England , learn for to lament 
His death ; who from us hath been long absent ; 
And at the last is come on English shore 
To lay his corpse ; whose death we now deplore . 
Just in the prime and blooming of his age , 
Dear Gloster's ravished from this mortal stage : 
Yet though his body can no more revive , 
Pet his rare virtues seem to be alive . 
Scarce had fair England bidden welcome home 
This our most virtuous Prince , but death doth come ; 
Scarce had his weary body taken rest , 
Behold grim death doth come and takes his breath . 
How can fair England weep enough and mourn , 
His comely corpse we can't enough adorn : 
Oh death , our hopes , our treasure , in an hour 
Hast thou dispersed , which makes salt tears to shower 
Oh envious death ! how dar'st thou in his prime , 
To cut down him , in whom all virtues shine : 
Therefore we 'll seek his virtues for to blaze , 
Upon his tomb we will set forth his praise . 
No sooner in his virtues we did trust , 
But presently this Prince is turned to dust : 
Oh than what course of lives would mortals take , 
Seeing that Princes cannot death forsake . 
Great Emperors and Kings lie at the stake , 
To day they live , to morrow their graves they make 
Death is a debt we owe , which we must pay : 
When death doth call , poor mortals must they . 
The second part 

To the same tune , 





Oh that loud man , would but view o'er his says , 
And seriously consider his own ways : 
Now that all things below are vanity , 
But soul's redeemer 't is that lives on high . 
The god of love pour forth his mercies great 
On our dread sovereign , even from his mercy seat ; 
Oh give him grace and wisdom to consider 
That where his brother 's gone , he must go thither . 
For Kings and Princes are but a span , 
When death both come with 's grimly dart in hand 
To give the stroke : whilst nature bios adieu 
To all its pleasures , and its comfort too . 
Oh that our god would pour his spirit upon 
Our King and Prince , that they May both live long ; 
Oh let them know 't is not the arm of flesh 
that 's able to withstand deaths powerful crush . 
't is not man's honour nor his powerful hand , 
Nor his riches that are at his command , 
Neither his friend at all can him deliver 
From death's sad stroke , which strikes but once for ever . 
Oh learn with blessed David for to prove 
That gods thy portion and thy only love ; 
Then death shall not affright thee , nor the grave ; 
But this shall thee rejoice , thy soul to save . 
Death is no sting , the grave cannot contain 
The righteous soul that makes 〈◊〉 his aim , 
But wicked men when once lass in the men , 
Their souls in torments ever after burn . 
But this is not our Gloster case , for he 
Was the true partern of nobility : 
Saint like he lived , and he the same did die , 
As soon as dead to heaven his soul did fly . 
When France did harbour this out noble p• 
His mother did endeavour to convince 
Him to turn Papist ; but with courage bold 
He said his true religion he would hold 
The learned Jesuit could not him deceive , 
Their damned doctrine he would not believer 
Nor all the learned men that France could yield 
Could make this Christian Prince to quite the field . 
But now he 's dead ! alas , where is he gone , 
His corpse to dust , his soul to heaven is come : 
Oh then rejoice , oh England , and be glad , 
That God has carried him , then to good from had . 
Concluding , now i end my mournful song . 
Which to all men in England doth belong , 
Prepare for death before before you die , 
If e'er you mean to live eternally . 
London , printed for Charles Tyns on London-bridge . 








