THE TRAGEDY OF MARIAM , THE FAIR Queen of jewry . 

Written by that learned , virtuous , and truly noble Lady , E. C.  

LONDON . Printed by Thomas Creed , for Richard Hawkins , and are to be sold at his shop in Chancery Lane , near unto Sergeant's Inn . 1613.  

TO DIANA'S EARTHLY DEPUTESSE , and my worthy Sister , Mistress Elizabeth Carry . 

When cheerful Phoebus his full course hath run , 
His sisters fainter beams our hearts doth cheer : 
So your fair Brother is to me the Sun , 
And you his Sister as my Moon appear . 
You are my next beloved , my second Friend , 
For when my Phoebus' absence makes it Night , 
Whilst to th' Antipodes his beams do bend , 
From you my Phoebe , shines my second Light.  
He like to SOL , clear-sighted , constant , free , 
You Luna-like , unspotted , chaste , divine : 
He shone on Sicily , you destined be , 
T' llumine the now obscured Palestine . 
My first was consecrated to Apollo , 
My second to DIANA now shall follow . 
E. C.  The names of the Speakers . 

Herod , King of judea . 
Doris , his first Wife . 
Mariam , his second Wife . 
Salome , Herod's Sister . 
Antipater his son by Salome . 
Alexandra , Mariam's mother . 
Sillius , Prince of Arabia . 
Constabarus , husband to Salome . 
Phaeroras , Herod's Brother . 
Graphina , his Love.  
B●bus' first Son . 
Babus' second Son . 
Annanell , the high Priest.  
Sohemus , a Counsellor to Herod . 
Nunti● . 
Bu. another Messenger . 
Chorus , a Company of jews . 
The Argument . 

Herod the son of Antipater ( an Idumean , ) having crept by the favour of the Romans , into the jewish Monarchy , married Mariam the daughter of Hircanus , the rightful King and Priest , and for her ( besides her high blood , being of singular beauty ) he repudiated Doris , his former Wife , by whom he had Children . 

This Mariam had a Brother called Aristobolus , and next him and Hircanus his Grandfather , Herod in his Wives right had the best ●●le . Therefore to remove them , he charged the first with treason : and put him to death ; and drowned the second under colour of sport . Alexandra , Daughter to the one , and Mother to the other , accused him for their deaths before Anthony . 

So when he was forced to go answer this Accusation at Rome , he left the custody of his wife to jos●phus his Uncle , that had married his Sister Sal●me , and cut of a violent affection ( unwilling any should enjoy her after him ) he gave strict and private commandment , that if he were slain , she should be put to death . But he returned with much honour , yet found his Wife extremely discontented , to whom jos●phus had ( meaning it for the best , to prove Herod loved her ) revealed his charge . 

So by Salome's accusation he put josephus to death , but was reconciled to Mariam , who still bore the death of her Friends exceeding hardly . 

In this mean time Herod was again necessarily to revisit Rome , for Caesar having overthrown Anthony his great friend , was likely to make an alteration of his Fortune . 

In his absence , news came to jerusalem that Caesar had put him to death , their willingness it should be so , together with the likelihood , gave this Rumour so good credit , as Sohemus that had succeeded josephus' charge , succeeded him likewise in revealing it . So at Herod's return which was speedy and unexpected , he found Mariam so far from joy , that she showed apparent signs of sorrow . He still desiring to win her to a better humour , she being very unable to conceal her passion , ●ell to upbraiding him with her Brother's death . As they were thus debating , came in a fellow with a Cup of Wine , who hired by Salome , said first , it was a Love potion , which Mariam desired to deliver to the King : but afterwards he affirmed that it was a poison , and that Sohemus had told her somewhat , which procured the vehement hate in her . 

The King hearing this , more moved with jealousy of Sohemus , then with this intent of poison , sent her away , and presently after by the instigation of Salome , she was beheaded . Which rashness was afterwards punished in him , with an intolerable a●d almost Frantic passion for her death . 

Actus primus . Scoena prima . 

Mariam sola .  How oft have I with public voice run on ? 
To censure Rome's last Hero for deceit : 
Because he wept when Pompey's life was gone , 
Yet when he lived , he thought his Name too great● 
But now I do recant , and Roman Lord 
Excuse too rash a judgement in a woman : 
My Sex pleads pardon , pardon then afford , 
Mistaking is with us , but too too common . 
Now do I find by self Experience taught , 
One Object yields both grief and joy : 
You wept indeed , when on his worth you thought , 
But joyed that slaughter did your Foe destroy . 
So at his death your Eyes true drops did raine● 
Whom dead , you did not wish alive again . 
When Herod liu●d , that now is done to death , 
oft have I wished that I from him were free : 
oft have I wished that he might lose his breath , 
oft have I wished his Carcase dead to see . 
then Rage and Scorn had put my love to flight , 
That Love which once on him was firmly set : 
Hate hid his true affection from my sight , 
And kept my heart from paying him his debt . 
And blame me not , for Herod's jealousy 
Had power even constancy itself to change : 
For he by barring me from liberty , 
To shun my ranging , taught me first to range . 
But yet too chaste a Scholar was my hart , 
To learn to love another than my Lord : 
To leave his Love , my lessons former part , 
I quickly learned , the other I abhorred . 
But now his death to memory doth call , 
The tender love , that he to Mariam bore : 
And mine to him , this makes those river's fall , 
Which by an other thought unmoistened are . 
For Aristobolus the lowliest youth 
That ever did in Angel's shape appear : 
The cruel Herod was not moved to ruth , 
then why grieves Mariam Herod's death to hear ? 
Why joy I not the tongue no more shall speak , 
That yielded forth my brother's latest doom : 
Both youth and beauty might thy fury break , 
And both in him did ill befit a Tomb . 
And worthy Grandsire ill did he requite , 
His high Assent alone by thee procured , 
Except he murdered thee to free the spirit 
Whi●● 〈◊〉 he thought on earth too long immured . 
How happy was it that Sohemus mind 
Was moved to pity my distressed estate● 
Might Herod's life a trusty servant find , 
My death to his had been unseparate . 
These thoughts have power , his death to make me bear , 
Nay more , to wish the news may firmly hold : 
Yet cannot this repulse some falling tear , 
That will against my will some grief unfold . 
And more I owe him for his love to me , 
The deepest love that ever yet was seen : 
Yet had I rather much a milkmaid be , 
then be the Monarch of judeas' Queen . 
It was for naught but love , he wished his end 
Might to my death , but the vaunt-courier prove : 
But I had rather still be foe then friend , 
To him that saves for hate , and kills for love . 
Hardhearted Mariam , at thy discontent , 
What floods of tears have drenched his manly face ? 
How canst thou then so faintly now lament , 
Thy truest lover's death , a death's disgrace : 
I now mine eyes you do begin to right 
The wrongs of your admirer● And my Lord , 
Long since you should have put your smiles to flight , 
Ill doth a widowed eye with joy accord . 
Why now me thinks the love I bore him then , 
When virgin freedom left me unrestraind : 
Doth to my heart begin to creep again , 
My passion now is far from being feigned . 
But tears fly back , and hide you in your bank●ss , 
You must not be to Alexandra seen : 
For if my moan be spied , but little thanks 
Shall Mariam have , from that incensed Queen . 


Actus primus : Scoena Secunda . 

Mariam . Alexandra . Alex :  What means these tears ? my Mariam doth mistake , 
The news we heard did tell the Tyrant's end : 
What weepst thou for thy brother's murders sake , 
Will ever wight a tear for Herod spend ? 
My curse pursue his breathless trunk and spirit , 
Base Edomite the damned Esau's heir : 
Must he ere Jacob's child the crown inherit ? 
Must he vile wretch be set in David's chair ? 
no David's soul within the bosom placed , 
Of our forefather Abram was ashamed : 
To see his seat with such a toad disgraced , 
That seat that hath by judas race been feigned . 
thou fatal enemy to royal blood , 
Did not the murder of my boy suffice , 
To stop thy cruel mouth that gaping stood ? 
But must thou dim the mild Hersanus eyes ? 
My gracious father , whose too ready hand 
Did lift this Idumean from the dust : 
And he ungrateful caitiff did withstand , 
The man that did in him most friendly trust . 
What kingdoms right could cruel Herod claim , 
Was he not Esau's Issue , heir of hell ? 
then what succession can he have but shame ? 
Did not his Ancestor his birthright sell ? 
OH yes , he doth from Edom's name derive , 
His cruel nature which with blood is fed : 
That made him me of Sire and son deprive , 
He ever thirsts for blood , and blood is red . 
Weepst thou because his love to thee was bend ? 
And readst thou love in crimson characters ? 
slew he thy friends to work thy hearts content ? 
no : hate may justly call that action hers . 
He gave the sacred Priesthood for thy sake , 
To Aristobolus . Yet doomed him dead : 
Before his back the Ephod warm could make , 
And ere the Mitre settled on his head . 
O had he given my boy no less than right , 
The double oil should to his forehead bring : 
A double honour , shining doubly bright , 
His birth anointed him both Priest and King. 
And say my father , and my son he clue , 
To royalize by right your Prince born breath : 
Was love the cause , can Mariam deem it true , 
That Mariam gave commandment for her death ? 
I know by fits , he showed some signs of love , 
And yet not love , but raging lunacy : 
And this his hate to thee may justly prove , 
That sure he hate's Hercanus' family . 
Who knows if he unconstant wavering Lord , 
His love to Doris had renewed again ? 
And that he might his bed to her afford , 
Perchance he wished that Mariam might be slain . 


Nun :  Doris , Alas her time of love was past , 
Those coals were raked in embers long ago : 
If Mariam's love and she was now disgraced , 
Nor did I glory in her overthrow . 
He not a whit his first born son esteemed , 
Because as well as his he was not mine : 
My children only for his own he deemed , 
These boys that did descend from royal line . 
These did he style his heirs to David's throne , 
My Alexander if he live , shall sit 
In the Majestic seat of Solomon , 
To will it so , did Herod think it fit . 


Alex.   Why ? who can claim from Alexander's brood 
That Gold adorned Lion-guarded Chair ? 
Was Alexander not of David's blood ? 
And was not Mariam Alexander's heir ? 
What more than right could Herod then bestow , 
And who will think except for more than right , 
He did not raise them , for they were not low , 
But born to wear the Crown in his despite : 
then send those tears away that are not sent 
To thee by reason , but by passions power : 
thine eyes to cheer , thy cheeks to smi●eses be bend , 
And entertain with joy this happy hour . 
Feliciti● , if when she comes , she finds 
A mourning habit , and a cheerless look , 
Will think she is not welcome to thy mind , 
And so perchance her lodging will not brook . 
O keep her whilst thou hast her , if she go 
She will not easily return again : 
Full many a year have I endured in woe , 
Yet still have sued her presence to obtain : 
And did not I to her as presents send 
A Table , that best Art did beautify 
Of two , to whom Heaven did best feature lend , 
To woe her love by winning Anthony : 
For when a Prince's favour we do crave , 
We fir●● their Minions loves do seek to win : 
So I , that sought Felicity to have , 
Did with her Minion Anthony begin , 
With double slight I sought to captivate 
The warlike lover , but I did not right : 
For if my gift had born but half the rate , 
The Roman had been over-taken quite . 
But now he fared like a hungry guest , 
That to some plenteous festival is gone , 
Now this , now that , he deems to eat were best , 
Such choice doth make him let them all alone . 
The boys large forehead first did fairest seem 
then glanced his eye upon my Mariam's cheek : 
And that without comparison did deem , 
What was in either but he most did leek . 
And thus distracted , either's beauty's might 
Within the others excellence was drowned : 
Too much delight did bore him from delight , 
For either's love , the others did confound . 
Where if thy portraiture had only gone , 
His life from Herod , Anthony had taken : 
He would have loved thee , and thee alone , 
And left the brown Egyptian clean forsaken . 
And Cleopatra then to seek had been , 
So firm a lover of her waned face : 
then great Antonius fall we had not seen , 
By her that fled to have him hold the chase . 
then Mariam i● a Romans Chariot set , 
In place of Cleopatra might have shown : 
A mart of Beauties in her visage met , 
And part in this , that they were all her own . 


Ma.   Not to be Emprise of aspiring Rome , 
Would Mariam like to Cleopatra live : 
With purest body will I press my Tomb , 
And wish no favours Anthony could give . 


Alex.   Let us retire us , that we may resolve 
How now to deal in this reversed state : 
Great are th' affairs that we must now revolve , 
And great affairs must not be taken late . 


Actus primus . Scoena tertia . 

Mariam . Alexandra . Salome . Salome .  More plotting yet ? Why ? now you have the thing 
For which so oft you spent your suppliant breath : 
And Mariam hope's to have another King , 
Her eyes do sparkle joy for Herod's death . 


Alex.   If she desired another King to have , 
She might before she came in Herod's bed 
Have had her wish . more Kings than one did crave , 
For leave to set a Crown upon her head . 
I think with more than reason she laments , 
That she is freed from such a sad annoy : 
Who is (null) will weep to part from discontent , 
And if she joy , she did not causeless joy . 


Sal.   You durst not thus have given your tongue the rain , 
If noble Herod still remained in life : 
Your daughter's betters far I dare maintain , 
Might have rejoiced to be my brother's wife . 


Mar.   My betters far , base woman 't is untrue , 
You scarce have ever my superiors seen : 
For Mariam's servants were as good as you , 
Before she came to be judeas' Queen . 


Sal.   Now stirs the tongue that is so quickly moved , 
But more than once your colour have I born : 
Your fumish words are sooner said then proved , 
And Salome's reply is only scorn . 


Mar.   Scorn those that are for thy companions held , 
Though I thy brother's face had never seen , 
My birth , thy base birth so far excelled , 
I had to both of you the Princess been . 
thou party jew , and party Edomite , 
thou Mongrel : issued from rejected race , 
Thy Ancestors against the Heavens did fight , 
And thou like them wilt heavenly birth disgrace . 


Sal.   Still twit you me with nothing but my birth , 
What odds betwixt your ancestors and mine ? 
Both born of Adam , both were made of Earth , 
And both did come from holy Abraham's line . 


Mar.   I favour thee when nothing else I say , 
With thy black acts I 'll not pollute my breath : 
Else to thy charge I might full justly lay 
A shameful life , besides a husband's death . 


Sal.   't is true indeed , I did the plots reveal , 
That passed betwixt your favourites and you : 
I meant not I , a traitor to conceal . 
Thus Salome your Minion joseph slew . 


Mar.   Heaven , dost thou mean this Infamy to smother ? 
Let slandered Mariam open thy closed ear : 
Self guilt hath ever been suspicious mother , 
And therefore I this speech with patience bear . 
no , had not Salome's unsteadfast heart , 
In josephus' stead her Constabarus placed , 
To free herself , she had not used the art , 
To slander hapless Mariam for unchaste . 


Alex.   Come Mariam , let us go : it is no boot 
To let the head contend against the foot . 


Actus primus . Scoena quarta . 

Salome , Sola .  Lives Salome , to get so base a stil● 
As foot , to the proud Mariam Herod's spirit : 
In happy time for her endured exile , 
For did he live she should not miss her merit : 
But he is dead : and though he were my Brother , 
His death such store of Cinders cannot cast 
My Coals of love to quench : for though they smother 
The flames a while , yet will they out at last . 
O blessed Arabia , in best climate placed , 
I by the Fruit will censure of the Tree : 
't is not in vain , thy happy name thou hast , 
If all Arabians like Silleus be : 
Had not my Fate been too too contrary , 
When I on Constabarus first did gaze , 
Silleus had been object to mine eye : 
Whose looks and personage must allies amaze . 
But now ill Fated Salome , thy tongue 
To Constabarus by itself is tie : 
And now except I do the Hebrew wrong 
I cannot be the fair Arabian Bride : 
What childish lets are these ? Why stand I now 
On honourable points ? 't is long ago 
Since shame was written on my tainted brow : 
And certain 't is , that shame is honour's foe . 
Had I upon my reputation stood , 
Had I affected an unspotted life , 
josephus' veins had still been stuffed with blood , 
And I to him had lived a sober wife . 
then had I never cast an eye of love , 
On Constabarus now detested face , 
then had I kept my thoughts without remou●● 
And blushed at motion of the least disgrace : 
But shame is gone , and honour wiped away , 
And Impudency on my forehead sits : 
She bids me work my will without delay , 
And for my will I will employ my wits . 
He loves , I love ; what then can be the cause , 
Keeps me for being the Arabians wife ? 
It is the principles of Moses laws , 
For Contabarus still remains in life , 
If he to me did bear as Earnest hate , 
As I to him , for him there were an ease , 
A separating bill might free his fate : 
From such a yoke that did so much displease . 
Why should such privilege to man be given ? 
Or given to them , why bard from women then ? 
Are men than we in greater grace with Heaven ? 
Or cannot women hate as well as men ? 
I 'll be the custom-breaker : and begin 
To show my Sex the way to freedom's door , 
And with an offering will I purge my sin , 
The law was made for none but wh● are poor . 
If Herod had lived , I might to him accuse 
My present Lord But for the future's sake 
then would I tell the King he did refuse 
The sons of Baba in his power to take . 
But now I must divorce him from my bed , 
That my Silleus may possess his room : 
Had I not begged his life he had been dead , 
I curse my tongue the hinderer of his doom , 
But then my wand'ring hea●● to him was fast , 
Nor did I dream of change : Silleus said , 
He would be here , and see he comes at last , 
Had I not named him longer had he stayed . 


Actus primus . Soena quinta . 

Salome , Silleus . Silleus .  Well ●ound fair Salome judaeas' pride , 
Hath thy innated wisdom found the way 
To make Silleus deem him deified , 
By gaining thee a more than precious pray ? 


Salo.   I have devisde the best I can devose , 
A more imperfect means was never found : 
But what cares Salome , it doth suffice 
If our endeavours with their end be crowned . 
In this our land we have an ancient use , 
Permitted first by our lawgivers' head : 
Who hate's his wife , though for no just abuse , 
May with a bill divorce her from his bed . 
But in this custom women are not free , 
Yet I for once will wrist it , blame not thou 
The ill I do , since what I does for thee , 
Though others blame , Silleus should allow . 


Silleus .  Thinks Salome , Silleus hath a tongue 
To censure her fair action's : let my blood 
Bedash my proper brow , for such a wrong , 
The being yours , can make even vices good : 
Arabia joy , prepare thy earth with green , 
thou never happy wert indeed till now : 
Now shall thy ground be trod by beauty's Queen , 
Her foot is destined to depress thy brow . 
thou shalt fair Salome command as much 
As i● the royal ornament were thine : 
The weakness of Ara●ias' King is such , 
The kingdom is not his so much as mine . 
My mouth is our Obodas' oracle , 
Who thinks not aught but what Sill●us' will ? 
And thou rare creature . Asia's miracle , 
Shalt be to me as It : Obo●●as still . 


Salome .  't is not for glory I thy love accept , 
judea yields me honours worthy store : 
Had not affection in my bosom crept , 
My native country should my life ●●plore . 
Were not Silleus' n● with home I go , 
I would not change my Palestine for Rome : 
Much less woul● I a glorious state to show , 
Go far to purchase an Arabian roome● 


Silleus .  Far be it from Silleus so to think , 
I know it is thy gratitude requites 
The love that is in me , and shall not shrink 
Till death do sever me from earth's delights . 


Salom.   But whist ; me thinks the wolf is in our talk , 
Be gone Silleus , who doth here arrive ? 
't is Constabarus that doth hither walk , 
I 'll find a quarrel , him from me to drive . 


Sille.   Farewell , but were it not for thy command , 
In his despite Silleus here would stand . 


Actus primus : Soena Sexta . 

Salome : Constabarus . Const :  O Salome , how much you wrong your name , 
Your race , your country , and your husband most ? 
A strangers private conference is shame , 
I blush for you , that have your blushing lost . 
oft have I found , and found you to my grief , 
Consorted with this base Arabian here : 
Heaven knows that you have been my comfort chief , 
then do not now my greater plague appear . 
Now by the stately Carved edifice 
That on Mount Zion makes so fair a show , 
And by the Altar fit for sacrifice , 
I love thee more than thou thyself dost know . 
oft with a silent sorrow have I heard 
How ill judeas' mouth doth censure thee : 
And did I not thine honour much regard , 
thou shouldst not be exhorted thus for me . 
Didst thou but know the worth of honest fame , 
How much a virtuous woman is esteemed , 
thou wouldst like hell eschew deserved shame , 
And seek to be both chaste and chastely deemed . 
Our wisest Prince did say , and true he said , 
A virtuous woman crowns her husband's head . 


Salome .  Did I for this , upreare thy low estate ? 
Did I for this requital beg thy life , 
That thou hadst forfeited hapless fate ? 
To be to such a thankless wretch the wife . 
This hand of mine hath lifted up thy head , 
Which many a day ago had fallen full low , 
Because the sons of Baba are not dead , 
To me thou dost both life and fortune owe.  


Const.   You have my patience often exercised , 
Use make my choler keep within the banks : 
Yet boast no more , but be by me advised . 
A benefit upbraided , forfeits thanks : 
I prithee Salome dismiss this mood , 
thou dost not know how ill it fits thy place : 
My words were all intended for thy good , 
To raise thine honour and to stop disgrace . 


Sa.   To stop disgrace ? take thou no care for me , 
Nay do thy worst , thy worst I set not by : 
no shame of mine is like to light on thee , 
Thy love and admonitions I defy . 
thou shalt no hour longer call me wife , 
Thy jealousy procures my hate so deep : 
That I from thee do mean to free my life , 
By a divorcing bill before I sleep . 


Const.   Are Hebrew women now transformed to men ? 
Why do you not as well our battles fight , 
And wear our armour ? suffer this , and then 
Let all the world be topsy turued quite . 
Let fishes graze , beasts , swine , and birds descend , 
Let fire burn downew●rd● whilst the earth aspires : 
Let Winter's heat and Summers could offend , 
Let Thistles grow on Vines , and Grapes on Briers , 
Set us to Spin or Sow , or at the best 
Make us Wood-hewers , Waters-bearing wights : 
For sacred service let us take no rest , 
Use us as joshua did the Gibonites . 


Salom.   Hold on your talk , till it be time to end , 
For me I am resolved it shall be so : 
Though I be first that to this course do bend , 
I shall not be the last full well I know . 


Const.   Why then be witness Heaven , the judge of sins , 
Be witness Spirits that eschew the dark : 
Be witness Angels , witness Cherubins , 
Whose semblance sits upon the holy Ark : 
Be witness earth , be witness Palestine , 
Be witness David's City , if my heart 
Did ever merit such an act of thine : 
Or if the fault be mine that makes us part , 
Since mildest Moses friend unto the Lord , 
Did work his wonders in the land of Ham , 
And slew the firstborn Babes without a sword , 
In sign whereof we eat the holy Lamb : 
Till now that fourteen hundred years are past , 
Since first the Law with us hath been in force : 
You are the first , and will I hope , be last , 
That ever sought her husband to divorce . 


Salom.   I mean not to be led by precedent , 
My will shall be to me in stead of Law.  


Const.   I fear me much you will too late repent , 
That you have ever lived so void of awe : 
This is Silleus' love that makes you thus 
Reverse all order : you must next be his . 
But if my thoughts aright the cause discuss , 
In winning you , he gains no lasting bliss , 
I was Silleus and not long ago 
josephus then was Constabarus now : 
When you became my friend you proved his foe , 
As now for him you break to me your vowed . 


Sal.   If once I loved you , greater is your debt : 
For certain 't is that you deserved it not . 
And undeserued love we soon forget , 
And therefore that to me can be no blot . 
But now fare ill my once beloved Lord , 
Yet never more beloved then now abhorred . 


Const.   Yet Constabarus biddeth thee farewell . 
Farewell light creature . Heaven forgive thy sin : 
My prophesying spirit doth foretell 
Thy wavering thoughts do yet but new begin . 
Yet I have better scaped than joseph did , 
But if our Herod's death had been delayed , 
The valiant youths that I so long have hid , 
Had been by her , and I for them betrayed . 
Therefore in happy hour did Caesar give 
The fatal blow to wanton Anthony . 
For had he lived , our Herod then should live , 
But great Antonius' death made Herod die . 
Had he enjoyed his breath , not I alone 
Had been in danger of a deadly fall : 
But Mariam had the way of peril gone , 
Though by the Tyrant most beloved of all . 
The sweet faced Mariam as free from guilt 
As Heaven from spots , yet had her Lord come back 
Her purest blood had been unjustly spilt . 
And Salome it was would work her wrack . 
Though all judea yield her innocent , 
She often hath been near to punishment . 


Chorus .  Those minds that wholly dote upon delight , 
Except they only joy in inward good : 
Still hope at last to hop upon the right , 
And so from Sand they leap in loathsome mud . 
Fond wretches , seeking what they cannot find , 
For no content attends a wavering mind . 
If wealth they do desire , and wealth attain , 
then wondrous fain would they to honour leap : 
Of mean degree they do in honour gain , 
They would but wish a little higher step . 
Thus step to step , and wealth to wealth they add , 
Yet cannot all their plenty make them glad . 
Yet oft we see that some in humble state , 
Are chreefull , pleasant , happy , and content : 
When those indeed that are of higher state , 
With vain additions do their thoughts torment . 
th' one would to his mind his fortune bind , 
T'hother to his fortune frames his mind . 
To wi●h variety is sign of grief , 
For if you like your state as now it is , 
Why should an alteration bring relief ? 
Nay change would then be feared as loss of bliss . 
That man is only happy in his Fate , 
That is delighted in a settled state . 
Still Mariam wished she from her Lord were free , 
For expectation of variety : 
Yet now she ●ees her wishes prosperous be , 
She grieves , because her Lord so soon did die . 
Who can those vast imaginations feed , 
Where in a property , contempt doth breed ? 
Were Herod now perchance to live again , 
She would again as much be grieved at that : 
All that she may , she ever doth disdain , 
Her wishes guide her to she knows not what . 
And sad must be their looks , their honour sour , 
That care for nothing being in their power . 


Actus secundus . Scoena prima . 

Pheroras and Graphina . Pher.   't is true Graphin● , now the time draws nigh 
Wherein the holy Priest with hallowed right , 
The happy long desired knot shall tie , 
Pheroras and Graphina to unite : 
How oft have I with lifted hands implored 
This blessed hour , till now implored in vain , 
Which hath my wished liberty restored , 
And made my subject self my own again . 
Thy love fair Maid upon mine eye doth sit , 
Whose nature hot doth dry the moisture all , 
Which were in nature , and in reason fit 
For my monarchal Brother's death to fall : 
Had Herod lived , he would have plucked my hand 
From fair Graphina's Palm perforce : and tied 
The same in hateful and despised band , 
For I had had a Baby to my Bride : 
Scarce can her Infant tongue with easy voice 
Her name distinguish to another's ear : 
Yet had he lived , his power , and not my choice 
Had made me solemnly the contract swear . 
Have I not cause in such a change to joy ? 
What ? though she be my Niece , a Princess born : 
Near bloods without respect : high birth a toy . 
Since Love can teach blood and kindred's scorn . 
What booted it that he did raise my head , 
To be his Realm's Copartner , Kingdom's mate , 
Withal , he kept Graphina from my bed , 
more wished by me then thrice judeas' state . 
O , could not he be skilful judge in love , 
That doted so upon his Mariam's face ? 
He , for his passion , Doris did remove . 
I needed not a lawful Wife displace , 
It could not be but he had power to judge , 
But he that never grudged a Kingdom's share , 
This well known happiness to me did grudge : 
And meant to be therein without compare . 
Else had I been his equal in love's host , 
For though the Diadem on Mariam's head 
Corrupt the vulgar judgements , I will boast 
Graphina : brow 's as white , her cheeks as red . 
Why speaks thou not fair creature ? move thy tongue , 
For Silence is a sign of discontent : 
It were to both our loves too great a wrong 
If now this hour do find thee sadly bend . 


Graph.   Mistake me not my Lord , too oft have I 
Desired this time to come with winged feet , 
To be enwrapped with grief when 't is too nigh , 
You know my wishes ever yours did meet : 
If I be silent , 't is no more but fear 
That I should say too little when I speak : 
But since you will my imperfections bear , 
In spite of doubt I will my silence break : 
Yet might amazement tie my moving tongue , 
But that I know before Pheroras mind , 
I have admired your affection long : 
And cannot yet therein a reason find . 
Your hand hath li●ted me from lowest state , 
To highest eminency wondrous grace , 
And me your handmaid have you made your mate , 
Though all but you alone do count me base . 
You have preserved me pure at my request , 
Though you so weak a vassal might constrain 
To yield to your high will , than last not best 
In my respect a Princess you disdain , 
then need not all these favours study crave , 
To be requited by a simple maid : 
And study still you know must silence have , 
then be my cause for silence justly weighed , 
But study cannot boot nor I requite , 
Except your lowly handmaidens steadfast love 
And fast obedience may your mind delight , 
I will not promise more than I can prove . 


Phero.   That study needs not let Graphina smile , 
And I desire no greater recompense : 
I cannot vaunt me in a glorious stile , 
Nor show my love in far-fetched eloquence : 
But this believe me , never Herod's heart 
Hath held his Prince-born beauty famed wife 
In nearer place than thou fair virgin art , 
To him that holds the glory of his life . 
Should Herod's body leave the Sepulchre , 
And entertain the severed ghost again : 
He should not be my nuptial hinderer , 
Except he hindered it with dying pain . 
Come fair Graphina , let us go in state , 
This wish-endeared time to celebrate . 


Actus 2.  Soena . 2.  

Constabarus and Babus' Sons . Babus' . 1.  Son .  Now valiant friend you have our lives redeemed , 
Which lives as saved by you , to you are due : 
Command and you shall see yourself esteemed , 
Our lives and liberties belong to you . 
This twice six years with hazard of your life , 
You have concealed us from the tyrant's sword : 
Though cruel Herod's sister were your wife , 
You durst in scorn of fear this grace afford . 
In recompense we know not what to say , 
A poor reward were thanks for such a merit , 
Our truest friendship at your feet we lay , 
The best requital to a noble spirit . 


Const.   O how you wrong our friendship valiant youth , 
With friends there is not such a word as debt : 
Where amity is tie with bond of truth , 
All benefits are there in common set . 
then is the golden age with them renewed , 
All names of properties are banished quite : 
Division , and distinction , are eschewed : 
Each hath to what belongs to others right . 
And 't is not sure so full a benefit , 
Freely to give , as freely to require : 
A bounteous act hath glory following it , 
They cause the glory that the act desire . 
All friendship should the pattern imitate , 
Of jesses' Son and valiant Jonathan's 
For neither Sovereign's nor father's hate , 
A friendship foxed on virtue sever can . 
Too much of this , 't is written in the heart , 
And need no amplifying with the tongue : 
Now may you from your living tomb depart , 
Where Herod's life hath kept you over long . 
Too great an injury to a noble mind , 
To be quick buried , you had purchased fame , 
Some years a go , but that you were confined . 
While thousand meaner did advance their name . 
Your best of life the prime of all your years , 
Your time of action is from you bereft . 
Twelve winters have you operpast in fears : 
Yet if you use it well , enough is left . 
And who can doubt but you will use it well ? 
The sons of Babus' have it by descent : 
In all their thoughts each action to excel , 
Boldly to act , and wisely to invent . 


Babus' 2.  Son .  Had it not like the hateful cuckoo been , 
Whose riper age his infant nurse doth kill : 
So long we had not kept ourselves unseen , 
But Constabarus safely crossed our will : 
For had the Tyrant fixed his cruel eye , 
On our concealed faces wrath had swayed 
His justice so , that he had forced us die . 
And dearer price than life we should have paid , 
For you our truest friend had fallen with us : 
And we much like a house on pillars set , 
Had clean depressed our prop , and therefore thus 
Our ready will with our concealment met . 
But now that you fair Lord are dangerless , 
The Sons of Baba shall their rigour show : 
And prove it was not baseness did oppress 
Our hearts so long , but honour kept them low . 


Ba. 1.  Son .  Yet do I fear this tale of Herod's death , 
At last will prove a very tale indeed : 
It gives me strongly in my mind , his breath 
Will be preserved to make a number bleed : 
I wish not therefore to be set at large , 
Yet peril to myself I do not leer : 
Let us for some days longer be your charge , 
Till we of Herod's state the truth do hear . 


Const.   What art thou turned a coward noble youth , 
That thou beginst to doubt , undoubted truth ? 


Babus' . 1.  Son.   Were it my brother's tongue that cast this doubt , 
I from his hart would have the question out : 
With this keen falchion , but 't is you my Lord 
Against whose head I must not lift a sword : 
I am so tie in gratitude Const. believe 
You have no cause to take it ill , 
If any word of mine your heart did grieve 
The word discented from the speakers will , 
I know it was not fear the doubt begun , 
But rather valour and your care of me , 
A coward could not be your father's son , 
Yet know I doubts unnecessary be : 
For who can think that in Antonius' fall , 
Herod his bosom friend should scape unbrusde : 
then Caesar we might thee an idiot call , 
If thou by him shouldst be so far abused . 


Babus' . 2.  Son .  Lord Constab : let me tell you this , 
Upon submission Caesar will forgive : 
And therefore though the tyrant did amiss , 
It may fall out that he will let him live . 
Not many years agone it is since I 
Directed thither by my father's care , 
In famous Rome for twice twelve months did live , 
My life from Hebrews cruelty to spare , 
There though I were but yet of boyish age , 
I bend mine eye to mark , mine ears to hear . 
Where I did see Octavious then a page , 
When first he did to julions' sight appear : 
Me thought I saw such mildness in his face , 
And such a sweetness in his looks did grow , 
Withal , commixed with so majestic grace , 
His Phi●mony his Fortune did foreshow : 
For this I am indebted to mine eye , 
But then mine ear received more evidence , 
By that I knew his love to clemency , 
How he with hottest choler could dispense . 


Const.   But we have more then barely heard the news , 
It ha●● been twice confirmed . And though some tongue 
Might be so fal●e , with fal●e report t'abu●e , 
A fal●e report hath never la●●ed long . 
But be it so that Herod have his life , 
Concealment would not then a whit avail : 
For certain 't is , that she that was my wife , 
Would not to set her accusation fail . 
And therefore now as good the venture give , 
And free ourselves from blot of cowardice : 
As show a pitiful desire to live , 
For , who can pity but they must despise ? 


Babus' first son .  I yield , but to necessity I yield , 
I dare upon this doubt engage mine arm : 
That Herod shall again this kingdom wield , 
And prove his death to be a false alarm . 


Babus' second son .  I doubt it too : God grant it be an error , 
't is best without a cause to be in terror : 
And rather had I , though my soul be mine , 
My soul should lie , then prove a true divine . 


Const.   Come , come , let fear go seek a dastards nest , 
Undaunted courage lies in a noble breast . 


Actus 2.  Scoena 3.  

Doris and Antipater . Dor.   Your royal buildings bow your lofty side , 
And scope to her that is by right your Queen : 
Let your humility upbraid the pride 
Of those in whom no due respect is seen : 
Nine times have we with Trumpets haughty sound , 
And banishing sour Lea●ens from our taste : 
Observed the feast that takes the fruit from ground . 
Since I fair City did behold thee last , 
So long it is since Mariam's purer cheek 
Did rob from mine the glory . And so long 
Since I returned my native Town to seek : 
And with me nothing but the sense of wrong . 
And thee my Boy , whose birth though great it were , 
Yet have thy after fortunes proved but poor : 
When thou wert born how little did I fear 
thou shouldst be thrust from forth thy Father's door . 
Art thou not Herod's right begotten Son ? 
Was not the hapless D●ris , H●rods' wife ? 
Yes : ere he had the Hebrew kingdom won , 
I was companion to his private life . 
Was I not fair enough to be a Queen ? 
Why ere thou wert to me false Monarch tide , 
My lake of beauty might as well be seen , 
As after I had lived five years thy Bride . 
Yet than thine oath came pouring like the rain , 
Which all affirmed my face without compare : 
And that if thou mightst Doris love obtain , 
For all the world besides thou didst not care . 
then was I young , and rich , and nobly born , 
And therefore worthy to be Herod's mate : 
Yet thou ungrateful cast me off with scorn , 
When Heavens purpose raised your meaner fate . 
oft have I begged for vengeance for this fact , 
And with dejected knees , aspiring hands 
Have prayed the highest power to enact 
The fall of her that on my Trophy stands . 
Revenge I have according to my will , 
Yet where I wished this vengeance did not light : 
I wished it should high-hearted Mariam kill . 
But it against my whilom Lord did fight 
With thee sweet Boy I came , and came to try 
If thou before his bastards might be placed 
In Herod's royal seat and dignity . 
But Mariam's infants here are only graced , 
And now for us there doth no hope remain : 
Yet we will not return till Herod's end 
Be more confirmed , perchance he is not slain . 
So glorious Fortunes may my Boy attend , 
For if he live , he 'll think it doth suffice , 
That he to Doris shows such cruelty : 
For as he did my wretched li●e despise , 
So do I know I shall despised die . 
Let him but prove as natural to thee , 
As cruel to thy miserable mother : 
His cruelty shall not upbraided be 
But in thy fortunes . I his faults will smother . 


Antipat.   Each mouth within the City loudly cries 
That Herod's death is certain : therefore we 
Had best some subtle hidden plot devose , 
That Mariam's children might subverted ●ee , 
By poisons drink , or else by murderous Knife , 
So we may be advanced , it skills not how : 
They are but Bastards , you were Her●ds' wife , 
And foul adultery blotteth Mariam's brow . 


Doris .  They are too strong to be by us removed , 
Or else revenges foulest spotted face : 
By our detested wrongs might be approved , 
But weakness must to greater power give place . 
But let us now retire to grieve alone , 
For solitariness best fitteth moan . 


Actus secundus . Scoena 4.  

Silleus and Constabarus . Silleus .  Well met judean Lord , the only wight 
Silleus wished to see . I am to call 
Thy tongue to strict account . 


Const.   For what despite 
I ready am to hear , and answer all . 
But if directly at the cause I guess 
That breeds this challenge , you must pardon me : 
And now some other ground of fight profess , 
For I have vowed , vows must unbroken be . 


Sill.   What may be your expectation ? let me know . 


Const.   Why ? aught concerning Salome , my sword 
Shall not be wielded for a cause so low , 
A blow for her my arm will scorn t' afford . 


Sill.   It is for slandering her unspotted name , 
And I will make thee in thy vows despite , 
Suck up the breath that did my Mistress blame , 
And swallow it again to do her right . 


Const.   I prithee give some other quarrel ground 
To find beginning , rail against my name : 
Or strike me first , or let some scarlet wound 
Inflame my courage , give me words of shame , 
Do thou our Moses sacred Law's disgrace , 
Deprave our nation , do me some despite : 
I 'm apt enough to fight in any case , 
But yet for Salome I will not fight . 


Sill.   Nor I for aught but Salome : My sword 
That owes his service to her sacred name : 
Will not an edge for other cause afford , 
In other fight I am not sure of fame . 


Const.   For her , I pity thee enough already , 
For her , I therefore will not mangle thee : 
A woman with a heart so most unsteady , 
Will of herself sufficient torture be . 
I cannot envy for so light a gain , 
Her mind with such unconstancy doth run : 
As with a word thou didst her love obtain , 
So with a word she will from thee be won . 
So light as her possessions for most day 
Is her affections lost , to me 't is known : 
As good go hold the wind as make her stay , 
She never loves , but till she call her own . 
She merely is a painted sepulchre , 
That is both fair , and vilely foul at once : 
Though on her outside graces garnish her , 
Her mind is filled with worse than rotten bones . 
And ever ready lifted is her hand , 
To aim destruction at a husband's throat : 
For proofs , josephus and myself do stand , 
Though once on both of us , she seemed to do at . 
Her mouth though serpentlike it never hisses , 
Yet like a Serpent , poisons where it kisses . 


Silleus .  Well Hebrew well , thou barkest , but wilt not bite . 


Const.   I tell thee still for her I will not fight . 


Sille :  Why then I call thee coward . 


Const :  From my heart 
I give thee thanks . A cowards hateful name , 
Cannot to valiant minds a blot impart , 
And therefore I with joy receive the same . 
thou knowest I am no coward : thou wert by 
At the Arabian battle th' other day : 
And saw'st my sword with daring valiancy , 
amongst the faint Arabians cut my way . 
The blood of foes no more could let it shine , 
And ' was enameled with some of thine . 
But now have at thee , not for Salome 
I fight : but to discharge a coward's stile : 
Here 'gins the fight that shall not parted be , 
Before a soul or two endure exile . 


Silleus .  Thy sword hath made some windows for my blood , 
To show a horrid crimson phisnomie : 
To breath for both of us me thinks ' were good , 
The day will give us time enough to die . 


Const :  With all my hart take breath , thou sh●lt have time , 
And if thou list a twelve month , let us end : 
Into thy cheeks there doth a paleness clime , 
thou canst not from my sword thyself defend . 
What needest thou for Salome to ●●ght , 
thou hast her , and may'st keep her , none strives for her : 
I willingly to thee resign my right , 
For in my very soul I do abhor her . 
thou seest that I am fresh , unwounded yet , 
then not for fe●re I do thi● offer make : 
thou art with loss of blood , to fight unfit , 
For here is one , and there ●nother take . 


Silleus .  I will not leave as long as breath remains 
Within my wounded body : spare your word● , 
My heart in blood's stead , courage entertains , 
Salome's love no place for fear affords . 


Const :  O could thy soul but pprophecy like mine , 
I would not wonder thou shouldst long to die : 
For Salome if I aright divine 
Will be then death a greater misery . 


Sille●  then list , I 'll breathe no longer . 


Const :  Do thy will , 
I hateless fight , and charitably kill . ay , I , they fight , 
Pity thyself Silleu●'s , let not death 
Intruded before his time into thy hart : 
Alas it is too late to fear , his breath 
Is from his body now about to part . 
How farest thou brave Arabian ? Silleus' very well , 
My leg is hurt , I can no longer fight : 
It only grieves me , that so soon I fell , 
Before fair Salo●s wrong● I came to right . 


Const :  Thy wounds are less than mortal . Never fear , 
thou shalt a safe and quick recovery find : 
Come , I will thee unto my lodging bear , 
I hate thy body , but I love thy mind . 


Sille●s' .  Thanke● noble jew , I see a courteous foe , 
Stern enmity to friendship can no art : 
Had not my heart and tongue engaged me so , 
I would from thee no foe , but friend depart . 
My heart to Salome i● tide so fast , 
To leave her love for friendship , yet my skill 
Shall be employed to make you favour last , 
And I will honour Constabarus still . 


Const :  I open my bosom to thee , and will take 
Thee in , 〈◊〉 friend , and grieve for thy complaint : 
But if we do not expedition make , 
Thy loss of blood I fear will make thee faint . 


Chorus .  TO hear a tale with ears prejudicate , 
It spoils the judgement , and corrupts the sense : 
That human error given to every state , 
Is greater enemy to innocence . 
It makes us foolish , heady , rash , unjust , 
It makes us never try before we trust . 
It will confound the meaning change the words , 
For it our sense of hearing much deceives : 
Besides no time to judgement it affords , 
To way the circumstance our ear receive● . 
The ground of accidents it never tries , 
But makes us take for truth ten thousand lies . 
Our ears and hearts are apt to hold for good , 
That we ourselves do most desire to be : 
And then we drown objections in the flood 
Of partiality , 't is that we see 
That makes false rumours long with credit p●st , 
Though they like rumours must conclude at l●st . 
The greatest part of us prejudicate , 
With wishing Herod's death do hold it true : 
The being once deluded doth not bate , 
The credit to a better likelihood due . 
Those few that wish it not the multitude , 
Do carry headlong , so they doubts conclude . 
They not object the weak uncertain ground , 
Whereon they built this tale of Herod's end : 
Whereof the Author scarcely can be found , 
And all because their wishes that way bend . 
They think not of the peril that ensu'th , 
If this should prove the contrary to tru●● . 
On this same doubt , on this so light a breath , 
They pawn their lives , and fortunes . For they all 
Behave them as the news of Herod's death , 
They did of most undoubted credit call : 
But if their actions now do rightly hit , 
Let them commend their fortune , not their wit.  


Actus tertius : Scoena prima . 

Pheroras : Salome . Phero.   Urge me no more Graphina to forsake , 
Not twelve hours since I married her for love : 
And do you think a sister's power can make 
A resolute decree , so soon remove ? 


Salome .  Poor minds they are that honour not affects . 


Phero :  Who hunt's for honour , happiness neglects . 


Salom.   You might have been both of felicity , 
And honour too in equal measure seized . 


Phero :  It is not you can tell so well as I , 
What 't is can make me happy , or displeased . 


Salome .  To match for neither beauty nor respects 
One mean of birth , but yet of meaner mind , 
A woman full of natural defects , 
I wonder what your eye in her could find . 


Phero :  Mine eye found lovelines , mine ear found wit , 
To please the one , and to enchant the other : 
Grace on her eye , mirth on her tongue doth sit , 
In looks a child , in wisdom's house a mother . 


Salome :  But say you thought her fair , as none thinks else , 
Knows not Pheroras , beauty is a blast : 
Much like this flower which to day excels , 
But longer than a day it will not last . 


Phero :  Her wit exceeds her beauty , 


Salo :  Wit may show 
The way to ill , as well as good you know . 


Phero :  But wisdom is the porter of her head , 
A●d b●res all wicked words from issuing thence . 


Sal.   But of a porter , better were yo● sped , 
If she against their entrance made defence . 


Phero.   But wherefore comes the sacred Ananell , 
That hitherward his hasty steps doth bend ? 
Great sacrificer y' are arrived well , 
Ill news from holy mouth I not attend . 


Actus tertius . Scoena 2.  

Pheroras . Salome . Ananell . Ananell .  MY lips , my son , with peaceful tidings blessed , 
Shall utter Honey to your listening ear : 
A word of death comes not from Priestly breast , 
I speak of life : in life there is no fear . 
And for the news I did the Heaven's salute , 
And filled the Temple with my thankful voice : 
For though that mourning may not me pollute , 
At pleasing accidents I may rejoice . 


Pheror.   Is Herod then revived from certain death ? 


Sall.   What ? can your news restore my brother's breath ? 


Ana.   Both so , and so , the King is safe and sound , 
And did such grace in royal Caesar meet : 
That he with larger stile than ever crowned , 
Within this hour jerusalem will greet . 
I did but come to tell you , and must back 
To make preparatives for sacrifice : 
I knew his death , your hearts like mine did rack , 
Though to conceal it , proved you wise . 


Salom.   How can my joy sufficiently appear ? 


Phero.   A heavier tale did never pierce mine ear . 


Salo.   Now Salome of happiness may boast . 


Pheror.   But now Pheroras is in danger most . 


Salom.   I shall enjoy the comfort of my life . 


Pheror.   And I shall lose it , losing of my wife . 


Salom.   joy heart , for Constan : shall be slain● . 


Phero.   Grieve soul , Graphina shall from me be tan● . 


Salom.   Smile cheeks , the fair Silleus shall be mine . 


Phero.   W●●pe eyes , for I must with a child combine . 


Salom●  Well brother , cease your moans , on one condition 
He undertake to win the King's consent : 
Graphina still shall be in your tuition , 
And her with you be ne'er the less content . 


Phero.   what 's the condition ? let me quickly know , 
That I as quickly your command may act : 
Were it to see what Herbs in Ophir grow , 
Or that the lofty Ty●us might be sacked . 


Salom.   't is no so hard a task : It is no more , 
But tell the King that Consta : hid 
The sons of Baba , done to death before : 
And 't is no more than Consta. did . 
And tell him more that he for Herod's sake , 
Not able to endure his brother's foe : 
Did with a bill our separation make , 
Though ●oth from Consta : else to go . 


Phero.   Believe this tale for told , I 'll go from hence , 
In Herods●are ●are the Hebrew to deface : 
And I that never studied eloquence , 
Do mean with eloquence this tale to grace . Exit . 


Salom.   This will be Constabarus quick dispatch , 
Which from my mouth would lesser credit find : 
Yet shall ●e not decease without a match , 
For Mariam shall not linger long behind . 
First jealousy , if that avail not , fear 
shall be my minister to work her end : 
A common error moves not Herods●are ●are , 
Which doth so firmly to his Mariam bend . 
She shall be charged with so horrid crime , 
As Herod's fear shall turn his love to hate : 
He make some swear that she desire's to climb , 
And seeks to poison him for his estate . 
I scorn that she should ●ive my birth t' upbraid , 
To call me base and hungry Edomite : 
With patient show her choler I betrayed , 
And watched the time to be revenged by 〈◊〉 
Now tongue of mine with scandal load her name , 
Turn hers to fountains , Herod's eyes to flame● 
Yet first I will begin Pheroras suit , 
That he my earnest business may effect : 
And I of Mariam will keep me mute , 
Till first some other doth her name detect . 
who 's there , Silleus' man ? How fares your Lord● 
That your aspects do bear the badge of sorrow's 


Silleus man   He hath the marks of Constabarus sword , 
And for a while desire's your sight to borro● 


Salom.   My heavy curse the hateful sword pursue , 
My heavier curse on the more hateful arm 
That wounded my Sill●us' . But renew 
Your tale again . Hath he no mortal harm ? 


Silleus' man   no sign of danger doth in him appear , 
Nor are his wounds in place of peril seen : 
He bides you be assured you nee● not fear , 
He hope's to make you yet Arab●as' Queen . 


Salom.   Commend my heart to be Silleus' charge , 
Tell him , my brother's sudden coming now : 
Will give my foot no room to walk at large , 
But I will see him yet ere night I vow . 


Actus 3  Scoena 3.  

Mariam and Sohemus . Mariam .  Sohemus , tell me what the news may he 
That makes your eyes so full , your cheeks so blue ? 


Sohem.   I know not how to call them . Ill for me 
't is sure they are : not so I hope for you . 
Herod . 


Mari.   O , what of Herod ? Sohem. Herod live● . 
How ! lives ? What in some Cave or forest hid● 


Sohem.   Nay , back returned with honour . Caesar gives 
Him greater grace than ere Antonius did . 


Mari.   Foretell the ruin of my family , 
Tell me that I shall see our City burned : 
Tell me I shall a death disgraceful die , 
But tell me not that Herod is returned . 


Sohem.   Be not impatient Madam , be but mild , 
His love to you again will soon be bred : 


Mar.   I will not to his love be reconciled , 
With solemn vows I have forsworn his Bed.  


Sohem.   But you must break those vows . 


Mar.   I 'll rather break 
The heart of Mariam . Cursed is my Fate : 
But speak no more to me , in vain ye speak 
To live with him I so profoundly hate . 


Sohem.   Grea● Queen , you must to me your pardon give , 
Sohemus cannot now your will obey : 
If your command should me to silence drive , 
It were not to obey , but to betray . 
Reject , and slight my speeches , mock my faith , 
Scorn my observance , call my counsel naught : 
Though you regard not what Sohemus saith , 
Yet will I ever freely speak my thought . 
I fear ●re long I shall fair Mariam see 
In woeful state , and by herself undone : 
Yet fo● your issue's sake more temperate be , 
The heart by affability is won . 


Mari.   And must I to my Prison turn again ? 
O , now I see I was an hypcorite : 
I did this morning for his death complain , 
And yet do mourn , because he lives ere night . 
When I his death believed , compassion wrought , 
And was the stickler 'twixt my heart and him : 
But now that curtain 's drawn from off my thought , 
Hate doth appear again with visage grim : 
And paint● the face of Herod in my heart , 
In horrid colours with detested look : 
then fear would come , but scorn doth play her part , 
●●d saith that scorn with fear can never brook . 
〈◊〉 now I could enchain him with a smile : 
●●d lead him captive with a gentle word , 
scorn my look should ever man beguile , 
●r other speech , then meaning to afford . 
●lse Salome in vain might spend her wind , 
●n vain might Herod's mother whet her tongue : 
●n vain had they complotted and combined , 
For I could overthrow them all ere long . 
O what a shelter is mine innocence , 
To shield me from the pangs of inward grief : 
'Gainst all mishaps it is my fair defence , 
And to my sorrows yields a large relief . 
To be commandress of the triple earth , 
And sit in safety from a fall secure : 
To have all nations celebrate my birth , 
I would not that my spirit were impure . 
Let my distressed state unpitied be , 
Mine innocence is hope enough for me . Exit . 


Sohem :  Poor guiltless Queen . O that my wish might place 
A little temper now about thy heart : 
Unbridled speech is Mariam's worst disgrace , 
And will endanger her without desert . 
I am in greater hazard . O'er my head , 
The fatal axe doth hang unsteadily : 
My disobedience once discovered , 
Will shake it down : Sohemus so shall die . 
For when the King shall find , we thought his death 
Had been as certain as we see his life : 
And marks withal I slighted so his breath , 
As to preserve alive his matchless wife . 
Nay more , to give to Alexander's hand 
The regal dignity . The sovereign power , 
How I had yielded up at her command , 
The strength of all the city , David's Tower. 
What more than common death may I expect , 
Since I too well do know his cruelty : 
' were death , a word of Herod's to neglect , 
What then to do directly contrary ? 
Yet life I quite thee with a willing spirit , 
And think thou couldst not better be employed : 
I forfeit thee for her that more doth merit , 
Ten such were better dead than she destroyed . 
But fare thee well chaste Queen , well may I see 
The darkness palpable , and river's part : 
The sun stand still : Nay more retorted be , 
But never woman with so pure a heart . 
thine eyes grave majesty keeps all in awe , 
And cuts the wings of every loose desire : 
Thy brow is table to the modest law , 
Yet though we dare not love , we may admire . 
And if I die , it shall my soul content , 
My breath in Mariam's service shall be spent . 


Chorus .  't is not enough for one that is a wife 
To keep her spotless from an act of ill : 
But from suspicion she should free her life , 
And bore herself of power as well as william 
't is not so glorious for her to be free , 
As by her proper self restrained to be . 
When she hath spacious ground to walk upon , 
Why on the ridge should she desire to go ? 
It is no glory to forbear alone , 
Those things that may her honour overthrow . 
But 't is thankworthy , if she will not take 
All lawful liberties for honour's sake . 
That wife her hand against her fame doth rear , 
That more than to her Lord alone will give 
A private word to any second ear , 
And though she may with reputation live . 
Yet though most chaste , she doth her glory blot , 
And wounds her honour , though she kills it not . 
When to their Husbands they themselves do bind , 
Do they not wholly give themselves away ? 
Or give they but their body not their mind , 
Reserving that though best , for others pray ? 
no sure , their thoughts no more can be their own , 
And therefore should to none but one be known . 
then she usurps upon another's right , 
That seeks to be by public language graced : 
And though her thoughts reflect with purest light , 
Her mind if not peculiar is not chaste . 
For in a wife it is no worse to find , 
A common body , than a common mind . 
And every mind though free from thought of ill , 
That out of glory seeks a worth to show : 
When any's ears but one therewith they fill , 
Doth in a sort her pureness overthrow . 
Now Mariam had , ( but that to this she bend ) 
Been free from fear , as well as innocent . 


Actus quartus : Scoena prima . 

Enter Herod and his attendants . Herod .  Hail happy city , happy in thy store , 
And happy that thy buildings such we see : 
more happy in the Temple where w'adore , 
But most of all that Mariam lives in thee . 
Art thou returned ? how fares my Mariam ? Enter Nutio.  


Nutio.   she 's well my Lord , and will anon be here 
As you commanded . 


Her :  Muffle up thy brow 
thou days dark taper . Mariam will appear . 
And where she shines , we need no● thy dim light , 
O hast thy steps rare creature , speed thy pace : 
And let thy presence make the day more bright , 
And cheer the heart of Herod with thy face . 
It is an age since I from Mariam went , 
Me thinks our parting was in David's days : 
The hours are so increased by discontent , 
Deep sorrow , josua like the season stays : 
But when I am with Mariam , time runs on , 
Her sight , can make months , minutes , days of weeks 
An hour is then no sooner come then gone . 
When in her face mine eye for wonders seeks . 
You world commanding city , Europe's grace , 
Twice hath my curious eye your streets surveyed , 
And I have seen the statue filled place , 
That once if not for grief had been betrayed . 
I all your Roman beauties have beheld , 
And seen the shows your Aediles did prepare , 
I saw the sum of what in you excelled , 
Yet saw no miracle like Mariam rare . 
The fair and famous Livia , Caesar's love , 
The world's commanding Mistress did I see : 
Whose beauties both the world and Rome approve , 
Yet Mariam : Livia is not like to thee . 
Be patient but a little , while mine eyes 
Within your compassed limits be contained : 
That object strait shall your desires suffice , 
From which you were so long a while restrained . 
How wisely Mariam doth the time delay , 
Lest sudden joy my sense should suffocate : 
I am prepared , thou needst no longer stay : 
who 's there , my Mariam , more than happy fate ? 
O no , it is Pheroras , welcome Brother , 
Now for a while , I must my passion smother . 


Actus quartus . Scoena secunda . 

Herod . Pheroras . Pheroras .  All health and safety wait upon my Lord , 
And may you long in prosperous fortunes live 
With Rome commanding Caesar ; at accord , 
And have all honours that the world can give . 


Herod .  O brother , now thou speakest not from thy hart , 
no , thou hast struck a blow at Herod's love : 
That cannot quickly from my memory part , 
Though Salome did me to pardon move . 
Valiant Phasaelus , now to thee farewell , 
thou wert my kind and honourable brother : 
O hapless hour , when you self stricken fell , 
thou father's Image , glory of thy mother . 
Had I desired a greater suit of thee , 
then to withhold thee from a harlot's bed , 
thou wouldst have granted it : but now I see 
All are not like that in a womb are bred . 
thou wouldst not , hadst thou heard of Herod's death , 
Have made his burial time , thy bridal hour : 
thou wouldst with clamours , not with joyful breath , 
Have showed the news to be not sweet but sour . 


Phero.   Phasaelus great worth I know did stain 
Pheroras petty valour : but they lie 
( Excepting you yourself ) that dare maintain , 
That he did honour Herod more than I 
For what I showed , loves power constrained me show , 
And pardon loving faults for Mariam's sake . 


Herod .  Mariam , where is she ? 


Phero.   Nay , I do not know , 
But absent use of her fair name I make : 
You have forgiven greater faults than this , 
For Constabarus that against you will 
Preserved the sons of Baba , lives in bliss , 
Though you commanded him the youths to kill . 


Herod .  Go , take a present order for his death , 
And let those traitors feel the worst of fears : 
Now Salome will whine to beg his breath , 
But I 'll be deaf to prayers : and blind to tears . 


Phero.   He is my Lord from Salome divorced , 
Though her affection did to leave him grieu● : 
Yet was she by her love to you enforced , 
To leave the man that would your foes relieve . 


Herod .  then haste them to their death . I will requite 
Thee gentle Mariam . Salome I mean 
The thought of Mariam doth so steal my spirit , 
My mouth from speech of her I cannot wean . Exit . 


Actus 4.  Scoena 3.  

Herod . Mariam . Herod .  And here she comes indeed : happily met 
My best , and dearest half : what ails my dear ? 
thou dost the difference certainly forget 
'twixt Dusky habits , and a time so clear . 


Mar.   My Lord , I suit my garment to my mind , 
And there no cheerful colours can I find . 


Herod .  Is this my welcome ? have I longed so much 
To see my dearest Mariam discontent ? 
What is (null) that is the cause thy heart to touch ? 
O speak , that I thy sorrow may prevent . 
Art thou not juries' Queen , and Herod's too ? 
Be my Commanders , be my Sovereign guide : 
To be by thee directed I will woe , 
For in thy pleasure lies my highest pride . 
Or if thou think judaeas' narrow bound , 
Too strict a limit for thy great command : 
thou shalt be Empress of Arabia crowned , 
For thou shalt rule , and I will win the land 
I 'll rob the holy David's Sepulchre 
To give thee wealth , if thou for wealth do care : 
thou shalt have all , they did with him inter , 
And I for thee will make the Temple bare . 


Mar.   I neither have of power not riches want , 
I have enough , nor do I wish for more : 
Your offers to my heart no ease can grant , 
Except they could my brother's life restore . 
no , had you wished the wretched Mariam glad , 
Or had your love to her been truly tie : 
Nay , had you not desired to make her sad , 
My brother nor my Grandsire had not died . 


Herald   wilt thou believe no oaths to clear thy Lord ? 
How oft have I with execration sworn : 
thou art by me beloved , by me adored , 
Yet are my protestations heard with scorn . 
Hercanus' plotted to deprive my head 
Of this long settled honour that I wear : 
And therefore I did justly doom him dead , 
To rid the Realm from peril , me from fear . 
Yet I for Mariam's sake do so repent 
The death of one : whose blood she did inherit : 
I wish I had a Kingdom's treasure spent , 
So I had ne'er expelled Hercanus' spirit . 
As I affected that same noble youth , 
In lasting infamy my name enroll : 
If I not mourned his death with hearty truth . 
Did I not show to him my earnest love , 
When I to him the Priesthood did restore ? 
And did for him a living Priest remove , 
Which never had been done but once before . 


Mariam .  I know that moved by importunity , 
You made him Priest , and shortly after die . 


Herod .  I will not speak , unless to be believed , 
This froward humour will not do you good : 
It hath too much already Herod grieved , 
To think that you on terms of hate have stood . 
Yet smile my dearest Mariam , do but smile , 
And I will all unkind conceits exile . 


Mari.   I cannot frame disguise , nor never taught 
My face a look dissenting from my thought . 


Herod .  By heaven you vex me , build not on my love . 


Mari.   I will not build on so unstable ground . 


Herod .  Naught is so fixed , but peevishness may move . 


Mar.   't is better sleightest cause than none were found . 


Herod .  Be judge yourself , if ever Herod sought 
Or would be moved a cause of change to find : 
Yet let your look declare a milder thought , 
My heart again you shall to Mariam bind . 
How oft did I for you my Mother chide , 
Revile my Sister , and my brother rate : 
And tell them all my Mariam they belied , 
Distrust me still , if these be signs of hate . 


Actus 4.  Scoena 4.  

Herod .  What hast thou here ? 


Bu.   A drink procuring love , 
The Queen desired me to deliver it . 


Mar.   Did I : some hateful practice this will prove , 
Yet can it be no worse than Heavens permit . 


Herod .  Confess the truth thou wicked instrument , 
To her outrageous will , 't is passion sure : 
Tell true , and thou shalt scape the punishment , 
Which if thou do conceal thou shalt endure . 


Bu.   I know not , but I doubt it be no less , 
Long ●ince the hate of you her heart did cease . 


Herod .  Knowest thou the cause thereof ? 


Bu.   My Lord I guess , 
Sohemus told the tale that did displease . 


Herod .  O Heaven ! Sohemus' false ! Go let him die , 
Stay not to suffer him to speak a word : 
O damned villain , did he falsify 
The oath he swore e'en of his own accord ? 
Now do I know thy falsehood , painted Devil 
thou white Enchantress . O thou art so foul , 
That Hyssop cannot cleanse thee worst of evil . 
A beauteous body hides a loathsome soul , 
Your love Sohemus moved by his affection , 
Though he have ever heretofore been true : 
Did blab forsooth , that I did give direction , 
If we were put to death to slaughter you . 
And you in black reu●nge attended now 
To add a murder to your breach of vow . 


Mar.   Is this a dream ? 


Herald   O Heaven , that 't were no more , 
I 'll give my Realm to who can prove it so : 
● would I were like any beggar poor , 
So I for false my Mariam did not know . 
Fowl pith contained in the fairest rind , 
That ever graced a Cedar . O thine eye 
Is pure as heaven , but impure thy mind , 
And for impurity shall Mariam die . 
Why didst thou love Sohemus ? Marinell : they can tell 
That say I loved him , Mariam says not so . 


Herod .  O cannot impudence the coals expel , 
That for thy love in Herod's bosom glow● : 
It is as plain as water , and denial 
Makes of thy falsehood but a greater trial . 
Hast thou beheld thyself , and couldst thou stain 
So rare perfection : even for love of thee 
I do profoundly hate thee . Wert thou plain , 
thou shouldst the wonder of judea be . 
But o thou art not . Hell itself lies hid 
Beneath thy heavenly show . Yet never wert thou chaste : 
thou mightst exalt , pull down , command , forbid , 
And be above the wheel of fortune placed . 
Hadst thou complotted Herod's massacre , 
That so thy son a Monarch might be styled , 
Not half so grievous such an action were , 
As once to think , that Mariam is defiled . 
Bright workmanship of nature sullied o'er , 
With pitched darkness now thine end shall be : 
thou shalt not live fair fiend to cozen more , 
With heavy semblance , as thou cozenedst me . 
Yet must I love thee in despite of death , 
And thou shalt die in the despite of love : 
For neither shall my love prolong thy breath , 
Nor shall thy loss of breath my love remove . 
I might have seen thy falsehood in thy face , 
Where couldst thou get thy stairs that served for eyes ? 
Except by theft , and theft is foul disgrace : 
This had appeared before were Herod wise , 
But I 'm a sot , a very sot , no better : 
My wisdom long ago a wand'ring fell , 
Thy f●ce encountering it , my wit did fetter , 
And made me for delight my freedom ●ell . 
Give me my heart false creature , 't is a wrong , 
My guliltles heart should now with thine be slain : 
thou hadst no right to look it up so long , 
And with usurpers name I Mariam stain . 


Enter Bu : He :  Have you designed Sohemus to his end ? 


Bu :  I have my Lord Herod : then call our royal guard 
To do as much for Mariam , they offend 
Leave ill unblamed , or good without reward . 
Here take her to her death Come back , come back , 
What meant I to deprive the world of light : 
To muffle jury in the foulest black , 
That ever was an opposite to white . 
Why whither would you carry her : Sold : you bade 
We should conduct her to her death my Lord  


Hero :  Wie sure I did not , Herod was not mad , 
Why should she feel the fury of the sword ? 
O now the grief returns into my heart , 
And pulls me piecemeal : love and hate do fight : 
And now hath 'bove acquired the greater part , 
Yet now hath hate , affection conquered quite . 
And therefore bear her hence : and Hebrew why 
Seize you with Lion's paws the fairest lamb 
Of all the flock ? she must not , shall not , die , 
Without her I most miserable am . 
And with her more than most , away , away , 
But bear her but to prison not to death : 
And is she gone indeed , stay villains stay , 
Her looks alone preserved your Sovereign's breath . 
Well let her go , but yet she shall not die , 
I cannot think she meant to poison me : 
But certain 't is she lived too wantonly , 
And therefore shall she never more be free . 


Actus 4.  Scoena 5.  

Bu.   Foul villain , can thy pitchy coloured soul 
Permit thine ear to hear her cawls doom ? 
And not enforce thy tongue that tale control , 
That must unjustly bring her to her too me . 
O Salome thou hast thyself repaid , 
For all the benefits that thou hast done : 
thou art the cause I have the queen betrayed , 
thou hast my hart to darkest falsehood won . 
I am condemned , heaven gave me not my tongue 
To slander innocents' , to lie , deceive : 
To be the hateful instrument to wrong , 
The earth of greatest glory to bereave . 
My sin ascends and doth to heaven cry , 
It is the blackest deed that ever was : 
And there doth sit an Angel notary , 
That doth record it down in leaves of brass . 
O how my heart doth quake : Achitophel , 
thou found'st a means thyself from shame to free : 
And sure my soul approves thou didst not well , 
All follow some , and I will follow thee . 


Actus 4.  Scoena 6.  

Constabarus , Babus' Sons , and their guard . Const :  Now here we step our last , the way to death , 
We must not tread this way a second time : 
Yet let us resolutely yield our breath , 
Death is the only ladder , Heaven to clime . 


Babus' 1.  Son .  With willing mind I could myself resign , 
But yet it grieves me with a grief untold : 
Our death should be accompanied with thine , 
Our friendship we to thee have dear sold.  


Const.   Still wilt thou wrong the sacred name of friend ? 
then shouldst thou never style it friendship more : 
But base mechanic traffic that doth lend , 
Yet will be sure they shall the debt restore . 
I could with needless compliment return , 
't is for thy ceremony I could say : 
't is I that made the fire your house to burn , 
For but for me she would not you betray . 
Had not the damned woman sought mine end , 
You had not been the subject of her hate : 
You never did her hateful mind offend , 
Nor could your deaths have freed your nuptial fate . 
Therefore fair friends , though you were still unborn , 
Some other subtlety devisde should be : 
Were by my life , though guiltless should be torn , 
Thus have I proved , 't is you that die for me . 
And therefore should I weakly now lament , 
You have but done your duties , friends should die : 
Alone their friend's disaster to prevent , 
Though not compelled by strong necessity . 
But now farewell fair city , never more 
Shall I behold your beauty shining bright : 
Farewell of jewish men the worthy store , 
But no farewell to any female wight . 
You wavering crew : my curse to you I leave , 
You had but one to give you any grace : 
And you yourselves will Mariam's life bereave , 
Your commonwealth doth innocence chase . 
You creatures made to be the human curse , 
You Tigers , Lionesses , hungry Bears , 
Tea●e massacring Hyenas : nay far worse , 
For they for pray do shed their feigned tears . 
But you will weep , ( you creatures cross to good ) 
For your unquenched thirst of human blood : 
You were the Angels cast from heaven for pride , 
And still do keep your Angels outward show , 
But none of you are inly beautified , 
For still your heaven depriving pride doth grow . 
Did not the sins of many require a scourge , 
Your place on earth had been by this withstood : 
But since a flood no more the world must purge , 
You stayed in office of a second flood . 
You giddy creatures , sowers of debate , 
you 'll love to day , and for no other cause , 
But for you yesterday did deeply hate , 
You are the wreak of order , breach of laws . 
You best , are foolish , froward , wanton , vain , 
Your worst adulterous , murderous , cunning , proud 
And Salome attends the latter train , 
Or rather he their leader is allowed . 
I do the sottishness of men bewail , 
That do with following you enhance your pride : 
'T were better that the human race should fail , 
then be by such a mischief multiplied . 
Cham's servile curse to all your sex was given , 
Because in Paradise you did offend : 
then do we not resist the will of Heaven , 
When on your wills like servants we attend ? 
You are to nothing constant but to ill , 
You are with naught but wickedness endued : 
Your loves are set on nothing but your will , 
And thus my censure I of you conclude . 
You are the least of goods , the worst of evils , 
Your best are worse than men : your worst then devils . 


Babus' second son .  Come let us to our death : are we not blessed ? 
Our death will freedom from these creatures give : 
Those trouble quiet sowers of unrest , 
And this I vow that had I leave to live , 
I would for ever lead a single life , 
And never venture on a di●ellish wife . 


Actus 4.  Scoena 7.  

Herod and Salome . Herod .  Nay , she shall die . Die quoth you , that she shall : 
But for the means . The means ! Me thinks 't is hard 
To find a means to murder her withal , 
Therefore I am resolved ●he shall be spared . 


Salom.   Why ? let her be beheaded . 


Herald   That were well , 
Think you that swords are miracles like you : 
Her skin will every Curtle-axe edge refel , 
And then your enterprise you well may ●ue . 
What if the fierce Arabian notice take , 
Of this your wretched weaponless estate : 
They answer when we bid resistance make , 
That Mariam's skin their falchions did rebate . 
Beware of this , you make a goodly hand , 
If you of weapons do deprive our land  


Sal.   Why drown her then . 


Herod .  Indeed a sweet device , 
Why ? would not every River turn her course 
R●ther then do her beauty prejudice ? 
And be reverted to the proper source . 
So not a drop of water should be found 
In all judeas' quondam fertile ground . 


Sal.   then let the fire devour her . 


Herald   'T will not be : 
Flame is from her derived into my heart : 
thou nursest flame , flame will not murder thee , 
My fairest Mariam , fullest of desert . 


Salom.   then let her live for me . 


Herod .  Nay , she sha● I die : 
But can you live without her ? 


Sal.   doubt you that ? 


Herod .  I 'm sure I cannot , I beseech you try : 
I have experience but I know not what . 


Salom.   How should I try ? 


Herald   Why let my love be slain , 
But if we cannot live without her sight 
you 'll find the means to make her breathe again , 
Or else you will bereave my comfort quite . 


Sal.   O I : I warrant you . 


Herod .  What is she gone ? 
And gone to bid the world be overthrown : 
What ? is her heart's composure hardest stone ? 
To what a pass are cruel women grown ? 
She is returned already : have you done ? 
Is (null) possible you can command so soon ? 
A creatures heart to quench the flaming Sun , 
Or from the sky to wipe away the Moon . 


Salo.   If Mariam be the Sun and Moon , it is : 
For I already have commanded this . 


Herald   But have you seen her cheek ? 


Sal.   A thousand times . 


Herod .  But did you mark it too ? 


Sal.   I very well . 


Herod .  What is (null) ? 


Sal.   A Crimson bush , that ever limbs 
The soul whose foresight doth not much excel . 


Herod .  send word she shall not die . Her cheek a bush , 
Nay , than I see indeed you marked it not . 


Sal.   't is very fair , but yet will never blush , 
Though foul dishonours do her forehead blot . 


Herod .  then let her die , 't is very true indeed , 
And for this fault alone shall Mariam bleed . 


Sal.   What fault my Lord ? 


Herod .  What fault is (null) ? you that ask : 
If you be ignorant I know of none , 
To call her back from death shall be your task , 
I 'm glad that she for innocent is known . 
For on the brow of Mariam hangs a Fleece , 
Whose slenderest twine is strong enough to bind 
The hearts of Kings , the pride and shame of Greece , 
Troy flaming Helen's not so fairly shined . 


Salom.   't is true indeed , she lays them out for nets , 
To catch the hearts that do not shun a bait : 
't is time to speak : for Herod sure forgets 
That Mariam's very tresses hide deceit . 


Herald   O do they so ? nay , than you do but well , 
Insooth I thought it had been hair : 
Nets call you them ? Lord , how they do excel , 
I never saw a net that showed so fair . 
But have you heard her speak ? 


Sal.   You know I have . 


Her :  And were you not amazed ? 


Sal.   no , not a whit . 


Herald   then 't was not her you heard , her life I 'll save , 
For Mariam hath a world amazing wit.  


Salo.   She speaks a beauteous language , but within 
Her hea●t is false as powder : and her tongue 
Doth but allure the auditors to sin , 
And is the instrument to do you wrong . 


Herod .  It may be so : nay , 't is so : she 's unchaste , 
Her mouth will open to every stranger's ear : 
then let the executioner make haste , 
lest she enchant him , if her words he hear . 
Let him be deaf , lest she do him surprise 
That shall to free her spirit be assigned : 
Yet what boots deafness if he have his eyes , 
Her murderer must be both deaf and blinde● 
For if he see , he needs must see the stars 
That shine on either side of Mariam's face : 
Whose sweet ●spect will terminate the wars , 
Wherewith he should a soul so precious chase . 
Her eyes can speak , and in their speaking move , 
oft did my heart with reverence receive 
The world's mandates . Pretty tales of love 
They utter , which can human bondage weave . 
But shall I let this heaven's model die ? 
Which for a small self-portraiture she drew : 
Her eyes like stars , her forehead like the sky , 
She is like Heaven , and must be heavenly true . 


Salom.   Your thoughts do rave with doting on the Queen , 
Her eyes are ebon hewed , and you 'll confess : 
A sable star hath been but seldom seen , 
then speak of reason more , of Mariam less . 


Herod .  yourself are held a goodly creature here , 
Yet so unlike my Mariam in your shape : 
That when to her you have approached near , 
Myself hath often ta'en you for an Ape . 
And yet you pra●e of beauty : go your ways , 
You are to her a Sun burned Blackamoor : 
Your paintings cannot equal Mariam's praise , 
Her nature is so rich , you are so poor . 
Let her be stayed from death , for if she die , 
We do we know not what to stop her breath : 
A world cannot another Mariam buy , 
Why stay you lingering ? countermand her death . 


Salo.   then you 'll no more remember what hath past , 
Sohemus' love , and hers shall be forgot : 
't is well in truth : that fault may be her last , 
And she may mend , though yet she love you not . 


Her :  O God : 't is true . Sohemus : earth and heaven , 
Why did you both conspire to make me cursed : 
In cozening me with shows , and proofs uneven ? 
She showed the best , and yet did prove the worst . 
Her show was such , as had our singing king 
The holy David , Mariam's beauty seen : 
The Hittites had then felt no deadly sting , 
Nor Bethsabe had never been a Queen . 
Or had his son the wi●est man of men , 
Whose fond delight did most consist in change : 
Beheld her face , he had been stayed again , 
no creature having her , can wish to range . 
Had Asuerus see●e my Mariam's brow , 
The humble jew , she might have walked alone : 
Her beauteous virtue should have stayed below , 
whiles Mariam mounted to the persian throne . 
But what avails it all : for in the weight 
She is deceitful , light as vanity : 
O she was made for nothing but a b●it , 
To train some hapless man to misery . 
I am the hapless man that have been trained , 
To endless bondage . I will see her yet : 
Mendoza thinks I should discern her if she feigned , 
Can human eyes be dazed by woman's wit ? 
Once more these eyes of mine with hers shall meet , 
Before the headsman do her life bereave : 
Shall I for ever part from thee my sweet ? 
Without the taking of my latest leave . 


Salo :  You had as good resolve to save her now , 
I 'll stay her death , 't is well determined : 
For sure she never more will break her vow , 
Sohemus and josephus both are dead . 


Herod .  She shall not live , nor will I see her face , 
A long healed wound , a second time doth bleed : 
With joseph I remember her disgrace , 
A shameful end ensues a shameful deed . 
O that I had not called to mind anew , 
The discontent of Mariam's wavering hart : 
' was you : you foul mouthed Ate , none but you , 
That did the thought hereof to me impart . 
Hence from my sight , my black tormenter hence , 
For hadst not thou made Herod unsecure : 
I had not doubted Mariam's innocence , 
But still had held her in my heart for pure . 


Salo :  I 'll leave you to your passion : 't is no time 
To purge me now , though of a guiltless crime . Exit . 


Herod .  Destruction take thee : thou hast made my hart 
As heavy as revenge , I am so dull , 
Me thinks I am not sensible of smart , 
Though hideous horrors at my bosom pull . 
My head ways downward : therefore will I go 
To try if I can sleep away my woe . 


Actus 4.  Scoena . 8.  

Mariam .  am I the Mariam that presumed so much , 
And deemed my face must needs preserve my breath ? 
ay , ay it was that thought my beauty such , 
At it alone could countermand my death . 
Now death will ●each me : he can pale aswell 
A cheek● of roses , as a cheek less bright : 
And dim an eye whose shine doth most excel , 
Assoon as one that casts a meaner light . 
Had not myself against myself conspired , 
no plot : no adversary from without 
could Herod's love from Mariam have retired , 
Or from his heart have thrust my semblance out . 
The wanton Queen that never loved for love , 
False Cleopatra , wholly set on gain : 
With all her slights did prove : yet vainly prove , 
For her the love of Herod to obtain . 
Yet her allurements , all her courtly guile , 
Her smiles , her favours , and her smooth deceit : 
could not my face from Herod's mind exile , 
But were with him of less than little weight . 
That face and person that in Asia late 
For beauty's Goddess Paphos Queen was ta'en : 
That face that did captive great julius' fate , 
That very face that was Antonius' bane . 
That face that to be Egypt's pride was born , 
That face that all the world esteemed so rare : 
Did Herod hate , despise , neglect , and scorn , 
When with the same , he Mariam's did compare . 
This made that I improvidently wrought , 
And on the wager even my life did pawn : 
Because I thought , and yet but truly thought , 
That Herod's love could not from me be drawn . 
But now though out of time , I plainly see 
It could be drawn , though never drawn from me : 
Had I but with humility been graced , 
As well as fair I might have proved me wise : 
But I did think because I knew me cha●te , 
One virtue for a woman , might suffice . 
That mind for glory of our sex might stand , 
Wherein humility and chastity 
Doth march with equal paces hand in hand , 
But one 〈◊〉 ●ingle seen , who setteth by ? 
And I had singl● o●e , but 't is my joy , 
That I was ever innocent , though sour : 
And therefore can they but my life destroy , 
My Soul is free from adversary's power . ) Enter Doris . 
You Princes great in power , and high in birth , 
Be great and high , I envy not your hap : 
Your birth must be from dust : your power on earth , 
In heaven shall Mariam sit in Sara's lap . 


Doris .  I heaven , your beauty cannot bring you thither , 
Your soul is black and spotted , full of sin : 
You in adultery lived nine year together , 
And heaven will never let adultery in . 


Marinell :  What art thou that dost poor Mariam pursue ? 
Some spirit sent to drive me to despair : 
Who sees for truth that Mariam is untrue , 
If fair she be , she is as chaste as fair . 


Doris .  I am that Doris that was once beloved , 
Beloved by Herod : Herod's lawful wife : 
' was you that Doris from his side removed , 
And robbed from me the glory of my life . 


Marinell :  Was that adultery : did not Moses say , 
That he that being matched did deadly hate : 
Might by permission put his wife away , 
And take a more beloved to be his mate ? 


Doris .  What did he hate me for : for simple truth ? 
For bringing beauteous babes for love to him : 
For riches : noble birth , or tender youth , 
Or for no stain did Doris honour dim ? 
O tell me Mariam , tell me if you know , 
Which fault of these made Herod Doris foe . 
These thrice three years have I with hands held up , 
And bowed knees fast nailed to the ground : 
Besought for thee the dregss of that same cup , 
That cup of wrath that is for sinners found . 
And now thou art to drink it : Doris curse , 
Upon thyself did all this while attend , 
But now it shall pursue thy children worse . 


Marinell :  O Doris now to thee my knees I bend , 
That hart that never bowed to thee doth bow : 
Curse not mine infants , let it thee suffice , 
That Heaven doth punishment to me allow . 
Thy curse is cause that guiltless Mariam dies . 


Doris .  Had I ten thousand tongues , and every tongue 
Inflamed with poison's power , and steeped in gall : 
My curses would not answer for my wrong , 
Though I in cursing thee employed them all . 
Hear thou that didst mount Gerarim command , 
To be a place whereon with cause to curse : 
Stretch thy revenging arm : thrust forth thy hand , 
And plague the mother much : the children worse . 
Throw flaming fire upon the base-born heads 
That were begotten in unlawful beds . 
But let them live till they have sense to know 
What 't is to be in miserable state : 
then be their nearest friends their overthrow , 
Attended be they by suspicious hate . 
And Mariam , I do hope this boy of mine 
Shall one day come to be the death of thine . Exit . 


Mariam .  Oh! Heaven forbid . I hope the world shall see , 
This curse of thine shall be returned on thee : 
Now earth farewell , though I be yet but young , 
Yet I , me thinks , have known thee too too long . Exit . 


Chorus .  The fairest action of our human life , 
Is scorniug to revenge an injury : 
For who forgives without a further strife , 
His adversary's heart to him doth tie . 
And 't is a firmer conquest truly said , 
To win the heart , then overthrow the head . 
If we a worthy enemy do find , 
To yield to worth , it must be nobly done : 
But if of base mettle be his mind , 
In base revenge there is no honour won . 
Who would a worthy courage overthrow , 
And who would wrestle with a worthless foe ? 
We say our hearts are great and cannot yield , 
Because they cannot yield it proves them poor : 
Great hearts are tasked beyond their power , but seld 
The weakest Lion will the loudest roar . 
Truth's school for certain doth this same allow , 
High heartedness doth sometimes teach to bow . 
A noble heart doth teach a virtuous scorn , 
To scorn to own a duty overlong : 
To scorn to be for benefits forborn , 
To scorn to lie , to scorn to do a wrong . 
To scorn to bear an injury in mind , 
To scorn a freeborn heart slave-like to bind . 
But if for wrongs we needs revenge must have , 
then be our vengeance of the noblest kind : 
Do we his body from our fury save , 
And let our hate prevail against our mind ? 
What can 'gainst him a greater vengeance be , 
then make his foe more worthy far than he ? 
Had Mariam scorned to leave a due unpaide , 
She would to Herod then have paid her love : 
And not have been by sullen passion swayed 
To fix her thoughts all injury above 
Is virtuous pride . Had Mariam thus been proved , 
Long famous life to her had been allowed . 


Actus quintus . Scoena prima . 

Nuntio .  When , sweetest friend , did I so far offend 
Your heavenly self : that you my fault to quit 
Have made me now relator of her end , 
The end of beauty ? Chastity and wit , 
Was none so hapless in the fatal place , 
But I , most wretched , for the Queen t' choose , 
't is certain I have some ill boding face 
That made me could to tell this luckless' news . 
And yet no news to Herod : were it new , 
To him unhappy 't 'had not been at all : 
Yet do I long to come within his view , 
That he may know his wife did guiltless fall : 
And here he comes . Your Mariam greets you well . 


Enter Herod . Herod .  What ? lives my Mariam ? joy , exceeding joy . 
She shall not die . 


Nun.   Heaven doth your will repel . 


Herod .  O do not with thy words my life destroy , 
I prithee tell no dying-tale : thine eye 
Without thy tongue doth tell but too too much : 
Yet let thy tongue's addition make me die , 
Death welcome , comes to him whose grief is such . 


Nunti.   I went amongst the curious gazing troop , 
To see the last of her that was the best : 
To see if death had hart to make her stoop , 
To see the Sun admiring Phoenix nest . 
When there I came , upon the way I saw 
The stately Mariam not debased by fear : 
Her look did seem to keep the world in awe , 
Yet mildly did her face this fortune bear . 


Herod .  thou dost usurp my right , my tongue was framed 
To be the instrument of Mariam's praise : 
Yet speak : she cannot be too often famed : 
All tongues suffice not her sweet name to raise . 


Nun.   But as she came she Alexandra met , 
Who did her death ( sweet Queen ) no whit bewail , 
But as if nature she did quite forget , 
She did upon her daughter loudly rail . 


Herod .  Why stopped you not her mouth ? where had she words 
To dark that , that Heaven made so bright ? 
Our sacred tongue no Epithet affords , 
To call her other then the world's delight . 


Nun.   She told her that her death was too too good , 
And that already she had lived too long : 
She said , she shamed to have a part in blood 
Of her that did the princely Herod wrong . 


Herod .  Base pickthank Devil . Shame , ' was all her glory , 
That she to noble Mariam was the mother : 
But never shall it live in any story 
Her name , except to infamy I 'll smother . 
What answer did her princely daughter make ? 


Nun.   She made no answer , but she looked the while , 
As if thereof she scarce did notice take , 
Yet smiled , a dutiful , though scornful smile . 


Herald   Sweet creature , I that look to mind do call , 
Full oft hath Herod been amazed withal . 


Nun.   Go on , she came unmoved with pleasant grace , 
As if to triumph her arrival were : 
In stately habit , and with cheefull face : 
Yet every eye was moist , but Mariam's there . 
When justly opposite to me she came , 
She picked me out from all the crew : 
She beckoned to me , called me by my name , 
For she my name , my birth , and fortune knew . 


Herod .  What did she name thee ? happy , happy man , 
wilt thou not ever love that name the better ? 
But what sweet tune did this fair dying Swan 
Afford thine care : tell all , omit no letter . 


Nun.   Tell thou my Lord , said she . 


Herald   Me , meant fl●e me ? 
Is (null) true , the more my shame : I was her Lord , 
Were I not made her Lord , I still should be : 
But now her name must be by me adored . 
O say , what said she more ? each word she said 
Shall be the food whereon my heart is fed . 


Nun :  Tell thou my Lord thou saw'st me lose my breath . 


Herod .  O that I could that sentence now control . 


Nun.   If guiltily eternal be my death , 


Hircius :  I hold her chaste e'en in my inmost soul . 


Nun :  By three days hence if wishes could revive , 
I know himself would make me oft alive . 


Herod .  Three days : three hours , three minutes , not so much , 
A minute in a thousand parts divided , 
My penitency for her death is such , 
As in the first I wished she had not died . 
But forward in thy tale . 


Nun :  Why on she went , 
And after she some silent prayer had said : 
She did as if to die she were content , 
And thus to heaven her heavenly soul is fled . 


Herod .  But art thou sure there doth no life remain ? 
Is (null) possible my Mariam should be dead , 
Is there no trick to make her breathe again ? 


Nun :  Her body is divided from her head . 


Her :  Why yet me thinks there might be found by art , 
Strange ways of cure , 't is sure rare things are done : 
By an inventive head , and willing heart . 


Nun :  Let not my Lord your fancies idly run . 
It is as possible it should beseene . 
That we should make the holy Abraham live , 
Though he entombed two thousand years had been , 
As breathe again to slaughtered Mariam give . 
But now for more assaults prepare your ears , 


Herod .  There cannot be a further cause of moan , 
This accident shall shelter me from fears : 
What can I fear ? already Mariam's gone . 
Yet tell e'en what you will : 


Nun :  As I came by , 
From Mariam's death I saw upon a tree , 
A man that to his neck a cord did tie : 
Which cord he had designed his end to be , 
When me he once discerned , he downward bowed , 
And thus with fearful voice she cried aloud , 
Go tell the King he trusted ere he tried , 
I am the cause that Mariam causeless died . 


Herod .  Damnation take him , for it was the slave 
That said she meant with poisons deadly force 
To end my life that she the Crown might have : 
Which tale did Mariam from herself divorce . 
O pardon me thou pure unspotted Ghost , 
My punishment must needs sufficient be , 
In missing that content I valued most : 
Which was thy admirable face to see . 
I had but one inestimable jewel , 
Yet one I had no monarch had the like , 
And therefore may I curse myself as cruel : 
' was broken by a blow myself did strike . 
I gazed thereon and never thought me blessed , 
But when on it my dazzled eye might rest : 
A precious Mirror made by wondrous art , 
I prized it ten times dearer than my Crown , 
And laid it up fast folded in my heart : 
Yet I in sudden choler cast it down . 
And pashed it all to pieces : ' was no foe , 
That robbed me of it ; no Arabian host , 
Nor no Armenian guide hath used me so : 
But Herod's wretched self hath Herod crossed . 
She was my graceful moiety , me accursed , 
To slay my better half and save my worst . 
But sure she is not dead you did but jest , 
To put me in perplexity a while , 
' were well indeed if I could so be dressed : 
I see she is alive , me thinks you smile . 


Nun :  If sainted Abel yet deceased be , 
't is certain Mariam is as dead as he . 


Her :  Why then go call her to me , bid her now 
Put on fair habit , stately ornament : 
And let no frown o'er shade her smoothest brow , 
In her doth Herod place his whole content . 


Nun :  she 'll come in stately weeds to please your sense , 
If now she come attired in robe of heaven : 
Remember you yourself did send her hence , 
And now to you she can no more be given . 


Herod .  she 's dead , hell take her murderers , she was fair , 
O what a hand she had , it was so white , 
It did the whiteness of the snow impair : 
I never more shall see so sweet a sight . 


Nun :  't is true , her hand was rare . 


Her :  her hand ? her hands ; 
She had not singly one of beauty rare , 
But sueh a pair as here where Herod stands , 
He dares the world to make to both compare . 
Accursed Salome , hadst thou been still , 
My Mariam had been breathing by my side : 
O never had I : had I had my will , 
Scent forth command , that Mariam should have died . 
But Salome thou didst with envy vex , 
To see thyself outmatched in thy sex : 
Upon your sex's forehead Mariam sat , 
To grace you all like an imperial crown , 
But you fond fool have rudely pushed thereat , 
And proudly pulled your proper glory down . 
One smile of hers : Nay , not so much a : look 
Was worth a hundred thousand such as you , 
judea how canst thou the wretches brook , 
That robbed from thee the fairest of the crew ? 
You dwellers in the now deprived land , 
Wherein the matchless Mariam was bred : 
Why grasp not each of you a sword in hand , 
To aim at me your cruel Sovereign's head . 
O when you think of Herod as your King , 
And owner of the pride of Palestine : 
This act to your remembrance likewise bring , 
't is I have overthrown your royal line . 
Within her purer veins the blood did run , 
That from her Grandam Sara she derived , 
Whose beldame age the love of Kings hath won , 
O that her issue had as long been lived . 
But can her eye be made by death obscure ? 
I cannot think but it must sparkle still : 
Fowl sacrilege to rob those lights so pure , 
From out a Temple made by heavenly skill . 
I am the Villain that have done the d●ed , 
The cruel deed , though by another's hand , 
My word though not my sword made Mariam bleed , 
Hircanus' Grandchild did at my command . 
That Mariam that I once did love so dear , 
The partner of my now detested bed , 
Why shine you sun with an aspect so clear ? 
I tell you once again my Mariam's dead . 
You could but shine , if some Egyptian blows , 
Or Aethiopian dowdy lose her life : 
This was , then wherefore bend you not your brows , 
The King of juries' fair and spotless wife . 
Deny thy beams , and Moon refuse thy light , 
Let all the stars be dark , let juries' eye 
no more distinguish which is day and night : 
Since her best birth did in her bosom die . 
Those fond Idolaters the men of Greece , 
Maintain these orbs are safely governed : 
That each within themselves have Gods a piece , 
By whom their steadfast course is justly led . 
But were it so , as so it cannot be , 
They all would put their mourning garments on : 
Not one of them would yield a light to me , 
To me that is the cause that Mariam's go● . 
For though they ●ame their Sa●urne melancholy , 
Of sour behaviours , and of angry mood : 
They ●ame him likewise to be just and holy , 
And justice needs must seek revenge for blood , 
Their jove , if jove he were , would sure desire , 
To punish him that slew so fair a lass : 
For Leda's beauty set his heart on fire , 
Yet she not half so fair as Mariam was . 
And Mars would deem his Venus had been slain , 
Sol to recover her would never stick : 
For if he want the power her life to gain : 
then Physics God is but an Empiric . 
The Queen of love would storm for beauty's sake , 
And Hermes too , since he bestowed her wit , 
The night's pale light for angry grief would shake , 
To se● chaste Mariam die in age unfit . 
But o I am deceived , she passed them all 
In every gift , in every property : 
Her Excellencies wrought her timeless fall , 
And they rejoiced , not grieved to see her die . 
The Paphian Goddess did repent her waist , 
When she to one such beauty did allow : 
Mercurius thought her wit his wit surpassed , 
And Cynthia envied Mariam's brighter brow . 
But these are fictions , they are vo●d of sense , 
The greeks but dream , and dreaming falsehoods tell : 
They neither can offend nor give defence , 
And not by them it was my Mariam fell . 
If she had been like an Egyptian black , 
And not so fair , she had been longer lived : 
Her overflow of beauty turned back , 
And drowned the spring from whence it was derived . 
Her heavenly beauty ' was that made me think 
That it with chastity could never dwell : 
But now I see that heaven in her did link , 
A spirit and a person to excel . 
I 'll muffle up myself in endless night , 
And never let mine eyes behold the light . 
Retire thyself vile monster , worse than he 
That stained the virgin earth with brother's blood , 
Still in some vault or den enclosed be , 
Where with thy tears thou mayst beget a flood , 
Which flood in time may drown thee : happy day 
When thou at once shalt die and find a grave , 
A stone upon the vault , some one shall lay , 
Which monument shall an inscription have . 
And these shall be the words it shall contain , 
here Herod lies , that hath his Mariam slain . 


Chorus .  Who ever hath beheld with steadfast eye , 
The strange events of this one only day : 
How many were deceived ? How many die , 
That once to day did grounds of safety lay ? 
It will from them all certainty bereve , 
Since twice six hours so many can deceive . 
This morning Herod held for surely dead , 
And all the jews on Mariam did attend : 
And Constabarus rise from Salome's bed , 
And neither dreamt of a divorce or end . 
Pheroras joyed that he might have his wife , 
And Babus' sons for safety of their life . 
To night our Herod doth alive remain , 
The guiltless Mariam is deprived of breath : 
Stout Constabarus both divorced and slain , 
The valiant sons of Baba have their death . 
Pheroras sure his love to be bere●t , 
If Salome her suit unmade had left . 
Herod this morning did expect with joy , 
To see his Mariam's much beloved face : 
And yet ere night he did her life destroy , 
And surely thought she did her name disgrace . 
Yet now again so short do humours last , 
He both reputes her death and knows her chaste . 
Had he with wisdom now her death delayed , 
He at his pleasure might command her death : 
But now he hath his power so much betrayed , 
As all his woes cannot restore her breath . 
Now doth he strangely lunatickly rave , 
Because his Mariam's life he cannot save . 
This day's events were certainly ordained , 
To be the warning to posterity : 
So many changes are therein contained , 
So admirably strange variety . 
This day alone , our sagest Hebrews shall 
In after times the school of wisdom call . 


FINIS . 

