The saints rest : or their happy sleep in death . As it was delivered in a sermon at Aldermanburic London , aug 24. 1651.  By Edmund Calamy b. d.  

John ii ii  

our friend Lazarus sleepeth . 

psal. 116. 15.  

precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints . 

London , printed by a. m. anno domini , mdcli . 

The saints rest . 

act. 7. 60. the later part . 

and when be had said this , be fell asleep . 

These words contain in them the happy closure and upshot of Stephen life ; wherein we have three particulars , 1.  The person that fell asleep . 
2.  The speech that he made , when he fell asleep . 
3.  What he did when he had finished his speech . 


first , we have the person that fell asleep , and that was Stephen : he was a man full of faith , and full of the holy ghost , as you May see act . 6.5 . He was the first martyr that ever suffered for the cause of Christ ; hence i Might gather this doctrine , viz.  

that the best of men are subject to violent and unnatural deaths . Stephen that was full of the holy ghost , was stoned to death ; and John the Baptist that was full of the holy ghost from the very womb , was beheaded ; Peter was crucified , and so was Andrew ; Isaiah was sawed asunder ; Teremiah was stored , and Zacharias was slain between the temple and the altar . But i shall pass this . 

The second part of the text , is the speech that Stephen made when he fell asleep , hoc dicto obdermivit , that is , when he had finished his prayer , he fell asleep . hence observe , 

that it is an excellent way to close up our lives with prayer . to die praying is a most Christian way of dying . they stoned Stephen calling upon God . after this manner Christ died , he prayed , father , into they hands i commend my spirit , and having thus said , gave up the ghost . this he did that it Might be a pattern to all Christians . 

Prayer is a necessary duty at all times , but especially when we are a-dying ; and that for these three reasons . 

1.  Because when we are to die , we have most need of good help , for then the devil is most busy , and we most weak . 
2.  Because when we are to die , we are to beg the greatest boon of God , that is , that he would receive us into his heavenly kingdom . Now prayer is the chief means to obtain this mercy , for it is porta coeli , clavis paradisi , the gate of heaven , a key to let us into paradise . Therefore we have great reason to die praying . 
3.  Because when a saint of God is dying , he is then to take his last farewell of prayer . In heaven there is no praying , but all thanks giving ; there is no need in heaven , therefore no prayer in heaven . Now a saint of God , being to take his leave of prayer , when he is to die , therefore it is sit he should die praying . 
I beseech you remember this pattern in the text , st Stephen died calling upon the Lord . Let us die praying , as that Emperor said , oportet imperatorem stantem mori ; so May i say , oportet christianum mori praecantem , it behovesa Christian to die praying . 

quest . but what was the substance of Stephen's prayer ? 

answ. he prayed for himself , and he prayed for his persecutors . 

1.  He prayed for himself , Lord Jesus receive my spirit , ver. 59 . 
2.  He prayed for his persecutors , Lord lay not this sin to their charge , ver. 60 . 
I will not enter upon this part of the text , for it would swallow up all my time . Therefore i shall wave it , and come to the third part , which is that , that ( By God's assistance ) i purpose to speak unto , viz. what Stephen did , when he had finished his prayer , when he had said this , he fell asleep , that is , he died . 

Behold here the magnanimity , the piety , and the Christian courage of Stephen . the persons were stoning of him , and gnashing their teeth upon him ; and the good man dyes with as much quietness of mind , as if he had died in his bed , he fell asleep , while they were stoning him . While he died he prayed , and while he prayed he died . 

But what made Stephen die thus quietly ? Read the 55 . verse , and you shall see the reason of it . being full of the holy ghost , he looked up stead fastly into heaven , and saw the glory of God , and Jesus standing at the right hand of God . Behold , saith he , i see the heavens opened , and the son of man standing at the right hand of God . this made him die with such a sweet , quiet and calm temper ; he saw Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God , ready to receive his soul , and that made him die with such an extraordinary quietness of mind . 

Death in scripture , especially the death of God's children , is often compared to a sleep . It is said of David , that he slept with his fathers . and it is said , i thes. 4.13 , i would not have you ignorant concerning them which are asleep ; that is , concerning them which are dead . And i cor. ii 30 . for this cause many are weakly and sick among you , and many sleep ; that is many die . This expression is a metaphorical expression , and will afford us many rare and precious instructions about death . And therefore ( The grace of God assisting me ) i desire to spend the rest of the time in the opening of this metaphor . 

the observation is this , viz. that when a child of God dyes , though his death he never so unnatural and violent , yet it is nothing else but a falling asleep : or , the death of a child of God , though stoned to death , though burned to ashes , though it be never so violent and unnatural , is nothing else but a falling asleep . when he had said this , he fell asleep . 

Somnus est mortis imago , sleep is the image of death . There are many notable resemblances betwixt sleep and death ; some of which i shall speak unto at this time . 

1.  Sleep is common to all men ; there is no man can live without sleep ; a man May live long without meat , but no man can live long without sleep . So it is true of death , death is common to all , it is appointed for all men once to die : and therefore David said , he was to go the way of all flesh ; statutum est omnibus semel mori , omnibus est calcanda semel lethivia , all men must sleep the sleep of death , or else be changed , which is a metaphorical death . 
2.  As sleep ariseth from the vapours that ascend from the stomach to the head , and tie the senses , and hinder their operations ; so death came into the world by Adam's eating the forbidden fruit , and by the poisonfull vapour of sin , that brought death upon him , and all his posterity . by one man sin entered into the world , and death by sin , and so death passed upon all men , for that all have sinned , rom. 5.12 . Had Adam never sinned , Adam should never have died : but in illo die , said God in that day thou eatest the forbidden fruit thou shalt die the death . sin brings omnimodam mortem , all kinds of death ; it brings death temporal , death spiritual , and death eternal . Now because all men are poisoned with the poison of sin , therefore all men must sleep the sleep of death ; it is sin that hath poisoned all mankind . 
3.  As a man when he goeth to sleep puts off his clothes , and goeth n•ked into bed : so it is with us when we come to die ; we came naked into the world , and we must go naked out of the world ; as we brought nothing with us into the world , so we must carry nothing with us out of the world ; and therefore death in scripture is called nothing else but an uncloathing of ourselves , 2 cor. 5.4 . Death to a child of God , is nothing else , but the putting off of his clothes . The body of man is animae {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} & vestimentum , it is the soul's clothing ; and death is nothing else but the uncloathing of the soul ; it is just like a man going to bed , and putting off his clothes ; st Peter calls it , the putting off our earthly tabernacle , 2 pet. 1.14 . Our bodies are the soul's tabernacle , and death is the putting off of this tabernacle . 
Beloved , when we come to die , we shall be stripped naked of three things , 1.  We shall be stripped naked of all our worldly honour , riches and greatness . 
2.  We shall be stripped naked of our bodies . and 
3.  Which is above all , we shall be stripped naked of our sins . And that is the happiness of a child of God , he shall put off , not only his mortal body , but the body of sin . 
4.  In the fourth place observe , as no man knoweth the time when he false asleep , a man false asleep before he is aware : so no man can tell the certain time when he must die . There is nothing so certain as that we must die , nothing so uncertain as the time when we shall die ; death comes suddenly even as sleep comes upon a man before he is aware . 
5.  Observe , as children and infants , because they do not know the benefit of sleep , are very loathe to go to sleep , many times the mother is fain to whip the child to bed ; even so it is with most of God's persons , because they do not study the benefit of death , that death puts an end to all miseries and sins , and opens a door to let us in unto everlasting happiness , and that we shall never see God or Christ before we die ; i say , because God's persons do not study the benefit of death , therefore they are like to little children , loathe to die , loathe to go to bed . And therefore death is called the King of terrors . death is terrible to many of God's children , because they are but infants in grace , and because they do not know the benefit of death . 
6.  Observe , as when a man is fast asleep , he is free from cares , and free from troubles ; let it thunder ( As it thundered not long since , as you know ) yet a man that is fast asleep , while he is asleep he hears it not ; let the house be on fire , while the man asleep , he sees it not , neither is he troubled at it . So it is with the death of God's children , when God's children sleep the sleep of death , they are free from the thunders of this world , they are free from all cares , from all troubles , they go to their graves as to their beds , and rest in quitness , and are not sensible of any troubles that are in the world , for Abraham knows us not , isa. 63.16 . So 2 king. 22.20 . thou shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace , and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which i will bring upon this place . when a child of God sleeps the sleep of death , he doth not feel , nor is he sensible of any of the calamities or sad providences of God upon the earth . 
7.  When a man goeth to sleep ; he goeth to sleep but for a certain time , in the morning he awakes out of sleep . So it is with the sleep of death ; and therefore death is called a sleep , because we must all awake in the morning of the resurfection . We are in the grave , as in ourbeds , and when the trumpet of God , and the voice of the archangel shall found , we shall all rise out of our grave , as out of our beds . Death is but a sleep for a certain time . 
8.  Sleep is a great refreshing to those that are weary and sick , and when the sick man awakes , he is more lively and cheerful than he was before he fell asleep and therefore sleep is called medicus laborum , redintegratio virium , recreator corporum , the great physician of the sick body , the redintegration of man's spirits , the reviver of the weary body . And so it is with death , when God's persons awake out of the sleep of death , they shall be more active for God , than ever they were before ; when you lie down in the grave , you lie down with mortal bodies ; it is sown a mortal body , it shall rise up an immortal body , it is sown in dishonour , but it shall rise up in honour , it is sown a natural body , but it shall rise up a spiritual body . 
9  As in the morning when we arise out of our beds , we then put on our clothes . So in the morning of the resurrection , we shall put on a glorious body , like to the glorious body of Jesus Christ , we shall put on stolam immortalitatis , the garment of immortality . 
10.  As no man when he layeth him down to sleep , knoweth the direct time when he shall awake . So no man can tell when the resurrection shall be . They do but cozen you , who say , that the general resurrection shall be such or such a year ; for , as no man can know the minute when he shall awake out of his natural sleep , no more can any man know when we shall arise from the sleep of death . 
11.  As it is a very easy thing to awake a man out of sleep , it is but jogging of him , and you will quickly awake him . So it is with the sleep of death , it is as easy for Jesus Christ to awake us out of the sleep of death , as it is for me , or you to awake a man out of sleep in bed . nemo nostrûm tam facilè excitat dormientem de lecto , quàm christus jacentem in sepulchro . 
12.  As when a man ariseth in the morning , though he hath slept many hours ; nay suppose he could sleep twenty years together , yet notwithstanding , when he awakes , these twenty years will seem to be but as one hour unto him . So it will be at the day of judgement , all those that are in their graves , when they awake , it will be tanquam somnus unius horae , but as the sleep of one hour unto them . 
13.  Lastly , and most especially , as sleep seizeth only upon the body , and the outward senses , but doth not seize upon the soul , the soul of man is many times most busy , when the man is asleep ; and God hath heretofore revealed most glorious things to his children in dreams , when they have been asleep ; God appeared unto Abraham and many others in dreams , the body sleeps , but the soul awakes . So it is with the sleep of death , the body , that dyes , but the soul doth not die . There are some men that are not afraid to teach you , that the soul sleeps as well as the body , and that when the body dyes and false asleep , the soul likewise continues in a dull leth•rgy veternoso somno correptus , neither capable of joy nor sorrow , until the resurrection . 


Beloved , this is a very uncomfortable , and a very false doctrine . They endeavour to prove it from my text , they say , that Stephen when he died fell asleep ; it is true in regard of his body , he fell asleep , but his soul did not fall asleep , that which was stoned fell asleep , which was his body only ; for when he was stoning , he saw Jesus Christ standing ready to receive his soul into heaven ; Lord Jesus faith he , receive my spirit . Stephen's soul could not be stoned , though his body was stoned . So when Jesus Christ was crucified , his soul was not crucified , i mean , when his body was killed , his soul was not killed ; indeed he did endure torments in his soul , which made him cry out , my God , my God , why hast thou for me ? But yet his soul did not die . So when Stephen died , his soul went to Christ . It is true , when a child of God dyes , the soul goes to sleep , how is that ? The soul goes to sleep in a scripture-sense , that is , it goes to rest in Abraham's bosom ( O blessed sleep ! ) it goes to rest in the embraces of God , it goes into the arms of its redeemer , it goes to the heavenly paradise , it goes to be always present with the Lord . But take heed of that wicked opinion , to say , that the soul sleeps in an Anabaptistical sense , that is , that it lies in a strange kind of lethargy , neither dead , nor alive , neither capable of joy nor sorrow , until the resurrection . Though Stephen's body fell asleep , yet his soul did not fall asleep , but immediately went unto Jesus Christ in heaven . Thus i have given the explication of the words . 

Now give me leave to make some application of all unto ourselves . 

if the death of God's children be nothing else but a falling asleep , then let this comfort us against the deaths of our godly friends , though they die nnnatural and violent deaths , though they be stoned to death , though they be burned to ashes , though they be sawn asunder , &c.  Here is a message of rich consolation , which as a minister of Christ i hold out unto you this day , viz. that the death of a child of God , let it be after what manner soever it will , it is nothing else but a falling asleep , he goes to his grave , as to his bed ; and therefore our burying places are called {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , dormitoria , our sleeping-house . A child of God , when he dyes he lies down in peace , and enters into his rest . And , as a man , when he is asleep , is free from all the cares and troubles that he hath in the day time ; so the persons of God , when they are fallen asleep , they are free from all the miseries and calamities , crosses , losses and afflictions that we are troubled with all ; therefore give me leave to say to you , as Christ did to the women that followed him to the cross , bewailing and lamenting of him , oh daughters of Jerusalem , weep not for me , but weep for yourselves , and for your children . so say i , o weep not for those that are dead in the Lord , that are fallen asleep in Jesus Christ , they are at their rests , they do not know the troubles that we are troubled with all , Abraham remembers us not ; they are not sensible of our miseries and afflictions , let us weep for ourselves , and for the miseries that are coming upon us ; and let us know , that when God's children die they do but lie in their beds until the morning of the resurrection , and then they shall put on stolam immortalitatis , the garment of immortality , and their bodies shall be made like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ . And know one thing more , which is all in all , viz. that when the body of a child of God false asleep , his soul immediately goes into the arms of Christ , and there lives for ever in the embraces of Jesus Christ ; though the body false asleep , yet the soul is received into Abraham's bosom . I beseech you , comfort one another with these words . 

let me beseech the persons of God that they would look upon death , not as it is presented unto us in nature's looking-glass , but as it is set down in a scripture-dress . Nature presents death in a very terrible manner ; and it is true , death is very terrible to a man out of Christ ; but to you that are in Christ , the sting of death is taken away , death is nothing else but a quiet and placid sleep , putting off of our clothes , and a-going to bed till we awake in the morning of the resurrection . Death to a child of God is nothing else but a putting off his earthly tabernacle . A going from an earthly prison into an heavenly palace , a hoising up sail for heaven . The letting of the soul out of prison , as a bird out of the cage , that it May flee to heaven : a change from a temporary hell to an eternal heaven . A going out of Egypt into Canaan , and therefore called {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 2 pet. 1.15 . is not mors hominis , but mors peccati , not the death of the man , but the death of his sins . It is sepultura vitiorum . it is the pilgrim's journey's end , the seaman's haven ; an absence from the body , and a presence with the Lord . Let all God's persons look upon death through scripture-spectacles , and consider it as it is sweetly represented in this text ! Remember blessed Stephen stoned to death , and yet falling asleep . And remember also that excellent saying of Austin , that a child of God should be as willing to die as to put off his clothes , because death is nothing else to him but a sleep , and a departure from misery to everlasting happiness . 

to beseech you all every night when ye go to bed , to remember this text , and especially to remember these four things . 

First , when you are putting off your clothes , remember that you must shortly put off your bodies . and 

Secondly , when you go into your beds , remember that it will not be long before you must go down into your graves . and 

Thirdly , when you close your eyes to sleep , remember that it will not be long before death 〈◊〉 close your eyes . and 

Fourthly , when you awake in the morning , remember that at the resurrection you must all arise out of the grave , and that the just shall arise to everlasting happiness , but the wicked to everlasting misery . 

It is a saying of an heathen man , that the whole life of a man should be nothing else but meditatio mortis , but a meditation of death . And it is the saying of Moses , deut. 32.29 . oh that men were wise , that they understood this , that they would consider their latter end . beloved , it is the greatest part of wisdom every day to remember our later end ; that man is the only wise man , and happy man in life and death , that is ever mindful of his death . 

but before i make an end , i must answer one question , viz. whether the death of the wicked be not in scripture compared to a sleep , as well the death of the godly ? 

i answer , that wicked men in scripture are said to fall asleep when they die . It is said of idolatrous Jeroboam , that he slept with his fathers . of Baasha and Omri , those wicked Kings , that they slept with their fathers . 

but then the question will be , in what respect is the death of the wicked compared to a sleep ? 

even as a man which is asleep , sometimes hath no benefit , rest nor ease thereby ; when the sick man awakes he is many times more sick than he was before he went to sleep : some men are much disquieted in their sleeps by hideous and fearful dreams ; Nabuchadnezzar when he was asleep , had a most scaring dream , and when he awoke he was amazed there with . So it is with a wicked man ; death to a wicked man is a sleep , but it is a terrifying sleep , the soul that goes immediately to hell , where it is burned with fire that never shall be quenched , and where the worm that never dyes is always gnawing upon it . The body that indeed lies in the grave asleep , but how ? even as a malefactor that sleeps in prison the night before he is executed , but when he awakes he is hurried and dragged to execution ; so the wicked man false asleep in death , but when he awakes , he awakes to everlasting damnation . But now a child of God , when he sleeps the sleep of death , he sleeps in his father's house , and when he awakes , he awakes to everlasting happiness . 

and this makes way for the fourth and last use , which is a use of very great consequence . And it is to beseech you all , that you would labour so to live , that when you fall asleep , you May sleep an happy sleep . There is the sleep that the wicked man sleeps when he dyes , and there is the sleep that the godly man sleeps when he dyes . Now i beseech you , labour so to live , that when you fall asleep , your sleep May be an happy sleep unto you , that when you awake in the morning of the resurrection , it May be an awakening unto you . 

but then the great question will be , how shall i do this ? 

i shall give you four or five helps for this , 

First , if you would sleep an happy sleep at death , than you must labour to sleep in Jesus Christ ; it is said , 1 cor. 15.18 . then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ . and 1 thes 4 14.  if we believe that Jesus died and rose again , even so them also which sleep in Jesus , will God bring with him . what is it to sleep in Jesus ? To sleep in Jesus is to die in the faith of Jesus Christ . 

2.  To sleep in Jesus , is to die with an interest in Jesus Christ , to die as a member of Christ united to him , as our head for you must know , that the dust of a saint is part of that man who is a member of Jesus Christ , and every believer when he sleeps in the dust , he sleeps in Jesus Christ , that is , he lies in the grave , and his dust is part of Christ mystical , and Christ as an head will raise it up , and cannot be complete without it . Now then , if ever you would sleep an happy sleep , labour to get a real interest in Christ , labour to live in Christ while you live . And then , when you fall asleep , you shall be sure to sleep in Jesus . There are many would have Christ to receive their souls at death , and that say with dying Stephen , Lord Jesus receive my spirit : but if ever you would have Christ to receive your souls when you die , you must be sure to receive him into your souls whilst you live , if ever you would have him to receive you into heaven , you must receive him into your hearts . No man makes a will , but he saith , imprimis , i bequeathe my soul unto Jesus Christ my redeemer . But how dost thou know that Jesus Christ will accept of this legacy ? If thy soul hath not Christ's image upon it , if it be not regenerated and renewed , Jesus Christ will never own it ; thou Mayst bequeathe it unto Christ , but the devil will claim it , if thy soul hath the devil's image upon it , if it be a swinish , polluted , unbelieving , unregenerate soul , thou Mayst bestow it upon God , but the devil will recover it out of God's hands , pardon this expression , it is not mine , but st Austin's . beloved , if ever you would reign with Christ when you die , he must reign in you whilst you live : and if ever you would sleep an happy sleep , you must live in Jesus that you May sleep in Jesus . 

Secondly , in the second place , if ever you would sleep an happy sleep at death , than you must take heed of overcharging yourselves with worldly cares . A man that is full of cares cannot sleep , therefore when men would sleep , they lay ( As the proverb is ) all their cares under their pillow , they labour to shut all cares out of their mind : oh take heed that you do not murder your souls by the cares of the world ; beloved , a man that eats out his heart with worldly cares , will never sleep an happy sleep , the cares of the world will choke all the good seed of the word of God ; and therefore , as men when they sleep lay aside all worldly thoughts ; so if ever you would sleep an happy sleep , take heed of overmuch carking and caring for the things of this world ; and remember what you have heard this day , and that will regulate and moderate all your cares , naked you came into the world , and naked you must go out of the world ; why should we we take care for that we know not who shall enjoy after us ? 

Thirdly , if ever you would sleep an happy sleep when you die , you must take heed of sucking too much of the pleasures of this life ; a man that eats a full supper , will sleep very disquietly , therefore they that would sleep quietly use to eat but light suppers ; for when a man's stomach is overcharged , it takes away his sweet sleep from him . So if ever you would sleep an happy sleep when you come to die , oh take heed of sucking too much of the pleasures of this life ; take heed of eating too large a meal of worldly delights , and of creature comforts , these worldly pleasures will make the sleep of death unquiet unto you . Oh let not Dalilah's lap , deprive you of Abraham's bosom ! Remember that David by Bathsheba's embraces , lost the embraces of God , i mean , the sense of the embraces of God , the joy and comfort of them . 

Fourthly , if ever you would sleep an happy sleep in death , then labour to work hard for heaven while you live . Oh how delightful is sleep to a weary man ? When a man hath taken pains all the day , as the traveller that hath traveled all the day , or the ploughman that hath been at work all the day , how quietly , how soundly doth he sleep in the night ? Oh beloved ! If ever you would sleep an happy sleep at death , then labour to work out your salvation with fear and trembling , and give all diligence to make your calling and election sure . The more you labour for heaven the better , the sweeter will your sleep be when you come to die . And remember this , that as much sleeping in the day time , will hinder a man's sleep at night ; so you that idle away the time of your providing for heaven in this your day , you that sleep away the minute upon which eternity doth depend , oh you will have a sad sleep when death seizeth upon you . Take heed therefore of sleeping whilst you live , that so your sleep in the night of death May be comfortable unto you . 

Fifthly , lastly , if ever you would sleep an happy sleep when you die , then take heed of the sleep of sin ; sin in scripture is compared to a sleep , awake thou that sleepest , that is , thou that finnest . Sin is such a sleep as brings the sleep of death . Sin brings the first death , and sin brings the second death ; all miseries whatsoever are the daughters of sin . If you would sleep an happy sleep , and have an happy awakening at the resurrection , then take heed of the sleep of sin , awake thou that sleepest , arise from the dead , and Jesus Christ shall give thee life , ephes. 5 . 14.  So rom. 13.11 , 12 , 13. with which i will conclude ; and i pray you mark it well , for it was a text that converted saint Augustine , knowing the time , beloved , that now it is high time to awake out of sleep , for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed : the night is far spent , the day is at hand , let us therefore cast off the works of darkness , and let us put on the armour of light ; let us walk honestly as in the day , not in rioting and drunkenness not in chambering and wantonness , not in strife and envying , but put you on the Lord Jesus Christ , and make no provision for the flesh , to fulfil the lusts thereof . 

Finis . 





observ. observ. luk. 23.46 . 1 king. 2.10 . doct.  Job 18.14 . i cor. 15.42 , 43.  use i.  luk. 23.27,28  use 2.  use 3.  quest . answ . 1 king. 16.6 , 28.  quest . answ . use 4.  quest . answ . 




















