TIMES PRECIOUS JEWEL , OR , A DIALOGUE between a YOUNGMAN and DEATH . BEING A Seasonable Warning for Youth to Forsake their Sins , and to lead a Religious Life : Left Death Surprise them , and Repentance comes too late . 

This may be Printed , 

R. M.  





ALL FLECH MU DIE 





Youth .  While Youthful Blood is flowing in my Veins 
And Providence Prosperity ordains ; 
The Glory of this World I here will view , 
And her sweet Baits will eagerly pursue : 
I'II search Earth's Bowels , across the roaring Seas , 
I 'll break may rest , nay , forfeit all my ease , 
So I may but arrive to that degree , 
As to enrich my whole Posterity . 


Death .  Forbear fond Youth , and be not so profuse , 
For I am come to bring unwelcome News ; 
Thy tender Thread of Life is at an end , 
Into Eternity thy Soul I 'll send . 


Youth .  What sudden Tidings soundeth in mine Ear ? 
Pray wherefore do you now seem so severe ? 
Forbear a while your Fury fierce and hot , 
I solemnly protest I know you not ; 
Nor did I ever see your Face before , 
Departed I say , come not a near me more . 


Death .  I am the Great Ambassador , called Death , 
Who does deprive all Mortals of their Breath ; 
Where ever I come , there 's none dare say me no , 
And you shall feel my power ever I go : 
Here in my Hand behold my Fatal Dart ! 
Which suddenly shall penetrate thy heart . 


Youth .  Stand back pale Death , do not approach so near 
My Person now , for why , the Case is clear , 
That you so soon was never sent to me , 
Behold I 'm Youthful , Strong and Stout , you see : 
Extend thy spite to those that lies in Tears , 
For I am Youthful , and of tender Years . 


Death .  Thou you are in the Glory of your prime , 
Yet you must hence , 't is your appointed time : 
Where is the brave Victorious Alexander , 
Who in his days was the whole world's Commander 
Where are those Heroes Famed in high Renown , 
Whose Noble Actions merited a Crown ? 
Youth , Beauty , Strength , and Wealth , cannot obtain 
no Favour from me , nor one Minute gain , 
For my Imperial power is from on High , 
God has decreed that thou this day shalt Die ; 
Therefore poor Mortal , do not think to save 
Thyself , by fair Excuses from a Grave . 


Youth .  OH tell me not that I this World shall leave 
So soon , for why , it makes my Soul to grieve ; 
Feign would I live to soar on Wings of Fame , 
To purchase here a long and lasting Name ; 
With Honour here I fain would be possessed , 
Be kind , pale Death , and grant me my Request . 


Death .  Wert thou Adorned with a Royal Robe , 
And was Supreme of all the Earthly Globe , 
And many thousand Knees before you bow , 
Yet I one Minute's time cannot allow ; 
Croesus , whose Gold surpassed the Indian Wealth , 
could not one Minute add unto his Health : 
This failing , shows all things are Transitory , 
Both the World's riches , and its fading Glory ; 
Therefore depend not here on things below , 
But place thy thoughts whereas true riches flow ; 
Lay hold on Faith , Repent thy Sins , for why , 
Thy Glass is run , and thou this day must Die . 


Youth .  Whose Sorrow in the world is like to mine ? 
O ' let me Live my Actions to refine ; 
Here with thy Dart pray do not me affail , 
For longer Life let Youthfulness prevail . 


Death .  I never granted Favour on these terms , 
Thy Youthful Flem shall make a Feast for Worms ; 
Thy dear-bought Soul shall take its flight also , 
To perfect Bliss or Everlasting Woe . 


Youth .  That Word of woe strikes Terror to my Soul , 
A'as ! my Sins are many , gross and soul ; 
OH grant me but a Season to Repent , 
For fear I am to Endless sorrow sent , 
I never thought of this my Dying day , 
But spent in Sin , my precious time away ; 
My former Sins come fresh into my mind , 
OH that I might of thee this favour find , 
To fit myself for thee before I go , 
Pity those Tears that from mine eyes do flow . 


Death .  My Name is 〈…〉 
You must with me , and this vain World forsake ; 
Pray was not you endued with time and space , 
then wherefore did you slight the means of Grace ? 
You knew full well this time would come at last , 
When as your fading Pleasures all were passed ; 
When you were in your full Prosperity , 
You oftentimes beheld Mortality 
In every Street where you were pleased to roam , 
Conveying to their long and lasting home ; 
Methinks the sound of every Passing Bell , 
Might have learned you the way of living well ; 
But now it is too late , and therefore you 
Must hence with me , and bid the world adieu . 


Youth .  My Dying Minute's come , and I must be 
Launched to the Ocean of Eternity ; 
But yet , alas ! my Sins does cause much woe , 
OH that the Lord in love would Favour show ; 
In whom indeed , alone I put my trust , 
thou art both Gracious , Merciful and Just : 
OH pardon me , even for thy Mercies sake ; 
And then with Sighs and Tears his heart did break . 


Both Old and Young that hear these Lines , I pray , 
Prepare yourselves against your Dying day : 
The Youngest Person here , for aught we know ▪ 
May soon be laid down in Grave full owe : 
Our Lives , alas ! are but a blast of breath , 
And there is no Repentance after Death . 


FINIS . 

Printed for R. Kell , at the Sign of the Blue Anchor in Pie-corner , near West-smithfield : 1688.  

