MORTALITY'S MEDITATION : OR , A DESCRIPTION OF SIN . 

With a Definition and plain setting forth of Man's three chiefest and greatest Enemies ; to wit , the WORLD , the FLESH , and the DEVIL . 

Written by WILLIAM HALL. . 

Gutta cadent lapides , non vi sed saepe cadendo : 
Sic homo fit Doctus , non vi sed saepe studendo . 


In English thus : 

By often falling , not by force do rain the stones make soft , 
So man 's made learned not by force , but it 's by studying oft . 


Nemo sine Crimine vivit . 


Imprinted at London , by Aug. Mathewes , for Benjamin Fisher , and are to be sold at his Shop in Paternoster Row , at the Sign of the Talbot . 1624. 

TO THAT COURTEOUS GENTLEMAN , AND MY much respected Friend M. JOHN LOW , junior , Esquire ; WILLIAM HALL. humbly dedicates the Buds and Blossoms of these is first Fruits , wishing all Honour during this Life , and after Death Life eternal . 

I Have presumed to dedicate this Book 
To you ; on which if you 'll vouchsafe to look , 
And if you please kindly to accept it , 
And from all slanderous tongues to protect it ; 
then at your feet I prostrate my Burden , 
If you accept it I have my guerdon : 
In love's unlimited and lawless Band , 
I unto you so far obliged stand , 
That if I should the Age of Nestor live , 
I satisfaction to you should not give , 
For undeserued kindnesses receiving , 
Which makes me thankful whilst i  life & breathing : 
For trusty friends are scarce to be gotten , 
Hard to be kept , but ne'er to be forgotten : 
Amity's chief breach is Ingratitude ; 
But unto that I 'll not be servitude ; 
And in requital of the love I owe , 
My weak Invention on you I 'll bestow : 
Some litterate Pamphlet better you befits ; 
then the Invention of my shallow wits . 
Yet kind Sir read them , although rude they be , 
judge with judicious eyes and you shall see 
My untuned verse ; but yet my Muse is free , 
And so unto the end she means to be : 
I 'll not insinuate , flatter , lie nor feign , 
My wit in Paper ca'nt your worth explain ; 
Still strive with virtue for to be superior , 
Deject and throw down vice as your Inferior : 
Go on in Virtue as you have begun ; 
That godly Race unto the end outrun , 
then shall you be beloved of all good Men ; 
Here stays my Muse , and here shall rest my Pen.  
Your Worships to command in what he may . WILLIAM HALL. . 

To the Courteous and uncourteous Readers . 

Readers , read judge , and then say what you will , 
all 's one to me whether it be good or ill : 
If you speak well , for that I am your Debtor , 
And i● this be not well , I would 't were better : 
But if you speak ill of it , all is one , 
To cry you mercy , I 'll never make my moan , 
For ill men's tongues they say no slanders are , 
Therefore say what you will and do not spare . 
I must confess my Muse is young and tender , 
And this is all he 'scuse that I can render , 
This is the first time she did ever write ; 
Therefore with currish words do not her bite . 
lest in her budding you do spoil her growth , 
If that you should do so I should be loath : 
Give her no ill words with good words her nourish , 
That she in time may grow , and bud , and flourish . 
Yours , as you are his : WILL : HALL. . 

THE AUTHOR TO HIS BOOK . 

Now Farewell Book , travel the Word so wide , 
Having no Tutor , Truths thy only guide : 
From envious tongues Truth will still defend thee , 
To good and bad men's judgements I commend thee . 
Mortality's Meditation , or a Description of Sinne.  

1 

I That as yet ne'er tasted one poor drop , 
Of the Castalian Liquor ; nor as yet 
Did ere mine eyes behold Parnassus' top : 
How should my understanding then beget , 
Nay , or begin and frame my Pen to write , 
Since I myself knows not how to indite . 
2 

Your help , O sacred Muses , I must crave , 
But not the blotting of Apollo's P●n , 
By any means I must , nor will not have , 
But simply of mine own invention then ; 
And industry some simple work I 'll make , 
Since I have gone thus far to undertake . 
3 

Cicero I want thy learned eloquence , 
And Mars thy stout and valiantness of heart ; 
And likewise Sol thy shining influence , 
To accommodate me and to take my part . 
Against envious tongues that seek to shame me , 
And belying me ofttimes do defame me . 
4 

My Ink congeals , unwilling to fulfil , 
My Hand unsteady , Palsie-like doth shake : 
My Memory is dull , and I want skill , 
For to set forth that which my Mind should speak : 
Obliviousnesse doth so my Brains possess , 
That what I should , I forget to express . 
5 

Of Tilts and Triumphs my Muse shall not sing , 
Ne wars nor wonders wrought within the air 
Nor how Tamburlaine did Bajazet bring , 
Conquered by him in the Turkish war : 
And carried by him in ●n Iron Cage , 
To be a Spectacle unto that Age.  
6 

Nor yet of ancient Stories will I write ; 
Nor travellers that go beyond the Cope , 
As did Parismus , Huon and the like ) 
Nor such as sacrifice unto the Pope : 
Hellhounds they are that deny their Maker , 
The Devil's friends , but the Lords forsaker . 
7 

But of a meaner Subject will I treat , 
That which I know is true I will reveal ; 
And all the Follies of my Youth repeat : 
there 's nothing hidden that I will conceal : 
And rip the target of my troubled heart , 
Which long have caused my wounded soul to smart . 
8 

And having then laid open to your sight , 
A Map of all my foul enormous Crimes , 
Committed both by day and eke by night 
In all places , all seasons , at all times : 
Now I 'll begin my doleful Song to sing , 
And hope the same to good effect to bring . 
9 

But if I fail , I pray spare not to judge , 
But pass your censures on me how you will ; 
I care not though you owe to me a grudge , 
Speak what you will I care not good or ill : 
Now once again my song I will begin , 
no Song of Songs : but it 's a Song of Sinne.  
10 

For since the time that I was first conceived 
Within the womb and entrailss of my Mother ; 
Before I was into the world received 
Sin was my Father , Sister , and my Brother : 
Being born in sin , in sin I lived still , 
And unto pleasure only gave my william  
11 

Who urged and pricked me always to go forward , 
And follow still the same I had begun ; 
Saying , I was a goodly Child and toward ; 
But yet this pleasure I did seek to eat : 
Who lulled and rocked my senses fast asleep , 
Which since hath caused me many times to weep : 
12 

To see that pleasure overcame me so , 
For I no Reason had it to withstand : 
But when I saw it was my deadly foe , 
I would no longer live at her Command : 
But threw her slavish yoke from off my neck , 
And then began my follies for to check . 
13 

Which long time had bereft me of my sight , 
That I at no time any good could see ; 
It kept me under in most slavish spite , 
Until the Lord was merciful to me , 
Opening my eyes to me the way did show , 
That I must walk the Gospel for to know . 
14 

then I began the English tongue to learn , 
My vowels and my Letters for to spell ; 
And in mine years I somewhat could discern , 
How Latin writers English do excel : 
Who can compare with Horace , Virgil , and 
Homer , which hath all under his command . 
15 

In which mine years I many sins committed , 
Through ignorance against my Sovereign Lord , 
All those I hope through Christ are clean remitted , 
As also those were done by my accord : 
As I to knowledge afterwards increased , 
Sinning I sinned , from sinning I ne'er ceased . 
16 

But still provoked the Lord of Hosts to ire , 
And had no care his Statutes to obey ; 
The Stipend due for sinners is hell fire , 
And those that from their Maker run astray , 
Let them be sure to feel his scourging Rod , 
He is a just , a wise , and loving God.  
17 

The death of Sinners he doth not desire , 
But that they would return and follow grace ; 
it 's true repentance that he doth require , 
That they may see his glory face to face : 
And praise his glorious name with one accord , 
With singing Halleluiah to the Lord  
18 

My Infancy and Childhood being past , 
My Youth and Manhood posting on with speed , 
Still I my faults and sins behind me cast : 
And would not see them until utmost need 
Compelled me from this wicked kind of life , 
Where was continual wars and deadly strife . 
19 

Betwixt my Spirit always ready pressed 
For God's Service contrary to evil ; 
And my weak flesh continually oppressed , 
Having conflicts with the World and Devil : 
Being thus bagirt with foes on every side , 
Unto thy mercy Seat I come to hide . 
20 

My senses are inveloped in sin , 
The weight whereof into Hell would sink me , 
When on the wicked life I have lived in , 
And Hell's torments I begin to think me : 
O how I am perplexed with grief of mind , 
My troubled Conscience can no comfort find . 
21 

With David now I am enforced to cry , 
I am a worm of men the very scorn , 
My help on thee OH Lord doth still rely , 
And have done ever since that I was born : 
In time of old age off do me not cast ; 
Nor yet when strength doth fail me at the last . 
22 

The Sabbaths which thou unto us dost give , 
Commanding us it holy for to keep , 
Given as a sign , or else we should not live 
amongst the flock of thy elected sheep : 
Who so defiles thy Sabbaths' sure shall die , 
Wert not for mercy Lord , even so should I  
23 

For I thy Sabbaths often have profaned , 
And spent them vildly to thy abusing ; 
Against thy holy name I have exclaimed , 
Under colour of my faults excusing : 
I went to Church God's holy word to hear , 
But was exempt from all Paternal fear . 
24 

The subtle Serpent , subtler than the rest , 
Of all the beasts which the Lord God did make , 
He cunningly doth creep into my breast , 
And the good sown seed away doth take : 
Pleasures of Sin also choke many seeds , 
Which ne'er sprung up pulled down by vicious weeds . 
25 

I looked for Sundays to no other end , 
But take my pleasure in pastime and play , 
In doing so I was not my own friend , 
The aged Counsel I would not obey : 
But ran at pleasure to drink and carouse , 
In some by place , or in some tippling house . 
26 

I cared not where if that I liquor had , 
For to content and please my fianticke Brain , 
I cared not greatly where 't were good or bad , 
If so I were in a right roaring strain ; 
A roaring strain , yea that 's the term we used , 
Whereby God's day and name was much abused , 
27 

Yet in this Sin I never was alone , 
But had Copartners always less or more ; 
For them , and I , and all , I make great moan , 
And pray that they , nor I do so no more : 
Who so doth use it , let him mark me well , 
it 's both the Highway and the Gate to Hell.  
28 

This sin is odious in jehovahs' sight , 
He doth abhor the person and the Crime , 
With th'instrumentall means that gave them light , 
Also the place , the season and the time : 
Yet some do seek this sin for to extenuate , 
But yet it doth the users' life abreviate . 
29 

Who hath woe , babbling , sorrow , who hath strife , 
But those that follow wine and drink their fill ? 
Of wine that 's mixed , ohtis a drunken life , 
To spend their days so wicked and so vile : 
Let them be sure God will strike home at last , 
Though he forbear his anger is not past . 
30 

With true repentance Lord I come to thee , 
And hearty sorrowing for my former sin ; 
In mercy Lord vouchsafe to look on me , 
To lead a new life now I will begin : 
Grant me thy grace I beseech thee therefore , 
My idle ways I may hate and abhor . 
31 

Forgive me Lord the sins I have committed , 
Against thee both in word , in deed , and thought , 
Having done evil but the good omitted , 
Which in thy sacred Scriptures thou hast taught : 
Godly repentance worketh to salvation , 
Whereby we shall be freed from condemnation . 
32 

Forgive me Lord , for mercy now I call , 
Blot out my sins , no more them think upon ; 
Before thy Mercy seat I prostrate fall , 
And beg thee bury them in oblivion : 
Mercy good Lord , mercy , I mercy crave , 
Hoping through Christ that thou my soul wilt save . 
33 

Farewell all sinful pleasures of my youth , 
Thrice farewell to the exercise I have used : 
Which long hath caused me to err from the truth , 
Both God contemned and his Laws abused : 
Farewell I say ; thrice farewell and adieu , 
Too long God knows I have been led by you . 
34 

For twenty years and upward I have led , 
A wicked life displeasing unto God ; 
On worldly vanities I have still fed , 
For which I do do serve Gods scourging Rodriguez : 
Except his Mercy , his justice overcome , 
I must expect a dismal day of Doom . 
35 

My life was sinful Lord I do confess it , 
Spare them OH Lord that do their faults confess ; 
As it was sinful now I will redress it , 
And from those errors ever will I cease , 
then mercy on me take , hear my complaint , 
Of a vild Sinner make me a glorious Saint . 
36 

Being with sin polluted and defiled , 
Which can't be cleansed without Christ his blood ; 
( In whose sight I a Sinner am most vild ) 
Which was shed for us all to do us good ; 
Yea for us all which in time do repent . 
That we Gods future anger may prevent . 
37 

There is no bondage like to that of Sin , 
Where neither Body nor yet mind is free , 
To slavish servitude we are kept in , 
When as our Souls bereft of liberty : 
From that bondage good Lord deliver me , 
That I may sing continual praise to thee . 
38 

My Soul from out of prison Lord then bring , 
As David prayed in like wise do I , 
Thy Song in a strange Land how can I sing , 
I would be set at freedom willingly ; 
Freedom each Creature gladly doth require , 
And to be free from sin is my desire . 
39 

Three enemies we have with all to fight , 
Which do incite us evil to commit , 
Yea they suggest us all ways day and night , 
That the good which we should do we omit : 
We commit nothing but that which is evil , 
These three are , the World , the flesh and Devil . 
40 

The World enticeth us to pleasures vain , 
That momentary things we more respect , 
then that which do belong Heaven to gain , 
Those things we altogether do neglect : 
We spend our time , or study and our wit , 
To that which turns not to our benefit . 
41 

Our greatest care is how to gather wealth , 
To purchase Land , to rise unto promotion ; 
At no time we take care for our Souls health , 
Nor to serve God with any good Devotion : 
That which by us should chiefly be respected , 
Continually by us is still neglected . 
42 

We strive for honour , follow after pleasure , 
Paul's exhortation seldom we obey , 
As for Decorum we keep little measure , 
Our chief delight 's in pride and going gay : 
Having good clothes that we go neat and fine , 
We take no care how many Bodies pine . 
43 

David describeth how vain man doth waste , 
And to a shadow he doth him compare , 
Which is no sooner seen but staight its past , 
So frail , so fickle , and so weak we are : 
We gather wealth which turns to our annoy , 
But yet know not who shall it enjoy . 
44 

The Lilies of the field , consider how 
They get their living , for they never spin ; 
Nor once take pains their Bodies for to bow , 
At no time they do any work begin : 
Yet Solomon being a mighty King , 
Such clothing as this was he could not bring . 
45 

What are become of those that hoard up Gold , 
And of their gettings never make an end ? 
Still scraping wealth until it can't be told , 
But yet they know not who the same shall spend : 
Vanished they are and gone down to the grave , 
Others come up their riches for to have . 
46 

Who will it spend faster than 't was gotten , 
When as their means do come into their hand ; 
Those friends that it gave shall be forgotten , 
To purchase apparel they will pawn their Land : 
they 'll sell their credit all what ere they have , 
But they will have clothes to go neat and brave . 
47 

The son of Syrach pointeth at the pride , 
And vain excess of apparel in our days : 
Decking ourselves much good time we let slide , 
And spend it all to jehovahs' dispraise , 
Pride will reign in some men do what they can , 
it 's a sin hated both of God and man  
48 

To boast in raiment is ' 'gainst God a fault , 
Knowing we are but worm ▪ s meat and dust ; 
Likewise in honour ourselves to exalt , 
Neither in strength we ought not put our trust : 
Help us good tord in trouble and in pain , 
As for the help of man it is but vain . 
49 

th' apostle wills us for to be content , 
And not for worldly wealth to care and crack , 
It is enough if we have food and raiment , 
What need we then for drossy pelf to rake ? 
Considering as we here this wealth did find , 
We must depart and leave it all behind . 
50 

From the meanest Caitive to the mightiest King , 
That ever breathed , or on the earth did reign : 
Into this world nothing at first did bring , 
And sure shall carry nothing forth again : 
Except a Coffin and a winding sheet , 
Tied with two knots , one at the head and feet 
51 

To many errors the world doth us lead , 
Which for to follow we are apt you see ; 
But in the path of Virtue we ne'er tread , 
We run the Race when once the raines let free , 
Of lustful youth we swagger , lie and swear , 
And with blasphemous oaths the Lord we tear . 
52 

We ought to tremble when God's name we hear , 
And not blaspheme him , nor against him spew : 
Such Oaths that stink before him ( I do fear , 
I write no more than what is too to true : ) 
We still blaspheme him , and we forget how 
At 's name each knee in heaven & earth shall bow . 
53 

For four causes God bestows on men , 
riches to use , as goods unto them lent , 
They must leave all behind but knows not when , 
And therefore care not how their time be spent : 
Th'vnthrifty will spend all in Prodigality , 
But the old Miser none in hospitality . 
54 

The first is for the honour of God's name , 
And propagation of God's holy word , 
Still to continue and preserve the same , 
That we may praise his name with one accord , 
And that the splendent light of this clear Sun , 
May always shine but yet be never done . 
55 

The second use for which our goods were given , 
Is for to spend it for our Country's sake ; 
By our wealth others might be relieven , 
With it a freedom or releasement make : 
We ought to spend our goods , our lives , our blood , 
In any thing to do our Country's good . 
56 

Is for the good of those by whom we live , 
That are in need , necessity , and want ; 
To them part of our means we ought to give , 
And to relieve them if their store be scant : 
Yea to strengthen with all our power , 
And to refresh their bodies every hour . 
57 

The last is for the maintenance of those 
Which are our servants , yea and for us all ; 
Yea for ourselves we may think and suppose , 
And for all others that on him do call : 
Opening his hand each living thing doth fill , 
With plenteousness according to his william  
58 

Saint John exhorts us from this worldly love , 
And not to love it nor the things therein , 
Yea , very plainly , he the same doth prove , 
That whatsoe'er is of the world is sin : 
then of this enemy we must beware , 
That he at no time do our Souls ensnare . 
59 

How many Dives at this time have we , 
Which do far most deliciously each day ; 
In Purple and fine Linen we them see , 
Being bravely clad in Robes and rich array : 
These Silkworms many Lazarus will starve . 
Rather than with their scraps they will them serve . 
60 

The second Enimie's our fleshly Lust , 
And always fresh assaults with him we have , 
Unto ourselves therefore we must not trust , 
But fly to Christ , i●●● he our Soul must save : 
Who conquered hath the grave , yea death , and hell , 
All our adversaries for to expel . 
61 

Each sense and member festered is with sin , 
Yea and corrupted in jehovas' sight : 
Such an infectious time we do live in , 
And this sin serpentlike doth us so bite , 
Even as a scurf doth o'er man's body spread , 
So soul and bodies with sin's pestered . 
62 

Our bodies to sin are so linked and chained , 
Every sense of Virtue is be reft . 
And Viciousness in us so long hath Reigned , 
So little goodness in us there is left , 
Turning from God , we are Christ's sinful abjects , 
But unto Satan very loving subjects . 
63 

From top to toe we are with sin Closd fast , 
That in us there is no whole part nor sound , 
Our breath infects the Air at each blast , 
Our feet unworthy to tread on the ground : 
Sin doth Reign in us and about us Round , 
Is naught but sinfullnesse for to be found . 
64 

Our head is the Receptakle of sins , 
And first receiver of ungodly deeds , 
Yea the head Fountain where all vice begins , 
Upon man's body greedily it feeds : 
And like the horseleech still doth cry give , give , 
Seldom forsaking men whilst they do live . 
65 

Our memory with dulness is possessed , 
Especially in hearing of thy word ; 
For that we seek not which should please thee best , 
But follow vanity with one accord : 
We quite forsake that which being understood , 
At present time would prove our future good . 
66 

Our eyes spectators on iniquity , 
The gate and entrance to the inward man ; 
Delight we take to gaze on vanity , 
But seldom satisfied do what we can : 
We greedily desire what we do see , 
Longing to have it although ill it be . 
67 

Our eyes should be employed to better use , 
The sacred Scripture with them we should read ; 
But oft we do neglect and still refuse , 
The way that we a godly life might lead : 
We run the way that is composed of evil , 
Following which path we walk unto the Devil . 
68 

Our ears are open blasphemies to hear , 
And all revile ' 'gainst God's holy name , 
And 'gainst his Christ which all our sins did bear , 
To free us from that everlasting pain : 
To us belongeth both shame and confusion , 
To which we are led by Satan's illusion . 
69 

Like the deaf Adder we do stop our ears , 
Yea deaf and dumb almost ourselves we fain , 
The Charmers voice we do refuse to hear , 
Charm whilst he will his charming is in vain : 
Though he charm wisely we don 't it respect , 
He and his charming both we do neglect . 
70 

To talk of riches , of wealth and glory , 
To hear of news of merriment and sport , 
To pass our time in things transitory , 
To this whole flocks of people will resort : 
With great attention all will harken to it , 
Though it be ill actors enough to do it . 
71 

Our mouth the Chamber of ungodliness , 
Our lips the Roof which doth that hose cover ; 
Through which all emitable beastliness , 
Proceedeth forth which doth our lives discover : 
And shows the wicked life we have lived in , 
Which to amend we never do begin . 
72 

Our teeth's a hedge fos that unruly member , 
Which do we what we can it will break out ; 
To have a care of him we must remember , 
For in vain he too fast will run about , 
The tongue is a good member if well used , 
But it 's the worst we have if that abused . 
73 

That godly Prophet holy David says , 
As with a bit he will his mouth keep fast ; 
Look to his tnngue take heed unto his ways , 
And speak not till the wicked ones be passed : 
Yea from good words he also did refrain , 
Although to him it was both grief and pain . 
74 

Scurrility we always ought to fly , 
And not with cursings once our mouths defile ; 
All beastly idle talk and blasphemy , 
We from our mouths should utterly exile : 
Paul doth will us lying to put away , 
And each man to his neighbour truth to say . 
75 

it 's written we a just account must give 
Of every idle word that we do speak ; 
But yet alas how vainly do we live , 
And never care how we Gods Statutes break : 
For by our words we justified shall be , 
Or else condemned to live in misery . 
76 

A righteous mouth is like a Well of life , 
From the which many godly streams do flow ; 
A wicked mouth is always filled with strife , 
Which naught but wrath and violence doth show : 
Knowing the best , the same we ought to choose , 
And from the worst refrain and it refuse . 
77 

Every member of us that 's within 
With wickedness is so replete and stuffed ; 
We are so soon tempted unto each sin , 
And with security we be so puffed : 
If we consider how we are oppressed , 
We never should live quiet , nor at rest . 
78 

Sin is a foe external and internal , 
Eternally hereafter it will shame 
And bring us into the Lake infernal , 
Which still do burn in continual flame : 
Both souls and bodies shall be there tormented , 
If in life time our sins be not repent . 
79 

Truth thou requirest in the inward parts , 
We should perform as much as in us lies ; 
create in us both new and contrite hearts , 
Such ones ( OH Lord ) which thou wilt not despise 
Grant we may be amongst the sheep elected , 
And not amongst the Goats to be rejected . 
80 

Our hearts are harder than an Adamant , 
God's Law nor word we at no time will hear , 
So obdurate that we cannot recant 
Our wicked life , nor of God stand in fear : 
We ne'er obey but disobey him still , 
And do provoke to wrath God's holy william  
81 

Yet God is just in all that hath been done , 
Unto us sinners every thing is right , 
But we contemned have God and his son , 
And wickedly have we done in his sight : 
Yet Lord forgive us our sins we thee pray , 
Thy heavy hand of justice from us stay . 
82 

Our mind so elevated is with pride , 
one selfe-conceipt doth puff us up on high , 
Our equals and inferiors we deride , 
Against our betters ofttimes we inveigh : 
What we affect to be good we approve , 
Though it be hurtful , yet the same we love . 
83 

Modesty is a bridle to rain back 
This swift winged pride swifter than a swallow , 
Our appetite to it we should keep slack ; 
For if we give way sure it will follow : 
If that we let it run his full Career , 
o'er souls and bodies it will donineere . 
84 

What things we do we must of it esteem , 
So that in it no pride at all we take ; 
Better than we are we ought not to deem 
Ourselves ▪ but from all errors to awake : 
He that thinks himself wise in 's own conceit , 
Doth like a fool fill his heart with deceit . 
85 

Humility a curb to keep us in , 
Much like a Snaffle , nay rather a Bit , 
Which doth withhold us from that deadly sin , 
And keep us that we do not it commit : 
Who humbleth himself like unto a Child . 
Of Heaven's joys shall not be beguiled . 
86 

Like weaned Children we should us behave , 
Have no proud looks , nor yet no scornful mind ; 
If that we do intend our souls to save , 
These misdemeanours we must cast behind : 
Our smallest thoughts on it we must not spend , 
On Elohim should all our hope depend . 
87 

The pleasures of the flesh are manifold , 
Yea numberless they cannot be accounted ; 
Which causeth all to sin both young and old , 
Our sins the sands in number have surmounted : 
In number more than the hairs of our head , 
Such an impious Course of life we have led . 
88 

Now having thus described each several sense , 
Throughout man's body in which sin doth reign ; 
Which oft is coloured under good pretence , 
Of godliness from which we do refrain : 
We take no pains nor care the Lord to serve , 
The lest of 's mercies we do not deserve . 
89 

We never thank God for what he hath done , 
Creating us after his Image right ; 
And redeeming us with Christ his dear Son , 
To sanctify us with his holy Spirit : 
By our works we expect justification , 
And after death we hope glorification . 
90 

My Muse to the last enemy is come , 
With much ado the other two are past ; 
My scantling glass of time is almost run , 
Time is soon gone , yet comes again as fast : 
Lord I beseech thee guide my heart and hand , 
This cunning Adversary to withstand . 
91 

Satan did tempt our Parents first of all , 
And the forbidden fruit caused them to eat : 
Eating this fruit it brought 's all into thrall , 
Our misery no tongue can half repeat : 
Deceiver-like he said ye shall not die , 
To which they condescended willingly . 
92 

And eat the fruit forbidden of the Lord , 
He first unto the woman did it give , 
She to her Husband , thus with one accord 
Both sure of death though promised to live : 
By his enticements he them both alured , 
By which he their eternal woe procured . 
93 

Against the feebler Sex his Rage is shown , 
The woman he did first of all attempt ; 
Thus his deceit was at the first made known , 
Yet from seducing he would not exempt , 
Nor free himself ; but like an old deceiver , 
Of Soul and Bodies good he 's a bereaver . 
94 

he 's always ready for to lay his baits 
To catch all silly Souls and to ensnare 
Them in his subtle and deceiving slights ; 
For to withstand him then we must prepare , 
We cannot him resist do what we can ; 
Help us Lord , for vain is the help of Man  
95 

Our Saviour's presence he did not refrain , 
With proffered show of worldly wealth and pleasure ; 
This worldly pleasure he did clean disdain , 
Having God's word far better than all treasure : 
Satan did tempt , yea reattempt again , 
And thrice deui'de before he would refrain . 
96 

In thousand shapes he will to us appear , 
What we command him he will that fulfil ; 
Invisible , we ca'nt him see nor hear , 
Yet soon will be obedient to our will : 
Of our desire we shall not fail or miss , 
On the condition that we will be his . 
97 

To any thing he 'll tempt us that is ill , 
Each motion that is good he 'll from us put ; 
With idleness allure us he will still , 
Our thoughts in ignorance he close will shut : 
And blind us from the love of God the highest , 
he 's a Deceiver and an Antichrist . 
98 

He often will insinuate into 
Our heads , our thoughts , our hearts for to offend ; 
God , King , and Country , all for to undo , 
In whose defence our dear blood we should spend : 
Against ourselves he our own selves will set , 
For to destroy us if we have no let . 
99 

He will attempt us for to hang ourselves , 
Whereby Gods heavy wrath we do procure ; 
To die in such a case like desperate clues , 
A curse denounced against all its sure : 
Yea against all that do this sin commit , 
God grant we may have grace to witstand it . 
100 

Sometime he tempts us when we are asleep , 
With false deluding and deceitful dreams ; 
To drench ourselves in some vast Ocean deep , 
And lose our lives in one of Neptune's streams : 
God did it give , it 's he that must it take , 
A Satan's sacrifice we must not make . 
101 

Of our own bodies or of any other , 
If Satan do entice us for to murder ; 
Our dearest friends , our Sister , or our brother , 
To do wicked deeds he will us further : 
With hearty prayers we must it prevent , 
Think not on future time , but on th' event . 
102 

And what will follow after shedding blood , 
Especially of those whom God doth love : 
That we ne'er had been born it had been good , 
then to provoke the holy one above : 
And grieve his holy Spirit which did seal 
Us to salvation if we have true zeal . 
103 

A murderer from the Original 
Belzebub is , the truth he doth abhor ; 
Also of lies he is the principal , 
And is to be of us abhorred therefore , 
Because that in the truth we should rejoice , 
And laud the Lord both with our hearts and voice . 
104 

He can transform himself to any shape , 
His cunning purposes for to obtain ; 
Unto the likeness of a Bear or Ape , 
And then that likeness can again regain : 
And change himself perchance to some Creature , 
He is of such a variable nature . 
105 

Like a Chameleon quickly he can change 
His dark and obscure form both clear and bright : 
Throughout the spacious Orb he still doth range , 
And turns himself to an Angel's shape of light ; 
Prince of the Air he is called likewise , 
Which works in those that do the Lord despise . 
106 

To malice , pride , and anger he 'll provoke 
Us unto drunkenness and lechery ; 
All Godly thoughts in us he sure will choke , 
And stir us up to wrath and treachery : 
To play the Prodigal and the unthrift , 
To win our souls to him is all his drift . 
107 

Each bait for vice is hidden under pleasure , 
Which greedily we follow and pursue ; 
And wickedness we work beyond measure , 
We ne'er regard , nor think what will ensue : 
So that of pleasure we may have our fill , 
We do not care although our souls it spill . 
108 

Under the honest show of cleanliness , 
Pride walketh masked yet all men may it see ; 
Old gripping , carking raking covetousness , 
Is called of every cloth good Husbandry , 
In the superlative degree they swear , 
As if the Devil should them rend and tear . 
109 

My brethren saith Saint james swear not at all ▪ 
nether by Heaven nor yet by the Earth , 
Nor any Oath that may our souls enthral , 
When ever Mors doth come to stop our breath , 
Yea , yea , nay , nay , are the oaths we should call , 
Lest into condemnation we fall . 
110 

Thus Swearing is the Devil's instrument , 
On of the loud'st alarms he can found ; 
Likewise the Devil Pride did first invent , 
The first Author of any sin that 's found : 
he 's the first founder of iniquity , 
And the Original of all antiquity . 
111 

We must assault this seven headed beast , 
Having ten horns ; yet not with dint of sword , 
Ne Lance nor Spear ( deceiving he 'll ne'er rest ) 
He must be conquered by God's holy word : 
A Christians Armour than we must put on , 
And take a Christians courage us upon . 
112 

Our Loins with truth they must be girded well , 
Of Righteousness we must have the breastplate , 
With preparation of the Gospel , 
Our feet must be shod , eschewing all hate : 
The shield of Faith , laying aside all evil , 
To quench the fiery Darts of the Devil . 
113 

Also the Helmet of Salvation , 
The spiritual sword the Word of God ; 
Still praying with Prayer and Suppplication , 
That God would turn away his scoerging Rod , 
And all our misdeeds utterly deface , 
Blot out our sins they ne'er may come in place . 
114 

Neither in this world us for to accuse , 
Nor in the world to come us to condemn ; 
The death of Christ will all our sins excuse , 
And his Bowels bury all and some : 
And being then from servile sin made free , 
True servants of righteousness we might be . 
115 

This old deceiver will us not yet leave , 
So long as there is any spark of life ; 
In our bodies he will our Souls deceive , 
Till death doth cut it with his fatal knife : 
Oft-times in sickness he will some molest : 
With terrors which are not to be expressed . 
116 

This is the Dragon which would us devour , 
This is the Serpent which did Eve beguile ; 
This is the roaring Lion which each hour , 
This he that seeks t' ensnare us with his wile : 
This is the father of falsehood and lies , 
The worker of our woes and miseries . 
117 

Peter commands us to be vigilant , 
This deadly Adversary to withstand ; 
him to resist with force and to be valiant , 
Our souls and bodies against him to band : 
And reunite our forces altogether , 
Yea to defy him still we must persever . 
118 

If these ungodly sins we follow still , 
And the inticers of them do obey ; 
And follow it : in Folio we shall fill 
A Volume great compiled against that day , 
In which one good deed done will profit more 
Than thousands of Gold hoarded up in store . 
119 

And having served these Masters whilst we live , 
far worse than slaves by them we are kept under ; 
Yet unto them by no means we shall give , 
One inch of leave ; for they are ne'er asunder : 
To work our bodies or our soul's annoy , 
They do incite themselves both to destroy . 
120 

Our worldly pleasures little will avail , 
Our fleshly lusts will nothing help at all ; 
Our hoarded wealth will naught at all prevail , 
When we are summoned by deaths fatal call : 
Who uncertain yet certain will meet us , 
And with , Sir I arrest you , it will greet us.  
121 

Like a bold Sergeant with his Maze in 's fist , 
Not to be daunted , for death no man fears ; 
Who can resist him then , not he that list , 
The rich man's threats , nor yet the widow's tears : 
he 's unrelenting for he never respects , 
Rich , poor , fair , foul , he all to grave dejects . 
122 

he 's so impartial that he none will spare , 
Both young and old , yea all death will surprise ; 
For fatherless nor Orphans he doth care , 
Weep whilst they will he ne'er regards their cries : 
Death is the wages that is due for sin , 
Which all our life time we have lived in . 
123 

Certain death will come , we must expect it , 
The time and place God hath from us concealed ; 
Is 't fit for us therefore for to neglect it , 
Because our day of death is not revealed : 
We should think on it and premeditate , 
Before it come and ourselves consolate . 
124 

Against the time that death will us deprive , 
Of all this worldly pleasure we enjoy ; 
It is in vain to withstand him or strive 
Against him : for he soon can us destroy : 
And change us as is God's decree we must , 
Be turned into ashes and to dust . 
125 

Death is the deprivation of Life , 
Ordained by God , imposed on man for sin ; 
A punishment which endeth all our strife , 
Due unto us since Life did first begin : 
And by the disobedience of one man , 
Sin entered first , and death by him began . 
126 

To seize on all the time of Adam's Kace , 
Upon each Creature , there 's not one that 's free , 
Or can escape , each one must it embrace , 
Yea , all are subject to Mortality : 
Be it Emperor , King , Potentate or Prince , 
Death stands not with him for to dispense . 
127 

Two kinds of death the Scripture says there are , 
The first whereof is called corporal ; 
Of which each Mother's Son must have a share ; 
The last and second is spiritual . 
Ordained by God to be a punishment , 
For all hard hardened hearts that don't repent . 
128 

Of corporal death each Creature must taste , 
Birds , fishes , Beasts , as well as mortal men ; 
Therefore before spiritual death it 's past , 
As it in order first proceedeth when 
Corporal death of life doth us deprive , 
'Gainst which all human creatures still do strive . 
129 

Betwixt Man's death and Beasts the difference 
After they are of vital life bereaven , 
The spirit of Man hath his perfect essence , 
With the immortal God that reigns in Heaven : 
And though man's body be dissolved to dust , 
At day of judgement rise again we must . 
130 

And having finished death corporal , 
Which is the deprivation of breath ; 
So that our souls may become immortal , 
So that we need not fear the second death : 
That through Christ who hath bruised the Serpent's head , 
Our souls may live although our Bodies dead . 
131 

Yet dead we are not , but in Christ we sleep , 
Though in the ground our bodies buried be ; 
We hope through Christ that God our souls doth keep 
Who hath redeemed us with his blood , and freed 
Us from the bondage both of death and Hell , 
That his elected might in glory dwell . 
132 

The death of a beast now is otherwise , 
He being dead his body is resolved ; 
To the first maker his soul doth arise 
From the temperature , and is dissolved , 
To nothing , which was nothing first of all , 
There is the end of breath and life final . 
133 

Spiritual deaths the total separation , 
Of Soul and body from the love of Christ ; 
And from that blessed Congregation , 
Which do remain above with God the highest 
Triumphantly rejoice and singing praise , 
Lauding and bless Gods holy name always . 
134 

Who would not then spend well in this little time , 
That is bestowed on us , and us lent ; 
We should have a care to commit no crime , 
To serve the Lord our chief care should be bend ; 
In prime of youth we ought to think on death , 
Seeing you know not when he 'll stop our breath . 
135 

Perhaps it may be at this present hour , 
When least of all we think upon our end ; 
Man withereth ( saith Job ) as doth a flower , 
So doth Man perish and come to an end : 
Christ which our sins did bear this salve did give , 
Being dead through sin , to righteousness to live . 
136 

Our youthful days of jollity and pleasure , 
Those days we sacrifice unto the devil ; 
For God's service seldom we find leisure , 
Our lips is ●o composed of all evil , 
That sin●e we do commit whilst we have power , 
And ne'er desist from sinning day nor hour . 
137 

But to do evil still we do ensue , 
All wickedness we work with greediness , 
Each motion that is good we do eschew , 
We give our minds unto lasciviousness , 
With wanton pleasures we ourselves deceive , 
And ne'er leave sinning till sin doth us leave . 
138 

Death in his nature fearful is and grim , 
Christ by his death that fear hath rane away , 
And with his powerful death vanquished him , 
That we to death triumphantly may say : 
Death where 's thy sting ? and likewise to the grave 
no victory of us thou now canst have . 
139 

Moses describes our years threescore and ten , 
But few do live to that , fewer to more ; 
So short then are the days of mortal men , 
Not one to twenty lives to be four score : 
That godly Moses to the Lord still prays , 
Teach me ( saith he ) for to number my days . 
140 

That holy David likewise doth entreat 
That he the number of his days might know ; 
Yea earnestly these words he doth repeat , 
As is apparent , wherein he doth show : 
To know his frailty he doth it require , 
Which was the total somme of his desire . 
141 

My days thou hast made like unto a span , 
Mine age is nothing in respect of thee ; 
We must return to dust do what we can , 
Every one living is but vanity : 
Like to a shadow time doth pass away , 
Without controlment , no man can him stay . 
142 

Each day our life doth hasten to an end , 
For we are nearer unto death this day , 
then yesterday , who can with time contend , 
Nor bostingly no man ought thus to say , 
I certain am to live till to morrow , 
The smallest moment of time who can borrow . 
143 

Man is by job compared unto grass , 
Which now do flourish , yet cut down ere night : 
Or to a shadow which apace doth pass , 
Swifter than Eagles hastening in their flight : 
Death still pursues men wheresoever they go , 
Friend to the Godly , but the wickeds foe . 
144 

Life is compared to things of short continuance , 
To smoke , to flowers , which do vanish soon ; 
Unto things which are of no persistance , 
And changes oftener than the changing Moon : 
Unto a dream , or likewise unto stubble , 
Which fire doth burn , or to a water-bubble . 
145 

Seeing man's life is so uncertain then , 
We need not wish long livers for to be , 
Being certain death will come we know not when , 
And longest livers greatest sinners be : 
Although we live long , yet death comes at last , 
And then amongst dead men we must be placed . 
146 

What man is he that listeth long to live , 
Unto the utmost as Long as may be , 
His mind to viciousnesse he must not give , 
If that he do intend good days to see : 
His heart uprightly he must keep the while , 
His tongue and lips that they do speak no guile . 
147 

Our life 's composed of naught but misery , 
In Youth , in Manhood , and Decrepit age ; 
Nothing attends on these but vanity , 
Which doth the shortness of man's life presage , 
Which is Compared to glass that is so brittle , 
And flieth faster than a weaver's Shuttle , 
148 

For in this life is naught but vexation , 
Our minds and bodies are always troubled , 
Replete with sorrow and contemplation , 
Christ's death these sorrows all hath comforted , 
And buried them in his dear precious blood , 
Which is the salve that should do our souls good . 
149 

God grant it may , that we may reign in heaven , 
And with Jehova sing continual praise ; 
Of care and sorrows we shall be bere●aen , 
If we take care to serve the Lord always : 
Which for to do we must ourselves endeavour , 
From doing good we never must persever . 
150 

For of welldoing we should not be weary , 
As we have sown so we shall reap likewise ; 
Yea in due time we shall reap and be merry , 
If that we faint not , nor God's laws despise : 
We need not fear the fatal dint of death , 
Come when it will it can but take our breath . 
151 

Our bodies for a while may be dissolved , 
And turned to dust and earth from whence ' was ta'en : 
Our souls shall live we are certainly resolved , 
To reign with Christ with whom they did remain : 
When we were in our Mother's womb conceived , 
Before we were into the world received . 
152 

As our soul is the union of life , 
So is ●he Spirit of God the soul of ours , 
Which cannot be divided with death's knife , 
If God his Spirit into our souls once power : 
In the Celestial heaven we shall reign , 
And never feel the force of death again . 
153 

The thought of death in some will terror breed , 
( And like Belshazzar make them trembling stand ; ) 
At the remembrance of each thought and deed , 
When all our enemies themselves do band 
Against us ; and the devil will employ , 
His best endeavours our souls to destroy . 
154 

Death to the Godly is a welcome guest , 
And such a one as they do long to see , 
It being come their troubles shall have rest , 
And they God's glory face to face shall see : 
Blessed are those that in the Lord do die , 
From their labours they rest eternally . 
155 

Certain uncertain death we must expect , 
And at all times we must stand on our Guard , 
no time nor moment we must once neglect , 
Unto ourselves we must have more regard : 
That death at no time unprovided catch us , 
And unexpected to the grave do snatch us.  
156 

In dying well , God doth two things require , 
Of every Christian man that he should save ; 
At these two things I greatly do admire , 
To see that men no greater wisdom have : 
But to neglect a thing of greatest : good , 
In time to come if they it understood . 
157 

The first is on death to premeditate , 
Come wh●n it will we may be ready for it ; 
And not defer it till it be too late , 
So that we need not fear it , nor abhor it : 
To bid death welcome we should ready be , 
And think 't the joyfull'st day we ere shall see . 
158 

The second thing God doth of us require , 
At time of death well ourselves to behave ; 
Whereby we may escape Hell's burning fire , 
And fly to Christ that he our souls may save : 
This we should do , death's vigour to prevent , 
' 'Gainst God doth come and call us to judgement . 
159 

Whilst we are living yet we may relent , 
And turn from us God's wrath and indignation , 
But being dead its too late to repent , 
There is no sacrifice nor satisfaction : 
For after death there is no change at all , 
The tree doth lie as is at first his fall . 
160 

And as men die they must to judgement rise , 
To answer for those sins they have committed ; 
Even as they died and no otherwise , 
They can add naught , nor aught can be omitted : 
To think on death each man sometime should spend , 
If that he 'll make a sanctified end . 
161 

As death doth leave them so God will them find , 
And as he finds them so they judged shall be ; 
If to do well they have themselves inclined , 
From all eternal woe they shall be free : 
Certain all must die by God's appointment , 
And after death all must come to judgement . 
162 

Nam scriptum est that we accounted must give , 
Of every idle word we peak that 's bad ; 
In what state of condition we did live , 
A Red rationem must be had : 
Of all our sins we must cast up the sum , 
When we before God's judgement seat do come . 
163 

The Book laid open our offences read , 
Before God's face all must trembling stand ; 
Both small and great , yea all that have been dead , 
Being summoned by Trumpets Command : 
Blessed are they thrice blessed in their heart . 
That in the first Resurrection had part . 
164 

Whether one talon be hid or destroyed , 
Under ground , account shall be demanded , 
To what good use or bade it be employed . 
Doing Gods Service as we are commanded : 
That we may go into our Mosters' joy , 
And utterly be freed from all annoy . 
165 

The Sun in that day shall be darkened quite , 
The Firmaments of light shall be bereaven ; 
The changing Moon shall not renew her light , 
The Stars likewise shall fall down from Heaven : 
All mortals hearts with fear must needs be taken 
When as the powers of Heaven shall be shaken . 
166 

The Earth shall be removed from off her place , 
The Air shall be dissolved to drops with heat ; 
Every thing thus changed , it 's a heavy case , 
The terror of that day who can repeat : 
It would dissolve a heart harder than Ire , 
To behold the world in a burning fire . 
167 

This is a day of wrath and weariness , 
A day of Clouds and of thick gloominess , 
A day of desolation and distress , 
A day of trouble and of wastinesse : 
This day will put the stoutest heart to fear , 
Maugre his force in it he must appear . 
168 

Before the judgement seat of jesus Christ , 
For to receive the guerdion for their hire ; 
If it be good they shall reign with the highest ; 
If otherwise they are fit for Hell-fire : 
Fewell for God's wrath to be tormented , 
Because in life their sins were not repent . 
169 

jude , james his Brother , likewise tells us plain , 
That the Angels which kept not their estate , 
Their first estate , but followed pleasures vain , 
Their Habitation they left desolate , 
In everlasting chains he them reserves , 
Against the judgement day , as they deserves . 
170 

In what place will the sinner then appear , 
no place is left for him himself to hide ; 
When God in judgement begins to draw near , 
Before whose justice he cannot abide : 
With all his power he will cry and call , 
And wish that mountains on him then would fall . 
171 

And hide them from the face of him that sitteth 
Upon the Throne , and from the angry Lamb : 
Being a judge , all fear to him befitteth , 
To him that before Abram was , I am : 
Before his face all men must trembling stand , 
Like Belshazzer summoned by trumphs command . 
172 

The sign of the Son of Man shall appear , 
In the Clouds coming with power and glory , 
Who will astonish all men's hearts with fear , 
What will profit this life transitory ? 
Each creature for fear shall be forlorn , 
And all the Tribes of the earth than shall mourn . 
173 

In an instant God will his Angels send , 
With Trumpets sound to gather his Elect ; 
From the four corners of the earth he 'll send 
Legions of Angels to call his Elect : 
This judgement 's general we must surmise , 
All graves must open , all dead must arise . 
174 

And all before the judge must be presented , 
Rich , poor , young , old , persons are not respected , 
Twice happy are those that their sins repent , 
But treble woe to those that it neglected : 
The joys of one shall ne'er be deceived , 
The others torments cannot be conceived . 
175 

This is a time of trouble and Vexation , 
A time of grief of sorrow and of pain ; 
A time of anguish and desolation , 
A time that former time will not regain : 
One hour the worth of thousands will surmount , 
Of hours , days , years , we now make no account . 
176 

A separation of Goats from the sheep , 
Sheep on the right hand , Goats on left being placed : 
With mercy and justice God will judgement keep , 
In no wise he will have his Saints disgraced : 
Each one shall shine far brighter than the Sun , 
Being so decreed by God it must be done . 
177 

Unto the sheep with joy the Lord shall say , 
Come ye blessed of my Father inherit 
The Kingdom that 's prepared for you for ay , 
Because in life time you the same did merit : 
You clothed me naked , hungry you me fed , 
And if not me , poor brethren in my stead . 
178 

Unto the goats the Lord will say in 's ire , 
Ye workers of iniquity depart ; 
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire , 
I do hate and abhor you with my heart : 
I being hungry you no meat me gave , 
And in my Kingdom you no share shall have . 
179 

What joy and sorrow will be uttered then , 
The just to go singing continual praise ; 
That they shall reign with God who were but men , 
In the fellowship of Angels always : 
Continually with praises there to sing , 
Unto the Lord both earth and heavens King.  
180 

O endless joy that doth all joy contain , 
O happy haven whose harbour is ease ; 
O place of rest for to be freed from pain , 
O fruitful tree that fruit dost never lack , 
O place delightful which shall never cease , 
O Blessed haven that ne'er sufferest wrack . 
181 

Even as their joys be innumerable , 
So in likewise the wicked are in pain ; 
They suffer torments insupportable , 
And ne'er shall be at ease nor rest again , 
A terrible woe against them is denounst , 
When as the sentence , go , is once pronounced . 
182 

Woe be to them they still shall live in pain , 
Woe unto them they torments shall endure ; 
Woe to them they shall ne'er be freed again , 
Woe to their sins for they did this procure : 
Woe be to them , and woe be to us all , 
For sinning thus we bring our souls in thrall 
183 

Now that we may leave sinning God grant grace , 
That in the highest heavens we may reign ; 
There to behold Jehovahs' shining face , 
In that celestial place still to remain : 
There we shall praise his name with one accord 
With singing Halleluiah to the Lord  
Memento to esse Mortalem . 
FINIS . 





Tres centoes fertur vixisse amoes . 

Ezeck . 27.18 21.  Reu. 19.3 . Non videbo id Manticae quod intergo est . Psal . 22.6 . Psal . 71.1 . Exod. 31.13.14 . Pro. 23.29.30 . 2 Cor. 7.10 . Psal . 137.4 . The nature of most men . Homo vanitate fimales factus est . Psal . 144.4 . Psal . 39.7 . Luk. 12.27 . Baruch 3.17.19 . Eclesiast . 5.12.3 . Eccles . 10.7 . Eccles . 11.4 . Psal . 60.11 . 1 Tim. 6.7 . 1 Tim. 6.1 . Phil. 2.10 . Pro. 3.9 . The third use . Pro 31.20 . Luk. 16.3 . 1 joh. 2.25 . Quisquis amat mundum , amor dei non est in illum . Luk. 16.19 . Man's second enemy is himself . Psal . 58.45 . Lingua quid peius eadem . Psa . 39.123 . Eph. 4 . 2●  Mat. 12.6 . Mat. 12.37 . Pro. 10.11 . Psal . 51.6 . Zach. 7.12 . Modesty and humility are two bridles for Pride . Rom. 12.3 . Mat. 11.4 . Psa . 131.13 . Our third enemy is the Devil . Gen. 3.4 . The presumption of Satan . Mat. 4.10 . 2 joh. 1.7 . Gal. 3.13 . Amen . 1 Cor. 10.20  If we destroy our bodies , we sacrifice them to the Devil . Mat. 26.24 . Ephe. 4.30 . joh. 8 44.  1 Cor. 13.6 . 2 Cor. 11.14 . Eph. 2.2 . jam. 5.12 . Mat. 5.37 . Reu. 12.3 . Eph. 6.44.15 16.17.18 . Rom. 6.18 . Rom. 6.13 . Rom. 5.12 . Reu. 2.11  Pet. 11.24 . Eph. 4.19 . 1 Cor. 15.55  Psal . 90.10 . Psal . 39.4 . Psal . 39.5 . job. 14.2 . Psal . 34.12 . Gal. 6.8 . ● . Gen. 18.27 . Reu. 14.  ● . Qualis vitae finisita . Heb. 9.27 . Mat. 12.36 . Luk. 16.2 . Reu. 20.12 . Reu. 20.6 . Mat. 25 . 1● . Mat. 24.29 . Zeph. 1.15 . 1 Cor. 5.10 . jud. 1.6 . joh. 15.  28 . Mat. 25.39 . Mat. 29 ●2 . Rom. 2.11 . Mat. 25.34 . Mat. 25.41 . 