an antidote against immoderate mourning for the dead . 

being a funeral sermon preached at the burial of Mr. Thomas Bewley junior , December 17th 1658.  

by sa. Clerk , pastor in Bennet Fink , London . 

Quid interest utrum febris , an ferrum de corpore solverit : non quâ occasione , sed quales ad se exeant , dominus attendit in servis suis . August . 

is there not an appointed time to man upon earth ? are not his days like the days of an hireling ? Job 7. 1.  

London , printed by e. m. for George Calvert , at the half moon in Paul's churchyard , near the little north-door , 1659.  

To his honoured and much esteemed friends Mr. Thomas Bewley , merchant ; and Mrs. Mary Bewley , his wife . 

Dearly beloved in the Lord : 

It was at your request that i first preached this sermon ; and it is more to satisfy your desires than mine own , that i now print it . They that know me , cannot but withal know how backward i have ever been ( Being conscious to my own weakness ) to publish any of my labours in this kind ; and yourselves can bear me witness , that it was my earnest request , that you would have laid this burden upon abler shoulders , especially having so great choice of godly and learned ministers whom you invited to the funeral : but when you persevered in your desires and requests to me to undertake it , my chiefest care was to make choice of such a subject , as ( Through God's blessing ) Might come home to your hearts , and direct your behaviour under so great a burden , as is the loss of a dear and and only son . I knew that your affections were strong , and that you had need of a great deal of heavenly wisdom to enable you to moderate them ; and whence is this wisdom to be learned , but from the sacred scriptures , which are richly stored with precious promises , as with so many cordials to revive and strengthen us in our greatest necessities . unless thy law ( Faith David , meaning principally the promises contained in it ) had been my delights , i should have perished in mine affliction , psal. 119. 92.  But as those which are fallen into a swoon , May be fetched again with hot waters poured down their throats : so they that are troubled and pressed down under the heavy burden of sorrow and grief , May by patience and comfort of the scriptures recover hope and joy . 

The text which God directed me to treat of was both seasonable and suitable to your present condition ; as not only teaching you how to behave yourselves under such an affliction , but holding forth to you sound and sufficient arguments to persuade and induce you to the practice of the same : i beseech you therefore to read it over and over again , and remember what the father said ; these are verba vivenda , & non legenda solùm , words to be lived and practised , and not to be read only : such a sentence it is as a man would fetch from China upon his bare feet , rather than be without it . Take , i pray you , your correction as from God's hand , and humble yourselves under the smart of it : yet withal look to Christ , and entreat him that your faith , hope , and meekness May not be overturned by it , but rather that the affliction May bring forth patience , and patience experience , and experience hope . consider who it is that hath done it : is he not your heavenly father ? Now if your natural father had done some shrewd turn at unawares , by breaking a thing wherein you much delighted , when you heard that he did it , you would be quiet , though before you were much moved : should you not say with Christ ? shall i not drink of that cup , that my father will have me to drink of ? remember , i pray you , what the apostle suggesteth , hebr. 12. 9  we have had fathers of our flesh that have corrected us , and we gave them reverence : shall we not much rather be in subjection to the father of our spirits , and live ? v. 10.  for they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure ; but he for our profit , that we Might be partakers of his holiness . 

Consider , i pray you , if God when you were first married should have told you , i will give you two children , and you shall bring them up so many years , and then i will take them away again ; would you not have accepted gladly of this offer , and taken it thankfully too ? why ? the event doth tell you no less than if he had spoken so aforehand , and will you now murmur or repine at his dispensation ? Is not God the chief father of all the families in heaven and earth , and we but foster-parents to our own children under him ? Is it not a mercy that God hath made you instrumental for the enlarging of his kingdom , though he hath taken both your children from you ? Say therefore with Job , the Lord hath given , and the Lord hath taken away , blessed be the name of the Lord . at least say with David , i was dumb , and opened not my mouth , because thou Lord didst it . oh! labour for good old Eli's temper , it is the Lord , let him do what seems good in his eyes , 1 sam. 3. 18.  Consider that God who hath done it , is love , and if you look upon it as an effect of his anger towards you , yet be of good comfort , that God that would not have sinful man to let the sun go down upon his anger , he will not retain his anger for ever , because he delighteth in mercy , Micha . 7. 18.  

But i presume that one thing adds a great sting to your affliction , which is , that hereby you want an heir to enjoy your estate , and to preserve your name : for all men naturally affect immortality , and because they cannot enjoy it in themselves , they desire it in their posterity that survives them : but for a medicine to this malady , remember what the Lord speaketh , isa. 56. 3 , 4 , 5 let not the eunuch say , behold , i am a dry tree . For thus saith the Lord to the eunuchs that keep my Sabbath , & choose the things that please me , and take hold of my covenant ; even unto them will i give in my house , and within my walls , a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters , i will give them an everlasting name that shall not be cut off . 

Let me but add one word more , and i have done ; consider what a mercy it is , that God hath given you so many Christian friends that sympathize with you , and help to bear your burden ; so many godly and able comforters to speak a word in season to your afflicted souls , so many faithful ministers and Christians that daily pray for you , and beg of God that he will support you under this heavy loss , and make it up in some better blessing . Remember , i beseech you , what our Lord and saviour Christ saith , Luke 14. 26.  if any one come unto me , and hates not his father , and mother , and wife , and children , and brethren , and sisters , yea and his own life also , he cannot be my disciple . 

Now the god of comfort be your comforter , and give you a large measure of prudence , patience , self-denial , with a full and free resignation of your ▪ self , to the absolute disposal of the all-wise and all-merciful God , that you May as well in heart , as in words say , thy will be done in earth , as it is in heaven , which is the servant prayer of 

from my study in thread-needle-street jan. 14. 1658  / 9  Your affectionate friend to love and serve you , s. Clerk . 

An antidote against immoderate mourning for the dead . 

1 thes. 4. 13 , 14.  

but i would not have you ignorant , brethren , concerning them which are asleep , that ye sorrow not , even as others which have no hope . 

for if we believe that Jesus died , and rose again , even so them also which sleep in Jesus , will God bring with him . 

The apostle Paul , by God's blessing upon his ministry , had gathered a large church in Thessalonica , the chiefest city of Macedonia : for besides that some of the Jews believed , there were also multitudes of the Greeks , and of the chief women not a few , that readily entertained the gospel , and comforted with Paul and Silas , act. 17. 4. whereupon the devil , moved with envy , raised a great persecution against them by the Jews that dwelled there , and other lewd fellows of the base sort that they adjoined to them ; upon which occasion Paul and Silas were forced to fly to Berea , and from thence Paul went to Athens : and after a while Silas and Timotheus coming to him thither ; he , not being unmindful of his flock that he had left at Thessalonica , sent Timothy to confirm them in the faith that he before had preached , and they had received . 

At Timothy's return to him at Corinth , being informed by him of their estate , he thought fit and expedient to write to them this epistle , as appears , 1 thess. 3. 1 , 2. wherein after the apostolical salutations , c. 1. v. 1. the epistle consists of two principal parts . 

In the first , the apostle endeavours to confirm and strengthen them in the faith received , to the end of the third chapter . 

From thence to the end of the epistle , he exhorts them by a Christian conversation to beautify and adorn their profession ; and this he doth : first , in general , ch. 4. v. 1 , 2.  Secondly , in particular , by persuading them to the practice of sundry Christian virtues , and duties ; as , 

1.  To chastity , v. 3 , 4 , 5.  
2.  To justice and equity in all their dealings , v. 6.  
3.  To brotherly love , v. 9 , 10.  
4.  To a quiet life , and attending their own businesses , v. 11 , 12.  
5.  To be moderate in their sorrow for their deceased friends , seeing they shall be raised up again by Christ , v. 13 , 14. and thereupon he takes occasion largely to describe the glory of Christ's coming to judgement , and the order of the resurrection of the dead , declaring the certainty of it , though the time was uncertain , and this he doth to the fourth verse of the fifth chapter . 
In these two verses of my text , the chiefest scope of the apostle is to persuade them to keep a mean in their mourning for the dead ; wherein are considerable , 

First , the friendly compellation that he uses , brethren . 

Secondly , an information concerning the state of the dead , set down negatively , i would not have you ignorant , as if he should say , i would have you well informed of this doctrine , the knowledge whereof will conduce much to your comfort . 

Thirdly , the end why he was so careful to inform them of it , that they Might not sorrow , as did others which had no hope , viz. as the heathen did : for although they believed the immortality of the soul , yet they were never able to comprehend or believe the resurrection of the bodies , and reuniting them with the souls , whereof he speaks in the subsequent verse , as appears , acts 17. 32. and 26. 23 , &c.  

Fourthly , a strong argument to enforce his exhortation for their moderate mourning for the dead , ver. 14.  for if we believe that Jesus died and rose again , &c.  

Thus having heard the occasion and scope of these words , and the principal parts of the text , i will make no other curious division of it , but proceed to show you how many useful observations May be gathered out of these verses : and first , from the friendly compellation used by the apostle , brethren . whence note first , that , 

All God's children are brethren ; so saith Abraham to Lot , gen. 13. 8.  let there be no strife , i prithee , between me and thee , &c. for we are brethren : so col. 1. 2. 1 thes. 5. 26 , 27. 1 tim. 6 2. for 

First , they are the adopted children of the same father , ephes. 4. 6.  

Secondly , they are born of the same mother , the church , 1 pet. 1. 23.  

Thirdly , they are brought up in the same family , ephes. 3. 15.  

Fourthly , they are nourished with the same food , 1 pet. 2. 2.  

Fifthly , they have all the same inheritance , rom. 8. 17.  

Secondly , again , consider who it is that calls them brethren , the apostle Paul , the great doctor of the gentiles , and a man endowed with more than ordinary gifts and graces : and who they were that he calls brethren ; the lately converted Thessalonians : most of them of mean rank , and mean gifts , in comparison of him : whence note , 

They which have the greatest gifts and graces bestowed upon them by God , must not superciliously overlook those which are meaner and weaker than themselves , but must own them for , and acknowledge them to be brethren hence , 1 cor. 4. 7. who makes thee to differ from another ? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive ? Now if thou didst receive it , why dost thou glory , as if thou hadst not received it ? 

Thirdly , in that the apostle was so careful to inform them of this comfortable truth ; observe , 

God's ministers must be careful to inform their persons of all such saving truths as May conduce to their edification and comfort : that when they come to leave their persons , they May be able to say with the apostle , act. 20. 27.  i have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God . 

Fourthly , it seems that till now the Thessalonians were ignorant of these things which made them to over-sorrow for their dead . Hence observe : 

Ignorance of the blessed estate of the saints departed is the cause of excessive mourning for them . 

Fifthly , Paul speaking of the dead , saith , they were asleep , hence observe : 

The death of the righteous is but a sweet sleep : so it is often called in scripture . Christ speaking of dead Lazarus , saith , our friend Lazarus sleepeth , joh. 11. 11. with 14. and when Stephen was stoned to death , its said , that he fell asleep , act. 7. 60. and in these two verses of my text , Paul twice calls it a sleep : and hence the grave is called a bed , isa. 572. and the Greeks called it {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} a dormitory , or sleeping place . 

Sixthly . i would not have you sorrow as do others , &c.  he doth not say , i would not have sorrow at all : for , it 's a duty to mourn for the dead : for as a reverend and learned doctor saith , sorrow and lamentation is the dues of the dead . It is fit that the body , when it 's sown in corruption , should be watered with the tears of them that plant it in the earth , and to be without natural affections is an heathenish sin , rom. 1. 31. and one of those that make these later times perilous , 2 tim. 3. 3.  From whence we May observe : 

it 's lawful to mourn and sorrow upon the death of our friends and relations . Our Lord Christ himself wept at the death of Lazarus , joh. 11. 35.  And the church made great lamentation for Stephen , act. 8. 2.  And the widows wept for Dorcas , act. 9 39  And Paul sorrowed when Epaphroditus was deadly sick , phil. 2. 27.  

Seventhly , as do others that have no hope , i. e. as the heathen do , which are ignorant of these things ▪ hence , 

The heathen use to be immoderate in their mourning for the dead ; becave they want a hope of the present blessedness of their souls , and the future resurrection of their bodies . Forbidden God's persons , lev. 19 27 , 28.  

Eightly , but i would not have you do so , saith the apostle . Hence , 

Christians which know these things must be moderate in their mourning . 

Ninthly , verse . 14.  for if we believe , that Jesus died and rose again , &c.  hence observe , first ; 

The resurrection of Christ's body from the dead is a sure and certain pledge and evidence of the resurrection of out bodies : so the holy apostle Paul makes it , 1 cor. 15. 12 , &c. if Christ be preached , that he rose from the dead , how say some among you , that there is no resurrection of the dead : but if there be no resurrection of the dead , than Christ is not risen : and verse 20.  but now is Christ risen from the dead , and become the first fruits of them that slept , &c.  

Tenthly , even so them also which sleep in Jesus . hence observe . 

That the bodies of the saints departed sleep in the arms of Jesus : he takes care of all the bones , yea , of the very dust of his saints , that none of it shall be wanting when he comes to raise their bodies again at the last day . Our bodies , even whilst they lie in the grave , are members of Christ ; and therefore it 's no marvel , though he takes such care of them . 

Eleventhly , will God bring with him . whence i gather . 

That when Christ shall come to judgement , then shall the resurrection of our bodies be : this is an article of our faith . It was typified by the budding and blossoming of Aaron's dry rod : by Ionas deliverance out of the belly of the fish , where he had been three days and three nights . It was believed by the patriarchs of old , heb. 11. 13.  And its an infallible truth , that these bodies of ours that are sown in corruption , shall be raised in incorruption , 1 cor. 15. 42.  And for our further security , Enoch before the flood , and Elijah after the flood , were taken into heaven in their bodies . 

Neither indeed is this contrary to reason , though it be above the reach of reason : for why cannot Christ as well raise a body out of the dust , as at first he made it out of the dust ? especially considering that the soul is preserved in heaven for this very end , to be joined to the body again . This Job was confident of , Job 19 26 , 27.  though after my skin worms destroy this body , yet in my flesh i shall see God , &c.  nay , it 's not contrary to the course of nature : for we yearly see that the resurrection of the spring succeeds the dead winter , the day the night : and thou fool , the corn that thou sowest , is not quickened , except it die , saith Paul , 1 cor. 15. 36. and the same apostle tells us , rom. 8. 11.  that if the spirit that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in us , he that raised up Christ from the dead shall quicken our mortal bodies by his spirit that dwells in us . besides , Christ is the second Adam , and as we did bear the image of the first Adam in corruption , so we must bear the image of the second Adam in glory , 1 cor. 15 22. 45 , 49.  

Twelfthly , but that which is the principal thing that i intend to insist on is a doctrine held forth to us in the latter end of the fourteenth verse , that ye sorrow not as do others that have no hope : whence , 

A well-grounded hope of the happiness of our friends deceased should moderate our mourning for them . This ( Without question ) moderated Abraham's mourning for Sarah . mourn indeed he did , for the text saith , gen. 23. 2. that Sarah died — and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah , and to weep for her ; but that he kept a mean in his mourning , appears by the next words , v. 3 , 4.  And Abraham stood up from before his dead , and bespoke a burying place to bury his dead out of his sight ; and this he did , that the object being removed , his sorrow Might be mitigated . This also moderated Joseph's and the Israelites mourning for Jacob , gen. 50. 1. where it is said , that Joseph fell upon his father's face , ( When he died ) and wept upon him , and kissed him : and vers. 10. it 's said , that Joseph and the Israelites made a mourning for him seven days : but v. 3.  it 's said , that the Egyptians ( Who mourned as men without hope ) mourned for him threescore and ten days . this also moderated David's mourning for his child , 2 sam 12. 23.  now he is dead , wherefore should i fast ? can i bring him back again ? I shall go to him , but he shall not return to me : and this was Martha's comfort , when her dear brother Lazarus was dead , i know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day , joh. 11. 24.  

In the prosecution of this point , i shall show you , first , what is meant by a well-grounded hope . Secondly , wherein the happiness of our friends departed in the Lord , consists . Thirdly , why the consideration of these things should put a mean to our mourning for them . Fourthly ; i will answer some objections that May be made against it . And fifthly , make application of it . 

For the first : 

What do you call a well-grounded hope ? 

I use this epithet , to distinguish it from that ill-grounded hope wherewith so many do delude themselves . as 

First , because their friends were born of Christian parents , baptised , and brought up in the church . 

Secondly , because they had gotten some knowledge , and made an outward profession of religion . 

Thirdly , because they used to attend upon the public ordinances , and that with some seeming devotion . 

Fourthly , because they were free from gross sins , and dealt justly with every man . 

Fifthly , because they enjoyed outward peace and prosperity , the sun of God shining upon their tabernacles . 

Sixthly , because they died quietly like lambs , and it May be , went out of the world with some good words in their mouths , psal. 73. 4 , 5.  there are no bands in their death , but their strength is firm ; they are not in trouble as other men . from these and such like weak grounds , they presume that their friends after death must needs go to heaven , and therefore they comfort themselves , and one another with these words : whereas the truth is , they May go to hell after all these things . Our saviour Christ tells us , matt. 5. 20. that except our righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees , we shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven : and these men are so far from exceeding , that they come short of the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees , who were frequent in alms-deeds , in prayer , in fasting , mat. 6. 2. 5. 16. and yet Christ calls them hypocrites . Yea , they made long prayers , matth. 23. 14. they compassed sea and land to make one proselyte , v. 15. they paid even their smallest tithes , v. 23.  They outwardly appeared righteous unto men : v.  28. they blamed their fathers for murdering the prophets , and by way of compensation to free themselves from the guilt , they built tombs for those prophets , and garnished the sepulchers of the righteous , v. 29. 30. notwithstanding all which , Christ pronounceth many woes against them . 

Thus we see what are ill-grounded hopes , which prove but like a spider's web to those that trust in them . I shall therefore in the next place show you what is a well-grounded hope of the happiness of our friends departed , which consists in this : 

When our deceased friends have in their life-time given us some good evidence of the work of grace and sanctification wrought in their hearts , whereby we could discern that , by God's blessing upon the means , their eyes were opened , that they were turned from darkness to light , and from the power of Satan unto God : for than we May conclude , that they have received forgiveness of their sins and an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified by faith that is in Christ , act. 26. 18.  

But this work of grace being inward and secret , how shall we be able to judge of it ? 

Our saviour Christ gives us a rule for our direction in judging of others , mat. 7 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20.  ye shall know them ( Saith he ) by their fruits . Do men gather grapes of thorns , or figs of thistles ? even so every good tree brings forth good fruit ; but a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit . a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit , neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit : wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them . from whence we May gather , that as wicked men , for the most part , May be known by their wicked lives ; so gracious persons May be known by their gracious lives . For it 's as easy to carry fire in our bosom , or oil in our hands without discovery , as grace in our hearts without the manifestation of it . 

Now many signs Might be given , whereby we May judge of the work of grace in others , but i shall content myself for the present with these three . 

First , if living with them , we observe that they make conscience of , and practise private and secret duties as well as public . Hypocrites when they do duties , do all to be seen of men , that they May have glory of men , matth. 6. 2. 5. 16. and therefore in their very private prayers they love to make them in the synagogues , and in the corners of the streets , v. 5. they have Jacob's voice , but Esau's hands : the Lord indeed is much in their mouths , but far from their reins , jer. 12. 2. they lay claim to Christ , but yet have no share in him : they deeply affirm of him , but have no manner of right to him : their faith is but fancy , their confidence but presumption ; they are like the mad man at Athens that laid claim to every ship that came into the harbour , when he had no part in any ; like Haman , that hearing the King would honour a man , concluded ( But falsely ) that himself was the man : or like Sisera that dreamt of a kingdom , whereas Jael's nail was nearer his temples then a crown : and thus they deceive themselves with their shows , and think to deceive others ; but God's children can usually discern them , and discover them to be like harpies that are said to have virgins faces , but praetors talons : but on the contrary , a sound-hearted Christian , though he dare not neglect , yea , though he prefer the public , yet he also makes conscience of private duties , and prays to his father in secret ; so that if we observe this in them , its one good ground that they have the work of regeneration wrought in their hearts . 

Secondly , if we observe them , that they labour to keep a conscience void of offence both towards God , and towards men , as saint Paul professeth that he did , act. 24. 16.  If they have had respect to all God's commandments , as David , psal. 119. 6.  If they have made conscience of the duties of both tables , serving God in holiness and righteousness all the days of their lives , Luke 1. 75. hiring themselves unto him for term of life , not desiring to change their Master , knowing that they cannot mend themselves neither for fairness of work , nor fullness of wages , whereas an hypocrite is versutulus & versatilis , he casts about how to deceive God and man with mere shows of devotion , being not afraid to be damned , so he May seem to be saved , and seeking so long to deceive others , that in fine he deceives his own soul . imposturam faciunt & patiuntur , as that Emperor said of them that sold glass beads for pearl . They deceive , and are deceived . 

Thirdly , when we have heard them groaning and mourning under the remainders of corruption , and the relics of sin , crying out with the holy apostle , rom 7. 24.  oh wretched man that i am , who shall deliver me from the body of this death ! when they have manifested their hatred against all sin , and shunned every evil way , saying with the wisest of men , prov. 8. 13. the fear of the Lord is to hate evil ; pride , and arrogancy , and every evil way do i hate : whereas a dispensatory conscience is a naughty conscience : neither doth he God's will , but his own , that doth no more nor no other than himself pleaseth , as hypocrites use ; such holiday servants God cares not for . Every one can swim in a warm bath , and every bird will sing in a summers-day . Judas will bear the cross , so he May bear the bag : and the carnal capernaits will follow Christ for the loaves , though not for love , joh. 6. 26.  But Abraham will forsake all to follow God , though he know not whither yea though God seems to go a cross way , as when he promised him a land flowing with milk and honey ; and yet so soon as he came there , he met with a famine , gen. 12. 10.  

If then you have observed these three things in your Christian friends whilst they lived , you May have a well-grounded hope of their blessedness after death , which , sure , cannot but moderate your mourning for them . 

But wherein consists the happiness of our friends who are departed in the Lord ? 

I shall show this in two particulars : 

First , in the evils that they are freed from by death 

Secondly , in the good things that they are put into the present possession of : so that their happiness is both privative and positive . 

What are the evils that they are freed from by death ? 

They May be reduced to these seven heads . 

First , they are freed from worldly cares , businesses , and troubles . For its God's institution since the fall , that every one shall live , either by the sweat of his brain , or by the sweat of his brow . And Eliphaz tells us , that man is born to trouble , as the sparks fly upward , Job 5. 7. and the apostle tells us , that he that careth not for his own , and especially for those of his own house , he hath denied the faith , and is worse than an infidel , 1 tim. 5. 8.  So than whilst we live here , we cannot be free from multiplicity of cares , businesses , and troubles . The world is like a tempestuous sea , where troubles succeed one another , as one wave follows another . 

— Dolour & voluptas 
Invicem cedunt , brevior voluptas . 


Joy and sorrow ( As one wittily saith ) make checkered work in our lives : sorrow bedews our cheeks with tears , and joy wipes them off again . Our condition in this life is not unlike to that of the Israelites in the wilderness , where they met with many troubles , dangers , and occasions of sorrow . Are we hurt then , if by a tempest of sickness we are driven out of the sea of this world into the safe harbour of the grave , the only place where the weary are at rest , Job 3. 17. where they enter into peace , and rest in their beds , isa. 57 2.  For which cause amongst others , they are pronounced blessed by God himself , rev. 14. 13.  blessed are the dead which die in the Lord — for they rest from their labours . indeed the messenger of death is to most men and women very terrible ; but to a dying believer , then acting faith , it 's nothing so , but it 's entertained by him as a welcome messenger sent from the father to a child at nurse , to bring it home , where it shall be better provided for , whilst it transmits him from all his cares and sorrows into that place and state of bliss where all tears shall be wiped from his eyes , and he shall never sorrow more , revel. 21. 4.  

Secondly , they are freed from the company and society of the wicked , which ( Whilst they lived ) was a cause of much sorrow to them , and that 

First , because of their sins , which were a continual grief to their godly hearts . Hence David professeth , that rivers of waters run down his eyes , because men kept not God's law , psal , 119. 136. and the apostle Peter tells us that just Lot was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked . For ( Saith he ) that righteous man dwelling amongst them , in seeing & hearing , vexed his righteous soul from day to day , with their unlawful deeds , 2 pet. 2. 7 , 8 God's children are so tender of their father's honour , that they cannot see , or hear his name blasphemed , his truths adulterated , his Sabbaths profaned , his ministers , and ordinances despised , &c. but it goes like so many daggers to their hearts , neither can they be free from such occasions of sorrow whilst they continue in this wicked world , death only removes such objects of grief from them . 

Secondly , because of the wrongs , injuries , and persecutions which they meet with from them these goats will be pushing at Christ's sheep : sometimes wounding them in their good names : sometimes wronging them in their estates : and othersometimes raising greater persecutions against them . For the apostle tells us , that this is the portion of all God's children in this life ; all that will live godly in Christ Jesus , shall suffer persecution , 2 tim. 3. 12. and our saviour Christ tells his disciple , that the time should come , that whosoever killed them should think that he did God service , joh. 16. 2.  Thus Cain persecuted Abel : Ishmael , Isaac : yea , which of the prophets or apostles did not the wicked of their times persecute ? This made David to cry out , woe is me that i fojourn in Mesech , that i dwell in the tents of Kedar . My soul hath long dwelled with him that hateth peace , psal. 120. 5 , 6.  But now in the grave the wicked cease from troubling . There the prisoners rest together , and hear not the voice of the oppressor , Job 3. 17 , 18.  

Thirdly , death frees them from evils to come , God herein dealing as parents use , who have children forth at nurse or at school , when troubles or dangerous diseases come into those places where their children are , they send for them home , that they May be in safety . So God many times takes his children out of this world , that he May secure them from imminent dangers : or as when our houses are in danger of firing , we remove our treasure and jewels in the first place into places of more security : so where God wrath , s like fire , is breaking in upon a place , he removes his children to heaven , as to a place of greater safety . it 's the father's love and care ( Saith one ) then hastily to snatch away his child , when the wild bull is now broken loose , and running upon him . The wise husbandman hastens to get in his corn before the storm cometh , or the swine be turned out into the field to root up all . This is that which the Lord by the prophet Isaiah long since assured us of , isa. 57 1.  the righteous perisheth , and no man layeth it to heart ; and merciful men are taken away , none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come . as it was a sign that Samson meant to pull down the house upon the heads of the Philistines when he pulled down the pillars that bare up the roof : so its a shrewd sign that God intends to ruin a state , when he takes away those that were the pillars and props of it . When Methusalem died , the flood came upon the old world : when Josias was gathered to his fathers , the Babylonish captivity hastened . When s. Augustine died , Hippo was taken and sacked by the Vandals , and Heidleburg by the Spaniards , shortly after the death of Pareus . 

Fourthly , death frees them from all sicknesses , diseases , pains , and all other bodily distempers . It cures the blind eyes , the deaf ears , the dumb tongue , the lame legs , the maimed hands , &c.  It easeth the tormenting stone , the painful gout , the aching head , the intolerable twisting of the guts , the loathsome strangury , &c.  Death to the godly is the best physician , it cures them not of one disease , but of all , and of all at once , and of all for ever ; yea it cures them of death itself . 

Fifthly , it frees them from the fiery darts and temptations of Satan , from which they cannot be free whilst they live here : for the whole world is the devil's diocese : he goes to and fro in the earth , and walketh up and down in it , Job . 1. 7. yea , as a roaring lion he walketh about , seeking whom he May devour , 1 pet. 5. 8.  No place can exempt us from his tentations whilst we live in this world . He assaulted Adam in paradise , Lot in the cave , David in his palace : Josuah the high priest , in the presence of the angel of the Lord ; Christ in the wilderness ; Peter in the high priest's hall , &c.  But when death comes , these Egyptians which you have seen to day , ye shall see them again no more for ever , exod. 14. 13.  Satan shall never more molest God's children after this life is ended . Hence , saith saint Ambrose , diabolus per quod potestatem habuit , victus est . the devil , who had the power of death , heb. 2. 14. hath by death his power abrogated and abolished . 

Sixthly , death frees them from God's frowns , which sin often exposeth them to here , and which to a child of God is more terrible than death itself : for if in God's favour is life , as David affirms , psal. 30. 5. then in his frowns is death . : yea , if God's loving kindness is better than life , psal. 63. 3. then his frowns are worse than death . There are no outward or corporal afflictions , but a resolute and Roman spirit will stand under them : the spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity , prov. 18. 14. but the frowns of God and tokens of his displeasure are intolerable : a wounded spirit who can bear ? it made David roar , psal. 32. 3.  Hezekiah chatter , isa. 38. 14. yea Christ himself to sweat drops of congealed blood , and to cry out in the anguish of his soul , my God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ? but after death the light of God's countenance shines perpetually upon them , and shall never admit either of a cloud or eclipse : when Lazarus died , he who lay grovelling at the rich man's gate , was found in Abraham's bosom , in a place of warmest love . For seeing by death God's children are freed from corruptions , therefore after death they have no need of God's frowns , or corrections . 

Seventhly , death frees them from the very being and existence of sin . At death , the spirits of just men are made perfect , heb , 12. 23.  The death of their body delivers them from the body of death . Death and sin do not meet in a child of God ; but so part , that when the one comes , the other is gone for ever : as when Samson died , the Philistines died with him : so when a child of God dyes , all his sins die with him . Hence Ambrose saith , quid est mors , nisi peccatorum sepultura ? what is death but the grave of our sins wherein they are all buried ? Thus death doth that at once which grace doth by degrees . Grace indeed when it is once wrought in the heart , under the conduct of the spirit , it resists and fights against sin , and gives it such mortal wounds that it never fully recovers again : it dejects it from its regency , but cannot eject it from its inherency . It frees us from the reigning of sin , but cannot free us from the remaining of sin : after regeneration sin hath not dominion over us : but yet there is a law in our members warring against the law of our minds , and many times leading us captive unto the law of sin that is in our members , so that we cannot do the good that we would ; but the evil that we hate , that do we , rom. 7. 19 23.  But when death comes , it wholly extirpates sin , root and branch ; and not one , or some few sins , but all sin ; and that not for a time only , but for ever : when the souls of God's children are dislodged from their bodies , this troublesome and encroaching inmate shall be dislodged and thrust out of doors for ever . Hence one saith , peccatum peperit mortem , & filia devoravit matrem . sin at first begat and brought forth death , and death at last destroys sin , as the worm kills the tree that bred it . And as Bernard saith , death which before was porta inferni , the trap-door of hell , is now introitus regni , the porch that lets us into heaven . And Mr. Brightman saith , what was before the devil's sergeant to drag us to hell , is now the Lord's gentleman-usher to conduct us to heaven . 

Thus i have showed you in these seven particulars what are the evils that God's children are freed from by death : now in the next place i will endeavour to show you the privileges that at death they are invested in , and the good things that they are put into the present possession of : but yet this must be premised , that if i had the tongue and pen of men and angels , yet should i come far short of that which i aim at : for whatsoever can be said of heaven , is not one half ( As the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon's magnificence ) of what we shall find in that city of pearl . To express it ( Saith a reverend divine ) is as impossible as to compass heaven with a span , or to contain the ocean in a nutshell . And Chrysostom speaking of the happiness of the saints in heaven , saith , sermo non valet exprimere , experimento opus est : words cannot express it ; we must have trial of it before we can know it . But yet that which i shall say of it is contained in these six particulars . 

First , death invests God's children with perfection of all graces . Here we know but in part , we prophesy but in part : but when that which is perfect , is come , then that which is in part shall be done away , 1 cor. 13. 9 , 10.  it 's true , when God first regenerates and sanctifies us , we have perfection of parts , there is no grace wanting that is necessary to life and salvation : for God doth none of his works by the halves : but yet we attain not to perfection of degrees till death comes : whilst we live here we are exhorted to add grace to grace , 2 pet. 1 5 , 6 , 7. and one degree of grace to another . We are commanded to grow in grace , and in the knowledge of eur Lord and saviour Jesus Christ , 2 pet. 3. 18.  To make a daily progress , till we come unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ , ephes. 4. 13.  But yet when we have done all that we can , our faith is mixed with doubtings , our love to God with love of the world : our tears in repentance need washing in the blood of Christ ; our humility is mixed with pride ; our patience with murmurings , and all our other graces have defects in them : but in death they are all perfected , and thereby we are put into a far better condition than we were capable of in this life . 

Secondly , death puts the saints into the present possession of heaven , a stately place , into which there never did , or can enter any unclean thing : no dirty dog ever trampled upon this golden pavement . it 's called paradise , Luke 23. 43.  Indeed paradise which God made for Adam's palace ( Though the stateliest place that ever the eye of mortal man beheld , wherein was a confluence of all earthly felicities ) was but a type and shadow of it . Heaven is a large place . in my father's house ( Saith our saviour ) there are many mansions , joh. 14. 2.  it 's a golden city , having the glory of God in it , and her light like to a stone most precious , even like a Jasper stone , clear as crystal : and the wall of it is of Jasper : and the city is pure gold , clear as glass , the foundations of the wall are garnished with all manner of precious stones , and the city hath no need of the sun , neither of the moon to shine in it ; for the glory of God doth lighten it , and the lamb is the light thereof , rev. 21. 11 , 19 , 23.  it 's a city whose builder and maker is God , heb. 1. 10. and therefore having such an architect , it must needs infinitely transcend the stateliest fabrics that were ever made by man . It hath been near these six thousand years in preparing , matt. 25. 34. and Christ , ever since his ascension , hath been further preparing of it for us , joh. 14. 2.  i go ( Saith he ) to prepare a place for you . let us say therefore , as Fulgentius did , when he saw the Roman nobility mounted in their pride and bravery . si talis sit roma terrestris , qualis est roma coelestis ? if Rome be such a glorious and glittering place , what is heaven ? How should these considerations make us to grow weary of the world , and groan and breath after heaven , where are riches without rust , pleasure without pain , joy without sorrow , youth without decay , ubi totum sit quod velis , & nihil sit quod nolis : where is all that the heart of man can wish , and his mind desire ; where is nothing more that can be desired , nothing more than can be desired . If an heathen could say , fugiendum est ad clarissimam patriam ; ibi pater , ibi omnia : how much more should a Christian say , let us flee apace to our own country that is above , sith there is our father ; yea , there is all that heart can wish , or need require . 

Thirdly , a third privilege wherewith all the saints departed are invested , is , that they have immediate fellowship with the blessed angels , and the spirits of just men made perfect , heb. 12. 22 , 23.  In heaven they enjoy Abraham , and Isaac , and Jacob , and all the patriarchs , and all the prophets , and apostles , and the noble army of martyrs , their godly friends and relations which went before them , and all other the true members of Jesus Christ , of what tongue , or nation , or kindred soever they have been . One of the greatest happinesses which the godly enjoy in this world , is the communion of saints . The prophet David professeth that all his delight was in the saints , and in those that were most excellent , psal. 16. 3 and though he was a King , yet made he himself a companion of all them that feared God , and of them that kept his precepts , psal. 119. 63.  He would have such , and none but such , by his good will , about him . mine eyes ( Saith he ) shall be upon the faithful of the land , that they May dwell with me : he that walketh in a perfect way , he shall serve me , psal. 101. 6.  And yet , by woeful experience we see how many bones of contention the devil casts in amongst them to sour their society , and what breaches many times are occasioned by small and trifling matters : but in heaven they are all of one mind , which makes their society the more comfortable . When Grinaeus lay on his death bed , he told some friends that came to visit him , that he was going to that place , ubi Luthero cum zuinglio optime convenit : where Luther and Zuinglius ( Who because they differed in judgement about the manner of Christ's presence in the sacrament , could never agree on earth ) agreed excellent well . In heaven ( If there be degreesof glory , as probably there are ) yet shall not those who have their choicest graces crowned with the greatest weight of glory , despise or overlook the meanest saint , but they are perfectly knit together in the bonds of dearest love . 

Fourthly , another privilege which our Christian friends departed enjoy in heaven , is , that they are neerlier united to their head Christ than possibly they could be in this world . it 's true , that even whilst they live here , they are the members of Christ . For the holy apostle tells us , that as we have many members in one body — so we being many are one body in Christ , rom. 12. 4. 5. yet are we now at a great distance from him . Our head is in heaven , and we upon the earth , and therefore saint Paul tells us , that whilst we are at home in the body , we are absent from the Lord , 2 cor. 5. 6. and this makes us sigh and groan , not for that we would be unclothed , but clothed upon , that mortality Might be swallowed up of life , vers. 4.  And this made the church to pray so pathetically , cant. 8. 14.  make haste , my beloved , and be thou like to a roe , or to a young hart upon the mountains of spices . and Paul himself considering his distance from his head , cties out : 

dis cupio solvi , tecumque o christe , manere . 

phil. 1. 23.  i desire to depart , and to be with Christ , which is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; by much far the better . And no marvel , though the members do so long to be conjoined with their head in heaven . For there ( As one saith excellently ) the Lord Jesus Christ perpetually and without intermission manifesteth the most glorious and visible signs of his presence , and seals of his love : he there pours forth all the plenteous demonstrations of his goodness to his members , and gives them eyes to see it , and minds to conceive it , and so fills them with exceeding fullness of love to him again ; so that they even swim in pleasure , and are overwhelmed with joy . A joy too big to enter into them ; and therefore they are said to enter into it , matth. 25. 21.  A glory fit to be believed , than possibly to be discoursed : an exceeding , excessive , eternal weight of glory , 2 cor. 4. 17.  Such a weight , that if the body were not upheld by the mighty power of God , it were impossible but that it should faint under it . Oh therefore let there be continual ascensions in our hearts thitherward . Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to our head in heaven . Praying with the church , even so come Lord Jesus , come quickly , and then ere long he will send his chariots for us ( As Joseph did for his father ) and will fetch us riding upon the clouds , and convoy us by his angels through the air , and put us into that general assembly of happy and blessed souls ; and though death ( Like Peter's good angel ) smite thee on thy side , yet it is only that it May lead thee out of thy prison , through the iron gates into the city of God . 

Fifthly , the next privilege which the saints enjoy in death , is the beatifical vision . Here indeed they see God in a measure , as they are able : but there they shall see him in all fullness , and perfection . Here as in a glass obscurely , or as an old man through spectacles , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ; but in heaven they see him face to face : now they know him in part : but there they know , even as they are known , 1 cor. 13. 12.  Happier herein than Solomon's servants , for a greater than Solomon is there . God looks upon them with singula complacency , and they look upon him with infinite comfort . I cannot better express the happiness which the saints enjoy in this beatifical vision than in the words of a reverend and learned doctor . The saints in heaven , ( Saith he ) that delight in the sight of God's glory , do still desire for ever to be so delighted ; their desire is without anxiety and trouble , because they are satiated with the thing that they do desire , and their satiety is without loathing , because they still desire the thing with which they are satiated . They desire without grief , because they are replenished ; and they are replenished without weariness , because they desire still : they see God , and still they desire to see him : they enjoy God , and still they desire for ever to enjoy him : they love and praise God , and still they make it their immortal business to love and praise him . 

Et quem semper habent , sempere haber volunt . 
Whom they for ever have , with love yet higher ▪ 
To have for ever they do still desire . 


Sixthly & lastly , our friends departed in the Lord , enjoy all these and more than can be spoken ; yea such things as neither eye hath seen , nor ear hath heard , nor can enter into the heart of man to conceive of unto all eternity : hence the prophet David tells us , psal. 16. 11.  — in thy presence is fullness of joy , and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore ; where is as much said in a few words as can be spoken of it . For quality , there is in heaven joy and pleasure ; for quantity , a fullness , a torrent , whereat the saints drink without let or loathing : for constancy , it is at God's right hand , who is stronger than all , neither can any take us out of his hand : it 's a constant happiness without intermission : and for perpetuity , it is for evermore : heavens joys are without measure , mixture , or end . And the apostle Paul tells us , 1 thess. 4. 17.  — we shall ever be with the Lord . it is granted by all , that one of the greatest aggravations of the torments of the damned in hell , is the thought of the eternity of their torment : and therefore it follows by the rule of contraries , that it shall much heighten the felicity and joy of the saints in heaven , to think that they shall continue to all eternity . 

But why should these considerations moderate our mourning for them ? 

First , because if our friends died in the Lord , they have lost nothing by death , but what May well be spared , viz. sin and sorrow : we use not to mourn for such losses of our friends , which are but small and inconsiderable , especially if it be of such things as are better lost than found : but such are the losses of our Christian friends departed . Is it not better to lose sin and sorrow than to retain them ? and upon this account it is , that the wisest of men , Solomon tells us , eccles. 7. 1.  — that the day of death is better than the day of ones birth . The Greeks call the beginning of man's nativity , the begetting of his misery . Man that is born of a woman , is born to trouble , Job 14. 1.  If he lives to see the light , he comes crying into the world : a fletu vitam auspicatur , saith Seneca ; and saint Augustine speaking hereof , saith , nondum loquitur , & tamen prophetat : ere ever a child speaks , he prophecies by his tears , of his ensuing sorrows : nec prius natus , quam damnatus ; no sooner is he born , but he is condemned to the galleys , as it were of sin and suffering : and therefore in this text Solomon prefers his coffin before his cradle ; whereupon one infers , one would wonder ( Saith he ) that our life here being so grievously afflicted , should yet be so inordinately affected ; and yet so it is , that God is even forced to smoke us out of our clayie cottages , and to make our life to be unto us no better than a lingering death , that we May grow weary of it , and breath after a better . 

Secondly , because they are not only not losers , but they are great gainers by death : they are immediately put into a far better condition than they were capable of in this life . The day of death is to them the daybreak of eternal righteousness . It gives them malorum ademptionem , bonorum adeptionem , freedom from all evil , and the fruition of all good . And as it 's not a loss but a preferment and honour for a married woman to forsake her own kindred and father's house to go to her husband ; so it 's not a loss , but a preferment for the souls of our friends for a time to relinquish their bodies , that they May go to Christ , who hath married them to himself for ever . Hence our saviour Christ comforts the dying thief upon the cross with this : this day shalt thou be with me in paradise , Luke 23. 43. why then should we so mourn for them , seeing our loss is their gain ? they are indeed absent from us , but it is that they May be present with the Lord : they have put off the old rags of mortality , that they May be clothed with immortality : they have parted with flesh and blood , that so they May be in a capacity of inheriting the kingdom of heaven , 1 cor. 15. 50.  Justi vivunt ( Saith saint Augustine ) etiam quando corpore moriuntur . godly men live even when their bodies die . They are not lost , but laid up : our grief therefore should not exceed , either for measure or continuance . i would not have you sorrow even as others that have no hope . 

We mourn not for them , but for our own loss : for the loss of their sweet society , and of all the comfort that we expected in and by them ? 

Truly , for this we May mourn : weep not for me , ( Saith Christ to those good women that followed him to his cross ) but weep for yourselves : yet always remember , that though there be reason for weeping and sorrow , yet there is no reason for excessive and immoderate mourning : for that is a sin , and there is no reason , because God hath taken away our friends and relations , that therefore we should further provoke him by sinning against him . Immoderate mourning is a cha•ging of God foolishly : so did not Job , though he rent his mantle , and shaved his head , and fell down upon the ground , yet it was not through impatience , but to worship God ; for the text saith , in all this Job sinned not , nor cha•ged God foolishly , Job 1. 20. with 22.  It was Jacob fault , that he refused to be comforted , and said , for i will go down into the grave , unto my son , mourning : sorrow indeed and lamentation are the dues of the dead ; but it ought not to exceed either for measure or duration : neither should we mourn so much for our friends departed , as for our sins against God . 

But our child that is snatched away by death , was young , and Might have lived not only to have been a great comfort to us , and the staff of our old age , but very instrumental to God's glory . 

First , we must not take upon us to be wiser than God , or to teach him , as when to give us children , so how long to continue them unto us . it 's his royal prerogative , that he May do with his own what he pleaseth . they are not so much our children as gods , ezek. 16. 21.  He doth but put them forth to us to nurse , and May send for them home when he pleaseth . We who are parents would not take it well if having set forth a child to nurse , when we send for it home , the nurse should refuse to part with it , and grow into impatiency when we take it away . Neither can God take it well at our hands . 

Secondly , was your child young when he died ? Yet remember that it was God's mercy to spare him so long . For life is not long enough to deserve the title of time , eccles. 3. 2.  there is a time to be born , and a time to die : he doth not say , there is a time to be born , and a time to live . Death borders upon our births , and ( As one saith ) our cradles stand in our graves . 

Multos ostendunt terris bona fata , nec ultra 
Esse sinunt — finisque ab origine pendet . 


God deals with some , as a skilful limner doth with his masterpiece , brings it , and sets it forth to be gazed at and admired by the multitude ; and after a while draws a curtain over it , and carrieth it back into his house again : so God sends some whom he endows with admirable parts to be looked upon , and wondered at by the world , and then draws the sable curtain of death over them , and takes them into his own habitation in heaven . Indeed the longest liver hath but a short cut from the grave of the womb , to the womb of the grave . orimur , morimur , we are born , we die . And considering the frailty of our lives , it 's no marvel that we die so soon ; it 's rather a marvel that we escaped so long . For mors ubique nos expectat : death waits for us at every turn : in the fields , in the streets , in our houses , in our beds , &c.  mille modis morimur ; we come but one way into the world , but we May go out a thoufand ways . 

Thirdly , did your child die young ? yet if he was ripe for heaven , he lived till he was old enough . Hierom saith of a godly young man , that in brevi vitae spatio tempora virtutum multa replevit , he lived long in a little time . And indeed some live more in a month or two , than others do in many years . A good man ( Saith reverend doctor Preston ) prolongs his days , though he dyes young , because he is ripe before he is taken from the tree : he even falls into the hands of God that gathers him . They that die soon in God's fear and favour , though as grapes they be gathered before they be ripe ; and as lambs slain before they be grown up , yet ( Besides the happiness of heaven ) they have this advantage , that they be freed from the violence of the winepress that others fall into , and escape many rough storms that others meet with . 

Fourthly , did God take away your dear relation whilst he was young ? What then ? Hath God anywhere promised that all shall live till they be old ? Is not mortality the stage of mutability ? Doth not experience show us , that man is but the dream of a dream : but an empty vanity , but the curious picture of nothing , but a poor feeble dying flash ? In Golgotha there are skulls of all sizes . Bernard tells us , senibus mors in januis , adolescentibus in insidiis : death stands at old men's doors , and it lies in wait to surprise young men also . it 's like lightning , that blasts the green corn as well as the dry : like the thunderbolt that dasheth in pieces new and strong buildings as well as old . Do you not know that , as for our lands , so for our lives , we are but God's tenants at will ? Man's life is his day : and we see by experience that days are not all of a length ; but some longer , some shorter . Death is the Lady and Empress of all the world ; and from her sentence the youngest cannot appeal . As the rivers haste to the sea , and the stars to the West , so man hastens to the grave . its domus conventionis , the house of parliament , where all estates and ages meet together . 

Hence it is that we are exhorted to gather manna in the morning of our lives : to remember our creator in the days of our youth , eccles. 12. 1.  To present our first-fruits to God , whose soul desires the first ripe fruits , Micah 7. 1. and who will remember the kindness of our youth , the love of our esponsals , jer. 2. 2.  He would be served with the primrose of our years , and therefore he made choice of the almond-tree , jer. 1. 11. because it blossometh first of all others ; and truly we have reason to obey his precepts , and answer his expectation , if we rightly consider the brevity of our lives . 

Must we keep a mean in our mourning for our deceased friends ? This then May exhort and persuade parents to be careful in training up their children in the faith and fear of God , in bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord , ephes. 6. 4. and to labour to promote and see the work of grace in their souls , that so if they die before them ( As ofttimes they do ) they May have hope in their death , and so not sorrow as do others that have no hope . probably this much aggravated David's sorrow for Absalon , that he had cockered , and not corrected him in his childhood , and he now saw him taken away in his sin and rebellion , whereby he could have no hope of the salvation of his soul . 

So should all other relations do ; endeavouring to be heirs together of the grace of life , that so when death makes a divorce betwixt them , they May leave a well-grounded hope to their friends of their blessed estate and condition , which cannot but much moderate their mourning for them . 

It reproves and justly blames such , as upon the loss of their godly friends , give too much way to Satan's tentations , and their own corruptions , whereby they become immoderate and excessive in their sorrow , to the dishonour of God , the disgrace of their profession , the disfitting themselves both for the service of God and man , in the duties of their general and particular callings , to the prejudice of the health of their bodies ; ( For worldly sorrow causeth sickness , and death , 2 cor. 7. 10.  ) and to the opening of the mouths of the wicked , who scorn them and religion for it , saying , these are your professors , that make idols of their children and friends , and mourn for the loss of them , as if they had lost their god . They are like Rachel , that wept and lamented for her children , and would not be comforted , because they were not . such forget the exhortation which speaks to them as unto children ; my son , despise not thou the chastening of the Lord , nor faint when then art rebuked of him , heb. 12. 5.  prov. 3. 11.  

Indeed we are sometimes in danger of setting light by God's corrections , saying with those sturdy persons , it is my burden , and i must bear it , jerem. 10. 19  But more frequently we are impatient , either outwardly fretting at the rod , like those plunging horses which will not endure their rider ; or inwardly repining , like those horses which digest their choler , by biting their bridles . And if we neither despise , nor impatiently murmur against the dispensation of God , yet our weakness is such , that we are ready to take the affliction too much to heart , so that our spirits droop and faint : and this is so much the worse , because it 's commonly accompanied with a wilful indisposition , which will not suffer us to entertain such things whereby we Might be truly comforted : and the hearts of such many times , like nabals , die within them , that they are not capable of counsel ; so that all consolatory exhortations are to them like water spilt upon the ground : whereas we should take our correction , and humble ourselves under the smart of it : but withal we should look to Christ , and beg of him that he would not suffer our faith , hope and meekness of mind to be overturned . 

Again , consider that it 's not love to them , when we are persuaded , that they are with the Lord , which makes us excessively grieve when they are taken from us : it is indeed self-love and carnal affection . Our Lord Christ told his disciple , if ye loved me , you would be glad because i go to the father . and what measure then do we offer to God herein ? We can many times send our children far from us , where it May be we shall never see them again , if we are but well persuaded that it will be for their good and preferment ; and yet we cannot endure to have them taken out of our sight by the Lord , though we are persuaded that their souls are with him in the highest glory . We ought to labour for such tractable and obedient hearts , as May not be content perforce to let him take them , but May willingly resign even our children ( If it were by sacrificing them with our own hands , as Abraham ) to him , who hath not thought his only begotten son , too dear for us , but hath delivered him to death for our sakes . 

Once more remember , that it 's a sign that we felt not God's love in them , nor received them at his hand as we ought to have done , if we do not thankfully give them back to him when he calls for them . Hannah having received Samuel as a gift gotten by prayer from God , did readily part with him to God again , and she lost nothing by that loan which she so cheerfully lent to the Lord , as you May see , 1 sam. 2. 20 , 21. and so dealt Abraham with his only son Isaac , whom by faith in the promise he had obtained of the Lord , hebr. 11. 17.  

This is true indeed ; but yet parentlike affections cannot easily part with and yield up children so dearly beloved . 

But take heed , lest whilst you plead love to your children or friends , you do not bewray and discover unkindness unto God . Dare any of you say , Lord , if i did not so love them , i could be content to give them to thee : surely if with a calm spirit you think of this , you would blush for shame , that your heart should be so cold towards God , as not to be willing to part with any thing you love when he calls for it : to part with that which you much care not for , is not at all thanks-worthy . it 's said of Abraham , that when God commanded him to sacrifice his own and only son , that he arose early in the morning , gen. 22. 3. to do it : he consulted not with flesh and blood , nor with carnal reason , nor with fond affections , but ( As David said ) he made haste and delayed not to keep God's commandments . how should this shame our backwardness and our many reluctancies against the will of God , when he hath declared it in taking away a dear child or relation from us ? How much better were it for us to do as David did ( That man after God's own heart ) who when he heard that his child was dead , arose from the earth , and washed , and anointed himself , and changed his apparel , and went into the house of the Lord , and worshipped , and then came into his own house , and called for bread , and did eat , 2 sam. 12. 20.  

Again , the consideration hereof May minister singular consolation . 

First , to every godly person , when he lies upon his sick bed , and sees death approaching , and his friends standing about his bed weeping and wring their hands , and that upon a twofold ground . 

First , because himself hath hope in his death , prov. 14. 32.  Death is to him as the valley of Achor : it 's a door of hope to give entrance into paradise , and to translate him into a state of blessedness , whereas to the wicked it 's a trap-door , through which they fall into hell . it 's an excellent saying , improbi dum spirant , sperant : Justus etiam cum expirat , sperat : wicked men hope whilst they live ; but a godly man , when he breathes forth his last , hath hope . He is like unto that dying swan , of which Aelian tells us that sang most sweetly and melodiously at her death , though in her life-time she had no such pleasant note . There is some truth in that saying of the heathen , optimum est non nasci , proximum quam celerrime mori . for wicked men , it had been best for them never to have been born , or being born to die quickly , seeing that by living long they heap up sin , and thereby treasure up wrath against the day of wrath : but as for good men , the day of death is best to them , because here to live is but to lie a-dying ; and eternal life which they are now taking possession of , is the only true life , as saith saint Austin . 

Secondly , because as they have hope themselves in their death , so they leave a good hope to their friends , to quiet their hearts in their loss . Oh what a cutting grief is it to a godly heart , to see a child , or kinsman , or other dear relation taken away , and cut off in the midst of his sins , so that he can have no hope of his blessed estate in another life ! But on the contrary , ( If self-love be not too prevalent with us ) we cannot but moum moderately for those which die in the Lord , and say with holy Job , the Lord hath given , and the Lord hath taken away , blessed be the name of the Lord . how much better cause have such than Tully to cry out , oh praeclarum diem , cum ad illud animorum concilium , coetumque proficiscar , & cum ex hac turba , & colluvione discedam ! oh what a brave and bright day is it to our friends when they go to the congregation-house of blessed spirits , and walk no longer in the way of this world , which is ( Like the land of Chabul ) dirty and dangerous : like the the vale of Siddim , slimy and slippery , full of lime-pits and pitfalls , snares and stumbling-blocks laid by Satan to maim and mischief them . 

Here is comfort also to the parents and relations of this young gentleman now with the Lord , in that they have and May have a well-grounded hope of his now blessed estate in heaven : could he speak to you , you should hear him saying , weep not for me , but weep for yourselves , for i have made a blessed change , and am gone from night to day , from darkness to light , from sorrow to solace , and from a troublesome world to a heaven of happiness . and this brings me to the last thing which i intended , which is to speak something of our deceased brother . But before i begin , i thought fit to make this profession : that i shall speak nothing of him , but what i either observed in him myself , or have from the faithful relations of those which were nearer about him , the truth of whose testimony i dare not call into question : and what i shall speak of him , i shall reduce to these two heads : 

First , to show you what were his privileges . 
Secondly , what improvement he made of them . 
His privileges were these : 
First , that he was born of godly parents , et nasci ex piis parentibus non minima laus est : to be born of godly parents , as it 's no small praise , so it 's no small privilege . the glory of children are their parents , saith Solomon , prov. 14. 6.  It was a great honour to Jacob , that he could swear by the fear of his father Isaac : to David , that he could say , i am thy servant , and the son of thy handmaid , psal. 116. 16.  To Timothy , that the same faith that was in him dwelled first in his mother and grandmother , 2 tim. 1. 5.  To those children whose mother saint John styles the elect Lady : to Mark , that he was Barnabas' sisters son : to Alexander and Rufus , that they were children to Simon of Cyrene , mar. 15. 21.  Now the privilege of such children consists in these two things : 

First , that they have the godly example of their parents , as a copy or continual pattern sor their imitation ; and experience tells us , that children's manners are much moulded by the examples of their parents . it 's reported of the hearts of Scythia , that they teach their young ones to leap from bank to bank , from rock to rock , and from one turf to another , by leaping before them , by which means when they are hunted , no beast can overtake them : so godly parents , by giving a good example of piety to their children when they are young , preserve them from Satan ( That mighty hunter ) that he shall never have them for his prey . 

Secondly , children of believing parents are by virtue of their parent's copy & God's gracious entail , within the compass of the covenant , as appears gen. 17. 7.  i will establish my covenant between me and thee , and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant , to be a God unto thee , and to thy seed after thee , and psal. 112. 2.  David speaking of the blessedness of that man that feareth the Lord , adds , his seed shall be mighty upon earth ; the generation of the upright shall be blessed : and act. 2. 39  Peter tells us , the promise is made to you , and to your children : and Paul to the same purpose adds , if the first fruit be holy , the lump is also holy ; and if the root be holy , so are the branches , rom. 11. 16.  

Secondly , a second privilege was , that presently after his coming into the world , he was by the care of his godly parents presented before and dedicated unto God , being made a visible member of the church by baptism , which is called a laver of regeneration , and renewing of the holy ghost , tit. 3. 5. yea , baptism is said to save us , 1 pet. 3. 21.  To wit , sacramentally ; because it seals up salvation to the believer , mar. 16. 16. and it is of perpetual and permanent use to him for that purpose throughout his whole life , ut scaturigo semper ebulliens ; as a fountain bubbling up to eternal life . And truly this his privilege was the greater , if we consider how many poor infants are deprived of it , through the default of their parents in these last and worst of times , who yet pretend much to religion . 

Thirdly , that with Timothy , from a child he was taught to know the scriptures , which are able to make one wise to salvation , 2 tim. 3. 15. and his Christian parents were the more careful to instruct him therein , because themselves had found it fit milk for babes , 1 pet. 2. 2. dainty and delicious food , sweeter than honey , psal. 119. 103. wells of salvation , isa. 12. 3.  breasts of consolation , isa. 66. 11. the hony-drops of Christ's mouth , cant. 4. 11.  To be preferred before gold and silver , psal. 19 11.  Before pearls and rubies , prov. 3. 15.  Before all other learning , deut. 4. 6.  They knew that the scriptures are a lamp to our feet , as saith David , psal. 119. 105.  God's epistle to us , as saith Gregory : the soul's food , as Athanasius : the soul's physic , as Chrysostom : the invariable rule of truth , as Irenaeus , &c. their care therefore was so to acquaint him with them from his childhood , that he Might love them as his sister , prov. 7. 4. that he Might be ready in them , and have them always , as Saul had his spear at his bolster : as David had his stones at hand in his scrip . And thus ( According to the apostles rule , ephes. 6. 4.  ) he was brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord . 

Fourthly , it was his privilege , and happiness to be brought forth in such a time , and to be brought up in such a city , wherein he enjoyed more plentiful means of grace and salvation than he could have done in former times , and ( I dare boldly say ) in any other city or place in the Christian world besides . We read of Plato , that when he drew near unto his death , he rejoiced and gave God thanks for three things : first , for that he had made him a reasonable man , and not a bruit beast . Secondly , a Greek , and not a barbarian . and thirdly , that he was born in the time of Socrates , from whom be had learned many good instructions . How much more cause had this gentleman to praise God for making him a man , a Christian , and a Londoner at such a time as this ? 

Fifthly , his parents were not only thus careful betimes to bring him up in the knowledge and fear of God , but to have him instructed in human learning also , that thereby ( If the Lord should please to lengthen out the thread of his life ) he Might be the more useful and serviceable in his generation : for which end 

First , they took care to have him taught the first grounds of learning , and that betimes in his childhood , whereby he excelled and out went not only many of his contemporaries , but divers that were older than himself . 

Secondly , when he was thus fitted at home , they placed him forth at a Boarding-school , in the family of a godly minister , that so , whilst he went forward in human , he Might make a further progress in divine learning also . 

Thirdly , when they thought fit to take him back under their own wing ( Being exceeding tender of him ) and not daring to trust him in a public school , by reason of those many evil examples that he Might meet with there , they provided a godly and learned tutor whom they maintained in their own house , to have the oversight and education of him . 

These were his privileges . Now fot his improvement of them . 

But before i mention that , i must tell you with what parts God had endowed him , whereby he was enabled to make a good improvement of these opportunities : and therein especially these three things were remarkable . 

First , that he had a quick invention . 
Secondly , a strong and active fancy . 
Thirdly , a diligent and industrious spirit . 
And by help of these he quickly learned to read and write , and so proceeded to the grounds of the Latin tongue ; and after he had made a good progress therein , the care of his tutor was to acquaint him also with the sacred languages of the Greek and Hebrew : and then he applied himself to the study of the arts : first , of logic , then of philosophy , astronomy , geography ; and ( Being denied the opportunity of travelling abroad ) he spent some time in reading history , and the travels of sundry persons both by sea & land . And lastly , being admitted a member of that honourable society of Grays-inn , he betook himself to the study of the law , and made no inconsiderable progress therein : by all which ( If God had lengthened out his days ) he Might probably have been very serviceable to his country . All which being considered , i May say with a reverend divine , that it 's a blessed institution of younger years , when reason and religion are together fashioned and moulded in a tender mind . 

But that which gave him the greatest lustre , and was ( As it were ) the diamond in the ring , is yet behind , which i shall reduce to these three heads . 

First , his piety to God . 
Secondly , his dutifulness to his parents . 
Thirdly , his charity to the poor . 
His piety to God manifested itself , both 
In his life ; and 
At his death . 
In his life . by 
First , his constant and diligent attending upon the public ordinances , wherein he was not an idle and careless hearer , but could in the evening give a good account of what he had heard in the day . 

Secondly , his careful sanctification of the whole Sabbath , insomuch as if ( Through inadvertency ) any unfitting and unseasonable speeches had proceeded from him on that day , his heart smote him for it , and it made him more cautious for the future . 

Thirdly , besides his joining in family-prayers , and with his tutor , his manner was , to retire daily into his closet , where he first read a portion of scripture , and that not cursorily as too many do , but endeavouring to understand what he read ; and when he met with any hard place , he used to inquire of his tutor , therein following the advice of a worthy divine : the difficulties which we meet with in reading the word of God ( Saith he ) should not weaken , but waken our more diligent search ; not being contented with the first oar that offers itself to our view ; but digging deeper and deeper we should search till we become owners of the whole treasure , which will sufficiently pay us for all our pains . After the scripture read he betook himself to prayer : in which duties , if he was disturbed , he was displeased with it , and what at one time he omitted , he used to regain at another ; all which he carried on with such privacy , that scarce any , besides his tutor , knew of it . 

Fourthly , to these also of late he adjoined meditation , which is an excellent character of a godly person : for , as the philosopher's stone ( They say ) turns all metal into gold : as the bee sucks honey out of every flower : and as a good stomach sucks some wholesome nourishment out of the food that it receives into itself : so doth an holy heart , so far as its sanctified , convert and digest all into spiritual and useful thoughts and meditations : and we shall find by experience , that when we go to sleep with some holy meditations in our minds , it will be an excellent preservative against foolish dreams and ••••ciess , and we shall find our hearts in the better frame when we awake : as he that rakes up his fire over night , shall find it again in the morning , psal. 119. 15 , 16.  prov. 6. 22.  Now of his dexterity in this kind , i shall anon give you an example , which he hath left in writing behind him . 

Fifthly , he reverenced and loved godly ministers and Christians , and liked that ministry best that was most plain , powerful , and searching . I remember that Luther in his me observed two sorts of divines : one was theologus crucis , the poor divine , that preached plainly , and told men faithfully how things stood with them : the other was theologus gloriae , the divine that hunted after praise , glory , and preferment ; concerning whom his prayer was , a theologo gloriae liberet suam ecclesiam dominus ; that God would deliver his church from vainglorious divines . Peter so preached ; that his hearers were pricked at the heart , act. 2. 37 , 38. and Steven's hearers were cut at the heart ▪ with his words , act. 7. 54.  And truly this was the more commendable in this young gentleman , seeing there be so many at this time , and in this city , that are like those Greeks , that Counted the plain preaching of the cross foolishness , 1 cor. 1. 22. 23. so that neither God , nor his ministers can please them , except they speak tinkling and tickling words . But such should get their ears healed ( As Demosthenes advised his countrymen of Greece to do ) before they can hear God's word with profit . They must learn of bees to pass by roses and violets , and to sit upon Thime , though it be bitter ; and to prefer sound rebukes before smooth flatteries . 

Sixthly , he was willing to be admonished , and reproved for what was amiss in him , being herein of David's mind , psal. 141. 5.  let the righteous smite me , it shall be a kindness ; and let him reprove me , it shall be an excellent oil which shall not break my head . he was one of those that had an obedient ear to reproofs , of whom Solomon speaks , prov. 25. 12.  as an ear-ring of gold , and an ornament of fine gold ; so is a wise reprover to an obedient ear . and this is one good sign of a godly wise man , prov. 15. 5.  he that regards reproof , is prudent , and vers. 31. the ear that heareth the reproof of life , abides amongst the wise . Hesiod tells us of three sorts of men : first , such as live so well that they need no reproof ; these are best of all . Secondly , such as do not so well , but can be content to hear of it ; and these ( Saith he ) are not bad . Thirdly , such as will neither do as they ought , nor be advised to do better ; these are in a very dangerous condition , such May read their doom , and see their destiny , psal. 50. 21 , 22.  truth ( Saith one ) is sharp , but bitter though it be , yet it is better and more savoury to sound senses , than the hony-drops of a flattering tongue . 

Seventhly , he ( By God's grace ) resisted tentations from some of his familiars , who would have drawn him to taverns , and mildly reproved them for it . Concerning all these i shall present you with the attestation of his tutor , given me in writing , and that in his own words . 

he was ( saith he ) when i came to him ( which was about four years ago ) a Christian youth , well principled in the grounds of religion , and i left him a little before he died ( which was about the eighteenth year of his age ) knowing what was in the assemblies confession of faith , in Wollebius , and what Altingius in his didactica hath written : of late also he delighted much to read Calvin's institutions , and b. Hall's meditations , and of his knowledge of the things of God , yea of the hardest of them , i have found satisfaction after trial : he not only knew God , but loved him , and in his last sickness , wept to think that he had , and did love God no more . He was a lover of the children and ministers of God ; and amongst his acquaintance he valued them most , in whom he saw most of virtue . He heard the word , and could retain and judge of what he heard , and did not so much affect flaunting and quaint preaching , as that which spoke most home to his heart . In his closet , before he came out of his chamber , he read a portion of scripture , from which he hath raised pertinent observations , when put to the trial ; and what he knew not , that he asked . He read with judgement , and hath said , that all other books but the bible did bring weariness : & to his reading he joined prayer : i have seen him displeased , when disturbed , and what at one time he omitted , at another time he would repair ; and this he carried on with so little noise , that i only was privy to it . 



Thus you have heard of his piety manifested in his life : & vita qualis , finis talis ; as was his life , such was his death . For , 

In his last sickness ( Which was the small pox accompanied with a fever ) he bore it with great patience . He enquired of his tutor , how he Might know that he loved God ? and being answered , he broke forth into tears : and when his tutor asked him , why he wept ? he answered , because he had loved God no more , nor made a better improvement of his former deliverances . Yet he said , that the word of God was his meditation , the promises whereof did now comfort him . He was sensible of his approaching death , and the night before , told some about him , that he should not live another night . One of his last words was , i must be gone . 

The next thing that i propounded to speak of was , his dutifulness to his parents , which can be testified by many : indeed they were very tender of him , and indulgent towards him , yet did not he abuse their love to liberty , nor through familiarity contemn their authority , but was many times content to refrain from things lawful and suitable to his desires , to give them satisfaction . 

Neirher was his charity to the poor less remarkable than the two former . For from his childhood he would often go to the servants to fetch relief fot such poor as came to his father's door . And being grown up to more maturity , he frequently distributed money amongst them , & would many times say , that if God ever brought him to the enjoyment of his estate , he would as constantly make provision for such as were in want , as for himself and family . He knew that , temporalia dei servis impensa , non pereunt , sed parturiunt , alms given to the poor , perish not , but multiply : that bounty is the most compendious way to plenty ; and that hereby he Might lay up a good foundation for himself against the time to come , 1 tim. 6. 18.  He knew that rich men's houses should be God's storehouses ; and that sowing oft of this fruitful seed , we shall be sure to reap in our greatest need : and God is not unrighteous to forget our labour of love in this kind , heb. 6. 10.  Oh! how May this shame many rich men that keep no proportion between their increases for God , and increases from God : that though they are rich in this world , yet they are poor in good works : they lay not by for pious and charitable uses , as God hath blessed them , 1 cor. 16. 2.  But indeed are , the richer the harder , as children that have their mouths full , and both hands full , and yet will part with none , but spill it rather . Men when they grow fat , have so much the less blood : so the fatter men are in their estates , the less blood , life , and spirits they have for God : or if they do give something , yet they do not love mercy , Micha 6. 8. they are not ready to distribute , willing to communicate . 1 tim. 6. 18. their mercy doth not flow from them like water from the fountain , or light from the sun , naturally and freely : but it must be wrung from them , like verjuice from the crab , or as distilled water , that is forced out by the heat of the fire . 

it 's no marvel therefore that this charitable frame of heart contributed so much towards the comfortable end of this our deceased brother . I remember what Hierom saith , non memini me legisse malâ morte mortuum , qui libenter opera charitatis exercuit : habet enim multos intercessores . i do not remember ( Saith he ) that i ever read of any one that died an ill death that was frequent in works of charity ; and no marvel , sor he hath many intercessors for him ; which agrees with that of David , psal. 112. 9  he hath dispersed , he hath given to the poor , his righteousness endures for ever , his horn shall be exalted with honour , and psal. 41. 3. the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing : thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness . 

Having thus dispatched those three things that i proposed to speak to , i Might add much more , by telling you of his humility in concealing himself and his own parts , as the sweet violet that grows low , near unto the ground , and withal hides itself under its own leaves . Of his sweet and affable nature , and loving and courteous disposition : of his indefatigable diligence in his employments , and shunning , yea hating of idleness . I shall only add one word more of his ingeniousness in , and the usefulness of his recreations , which were divers : one while he exercised himself in the art of dialling ; another while he applied himself to music : but i shall say no more of these , because he attained not to any perfection in them ; that which he followed with most diligence and delight was the art of drawing , painting , and limning , whereof he hath left many very good pieces for so young a practitioner ; and had he lived longer , probably he would have attained to a great perfection therein . He had also a poëtical vein , whereof i shall give you a taste by and by . 

his meditation upon the history of Christ's transfiguration , matth. 17. 1 , &c.  

Jesus Christ is so willing that we should have communion with him in this life , that he takes us up into his most secret retirements . 

Prayer is a divine ascension , and whosoever would pray spiritually , must have an holy elevation of spirit to meet God in that duty . 

High turrets of faith and mountains of graces are the real helps in prayer . 

In prayer we are sure to enjoy God's presence . it 's a sure way to see God face to face ; and ( If i May so say ) in his natural complexion : we May meet with God , as Moses did in the mount Sinai of prayer . 

It was in the mount praying when the fashion of Christ's countenance was altered : it is in the mountain of prayer that Christ's purity appeareth more and more to a believer . 

Never more whiteness do believers see in Christ , then in their prayers to him . 

In this life the saints have a taste of the glistering and whiteness of his outside : but in the life to come it is that they have immediate fruition of himself : in this life we only see a sudden transfiguration to stay our stomaches ( As i May say ) till hereafter at what time we shall see him as he is : and if this transfiguration appears white 

He began to write a book in verse , which he calls spuma musarum , which he purposed to dedicated to his father and mother ; i shall only give you an account of the first verses in it , that by them you May judge of the rest . 

rete venatur ventos . to hunt the winds with a net . 

thou that dost strive the winds with net to catch , 
unfruitful labours to thyself dost hatch : 
what! catch the wind ? If caught , thou 'lt not enjoy 
thy dear times worth to purchase such a toy : 
and when y' have done , look in your net , you 'll find 
all that remains is folly , yea , and wind . 
many littles make a much . 

't is unity brings strength ; if then you 'd have 
Strong , noble virtues , vices to outbrave , 
Unite your weak-limbed forces , and you 'll see 
Many a little will a much be . 


T. b.  

Finis . 

Upon the death of that pious young gentleman Mr. Thomas Bewlije . 

Thomas Beulije . Anagram , oh beati humiles . 

If either fate or fortune had 
Made such a breach among us , 
I should have called them blind , or mad , 
Or envious , thus to wrong us . 
I should have in my showers of tears expressed 
A weeping eye with furious anger dressed . 
That when in all the garden did 
But one choice flower appear , 
It should be thus nipped in the bud , 
Who can with patience bear ? 
But most in that in this one flower alone , 
The sole hope of the root is overthrown . 
But stay ! it was a better hand , 
More sacred and more wise , 
Then fate or fortune can command : 
[ those heathen-deities . ] 
The root 's not dead , the flower is but transplanted , 
With added beauty which before it wanted . 
And happy they who humbly can submit 
To him whose wisdom hath transplanted it . 
Thomas beulye . Anagram . thy love-beams . 

thy love-beams Lord , so strongly shone on me , 
That i impatient was of more delays ; 
But needs must leave the earth to go , and see 
The sacred fountain of those glorious rays . 
Thomas Beulie . Anagram . the smile above . 

* * the posy of the ring given at the funeral . set your affections on things above , 
Not things of sense ▪ 
It was the smile above , loadstone of love , 
That drew me hence . 
Ad parents . 

Thomas Beaulie . Anagram . leave me as i both . 

leave me as i both you , 't is for our gain ; 
When you know how i do , you 'll not complain . 
Thomas bewlie . Anagram . I 'm well as both . 

I 'm well as both you can be ; nay i am 
Better , because triumphing with the lamb : 
Yet I 'm not gone for ever , our parting is , 
Till death unlock for you this door of bliss . 
J. c. a. m.  

on the death of that ingenious , industrious , and pious young gentleman , Mr. Thomas bewlie junior . 

Oh death ! of terrors King ! could nothing move 
Thee to suspend this stroke ! no not the love , 
Nor cries of parents , tutor , friends , and all 
That knew his worth , and now bemoan his fall ! 
nor 's age ! ( But eighteen years ! ) nor that estate , 
To which this only son was destinate ! 
Not's active soul ! and hand ! nor 's nimble head ! 
nor 's skill in common-law could thee out-plead ? 
nor 's tongues ! nor 's logic ! nor 's philosophy ! 
nor 's drawing ! Limning ! nor his poetry ! 
Not disposition sweet ! nor 's gracious heart ! 
Not's love to God nor that he did impart 
To saints ! not's pity great to poor , and such 
As age and chance with want afflicted much ! 
No! servant like , thou but to pass didst bring 
The counsel wise , of God his sovereign King : 
Who at this time , and thus , hath cropped this rose , 
With 's hand of love ; and giu'ned a safe repose , 
In heaven above , where he doth clearly see , 
What in his mountain thoughts he spied to be . 
Then cease you parents , tutor , friends , to wail , 
He is with God , your grief cannot avail . 
Another . 

View underneath this stone , a fancy choice ; 
Invention good , a sed'lous hand to poise 
The greatest things , a mind made wise by grace ; 
And tongues with arts not scantlingly t' embrace . 
His parent's joy ; now grief : his kindred's loss . 
o' th' bewlies phoenix here remains the dross . 
on the death of his dear friend and cousin , Mr. Thomas Bewley junior , gent.  

Art fled , dear soul ? and is thy purer breath 
Become a victim ? ah ! too rich for death . 
Could not the rivulets from thy parent's eyes 
Prevail for once to drown the destinies ? 
or 's death so envious ? that th' art only shown , 
Cropped , like a bud , before thou were 't well blown . 
Envious indeed , in that he doth deny 
Us the enjoyment of thy company . 
Which joined with goodness , and a candid mind , 
Must few aequators , no ascendent find . 
But here , methinks , injustice taints my will , 
In that while worth'less i would take my fill 
In traffic sure divine ; ( Of which each part 
Throughout thy soul Might make a several mart. ) 
I envy thee that perfect happy shore , 
To which on earth 't was thy desire to soaere . 
Injust ( Perhaps ) it seems , yet let me say 
That though i could have wished a longer stay : 
So great 's thy gain in thy friends greatest loss , 
That we 'll conjoin the harp unto the cross . 
To thee thy parents greatest love did run , 
A fit meridian for affections sun ; 
and nature will have vent , perhaps immerse 
Their eyes in tears attending on thy hearse . 
Yet should but an impartial judge stand by , 
he 'd think your tears from passions contrary 
Proceeded , that that seeming dismal sound 
Did not through sorrow , but through joy abound . 
that 's love indeed , if parents don't complain 
At their own loss , if 't be their children's gain . 
'Twixt joy and sorrow . T. e.  





doct.  doct.  doct.  doct.  doct.  dr , Tuck doct.  doct.  doct.  doct.  doct.  doct.  doct.  quest . answ . object . ans. quest . answ . quest . answ . dr. s•ought dr. Tuckney rev. 21. 2• . rev. 22. 20.  dr. Hall . dr. Reynold . Mr. Trapp . quest . answ . object . answ . gen. 37. 35.  object . answ . use . 1 pet.   . 7.  use . joh 14. 28.  Mr. Baines . object . answ . psa. 119. 60.  use . gen. 31. 53.  Mr. pat. Drummond . 





















