THE CHRISTIAN LIFE AND DEATH , OF MISTRESS KATHERINE BRETTERGH , LATE wife of Master WILLIAM BRETTERGH , of Bretterghoult , in the County of Lancaster Gentleman . With the manner of a bitter conflict she had with Satan , and blessed conquest by CHRIST , before her death , to the great glory of God , and comfort of all beholders . 

MICHA . 7. 8.  

Rejoice not against me , OH mine enemies : though I fall , I shall rise again : And when I sit in darkness , the Lord shall be a light unto me . 



PSALM . 37. 37.  

Mark the upright man , and behold the just : for the end of that man is peace . 



LONDON , Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON . 1634.  

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER , grace and peace in JESUS CHRIST . 

When Achimaaz the son of Zadoc requested that he might be the messenger to bring David word of Absoloms death , joab would not suffer him : thou shall not ( saith he ) be the messenger to day , but thou shalt carry news another time , but to day thou shalt carry none ; for the King's son is dead . He knew David's affection was such , that the news of his child's death would be most heavy to him , and the messenger himself not welcome for his message sake . 

This is all our infirmity , no tidings more grievous to us , then when we hear of the death of those whom we love . The Parent bewails his Child , the Husband his Wife , the Friend laments the death of his Friend , and we think it the loss of another friend to depart with this our grief . jacob mourned for joseph his son , that he would not be comforted of a long season , but thought he would weep for him as long as he lived . When the Amalekites had burned Ziklag , and led away captive the men's wives and their children , David and his campany wept , till they could weep no more . When Lazarus died , his sisters , Martha and Mary were much discomforted for him . So heavy a thing we see it is to be severed for a time from those that are dear unto us . One only thing there is , which is able in this case much to temper our affections ; when we see our friend to die in the Lord ; that is , in comfort of conscience , and assurance of salvation through Christ.  

This blessed departure God gives to many , for diverse good purposes . First , that the world may know that peace is the end of the just , and comfort in death is the portion of the righteous . Secondly , That his eternal truth in our holy profession may appear to be able to comfort us , not only in our life , but in our death also , when all other comforts forsake us. Thirdly , that our enemies may see our faith is not in vain . Fourthly , that the weak by their example may be encouraged to a holy life , when they see it bring with it so happy a death , and that they may be strengthened against the fear of death , seeing it is always comfortable to those that lead a godly life . Fifthly , and finally , that the friends of the departed , by their heavenly departure , may be admonished not to mourn so much for their death , as to rejoice for their life , and to thank God , that ever it was their lot , in any degree to be joined or matched with so blessed servants of God.  

This Gentlewoman , Mistress Katherine Brettergh was one of this number : her life , as long as God continued it , was dear to those among whom she was , as the life of a friend might be . Her husband , friends , kinsfolks , brethren , sisters , and all the godly that knew her , enjoyed a great blessing of God of her : and her death ( no doubt ) was grievous to her husband , as the death of a virtuous yoke-fellow . 

This is the thing I thought with profit might be presented to the view of other also that knew her not : for when I had for my own private use , and the use of my friends faithfully collected ( out of the fresh memories of those that were present , and eie-witnesses as well as myself ) and set down the manner of her sickness and death : I considered , that the knowledge thereof could not but be welcome to all those that desire to die the death of the righteous . And so the same causes that moved me to collect it , gave me also occasion to publish it . I remembered the saying of one , That it is is great piety to set forth the virtues of the departed , if they have excelled therein ; yea it is a means to increase grace in ourselves . I thought so great mercy of God showed to one among us , ought not to be forgotten , but should remain to us and our children an example , to teach us how good God is to them that love him , and to assure us that he will never forsake us ; but , in like manner as he did her , help and comfort us , when we shall by death be called unto him . I considered the ungodly and uncharitable tongues of the Papists abiding in our Country , who , since her death , have not ceased to give it out , that she died despairing , and by her comfortless end , showed that she professed a comfortless Religion . Wherein they bewray their malice and madness , and show themselves of what generation they are , even a people ( saith jeremie ) which bend their tongues like bows for lies : and ( as David saith ) make ready their arrows to shoot at them which are upright in heart . And lastly , when I remembered the censure given by our Saviour Christ of the woman , that poured costly ointment on his head , a little before his Passion , though some of his Disciples unjustly blamed her for the same , saying , What needed this waist ? yet he himself did not only excuse her for that fact , saying , she did it to bury him : but also commanded , that wheresoever the Gospel should be preached throughout the world , there also that which she had done should be spoken of , for a memorial of her . Even so , seeing this virtuous Gentlewoman hath been unjustly accused by some popish persons , I thought it ●it , that she should not only be justly excused , but also that a true history of her holy life , and Christian death , should be now published in print , as a brief history to be seen and read for a memorial of her . 

I had no other odours wherewith to embalm her , I am but the penman , the thing itself was her own , wrought in her by the spirit , of divine providence , the which God grant that we may all imitate . 

Amen . 

The holy Life and Christian Death , of Mistress KATHERINE BRETTERGH . 

This Gentlewoman was born in Cheshire , the daughter of john Breven of Brevenstapleford Esquire , well descended , and of an ancient House . Her education before her marriage was such , as became the profession of the Gospel , in godliness and purity of life and Religion , and well beseemed the house where she was brought up . The Scriptures she knew from a child , and by reading thereof , gained such knowledge , that she was able readily to apply them when occasion was offered , as we may see at the time of her death , and that so fitly , and effectually , that she seemed to have made them her daily meditation . For the things of this world she was moderate , and sober , and by her Christian life and death , she might teach many Gentlewomen , how vain the pleasures and fashions of this World are , and how far unable to bring that peace to a distressed heart , that the embracing of true Religion can . 

She used not to ga● abroad with wand'ring Di●ah , to ●●ncing gr●eneses , markets , or public assemblies ; but rather with Hannah did choose to tread upon the dust of the Sanctuary , and walk in the ways of Zion ; yea , with David rather to be a doorkeeper in the house of God than to have society with the wicked , or to dwell in the tents and tabernacles of the ungodly . The Sabbath day was always dear and welcome to her , what time she would not be without the Word preached , though many times she went far for it . Her delight was still to consecrate it glorious to the Lord And as it is said of josiah , his heart melted when he heard the Law ; so may it be said of her , her heart was so tender , and full of compassion , that oftentimes she was scene to hear Sermons , read , pray , and meditate with tears . 

She made conscience of all slave ; yea , of the least sin , such as worldlings count no sin : she never used to swear oath great nor small ; nor yet to abuse her tongue with vain or unseemly speeches ; no not so much as a iest-lye , or immodest word ; neither durst she name the Name of GOD , or take his titles in her mouth without great reverence . In private speech where she might speak with profit , she did it so well , that her speeches might have been delivered by a stronger vessel than herself : her words being so well seasoned , and proceeding from such a sanctified heart , did always minister grace to the hearers . 

To read , to pray , to sing , to meditate , was her daily exercise ; and her chiefest delight was in the holy society of the Saints upon earth ( which I say not for any cause , but only to show the fountain from whence her godly end flowed , and that the World may see some there be , which choose rather to be joined with the people of God , than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season ; and these I doubt not have chosen the better part . ) Finally , the precepts of the Lord were precious unto her ; for from her childhood she feared God , and walked before him : both knowledge and sanctification did join in her , the fruits and effects whereof did appear in her life , and was seen at her death , to the glory of God , and comfort of all beholders . 

She was not like the simple Popish women of our days , which are ever learning , and neverable to come to the knowledge of the truth ; but rather like the Noble men and women of Berea , which received the Word of God with readiness , and were able to discern of Paul and Silas preaching . But why do I speak of Popish women , whose understandings are darker than the darkness of Egypt : Let us come and examine many other which seem to detest Popery , and ask them a reason of their faith ; they can tell you a tale of their ruffs , and their pride , and their vanity : but for Religion , it is the least thing they regard , or seek to know : which I speak not so much to solace myself in the sins and simplicity of others , as earnestly desiring all Gentlewomen , that either knew this holy Saint of God , or hereafter shall hear of her , in stead of your glasses at home , wherein you prick and prune , and pin yourselves , to look into this glass before your eyes , that so her life , and death , may be an example for you to follow . 

When she was about twenty years old , ( by the consent of herself and her friends ) she was married to a young Lancashire Gentleman , Master William Brettergh of Bretterghoult near Liverpoole : one that likewise embraced Religion sincerely , and for the same endured many grievances at the hands of Papists . 

Two years and more she lived after she was married , and had issue only one daughter : during which time , this couple lived together in such mutual joy and comfort , as well beseemed the children of God , which make profession of his truth . And although this Gentlewomen came from the inhabitants of Abraham , to dwell in Sodom , amid the tents of Kedar , that is to say , among inhuman hands of brutish Papists , enduring many temporal grievances from them yet her knowledge , patience , mild inclination , and constancy for the truth was such , as that her husband was farther builded up in Religion by her means , and his face daily more and more hardened against th● devil , and all his plaguy agents : the Popish Recusants , Church Papists , profane Atheists , and carnal protestants , which swarmed together like cornets in those parts . 

It is not unknown to Lancashire , what Horses and cattle of her husbands were killed upon his grounds in the night , most barbarouslie at two several times by S●mi●ary Priests , ( no question ) and Recusants that lurked thereabouts . And what a l●sse and hindrance it was unto him , being all the stock he had on his grounds to any purpose : This fell out not long after she was married to him ; yet this was so far from dismaying her , or working such passions in her , as are common to her sex , that she rather rejoiced , then sorrowed ; turning it into matter of praising God , and submitting herself to his good providence . oft she would have said , It is good that such things be ; but woe be to them that do them . It is good in God , thereby to chasten his children , and prevent some sin , which he saw us like to fall into . It is good in respect of God's Church , that the weak may be confirmed in the truth ; and that Papistry may be disgraced , when the World shall see such wickedness flow from it . It is good in GOD , that so the wicked may be without excuse at the day of judgement , when their conscience shall tell them , that howsoever GOD suffers them to do such villainy for some just cause known to himself ; yet they commit it only of malice and revenge . Oftentimes also in these vexations , she would have said ; the mercies of God are infinite , who doth not only by his Word , but also by his Justice , make us fit for his Kingdom . Little do our enemies know , what good by these things they do unto us , and what wrack they bring to their own Kingdom , while they se● forth the wickedness thereof . Many times she would pray that God would forgive them , which had done them this hurt , and send them repentance : and she would call upon her husband , that he would do the like , and bless them that cursed him . And for fear lest her husband should fail in that point through infirmity and weakness , as it is said of job , who offered sacrifice for his sons , lest peradventure they should sin , and blaspheme God in their hearts : so she never failed , but daily prayed unto the Lord to sanctify her husband's thoughts , and direct his heart aright , only to seek God's glory , without either desire of revenge , or satisfying his own affections . So humble was her spirit , so careful to avoid and prevent sin , both in herself and others : and so mild of nature , that as jacob with his mildness softened the malicious heart of Esau his brother : and David by his kindness in the cave , changed the fury of Saul , into weeping and confession , that David was more righteous than he : so she by her meekness , humility , and unspotted carriage in the World , forced some of the adversaries to religion , to speak well of her . 

For her life , she was well reported of all that knew her . Pitiful and bountiful was she to the poor , and slacked no opportunity to do good wherein she could ; but constantly held her course , and kept her times of praying , reading , and meditating , ( wherein she had plentiful gifts ) and contiwasly used the same at such times as were fitting for her estate , sex , and calling . At the exercises of Religion , as prayer and instruction in her family , she would not be wanting : besides private prayer , and meditation which she omitted not , but used daily , both in her chamber , as also abroad secretly and solitarily in the Orchard , Garden , or Fields , as Isacks manner was . In reading the Scriptures she used evermore to task herself , eight Chapters a day at the least , and for the time which she saw evil or idly spent , without doing some good , she used to call the time of tentation . Many times also she would read some godly writer , or expositor of Scripture , or in the book of Martyrs ; and was seen to weep most bitterly , when either she had read of that which touched her affections near , or of the cruel Martyrdom , which the dear Children of God were put unto , by the cruel and wicked tyrants of former days . 

For Popery , she saw it so gross and foolish , that she would not once name it , except it were to argue against it , but never for it : so zealous was she of God's glory , and loved the truth so entirely , that she would not once open her mouth to pled for Baal . 

Sin above all things was hateful unto her , for thereat she would have grieved , as well when she had seen it in others , as in herself . One or two examples I cannot omit , wherein she bewrayed a worthy spirit , sanctified by the Spirit of God , and prepared for all the assaults of Satan . On a time , as her husband and she were riding toward the Church , he was angry with his man : Alas husband ( quoth she ) I fear your heart is not right towards God , that can be thus angry for a trifle : And weeping she said further , you must pray against this your affection , and always be sure your anger be of God , for else how dare you appear this day before his Minister ? And offer up your prayers in the public congregregation of the saints of God ? Another time , a Tenant of her husbands , being behind with his rent , she desired him to bear yet with him a quarter of a year , which he did : and when the man brought his money , with tears she said to her husband : I fear you do not well to take it of him though it be your right , for I doubt he is not well able to pay it , and then you oppress the poor . So great a compassion had she of other men's wants , that all things being duly considered , and rightly weighed , methinks I may say of her , as Paul said of Timothy , I know none like minded . 

Thus after she was married , she continued in the things she had learned , and held her profession with much sincerity , that the common enemies to our religion ( the very Papists ) had nothing to say against her , but confessed her life was unreprovable . And as for the godly that knew her , they always acknowledged that modesty , and virtuous carriage in her , joined with knowledge and practice of all the duties of religion , that they had lust cause to report of her , as of a sound and faithful professor of the Gospel . 

Two years , and something more she lived with her husband , till about 〈◊〉 , it pleased God to send her that sickness whereof on Whitsonday 1601. she died . 

Her sickness took her in the manner of a hot burning Ague , which made her according to the nature of such diseases , now and then to talk somewhat idly , and through the tempters subtlety , which abused the infirmity of her body to that end , as he oftentimes useth to do in many , from idle words , to descend into a heavy conflict , with the infirmity of her own spirit ; from the which yet the Lord presently and wonderfully delivered her , giving so joyful an issue to the tentation , that she might well use the words of the Prophet , as afterwards she did , For a moment OH Lord thou didst hide thy face from me , for a little season , but with everlasting mercy thou hadst compassion on me . On Saturday seven-night before Whitsonday , what time she sickened , she began to feel some little infirmity and weakness of faith , more than she had wont to show , but she soon overcame it . On Monday night it increased upon her , and the assault of the enemy began to be sharp , and so continued till the next day at afternoon ; what time God delivered her , and sent her peace , and comfort of conscience , and so increased the same in her continually till she died . The manner of her affliction was this : 

First , the severity of God's justice , and the greatness of her sins began to come into her mind , which much afflicted her , and she would often speak of it . then she accused herself of pride , that she had delighted to much in herself , and her beauty . Afterwards she thought she had no faith , but was full of hypocrisy , and had not embraced religion so earnestly , nor glorified God so worthily ( especially with her tongue , which oft she repeated ) nor loved him so sincerely , as she ought to have done . Sometime she would cast her Bible from her , and say : It was indeed the book of life , but she read the same unprofitably , and therefore feared it was become to her the book of death . Sometimes she would say her sins had made her a prey to Satan ; a spectacle to the world ; a disgrace to religion ; and a shame to her husband , kindred , and all true Christians : and here she would weep bitterly . Sometime the original corruption wherein she was born , troubled her , and the sins of her parents , and the common parents of all , the eaters of the forbidden fruit : as if that had made her unworthy of God , and were then laid to her charge . Many times she accused herself of impatience , bewailing the want of feeling God's Spirit , and making doubt of her election , and such like infirmities . She wis●●d , that she had never been born , or that she had been made any other creature , rather than a woman . She cried out oftentimes , Woe woe , wo , etc. a weak , a woeful , 〈◊〉 wretched , a forsaken woman , and such like pitiful complaints against herself , with tears continually trickling from her eyes . She complained of grievous thirst , such as all the water in the sea could not quench ( and yet when drink was given her , sometimes refused it , sometimes took a very little of it : ) sw●at burst out upon her exceedingly , and sometime her body burned extremely . So it seemed the sorrows of death hemmed her in , and the griefs of hell laid hold upon her . Sometimes she was very dull in prayer , and once when she should have said , Lead us not into tentation , she made a stop , saying , I may not pray ; I may not pray ( being interrupted , as she said , by Satan ) and so showed much discomfort : howbeit she was not ●●fe till ●●e could both pray , and make confession of her faith with special application to herself . Besides these ●●ry darts of Satan , she was once or twice troubled with vain speeches , as of her child , the kill of her husband's cattle , that she thought she saw a ●●re by her , etc.  But every one saw that these things proceeded of weakness , emptiness of her head , and want of sleep , which her disease would not afford her . 

These ●itss , though they were for the time grievous to herself , and uncomfortable to her friends ; yet were they neither long , nor continual , but in the very midst of them would she oftentimes give testimony of her faith , striving and fight against her tentations . Many times when the ●landerss by judged her afflictions at the sharpest , would she call upon God , lifting up her eyes and hands to heaven , and desire him to give her strength against her tentations . Many times with a cheerful countenance she would desire those that were by , not to faint , or to give her over , but constantly to pray , and help her against the tempter . Once in the midst of her tentation , being demanded by Master William Fox : whether she did believe the promises of God , or no ? and whether she could pray ? she answered . OH that I could , I would willingly but he will not let me . Lord I believe , help my unbelief : which she pronounced with a still voice . And when he replied , that if she had a desire to pray and believe , she did pray and believe , and that so effectually , that hell gates should not overcome her , according to that of the Apostle : God accepteth it according to that a man hath , not according to that a man hath not : she was much comforted thereby . 

Once after a great conflict with Satan , she said : Satan reason not with me , I am but a weak woman , if thou have any thing to say , say it to my Christ ; he is my advocate , my strength , and my redeemer , and he shall plead for me . Sometimes when she was afflicted with the accusation of her sins , and want of feeling God's mercy , she would with many a pitiful sob and much weeping , pray to the Lord jesus Christ , to help and comfort her a poor , woeful , distressed woman , and requested others to pray for her . And when she was moved to make confession of her faith , she would do it oftentimes , saying the Apostles Creed , and concluding the same with words of application to herself . I believe the remission of ( my ) sins , the resurrection of ( my ) body , and eternal life ( to me ) Amen . And having done , she would pray God to confirm her in that ●aith , ever concluding with the Lords prayer , as devoutly and reverently as any that were present . A Christian friend , who by his daily attendance on her , discharged the duty of a faithful Christian , standing by told her that no tentation had be fallen her , but that which appertained to the child of God , and that God is faithful and true , and had promised to give an issue with the tentation : whereas she expressed great comfort . 

Master Edward Aspinwall , a faithful professor of the truth , and a true Israeli●e , was much with her in the time of her sickness , and ministered much heavenly instruction unto her , and comforted her at all times with apt places of Scripture , meeting with her temptations : and so put the sword of the spirit into her hand . He propounded to her the most plentiful comforts of God unto his Church , in the 40 , 41 , 42 , and 43.  Chapters of Isaiah , uttered in such speeches and phrases , a● might most fitly answer her discomforts . Also he directed her to consider the Passion and Prayer of our Saviour Christ , for all his , john 17.  Matth. 26.  Luke 22. 23.  But especial did he often inculcate that sweet invitation of our Saviour : Come unto me all you that travel and be heavy laden , I will ●ase you . But the difficulty she had sometimes to apply these generals unto her own soul in particular , made the ease more full of anguish to her self , and fearful and lamentable to the standers by : Albeit she acknowledged God's Majesty , mercy , faithfulness , and truth ; yet still complained she of her own weakness , and unworthiness , and could hardly appropriate each thing to herself . 

To help her somewhat herein ( for properly otherwise , it is the peculiar work of the holy Spirit of God , to persuade the heart and soul of her particular interest in these general promises ) she was told , that the Almighty who was merciful , as she had proved , and faithful , as she confessed , intended all these mercies to as many as he did call , and make promise to . And that he called her she must needs confess , both because that then she not only herself read , but hard others read those blessed words of God unto her : and also for that in former times , she had been touched with the love of God , and that his truth : and had well profited in the detestation of sin , and imitation of her Saviour in a holy life . And for the proof thereof , she was wished to remember in former times her Baptism , her frequenting of Sermons , and often receiving the most comfortable repast of the holy Communion , her daily , and almost continual exercise of reading , meditating , and praying , etc.  Also he assured her , that neither the present agony she was in , nor the speeches th●n in that distress , tending to the signification of despair , extorted from her , were any just causes , why either she , or any that heard her , should judge fearfully of her , because all might see the fault was not in her will , as appeared by her prayers , confessions , plaints , sighs , tears , and groans to God for mercy , and full assurance in the blood of Christ ; but in her judgement , not able at that time to discern the ways of the Almighty : And therein ( he told her ) she was made conformable , not only to many the holy Saints of God , job , jeremy , David , and others more , but also to her head , our Lord and Saviour Christ jesus , of whom we read , that some have cursed the day of their birth , and called for their end , and darkness to cover them : They have been as men without hope , and swallowed up in despair : They have cried , how the wrath of God hath torn them , and the terrors of the almighty have fought against them : They have had no peace in their souls , nor comfort in their consciences , their prayers have been shut from God , their sins have been terrible unto them , crying that their iniquities had gone over their heads , and were a burden too heavy for them to bear : And they have thought themselves spectacles of shame and reproach , and as monsters unto men : They were grieved for the sins of their parents , and complained that they were desolate , forsaken , and most miserable and wretched in the world ; yet for all this were they still the dear children of God , as you are this day . Nay ( saith he ) I pray you consider , what corments God inflicted upon his dear Son on the Cross : did he not cry out , My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ? He complained , that his soul was heavy unto death ; yet was he heard in that which he feared , and God delivered him . After this , he read unto her the 22.  Psalm , wherein David complained partly of his own , but principally of the most bitter anguish which our Saviour Christ endured , and suffered in body and soul , putting her in mind , that her case was not so bad as David's , not much unlike our Saviour's , who endured all that , and more for her ; and therefore she had no cause to fear , seeing Christ had obtained victory , and would undoubtedly be with her , deliver her , and eternally glorify her with himself for evermore ; and so continually he propounded to her such comfortable places of Scripture as might meet with her infirmities . This greatly refreshed her , and gave her occasion many times to call upon God , for increase of grace , and deliverance from her grievous temptations : The which God of his accustomed goodness vouchsafed , on Tuesday , about three a clock in the afternoon , what time she felt herself in very good measure delivered from all her former fears and afflictions . But on Saturday next after , which was the day before her death , she was wholly released , and filled with such inward comfort , that it greatly affected us that saw it . 

This is the sum of that temptation which she had , wherein what can any man see that might give just occasion to report our religion comfortless , or the Gentlewoman died despairing ? This we are sure of , that to be without temptation is the greatest temptation : as also , that nothing ●esell her , which hath not befallen the holiest of the children of God. And she that considered her own corruption ) which how great it is in the best of God's Saints , I need not say ) and bethought herself of the punishment due thereunto , if God in justice should reward her ; no marvel if she broke out sometime into heavy complaints . I make no question it was the work of God in her , to suffer Satan to accuse her , and afflict her for her sins , that so she might the better see them , and consider the ha●nousnesse of them , and before her departure repent her of them , and betake her wholly to Christ for the saving of her soul . And if it pleased God thus to make her possess her sins before she died , let those which never yet knew the weight of their sins , 〈…〉 e wise in time , and remember that he shall never have his sin forgiven , which first or last doth not undergo a holy despair for it , and acknowledge nothing to remain in himself , but matter of judgement and condemnation : and comfort and eternal life to flow alone from jesus Christ.  

And as for those , which have learned to scoff at the terrors of God's children , and to censure such as are at sometimes cast down with feeling the anger of God against sin , let them consider the blessed issue that God gave to the troubles of this Gentlewoman , and let them acknowledge his work in her . And if they will not do this , but proceed to traduce the dead , then let them call to mind , those of the Popish crew , and persons of greater note among them , than this Gentlewoman was , which have died most fearfully indeed . Cardinal Sadelot , jacobus Latomus the Divinity Reader at Louvain , Ho●mester the Friar , Guarlacus , Bom●lius , Crescentius the Cardinal , Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester , and diverse the bloody persecutors in Queen Mary's time , and some of the Popes themselves , as namely , Pope Six●us Quintus of late years ; all which died most fearfully and miserably , and showed manifest signs at their death , that their popish superstition was the condemnation of their souls . And if they will judge of my religion by my death , let them acknowledge their religion is the doctrine of desperation , and that the truth and faith which was able to fill the heart and to●●ue of this blessed Gentlewoman at her death , with such heavenly comforts , is the doctrine of Christ , revealed from heaven , that we might live and die in it . 

From Tuesday , till Whitsun even , her comfort still increased , and temptations banished away . She would th●● very cheerfully join with the company in prayer , and singing Psalms , as occasion offered , and performed all such duties , as was meet fo● her in that estate . One day , her brother Master john Breven of Brevenstapleford came from his house in Cheshire to visit her , and after some kind salutation passed between them , he said unto her : Sister , be not dismayed at your troubles , but remember what the Apostle saith , that judgement must begin at the house of God : To whom she answered , as one that was also very ready in the Scriptures , with the very next words following , True it is , and if it begin at us , and the righteous shall scarce be saved , where shall the sinners and ungodly appear ? After that , she prayed with him , and sung a Psalm with him , as one that received great comfort by him , and acknowledged in him , a heart set to seek the things belonging to the Kingdom of Christ. During this time , in the night with such as waked with her , she would pray and rehearse for her comfort many texts of Scripture , and namely , the 8. to the Romans , many times concluding and closing up that she read , or repeated , with prayer , and most comfortable bless and applications thereof to herself , with show of such joy and comfort , that the hearers rejoiced at it . When she received any meat , she prayed God not only to sanctify those creatures for her bodily sustenance , but also to fill her soul with the waters of life , often repeating that of the Revelation , To him that thirsteth , will I give of the waters of life freely . 

One time she took her Bible in her hand , and joyfully kissing it , and looking up toward Heaven , she said that of the Psalm : OH Lord , it is good for me that I have been afflicted , that I may learn thy statutes : The law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver . 

Another time she called her husband to her , and said : OH Husband , beware of Papistry , keep yourself holy before the Lord : Yield not to the abomination of the wicked , lest they rejoice , and so you dishonour God , and destroy your own soul . Again she said , Let my little Child be brought up among the Children of God , and in the true fear and knowledge of his Majesty ; so shall I meet her in heaven , whom now I must leave behind me on earth . 

Again sometime she would pray with a low voice to herself , and that saying of Paul , We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more , but the Spirit of adoption , whereby we cry Abba father , was much in her mouth : and the last words Abba father , she would double oftentimes over . She would sing to herself the last verse of the 13.  Psalm . I will give thanks unto the Lord , and praises to him sing : 
Because he hath heard my request , and granted my wishing . 




Finally , in these and such like exercises and meditations , did she spend the whole time of her sickness , after the Lord had once enlarged her heart from the tentations of Satan . 

But upon Saturday about eleven of the clock in the morning , the Lord disclosed himself in mercy , to her more plentifully , than ever before , and as I may say , he dealt familiarly with his handmaid : for from that time , to her very death , which ensued the next day , the feeling of Satan's tentations seemed quite to be banished from her ; so that she made no show of them , her thoughts were not occupied with the world , husband , child , or any thing else , to our thinking ; neither was her sickness troublesome to her , as before it had been : but as one raised from death to life , or ravished in spirit , so seemed she to us that stood by : her countenance joyful : her tongue flowing with the praises of God : and her voice as most heavenly music and melody of peace , sounding praise , and honour , and glory to God in a wonderful manner , as followeth . 

About eleven of the clock she began to tremble and quake a little , and withal she asked her husband if he would help her with prayer to God against the tempter , saying , will ye neither pray with me , nor bring some godly man that may put holy things into my mind , whereby I may be able to resist Satan : having thus said , she uttered these words : OH Lord God of my salvation , help my weakness , pled thou my cause , OH God of truth , for in thee do I trust . After this , they prayed together , and she answered Amen to every petition . then after this she required him to read some part of the Scripture : whereupon he read unto her the 8. to the Romans , the 91.  Psalm , and the 17. of john , the which as he read , and came to the fourth verse , I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do , and now glorify me : She desired him to pause a while , and then said , Blessed be thy name , OH blessed Saviour , perfect the work I humbly beseech thee which thou hast begun in me . then as he read the 9 verse , I pray not for the world , but for them which thou hast given me , for they are thine : she interrupted him again , saying , OH Lord jesu , dost thou pray for me ? OH blessed and sweet Saviour , How wonderful ! how wonderful ! how wonderful are thy mercies ! Read on said she , the blessedst reading that I ever heard , the comfort whereof doth sweeten my soul . then reading verse the 22.  And the glory which thou gavest me , I have given them , that they may be one as we are one . With marvellous joy she uttered the words of David many times over , I confess before the Lord his loving kindness , and his wonderful works before the sons of men : for he hath satisfied my soul , and filled my hungry soul with goodness . When he came to the 24. verse , Father I will that they which thou hast given me , be with me , even where I am , that they may behold my glory , which thou hast given me ; Stay , said she , and let me meditate on the goodness of the Lord , for this is the sweetest saying that ever came to my soul : for now I perceive and feel the countenance of Christ my redeemer is turned towards me , and the bright-shining beams of his mercy is spread over me : O happy am I , that ever I was born , to see this blessed day ! Praise , OH praise the Lord , for his mercies ; for he hath brought me out of darkness , and the shadow of death ; he hath delivered my soul from the snare of the hunter , a●● hath taken me out of the den of Lions , even from the jaws of Leviathan , that piercing and crooked serpent , and hath set me in a place of rest , and sweet refreshing : O praise the Lord , OH my soul , all that is within me praise his holy name : my soul praise thou the Lord , and forget not all his benefits , which forgiveth all thine iniquities , and heals all thine infirmities : which hath redeemed thy life from the grave , and crowneth thee with mercy and compassion . This she often repent : And then again remembering the 21. and 22. verses of the 17. of john , she said : OH my sweet Saviour , shall I be one with thee , as thou art one with thy Father ? And wilt thou glorify me with that glory which thou hadst with the Father before the world was ? And dost thou so love me ( which an but dust and ashes ) to make me partaker of glory with Christ ? What am I poor wretch , that thou art so mindful of me ? O how wonderful ! how wonderful ! how wonderful is thy love ! O thy love is unspeakable , that hast dealt so graciously with me ! o I feel thy mercies , and o that my tongue and heart were able to sound forth thy praises as I ought , and as I willingly would do ! o that you all would help me to praise the holy one of Israel , the God of all consolations ! And thus for the space of five hours together at the least , she continued praising and lauding the Lord , with such a gladsome and heavenly countenance , testifying such inward joy , from a comfortable feeling of the mercies of God in her soul , and using such sweet sentences and sugared phrases of perfect and holy eloquence , as the truth thereof , if it could have been taken , were admirable , continuing so many hours together ; some part whereof was this . 

OH my Lord , o my God , blessed be thy name for evermore , which hast showed me the path of life . thou didst , OH Lord , hide thy face from me for a little season , but with everlasting mercy , thou hast had compassion on me : And now blessed Lord thy comfortable presence is come , yea Lord , thou hast had respect unto thy handmaid and art come with fullness of joy , and abundance of consolations : OH blessed be thy name , OH Lord my God. then she repeated part of the 16.  Psalm , saying : The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance , wherefore my heart is glad , and my tongue rejoiceth : thou wilt show me the path of life : In thy presence is fullness of joy , and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore : O that I could therefore praise the Lord , as he is worthy to be praised ! I will sing to the Lord , I will sing to the praise of the God of Israel : come , come , ( saith she ) and help me , OH help me to praise the Lord And with that she began to sing the third Psalm , and continued to the end of the Psalm , as perfectly , and with as sweet a voice , as ever she had before in her health ; and concluded with the 49. verse of the 106.  Psalm . The Lord the God of Israel , be blessed for evermore : 
Let all the people say Amen , praise ye the Lord therefore . 




And after this she said , OH praise the Lord , for he hath filled me with joy and gladness of heart , and brought me from the gates of hell , and of death : repeating that of the 16.  Psalm , My line is fallen unto me in a pleasant place : yea I have a fair heritage , for the Lord is the portion of mine inheritance : The place where I now am , is sweet and pleasant : o how pleasant is the sweet perfume of the place where I lie ! It is sweeter than A●rons' composed perfume of principal spices : how comfortable is the sweetness I feel ! it is like that odour that proceeds from the golden censer , that delights my soul . The taste is precious : do you not feel it : O so sweet it is ! yea sweeter than my●●h , the honey , or the honey comb . Let me therefore sing again , and again unto my Lord , and my God. then she did sing the 19  Psalm , beginning at the 7. verse , How perfect is the Law of God , etc. and so on to the end of the same . And after that spiritual rejoicing , in singing of Psalms , she then prayed unto God faithfully , and praised the Lord again joyfully . And being still full of these , and such like heavenly consolations , she did sing again most heartily , unto the praise of God the 136.  Psalm , Praise ye the Lord for he is good , for his mercy endureth for ever : etc.  In which Psalm , for his mercy endureth for ever , is 26. times repeated . A Christian friend coming in at the same time , which was about six of the clock in the evening , marvelling to see her exceeding joys , and heavenly harmony , wherein she continued with such words and phrases , that were so spiritual , prayed for the continuance of the same unto the end : whereupon she then burst out , relating further of her joys , saying : O the joys ! the joys ! the joys ! that I feel in my soul ! o they be wonderful ! they be wonderful ! they be wonderful ! And after that , she prayed for increase of faith , and that God would strenghthen her against tentations , with continual craving of remission of sins , ever meditating of heavenly matters , as by her sudden and often breaking out into heavenly speeches , and phrases , did appear : for the same evening she lying still and silent for a while , One prayed her to remember the Lord Jesus , and that she would in her heart , pray for constancy in her joyful course ; whereupon she answered with a delightsome and cheerful countenance , and comfortable voice : O ( said she ) so I do , for the Lord is my light , and my salvation , whom then shall I fear ? Though an host pitch against me , yet my heart shall not be afraid , for the Lord hath said , I will not leave thee nor forsake thee . Indeed , I should verily have fainted , but that I believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living . And now my heart is ready , my heart is ready and prepared , yea it panteth after thee OH God : as the Hart braieth after the rivers of water , so panteth my soul after thee OH God ; my soul thirsteth for God , even for the living God. When Lord , when shall I come and appear before thy presence ? etc. Saying then further , Lord , sith it hath pleased thee to prepare my heart , whether to life or death , thy will be done , dispose of me to thine own glory , I am thine Lord , work thy blessed pleasure , and good will upon me . And after this she fell into a short slumber , and awaking said , as the Spouse said unto Christ in the Canticles , O come kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth , for thy love is better than wine ? O how sweet the kisses of my Saviour be ? Than one said unto her , alluding to that place of S. john , Revel . 3. 8. and praying that the Lord would anoint her , with the eye-salue of his grace , that she might see and behold his glory . To whom she answered , Mine eyes are opened , mine eyes are opened , though for a while thy were closed up , and shut ; yet now I thank my God , mine eyes are opened and I do feel and see the everliving mercies of my Christ : saying then further as it is in the 27.  Psalm . thou saidst , seek my face : my heart answered to thee , OH Lord , I will seek thy face . OH hide not therefore thy face from me , nor cast thy servant away in displeasure , thou hast been my succour , leave me not , nor for sake me , OH God of my salvation . And being willed to commit her soul into the hands of Christ , she said : OH Lord jesus , thou hast redeemed me , plead thou my cause , for into thy hands alone do I commit my spirit , OH thou God of truth . And then feeling more joy to abound , one praising God with her for his great mercies showed toward her , she further said : I give thee thanks OH Father , Lord of heaven and earth , because thou hast hid these things from the wise , and men of understanding , and hast opened them unto me thy poor handmaid , which am but dust and ashes . OH how merciful and marvellous gracious art thou unto me ! yea Lord , I feel thy mercy , and I am assured of thy love , and so certain am I thereof , as thou art the God of truth , even so sure do I know myself to be thine , OH Lord my God ; and this my soul knoweth right well , and this my soul knoweth right well : which speech of her assurance , she often repeated . Presently after this sitting up in her chair , she sung the fourth Psalm ; and then being laid down again in her bed , she confidently sp●ke these words : I am sure that my redeemer lives , and that I shall see him at the last day , whom I shall see , and mine eye shall behold : and though after my skin , worms destroy this body , yet shall I see God in my flesh with these Eyes , and none other . 

then came into see her toward evening , Master William Harrison the Preacher , praising God for her continuance , in that her joyful and most happy course : and persuading her to an holy perseverance in the same , she thanked him , and desired him to rejoice in Christ with her , and to praise God for his mercies to her , and said . OH Master Harrison , my soul hath been compassed about with terrors of death , fear within , and fear without , the sorrows of hell were upon me , knots and knorres were upon my soul , ( which twice or thrice she repeated ) and a roaring wilderness of woe , was within me ; but blessed , blessed , blessed , be the Lord my God , who hath not le●t me comfortless , but like a good shepherd , hath he brought me into a place of rest , even to the sweet running waters of life , that flow out of the Sanctuary of God , and he hath lead me into the green pastures , where I am fed , and exceedingly comforted : yea , he hath restored my soul , and lead me into the plain and easy paths of righteousness . The way that now I go in , is a sweet and easy way , strewed with flowers , and as a fine sandy way ; yea , it is more easy and soft than the sand , for I go and tread upon wheat , even upon the finest flower of wheat : O blessed be the Lord ; OH blessed be the Lord , that hath thus comforted me , and hath brought me now to a place , more sweet unto me , than the Garden of Eden . O the joy ! the joy ! the delight some joy that I feel ! O how wonderful , how wonderful , how wonderful is this joy ! OH praise the Lord for his mercies , and for this joy , which my soul feeleth full well , praise his name for evermore . And these praises of God , she soundeth forth , like David's harmony , being endued with David's spirit , to the praise of the eternal and merciful God , continuing all night in such like prayers and praises to God , except some small time , that she was silent and quiet . Master Harrison prayed twice with her that evening , as also in the morning ( being Whitsunday . ) After he had prayed once with her , going then toward his public charge , she sent for him , to pray once more with her before he went , which he did ; to the joy and gladness of heart , both of her , and all that were present : and so he took leave of her , and departed . 

Another faithful man or two came presently in the morning , and diverse other well affected , who were with her at the time of her death , and often prayed with her that forenoon , she still abounding in spiritual comforts and consolations : sometimes as one awaking out of sleep , she would say , the Lord was her keeper , and deliverer . Again , one saying unto her , the Lord bless you : Yea , ( said she ) and the Lord jesus bless us all . And so seeming to sleep a little while , and awaking again she said : Lord I trust in thee , have mercy upon me , give me strength to praise thee : defend and preserve me in the hour of tentation , and lay no more upon me , than thou wil● enable me to bear . Afterwards being asked , if she would have them join in prayer together again with her . OH yes ( said she ) for Christ's sake I desire it : saying thus to herself : Hear OH Lord , and have mercy upon me : Lord , be thou my helper : thou hast loosed my sack , and girded me with gladness : therefore will I praise thee , OH Lord my God : I will give thanks to thee for evermore , With that , all that were present did join in prayer with her , and in conclusion ●sing the Lords prayer , which she said with them , to thine is thy kingdom ; her strength then being gone , her tongue failed her , and so she lay silent for a while , every one judging her then to be near death , her strength and speech failing her : yet after a while lifting up her eyes with a sweet countenance and still voice , said : My warfare is accomplished , and my iniquities are pardoned . Lord , whom have I in Heaven but thee ? and I have none in earth but thee : my flesh faileth , and my heart also , but God is the strength of my heart , and my portion for ever . He that preserveth jacob , and defendeth his Israel , he is my God , and will guide me unto death : guide me OH Lord my God , and suffer me not to faint , but keep my soul in safety . And with that she presently fell asleep in the Lord , passing away in peace , without any motion of body at all ; and so yielded up the Ghost , a sweet Sabbaths' sacrifice about four of the clock in the afternoon , on Whitesunday , being the last of May , 1601.  

This was the death of that virtuous Gentlewoman , happily dying in the Lord , and reaping the benefit of a holy profession : wherein we cannot but acknowledge and reverence the mercy of God , who in our greatest infirmity makes his grace to shine most clearly . A sure testimony of the truth of our profession , serving to encourage us therein , and to move us to a godly life . It must 〈◊〉 be a divine . Religion , and a truth coming from God , that thus can 〈◊〉 the heart and mouth of a weak woman , at the time of death , with such admirable comfort . And a wretched conceit , and me●re Antichristian is that religion , which so hates and persecuteth this faith , which is thus able to lead the truehearted professors thereof , with such unspeakable peace unto their graves . 

Her funeral was accomplished at Childwall Church on Wednesday following , being the third of june , 1601.  And now for conclusion , seeing this blessed Gentlewoman is taken from among us , and received into the holy habitations of the heavenly Jerusalem , there to remain in joy , glory , and blessedness for evermore ; let us lament for our loss , but rejoice for her gain : and let us pray , that in hear we could as willingly wish to be with her , as she is now unwilling to be with us.  

Solomon saith , The memory of the just shall be blessed : but the name of the wicked shall rot , Prou. 10. 7.  

FINIS . 





2 Sam. 18. 19 , 20.  Gen. 37. 3.  1 Sa. 30. 4.  joh. 1● . 19  Nazianz. Monod . Ba●ilii . jer. 9  〈◊〉 . Psal. 11. 2.  Mat. 16. 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13.  

Stapleford . Gen. 34. 1.  ●●a . 1. 9  1● . Psal. 84. 10.  2 Ki. 22. 19  Psal. 16. 3.  Heb. 11. 25.  2 Tim. 3. 6 , 7.  Act. 17 , 11 , 12.  Anna Brettergh . Ps. 120. 5.   john Wright into●●squier , Richard Orme . Ralph Heaton , etc. and many 〈◊〉 . Mat. 5. 44.  job. 1. 5.  Gen. 33. 3 , 4.  1 Sam. 14. 17 , 18.  Goe 24. 63.  Exo. 13. 13.  Psal. 16. 4.  Ephes. 5. 3.  judg. 6. 31 , 32.  Eccles. 4. 25. 28.  Phil. 2. 20.  〈◊〉 D●● . ●●01 . Isai. 54.  〈◊〉 . May 23.  May 25.  M. William Brettergh . Master William Fox . M. Edward Aspinwall . M. john Brettergh . Mistress Ma●d Brettergh . Mistress Scholastica Fox . William Woodward . Elizabeth Challoner . William Fox . Mark. 9  〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 Cor. 8. 12.  William Brettergh . john Brettergh . Edward Aspinwall . William Woodwaad . Isai. 40. 1 , 2. 28. 29 , 30 , 31.  Isai. 41. 8 , 9 , 10. 13. 14. 17. 18.  Isai. 4● . 1. 8. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 13. 14. 15. 16.  Isai. 43. 1. 2. 5. 15.  Mat. 11. 28.  job 31. etc. jer. 20. 14.  job 6. 4. 8. 9  job. 16. 9  Lament . 3. etc. Psal. 6. 3.  Psal. 38. 4.  etc. Psal. 71. 7.  Psal. 77. 1. 7.  etc. Psal. 51. 5.  Psal. 102.  〈◊〉 . etc. Rom. 7. 24.  Mat. 27. 46.  Mat. 26. 38.  Hob. 5. 7.  May ●6 . Fox . Act● and Mon. p. 1●04 . 61. pag. 19●8 .  Francis the Monk , one of the ten popish persons converted in France , An. Dom. 1601.  See Hasen Miller . historia jes●itica , who sets down certain examples of the Jesuits to this purpose . john Bruen Esquire . William Brettergh . William ●o● , john Brettergh . William Woodward . john Holland . Maud Brettergh . Scholastica Fox . 1 Pet. 4. 17. 18.  john Holland . William Brettergh . William Woodward .  Richard Orme . john Holland . William Brettergh . William Woodword . William Fo● . Revel . 21. 6  William Brettergh . William Fox . Psal. 119. 71. 72.  William Brettergh . M 〈…〉 Brettergh . William Brettergh . 〈◊〉 . 8. 15.  William Fox . Maij 30.  William Brettergh . Maud Brettergh . Elizabeth Challoner . Psal. 107. 8 , 9  ●●ai . ●7 . 1.  Psalm . 103. 1 , 〈◊〉 , 3 , 4.  Psal. 144. 3.  Psal. 8. 4.  Isai. 54. 8.  Psalm . 16. 5. 9 11.  judg. 5. 3.  Psal. 16. 6.  Exo. 30.  ●3 . R●vel . 8. 4.  M. William Fox . William Brettergh . William Fox . William Woodward . William Fox . Psal. 27. 1 , 3  Deut. 4. 31.  Psal. 27. 13.  Psal. 108. 1.  Psal. ●2 . 1 , 2  William Brettergh . Cant. 1. 1.  William Fox . Psal. ●7 . 8. 9  William Brettergh . Psal. 31. 5.  William Woodward . Mat. 11. 25  William Fox . Psal. 139.  1● . William Brettergh . job 19  ●5 . ●6 . ●7 . M. William Harrison . William Brettergh . William Fox . john Brettergh . William Woodward . Psalm . 23. 2. 3.  Psal. 147. 14.  William Brettergh . William Woodward . M. Edward Aspinwall . William Fox . William Brettergh . john Brettergh . William Woodward . Mistress Maud Brettergh . Mistress Scholastica Fox . Elizabeth Challoner . and diverse mo● . Psalm . 30. 10 , 11 , 12.  Isai. 40.  〈◊〉 . Psalm . 73. 25. 26.  