MEMENTO MORI 



Great-britain's Lamentation for her Deceased Princess : OR , AN ELEGY upon the Death of that Most Illustrious MARY , Queen of England , Scotland , France and Ireland ; who Exchanged this Life for a Better , Decemb. 28.1694 . 

Maeror obest Elegos Scribere cogit amor . 

A Rural Pen.  AH Sin ! thou grand Infringer of the Laws 
Of Sacred Justice , how art thou the Cause 
Of world 's of Mischiefs ? bringing up the Rear , 
Since thou to lead the Van didst first appear : 
'T was long of thee , the Angels fell so low , 
From height of Glory to the depth of Woe . 
'T was long of thee , the Just Offended God 
Plagued all Mankind with his Revenging Rod : 
'T was long of thee , that a late dismal stroke 
From Heaven hath England's Joys in sunder broke : 
't is thou , vile Sin ! 't is thou that art the Womb 
Of all our Sorrows ; thou that art the Tomb 
Of all our Comforts , but for thee , vile Sin , 
We longer might have kept our Gracious Queen . 
Religious Princes God doth sometimes take 
From Kingdoms , for their Sinning People's sake . 
Death is the Track that every one must tread ; 
Not One now living but shall once be dead . 
Death killeth some , will's others to survive ; 
Not one deceased , but was once alive . 
Death with a steady Hand his Dart le 's fly , 
At all ; all Men are Mortal ; All must die . 
Death is a Leveller , when he doth strike , 
The Highest and the Lowest fall alike . 
Death will not be by Force of Arms controlled , 
It spares not any , neither Young nor Old. 
Death knocks as boldly at the Princely Door , 
As at the humble Cabins of the Poor . 
The stately'st Cedars , and the sturdiest Oaks , 
Are overpowered by Death's All-conqu'ring Strokes . 
Caesar must be Supreme , and Rule alone , 
And Rival with him , Pompey will have none . 
Yet , those two direful Thunderbolts of War , 
Nay , Alexander's self , that Rid as far 
As Phoebus' Beams are spread , and terrified 
th' whole World , Conquered by Death , these Conquerors 
The Greatest Sovereigns on Earth must bow 
To Fates resistless Force . — And now , ah ! now 
At Royal MARY Death his Arrow darts , 
And kills as great a Conqueress of Hearts 
In these Dominions , as was ever found 
Within the spacious Earth's Sea-circled round . 
Our Warlike Pallas , and our mild Astraea , 
Of Sacred Virtue the Divine Idea , 
By equal sharing in the Government , 
To King ang Kingdoms gave no mean Content : 
Whilst far-famed William managed Martial Work 
' 'Gainst Lewis th' Antichristian Christian Turk 
In foreign Countries , she did overcome 
Her Foes by Prudence , and kept Peace at home . 
Her Crowned Presence , and Renowned Acts , 
Made her the Glory of the Female Sex. 
This Great Exemplar of a Pious Life 
To Kingly Caesar an Obedient Wife ; 
Copartner with him in th' Imperial Power , 
To Foes a Terror ; to her Friends a Tower : 
A Sword to Wrong ; a Shield to Innocence ; 
The Rod of Vice , and virtue 's Recompense : 
A Peerless Lady , in her florid Age , 
Brim-filled with Honour , Courteous , Modest , Sage , 
Witty and Wise , one of a resolute Mind , 
Yet to Compassion mightily inclined 
Even sometimes to a Fault , in saving those 
False Wretches that were her Life-seeking Foes : 
Factors for Rome , whom nothing will content 
Lesle than the Ruin of the Government . 
( Know Rebels , though a while you spared be , 
Time may advance you on your Mourning Tree . ) 
Death thrills his Kill Dart ; Great MARY dies , 
When on the sudden , Tides of Sorrow rise , 
And overflow the Land : All Eyes are drowned 
With Tears : All Places with a mourning sound 
Are filled ; and Oh! with what lamenting Tones 
Heart-renting Sighs , and never stinting Groans 
The Vaulted Regions ring : The Heavens are clad 
In Mourning , and the Earth's exceeding sad ; 
Britain Laments , and if the Seas we cross , 
What Country grieves not for this General Loss . 
Confed'rate Princes all agreed , express 
Great Grief for their great general 's Heaviness . 
OH what hard-hearted Niobe can forbear 
For his great Loss to spend a Sigh , or Tear ! 
Ah cruel Death ! to Church and State a Foe , 
To turn a Commonwealth to a Common Woe ! 
Ah cruel Death ! that dost at once destroy 
The Fair Maria's Life , and Britain's Joy ! 
Ah! cruel Death ! that sadly dost divide 
The Royal Consort and his Loyal Bride , 
th' one Moiety of the Forsaken Throne , 
Leaving but half himself to sit thereon ! 
How could he choose but Sigh , and Grieve , and Weep 
In thy rude Arms to see his dearest Sleep ! 
Be cheered my Liege , thy Soul , when Prison-free , 
Shall go to her , who may not come to thee . 
Thy Loss is Great , far greater is her Gains , 
In Splendorous Bliss thy Sainted Mary Reigns : 
Be cheered my Liege , and follow her apace , 
Who ran to Glory in the Way of Grace : 
Run well thy Race , and so shalt thou obtain 
An Heavenly Crown , and shalt thy lose regain 
Once more , and evermore with thy Saint Mary Reign . 
An Acrostic EPITAPH . 

Marry , the WOE rld's Or I enter Jewel ; 
Albion ' sgem : OF fection S Fuel ; 
Rome ' s Rod ; Britain is choice D elight ; 
Y oung , yet stor R ' d withvertu E s bright : 
Q veen El I za's Se C and ; Lowly , 
FIVE alien , Fai T hful , Prud E nt , Holy : 
England ' s D A rling ; Fr A nce ' s Terror ; 
Europe ' s Glor je ; Female s Mirror ; 
N ature's Var N is ; what E ' re is found 
E xcellent , h E re lies un D er Ground . 
N.B.  

London , Printed for John Whitlock , near Stationers-hall , 1695.  





( died . 