Christian Supports UNDER THE TERRORS OF DEATH . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Epict.  




LICENCED , 

June 11 th' . 1691.  Z. Isham . 

LONDON ; Printed , by B. Griffin , for Sam. Keble at the Great Turk's Head in Fleetstreet over against Fetter-lane-end , 1691.  

Christian Supports UNDER THE TERRORS of DEATH . 

PSALM . XXIII . 4.  

Yea though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death , I will fear no evil , for thou art with me . 

That mighty and continual care which the Divine Providence hath over us , is very gratefully represented by such soft and tender expressions , and characters of God , as do bespeak an abundant Affection and regard for us , giving us all the assurance and security imaginable of an infinite kindness and compassion constantly engaged for us . 

So when our Lord doth comfort his Disciples with the Doctrine of Providence , he thus expresseth it , Your heavenly Father knoweth , that you have need of all these Things . What can be dearer and and more solicitous than the Affections and concernment of a Parent ? Another of the like kind to the same end and purpose , is here mentioned and applied by David , who seems to assure or challenge to himself , the extraordinary care and protection of God , under all , the very worst circumstances , from the suitable character of Kindness and Indearment he ascribes to him , ver . 1.  The Lord is my Shepherd , and thence makes this natural Inference , I will not want . He will most certainly take care of me , for to continue the Parallel or Similitude here before us , ver . 2.  He maketh me lie down in green Pastures , or Pastures of tender Grass , he leads me beside still Waters , or Waters of quietness : Which is spoken with allusion to the most grateful things or conditions , that God will bestow upon , or provide for his People ; his goodness will take care , that they shall have what is most proper and convenient for them . And when they are brought to any distress , he will deliver them out of it , reduce them to a happy condition , and set them right and safe in their ways , ver . 3.  He restoreth my Soul , he leads me in the Paths of righteousness for his Names sake , and which is more , when they are under the most unpromising circumstances , in that sad and doleful condition , which we must all come to and lie under , the dismal pressure and stroke of Death ; even herein the People of God are relieved and supported by this extraordinary Divine care and goodness ; Yea , though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death I will fear no evil , for thou art with me . 

In which words are two things considerable : 

First , The terror or severity of a dying State , Yea , though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death . 

Yet Secondly under such dismal circumstances God doth most abundantly comfort and support us ; Yea , though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death I will fear no evil , for thou art with me . 

First , 't is observable , that holy David doth here remember us of the terror and severity of a Dying State or Condition ; Yea though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death ; which is greatly signified by almost every word in it , Yea 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 etiamsi , Notwithstanding , implying the utmost distress or extremity , I walk 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ambulavero , I shall walk ; intimating a leisurely , and so a more tormenting passage . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 in Valle , the Septuagint 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 in the middle , the depth or extremity of the shadow of death 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , in Valle umbrae lethalis , in the thickest of the deadly shade , i e. in ipsissimà & profundissimâ mortis umbrd , in the deepest and utmost shade or sorrow of death . The Word here , saith one , Notat horribilem quandam mortis speciem & figuram ( qualis morientium oculis observatur ) tristi●●iman● . It denotes a very horrid appearance of death , and that most dismal apprehension of it , which Men usually have when they come to die , every way beset with horror and distraction , in a word , a terrible and approaching destruction ( qui ●nim ad umbram accedit non long a corpore abest ) He that is in the shadow , is not far from the substance or thing itself , 

Thus the Psalmist represents a dying State as most severe and terrible , agreeable to what he tells us of it from his own experience , My heart is sore pained within me , and the pains of death are fallen upon me , fearfulness and trembling are come upon me , and horror , or as it is in the other Translation , an horrible dread hath overwhelmed me . 

Death , or rather the preliminary passage to it , and the way into the other World , is attended with great horror and affliction , and is beyond expression harsh and terrible ; to which Job may have some reference , when he faith , OH that my grief were thoroughly weighed , and my calamity laid in the balances together , for now it would be heavier than the sand of the Sea , therefore my words are swallowed up ( that is , I want words to express my grief ) for the arrows of the Almighty are within me , the poison whereof drinketh up my spirit , the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me . And that this was the utmost extremity of distress or afflictoin , he could think of , appears from that Standard of Sorrow ▪ which he makes it Chap. 24. 17 , If one know them , they are in the terrors of the shadow of death , which he therefore calls The King of terrors . The greatest of all human Evils or Miseries . And now that great terror and severity , which doth accompany a dying State or Condition , may be occasioned ; 

First , From the pains or agonies of it . 

Secondly , Mens misgiving thoughts of their future State.  

Thirdly , Their foregoing all the Pleasures and Enjoyments of this World.  

Fourthly , The sense of Gild or Sin , that will then crowd in upon us . 

Fifthly , The more and greater Assaults of our Spiritual Adversary . 

Sixthly , The thoughts and conviction of an ensuing Judgement . Upon all which accounts our dying Circumstances will appear sufficiently dreadful and terrible . 

The first great terror of Death doth arise FROM THE PAINS OR AGONIES THAT VSVALLY ATTEND IT ▪ For however it is to appearance , there may be , it 's very likely , even in the smoothest passage from this to the other World , some rugged and uneven paths which can be perceived by none , but those that tread them , certain it is that in the general , there is a great deal of hardship and difficulty at such a time and in such Circumstances as these , from those pains and sorrows which do naturally attend that condition , for in losing that knot , in dissolving the close Conjunction of Soul and Body , there must be , and we have reason to say there is , a great deal of unconceivable Anguish and Affliction , 't is an extreme violence to Nature , and the utmost contradiction to it . And therefore must mightily fret and molest us , for whence ( but from the most horrid pain and uneasiness ) can proceed such extravagant convulsions , cold sweats , deadly fainting , short breathing , distraction of the Eyes , and other dreadful Agonies that attend it ? For if these and the like , which we observe in daily Spectacles of Mortality are dreadful to behold ; What must they be to those poor Creatures that do , and to us that shall suffer under them ? And therefore a good man , that is not afraid of death , can't but shrink and tremble to think of the way to it , that is beset with such horror and distraction in every particular ; OH my God may be the language of the most pious Soul , I am willing to die and prepared for thee , being desirous to depart and to be with Christ , which is better than a continuance here , but my greatest concern is , how to come to thee on the other Shore , there is a great Gulf between us , I must be tossed on a boisterous Sea , and wracked by dreadful Waves , and Tempests . Is there no way to Canaan , but through a desolate Wilderness , and must I go through the valley of the Shadow of Death , to that Land which flows with Milk and Honey , that Heavenly Jerusalem ? These are things contrary to Flesh and Blood , and such as will make the stoutest courage faint and tremble , the pains and terrors of death can't be expressed or conceived by any but who are past or under them . And doubtless the holy Spirit of God doth in some measure intimate to us the sadness of them , when it mentions it as a great blessing to men that it is appointed to them , but once to die , and that there shall be no more death in the other State. One undoubted privilege whereof , is , that there shall be no more of those dreadful forerunners or concomitants of it , where are sorrows so severe and terrible as endanger the safety of our Souls as well as Bodies , by urging us to impatience , distrust , and the like ; thence says our Church , suffer us not at our last hour through any pains of death to fall from thee . Our greatest troubles and most dangerous conflict in this World is usually our departure out of it , so that to this case also we may apply that of the Prophet , The great day of the Lord is near , it is near and hasteth greatly , even the voice of the day of the Lord , the mighty Men shall cry therein bitterly . That day is a day of wrath , a day of trouble and distress , a day of wasteness and desolation , a day of darkness and gloominess , a day of clouds and thick darkness . 

Thus the Pains and Agonies of a dying State tender it most terrible and dreadful . 

Secondly , It will appear again to be so , FROM men's MISGIVING THOUGHTS OF THEIR AFTER STATE . I do not mean their doubtfulness of it , for I am apt to think , that the greatest pretenders that way are sufficiently convinced when they come to die , and the sense oft hat their languishing Condition will soon rub up their belief of another Life ; but now most or all Men are under no small distress and perplexity from the conviction and consideration of that future Life , for which none is sufficiently fitted and prepared , but hath reason , especially from himself , to have some diffidence , some distrust or suspicion of his condition in it , and it is what becometh a prudent and a good Man ; for an overweening opinion of ourselves , and a confident presumption of our preparation for Heaven may be ill grounded and mistaken , and seems to be inconsistent with a truly devout and penitent Soul , Be not high minded but fear is the Rule that such go by even in these circumstances . We must be sensible , and aught to be especially so , when we come to die , That we have had a great work to do in a little time , and being that God now calls us to give up an account of our Stewardship , it must put us into very great fear and consternation to think with ourselves what we have done , and whither we are going , and how can we but suspect our condition , when we consider that we are not able to answer God one word in a thousand ; must it not than most deeply concern , and mightily affect our Souls , to consider that near approach to their endless and unalterable State , and the best of Men may have some fear or suspicion at least of their Condition in it . This now is their grand Affair , and if they fail and miscarry here they are irrevocably gone and lost for ever : Who then can avoid being concerned at this great and weighty change , when he thinks with himself , that he is now hasting into another world , and at the gate of Eternity , though he fears not death , yet the apprehensions of another State must strike a damp into his Soul , and make him hugely ferious and perplexed in his thoughts ; men's hearts failing them for fear of what may become of them in another State. Nor is it blamable or unchristian to be so , for besides what Reason the best of Men may have to suspect themselves , such a temper as this , will dispose us for all due care and circumspection in that most solemn time and season , and such an humble distrust of ourselves may and will have better effects , than a very daring confidence and presumption : For the comfort of good Men , at the most depending upon hope , doth show that at the best they lie under some donbtfulness and insecurity : And therefore as you see Mens misgiving thoughts , as to a future State , is no small trouble and perplexity to them in their dying circumstances . 

Thirdly , Their trouble herein doth further arise , FROM THE THOUGHTS OF PARTING WITH ALL THE PLEASURES AND ENJOYMENTS HERE BELOW . Men that have lived in the World must needs have some interest and affections fixed in it , and there is scarce any that do or can sit so loose to these secular Affairs , as to bear the removal from them with an even and undisturbed Spirit ; nay so far is it from this , that these frequently prove the most pungent considerations or reflections in that dismal state : Have I , saith one , laboured all my life time for nothing but vanity and vexation of Spirit , for I find it to be so now ; I am to be removed , and to be taken from it : For this have I beaten my brains , wearied and molested my self , for this have I cheated and purloined , for this have I overreached or supplanted my Brother , wronged or oppressed my Neighbour , and must I be deprived of all in a moment ? What sorrow like to my sorrow will the Worldling say ? And those pleasures that others have too much in dulged , will but the more perplex their thoughts when they are thus forced from them ; nay even the moderate and lawful enjoyment of these things , will occasion in us no small trouble and vexation of mind , at this final parting with them : Thomas it behoves us to do it with Christian courage , and Resignation , yet we cannot without extreme sorrow and concernment say at that time , Farewell Wife , farewell Children , farewel Friends , farewel the World finally farewell whatever was here dear and valuable . And give me leave to add , the more have been men's comforts , and those of good Men have been the most and truest , the more and greater must be the grief and concernment , for that utter removal , and dismal separation from them . 

Fourthly , The troubles of a dying State must be again very great , FROM THE SENSE OF SIN OR GVILT THAT WILL THAN CROWD IN UPON US . However we may forget God and ourselves in a time of Health and Prosperity , when these decline or for sake us , we are usually brought to a sober sense , and in such a languishing State and Condition can hardly avoid it ; Conscience , if ever , will certainly awake when we come to die , and we may have observed the greatest Affliction that Men have then suff erred under , was their not being able to avoid their own thoughts , which are now more bitter and terrible than ever , ( and by the way 't is not only justice but withal goodness in God to make it so . ) Now the mind has quick and unbiased Reflections on its own Actions , and sets forth its Gild in true and proper Colours , and therefore the Apostle may well say , The sting of Death is Sin. no terror in this State like that which doth redound to us from our guilty Consciences which have now got us under hold , and will lash us severely . We can't now disguise or dissemble our guilt , there is no stifling of it by Riot or Intemperance , lewd and loof Company can divert us no longer ; all the livelong day our sins will plague and fret us , and in the wearisome nights , when we count every minute , our guilt will rush in upon our thoughts , attend us in every turn and motion , and render our Souls as restless and uneasy as our Bodies ; if what the Prophet saith of wicked Men be true at other times , 't is much more so at this , That they are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest , whose waters cast up mire and dirt . There is no peace , saith my God , to the wicked . When we come to die , the greatest melancholy that shall then seize our spirits , will be from the heavy load and burden of our sins , that will be ready to oppress and sink our Souls . then we shall find that threatening verified in us , I will reprove thee , and set them in order before thine eyes . And what grief or anguish can be comparable to that , which redounds from this ? When we are going hence , and God gives us Warning to remove , must it not concern and afflict us beyond all thought or expression , to consider the danger our Sins have now brought us to ? They hide God's face and mercy from us , and in our greatest Distress and highest need of Comfort , threaten us with utter Ruin and Destruction ; and nothing now can be so cutting and intolerable as the thoughts of a displeased and angry God. And well may that be so to us which was the greatest of our Saviour's troubles , for at his dying hour , the guilt of our sins that lay on him , occasioned the bitterest agony of his Soul , and that dismal exclamation , My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me . Most certainly the sense of guilt will be the bitterest Potion , and the very dregss of that Cup of trembling , Our Hearts will faint , and our Souls will sink within us , and we shall shake and fear , and cry mightily , and have on us such passionate concernment as is inexpressible , from the dismal apprehension of the Divine Wrath and Indignation which our sins have kindled and provoked against us . So that hereupon it may be said with Cain , My punishment is greater than I can bear . 

Fifthly , The troubles of a dying state will appear further considerable , FROM THE ASSAULTS OF OUR SPIRITVAL ENEMY , WHICH WILL BE THAN MORE AND GREATER THAN EVER . For to this we may apply what is said of him , Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth , for the Devil is come down unto you , having great wrath , because he knoweth that he hath but a short time . And accordingly we may expect that he will apply his temptations , now more closely and vigorously than ever , for if he discharges this last part effectually , they are utterly lost and gone , and he has gained them for ever . wherefore he may be supposed now to set all his Engines on work , and to ply it closely . He takes all the advantages that may be of these extreme and difficult circumstances ; herein he tempts us to fretfulness and impatience under God's hand , to a destrust or despair of his goodness . Dost thou still retain thy Integrity ? Curse God and die . If this will not do , he tempts us with too great presumption on the Divine goodness , to a neglect of due Examination and Repentance of our Sins , or distracts our thoughts with Secular Affairs . One way or other , he either keeps us from the duties requisite for that State , or endeavours to make us increase our sin in it . Most certain it is , that the Devil doth now hope , and industriously watch , for his Prey ; the last effect of his Malice and Revenge . The case here may be somewhat likened to that mentioned of him , rev. 12. 4  The Dragon stood before the Woman that was ready to be delivered , for to devour the Child as soon as it was born . But may our Souls escape like that , and be caught up unto God and to his Throne . 

Sixthly , A dying State or Condition , is rendered very dreadful and terrible FROM THE THOUGHTS OR CONVICTION OF AN AFTER-ACCOUNT OR JUDGEMENT . The Prisoner when going to his Trial , hath all along every step he takes , very strange and perplexing thoughts , and is beyond expression troubled and uneasy within himself . And what must the case be with Men , when on the confines of another World , to think of that great and impartial Judgement and Tribunal , before which they are now summoned to appear ? And how must it affect and cut them , to consider that they are now hasting to the presence of that Rightoous and Almighty Judge , who shall strictly examine every thought and idle word , before whom all things are naked and open ? To consider that after Death comes Judgement , is that which makes a dying State the most serious and weighty matter in the whole World. What concernment and anxiety must a man truly considerative have at such a time ? I am dying , I am departing ; that is , in other terms , I am called to give up my Accounts , I am going to be Judged before the great God ; behold , what matter so weighty , what concernment comparable to this ? This single consideration duly weighed , renders such circumstances very strait and terrible ▪ no other can be the genuine effect of men's thorough belief and conviction ( at that time ) of an approaching Judgement . 

But we have sufficiently represented the black and tragical part , it may be high time now to draw the Curtain , and set forth a fairer Seen . Well then , notwithstanding a dying condition is thus severe and terrible , yet we have particular , extraordinary supports and comforts under it . Yea , though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death , I WILL FEAR no EVIL , FOR THOU ART WITH ME , to assist me in these straits and necessities , and to afford suitable helps and advantages under them . And now those great supports which God doth give us in these most difficult circumstances , may be considered under these following particulars . 

First , The thoughts of this State ; as the appointment of God.  

Secondly , That God is therein peculiarly present with us , and gives us extraordinary helps and assistances of his Divine care and goodness . 

Thirdly , The near approach to Heaven and Happiness . 

Fourthly , The consideration of Christ's Death and Sufferings . 

Fifthly , The belief and expectation of a future Resurrection . 

Sixthly , The promise and assurance of pardon and forgiveness . 

Seven , The attendance of God's Holy Angels that are ready to receive our Souls . 

Which duly and seriously considered , will abundantly qualify and remove all the terrors and difficulties of a dying State.  

First , It is a very great support at that time to consider , That the STATE WE ARE NOW BROUGHT TO , IS ACCORDING TO THE DETERMINATE ORDER AND ALLOTMENT OF GOD , in whom we live , and move , and have our being . He is the breath of our Nostrils , he put our Souls into these Tabernacles , and we are here only Tenants at Will , liable to be dispossessed at Pleasure . And when we consider , that 't is appointed for all men once to die , and that it is an irrevocable decree of Heaven that we MU all walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death , why should we fear any evil ? be dismayed or terrified , at that which is the will and pleasure of the Almighty , as if some strange and unexpected accident did befall us ? For may we not hereupon say with the Apostle , That no man should be moved with these afflictions , for yourselves know that we are appointed thereunto . Is not God's hand in my suffering ? Is it not in my death ? 't is an undoubted mitigation even of this sorrow and affliction to consider that God hath appointed it as the unavoidable Lot and Portion of all men living ▪ so that , on this account , we may say , I will fear no evil , for thou art with me . 

Secondly , In our dying State or circumstances , GOD IS PECULIARLY PRESENT WITH US , AND GIVES US EXTRAORDINARY HELPS AND ASSISTANCES OF HIS CARE AND GOODNESS . thou art with me . That Providence which is always vigilant over us , hath then a more deep and special regard and concern for us . Are the very hairs of our head all numbered ? And doth his care extend so far , as that one of these shall not fall to the ground , but by the permission of our Heavenly Father ? May we not hence justly conclude , that he is peculiarly careful of us in such danger and extremity as this ? thou art with me ; it is rendered Penes me , in loquo quo sto , thou art near at hand , in the very place where I am , not as an indifferent unconcerned Spectator , but to be a very present help in trouble . then this our good God is with us , to comfort our Souls , to support our Spirits , to ease our Pain , and give us patience under it , to soften our cares , to mitigate the pangs and terrors of Death ; then the Eternal God is thy refuge , and underneath are the everlasting Arms. Such a mighty care of God over us , holy David was abundantly sensible of , and doth express very passionately , thou art about my path , and about my bed . The Lord will deliver him in time of trouble . thou wilt not deliver him into the will of his enemies . The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing ; thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness . The Hebrew word signifies turn , thou wilt turn all his bed in his sickness , as it were to make him lie more soft and easy . And he seems to have an undoubted reference hereunto , by what presently follows in this verse : thou art with me , thy rod and thy staff comfort me . At quid adserunt solatis virga & baculus ? adferunt & quidem plurimum , saith Erasmus ingeniously upon it , What comfort doth the rod and staff here import ? A great deal ; adversus latrocinia daemonum hoc Molientium , They are those Instruments whereby this great Shepherd doth defend his Flock from the rage and malice of the Devils , that wait to devour us . I am not ignorant , saith he , that some of the Ancients , by the rod here , understand some light affliction , wherewith God doth Chastise ; by the staff some more severe and heavy Judgement , whereby he doth punish his people . An opinion , though very pious , yet not so proper for this place ; for observe , saith he , the Psalmist doth not say , My rod and my staff , but thy rod and thy staff , and therein speaks more agreeably , to the Metaphor here of Gods being a Pastor ; and so we may take the rod and the staff here according to what is usual in Scripture , the rod may be his assisting Grace , the staff our Defence against our ravenous enemy . Haec virga pastoris Jesus hic beculus solatio sunt gregi imbecilli adversus terrores omnium malorum . This rod , this staff of the shepherd of our souls , Christ Jesus , will be our protection and security against all kind of evil . St. Paul , saith he , mentions the fiery Darts of the Devil ; these Christ keeps from us with his staff here mentioned : Hoc an non magnum interim militaris itineris solatium . And is not this by the way a great encouragement of our Warlike State ? How dearly doth our Lord Jesus love us , who , as you see , will neglect nothing that may any wise conduce to our protection , our refreshment , and our comfort ? 

Thus far he , which I have the longer insisted on , because it is such a genuine , though unusual Interpretation , and a seasonable representation of Gods so great , and peculiar care , and regard for us , in this most strait and difficult condition . 

To sum up this Head ; as nothing is surer than the day of Death , and our departure out of this earthly Body , which very likely may be attended with blackness and terror , with dreadful pains , and Agonies , too great to be expressed ; yet I may comfortably say , that herein the Lord is my helper ; yea , though I walk through this Valley of the shadow of Death , I will fear no evil , for thou art with me . Thomas the Arrows of the Almighty stick fast in me , and his hand presseth me sore though my condition be painful and tormenting , and I be stretched upon my Bed with grief and anguish , and my friends about me lament to think that the place which now seeth me , shall see me no more , notwithstanding the decree is past . That God hath numbered my Life and finished it , and I am now befet with gloominess and darkness , mine eye balls roll , and my Soul is just on the wing , ready to take its flight into the unknown Regions of the other World , Nevertheless I am continually with thee , thou hast holden me by my right hand , thou shalt guide me with thy Council , and afterwards receive me to glory ; Whom have I in Heaven but thee , and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee . My Flesh and my Heart faileth , but God is the strength of my heart and my Portion for ever . Which brings us to another thing that will relieve and comfort us , in a dying State and Condition , and that is 

Thirdly , THE THOUGHTS OR CONSIDERATION OF OUR NEAR APPROACH TO HAPPINESS AND GLORY . Having hitherto run the race that is set before us . We may expect greater sweets and troubles , and to be more tired , the nearer we come to the end of it . But this is the last Stage , if we can bear up under this only remaining difficulty , the day and the prize is ours , we may go on with patience Looking unto Jesus , the Author and Finisher of our Faith. How must it encourage our endeavours , and support our spirits , under the sorest pressure of Death itself , to behold , with an eye of faith , the glory ready to be revealed , and to see our Lord , with open arms , ready to receive us ? Come , bear up under this , and as it is your worst , it is your very last trial . There are blessed Mansions prepared for you , where there shall be no more death , neither sorrow , nor crying ; neither shall there be any more pain , for the former things are passed away . Thomas it may not seem consistent with what I have already delivered , to lessen the sad and sorrowful circumstances of our dying hours , yet I may say , that if our Souls be duly fixed on Heaven and Eternity , it must in a great measure abate , and will , I 'm sure , outweigh the worst that can be said or conceived of that State. This is able to outballance the utmost tyranny of pains and agonies , and to dispel all clouds and melancholy from our minds . The Night is come , but it brings us to the dawn of Eternity , and that shadow of Death is the confine of the days of Heaven . Yet a little while , and we are gone into YONDER World ; and must it not be a mighty satisfaction to us now , to say with the Apostle , We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved , we have a building of God , an house not made with hands , eternal in the heavens . To think that the pain will be over in a short time , is some ease to my mind in the greatest affliction ; but to add , and consider withal , that it will be presently succeeded with joy unspeakable and full of glory , must administer to our Souls the highest consolation . I will fear no evil , for thou art with me ; to say farther , and I shall be with thee , be transferred to that blissful State , to the presence of God , where there is fullness of joys and pleasures for evermore , is my most unspeakable support , and the very height of comfort and satisfaction . The years draw nigh in which thou shalt say I have no pleasure in them , while the Sun , or the Light , or the Moon , or the Stars , are darkened . In the day when the Keepers of the House shall remble . Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high , and fears shall be in the way . The silver Cord is loses ▪ Observe , upon that melancholy , and though elegant description , of our dying condition , Solomon subjoins us a comfort against the dismal thoughts of those sad circumstances , and against Death itself ; the consideration of our acceptance with God in the Immortal State. then shall the dust return to the earth as it was , and the spirit shall return to God who gave it . In a word , this single consideration , that we shall ever be with the Lord , duly weighed and relied on , will abundantly relieve and support us against all the Powers of Death , in its most horrid and ghastly , appearances , and sufficiently subdue the great difficulties of the dying State.  

Fourthly , This is again rendered further easy and supportable FROM THE CONSIDERATION OF CHRIST'S DEATH AND SUFFERINGS ; not only as they do expiate our sins , and so bring comfort to our Souls , as we may have occasion to show presently ▪ but withal , upon the account of his great and glorious conquest over Death and the Grave , which he vanquished and subdued , in the very worst , and most horrid circumstances , that they might have lesle power , and exercise lesle tyranny over us . Whereupon the Apostle triumphantly speaks , Death is swallowed up in Victory . OH Death , where is thy sting ? OH Grave , where is thy victory ? Thanks be to God , which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ . 

To consider that Christ our Lord under went the same before us , and in a more dismal manner than we are able to bear or imagine , is some mitigation in this most sorrowful condition ; considering withal , that in doing so , he hath made the way more smooth and passable for us . Death spent his most fiery Darts on him , and he hath so subdued his greatest strength and utmost power , that he either cannot , or dare not be over severe and rigorous with us ; at least , he can go no further than he will permit him . I am he that liveth and was dead , and behold I am alive for evermore , Amen : And have the keys of Hell and of Death . Death is now purely under Christ's command , and can do nothing but by leave from him ; and therefore , we may justly hope that our gracious Lord will not suffer him to exert his utmost fury upon us . How suitable then is that pious Prayer of our Church at this season : OH Saviour of the World , who by thy Cross and precious Blood hast redeemed us , save us and help us , we humbly beseech thee , OH Lord  

Fifthly , The troubles and sorrows of a dying State , are again very much abated and subdued FROM THE THOUGHTS OF A FUTURE RESURRECTION , which will satisfy our minds , and make abundant amends for all the doubts or troubles that do now attend us . What though we suffer under pains , and may be grieved to think that part of us shall be the prey of Worms and Corruption , yet the belief of this truth will soon dispel the sorrows that arise from thence . The time is coming ( and Lord , what joy is it in these straits ▪ ) when my Soul now returning to God , shall meet this body again glorious and refined ; never more to be vexed with , or separated from it . This shadow of Death , and that sorrowful Night , that is now beset with clouds and horror , will conduct us to the morn of our Resurrection ; and how can we be sorrowful as Men without hope ? This our Church looks upon as the most comfortable support , for the consideration of our own , or others dissolution , when in its great Prudence and Piety , it appoints that Lesson concerning the great Article of the Resurrection in the Burial Service , a Doctrine if rightly fixed and believed , that will render us steadfast and immoveable in the deepest sorrows . Thy Brother shall rise again , was the comfort our Saviour gave to Mary , and is such as will be able to bear up our spirits , even in the heaviest trials of a dying State. For how must it support me and others , at that time , to speak after this , or the like manner ? You behold me , brethren , seemingly forsaken and distressed ; and , indeed , My complaint is bitter , for my soul is exceeding sorrowful , even unto death , and my stroke is heavier than my groan . But yet I would have you believe and think as I do , that I am only to withdraw for a small season ; and as the Prophet speaks , to enter into my Chambers , and shut my Doors about me , and to hide myself , as it were , for a little moment , for thy dead men shall live ; together with my dead body shall they arise . And thereupon , observe what followeth : Awake and sing , ye that dwell in the dust . This long and solemn parting may cause grief in our hearts , and tears in our eyes ; but shall we not be comforted , considering the time is coming , in which , All that are in the Graves , shall hear the voice of the Son of God , and shall come forth . 



Sixthly , The Terrors of a dying State are mightily qualified and abated , FROM GOD'S MOST COMFORTABLE PROMISE AND ASSURANCE OF PARDON AND FORGIVENESS . The greatest and the truest sorrow of a dying State , is that which is occasioned from the sense of Sin and Gild ▪ Hinc illae lacryniae . This is the cause of our chiefest trouble and uneasiness at that time , and very justly too , for it is the most dismal rate as ever was threatened ; ye shall die in your sins . But when I come with a message of Pardon and Forgiveness , and this be rightly received and well grounded , then 't is Son be of good cheer , thy sins be forgiven thee . To be convinced that I have made my peace with God , and that my Pardon is sealed in Heaven , this will strengthen us in the midst of sorrows , even to the defiance of all pain and anguish : Instead of complaints , we may hereupon joyfully say , Lord , now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace . I do neither care nor value what I suffer , so I be reconciled , to God , and have my sins washed away by the Blood of Christ . And such may be the state of every one of us , for upon a sincere Faith and hearty Repentance , God will have mercy upon us , and abundantly pardon . Though your sins be as scarlet , they shall be as white as snow ; though they be red like crimson , they shall be as wool . This blessed promise takes away the sting of death , and puts us beyond the reach of its terror and malignity ; and therefore our Church may well prescribe it as the great , or only comfort , and security , in such a state or condition . Thus saying , The Almighty Lord , who is a most strong Tower to all them that put their trust in him , to whom all things in heaven , in earth , and under the earth , do bow and obey , be now and evermore they defence , and make thee know and feel , that there is no other name under Heaven given to Man ▪ in whom , and through whom , thou mayest receive health and salvation , but only the name of our Lord Jesus Christ . 

The Seventh , and last comfortable Consideration that we have against the great sorrows of Death is . THE ATTENDANCE OF GOD'S HOLY ANGELS READY TO RECEIVE OUR SOULS AND TO CONDUCT THEM INTO THE MANSION OF THE BLESSED . For he will give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways , certainly then in these , the most difficult of any . For are they not all Ministering spirits sent forth to Minister 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 for them that shall , or are ready to inherit Salvation ? 

The blessed God whose instruments the Angels are ( and who is therefore alone to be adored for it ) hath out of wonderful condescension towards us , assigned those glorious happy Being's , for our safety and protection in our dying Strength and Difficulties . For the holy Scripture tells us , They carried Lazarus his Soul into Abraham's bosom . And in our Saviour's dreadful Agonies there appeared an Angel unto him from Heaven strengthening him . And if such were able to bring him relief in his Circumstances , they may well do it to ours , which at the worst , come vastly short of his sorrowful Death and Passion . Why now should we be amazed , and terrified at the thoughts or approach of that most serious and solemn hour . Why art thou so heavy , OH my soul ? And why art thou so disquieted within me ? OH put thy trust in God. He and his blessed Angels continually watch over us for good . God in the ways we have heard , or others , as he knows best , Will keep thee from the hour of temptation , which shall come on all the World. God is our refuge and strength ; a very present help in trouble : Therefore will we not fear , though the earth be moved . The Lord of Hosts is with us ; the God of Jacob is our refuge . 

In all time of our Tribulation , in the hour of Death , and in the Day of Judgement , Good Lord deliver us . 

FINIS . 





Mat. 6. 32.  Bithner . Pst . 55. 4 , 5.  Chap. 6. 2 , 3 , 4.  Chap. 18. 14.  Heb. 9 27.  rev. 21. 4.  Zeph. 1. 14 , 15.  Isa . 57 20. 21.  Psal . 50. 21.  Gen. 4. 13.  rev. 12. 12.  Job 2. 9  Ver. 5.  1 These . 3. 3  Deut. 33. 27.  Psal . 41.  Dan. 5. 26.  Psalm . 73. 23.  rev. 2. 4.  2 Chro. 5. 1.  Psal . 16. 11.  Eccles . 12.  1 Cor. 15. 54.  rev. 1. 18.  Visitation of the Sick.  St. John 11. 23.  Isai . 26. 20.  St. Matth. 5. 28.  St. John 8. 24.  St. Matth. 9 2.  Isa . 55. 7.  1 18.  Visit . of Sick.  Psal . 91. 11.  Heb. 1. 14.  St. Luk. 16. 22.  St. Luk. 22. 43.  Psal . 43. 5 , 6.  rev. 3. 10.  Psal . 46. 1.  