The patriarchal funeral : or a sermon preached before the right honourable George Lord Berkeley upon the death of his father . 

By John Pearson . 

London , printed by e. Cotes , for John Williams at the sign of the crown in St. Paul's churchyard , 1658.  

To the right honourable George Lord Berkeley , Baron of Berkeley , Mowbray , Seagrave , and breouse . 

My Lord , 

I have been lately honoured by your lordship with a double command , one to preach , the other to publish , this sermon : of the first of which though i Might have been innocently ambitious , yet of the second i May be justly ashamed : partly , because the sermon itself is much unworthy of public view , especially upon an occasion of so great remark ; partly , and more concerningly , in regard that having been so many years happy in the knowledge of your lordship , and as long obliged as known unto your honour , i have not hitherto appeared with any thing worthy of your lordship's patronage . I shall therefore humbly crave the leave of making to myself this interpretation , that your honour did intend this command as a remembrance of my duty , that i May hereafter meditate something to demonstrate to whom i owe the encouragement of my studies . In the interim by this present discourse i shall only give a testimony , how properly i have endeavoured the memory of your father , by obscuring his virtues , and your concernments , in my expressions , from all persons who are strangers to your family , while i speak to them which were known unto you both , as to such as cannot but be most sensible , and bear a perpetual remembrance , of them . Howsoever what is wanting in this funeral sermon , shall be supplied in my perpetual devotion , praying for an everlasting succession of 〈◊〉 benedictions upon your honour , your honourable and most virtuous Lady , and your most hopeful issue , as becometh 

Your honour's most obliged and devoted servant John Pearson . 

The patriarchal funeral . 

gen . L. 10.  

and he made a mourning for his father seven days . 

There are two great names concealed in this text , but expressed by the prophet David in a peculiar and eminent manner : thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy persons , the sons of Jacob and Joseph . great was the name of Abraham , but all his sons were not accepted ; only Isaac was in the covenant . Great was the name of Isaac , but his son Esau was rejected . Great then must the name of Jacob be , who had twelve sons , and all accepted . The whole persons of God descended from him , and were called Israelites , and the sons of Jacob , as his by generation from his loins . One of these twelve was Joseph , and the rest did equally descend from him , and Might be called his sons by preservation , from his care and power . Howsoever , he is exempted from the number of his brethren ; and , that he Might be styled a father , two sons of his are numbered with his father's sons , and ranked with the patriarchs . Thus were all the persons of God the sons of Jacob and Joseph ; and Joseph , while the son of Jacob , the father of the sons of Jacob . these are the two concealed in the text ; Jacob the father , and that father dead ; Joseph the son , and that a mourning son : for he made a mourning for his father seven days . 

These words contain a brief relation of a patriarchal funeral ; in which two general parts are presented to our view ; the solemnization of the obsequies ; and , the continuation of the solemnities . In the description of the solemnization there are four particulars observable , the connexion . The person . The action . The occasion . The connexion , in the conjunctive particle and : the person understood , in the following pronoun he : the action represented , what he , that is , Joseph did , he made a mourning : the occasion expressed , for whom he mourned , for his father . the connexion of the text is double , in reference to the person , and in relation to the action . The connexion of the person , and he ; the connexion of the action with the precedent actions of that person , and he made a mourning . i shall begin with the connexion of the person , and in my whole discourse exactly prosecute the method of the text . 

When aged Jacob yielded up the ghost , and was gathered unto his persons , the physicians embalmed Israel , and the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days . they were not as yet the apparent enemies of God ; they had their tears for Jacob , who afterward would have drowned all his sons ; they preserved and prolonged the days of his life ; and when those were cut off , they continue the days of his weeping . But there is a difference between a formal and a real sorrow , between a solemn and a serious grief , between a popular and a filial sadness . Wherefore Joseph is not contented with the Egyptian mourning ; he hath a nearer relation than those strangers had , and therefore more of affection is expected from him ; his filial sympathy must go beyond their accustomed civility ; the Egyptians mourned , and he made a mourning for his father . this is the connexion in respect of the person ; that of the action followeth . 

When Jacob was near the time of his dissolution , Joseph put his hand under his thigh , and swore unto him that he would deal kindly and truly with him , that he would bury him in the burying place of his fathers . When he gathered up his feet into the bed and died , Joseph fell on his father's face , and wept upon him , and kissed him , and so paid the first-fruits of a funeral with his eyes and with his lips . After this he commanded the physicians to follow with spices and embalm him , desirous to preserve that body to the utmost possibility from corruption , from which he had received his generation . Then he entreated and obtained leave of Pharaoh to perform his oath which he swore unto Jacob : he went up to the land of Canaan to take possession with his father's body , and laid him in the field which Abraham bought . there they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife , there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife , there Jacob buried Leah , and there Joseph buried Jacob . and having thus fulfilled all the duties belonging to a son , there remaining but this one , fit to be performed then required , he made a mourning for his father . this is the connexion of the action . 

The person or chief mourner then is Joseph ; he which once was dead in the thoughts of Jacob , and desires of his brethren , survives his father to attend his funeral , and to preserve his brethren alive . His coming into Egypt cost aged Jacob many a tear ; and he must pass into Canaan to demonstrate his gratitude , and pay that debt unto his father there . This eminent person is proposed for an example unto all ages of the world : what he here performed , was no legal ceremony ; he was a patriarch , and long before the law : he was a singular and signal type of Christ , and hath done nothing which May misbecome the most retired and sublimed Christian . 

And this will readily appear , if we join the action to the person . he made a mourning . i call 't an action , which May as well be termed a passion : as a mourning , so a passion ; as he made it , so an action ; a passionate action , or an active passion . The internal grief of his mind and sorrow of his heart , as an inward passion of his soul , was voluntarily raised within him by resolved and continue thoughts of his father's death ; and at the same time the expression of that grief was willingly poured forth , as what he understood did well become him . We are not only to bewail our sins , but all those miseries which proceed from them : and therefore tears were not only lent us to declare compunction , but also to express commiseration . We read our blessed saviour twice did weep , once for the sins of Jerusalem , once for the death of Lazarus whom he loved . Two eyes nature bestowed upon us , though perfectly and distinctly we can see but with one at once , and both are equally made the fountains of tears , as we are sinners for contrition , as we are brethren for compassion . When the first martyrs blood was shed for the Christian faith , devout men carried Steven to his burial , and made great lamentation over him ; such were the tears of the infant church . When Peter found Dorcas , a woman full of good works and almesdeeds , dead , all the widows stood by him weeping . thus the first which died in Christianity , were followed with solemn tears : and it was a wise observation made by the apostate Julian , that one of the the means to convert so many heathens to our religion , was the care of the bodies , and the solemnities always used at the funerals of the dead . Thus far of the action , he made a mourning . 

The occasion of this sadness is expressed in a word , but must be considered in many more , as being the principal concernment both of the text and time . The mover of his passion , the object of his grief , the cause of his tears was his father , and he made a mourning for his father . this was so truly the occasion , that it was the only cause , that there can be no reason imaginable assigned why Joseph should mourn , but only because he had lost a father . Though he was aged to extremity , though he was holy unto eminency , though he was happy to eternity , though no way disadvantageous by his death to any , yet because dead , and that a father dead , he made a mourning for him . 

We usually say of ancient persons , that they have already one foot in the grave , and the rest of their life is nothing else but the bringing of these feet together . Why then should we weep for the death of aged persons , when it can be but the second part of their funeral ? That sorrow seems to be but useless which is spent upon necessities , and that grief irrational which would create impossibilities . the days of our years are threescore years and ten , and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years , yet is their strength labour and sorrow . what reason then can we produce , that the life of a man whom we esteem , should be sorrow to himself , and his death be grief to us ? Now Jacob gave this account of his age to Pharaoh when he came down to Egypt . the days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years ; and he lived in the land seventeen years ; so the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years . this extremity of age had fastened him to his bed , the perfect emblem and short forerunner of his grave . the eyes of Israel were dim , so that he could not see ; he was already in the shades of darkness . Nay , the time drew nigh , saith Moses , that Israel must die ; there was a natural necessity of his death , an apparent impossibility of longer life ; and yet this consideration is no excuse to Joseph , but he made a mourning for his aged father . 

Secondly , the death of the righteous is to be desired rather then lamented : and it were a dishonour put upon religion to think a pious man less happy dead , than when he lived . weep not for me , was the language of the immaculate lamb when he went to a shameful and a painful death : and why should he , which yields up his soul with comfort , leave his body to be covered with so much sorrow ? Those which live in impiety , and depart in their iniquity , they which have here provoked the wrath of God , and go hence with that wrath abiding on them , as they could create nothing to their relations but sorrow in their life , so must they necessarily increase it at their death . But Jacob was a patriarch , of eminent and constant piety , particularly and remarkably beloved of God , highly blessed by him , and powerfully blessing in his name ; and yet when Jacob dieth , Joseph weepeth : and he made a mourning for his pious father . 

Thirdly , death is nothing else but a change of a short and temporary for an unalterable and eternal condition . From whence it followeth , that those which die in their sins , from thence begin to feel those torments which shall never cease : and therefore they leave behind them a sad occasion of grief and sorrow to such as are apprehensive of the pains they feel . If the rich man in the gospel were so careful of his surviving brethren , and so concerned in their welfare ; if they had as well understood his sad and irreversible condition , what floods of tears would they have shed for him who called so earnestly for a drop of water to cool his tongue ! But as for such as pass from hence into a place of rest and joy , who change the miseries of this sinful world for the blessed presence of a good and gracious God ; weeping at their departure May seem improper and unkind officiousness , as 't were a sorrow for their happiness , and envy at their felicity . Now the soul of Jacob was certainly at rest , and Joseph sufficiently assured of his happiness . He knew that his father was heir of the same promise with Abraham : for he looked for a city which hath foundations , whose builder and maker is God ; he died in faith , and embraced the promises ; he confessed that he was a stranger on the earth , and that he sought a better country , that is , an heavenly ; and therefore God had prepared for him a city , and he was in the bosom of Abraham , the place of felicity . But the happiness of his soul is no excuse to Joseph for the funeral tears due at the interment of his body . and he made a mourning for his happy father . 

Fourthly , many persons expiring give too sad occasions of sorrow to their relations left behind : they which depend upon them , whose subsistence liveth and dyeth , and whose hopes are buried , with them , May go to their graves with unfeigned tears , lamenting not so much the departure of their friend , as their own loss ; something they May weep for them , and more for themselves . But the death of Jacob was not of any such condition ; there could no disadvantage arise from that to Joseph , no interest of his could suffer by it . He had already blessed all his sons , and Joseph principally ; there could be no more of heavenly favours expected from his prayers or prophecies . Had he died before he laid his hands upon Ephraim and Menasseh , had Joseph and his sons been absent when he blessed the rest , he Might have sadly mourned for the loss of his father , and of the benediction . If Esau lift up his voice and wept , because he was defeated of the blessing while Isaac lived , Joseph Might well have made a mourning , had he been prevented of the benediction by an unexpected or a distant death . But Jacob blessed them , and with his blessing gave order for his burial , and with that blessing and that order died . And as his death was no way prejudicial to the spiritual , so was it not at all disadvantageous to the temporal condition of his son . He suffered loss of no enjoyments by his father's death ; Jacob had lived long by the favour and the care of Joseph , his filial gratitude alone preserved his life ; but no such narrow thoughts abated the freeness of Joseph's sorrow . and he made a mourning for his father . 

If none of these considerations , which work so powerfully on other persons , did move this mourner to express such sorrow , what were the motives then which caused so deep a sense , what meditations wrought so powerfully on the heart of Joseph ? i answer , they were but two . Mortality , and paternity ; the one supposed , the other expressed in the text : Jacob was the father of Joseph , and that father dead , and therefore Joseph mourned for him . 

Mortality is a proper object to invite our pity , and privation of life alone sufficient to move compassion in the living . weep for the dead , saith the son of Sirach , for he hath lost the light . if for no other reason , yet because a man is dead , and by death deprived of those comforts which those that live enjoy , they which survive May providently bewail their future privation in his present loss . Thus every grave-stone bespeaks or expects a tear ; as if all those eyes which had not yet lost their light , were to pay the tribute of their waters to the dead sea . This fountain nature never made in vain , nor to be always sealed up ; that heart is rock which suffers it never to break forth ; and be it so , yet if the rod of Moses strike , an affliction sent from God shall force it . Let us therefore be ready with our sorrowful expressions when we are invited by sad occasions ; especially when a father , who May command them , calls for them , as that wise man did , my son , let tears fall down over the dead . and if paternal authority demands them at the death of others , it is no filial duty which denies them to attend upon a father's funeral . Joseph a man of a gracious and a tender heart , moved with common objects of compassion , had a vulgar sorrow arising from the consideration of mortality ; Joseph a son full of high affection and of filial duty and respect , was touched with a far more lively sense by the accession of paternity : and he made a mourning for his father : he made a mourning for his father , which begat him ; for his father , which loved him ; for his father , which blessed him ; for his father , which had mourned for him ; for his father , which came down to die with him . 

First , he made a mourning for his father who begat him : had there been no other but that naked relation , it had carried with it a sufficient obligation . There is so great an union between the parent and the child , that it cannot break without a deep sensation . He which hath any grateful apprehension of his own life received , cannot choose but sadly resent the loss of that life which gave it . If the fear of the death of Croesus , by a natural miracle , could untie the tongue of his son who never spoke before ; that man must be miraculously unnatural , the floodgates of whose eyes are not opened at his father's funerals , though he never wept before . The gifts of grace do not obliterate , but improve nature ; and it is a false persuasion of adoption , which teacheth us so far to become the sons of God , as to forget that we are the sons of men . Joseph a person high in the esteem of Pharaoh , higher in the favour of God , great in the power of Egypt , greater in the power of the spirit , yet he forgets not his filial relation , yet he cannot deny his natural obligation , but as a pious son he pays the last tribute of his duty to Jacob , and he made a mourning for his father who begat him . 

Secondly , he made a mourning for his father who loved him . Love , when in an equal , commandeth love ; and this is so just , that fire doth not more naturally create a flame . In this the similitude is so great , that there is no difference in the nature of the love produced , and that which did produce it . But when it first beginneth in a superior person , the proper effect which it createth in an inferior , is not of a single nature , but such a love as is mingled with duty and respect . The love of God to man challengeth love from us , but that of such a nature as cannot be demonstrated but by obedience ; and that of a father to his son is of the same condition , though not in the same proportion . The father loveth first with care and tenderness , with a proper and a single love ; the son returns it with another colour mingled with duty , blended with respect . Now Jacob had many children , and as an eminent example he loved them all : but among the rest , there was one clearer and warmer flame ; for he loved Joseph more than all his children : the offspring of Rachel , the son of his old age , the heir of his virtues , the corrector of his brethren , the beloved of God , had a greater share in Jacobs' affection then the rest of his issue . He did not so much prefer his wives before his handmaids , he did not so highly value Rachel before Leah , as he did esteem Joseph before the offspring of them all . This was the paternal love of Jacob , and this was answered with as high a filial respect in Joseph ; which after death could not otherwise be expressed then in tears ; and therefore he made a mourning for his father , who loved him . 

Thirdly , he made a mourning for his father who had blessed him . Blessing is the sovereign act of God , and the power of benediction like the power of God . He delegateth this power unto his priests , who stand between God and man , and bless the sons of men in the name of God . He derives the same upon our natural parents , that children honouring them May expect his blessing upon their desires and prayers . And what greater favour could we ask of God , then that those persons who have the most natural affection toward us , should also have the greatest power to bless us ? Now when the time drew nigh that Israel must die , when his body drew nearer to the earth , and his soul to heaven , when his desires were highest , and his words of the greatest efficacy , he called unto his sons , and blessed them , every one according to his blessing he blessed them . but as he loved Joseph more than all his brethren , so he blessed him above them all : he made one tribe of every son , and two of him : his affection showed itself rhetorical in his benediction , saying , the blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors : unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills they shall be on the head of Joseph , and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren . giving this benediction , Jacob dyes ; receiving this blessing , Joseph survives , who can render no other retribution after his death , but care of his burial , and tears at his funeral . and therefore he made a mourning for his father , who had blessed him . 

Fourthly , he made a mourning for his father , who had mourned for him . The parents cares and fears are equal , and when any infelicity besides their children , their griefs are great ; and all these bear a proportion with their love . Now the love of Jacob to Joseph was transcendent , and being so , it raised as high an hatred in the hearts of his brethren ; by which he was , in their intention , and in his father's opinion , dead . And now the funeral is Joseph's , let us see how Jacob does appear . he rent his clothes , and put sackcloth upon his loins , and mourned for his son many days . here is a real demonstration upon a supposed death , and a serious mourning at a feigned funeral . Had his dearest son been dead , yet he Might well take comfort in his numerous offspring , but he did not ; for all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him ; but he refused to be comforted : and he said , for i will go down into the grave unto my son mourning ; thus his father wept for him . thus it pleased God to permit this happy deceit of envious brethren , this pious mistake of an affectionate father , not only for a great example of paternal love , but also to teach all sons to measure their griefs at their father's death , by a consideration of those sorrows which their parents would have expressed , had they died before them . Howsoever Joseph was but just in this : for he made a mourning for his father , who had mourned for him . 

Lastly , he made a mourning for his father , who came down to die with him . It was the old expression of parent's comfort , that at their deaths they Might have their children to close their eyes ; and it hath been equally the desire of children to be made happy by that occasion , in showing the last testimony of their duty at their parent's death . Now Jacob , who upon the supposed death of Joseph , had said , i will go down into the grave unto my son ; upon the certain intelligence of his life and safety , resolveth to go down and die with him . For when he saw the wagons which Joseph sent , and his spirit revived , Israel said , it is enough : Joseph my son is yet alive , i will go and see him before i die : and when Joseph first presented himself unto him in the land of Egypt , the first words which he spoke were these , now let me die , since i have seen thy face , because thou art yet alive . now he which said at first , i will go and see him before i die , and when he saw him , said , now let me die , resolved nothing in that journey but to die with Joseph . And he made a moursing for his father , who came down to die with him . 

For all these reasons Joseph mourned ; for his father , who begat him , remembering his natural generation ; for his father , who loved him , not forgetting his singular affection ; for his father , who had blessed him , considering his double benediction ; for his father , who had mourned for him , meditating a pious retaliation ; for his father , who came down to die with him , embracing the opportunity of a dutiful expression . And thus i close up the first general part of the text , or the solemnization of the obsequies . 

The second general part of the same presents us with the continuation of the solemnity . Which ministers a double consideration , one as consisting of not many days , the other as determining how many days . and he made a mourning for his father seven days . 

Immediately after Jacobs' death in Egypt , forty days were fulfilled for his embalming , and the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days . they which have no hope of a life to come , May extend their griefs for the loss of this , and equal the days of their mourning with the years of the life of man . But so tedious a funeral solemnity is a tacit profession of infidelity . When Moses went up unto the mountain of Nebo , and died there , the children of Israel wept for him in the plains of Moab thirty days . the plains of Moab were nearer to the land of promise than Egypt was , and some light of the joys of the life to come was discovered under the law , and therefore more than half of the Egyptian solemnity was cut off by the faith of the Israelites . but this patriarchal funeral was made in Canaan , the land of promise , the type of heaven ; it was appointed by Joseph a blessed patriarch , and a type of Christ : it continue some days , to declare his natural affection , but those not many , to express his religious expectation . Had it been extended longer , it had demonstrated more of duty , but less of faith , he had showed himself more a son , but less a patriarch . But now he is become a great example , in mourning some days , of filial duty ; in mourning few days , of divinity . Which is our first consideration . 

The second leads us to the determinate number of the days , which are expressly seven . and he made a mourning for his father seven days . the Jews took special notice of this act of Joseph , and in the land of Canaan observed the number of these days , seven days do men mourn for him that is dead , saith the son of Sirach ; and though it be not unto us a law , yet it is a proper subject of our observation . 

It was afterward one of the laws of Moses , he that toucheth the dead body of any man , shall be unclean seven days . and therefore well did Joseph teach the Israelites to mourn the same number of days , that with their tears of natural affection , they Might mingle some thoughts of their natural pollution . 

Again , the number of seven is the number of rest , in six days the Lord made heaven and earth , the sea , and all that in them is : and he rested on the seventh day from all his works which he had made . now Joseph knew that there remaineth a rest to the persons of God , he was fully assured that as the days of the years of his father's pilgrimage were evil , so they ended in rest and happiness : that as sure as his body was past all weariness and pain , so his soul was placed above all possibility of grief or sorrow . A dove brought Noah word into the ark that the waters were on the face of the earth , and he stayed seven days , and then the dove sent forth returned , and lo , in her mouth was an olive leaf plucked off , so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth . if we mourn for the death of any person departed , and the waters appear upon the face of man , yet after the seventh day , when the olive leaf is plucked , when we have considered the peace , and rest , and joys of the souls departed in the fear of God , 't is time for the waters to abate , for mourning to cease . 

Thirdly , the number of seven is the number of holiness : as God rested the seventh day , so he blessed , and hallowea it . seven days Aaron and his sons the priests were consecrate ; seven days an atonement was made , and the altar was sanctified . Seven days hath Joseph set apart for his father's funeral , to show that mourning for the dead is something sacred , the tenth of the Egyptian mourning , an act of piety , a part of religion . The Jews observed that the circumcision was deferred till the eighth day , that a Sabbath Might pass upon the child , and so sanctify it before it was circumcised ; and Joseph appointeth seven days for mourning , one of which must necessarily be that day which God blessed and sanctified in the beginning , to procure a blessing upon that duty , and to sanctify his sorrow . 

Upon which seasonable consideration i shall take leave to conclude my meditations on the text , and apply myself to the present solemnity , which gave the occasion to consider it : that i May make such use of the work of this holy day , as May sanctify the sorrow of it . 

And now , most honourable Sir , the Joseph of this time , the chief mourner of this day , be pleased to endeavour the sanctification of your mourning by these reflexive meditations . 

First , learn from hence to meditate upon your own mortality , and be now assured , by this near and home example , that yourself shall die . This May seem but a cold monition , but a dull reflection ; every grave preacheth that doctrine , and every skeleton readeth as good a lecture : when we come into the house of God , our feet will learn thus much , and the ground we tread upon will thus far instruct us . 't is true , the examples of our mortality are numerous , but they are not equally efficacious ; the nearer our relations are to those which die , the more we are concerned in their death , and there is none so near in his concernment as that of the father and the son . There is a difference between the language of the scriptures , and such a prophet as Nathan was ; one tells us that all men are sinners , the other says , thou art the man . so common funerals tell us all men are mortal , but that of a father speaketh not only plainly , but particularly , thou art so . From his vivacity the son receiveth life , and in his death must read his own departure . 't is possible to imagine an immortal family , and then the deaths of others concerned that not : but where the father 's dead , there can be no pretence or thought of immortality . Beside , there 's something more than propinquity of nature in a father : religion teacheth us that our days are otherwise bound up in our parents lives . Remember the first commandment with promise , honour thy father and thy mother , that thy days May be long in the land : consider that you have lost in his death all further opportunity of improving the hopes of that promise ; and that you stand now only , as to him , upon what comfort you have in your former duty , and in your past obedience . Thus learn to fix a more immediate and more concerning meditation of your own mortality , upon the death of him , in whose life yours was involved both by a natural and spiritual dependence . 

Secondly , reflect upon that love and entire affection which you have lost ; and could no otherwise be lost , but by losing him , in whom it lived . Love is of that excellent nature , that it is esteemed by the best of men , and accepted from the meanest persons ; what then is the affection of a father ! what is the purity of that fire which God and nature kindles in the breast of man ! what were the flames which ever burned upon the altar of your father's heart , who never hated any man ! See but the nature of paternal love in David ; who , when Absalon , his son , but a most rebellious son , openly sought his life and crown , and died in that unnatural attempt , went up into his chamber and wept , and as he went , thus he said , oh my son Absalon , my son , my son Absalon ; would God i had died for thee , oh Absalon my son , my son : measure by this example the affection you have so lately lost , who never gave any offence as Absalon did , and yet had in your father's eye all the reasons of love which Absalon could have . Know than you make a mourning , as Joseph did , for a father that loved you : remember that the love of Jacob was divided between twelve sons , and therefore , though it was high , it could not be whole and entire to Joseph , as for many years your fathers hath been unto you . 

Thirdly , i speak not this out of design to renew or advance your grief , to tell you what you have lost alone ; but i propound this privation , that i May contrive it for your imitation , endeavouring to stir up the same fire , and to kindle the same affection in yourself , who now are wholly to be considered in the same relation . What you were to him , others are now to you ; and what he was to you , you are now wholly unto them . Before your natural affection was partly taken up with duty , respect , honour and obedience due to a father from a son ; it is now taken off from those expressions , as to him , that it May descend the more entire upon those which come from you , as you from him . Thus far you have been the Joseph of the text , be now the Jacob ; that those two great names May be concealed not only in the text , but in your breast . Thus far you have been the better part of Absalon , learn now to be the David : that we May truly say , that tender affection , that paternal love , died not with your father , but survives in you to your and his posterity . 

Fourthly , i desire you to look not only upon that which you have lost , but also upon that which he hath left behind him . Vulgar and common persons , as they carry nothing out of this world , so they leave nothing in it : they receive no eminency in their birth , they acquire none in their life , they have none when they die , they leave none at their death . But honourable persons , as they die like common men , so that only dieth with them which was common unto all degrees of men ; their singular respects , the privileges of their greatness , their honours survive them , and descend unto their heirs with their inheritance . Give me leave then yet to speak unto you as to the heir of your father's honours ; consider what the nature and design of honours are ; remember they were first graciously conferred as a reward of the virtues of your ancestors , and were as wisely continue upon a presumption , and as an encouragement , of the same virtues in their successors . Your honour knows how long the greatness of your family hath been preserved : acknowledge first the vigilant providence and infinite goodness of God in the preservation of it , while so many glorious titles have been lost , so many noble families cut off . Next , study to preserve and advance it further by the exercise of those virtues upon which it was first built , and hath been since continue : endeavour to uphold not only your own , but the very name of honour in this age , in which partly the want of such virtues as are necessary to support it , partly the weakness of that power which first gave life unto it , partly the unreasonableness of foolish men who endeavour to cast a disesteem upon it , have too much eclipsed the glory of it . 

Lastly , as i have advised you , with the son of Sirach , to let tears fall upon the dead , and to use lamentation as he is worthy ; so i shall conclude with his following advice , when that is done , than comfort thyself for thy heaviness ; that is , not only be comfored after sorrow , that consolation May succeed your griefs , this is the common revolution of the world : not only be comforted in lieu of your sorrow , that consolation May recompense your griefs , that were but a vulgar compensation ; but take comfort in your sorrow , and rejoice in yourself that you have been so happy as to be truly sad . There is so much deceitfulness in the heart of man , so much hypocrisy in funeral mourning , that you May bless God for your own assurance of the sincerity of your natural affection , and religious respect to your parents , and take delight in a just expectation , that it will be rewarded by the future respect of your children . So having performed the duty of Joseph , who made a mourning for his father , you May expect the blessing of Joseph , given by the mouth of Jacob for whom he mourned , Joseph is a fruitful bough , even a fruitful bough by a well , whose branches run over the wall . that this benediction May be your honour's portion shall be my constant prayer , by the god of thy father who shall help thee , and by the almighty , who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above , blessings of the deep that lieth under , blessings of the breasts and of the womb . amen . Amen . 

The end . 





psal. 77. 15.  gen. 49. 33. 50. 2 , 3.  gen. 50. 1.  gen. 49. 31.  act. 8. 2.  act. 9 39  psa. 90. 10.  gen. 47. 9 28.  gen. 48. 10.  gen. 47. 29.  luk. 23. 28  heb. 11. 10 , 13 , 16.  eccl. 22. 11.  eccl. 38. 16.  gen. 37. 3.  gen. 49. 1 , 48.  gen. 49. 26.  gen. 37. 34.  gen. 37. 35.  gen. 37. 35.  gen. 45. 27 , 28.  gen. 46. 30.  deut. 34. 2.  eccl. 22. 12.  numb 19 11.  exod. 20. 11.  gen. 2. 2.  gen. 8. 9 , 11.  gen. 2. 3.  2 sam. 12. 7.  ephes. 6. 2.  2 sam. 18. 33.  eccl. 38. 16 , 17.  gen. 49. 22.  25.  



