Cupid and death a private entertainment , represented with scenes , variety of dancing , and music , both vocal & instrumental . 

Written by j. s.  

London , printed for John Crook and John Playford , and to be sold at their shops in St.  Paul's churchyard and in the inner temple 

The scene 

A forest , on the side of a hill a fair house representing an inn or tavern , out of which cometh an host , being a jolly sprightly old man ; his cap turned up with crimson ; his doublet fustian , with jerkin and hanging sleeves , trunk hose of russet , stockings yellow , cross gartered ; after him a chamberlain . First entry . Ho .  Are all things in their preparation 
For my immortal guests ? 


Ch.   Nothing is wanting 
That doth concern my province Sir , i am 
Your officer above stairs . The great chamber 
With the two wooden monuments to sleep in 
( That weigh six load of timber , Sir ) are ready . 
That for the ••••ce d'amour , whom we call Cupid , 
I have trimmed artificially with roses , 
And his mother's myrtle . But i have 
Committed sacrilege to please the other , 
death does delight in ewe , and i have robbed 
A churchyard for him . Are you sure they 'll come 
To night ? I would fain see this dwarf called Cupid , 
For tother i look on him in my fancy , 
Like a starved goblin . 


Ho.   death . i must confess , 
Cuts not so many inches in the say 
As our last venison , 't is a thin-chapped hound , 
And yet the cormorant is ever feeding . 


Ch.   But good Sir resolve me , 
Are they good spirited guests ? will they tipple 
To elevation ? do they scatter metal 
Upon the waiters ? will they roar , and fancy 
The drawers , and the fiddles , till their pockets 
Are empty as our neighbour's drone ? and after 
Drop by degrees their wardrobe ? and in the morning , 
When they have daylight to behold their nakedness , 
Will they with confidence amaze the streets ? 
And in their shirts , to save their pickeled credits , 
Pretend a race , and trip it like fell footmen ? 
These rantings were the badges of our gentry , 
But all their dancing days are done i fear . 


Ho.   These were the garbs , and motions late in fashion 
With humorous mortals ; but these guests are of 
No human race . 


Ch.   Pray what attendance have they ? 



Ho.   Love has two 
Gentlemen , that wait on him in his chamber , 
Of special trust , he cannot act without them . 


Ch.   Their name's Sir , i beseech you ? 



Ho.   folly and madness . 



Ch.   A pair of precious instruments , 
Sure they are well descended Sir . 


Ho.   The fool 
Could ride a hundred mile in his own pedigree , 
And give as many coats — 


Ch.   Fool's coats , there are 
Enough to wear them . 


Ho.   As he had acres in 
Eleven fat lordships , 
And played at duck and drake with gold , like pebbles . 


Ch.   Was this man born a fool ? 



Ho.   No , but his keeping 
Company with philosophers undid him , 
Who found him out a Mistress they called fame , 
And made him spend half his estate in libraries , 
Which he bestowed on colleges , took the toy 
Of building quadrangles , kept open house , 
And fell at last most desperately in love 
With a poor dairy maid , for which he was begged — 


Ch.   A fool ? 



Ho.   And leads the the van in Cupid's regiment . 



Ch.   What was the madman Sir ? 



Ho.   A thing was born to a very fair per annum , 
And spent it all in looking-glasses . 


Ch.   How ? 
that 's a project i never heard on , looking-glasses ? 
How many did he break Sir in a day ? 


Ho.   They broke him rather , in the right understanding , 
For nature having given him a good face , 
The man grew wild with his own admirations , 
And spent his full means upon flatterers , 
That represented him next to an angel . 
Thus blown up , he took confidence to court 
A Lady of noble blood , and swelling fortune ; 
Within three days fell sick of the small pox , 
And on the fourth run mad , with the conceit 
His face , when he recovered , would be like 
A country cake , from which some children had 
New picked the plums . 


Ch.   A brace of pretty beagles . 



Ho.   They are here . 



Ch.   I see not death . 



Ho.   he 's the last thing we look for . 



Enter Cupid , folly , madness ; the host joins with them in a dance . Song . 

Though little be the God of love , 
Yet his arrows mighty are , 
And his victories above 
What the valiant reach by war , 
Nor are his limits with the sky , 
O'er the milky way he 'll fly , 
And sometimes wound a deity . 
Apollo once the Python slew , 
But a keener arrow flew 
From Daphne's eye , and made a wound 
For which the god no balsam found ; 
One smile of Venus too did more 
On Mars , than armies could before ; 
If a warm fit thus pull him down , 
How will she ague-shake him with a frown ; 
Thus love can fiery spirits tame , 
And when he please cold rocks inflame . 
Enter death , he danceth the second entry , after which he speaks . De.   Holla ! within ! 



Enter chamberlain . Ch.   You are welcome gentlemen ; ha ? 
Quarter , oh quarter , i am a friend Sir , 
A movable belonging to this tenement 
Where you are expected , Gupid is come already , 
And supped , and almost drunk , we ha' reserved 
According to order , for your palate , Sir , 
The cockatrice's eggs , the cold toad-pie , 
Ten dozen of spiders and adders tongues 
Your servant famine , Sir , bespoke . 


De.   Live , live . 

Exit . 

Ch.   I thank you Sir ; a curse upon his physiognomy ; 
How was i surprised ? ' twas high time to comfort me , 
I felt my life was melting downward . 
Death , oh death . 

Within . 

Ch.   who 's that ? I do not like the voice . What art ? 



Enter despair with a halter . Des.   A miserable thing . 



Ch.   Ay , so thou seemest ; 
Haste not a name ? 


Des.   My name , Sir , is despair . 



Ch.   despair , my time 's not come yet , what have i 
To do with thee ? what com'st thou hither for ? 


Des.   To find out death ; life is a burden to me ; 
I have pursued all paths to find him out , 
And here i' th' forest had a glimpse on him , 
But could not reach him with my feet , or voice ; 
I would fain die , but death flies from me , Sir . 


Ch.   I wonder you should travel in the forest , 
and among so many trees find none convenient , 
Having the tackling ready , about your neck too . 
Some great affairs take up the devil's time , 
He cannot sure attend these low employments , 
he 's busy about Leviathans . I know not , 
there 's something in 't ; you have not made your will sure . 


Des.   Yes Sir , i carry it women , it wants nothing 
But his name , and my subscription . 


Ch.   Whose name ? 



Des.   His name i mean to make my heir . 



Ch.   who 's that ? 



Des.   That charitable man 
Will bring death to me , there 's a blank left for him , 
And if you please to do me , Sir , the office , 
Even you shall be the man ; i have professed 
An usurerer this fifty years , and upwards , 
The widows and sad orphans , whose estates 
I have devoured , are croaking in my conscience . 


Ch.   And shall he be your heir that does this feat ? 
To make you acquainted with this cannibal 
You talk of ? 


Des.   Oh my happiness . 



Ch.   I 'll do it . 
But i believe you are sorry for your baseness , 
Your rapines and extortions — 


Des.   Mistake not , 
Am sorry for no mischief i have done , 
That would come near repentance , which you know 
cures all the achings of the soul . If i 
Could but be sorry , death were of no use to me . 


Ch.   Keep ye of that mind , you say very right Sir , 
I 'll try what i can do 
With death , to do your conscience a courtesy , 
he 's now within our house ; I 'll bring you pen 
And ink to write my name too , honest father . 


Des.   Thou art my dearest child , take all my blessings . 



Ch.   here 's like to be a fortune . 

Exit . 

Des.   I want strength 
To climb , i see a very pretty twig else He climbs 
And space for a most comfortable swing , 
't is a hard case the devil will not help 
At a dead lift . He falls . 
Oh my sciatica . 
I have broke my spectacles , and both my hips 
Are out of joint , help — 


Enter chamberlain with abottle of wine . Ch.   death will be with you presently , the last course 
Is now on the table that you May not think 
The time long , i have brought you ▪ ha ? rise up Sir . 


Des.   Alas , i have had a fall , i was endeavouring 
To do the meritorious work , and hang 
Myself , for death me thought was long a coming , 
But my foot slipped . 


Ch.   Alas what pity ' twas ? 
If i had thought your soul had been in such 
Haste , i would have given you a lift before 
I went . 


Des.   It was my zeal . 



Ch.   Alas it seemed so , 
You Might have took the river with more ease , 
The stream would have conveyed you down so gently , 
You should not feel which way your soul was going . 
But against the frights , death Might bring with him , 
I have brought you a bottle of wine . I 'll begin Sir . 
He drinks , 

Des.   Would it were poison . 



Ch.   So would not i , i thank you , 
't is pure blood of the grape . 


Des.   Wine ? 



Ch.   A• my charge , i know you do not use 
To pay for nectar , 
I bestow it Sir . 


Des.   that 's kindly said , i care not if i taste — 



Ch.   i' th' mean time please you , I 'll peruse the will , 
I can put in my own name , and make it fit 
For your subscription — what 's here ? — Reads . 
Ha ? A thousand pound in jewels — in ready money 
Ten thousand more — land — ha' preserve my senses . 
I 'll write my name and thank heaven afterwards . 
— here Sir , before you can subscribe , the gentleman 
Will come and kill you to your hearts content . 


Des.   Hum ! this foolish wine has warmed me , what d'ye 
Call the name on 't ? 


Ch.   Sack . 



Des.   Sack , my truly son — 



Ch.   Nay Sir make haste , for death will be here instantly . 



Des.   At his own leisure , i would not be troublesome ▪ 
Now i do know his lodging , i can come 
Another time . 


Ch.   But the will father , you May write now — 



Des.   Deeds are not vigorous without legal witnesses ; 
My scrivener lives at the next town , and i 
Do find my body in a disposition 
To walk a mile or two . Sack d'ye call it ? 
How strangely it does alter my opinion ? 


Ch.   Why ? have you no mind to hang yourself ? 



Des.   I thank you , 
I find no inclination . 


Ch.   Sha'not i be your heir then ? 



Des.   In the humour 
And spirit i now feel in brain and body , 
I May live — to see you hanged ; i thank you heartily . 


Ch.   But you will have the conscience , i hope , 
To pay me for the wine , has wrought this miracle . 


Des.   Your free gift i remember , you know , i use not 
To pay for nectar , as you call it . Yet 
I am not without purpose to be grateful , 
Some things shall be corrected in my will , 
In the mean time , if you 'll accept of a Gives him the halter . 
Small legacy , this hemp is at your service , 
And it shall cost you nothing , i bestow it . 
We men of money , worn which  and cares , 
Drink in new life , from win•••• costs us nothing . 
Farewell , and learn this lesson from despair , 
Give not your father sack to be his heir . 


Ch.   Not a tear left ? would's brains were in the bottle . 



Exit . Song . 

Victorious men of earth , no more 
Proclaim how wide your empires are ; 
Though you bind in every shore , 
And your triumphs reach as far 
As night or day , 
Yet you proud monarchs must obey , 
And mingle with forgotten ashes , when 
Death calls ye to the crowd of common men . 
Devouring famine , plague , and war , 
Each able to undo mankind , 
Death's servile emissaries are , 
Nor to these alone confined , 
He hath at will 
More quaint and subtle ways to kill . 
A smile or kiss , as he will use the art , 
Shall have the cunning skill to break a heart . 
Enter chamberlain . Ch :  Ho Master , Master . 



Enter host . Ho.   what 's the mátter ? 



Ch.   Nothing but to ask you , whether you be 
Alive or no , or whether i am not 
My own ghost , that thus walk and haunt your house . 


Ho.   Thou lookest frighted . 



Ch.   death and his train are gone , 
I thank heaven he 's departed ; i slept not 
One wink to night , nor durst i pray aloud , 
For fear of waking death ; but he , at midnight , 
Calls for a cup to quench his thirst , a bowl 
Of blood i gave him for a morning's draught , 
And had and ague all the while he drank it . 
At parting , in my own defence , and hope 
To please him , i desired to kiss his hand , 
Which was so cold , o' th' sudden Sir , my mouth 
Was frozen up , which as the case stood 
Then with my teeth , did me a benefit , 
And kept the dancing bones from leaping out , 
At length , fearing for ever to be speechless , 
I used the strength of both my hands to open 
My lips , and now feeled eve  i spoke 
Drop from it like an Icycls  


Ho.   This cold 
Fit will be over ; what said Cupid ? 


Ch.   He 
Was fast asleep . 


Ho.   The boy went drunk to bed , 
death did not wake him ? 


Ch.   It was not necessary in point of reckoning . 
death was as free as any Emperor , 
And pays all where he comes , death quits all scores . 
I have the summa totalis in my pocket . 
But he without more ceremony left 
The house at morning twilight . 


Ho.   Ha ? they knock — 
Get thee a cup of wine to warm thy entrails . Exit chamb.  
Though love himself be but a water-drinker , 
His train allow themselves rich wines . Your fool 
And madman is your only guests to taverns , 
And to excess ; this licence time affords , 
When Masters pay , their servants drink like Lords . 


Enter Chamberlin . Ch.   Sir , they call for you , Cupid's up , and ready . 
And looks as fresh , as if he had known no surfeit 
Of virgin's tears , for whose fair satisfaction , 
He broke his leaden shafts , and vows hereafter 
To shoot all flames of love into their servants . 
There are some music come , to give his godship 
Good morrow , so he means to hear one song , 
And then he takes his progress . 


Ho.   I attend him . 

Exit . 

Ch.   But i have made my own revenge upon him , 
For the hard-hearted baggage that he sent me ; 
And death i have served a trick for all his huffing . 
They think not what artillery they carry 
Along with them , i have changed their arrows . 
How death will fret to see his fury cozened ? 
But how will love look pale , when he shall find 
What a mortality his arrows make 
Among the lovers ? let the God look to 't , 
I have put it past my care , and not expect 
To see them again , or should i meet with death , 
I shall not fear him now ; for Cupid , if 
Lovers must only by his arrows fall , 
I 'm safe , for Ladies i defy you all . 


Song . 

Stay Cupid , whither art thou flying ? 
Pity the pale lovers dying . 
They that honoured thee before , will no more 
At thy altar pay their vows . 
Oh let the weeping virgins strew , 
In stead of rose , and myrtle boughs , 
Sad ewe , and funeral cypress now . 
Unkind Cupid leave thy killing , 
These are all thy mother's doves , 
Oh do not wound such noble loves , 
And make them bleed that should be billing . 
The scene is changed into a pleasant garden , a fountain in the midst of it . Walks and arbours , delightfully expressed , in divers places , Ladies lamenting over their lovers slain by Cupid , who is discovered flying in the air . Enter a lover playing upon a lute , courting his Mistress ; they dance . Enter nature in a white robe , a chaplet of flowers , a green mantle fringed with gold , her hair loose they start and seem troubled at her entrance . Na.   Fly , sly my children , love that should preserve 
And warm your hearts , with kind and active 
Is now become your enemy , a murderer . 
This garden that was once your entertainment 
with all the beauty of the spring is now 
By some strange curse upon the shafts of Cupid , 
Designed to be a grave ; look everywhere 
The noble lovers on the ground lie bleeding , 
By frantic Cupid slain ; into whose wounds , 
Distracted virgins pour their tears so fast , 
That having dreined their fountains , they present 
Their own pale monuments ; while i but relate 
This story , see , more added to the dead . 
Oh sly and save yourselves , i am your parent 
nature , that thus advise you to your safeties . 


Enter Cupid , he strikes the lover . he 's come already . 

Lover .  Ha ? what winter creeps 
Into my heart ? 


Na.   He faints , 't is now too late , 
Some kinder god call back the winged boy , 
And give him eyes to look upon his murders . 
nature grows stiff with horror of this spectacle ; 
If it be death to love , what will it be 
When death itself must act his cruelty ? 


Enter death . And here he comes , what tragedies are next ? 

Enter old men and women with crutches . Na.   Two aged pair , these will be fit for death , 
They can expect but a few minutes more 
To wear the heavy burden of their lives . 


death strikes them with his arrow , they admiring one another , let fall their crutches , and embrace . Exit death . Na.   Astonishment to nature , they throw off 
All their infirmities , as young men do 
Their airy upper garments . These were the 
Effects of Cupid's shafts ; prodigious change ! 
I have not patience to behold 'em longer . 


Exit . They dance with antique postures , expressing ▪ rural courtship . Song . 

What will it death advance thy name 
Upon cold rocks to waste a flame , 
Or by mistake to throw 
Bright torches into pits of snow ? 
Thy rage is lost , 
And thy old killing frost ▪ 
with thy arrows thou Mayst try 
To make the young or aged bleed , but indeed 
Not compel one heart to die . 
Chorus . 

Oh love ! oh death ! be it your fate 
Before you both repent too late to meet and try 
Upon yourselves , your sad artillery . 
So death May make love kind again , 
Or cruel death by love be slain . 
Enter six gentlemen armed as in the field to fight three against three ; to them death , he strikes them with his arrow , and they preparing to charge , meet one another , and embrace . They dance . Song . 

Change , oh change your fatal bows , 
Since neither knows 
The virtue of each others darts ; 
Alas , what will become of hearts 
if it prove 
A death to love , 
We shall find 
death will be cruel to be kind : 
For when he shall to armies fly , 
Where men think blood too cheap to buy 
Themselves a name , 
He reconciles them , and deprives 
The valiant men of more than lives , 
A victory , and fame . 
Whilst love deceived by these cold shafts , in steed , 
Of curing wounded hearts , must kill indeed . 
Chorus . 

Take pity gods , some ease the world will find , 
To give young Cupid eyes , or strike death blind . 
death should not then have his own will . 
And love , by seeing men bleed , leave off to kill . 
Enter Chamberlin leading two apes . Ch.   Oh yes , oh yes , oh yes , 
All you that delight to be merry come see 
My brace of court apes , for a need we be three ; 
I have left my old trade of up and down stairs 
And now live by leading my apes unto fairs . 
Will you have any sport ? draw your money , be quick Sir , 
And then come aloft Jack , they shall show you a trick Sir . 
Now ▪ am i in my natural condition , 
For i was born under a wand'ring planet ; 
I durst no longer stay with my old Master , 
for fear Cupid and death be reconciled 
To their own arrows , and so renew with me 
Some precious acquaintance . 


Enter death , he strikes the chamberlain . Ch.   oh , my heart , 
't was death i fear , i am paid then with a vengeance ; 
my dear apes do not leave me , ha ? come near — 
What goodly shapes they have , what lovely faces ! 
Ye twins of beauty , where were all those graces 
Obscured so long ? what cloud did interpose 
I could not see before this lip , this nose ? 
These eyes ? that do invite all hearts to woo , them , 
Brighter than stars ; Ladies are nothing to them , 
Oh let me here pay down a lover's duty ; 
Who is so mad to dote on woman's beauty ? 
Nature doth here her own complexion spread , 
No borrowed ornaments of white and red ; 
These cheeks were no adulterate mixtures on them , 
To make them blush as some do , fie upon them ! 
Look what fair cherries on their lips do grow ? 
Black cherries , such as none of you can show , 
That boast your beauties , let me kiss your a — 


Enter a satyr , that strikes him on the shoulder , and takes away his apes . what 's that ? A shot i' th' shoulder too ? ha . 
What will become of me now ? oh my apes ! 
The darlings of my heart are ravished from me . 
He beckons , and courts them back with passionate postures . No ? not yet ? nor yet hard-hearted apes ? 
I must despair for ever to enjoy them . 
despair ? that name puts me in mind , 
He looks in his pocket , and pulls out the halter . 't is here ; 
Welcome dear legacy , i see he was 
A prophet that bestowed it ; how it fits me ? 
As well as if the hangman had took measure . 
't is honour in some men to fight and die 
In their fair Lady's quarrel , and shall i 
Be 'fraid to hang myself in such a cause ? 
Farewell my pretty apes , when hemp is tied 
Drop tears apace , and i am satisfied . 
A dance of the satire and apes . Upon the sudden a solemn music is heapd , and Mercury seen descending upon a cloud , at whose approach , the other creep in amazed . In a part of the scene within a bower , nature discovered sleeping . Mer.   Hence ye profane , and take your dwellings up 
Within some cave , that never saw the sun , 
Whose beams grow pale , and sick to look upon you ; 
This place be sacred to more noble objects , 
And see where nature tired with her complaints 
To heaven for death and Cupid's tyranny 
Upon a bank of smiling flowers lies sleeping , 
Cares that devour the peace of other bosoms , 
Have by an over charge of sorrow wrought 
Her heart into a calm , where every sense 
Is bound up in a soft repose , and silence ; 
Be her dreams all of me . But to my embassy . 
Cupid , wheresoe'er thou be , 
The gods lay their commands on thee , 
In pain of being banished to 
The unfrequented shades below 
At my first summons to appear . 
Cupid , Cupid . 


Enter Cupid . Cup.   I am here , 
What send the gods by Mercury ? 


Mer.   Thy shame and horror . I remove 
This mist . He unblinds him . 
Now see in every grove 
What slaughter thou hast made , all these 
Fond Cupid were thy votaries , 
Does not their blood make thine look pale ? 
All slain by thee ,  Two ▪ not prevail 
To urge mistakes , thy fact appears ; 
Jove , and the gods have bowed their ears 
To groaning nature , and sent me 
From their high crystal thrones to see 
What blood , like a dire vapour rise , 
Doth spread his wings to blind the eyes 
Of heaven and day ; and to declare 
Their justice and immortal care 
Over the lower world , but stay 
Another must his fate obey . 
death heretofore , the looked-for close 
To tedious life , the long repose 
To wearied nature , and the gate 
That leads to man's eternal fate , 
I in the name of every God , 
Command thee from thy dark abode , 
As thou wilt fly their wrath , appear 
At my first summon — 


Enter death . De.   I am here . 



Mer.   nature awake , and with thy sleep 
Shake off the heavy chains that keep 
Thy soul a captive . 


Nat.   Mercury ? 
Or am i still in dreams ? 


Mer.   Thy eye 
Take truce with tears , see much abused 
nature , whom thou hast long accused , 
Leave thy wonder , and attend 
What the gods by Hermes send . 
But first i charge you to resign 
Your fatal shafts . 


Cup.   Ay , these are mine . 



They change . Mer.   Cupid , the gods do banish thee 
From every palace , thou must be 
Confined to cottages , to poor , 
And humble cells , love must no more , 
Appear in Prince's courts , their heart 
Impenetrable by thy dart , 
And from softer influence free 
By their own wills must guided be . 


Cup.   I shall obey . 



Mer.   death , thou Mayst still 
Exercise thy power to kill , 
With this limit , that thy rage 
Presume not henceforth to engage 
On persons , in whose breast , divine 
Marks of art , or honour shine ; 
upon these , if thy malice try , 
They May bleed , but never die ; 
These are not to be overcome , 
Above the force of age or tomb. . 
Is nature pleased ? 



Na.   The gods are just . 



Mer.   To this you both submit ? 



C. d.   We must . 



Mer.   Ye are dismissed . 



Exeunt . Nat.   But Mercury , 
What satisfaction shall i have 
For noble children in the grave 
By Cupid slain ? 


Mer.   They cannot be 
Reduced to live again with thee , 
And could thy fancy entertain 
In what blessed seats they now remain , 
Thou wouldst not wish them here . 


Na.   Might i 
With some knowledge bless my eye , 
nature would put on youth . 


Mer.   Then see 
Their blessed condition . 


The scene is changed into Elysium , where the grand masquers , the slain lovers appear in glorious seats and habits . Na.   Where am i ? 
The world no such perfection yields . 


Mer.   These are the fair Elysian fields . 



Song . 

Open blessed Elysium grove , 
Where an eternal spring of love 
Keeps each beauty fair , these shades 
No chill dew or frost invades ; 
Look how the flowers , and every tree 
Pregnant with ambrosia be ; 
Near banks of violet springs appear , 
Weeping out nectar every tear ; 
While the once harmonious spheres , 
( Turned all to ears ) 
Now listen to the birds , whose choir 
Sing every charming accent higher . 
Chorus . 

If this place be not heaven , one thought can make it , 
And gods by their own wonder led , mistake it . 
Na.   Oh , who shall guide me hence ? old nature's sight 
Grows feeble at the brightness of this glory . 


Mer.   I will be nature's conduct . 



Na.   Mercury — be ever honoured . 



Exeunt . The grand dance . Enter Mercury . Mer.   Return , return you happy men 
To your own blessed shades again , 
Lest staying long , some new desire 
In your calm bosoms raise a fire ; 
Here are some eyes , whose every beam 
May your wand'ring hearts inflame , 
And make you forfeit your cool groves , 
By being false to your first loves . 
Like a perfuming gale o'er flowers , 
Now glide again to your own bowers . 


The curtain falls . Finis . 

















