A sermon concerning death and the resurrection , preached in st Mary's , at Oxford , on low Sunday , April the 28. 1644.  Before the committee of the members of the honourable house of Commons . by w. Strode dr of divinity . 

Published by authority . 

Oxford , printed by Leonard Lichfield , printer to the university . 1644.  

col . 3. 3.  

for ye are dead , and your life is hide with Christ in God . 

After the death and resurrection of our blessed saviour , it will not be unseasonable , especially in these times of danger , to meditate upon our own . Lo therefore life and death , not now proposed to your choice , but to your meditation . The matter of my text is the whole race of man , both while he is , and while he is not : he still travels to and fro , betwixt two stages ; which are ever the same , though the order be mutually inverted . For we are no sooner entered into life , but we are dead , dead and buried with Christ in baptism ; no sooner dead to the world but new born to God through the same means ; when we are thus born again , ( Notwithstanding this spiritual parenthesis , ) we still proceed in a natural course of death ; no sooner dead so , but our life is hide with Christ in God . thus on the cornerstone we catch corners , alive and dead , dead and alive : and 't is quickly done : for life and death , or death and life are not so far disjoined as we account , none indeed so near neighbours ; they are severed not only but by an inch , as the poet fancied , at sea , tabula distinguimur , but on land also they are scarce distant by a moment of time : we find them so close united in my text , that they meet in the self same instant , nay further in the very nullity of time . For now even now ye are dead , and then even then after time your life is hide with Christ in God . 

So that my text affords a contrary assurance in two contrary cases ; assurance of death while ye live , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} for ye are dead , and assurance of life when ye die , for your life is hide with Christ in God : the first is the death of life , the second the life of death ; that passing sure , for ye are surer of nothing on earth then of yourselves , and yet howsoever ye are , ye are dead , the second surer yet , for God is surer than yourselves , your life is hide with Christ in God . in the first part i shall strike you dead ; ye are dead . 

How dead ? yes already ; in the aorist ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which we render not , ye shall die , but ye have died , or now are dead . man born of a woman is not born ( As you May think ) into life , but into death . Ye that are most awake sit asleep with your eyes open ; and when ye walk about , ye walk like ghosts . What ? shall i tell my hearers they are dead ? who then shall hear me ? I know to whom i speak , to the dead , that come hither to learn the way of life . Thrice noble and thrice worshipful , thrice worthy and thrice welcome , that ye May truly know how dead ye are , i say , ye are thrice dead ; yes , three ways , dead in law , dead by the course of nature , dead by the ▪ covenant of grace . 

First , ye are dead in law : the general sentence hath already passed upon all : in the day thou eatest of the forbidden fruit thou shalt surely die . from that day to this , every sprig of Adam lives merely by reprieve . For which we have nothing to plead but our book and child-bearing ; our book which contains God's merciful promise , and the child-bearing of Christ , whereby we become consanguineous with the innocent and holy one of God . 

If so , let me turn the inference of my text to the consequence , for to therefore , and so read backward , therefore set not your affections on things on the earth , as you are warned in the precedent verse . When we draw near to the end , we mind nothing else , and only thereto we set our strength . Would you not think the man mad , who being sentenced to death should be solicitous for titles to set forth hìc jacet ; if being straight to be demolished in person , he should seek out surveyors to build castles and Barnes ; if being stripped for the axe , he should send for the tailor ; if when he should gain peace with God by sacrificing his affections , he should choose to die like Zimri and Cosbi ? so vain , so mad are we : all our toil is for an epitaph ; we build houses when we must dwell in the grave ; we take measure for clothes when death takes measure for the coffin , we and the worms look for provision at once , and we die in our lusts.  The judge , under whose reprieve we stand , forbids anxiety for things that perish , yet still our wisdom teacheth us to be thus foolishly anxious : and therefore God prevents our projects as he did the project of that uncertain rich man in the parable : while he was driven into agony of thought what he should do with his great increase , while he became extreme miserable through much prosperity , and was ready to burst for want of a larger storehouse , his Repreiver says unto him , thou fool , this night will i take away thy soul , this night ; for the soul is always due , because we are dead in law . That which Christ spoke concerning the end of the world , let not he that is on the house top come down to take any thing out of the house , nor he that is in the field return to fetch his clothes , mat. 24. the same May i apply to the end of every particular person , that promiseth life to himself for the accomplishment of remote projects ; let not he that is below think of cutting down trees to make ladders for his advancement , nor he that stands above think of securing his condition by descending lower ; for we are dead in law . The gourd , wherein Jonas delighted , had a worm inbred to make it wither , so have all earthly delights : if that will not wean us from them , we have a worm of corruption within ourselves to make us let go our hold . Abraham the representation of all the faithful , had no inheritance in the land of Canaan , not a foot of his own perpetuity , save only a place of burial : of this we are capable by law . dust thou art and to dust thou shalt return . indeed a grave we cannot miss , because the body will consume and bury itself . 

Secondly , we are dead by the course of nature . believe it , ye are all dead men ( As we say of those that are desperately sick ) for ye cannot hold out long , ye are going while i speak . Ye find that the dust flieth away : are ye not made of dust ? that the wind vanisheth ; is not your breath in your nostrils ? that the shadow creepeth ; do not your bodies cast a shadow ? as the element such is the compound ; and as the shadow , such is the substance , but more expressly dust ye are , psal. 103. 14. v. your life is a wind , iob. 7. 7. v. your days a shadow , iob. 8. 9 v. you see the dust raised , not the rising of every atom ; the wind past , not the passage ; the shadow removed , not the motion ; and so your days slide away without present observation of declining . That ye are changed ye feel , though not the changing : you perceive in your age , a spring , a summer , an autumn , a winter , and happily several months of these great quarters : for every seven-year brings a sensible change : within the number of 70 years , ( Which David accounted a full pitch of life ) Solon observed ten changes , for ten times seven ; teeth , youth , beard , ability , wedlock , understanding , wisdom , virtue , equity , and then recess ; these changes we plainly discern at the stages , though not in the course : the items in their sum , the grains in their pounds we easily comprehend , but the little moments in themselves pass undiscerned , and we are stolen from ourselves unawares . Sometimes merrily , for we bring our years to an end as a tale that is told , psal. 90. 9 sometimes painfully , for our days are like the days of a hireling , iob. 7. 1. sometimes idly , for our life is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} a dreaming shadow , half of it shear sleep ; and ever we pass them swiftly ; for our days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle , iob. 7. 6. v. and so runs our thread of life , just so ; as that from hand to hand , so this from morning to evening , till we come from the beginning of the web to the fag , from the womb to the grave . Howsoever we move , still we move forward , we never stay ; the present tense is but a moment , that which is past is nothing , the future is not yet . What can we call ourselves , who are changed before the word is pronounced ? i am is the name of God , the name of the creature is i am not . 

We are much deceived , if we think we die not till the last gasp . The beginning of death is our birth ; we bring it with us ; because we bring both flesh , and sin , whereof one makes us capable of death , the other ready to earn it ; and therefore as our strength and work increaseth , so doth our wages , death comes on the faster from the first day to the last . We think sometimes we are grown younger by recoveries ; as when we proceed from creeping to walking , from weakness to strength : 't is not so ; for the year turns about , as well in fair weather as in foul , no less in spring then in autumn ; and as the time such is the timed , our very growth leads to decay , all addition to life is but an abatement . Turn your conceit a little from time to motion , you shall find the pilgrim's life such as his way , which by further progress , whether up-hill or downhill grows ever shorter and shorter ; or lay the voyage not by land but by sea ; in a ship whether we stand or sit , lie or go , sleep or wake , play or work , on we sail , till we arrive at the port : so is our life still bound for death , through all varieties of posture in rest or motion , through all changes of condition by chance or purpose . They that tarry within doors , cannot miss a significant emblem of their own fading ; all flesh ( Saith the prophet Esay ) waxeth old as doth a garment ; which whether it be worn , or folded in a chest , is consumed by degrees ; and as the cloth such is the wearer ; i May add , ( Since every thing far and near preaches the same lecture , ) as the house also , such is the dweller ; and as the meat , such is the eater ; and as the thought , such is the thinker ; in the best condition ever vanishing : but if the garment be neglected , the house unrepaired , the meat ill cooked , the thoughts destructive , if the Master too become more ruinous by sin then by mortality , how swift is the decay of nature so hastened by wast , how headlong is the race of a precipice so impelled by running ? 

To pass over particulars , the whole generation of men collected is like that of leaves , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , the blind poet could see so much : on a tree still furnished , while one leaf waxeth green another withers , while one is in the bud another drops off , and every leaf by blasting , wind , or age , successively vanisheth : so follow the generations of men ; though the world be ever full , yet they that fill it are ever voiding the room ; so you May see the high ways filled with unabiding passengers , and channels with fleeting streams . 

Is it so ? then what counsel in such a case ? First , be not over grieved for the loss of a friend by death , considering that thyself also dost lie wounded by his side , thou dead in fieri as he in facto , fish tumbling in the same net . Thou shalt follow him , but he shall not return to thee ; and sorrow for necessity must needs be unnecessary . 

Next reckon to thyself how death invades thee : know that every grey hair is a summons , and that every ache , every swelling is a veny or thrust made at thee , take it for a warning . Likewise cast thy account , how thou art changed ever since thy birth , or within a certain distance of time ; then by proportion of declining , thou Mayest conjecture , how near thou art to thy natural period . But thou must further add the various contingence of possible dangers ; though the way be smooth , the robbers May be rough and many ; our escape from infinite casualties , if well considered , makes every day a birth day . This multiplicity of danger May teach us the warier provision , and by provision death May be staved off . For though we always travel to it , yet our travel May be to and fro , long in passage of a little space , as the Israelites through frequent meanders were travelling forty years from Egypt to Canaan . 

After sufficient provision , the next caution must be against anxiety and immoderate pensiveness for more personal safety than belongs to our share : when all the world totters , and so many eminent worthies are daily sacrificed by the sword , now to cover a particular exemption from danger is too much partiality of tenderness . The only means of security is to expect none upon earth , but to stand armed with patience and resolution to endure the lot which God hath appointed . The heart being thus settled and prepared for death , nothing else can seem terrible , quid ad me quàm magnis moriar , ipsum mori non est magnum . 

But the best use is , daily to add to our future life as much as we loose of the present , and as fast as we perish here , so with all speed to lay the foundations of immortality in heaven ; selling both profit and pleasure for one inestimable jewel , and making friends of the unrighteous Mammon . since die we must , let us learn betimes how to die ; that we May turn our necessity into virtue , and meet our destiny not in horror , but in honour ; not as a loss ▪ but as an advantage ; not as a Trapdore swallowing up in destruction , but as a gate opening to everlasting life . And this is done , first by recounting our loser days in bitterness , so shall we unlive the time we have lived amiss ; then by frequent meditation and foretaste of death ; think thine eyes grown dim in the fainting twilight of life , and thou shalt soon turn them aside from vanity ; think thine ears grown deaf with sickness , and thou wilt soon stop them against idle words ; think thy tongue grown stiff with drought , and that thought will be a watch before thy mouth , to examine what thou lettest out and what thou lettest in ; think on the cold sweat of death , so thou wilt abhor to swim in lust ; think how naked thou must go hence , even as bare as thou camest , only with a shroud as thou camest in with a cawl , and almost with as little flesh , than thou wilt easily contemn all worldly pomp , and subdue thy carnal tumours . Thinkest thou , that death draws nearer when it is thought of , or dares not to approach unless it be called ? no such matter : this practice of dying daily will not make us to die the sooner , but so to live as that we May die the happier . and this or the like practice belongs to our Christian profession assumed in baptism , where by the covenant of grace we become dead in a third acception . 

dead in quality ; dead to all worldly and carnal lusts ; though we May sometimes fall upon them by infirmity , yet to pursue them is against our profession . The desire is dead , and the renunciation made against them is a kind of death . The spiritual Pharaoh with all his . Host lies drowned in the font , representing a red sea , the blood of Christ : there Christ and we enter into covenant , he to free us from sin , and we to forsake it ; he to strike off the dominion and gild thereof , we the service and confederation . Because by nature we are born dead in sin , and subject to corruption , therefore by a second birth we are born dead unto sin , the spiritual death is a countermine against the natural . For by the power of baptism the old man together with his lusts is taken and crucified , nailed hand and foot to the cross of our saviour , quite disabled from acting what he would , and at length with much ado , with striving and struggling ; with gall and vinegar , with piercing or breaking forced to die outright . 

how then shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein ? 't is the use of the apostle , rom. 6. 2. v. is it not strange to hear that a dead man walks ? is it not stranger to hear that he speaks and works , yes eats and drinks abundantly , and yet dead ? how is it then that the old man so long since crucified , dead , and buried , doth yet so frequently exercise the actions of life , moving the tongue to idle words , lying , & swearing , the throat to excess , the eye to adultery , the hands to oppression , and all the members to several iniquity ! how is it that the church of God is haunted with such evil spirits and goblins ! sure there is some spell or magic in this foul prodigy ; otherwise without the help of the devil it could not be . I grant , that a rotten tree after it is hewn down and laid in the dirt , May put forth a sprig , a leaf , or so ; but they come to no strength , they never prosper . Hair May grow on a carcase , but such hair is never dressed nor keemed . So May the relics of the old man have a counterfeit show of life , but must not gather head , never be cherished within any Christian bosom . Death frees us from all worldly relations , and bonds ( As s. Paul disputes in the sixth to the Romans ) it frees the wife from the yoke of her husband , the servant from the task of his Master : shall we then who are freed by death forsake a fresh and lovely spouse who died for our love , and be reunited to an old rotten carcase ? shall we forgo this new Master who bought us with his blood , for an old tyrannous cannibal that feeds on our destruction ? God forbid . 

So much for this point ; wherein you have heard , that we are now dead already , and in three respects : dead in law , through the sentence pronounced on sin , that therefore we ought not to be over-solicitous for much provision where we have no right to tarry longer . Dead by the course of nature , as appears by the mutability of those elements whereof we consist , and of things appertaining ; by daily declynations , insensibly but yet continually growing into sensible changes , in our own persons , and by the successive defluction of all mankind : from whence we should gather patience for the loss of others , caution for ourselves , but without anxiety , and above all godly preparation for a better life . Lastly , that we are dead by the covenant of grace , dead to sin , and sin to us , that therefore sin ought not to rule and exercise our members . Then if the old Adam die within us while we live , we shall live in the new when we die ; as we were buried in baptism , we shall be baptised in burial , and return with bodies as clean from the grave as we did with souls from the font . So from the death of life i pass to my second general , the life of death , your life is hide with Christ in God . 

Death having lost her sting cannot kill us utterly ; some life is left , else it could not be hide . You May then observe these three degrees of comfort , the safety of life in the chamber of death , 't is hide ; the ready means of safety , 't is hide with Christ , the strong author of the means , 't is hide with Christ in God . the subject is aptly disposed to a resurrection , the means are already prepared , the author is all-sufficient and infallible . 

First , our life is hide . than it is not quite extinguished , but safe laid , as coals raked up in ashes , safe though unseen , alive though close covered . It lies like treasure under ground , not out of mind , though out of sight , and shall again be diged up , if not for the worth of the mettle , yet for the image of God which it bears . 

Death is but a longer and sounder sleep , and life is hide in sleep , as well as in death ; for in sleep the senses are fettered , as in death all bodily faculties . Howsoever from the captivity of one part an utter destruction of the whole is not concluded . When half the body is struck and possessed by a dead palsy , there still remains a living body , because there is life in some part . So when the whole body is seized by death , there still remains a living man , because there is life in the best part , the soul . Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob have being enough to preserve their names , and our saviour proves them to be also living . What though the union of parts be actually dissolved ? Yet the dissolution is not totall , because there still remains a possibility and a natural desire of reuniting . The parts which stand separate are in want and imperfect , as without the whole they needs must ; therefore the widowed soul longs for the body's fellowship , to supply this want , and to gain the fullness of perfection : how long ( Cry the saints under the altar ) oh Lord holy and true , how long ? Rev. 6. 9  V : this natural desire cannot ever be frustrated . So then upon the matter , the dead are but asleep ; and if they sleep , than ( As the apostles well answered ) they shall do well : for as men , that have sleped soundly , arise from their couch more fresh and lively , the dull and cumbersome humours being well concocted ; so the dead roused with a loud summons from the grave , will appear more glorious and agile , all imperfections being worn off by the furnace of corruption . In the mean time , while the bodies of both sleepers lie senseless , their souls are alike busied ; as in the living sleep they are taken up with dreams , so in the dead sleep with heavenly visions . 

But shall we call it a sleeping or hiding , when the body is turned to the substance of the bed , flesh to mold ? still we May . For what think you of the seeds sown in your ground ? is that sowing a destruction , or only a hiding ? say then , doth our creed , in this point extend to our corn , and not to ourselves ? Behold in a little seed there sleeps the bulk of a rising tree : when 't is grown to a vast extent , consider in what secret cranny so spacious virtue lodged : where was the ruggedness of the bark , the solidity of the trunk , the verdure of the leaf , the pleasantness of the fruit ? feel and examine the seed , 't is not rough , whence this grate of the bark ? 't is not tough , whence in process this hardness of the wood ? 't is not green , whence this tincture of leaves ? it smells not , whence this fragrance in the fruit ? wherefore in secrecy they all at once lay dormant , though at once they do not break forth . From the seed is the root produced , from the root the trunk and bark , from them the twig , from the twig the leaves and fruit , and again from the fruit the seed . Now man like seed lies resuscitable in the womb of the earth : if from a small kernel having no distinction of parts , wood , bark , leaves and fruit be daily raised into the massy bulk of a tree , what more wonder , if out of dry homogeneous dust , bones , sinews , veins , flesh , skin , and hair , be reduced into man . He that asks a reason of the manner , must be cunningly answered by asking other questions , of things continually obvious to sight , yet no way comprehended by reason ; that since by seeing we cannot penetrate the depth of things visible , we May believe by hearing the truth of the invisible . so s. Gregory on the twentieth of s. John's gospel . the philosopher May object , that the raising of a tree out of seed is rather a reparation of kind then of the particular , and so an instance of generation rather than of the resurrection ; but since this generation is from the womb of the earth , not from the stock of the tree , we reply that it is also an argument of the resurrection , so urged both by our saviour and by s. Paul . 

And to make this doctrine more familiar , the steps of the resurrection are imprinted in most of the creatures . The phoenix waxing old fills her nest with billets of spice , on her funeral pile she turns into ashes , and after by the dew of heaven springs up a new phoenix . Divers imperfect bodies , which yesterday lay labouring in some deep puddle , now start into life ; bees in the hive , flies in the clefts of walls , which lay all winter without sense or motion , suddenly revive at the sun's approach : day itself dyes into night , and the life of the sun is hide with the antipodes , yet within a few hours he appears in his sparkling dress , to cheer the forsaken world . All things are preserved by perishing , and are new trimed by dissolution . So Tertullian . though these arguments seem merely rhetorical , and far short of demonstrating the resurrection of man ; yet upon better consideration , since they plainly demonstrate an aptitude of reviction in nature , under the power and providence of the author , from the raising of these inferior creatures , we May confidently conclude , a proportional likelihood of raising that , which bears his own image . 

Wherefore i return to the meditation of nature , whose reparation is most apparent at this present season : behold now the revolution of the whole world is an earnest of man's restitution ; now all the emblems of mortality enjoy their spring ; grass and flowers rise from the sullen clod , under which their life lay hide . Shall we borrow their names only in time fading , and not when they flourish ? Why so ? for all these things are renewed for man , and man doubteth not of their renewing : shall he for whom they are revived , despair of his own resurrection ? What though he lie long , and wast in the earth ? so he ought . Creatures , that soon fade again , May have quick returns of their spring , but man , who after his rising is sure to wake for ever , May well endure a long sleep . Again , creatures less noble , unless they spring quickly , cannot spring at all ; but man consisting of a reasonable soul , and endued with vegetant power in the most excellent manner , is ripened more deliberately , ( Saith Athenagoras ) and must rise the last of all : he hath a privilege to rise after many thousands of years , out of any elements , fire , air , sea , and earth , wheresoever he hath been scattered . Nothing springs before the due time , at the due time man shall also : would you have the harvest before all the grain be sown ? mundi tempora homini annus est , the end of the world is man's harvest ; and best of all so , least again he should rise to sin : but when men have been all sown , when the winter of dying is past , when God the husbandman hath sufficiently purged us , and clarified the flesh from dross , he will call us up to an endless summer ; a summer answerable to the past winter . For which purpose , we also have our peculiar sun , and proper dew ; sun and dew as well as the creatures : our sun is the sun of righteousness ; when he appears , than ( As it follows after my text ) we shall appear together with him in glory : our dew , whether it be the dew of tears , it ushers in the reaping of joy , or whether the dew of God's promise , it shall not fail of performance . Awake and sing ( Saith he ) ye that dwell in the dust , for thy dew is as the dew of herbs ; and the earth shall cast out her dead , Esay . 26. 19 v. when this comes to pass ( As who dares doubt it ? ) than it shall appear , that we lay as flos in hyeme , that we wintered in Christ our cause , and only sunk into his root , who is the true vine , and tree of life . this is our second degree of comfort , that our life is hide with Christ . 

with Christ , he is the means : under the power of his resurrection our life is hide . Shall not he be able to effect for us , what the sun can do for flowers ? some will ask , how shall the dead rise , or with what body shall they come ? Christ answers ; with my dead body shall they rise , Esay . 26. at the 19 v. by virtue of his body already risen from death . vbi gloria praecessit capitis , eòsequetur & spes corporis , ( Saith Leo ) whither the head hath gloriously gone before , the members hope to follow after . 

At the first view there appears no more in Christ's resurrection , but a man risen ; but when we consider the condition and relation of that man ; that being the innocent and holy one of God , he was neither worthy of death , nor tenable by it , that therefore he died not for himself , but for the guilty , not as an offender , but undertaker , and laid down his life with power to take it up again , for the benefit of those for whom he laid it down ; that death unadvisedly seizing upon an unlawful prize , forfeited the lawful hold of sinners together with the just ; when the gospel hath yielded this discovery , than we find that this son of man is become the everlasting father , the Lord and giver of life to all mankind ; that our resurrection is virtually included under his ; and that though power thereof , we shall rise as surely , as if we had his power to raise ourselves . For as to us a child was born , and for us a man was crucified , so for us a saviour is risen . whatsoever Christ did on earth , the same he did in our behoof , not for himself , so that if we rise not , in vain is Christ risen . Why is he called the foundation , the head , the root , the first fruits , but in relation to us ? if the foundation be laid by wisdom , it implies a rising structure , if the head be above water , the members are safe , if the root be quick , the branches will sprout , if the first fruits be holy , so is the whole crop.  

Christ is our life ( In the next words after my text ) this life lay hide in our grave , and therefore it is but a correspondent exchange , that our life should be hide with Christ ; that since he lay in a sepulchre hewed out for another , others should be quickened by his rising . But how was Christ hide in our grave ? himself hath showed in the 12. of St. John , 24. v.  Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die , it abideth alone , but if it die , it bringeth forth much fruit ; he lay then in the grave as a grain of wheat in the furrow , so purposely sown for us , that our life Might be hide with him , as increase in the grain which was sown . It is not to be forgotten , that as Christ at his passion compared himself to a grain of wheat , so the apostle in his resurrection hath fitly compared him to the first fruits . Cor. 15. 20. the complete allegory declares this virtue in him , this dependence in us ; that since he lay in the ground not like a stone , but like corn , therefore in springing up he rose not single , not as Jonas from the belly of the whale , ( Unless to Jonas you reckon the ninivites raised by his preaching ) but multiplied to more than fifties , to more than hundred , to a world of grains besides himself : that since at his resurrection he likewise became the first fruits of them that sleep , he hath consequently obtained a blessing for the whole field . 

Wherefore as the Lord Jesus ( Who is blessed for evermore ) hath returned victor in spite of invading death , and all impediments wherewith he was blocked , so shall it be , that all his dependants in the utmost skirts of the world shall rise from death , notwithstanding the drowning , burning , mangling , confounding , scattering of carcases , whose disordered destiny makes a distinct recollection of parts to seem impossible . But in presence of a sufficient means , and unresistible power , impossibility must vanish . We find in the general course of nature , things as much beyond our reach daily renewed ; we find in human nature no reluctance , no repugnance against the resurrection , but rather an aptitude and desire , if there come a sufficient cause to reduce it into act. now when Christian religion hath discovered to reason an able means in Christ , who for this purpose became the first fruits of them that sleped , and hath gotten power to be judge of the quick and dead , that the dead Might rise and appear before his tribunal , now the resurrection is more than possible , more than feasible , 't is in virtue already performed ; and when i shall show you that the author , who hath chosen and apppointed this means , is God , it will be found to be necessary . And herein consists the third degree of comfort , our life is hide with Christ in God . 

in God . where could our life be better or safer placed ▪ for as the soul is the life of the body , so God is the life of our souls , and consequently both souls and bodies are in his hand ; hardly to be pointed out , but safe kept in an invincible and infallible custody . The same who of his infinite goodness hath appointed Christ to be the means of our resurrection , he having power and will to produce the deserved effect , will not fail of his justice and truth to bring it to pass . If yet you can doubt , consider your own creatures , the works of man : when a musical air hath been played , is it quite lost , never to be called for again ? or what is become of it ? is it hide in the bowels of the instrument , in the pricked or conceived copy , or in the hand and power of the musician ? in all these ? so when the breath of man is expired , he is hide in the mould as in the matter , with Christ as with our idea and pattern , in God as in the author and harmonious composer . Again , when a printer dissolves his impression , and casts it into the first elements or letters , is it quite lost , or what is become of it ? is it hide in the boxes which contain those letters , or in the book out of which it was copied , or in the hand of the printer that sets the letters together ? in all these ? such is the case of man : though all his quarters be divided into the quarters of the world , though his parts be distributed like those of the Levites wife , or digested into other bodies , or scattered into all elements , they are still within God's boxes ; though his figure be lost to the memory of men , it remains fresh with Christ , and in his book are all our members written ; though they cannot meet of themselves , yet God can find them out , and will join them together after his son's likeness , and his particular register . Who turned the round world , who fashioned the parts of man at first ? was not God that carpenter , and Christ his son ? Now which is harder , to make a table and the timber too , or to join the parts taken asunder ? to create that which was not , or to new cast that which was before ? That potential being , which man had within the hand of his maker before his creation , the same , and more , remains after his dissolution . Look on nature , the creature is potentially couched under her power in the seed ; look on art , so is the frame within the artificers call in the wood ; look up to God , so are they that shall rise , within the mould , before him : how gross is it to believe nature in her natural effects , art in her artificial , and only to mistrust God in his works divine ? Ask not , how the bodies confounded one with another shall be sifted and severed ; for God is the keeper of bodies and elements , he knows where every atom lies , what belongs properly to every person , and how to call it forth . How vain is it , to question God's power in things impossible to our scant apprehension ? yet to widen your apprehension in this particular , and to show you an answer to more than ever was objected , though all adventitious matter should be separated , and none should remain but that which issued from the loins of our parents , and was also derived from our first parents Adam and Eve , God out of those few drops could raise distinct and proper bodies to all mankind . 

nihil deo impossibile nisi quod non vult , ( Saith Tertullian ) nothing is impossible to God but what he will not do , and what he will that 's necessary . Now God hath revealed his will by appointing and using the means of raising us , and hath past his promise by his son Jesus ; that through him he will raise us up at the last day . this is the father's will which hath sent me ( Saith our saviour ) that of all which he hath given me , i should lose nothing , but should raise it up again at the last day , ioh. 6. 39 v. so that now God's justice and truth are deeply at stake , till there come a resurrection . His justice would have stood engaged however , though no such means , no such promise had been revealed ; if we grant , there is a God , it May be evinced out of moral principles , that of necessity there must be a resurrection , though we knew not how : for either there would be no difference of virtue and vice in respect of reward and punishment , and so divine justice would be but a bugbear , or else there would be need of a resurrection , that they who have been prosperous in their wickedness Might be called to account hereafter , and they that have here suffered by virtue Might then shine in glory . But since the means are expressly revealed , since Christ hath paid the price of our resurrection , and God hath promised to make it good , since many martyrs have died in defence of this hope , upon God's word , God is further engaged both to Christ and them , both in his justice and truth , to perform his purpose and promise . And we May be sooner induced , to yield , that there is no god , or that he was not at all our builder , nor Christ his corner stone , then that he should begin to build and not make an end , or promise an end and not fulfil it . Wherefore without doubting , let us here rest our hope , that as the glory of the father hath raised his son , so he will perfect his glory in raising his son's attendants . 

Thus you have heard the three degrees of our comfort ; the safety of life in death , in that it is hide ; the sure means of safety for that it is bid with Christ ; and the strong author of the means , in that it is hide with Christ in God . 

It remains now on our part , that we be not affrighted with death , because it is no longer the jaw of destruction , but the gate of life , and a passage into everlasting happiness . * if those bold spirits , that having heard of the immortality of the soul , or at least her rest from misery , presently dispatched themselves out of this world , without any other call , or further warrant , but only this notion ; if those undaunted venturers had been likewise taught the resurrection of the body to a better life , and had such an occasion to spend their lives , as is now offered to us , the defence of religion , laws , and liberties ; doubtless their courage had been so inflamed , that either through too much valour they would undeservedly have found their seeking , or have gotten such honour , as Might stay the desire of death by pursuing the death of others , and by taking content in acts of glory . I do not wish any to run this course unadvisedly ; a sober expectation of death or victory , in useful service , both by charging and sustaining , is valour sufficient , and not too much , for any soldierly martyr . 

Further since Christ by the wood of his cross hath sweetened our bitter waters , and died for sin to make death easy , since he hath risen again to lead us the way into life eternal , i cannot too much inculcate this other lesson ; that we walk not disorderly in this our pilgrimage ; least we turn the gift of life into double death , the joy of our hearts into horror and judgement , our rising into bottomless falling . In itself , nothing can be so sweet and desirable as the appearance of the Lord Jesus in the resurrection . Why should we so confound the conscience with unrepented guiltiness , that we should need mountains to cover us from his presence ? Let us rather amend our ways , and live carefully , that we May die with comfort and rise with joy ; that the hope of a joyful rising May remain comfortably sealed unto us in the time of our hiding , by assurance of the holy ghost , through Christ the means , and God the author . To whom be all thanks , praise , dominion , and glory , now and for evermore . amen . 

Finis . 





gen. 3. 19  isa. 51. 6.  hom. Iliad . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . * cics de contem : morte . 















