AN ANSWER TO MASTER WILLIAM PERKINS , Concerning Christ's Descension into Hell : By JOHN HIGINS . 

AT OXFORD , By JOSEPH BARNES , Printer to the University . 1602.  

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader john Higins wishes perfect knowledge of the Creed in Christ jesu ▪ 

AT first ( Christian Reader ) I written these things more at large , interposed with the other which I took upon me to answer . But now I thought it far better thus to set them at view after this manner , which I could not with out the much abridging of that my first copy . And this I did for two causes ; the one to save my labour in writing them out : the other to ease thee in reading them over . I have prefixed each of our names , and by the letters , A. B. C. D. E. etc. applied the reasons and answers of the one to the other , that so thou mayest the easier compare the places of both together , and better consider & sentence of both . This I do because I think plain dealing a jewel , and this order is better . Now ( if it please thee ) I pray thee on kindness , with conscience and charity to read them : read , regard , and then judge ; but beware thou judge not amiss , lest thy judgement endamage thyself . And so wishing thee to believe all the Articles of the Creed , and withal wishing thy health in Christ jesu , jende . 

At Winsam the 22. of june . 1602.  john Higins . 

WILLIAM PERKINS .  It seems very likely that these words ( he descended into hell ) were not placed in the Creed at the first , or as some think they crept in by negligence . 

Because above threescore Creeds of the most Ancient Counsels , and Fathers want this clause , and amongst the rest the Nicen Creed . 

But if the Ancient learned Fathers assembled in those Counsels had been persuaded , or at least had imagined that these words had been set down at the first by the Apostles , no doubt they would not in any wise have left them out . 

And an Ancient father saith directly , that these words ( He descended into hell ) are not found in the Creed of the Roman Church , nor used in the churches of the East , & if they be , that then they signify the Burial of Christ . 



JOHN HIGINS .  It seemed to some men that certain books of the New Testament were not Canonical , but in that seeming their thoughts were not worthy to be made account of . wherefore these words : some men ( of yesterday ) think they crept in : are no sufficient ground to build on in matters of such antiquity , weight & authority as these are . I reckon not of Erasmus in the imitation of Lucian's Dialogues , but I know he writeth on the Acts of the Apostles , that Christ descended into hell . 

If we deny all the clauses which those 60.  Creeds want , the Creed will be very short . For example , your Nicen Creed hath not these , born of the Virgin Mary , he was buried , he sitteth on the right hand of God , the Catholic church ; the Communion of Saints ; the resurrection of the body ; and the life everlasting : did all these therefore creep in by negligence ? I think not . 

The Ancient Fathers were persuaded of the descension , as they were of the other Articles which they left out . But in that Counsel they chiefly handled the heresy of Arrius concerning the two natures of Christ , applying all their saying in that Creed unto the plague of that time . 

The same Ancient father saith there : but that he descended into hell is evidently foretold in the Psalms , alleging certain places , and a little after he saith : Peter also hath said : for Christ was mortified in the flesh , but quickened in the spirit , in which he went and preached to the spirits also which were shut up in prison in the days of Noah , in which text is declared what work he did in hell . But the Lord himself saith by the Prophet , as of the time to come : because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell , neither will't thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption . Which again he showeth prophetically to be fulfilled when he saith : Lord thou hast led forth my soul out of hell , thou hast saved me from them which go down into the lake . Thus your Ruffinus expoundeth this clause ( he de scended into hell ) 



WILLIAM PERKINS .  And it must not seem strange to any that a word or two in process of time , should creep into the Creed . 

Considering that the Original Copies of the old and new testament have in them sundry varieties of readings & words otherwhiles , which from the margin crept into the text . 

Nevertheless considering that this clause hath long continued in the Creed & that by the common consent of the Catholic Church of God , and that it may carry a fit sense ▪ and exposition , it is not ( as some would have it ) to be put forth of the Creed . 

Therefore that we may come to the meaning thereof ; we must know that it hath four usual expositions , which we will rehearse in order , and then make choice of that , which shall be thought to be fittest . 

The first exposition , is that Christ's soul after his passion upon the cross did really and locally descend into the place of the damned . But this seems not to be true . 



JOHN HIGINS .  It seems both strange and unture . For Irenaeus believed the same clause 1400. years since : Athanasius Creed had the same clause 1200 years since . Chrysostome and Ruffinus expounded the same 1100. years since : Fulgentius believed the same above 1000 years since , & it was in the prophetical Scriptures above 1000 years before Christ , and hath continued in the new Testament , And in the Creed 1550 ▪ years since Christ ; & in this process of above 1550 years these words crept out of the Scriptures into the Creed ▪ and yet they remain in both still . 

The old and new Testaments in a 1000 pages , have a few divers readings ; but the old and new scarce 60 pages of Creeds have no such sundry readings at all . But you note in your Margin jeremy put for Zacharie . Mat. 27. 9  Lo , thus is the text . then was fulfilled , that which was said by the Prophet jeremy , saying , , etc.  The holy Ghost in S. Matthew knew who said it , saying , and who wrote it , writing . For Zachary livedafter jeremy and might as Baruch etc. write that which jeremy spoke or prophesied before him . 

It is neither to be put forth of our Creed , not to be expounded by sense , because it is a matter of faith . 

These four expositions as in order you place them , shall in order be examined , and refuted , or answered : because as I take it they are handled amiss . 



The first exposition . 

Christ descended into hell , that is , Christ in his human Soul after his death , did really and locally , actuallie , and effectually descend into hell where the wicked are tormented . This is a true exposition . 

WILLIAM PERKINS .  The reasons why this first exposition seems not to be true are these . 

All the Evangelistes and among the rest S. Luke intending to make an exact Narration of the life and death of Christ , have set down at large his Passion , death , burial , resurrection , and ascension , and withal they make rehearsal of small circumstances ; therefore no doubt they would not have omitted Christ's Local descension to the place of the damned , if there had been any such thing . And the end why they penned this history , was that we might believe that jesus is Christ the Son of God , and that in believing we might have life everlasting . 

Now there could not have been a greater matter for the confirmation of our faith then this , that jesus Christ the son of Mary , who went down to the place of the damned , returned thence to live in happiness for ever . 



JOHN HIGINS   The Reasons why this first exposition is true are these . 

The Evangelists and especially St. Matthew , report that CHRIST who is the truth itself , prophetically spoke twice thereof in the sign of jonas . And St. Luke saith , that the same truth told after his Resurrection , how all must be fulfilled which were prophesied of him . St. Luke also reports how the holy Ghost expoundeth the prophecy of David , and again St. Paul and St. Peter spoke thereof in their Epistles . Assure yourself then there was such a thing , as in places fit ( God willing ) shall plainly appear ere we end with this our work . 

We must not then confute , but believe this great matter for the confirmation of our faith , as the scriptures do teach us , Considering that if he had not in Soul descended , the Devil and the damned might have bragged of the force of that their kingdom . But as the 3. young men in the hot Oven , Daniel in the den of the Lions , and jonas in the belly of the Whale , being the signs and figures of CHRIST'S Descension , came forth without hurt : so Christ from that furnace , from that den of the Lion , from that belly of hell , victoriously , as he descended , came forth with valour , with freedom , with triumph . 



WILLIAM PERKINS .  The second reason why this first exposition seemeth not to be true is this . If Christ did go to the place of the damned , then either in soul , or in body , or in his godhead : but the godhead could not descend because it was every where , and his body was in the grave ; And as for his soul , it went not to hell , but presently after his death it went to Paradise , that is , the third heaven , a place of joy and happiness . Luk. 23 ▪ 43.  This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise . 

Which words of Christ must be understood of his manhood or soul , and not of his godhead : for they are an answer to a demand , and therefore unto it they must be suitable . 

Now the thief seeing that Christ was first of all crucified , and therefore in all likelihood should first of all die ; maketh his request to this effect : Lord thou shalt shortly enter into thy kingdom , remember me then . To which Christ's answer ( as the very words import ) is thus much : I shall enter into Paradise this day , and there shalt thou be with me . 

Now there is no entrance but in regard of his soul , or manhood . For the godhead , which is at all times in all places , cannot be said properly to enter into a place . 



JOHN HIGINS .  Your second reason stands on this place : to day thou shalt be with me in Paradise . Christ spoke this as God , who only hath power to give Paradise , and whose to day as Augustine saith is eternity : and he speaketh it as man to that happy man , who after that evening never since saw night nor darkness . For they blessed departing hence , have their evening at their death , and being dead presently see in soul the day spring visiring them from an high , of that to day which after is nightlesse . then he that looks for a sublimary day of light and darkness , amongst the blessed souls in Paradise , is darkly deceived . For if the thiefs soul went that same night to Paradise , as we believe it did , yet went it the same to day of Christ's eterne nature , and was in Paradise the same to day of Christ's glorious human nature's ascension , which with the thief was yet the same to day & lasteth nightlesse till now and for ever . 

Christ was not bound by necessity of must , nor did in custom suit every demand or petition with answer . For sometimes he questioned again , and sometimes he did not answer at all . But to this petition he answered as God and Man , and therefore your two musts , assigning the same to the manhood , and cutting it of from the godheade , are more than the scriptures allow . 

This supposition with the fiction of two Enters , interferres itself . For the text is not so , but thus : Lord remember me when thou comest into they kingdom . And jesus said unto him : to day thou shalt be with me in Paradise . He spoke ( saith Euthymius ) as God which filleth all , and was together every where ; in the Sepulchre , in hell , in Paradise , and in heaven . Also if the soul of Christ was in Paradise before his resurrection , them it was not in the grave ; if not in the grave , than that translation is false , thou wilt not leave my soul in grave . 

Now your concluding no entrance with the fiction of two enters , interres nothing . The text of S. Luke is true , yours is not so . 



WILLIAM PERKINS .  Again when Christ saith , thou shalt be with me to day in Paradise , he doth intimate a resemblance , which is between the first Adam , and the second Adam . The first Adam sinned and was presently cast out of Paradise . 

Christ the seconde Adam , having made the satisfaction for sin , must immediately enter into Paradise . 

Now to say that Christ in soul descended locally into hell , is to abolish this Analogy , between the first , and the second Adam . 

The end of the second reason . 



JOHN HIGINS .  In this matter there can be no resemblance between them ; for the first Adam was not presently cast out of paradise after his death , but nine hundred years before he died , or was buried . The second Adam ascended into the heavenlye Paradise after his death , burial , descension and resurrection . The first Adam wente out of the earthly Paradise with a mortal body ; the seconde Adam went into the heavenly with a glorified body . And whosoever will read Gen. 3. the 7. verse , and the verses after ( considering well the particulars there ) shall plainly perceive , that Adam was not presently cast out ( as you say ) for that presently is not in the third of Genesis . 

Neither must Christ immediately after satisfaction , etc. ( as you say ) enter into Paradise ; this immediately is not in all the new Testament . 

Now to say that Christ's Soul descended not into Hell , is to abolish the authorities of the Scriptures and to cashier the Creed , which prove the descension . 

The end of the second Reason . 



WILLIAM PERKINS .  The third reason why the first exposition seems not to be true . Ancient Counsels in their confessions & Creeds omitting this clause , show that they did not acknowledge any real descent ; And the true meaning of these words ( he descended into hell ) was sufficiently included in some of the former , and that may appear , because when they set down it , they omit some of the former . 

As Athanasius in his Creed , setting down these words ( he descended into hell ) omittes the burial ; putting them both for one , as he expoundeth himself else where . 

Now let us see the reasons which may be alleged to the contrary . Ob. 1 : Mat. 12. 40.  The son of man must be three days and three nights in the hart of the earth , that is , in hell . 

Answer . 1.  This exposition is directly against the scope of the place . 

For the pharisees desired to see a sign , that is , some sensible and manifest miracle . And hereunto Christ answered , that he would give them the sign of the prophet Ionas , which cannot be the descent of his soul into the place of the damned , because it was insensible , but rather of his burial , and after it his glorious ascension . 



JOHN HIGINS .  Of Ancient Counsels etc. omitting of causes , we spoke pag. 1. in ●C . they could not but believe that which the spirit of God foretold , the Son of God performed ; and the same spirit witnessed to be fulfilled . Now to say that ( he descended into hell ) was sufficiently included in some of the former ▪ this cannot be ; for the former ( he was curcified , dead , and buried ) are of passion ; but these latter ( he descended into hell , he rose again the third day : he ascended into heaven ) are mere actions of Christ secluded from those , not included in them ▪ 

Athanasius saith , he descended into hell ▪ He is not against it ; Chrysostome saith he descended into hell ; that there also he might not be void of a miracle . He is not against it . 

Now let us see the scriptures which prove the descenision . The evil and adulterous generation requests a sign , but a sign shall not be given unto it , unless the sign of the Prophet jonas . For as jonas was 3. dares and 3. nights in the whales belly ; so shall the son of man be 3. days and three nights in the heart of the earth , that is , in hell . 

These places of the Gospel are plain . Wherein by the sign of , jonas in the whales belly , jesus foreshoweth his own descension into hell . 

For the evil & adulterous generation , the Pharese and Saducees tempting him required a sign from heaven , and therefore jesus gave them no sign from heaven , but a sign in hell . 



WILLIAM PERKINS .  The second Answer . The hart of the earth may as well signify the grave , as the centre of the earth . 

For Tyrus bordering upon the sea , is said to be in the heart of the seas . 

The third answer . This exposition takes it for granted that hell is seated in the middle of the earth ; Whereas the Scriptures reveal no such thing , but this , that hell is in the lower parts ; but where those lower parts be , no man is able to define . 

The 2. objection . Act. 2. 27. thou wilt not leave my soul in hell ; neither will't thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption . 

These words cannot prove any local descent of Christ's Soul . 

For Peter's drift in all eadging this , is to prove the resurrection , and he saith expressly , that the words must be understood of the resurrection of Christ . What ? namely these words , that his soul was not left in hell . 

Now there is no resurrection of the soul , but of the body only , as the soul cannot be said to fall , but the body . 



JOHN HIGINS .  The heart of the earth may as well signify hell , as it may signify the middle or centre of the earth . 

For Tyrus being an Island four furlongs , or seven hundred pases from the land , was therefore said of God to have her limits in the heart , or middle of the seas Again the proud king thereof said , I am God , I sit in the throne of God , in the hart or middle of the seas . 

These words of Christ : for as jonas was 3. days etc. so shall the Son of man be 3. days & 3. nights in the hart of the earth : give us to understand where hell is sited , they reveal the place in question . But if hell & the grave , & the hart of the earth be alone , they which site hell so shallow , & the grave so deep , confound the he●l of the Damned , and the graves of the blessed together . 

This prophecy : thou will't not leave my soul in hell , neither suffer thine holy one to see corruption : was one of all those things of which Christ said , it behoved all things to be fulfilled which are written of me in the Law of Moses , and in the Prophets , and in the Psalms . 

And if this Prophecy prove not the Local descension of Christ's soul by reason , it confirms it in faith , because Christ said : it behoved all things to be fulfilled etc.  

Peter is plain , he saith , David foreseeing spoke of the resurrection of Christ , for why , his soul was not left in hell , neither saw his flesh corruption . 

If your translation or exposition be true , thou wilt not leave my soul in grave , than the person or the soul of Christ is risen , or else Christ is not risen . And for your fall , I ask first , whether it may be said , that christs body fell into the grave secondly whether if it fell not , but was buried therein , it may not yet be said to have risen ; thirdly , whether Christ rose without a soul , because it fell not into the grave . For many bodies of Saints arose which fell not ; neither did they arise without souls , which souls yet fell not into the grains ▪ So I say , if none arise at the last day , but the bodies of them which fell , there will be a very small resurrection in respect of the whole number of the departed . 



WILLIAM PERKINS .  It will be replied that the word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ( ay ) soul , cannot signify the body . 

And the word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ( ay ) hell , cannot signify the grave . 

The first word , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , signifies not only the spiritual part of man , i , the soul : but also the whole person , or the man himself . Rom. 13. 1. 1.  Cor. 15. 45.  

And the second word ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) is aswel taken for the grave , as for hell . Apoc. 20. 14.  Death and ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) are cast into the lake of fire . Now we cannot say that hell is cast into hell , but the grave into hell . 

And the very same word ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) in this text , must needs have this sense , i his soul or person was not left in grave 

For Peter makes an opposition between the grave into which David is shut up , & the hell , out of which Christ was delivered . verse . 29. 31.  



JOHN HIGINS   The word ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) i soul in these places alleged Act. 2. 27. 31. cannot signify the body of Christ , as shall appear in this page . 

And the word ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) i hell , cannot signify the grave , tomb , monument , or sepulchre of a dead body . This grave is not found in all the scriptures . 

The word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 i soul , sometimes signifies the whole person , the man a live , as in these places : and there were added that day about three thousand souls : let every soul submit itself to the authority of the higher powers : the first man Adam was made a living soul , these were not whole persons of dead men buried , but Christians newly converted , and Roman subjects alive . So Adam was made a living soul , but he was not so buried ; the whole person so signified by 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , was not buried in hell . If it were , then by these texts , ( to day shalt thou be with me in Paradise ; thou wilt not leave my person in hell ; and his soul was not left in grave ) the whole person was in Paradise , in hell , & in the grave the same day that he was buried . 

The second word , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , hell , is not taken for the grave or toomb of the dead ; the text truly translated is thus : death and hell were sent into the lake of fire , this is the second death ▪ And whosoever was not found written in the book of life , was sent into the lake of fire . That is , the Devil and his Angels & the wicked were sent into everlasting fire , as in Mat. 25. 41.  Christ doth plainly show ; but the prophet here speaketh it more dar●kly . Also if your speech here be true , that 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , is as well taken for the grave , as for hell , than this translation is tolerable . And the rich man died and was buried and in the grave , lifting up his eyes being in torments , for ( saith he ) I am tormented in this flame . 

You first cast the grave into hell , and now you site the Paradi●'de soul in the grave . 

Peter makes an opposition between the dead entombed body of David not risen , and the human nature of Christ risen ; affirming that David prophesied thereof long before . And saith , his soul was not left in hell , as you here translate 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 hell , and not grave . 



William Perkins .  Again it will be said that in this text there be two distinct parts ; the first of the souls coming forth of hell in these words : thou wilt not leave my soul in hell . And the second of the body rising out of the grave , in the next words following : Neither wilt thou suffer my flesh to see corruption . It is not so . 

For the flesh in this place signifieth not the body alone , but the human nature of Christ : as appeareth Act. 2. verse . 30. unless we shall say that one & the same word in the same sentence is taken two ways , flesh ( you mean ) in the 30. and in the 31. verses . 

And the words rather carry this sense ; thou wilt not suffer me to continued long in the grain ; nay which is more , in the time of my continuance there , thou wilt not suffer me so much as to see corruption , because I am thy holy one . 



JOHN HIGINS .  Here in the Psalm . 16. 10.  thou wilt not leave my soul in hell , neither will't thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption , the two parts & places of Christ's humanity are plainly distinguished a sunder . So also Peter interpreteth , Act. 2. 31. and so Fulgentius bringeth these places distinguished against the Ar●ians , expounding them of the soul and flesh apart . 

In the first , 30. verse , Peter explains a Prophecy of the regal human generation of Christ thus : he then , that is , David , sith he was a Prophet , and knew that God had sworn unto him by an oath , of the fruit of his loins , according to the flesh , to raise up the Christ , that he might place him on his seat . Here the Apostle addeth ( according to the flesh , ) to distinguish and to tell us , that the soul is not ex traduce ; but that the flesh & it be of different natures , which immediately after ( expounding the other prophecy ) he clearly explains thus . 31. vers . David foreseeing spoke of the resurrection of Christ , that his soul was not le●t in hell , neither did his flesh see corruption . There in the 30. vers . Peter spoke of the flesh ( not of the soul ) generated : and here in the 31. of the flesh & of the soul separated by death . In both yet by flesh , meaning one & the same flesh of christ . 

S. Peter's words are of credit enough : a rather carriage of sense , comes to late . 



WIL PERKINS .  Object . 3.  Christ was quickened in the spirit , by the which spirit he went & preached unto the spirits which are in prison . 

Answer . This place is not for this purpose , for by the spirit is not meant the soul of Christ , but his godhead which in the ministry of No preached repentance to the old world . 

And I think that Peter in this place alludes to another in Genesis 6. 3. where the Lord saith , my spirit shall not always strive with man , because he is but flesh . 

And if the spirit do signify the soul , than Christ was quickened in his soul , or by his soul , but neither is true . 



JOHN HIGINS .  We must not allege , nor take the text lamely . It is thus : for Christ once suffered for sins , the just for the unjust , that he might bring us to God , he was mortified in the flesh , but was quickened in the spirit , in which spirit he went and preached unto the spirits which are in prison . here is the suffering of Christ , his death , immortality of soul , with the descension thereof , and ( as Ruffinus saith ) what work it did in hell . 

And therefore this place is pregnant for the descension . For by the spirit is meant the soul of Christ , & not his godhead ( as you say . ) For than your text should be thus : Christ was quickened in the godhead , by which godhead he went and preached to the spirits which are in prison , which you said in No preached to the old world . But this cannot be ; it was after Christ's mortification in the flesh , not in the old world but in that which is now . 

That which is said in Genesis 6. 3. my spirit shall not always contend with man , because he is but flesh , and his days shall be an hundred & twenty years was fifty generations before Christ , this in Peter was after Christ's death ; that was in spirit divine , this was in the soul human ; that was on earth with men in the flesh ; this was in hell with the spirits of the dead ; Peter therefore in this place alludes not to that in Genesis . 

Of Christ's quickening in the spirit shall be more said in the next page . 



WIL PERKINS .  For the first , it cannot be said , that Christ was quickened by his soul , because it did not join itself unto the body ; but the Godhead joined them both . 

Neither was he quickened in soul . For the soul died not . It could not die the first death , which belongeth to the body ; & it did not die the second death , which is a total separation from God. Only it suffered the sorrows of the second death , which is the apprehension of the wrath of God , as a man may feel the pangs of the first death , & yet not die the first death , but live . 

Again , it is to no end that Christ's Soul , should go to hell to preach . 

Considering it was never heard of , that one soul should preach to another , especially in hell , where all are condemned , & in conscience convicted to their just damnation ; and where there is no hope of repentance , or redemption . 



JOHN HIGINS .  To say that Christ was quickened by his soul , is to reason upon no text , and so we leave it . So was the descension of Christ also . 

Christ was mortified in the flesh , but he was quickened in the spirit , that is , in soul ; not that it died , but that in anguish it suffered the sorrows of death which compassed his body . And therefore he said : my soul is very sad even to the death . But when that death was past , the sorrow , anguish , & sadness were ended ; and the joy , the comfort and solace which his soul immediately after received , may very fitly be named , a reviving or quickening . And of this reviving or quickening all the blessed souls departed have presently after this life , a joyful & most happy feeling . 

There is an end why Christ went & preached in hell , and why Peter wrote that he preached there . We must believe the word , though we know not the end . 

Considering it was ever heard of , since Christ's time , that the soul of Abraham had a speech with the soul of the rich man in hell , and told him his own , and besides how that his brethrens had Moses and the Prophets , etc.  And the born blind said : It was never heard of , that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind . But yet the cure was to some end , & so was the descension of Christ also . 



WILLIAM PERKINS .  It will be answered that this preaching ( whereof Peter speaketh . 1.  Pet. 3. 19  ) is only real or experimental , because Christ showed himself there to convince the unbelief of his enemies . 

But this is flat against reason . For when a man is justly condemned by God , and therefore sufficiently convicted ; what need the judge himself come to the place of execution to convict him ? 

And it is flat against the text . For the preaching spoken of here ( 1.  Pet. 3. 19  ) is that which is performed by men in the ministry of the word , as Peter expoundeth himself elsewhere ( 1  Pet. 4. 6.  ) to this purpose also was the Gospel preached to the dead , that they might be condemned according to men in the flesh ; but that they might line according to God in the spirit . 



JOHN HIGINS .  The preaching of Christ in hell , was real ; that is , in re , indeed : not experimental , as to prove an experiment , or conclusion . For all the prophecies must needs be fulfilled , so as the Council of God decreed , and as the Scriptures report . It was then a powerful passage , in his sinless souls , freedom and valour ; for so he went to conquer the devil , and to confound the damned in hell , from whence he returned with triumphant victory . 

But these matters of faith are not to be measured by the shallow flattes of reason ? for all things whatsoever the Lord would , that did be in heaven , and in earth , and in the sea , & in all deep places . This prerogatiude judge might go where he would , and convict whom he list , he could be no more exempted from hell , than he could be pained thereby , or detained therein . 

These two texts are not flat of one nature ▪ For there in 1.  Pet. 3 ▪ 19 the spirit of Christ went and preached to the spirits in hell : here in 1.  Pet. 4. 6. the Gospel is said to be preached to the dead etc. that is to the Gentiles or gentilized jews , unto such as Christ meant when he said , let the dead bury their dead ▪ 



WILLIAM PERKINS .  Lastly there is no reason why Christ should rather preach & show himself in hell to them that were disobedient in the days of No ; then to the rest of the damned . 

And this is the first exposition The second followeth . 



JOHN HIGINS .  If we shall run from faith to no reason , I will confer like reason with your reason thus : there is no reason why Abraham should rather show himself to the rich glutton in hell , then to the rest of the damned ; this is as wise a reason as that . But all things are possible to him that believeth . The text is , he went in spirit , and preached to the spirits which are in prison . And this the faithful believe , because it is Scripture ; and they believe the descension , because they are Christians . 



And thus much touching the first exposition . The second followeth . 

WILLIAM PERKINS .  The second usual exposition of this clause ( he descended into hell ) is , that Christ descended into the grave , or was buried . 

This exposition is agreeable to the truth , yet it is not meet or convenient . For the clause next before ( he was buried ) contained this point , and therefore if the next words following yield the same sense , there must be a vain and needless repetition of one & the same thing twice ; which is not to be allowed in so short a Creed as this . 

If it be said , that , these words are an exposition of the former ; the answer is , that then they should be more plain than the former . For when one sentence expoundeth another , the latter must always be the plainer . But of these two sentences : he was buried ; he descended into hell : the first is very plain & easy , but the latter very obscure and hard . 

And therefore it can be no exposition thereof , and for this cause this exposition neither is to be received . 

And thus endeth the 2. exposition 



JOHN HIGINS .  If Christ descended into the grave , it was in his body alive : for to descend is a lively action . This cannot stand with the Scriptures , for all the Evangelistes say , he yielded up the Ghost , & also they say , he was taken down & was shrouded & buried in a new sepulchre by Joseph of Arimathea , etc. his body could not descend except it were alive , and they would not have buried it , if he had not been dead . 

That seconde exposition than is not agreeable to the word : and as you say it is not meet nor convenient , so say I , because it is false . For it makes a vain and needless repetition of one thing twice , etc.  wherefore it is not to be allowed nor liked of . 

His burial was sensible , it was done and seen here on earth , his descension was an invisible action of the immortal soul performed in hell , only comprehended by faith , not by sense , nor by reason , and therefore ( as you say ) this seconde exposition is not to be received , as expounding the burial , and in this we somewhat agree . 



And thus much touching the second exposition , now followeth the third . 

WILLIAM PERKINS .  Thirdly others there be who expound it thus , he descended into hell , that is , Christ jesus when he was dying upon the Cross self and suffered the pangs of hell , and the full wrath of God seizing upon his jowl . 

This exposition hath his warrant in God's word , where hell oftentimes signifieth the sorrows and pains of hell . 

As Hanna in her song to the Lord saith : the Lord killeth and maketh alive , and he bringeth down to hell & raiseth up again . That is , he maketh men feel woe and misery in their souls even the pangs of hell , and after restoreth them . And David saith : the sorrows of death compassed me , and the terrors of hell laid hold on me . This is an usual exposition received in the Church , & they which expound this Article thus , give this reason thereof . The former words , was crucified , dead , and buried , do contain ( say they ) the outward sufferings of Christ . Now because he suffered not only outwardly in body , but also inwardly in soul ; therefore these words , he descended into hell , do set forth unto us his inward sufferings in soul , when he felt upon the cross the pangs of hell and the full wrath of God seizing upon him . 

This exposition is good and true , & whosoever will , may receive it ; yet nevertheless it seemeth not so fitly to agree with the order of the former Articles . For these words : was crucified , dead , & buried , must not be understood of any ordinary death , but of a cursed death , in which Christ suffered the full wrath of God , even the pangs of hell , both in soul and body . 

Seeing then this exposition is contained in the former words ; it cannot fitly stand with the order of the short Creed , unless there should be a distinct Article of things repeated before . 

And thus endeth the 3. exposition . 



JOHN HIGINS .  We must hold that jesus Christ the son of God , dying upon the cross , could neither feel not suffer the pangs of hell , nor the full wrath of God seizing upon his soul ; because it was neither separated from the godhead ; nor subject unto sin ; and also because that laying down his life , he used these words of delivery : Father into thy hands I commend my spirit . By which we understand , that he was then seized and did possess his own soul , and yielded the possession and seazen thereof unto his father , and neither the devil , nor the pangs of hell had any seazen , hold , interest , or possession therein . 

This exposition , that Christ after his death descended into hell in soul , hath many warrants in the old testament , of which one is in these words of Hanna : the Lord mortifieth and quickeneth ; he causeth to descend into hell and causeth to ascend . And this was a prophecy of the death , descension , resurrection , and ascension of Christ . So the said Hanna in the 10. verse after prophesied of the kingdom of Christ also thus : jehovah will judge the ends of the earth ; and he will give fortitude to his king , & he will exalt the horn of his Christ . And David saith : the sorrows of death compassed me , and the land floods of ungodliness made me afraid . These were the sorrows of the first death in the flesh , and not the pangs of hell , which seize only upon the wicked , but not on the just . 

He was crucified , dead , and buried ▪ these were of his passion , concerning the body mortal , and did not ( but in his death ) concern the soul . For neither could the jews hurt it , neither could joseph bury it : but these , he descended into hell ; he rose again from the dead , he ascended into heaven , are actions performed by Christ , the first in his soul , and the other two in his whole human triumphing nature . 

The death of his holy ones , or of his merciful men , is precious in the sight of God : God then is not wroth with them , neither doth he inflict the pangs of hell upon them , much less upon his most holy , upon his most just one . In these words of S. Peter . Act. 2. 23. 24. hunc interemistis , there is the death , quem Deus suscitavit solutis doloribus Inferni , there is the resurrection from hell and from the sepulchre . These places plainly demonstrate that the Apostle spoke of that which Christ suffered and did in his death , burial , descension , etc. and that his descension was not before his death but after , Ergo Christus non resurrexit ab inferno ante mortem suam : and also Peter expoundeth it even so in these words : Providens ( David ) locutus est de resurrectione Christi ; quia neque derelicta est anima eius in inferno , etc.  



Thus much touching the 3. exposition . Now followeth the 4. and last . 

WILLIAM PERKINS .  But let us come to the fourth exposition . He descended into hell , that is , when he was dead and buried , he was held captive in the grave , and lay in bondage under death for the space of three days . This exposition also may be gathered forth of the scriptures . So Peter saith , God hath raised him up ( speaking of Christ ) and loosed the sorrows of death , because it was impossible that he should be holden of it . 

Where we may see , that between the death & the resurrection of Christ , there is placed a third matter , which is not mentioned in any clause of the Apostles Creed save in this ; and that is his bondage under death , which cometh in between his death and his rising again , and the words themselves do most fitly bear this sense . 

As the speech of jacob showeth . I will go down into hell to my son mourning . 

And this exposition doth also best agree with the order of the Creed . First he was crucified and died ; secondly he was buried ; thirdly laid in the grave and was therein holden in captivity & bondage under death . And these three degrees of Christ's humiliation are most fitly correspondent to the 3. degrees of his exaltation . The first degree of his exaltation ; [ he rose again the third day ] answering to the first degree of his humiliation [ he died ] the 2. degree of his exaltation ; [ he ascended into heaven , ] answering to his going into the grave , or he was buried . And thirdly his sitting at the right hand of God ( which is the highest degree of his exaltation ) answering to the lowest degree of his humiliation , he descended into hell . 

These two last expositions are commonly received , & we may indifferently make choice of either . But the last ( as I take it ) is most agreeable to the order and words of the Creed . 

Thus endeth the 4. exposition . 



JOHN HIGINS   Christ was buried and descended into hell : but in the grave his body was free from pain , free from bondage , and free from corruption : and his soul in hell was free from torments ; free from bondage , and free from detention . He was captive to neither of both , though he would for a time be contained of both , who in his divine nature contains all , and cannot at all be contained . So we find that Christ was free among the dead ▪ whom God hath raised up , losing the sorrows of hell , because it was impossible he should be holden of it . Why was it impossible ? because he is free , & because the gates of hell cannot prevail against his church , muchlesse against himself which is the head thereof . 

In the grave then & in hell , he would be for 3. days & 3. nights without corruption and torments ; to declare his mortality , his immortality & his innocency . But the body did not descend , it was buried in the sepulchre : the soul descended into hell , it was not buried in the grave . And this descension was after his death and before his resurrection . And this was an Act of his freedom , the other of freedom in patience , and both were in prophecy and in promise . 

That which jacob propheticallie spoke of his own descension into Egypt , and of Christ's descension into hell well weighed by the state of the Church in Egypt , and by the speech of his grandsire Abraham in bliss , & by the nature of the word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is not so full of question as men do make it . 

Wherefore the best exposition agrees best with the order of the Creed thus : first he was crucified by the jews : secondly he died when he gave up the ghost ; thirdly he was buried by joseph of Arymathea etc. fourthly he descended into hell , that was in spirit , or soul : five the third day he rose again from the dead , & sixthly he ascended into heaven etc. but your secondly he was buried , and thirdly laid in the grave , make two burials . 

Thus have I briefly delivered , what I thought meet to be said , concerning the descension of Christ into hell . In all which I refer myself to the judgement of those who may & can best discern of these matters , as by the word of God , and her Majesty's Laws I am bound . 



Faults escaped in the printing . 

P. 3. lin . 10. for is declared read is also declared 

P. 8. in the margin , for Jam. 20 read John 20.  

P. 18. lin . 9 for curcified read crucified 

P. 24. lin . ult. for this page read this next page 

P. 25. in the margin for Ge● . 27 read Gen. 2. 7.  

FINIS . 





Pet. Vire● in Symbol Erasmus 〈◊〉 Colloquij●  Ruffinus i● exposed . Symbol . ●rasmus in ●is paraphrase upon●he Acts of ●he Apo●tles . ca 2.  Ruffinus i● exposed . Symbol . 1.  Pet. 3. 1 ▪  Psal . 16. 1●  Psal . 30. ●  Psal . 30. 4.  ●arietas ●ctionis . ●at . 27. 9  ●remie for zachary . Mat. 27. 9  jerem. 36.  juke . 1. 3.  jam. 20. 31.  Mat. 12 , 40.  Math. 16. 4.  Luk. 23. 43.  Acts. 2. 31.  Ephes . 4. 9 10.  1.  Pet. 3. 18. 19  Dan. 3. 21.  Dan. 14. 30.  joh. 2. 1. 2. 3.  Luk. 23. 43.  Luk. 23. 42. 43.  Luk. 23. 43.  Aug. lib. 11. confess . ca 13. in fine . Luk ▪ 1. 78.  Luk. 23. 42  ▪ 43.  Euthymius super hunc locum . Gen. 3. 7.  Gen. 3. 7.  Athana . lib● de incarn ▪ Chrysost . home ▪ 2. in Symb.  Mat. 12. 40 ▪  ●sal . 16. 10.  ●ath . 12. 40 ●ct . 1. 31.  Athanas . in ●●mb . ●hersost . 〈◊〉 ●●super ●●mb . ●at●h 12.  〈◊〉 ▪ 40.  Matth. 16. 24.  Mat. 16. 24.  Ezech. 27. 4.  〈◊〉 c●rde ma●is . [ Sunt ●ermini tu● ] Act. 2. 27.  jonas 2. 1. 2.  Act. 2. 27.  Ezec 27. 4.  Ezec. 28. 2.  Mat. 12. 40.  Psal . 16. 10.  Luk. 24. 44.  Act. 2. 31.  Act. 2. 27.  Mat. 27. 52.  Rom. 13. 1. 1.  Cor. 15. 45.  Apoc. 20. 14  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 soul 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 hell . Act. 2. 41.  Rom. 13. 1 ▪  1.  Cor. 15. 45.  Genes . 27.  Luk. 23. 43.  Act. 2. 27. 31.  Apoc. 20. 14  Mat. 25. 41  Luk 16. 22. 23.  ●er . 24.  Act. 2. 29. 31  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the person . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the grave . Act. 2. 30. 31  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the soul 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 hell . Psal . 16. 10.  Fulgen. lib. 3. ad Thrasimund . Act. 2. 30.  Psal . 3. 32. 11.  Act. 2. 31.  Psal . 16. 10.  1.  Pet. 3. 18. 19  Gen. 6. 3.  1.  Pet. 3. 18. 19  1.  Pet. 3. 18.  Genes . 6. 3.  1.  Pet. 3. 18. 19  Ruffinus in Symbol . Genes . 6. 3.  1 Pet. 3. 19 1.  Pet. 4. 6.  1.  Pet. 3 , 19 1.  Pet. 4. 6.  Psal . 18. 5.  Mat. 26. 38.  Luk. 16. 25.  Io. 9 32.  1.  Pet. 3. 19  ●sal . 135. 6.  Math. 8. 22.  He descended into the grave . He descended into hell . Luk. 16. 25.  Math. 9 23.  Mat. 27. 50.  Mar. 15. 37.  Luk. 23. 46.  ●o . 19 ▪ 30.  upon the cross Christ dying felt & suffered the pangs of hell & the full wrath of God.  1.  Sam. 2. 6.  Psal . 88 5.  Luk. 23. 46.  1.  Sam. 2. 6.  vers . 10.  Psal . 18. 5.  Psal . 116. 13  Act. 2. 23. 24.  Act. 24.  Gen. 37. 53. death or the grave . Asal . 88 6.  Act. 2. 24.  Variae Lectiones Grae●●● . Syra ver●● . Hieromi●●i translat . Gen. 37. 53  Luk. 16. 25.  