Man wholly Mortal ; OR , A TREATISE WHEREIN 't is proved , both Theologically and Philosophically , That as whole Man sinned , so whole Man died ; contrary to that common distinction of Soul and Body : And that the present going of the Soul into Heaven or Hell is a mere Fiction : And that at the Resurrection is the beginning of our Immortality ; and then actual Condemnation and Salvation , and not before . 

With Doubts and Objections answered and resolved , both by Scripture and Reason , discovering the multitude of Blasphemies and Absurdities that arise from the fancy of the Soul.  

Also , diverse other Mysteries ; as of Heaven , Hell , the extent of the Resurrection , the New-creation , etc. opened , and presented to the Trial of better Judgement . 

By R. O.  

The second Edition , by the Author corrected & enlarged . 

That which befalleth the Sons of Men , befalleth Beasts ; even one thing befalleth them all : as the one dieth , so dieth the other ; yea , they have all one breath : so that Man hath no pre-eminence above a Beast : for all is vanity . 

Eccl. 3.19 . 



Printed at London , Anno 1675.  

To the READER . 

Judicious Reader , 

Thy serious perusal , but the scorn and division of the multitude hereof , is my expectation : Startle not thou , be patient , read , ponder , and Berean , like-try whether these things be so or no : If any thing in it be worth thy owning , take it , it is thine as well as mine , and I have my end , thy benefit : I wish it well to all , but I fear it will be a Parable so most ; however , I have unbosomed my duty ; freely as I have received , I give it freely to the World ; it is my faith , as I believe , so have I spoken . I expect an Answer ; if it it be such as will not hold trial , it is likely I shall vindicate myself ; but if by force of Argument it shall convince , I shall be ready and free thankfully to embrace it , and renounce my error , whether it be in part or in whole , though in the main I am nothing jealous ; had I therein doubted , my weakeness had not been thus visible to the World. Whereas in several places scattered thorough the Book the use of the word Soul may seem to some , to imply that which I deny ; let such know , it is for Argument sake , not intending in the least any self-distinct being by it . Thus desiring my endeavours may have a fair and equal trial by Scripture and solid Reason , I commit thee to the blessing of God in the perusal thereof , and rest 

thine in the love of the Truth , R. O.  

Man's Mortality : OR , A Treatise proving MAN ( as he is a Rational creature ) a Compound wholly mortal . 

CHAP. I Considerations from Natural Reason , disproving the common opinions of the soul , and proving man wholly mortal . 

IF we will rationally argue concerning the Soul , it is necessary to define what that is , to which this immortality is ascribed : But since it is defined by some one way , by some another way , I shall produce some Opinions about it ; and then bring the most rational to trial , omitting the more frivolous : viz.  

The Stiocks held it , a certain blast hot and fiery ; or the vital spirit of the blood : The Creatins , Blood : Galen , a certain exhalation of the purest blood : Zeno , Cleanthes , Antipater , and Possiodonius , a hot complexion , or corporeal quality diffused through the whole body : Democritus , Fire ; and his opinion was , the round atoms being incorporated by air and fire , do make up the Soul : Pythagoras opinionated it a Number moving of itself : Plato , a substance to be conceived in the mind , that received motion from it-self , according to Number and Harmony : Aristotle , the first continual motion of a body natural , having in it those instrumental parts , wherein was possibility of life : Dinarchus , an Harmony of the four elements : Nemesius , divides it into Fantasy , Judgement , Memory ; Aristotle in his Physics , into vegetative , sensitive , motive , appetetive , intellective : And Ambrose Parey , p. 895. saith , the soul is the inward Entelechia , or the primative cause of all motions and functions both natural and animal , and the true Form of a man : It seeth , heareth , smelleth , toucheth , tasteth , imagineth , judgeth , etc.  And more exactly pag. 83.  Lib. 3.  Cap. 1. he saith the soul is commonly distinguished into three Faculties : Animal , Vital , Natural : The Animal , into Princial , Sensitive , motive : The Principal , into Imaginative , ( seated in the upper part of the brain ; ) Reasonable ( the middle part of the brain ; ) Memorative , ( Cerebellum , or after-braine . The Sensitive , into Seeing , ( the eyes ; ) Hearing , ( the ears ; ) Smelling , ( the nose ; ) Tasting , ( the tongue , pallet ; ) Touching , ( the body . ) The Motive , into Progressive ( legs ) Apprehensive , ( hands . ) 

The Vital , into Dilative , or parts for Respiration , ( weazon , lungs : ) Concoctive , or parts for vital motion , ( heart and arteries ) understood by the Pulsificke Faculty . 

The Natural , into Nutrative , Active , Generative : which three are performed by the help of the Attractive , ( the gullet ; ) Retentive , ( lower passage , or the stomach ; ) Concoctive , ( body of the ventricle ; ) Assimulative , ( three small guts ; Expulsive , ( three great guts . ) 

Augustine and Athanasius say it is a substance created , a spirit intelligent , invisible , immortal , incorporeal , like the angels . 

And there be several Opinions of its Body : Lucippus and Hipparchus say , it hath a fiery Body : Critias and Anaxemines , Woolnor and others , an aerial body : Hesiod , an earthly : Epicurius , fiery and airy : Zenophon , watery and earthly : Drone , a middle betwixt the spirit and the body : Didimus and Origen , a third substance . 

diverse other conceptions and fancies there be , to uphold this ridiculous invention of the Soul , traducted from the Heathens , who by the Book of Nature understood an immortality after Death ; but through their ignorance how , or which way , this invention ( reported to be Plato's ) was occasioned , and begot a general belief : and so they , and after them the Christians , have thus strained their wi●ss to such miserable shifts , to define what it is ; but neither conclude any certainty , or give satisfaction therein . Yet since it is generally concluded to be in man , and of man ; but what , where , or how , no man knows ; though such several opinions of it be , if but examined : I 'll pitch upon those which afford most conceptory definition : that is , that of Aristotle , Nemesius , or Ambrose Parey , which make the Soul to be all the internal and external . Faculties of man jointly considered , or Man Anatomised : and thereto Reply thus . 

All the Faculties of Man ( severally or together ) are all , and each of them mortal ▪ as well those that are peculiar to man , as those that are common to Beasts : and if all those , with his corpulent matter completing Man , be proved mortal ; then the invention of the Soul upon that ground vanisheth : which I thus prove . 

All elementary compositions or Temperatures are mortal , and transitory : 

But man's Faculties from the least to the greatest are Temperatures : 

Ergo , mortal . 

The Minor is thus proved . 

That which is subject to increase and diminish , is a Temperature . 

But all man's Faculties , yea those of Reason , Consideration , Science , etc. all that distinguish Man from a Beast , are augmented by Learning , Education , etc. lessened by negligence , idleness , etc. and quite nullified by madness : 

Ergo.  

That those Faculties are Temperatures , I further prove , thus . 

A Temperature is a Quality ; and a Quality may be in the Subject , or absent from it , without the destruction of the same subject . 

But reason , understanding , etc. may be absent from the Body their Subject , and yet the Body living : as , in madmen , and persons in the Falling-sickness ; and none will deny they are men at that same time : 

Ergo.  

Object . Qualities of the Body are subject to sense . 

But understanding , etc. subject to none : 

Ergo.  

Answ . A hot and dry brain is quickwitted , which by moisture and coldness is altered : and so we are disposed according to the present constitution of our Bodies . 

If this suffice not , I add , that an effect is by passion from the cause , as motion cannot be without passion from that which moveth : for take away the cause , and the motion ceaseth : tolle causam , tollitur effectus : Therefore quickness of wit cannot be without passion from heat & dryness : for overpower that hot and dry brain with moisture and coldness , as may be with Opium , and the hotness and dryness thereof ceaseth , and dulness followeth . 

Further , even from my Opposites Assertions , I prove this Soul they so talk on , to be elemental , as Woolnor & others , who ascribe unto it an Aerial Body : For whatsoever is Aerial is elemental , else could it not be Aerial : 

Ergo , this Soul is elemental , and so finite . 

If this immortal spirit have an Aerial Body , I wonder what would become of it , if a living man were closed up in a Vessel , which were so solid every where , that the Air could not possibly evacuate , and there the man die ; either it must perish with the man , or else ▪ remain there , through which there is no passage for its Aerial Body : So that he so martyred hath an ill-favoured Paradise for his Soul.  

And further , experience tells us ; If the former Brainpan be hurt , the Senses are hindered , but the Cogitation remaineth sound . 

If only the Middle-pan be harmed , the Cogitation is maimed ; but the Seat of Sense keeps all the five Senses whole : If any hurt befall both to the Former and Middle-pan , both Sense and Cogitation decay 

If the Hinder-pan be disordered only , the Memory alone , and neither Sense nor Cogitation receive harm . 

So that in verity , Man is but a Creature whose several parts and members are endowed with proper natures or Faculties , each subservient to other , to make him a living Rational Creature ; whose degrees or excellences of natural Faculties make him in his kind more excellent than the Beasts : So that though Parey and others do so excellently set forth his several endowments , or properties of his several members , it doth not follow , that those Faculties together are a Being of themselves immortal : For as the members cannot be perfect members without them , so they cannot be faculties without their members : and separation cannot be without destruction of both : As attraction or heat is the property of fire , which cannot be , if fire cease ; nor fire be , if it cease : and as well may we say the heat of the fire continueth , after the fire is dead out , as those Faculties when their Body is dead : for spoil one , spoil both ; kill one , kill both ; this is in that , and that is in this : The Form is so in the Matter , and the Matter so in the Form , as thereby , and not else , is an Existence , or Human Entity : And their Being is in this Union , and their Union is in this Being : So that , take away Form , and Matter ceaseth ; take away Matter , and Form ceaseth : destructio unius est interitum alterius . The Form is the Form of the Matter , and the Matter the Matter of the Form ; neither of themselves , but each by other , and both together make one Being : therefore if one Be by the other , and thereby Both together ; then one cannot consist without the other , but must Both perish together : For nothing can consist without that , by which it is . 

But suppose on the contrary , one could consist without the other , as they say the Soul can without the Body ; then one may be generated without the other , Soul without Body , and so according to their preposterous precepts , it is not unnatural for a Woman to bring forth a spirit , that hath neither flesh , blood nor bones , instead of a Child . 

Or if one Be without the other , as Form without Matter ; Mass concepted , without the Faculty conceptive : then should all corpulent Substances be as infinite as God , without beginning , and Be of themselves , and themselves Gods : But I hope all grant both impossible : Therefore they must as well end together , as begin together ; and begin together as end together . Moreover , experience further tells us , that they neither can Be , nor consist without other : For if Nature be deprived more or lesle in her work of conception , of her due , ( her Forms or conceptions being by her power Formative or conceptive , or her Form Faculties by her Facultive Forms ) her Effect is accordingly : If membrally impedited , a membral impediment ; if totally impedited , a total frustration of Matter and Form , in Both : For he that is born without any member , hath neither Form nor Faculty thereof at all ; or with any membral imperfection , that part hath not its perfection either of Form or Faculty : so cometh it that some are born Fools , and never can be wise : Therefore their original Being must be together . And that their ultimate end is together , we see , that the Eye is no Eye without the Sight ; and Sight no Sight without the Eye : and so of all the other Senses and Faculies' e minore ad majus . wherefore , membral perfection is not so much in shape as in virtue ; and virtual perfection not so much in Mass as in due proportion , and both jointly make natural perfection , which is the gift of God , or Nature's general instinct : So , as one can by no means be without the other , so one cannot subsist without the other : For could there be a Facultive subsistence ( as that of the Soul is made ) without its body ; then a man might live when his head were cut off . 

Further , this Facultive Gift , or Nature's endowment , can no more be said to be a subsistent living Spirit , without its Receptacle , than the Sunbeams without the Sun , which are the gift or property of the Sun. But the Being of this communication must be in the Subject , as levity in the Fire , ponderosity in the Earth : And though the natures of things , be immediate communications of God's Power to Nature , yet disjunctively those communications are no Entities , without God be so many several Being's ; for in that sense they are not communications , but absolute Being's of themselves ; for betwixt Faculty and Subject is a Relation to communication , as betwixt Father and Son to Fatherhood ; neither without other , nor it without both : and to say notwithstanding , as this fancy of the Soul importeth , that there may be a Facultive Subsistance without its Subject ; then Nature's several Faculties must not be the several communications of One Being , but so many absolute irrelative Being's of themselves : So that this Doctrine of the Soul implieth , no God ; if a God , so many several Gods as Faculties : and if but ONE , than it chaps that ONE smaller than herbs to the pot : Therefore Faculty ceaseth with its Subject , or with the Subject God gathereth to himself the power , and yet his power no more by retraction , then lesle before by communication ; and so but One Being , in whom all things are , or one Ens Entium . 

Moreover , those several Faculties cannot be united or comprehended in one body , but by the several members of the same body ; for we see , if the member decay , the Faculty decays : Therefore their unite subsistence must be terminated membrally in the body : And if it were possible they could subsist , separated from their members ; then in that separation their Being could not be conjunct or unite , for want of that which tied them together , the several members : And so , if any Being , so many several Being's as several Faculties : if any Soul , so many several Souls : a Fantastic Soul , a Rational Soul , a Memorative Soul , a Seeing Soul , a Hearing Soul , a Smelling Soul , a Tasting Soul , a Touching Soul ; with diverse other Souls of all sorts and sizes . 

And further , that those Faculties are thus in their Subjects , and are not without them , ( as accidens non est nisi in subjecto , ) we see , that they increase and grow with their Subjects , and perfect together : For a Child is totally proportionated ( as Adam when God form him of the Earth ) before the vital Faculty be actual , ( as Parey saith ) and the Rational requireth a due process of time after birth , before it be ripe to bring forth the fruit of Rationality ; and as its Subject groweth and ripeneth , so it increaseth and perfecteth : for it is impossible , that the thing which is not actual in itself , should have a second thing actual in it ; and Rationality in an Infant , is no more in it then a Chicken in the egg , only in posse : therefore a Child cannot possibly ratiocinate , before it be actually Rational ; which cannot be before Organical perfection : For Reason cannot Be , and not show itself ; show itself , and not Be , for its Being is its Rationality , and its Rationality its Being : therefore as its Organs are potential ▪ it is potential ; and as its Organs are weak and imperfect , it is weak and imperfect ; and as they are perfect , it is perfect : Therefore Faculties increase with their Subjects ; and if increase , they must decrease . 

Anatomize Man , take a view of all his lineaments & Dimensions , of all his members & faculties , and consider their state severally , & all are transitory , even all that goeth to the Subject Man is corruptible , and himself but a Bundle of corruption , or curious Mass of vicussitudes . If all of Man that goeth to his Manhood be mortal , where then , or what is this immortal thing the Soul they talk of ? we have examined all his parts and Faculties , and find even all mortal : It is not sure his prima materia , though ingenerable , incorruptible , insensible , indefinite , etc , Nor his Forma prima , that principle which first gives Essence to a natural Body ; the first Active principle , informing and figurating the First Matter , sui appetentem ; for both are general to the whole Creation , whose Efficient Cause is only immediately God himself , by whose power all things that are made , shall be returned to that of which they were made , their Materia prima , or created matter : So that , ( as Solomon saith , ) Man hath no pre-eminence above a Beast , even one thing befalleth them . 

What Reason is there now , that Man's Faculties in a higher Degree , should be an immortal Spirit , more than a Beasts in a lower Degree ? but both elementary and finite . 

Further ▪ if it be not unnatural that Seeing , Hearing , etc. should be producted by an Elementary operation , as none deny in the propagation of Beasts : why is not the Rational Faculty in Man as natural in Man , and may as well be producted elementarily by Man , as the other by Beasts , & be as actually mortal ? If this suffice not , observe ; Substantia non recipit majus aut minus , a Giant is no more a man then a Dwarf ; there may be a gradual distinction , and yet no Essential difference ; Degrees of Faculties in several persons , and yet the Faculties the same , and of one nature , though not equally excellent : and the Degree doth not make a Faculty more a Faculty , or lesle a Faculty : Therefore , if the said Faculties in an inferior Degree be elementary , so must they in a superior : But in Brutes , whom none deny to be wholly mortal , and all their Faculties elementary , have our most noble parts & faculties scattered amongst them , though in an inferior degree , as Ambr. Parey said , ( Lib. 2. chap. 1. ) If we will diligently seach into their nature , we shall observe the impressions of many virtues : as of Magnanimity , Prudence , Fortitude , Clemency , Docilitie , Love , Carefulness , Providence ; yea , Knowledge , Understanding , Memory , etc. is common to all Brutes , the Affections and Passions of the Mind , all his Qualities good and bad , and every Faculty he hath is to be found more or lesle amongst them : And Parey further saith : They are of quick Sense , observant of the Rights of Friendship and Chastity , they submit themselves to the discipline of man , they have taught man many things , etc.  

The Hare is eminent for Memory , the Dog for Apprehension and Fidelity , the Serpent for Wisdom , the Fox for Subtlety , the Dove for Chastity and Innocency , the Elephant for Docilitie , Modesty , and Gratitude : Pliny saith , he cometh near the understanding of a man , that they worship the Moon and Stars ; Plutarch , that they worship the Sun rising : the Ape is eminent for Imitation and Understanding , the Turtle for Love , the Crocodile for Deceit , the Lamb for Patience , the Wasp for Anger , etc. and for his Five Senses , he is by them exceed . Aper auditu nos vincit , Aranea tactu , 
Vulture odoratu , Lynx visu , Simia gustu . 




Thus Man in sensu diviso is to be found amongst the other Creatures , and in him alone those several Faculties are eminent sensu conjuncto , and so only capable of God : Therefore those Faculties being elementary in an inferior Degree , in an inferior Creature ; why may they not be ▪ elementary in a superior , Degree in a superior Creature ? 

Now from all , this followeth , that if in man be an immortal Spirit , then diverse other Creatures have the like , though not in the same Degree ; for if Degree therein should make or mar the thing itself , than some would have no more Soul than Beasts , and some lesle ▪ as , Madmen and Fools no more ; and Infants lesle . If it be the Rational Faculty , than all men are born without Souls , and some before they had Souls , as Infants ; and some after their Soul is gone , as Madmen that live and perish in their Madness ; and some would be born , live , and die without Souls , as Fools ; and some would have Souls but by fits and jumps , as Drunkards , persons with the Falling-sickness , etc. nay all of us spend a great part of our days without our Souls ; for while we are in sound sleep , our Rationality ceaseth pro tempore : Thus this immortal Spirit goes and comes as occasion serves . 

That which is finite and mortal , ceaseth from the time of the grave , till the time of the resurrection ; But whole man is finite and mortal . 

Ergo.  

Minor proved . 

That which is elemental , is finite and mortal : But whole man is elemental . 

Ergo.  

Minor proved . 

All that is created , is elemental . But whole man is created : 

Ergo.  

Mayor proved . 

That which is material , is elemental . But all that is created is material : for that which is not material , is nothing . 

Mayor proved two ways . 

First , 

If that which is matter , be not compounded of the four elements , then that which is no matter must be compounded of them , else no composition at all ; and besides the four elements , there is nothing else to compound with , or to make this or that matter or thing of . 

But no matter is uncapable of composition ; for of nothing comes nothing : 

Therefore , that which is matter , is compounded of the four elements . 

Secondly , 

If matter created be not Elementary , than the Heavens and the Earth , with the things therein contained , which are infallibly Matter Created , are void of the elemental properties , to wit , heaviness , lightness , thickness , thinness ; heat , coldness ; moisture , dryness . 

But experience teacheth , that the Heaven and the earth , with the things therein contained , are not void of those properties , but are essentially consistent thereof . 

Ergo , Matter created must needs be elementary . 

And so whole man being matter created , is elemental , finite , and mortal : and so ceaseth from the time of the grave , till the time of the Resurrection . 

Another Argument disproving any actual immortality to be in fallen Man  

If there be an immortal Soul ( as is imagined ) in man , than it must be neither hot nor dry , nor cold nor moist ; neither thick nor thin , nor heavy nor light ▪ for all such compositions in fallen nature , are mortal and finite , ( as before proved , ) for they are elemental . 

But every thing in nature must be one or some of those , or all those together : for in nature nothing can be , but it must be hot or dry , cold or moist , thick or thin , heavy or light ; for of those radical Qualities the whole creation consisteth : that is not a creature that is not composed thereof . If there can be any thing in Nature void of those qualities , let it be named , where it is , how it can be , what and whereof it is , and that shall be called the immortal Soul ; but such a thing to be in nature , is past Imagination , yea , absolutely impossible . 

Therefore , no immortality in fallen man : as he is wholly elemental , so is he wholly dissoluble : Every element returns to its Centre ; his earthly part unto the earth , his moisture or watery part unto the water ; his warmth or fiery part , to the seat of fire , his airy part unto the air : and thus the composition Man returns to his simples , and so ceaseth from his Being ; and is become as before that composition , or elemental conception : Imagine how it was before he was form , conceived , or born ; and even so is it with him when he is dead : for as before his conception , he was in his elements ; even so after his death he returns to the same , and hath no more being , nor otherwise , after death , then before life : and so there is no more time to him after his death to the Resurrection , or recomposition of his elements , than there was to him from the creation to his birth , which is none at all . 

Another Argument . 

That which is not partly immortal as well as mortal , doth cease from life or Being from the time of the grave till the Resurrection . 

But man is not partly immortal as well as mortal . 

Ergo.  

Minor proved . 

That which is partly immortal , partly mortal , hath two lives or Being's . 

But man hath not two beings or lives . 

Therefore , man is not partly immortal , partly mortal . 

Mayor and Minor proved , and first the Mayor . 

If that which is partly mortal , partly immortal , have not two lives or Being's , then that being must be all a mortal being [ and then whole man dies ] or else all an immortal being , [ & then whole man life's for ever ] or else his flesh is no more part of him , than a tree is part of an house ; and so when the Headsman chopped off the Bishop of Caterburies' head , he cut off no part of the man : 

Therefore , man must either be all mortal , or all immortal ; or that which is partly mortal , partly immortal , must have two beings or lives . 

Minor proved , to wit , that man hath not two lives or beings . 

If there be two distinct lives or beings in man , than one creature is two creatures ; for the distinction of Being's , is the distinction of creatures . 

But for one creature to be two creatures , is impossible . 

Ergo , there cannot be two beings in man  

That the distinction of beings is the distinction of creatures , I prove thus . 

If the distinction of beings be not the distinction of creatures , than a man is a Bull , a Bear , a Lion , a Dragon , etc. yea , all things is one thing , and one thing is all things . 

But man is not a Bull , a Bear , a Lion , etc.  Therefore , the distinction of Being's is the distinction of Creatures . 

The consequence proved . 

If my being did not distinguish me from an owl and a woodcock , and thy being the same ; then an owl and a woodcock were both writer and reader . 

But an owl and a woodcock is neither writer nor reader : 

Therefore the distinction of beings must needs be the distinction of creatures . 

And so it is impossible for one man to have two Being's , except one man be two men . Therefore , if he have not two beings , he hath either none , or but one ; and if but one , that must be all mortal , or all immortal : For contraries cannot possibly be in one object . Now if he be all mortal , than he must all die ; if all immortal , than he must all live for ever ; but our dying natures witness against that : therefore this must be the sum of all , That whole man is mortal . 

Therefore well says Tertullian , in his Book de Anima , that the Soul and Body of man are both one ; which , saith Saint Jerome , in his Epistle to Marcellina and Anapsychia , was the opinion of the greatest part of the Western Churches . And Saint Austin in his four Books of the original of Souls , leaves the question undecided ; neither dares he rashly determine any thing . And his second Book of Retractions , Chap. 56. doth witness that he continued in that opinion to his death . 

As testifieth Moulin in his Anatom . pag. 67.  

Chap. II Considerations from the Creation , Fall , and Resurrection of man , disproving the Opinion of the Soul , imagining the better part of man immortal ; and proving him , as a reasonable creature , wholly mortal . 

Having had some consideration concerning the state of the Question in hand , from the Dictates of Nature and Reason ; let us repair to the unerring rule of the Scriptures , to see how this mortality is either proved or disproved thereby . 

And first , we may consider that the Scripture saith , that when God had moulded , form , and completely proportionated Adam of the dust of the ground , he breathed in his face the breath of life , and man became a living Soul , Gen. 2.7 . Here , first , we are to consider that we are not to speak of Man , as the title or word man may be ascribed to the human shape or carcase , as in this place it seemeth it is , by way of distinction from other forms ; but of such an human shape or carcase as is a living soul : and so always when we speak or treat of man in this point of difference , we are not to mean his carcase in human form or shape only , but as he is a rational living soul in that form , and so called man : for the text ascribeth the title of Man to him , both before and after the breathing in his face the breath of life ; and man became a living Soul : therefore that living Soul was Man That which was form or made of the earth , became a living soul , or creature , by the breathing [ or communicating ] the breath of life [ a communicative rational , Faculty , or property of life in his kind . ] That liveless Lump became a living soul ; and not such a living soul , another creature , a distinct being of itself , was infused into that form matter , that had its Being before that Infusion , and can be when the body ceaseth , as is vulgarly supposed . That which was breathed before it was breathed , was not a living soul ; but that which was breathed upon , became the living soul ; no living soul was ascribed to man , before that : so that man was form , and man became a living soul , as Paul saith , 1 Cor. 15.45 . The first man Adam was made a living Soul , which was his natural body , as verse . 44. of whom was the woman , both innocent , free from sin , and so from Death and mortality : For the wages of Sin is Death , Romans 6.23 . therefore before sin there could be no death ; but as by one man sin entered into the world , even so death by sin , Rom. 5.12 . and by the offence of one man , Judgement came upon all men unto death , vers . 18. and 1 Cor. 15.21 . by man came death : therefore man was created free from the power of death , so to continue ; but in the day he did eat the forbidden fruit , he became mortal : and as he was made a living soul , 1 Cor. 15.45 . so by transgression a dying soul , Gen. 2.17 that is , in dying to die ; or by becoming mortal , be dissolved , or return to what he was , the dust , Gen. 3.19 . namely , his Elements . Thus Man was gloriously immortal , yet no longer a Creature incorruptible , then during innocent : For ( Gen. 2.17 . ) God said , Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shalt not eat of it , for in the day thou eatest thereof , thou shalt surely die ; or , dying thou shalt die : that is , thy immortality shall be changed for mortality : Immortal Adam shall be made mortal ; not apart of thee , but thou shalt surely die , even whole man , without the least exception of any , the worst or noblest part of him , unless God had a mental reservation : but even the same thou that livest , thou shalt surely die : that must die wherein was life : then surely if he had an immortal Soul , which is the life of the body , that must be made mortal . The result of all which , is this : 

That what of Adam was immortal through Innocency , was to be mortalized by Transgression . 

But whole Adam ( quatenus Animal rationale ) was in Innocency immortal . 

Ergo , all , and every part , even whole Man , was liable to Death by Sin : And so consequently , if Adam had then such an indefinable thing in him , & of him , without which he was not Man , ( as is vulgarly supposed , and zealously meintained by the Church of Rome , England , etc. ) as an Angelical Spirit , that neither could , nor can be subject to mortality : then he had that he had not ; which made him be what he was not : he sinned with that , with which he could not ; which made him fall when he did not : for if Adam sinned , and that not , it was no part of him ; so that Adam was a living Soul , when he was not . And if Adam sinned with that which he had not , he sinned with that with which he could not ; which made him fall when he did not : which Bopeep in impossible : For if Adam was mortalized , and That not , It was no part of him ; this they must confess or else the otheer follows . 

Now whereas many from the expression of God's breathing into man the breath of life , and he became a living soul , conceive an Angelical Entity ; a supernatural , spiritual , infinite Existence to be couched in the flesh , or men's corpulency ; whose being doth not depend on it , but is proper and peculiar to itself : let such know , that so weak is the ground from whence it is concepted , that by the same reason the like may be said of fish , birds , and beasts ; for the breath of life , and a living soul , is ascribed to them , as well as to man , Gen. 7.21 . to which read the margin in R. Jatran , compared with verse . 28. and verse . 30.  And to every beast of the earth , and to every Foul of the Air , and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth ; wherein there is a living soul : see the margin . 

This being thus cleared and proved from Adam's Creation and Innocency ; let us proceed to his Fall , Restitution , and Resurrection ; who eating of the forbidden fruit , God fulfilled his threatened Curse upon him , saying , ( Gen. 3.19 . ) In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread , till thou return unto the Ground ; for out of it waste thou taken : for Dust thou art , and unto Dust thou shalt return . Here he is plainly disrobed of all his immortality ; he must to Dust , without the least mention of any being thereafter , either of part or whole , till the Resurrection : for then , and not before , Man's immortality is in Actual Being , whose beatitude and infelicity comes through Faith and infidelity . So that Death reduceth this productio Entis ex Non-ente ad Non-entem , returns Man to what he was before he was ; that is , not to Be : Psal . 115.47 . the Dead praise not the Lord , neither they that go down into silence : And Psal . 116.4 . His breath goeth forth , he returns to the Earth , in that very Day his thoughts perish . ( see more , pag. 5 , 6 , 7 , 8. ) But Christ the second man Adam , who is made a quicking Spirit , 1 Cor. 15.45 . at the Resurrection restoreth this non-ented Entity to an everlasting Being , 1 Cor. 5.42 . It is sown in corruption , it is raised in incorruption . 

Thus Mortality is derivated to all Adam's posterity : The first man ( quatenus homo ) is of the Earth earthly : as is the earthly , such are they that are earthly : ( CITIZEN Cor. 15.47 , 48. ) But the Earth of which Man is , is corruptable , and shall be burned up with fire , 2 Pet. 3.10 . Therefore whole Man is corruptable : for as in Adam all dye , ( CITIZEN Cor. 15.22 . ) even so in Christ shall all be made alive ; what fell in Adam , shall be raised by Christ ; what was mortalized by the earthly Man , shall be immortalised by the Heavenly man : wherefore All , not a part of Man was mortalized by Adam ; or else only the fallen part must be redeemed ; and not the whole man : for no more of man than fell , was redeemed ; and if the body only fell , and his formal part ( his soul ) continued immortal , than that part of man ( his body only ) was purchased , not his constitutive or better part , his Soul : So that the bodies only of the Reprobate , according to this fancy , shall be damned ; for nothing of Adam , but what fell of Adam , can be made liable to condemnation ; and what of him stood , shall stand , as well as the Angels that never fell : But in Christ we are complete , Col. 2.10 . Therefore in Adam totally fallen . 

Further : If Adam's fall was not a complete change of his whole manhood , from immortality to absolute mortality of the whole ; then in the day that he did eat ( the forbidden Fruit , ) he did not surely die ; for He implies his Manhood , ( and my very Opposites confess the Soul the very Essence and Being of Manhood : ) and [ in the day ] and [ surely die ] imply Execution as well as Transgression to be then ; for both have equally relation to the Day : In the Day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die : so as well may we say , he did not eat , as did not die That Day . 

And if nothing died , that is , became mortal , but his Body ; then that died , & his Soul lived , that is , must be as it was at first , before God breathed life into it , that is , a dead corpse , and indeed was never other , if the Soul were a distinct Being of self , and all life in itself ▪ and the Body but an Instrument to it , whereby it performeth all motion and action ( as Nemesius on Man's Nature , p. 266. with others , maintain : ) And thus it must needs follow , that this death threatened was a mere Scarecrow , even nothing at all ; for He , that is , his constitutive part ( his Soul ) continued immortal , and unchanged , and used his body instrumentally , as it did before the Transgression . And if it be answered ; It became sinful and subject to sin , and so of final Condemnation in Hell at the length : I Reply ; That before he sinned , he was subject to sin , or else he could not have sinned , for quicquid est in actu , prius fuit in potentia ; and if the wages of sin be death , than he must be of necessity subject to death the effect , as well as sin the cause , at the same time : And so consequently , the Souls possibilty of sinning being producted into Actual sin , the Soul must have its wages , Actual mortality . Further , if the Souls Death be only that of Hell ; so then principal or efficient cause deepest in the Transgression was lesle punished , than the instrument , the Body being but the Souls instrument whereby it acts and moves : as if a Magistrate should hang the Hatchet , and spare the Man that beaten a man's brains out with it : and so the Soul suffer the last death , and scape the first : which is as preposterous , as , if this Death should be received before this Life . Moreover : Condemnation in Hell is not properly , but remotely the reward of Adam's Fall ; For properly Condemnation is the wages of Infidelity , or unbelief in Christ , as Salvation is of Belief : So that none can be condemned into Hell , but such as are actually guilty of refusing Christ ; because immortality or the Resurrection cannot be by Propagation or Succession , as mortality from Adam to his Issue ; and so the Child , though temporally , yet shall it not eternally be punished for his Father's sin , but his Condemnation shall be of himself . 

If the Soul ( as they say ) be the very life , or have all life in itself , and the body but its instrument ; then the body now hath no more life in it , then when it is reduced to the earth ; but is as dead as a dore-naile : And so at the Resurrection cannot be raised from death ; for that which never had life , cannot be raised from death ; and the union of it to the Soul at the Resurrection they Fabulate on , is but an addition of corpulency or gross matter to the Soul ; which in truth is no Resurrection at all from the dead , no more than the restoration of flesh lost by Famine , sickness , etc.  For Resurrection from the death , is not the addition of gross matter to life ; but the Restoration of life from death : So that the restitution of lost flesh now to the soul , is in quality as much a Resurrection from the dead , as the addition of the whole body to the soul at the Last day ; which is to say with the Sadduces , there is no Resurrection from the dead . But the Soularies , I know , are loath to be branded for Sadduces ; which how they will avoid , I cannot see : for if the soul live separated from the body , the body cannot be raised from the dead , except the body had a life of its own , differing from that of the soul ; and so a man must have two lives ( as they say a Cat hath nine : ) the one mortal , the other immortal ; and at the Resurrection have two immortalities . If the soul be of a distinct being from the body , and sinned as the body , and thereby incurred the condemnation of Hell ; then must the soul have a particular redemption from thence , as the body from the grave ; or else it must perish there for ever : And if Christ redeemed us from thence , than he must suffer the same eternal Torments ; that is , the worm of conscience , despair , everlasting chains of darkness , etc.  But those he never suffered , as witnesseth Doctor Ames to Bellarmine . 

Ergo.  

If you urge , that in his agony and sweeting of blood , he suffered equally with the Torments , and therefore might be said to suffer eternal toments , though he was never personally in hell ; then may we as well say , that by his agony , etc. he suffered pain equivalent to death , and therefore might be said to have suffered the death of the grave , though personally he had never been in the grave : for there is a greater equivalency betwixt those sufferings and the grave , then betwixt his sweeting of blood and the torments of the damned Spirits in hell . 

CHAP. III Scriptures to prove this Mortality . 

Job 3.12 , 13 , 16.  Why did the knees prevent me ? or why the breasts that I should suck ? for now I should have lain still , and been quiet ; I should have s●ept ; then had I been at rest : Or as a hidden untimely birth ( mark ) I had not been , as an Infant that never saw light . 

Job 4.19 , 21.  How much lesle on them that dwell in Houses of clay , whose Foundation is in the Dust , which are crushed before the moth . Doth not their excellency which is in them go away ? they die even without Wisdom . 

Job 14.1 , 2.  Man that is born of a woman is of few days , and full of trouble ; he cometh up like a flower , and is cut down : he fleeth also as a shadow , and continueth not : ( and verse . 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12. ) For there is hope of a Tree , if it be cut down , that it will sprout again , and that the tender branch thereof will not cease : though the root thereof wax old in the ground , and the stock thereof die in the earth , yet through the sent of water it will bud , and bring forth branches like a plant : But Man dyeth and wastes away ; yea , Man giveth up the ghost , and where is He ? As the waters fail from the Sea , and the flood decayeth , and drieth up , so Man lieth down , and riseth not , till the Heavens be no more , they shall not awake out of their sleep . 

Psal . 103.15 , 16.  As for man , his days are as grass , as a flower of the field , so he flourisheth , for the wind passeth over it , and it is gone , and the place thereof shall know it no more . 

From these places compared , we may see , that man ( not his flesh only , for that makes not man ; but flesh and Spirit sensu conjuncto make Man ) is not as a Tree , when He is cut down , whose Spirit liveth , and sprouteth forth , and continueth : but as the flower of the field , ( not the stalk , but the bare flower , ) which totally fadeth and perishes : Therefore Man is wholly mortal : he shall die , and the Son of Man shall be made as grass , Isa . 51.12 . 

Ezekiel 13.19 . To slay the souls that should not die , and to save the souls that should not live . 

Psal . 7.1 , 2.  Save me , etc.  lest he tear my soul like a Lion , renting it in pieces , etc.  

Psal . 89.48 . Who can deliver his soul from the hand of the grave ? 

Psal . 19.10 . Leu. 21.1 , 11 , and 19.28 . Numb . 5.2 . and 19.11 , 13.  Hag. 2.13 . in all which places , the words dead body in the Original is soul . See Jun. Annot. Leu. 21.1 . 

2 Cor. 5.1 , 2 , 3 , 4. there out Being after death is called , a building of an house not made with hands , eternal in the heavens : with this the Apostle desire's to be clothed ; and what it is , he defines , viz. mortality swallowed up of life : whence it is most evident , that all his hope of future life was grounded upon the Resurrection ; and that his hope was altogether grounded thereon , he confirms , 1 Cor. 15 , arguing , if Christ be not risen , the dead should not rise : and ( verse . 18. ) They which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished : and ( verse . 14. ) then is our faith also in vain ; whose end ( CITIZEN Pet. 1.9 . ) is the Salvation of our Souls . How should then all be in vain , if our souls as soon as breath is out of the body enter into glory and salvation ? For by that , though there were no Resurrection of the flesh , we should receive the end of our Faith , the Salvation of our Souls . Nay further , he maketh all our hope to be in this life , if there be no Resurrection ; for vers . 19 having shown the evils that follow the denial of the Resurrection , faith ; If in this life only we have hope in Christ , we are of all men most miserable : vers . 32.  Saint Paul said , If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus , what advantageth it me , if the dead rise not ? whence plainly appears , that the denial of the Resurrection confines all our hopes and advantages within this life ; and so all our sufferings , persecutions , prayers , faith , etc. were to no purpose : which could not be , by this Soulary fancy of present reward of beatitude after this life . 

1 King. 2.2 . David saith to Solomon , I go the way of all the earth : that is , as the earth must see corruption , so must he ; and if his Soul were part of him , yea , himself , so must it ; else should he not go the way of all the earth . 

And the expression in Joshua 2.13 . Deliver our lives from death , importeth absolute mortality : for if Death be not dissolution of life , or its deprivation , how can it be said to suffer death ? not by a bodily separation , for that is but as the laying down of a burden , wherewith it was clogged and tired , whereby it is made more lively ten thousand times , ( as , my Opposites confess ) and so , can no more be said to be dead , than a Porter when he is disburdened of his Load . 

Job 34.15 . All flesh shall perish together , and man shall turn again unto dust . 

That which is born of the flesh , is flesh , John 3.6 and , flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God , 1 Cor. 15.50 . 

But this Spirit , the soul so Idolised , ( if such a thing be ) is born of the flesh ; for in the womb a Child is a living soul , and is so born of the mother that is flesh . 

Therefore this soul is fleshly , and cannot enter into the Kingdom of glory , till corruption have put on incorruption ; which cannot be , but by death : thou fool , that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die , 1 Cor. 15.36 . 

Eccl. 3.12 . That which befalleth the Sons of Men , befalleth Beasts ; even one thing befalleth them : as one dyeth , so dyeth the other : they have all one breath , so that they have no pre-eminence above a Beast : for all is vanity . 

wherefore if their Breath be all one , than God breathed no other Breath , ( that is , life or soul , ) into Man , than he gave to Beasts : So that if Man be Fallen , and the Beasts be cursed for his sake , Man must be equally mortal with them . 

1 Tim. 4.8 . I have fought a good fight , I have funished my course , I have kept the faith : henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness , which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at THAT DAY ; and not to me only , but to all them that love his appeareing . Here from the finishing of his course a Crown being laid up , ( which is even the same which Peter , Epist . 1 cap. 1.9 . maketh the end of our faith , the Salvation of our souls ) to be given at THAT DAY , concludes an intermission to him and us till then . 

1 Tim. 6.14 , 16.  Keep this Commandment until the appeareing of our Lord Jesus Christ , who only hath immortality , dwelling in light which no man can approach unto ; whom no man hath seen , nor can see . 

Whence appeareth , that none ever entered into Heaven since the Creation . And it is in vain for my Opposites to say it is meant of the corpulent matter only ; for they make the Soul the very manhood : and none that enter therein , enter by halves and piecemeal : and this is confirmed by Joh. 3.13 . And no man hath ascended into Heaven , but he that came down from Heaven , even the Son of man , which is in Heaven . 

Psal . 6.5 . For in death there is no remembrance of thee ; in the grave who shall give thee thanks ? 

Psal . 89.11 , 12.  Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave ? or thy faithfulness in destruction ? shall thy wonders be known in the dark ? and thy righteousness in the Land of forgetfulness ? 

Isa . 38.18 , 19  For the grave cannot praise thee , death cannot celebrate thee : they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth . The living , the living , he shall praise thee , as I do this day : the Father to the Children shall make known thy truth . 

Hence it is plain , that during this Death Man is void of actual Being : for had he then an incorruptible or present actual Being in glory , he should be more capable of the praise and remembrance of the Lord , than he was before he died . 

Job 3. from the 11. to 20.  Why died I not from the womb ? etc. for now should I have lain still , and been quiet , I should have slept , and then I should have been at rest ; as a hidden untimely birth , I had not been ; as Infants that never saw light : there the Prisoners rest together , they hear not the voice of the Oppressor . 

Hence followeth , that during this Death there is no more present Being to man , then to an hidden abortive Embryo in this life ; and no more capability , then light to unborn Infants ; nor more oppression or torment , then where there is none to oppress : which is to say , He absolutely IS NOT : Answerable to that of Jacob , Me have ye bereft of my children : Joseph is not , and Sime●n is not , Gen. 42.36 . to this add Psal . 146.2 . Job 7.21 . For now shall I sleep in the dust , and thou shalt seek me in the Morning , but I shall not be . 2 Pet. 1.25 . Isa . 26.14 . Psal . 39.13 . OH spare me , that I may recover strength , before I go hence and be no more . 

Job 4.17 , 19 , 2O , 21.  Whose foundation is in the dust , they perish for ever : that is , cease to Be , till the resurrection . 

Luke 20.37 , 38.  Now that the dead are raised , etc. relating to Exod. 3.6 . I am the God of Abraham , etc.  From whence Christ proveth the resurrection : But if Abraham , Isaac , etc. had then lived in their souls , it had been no Argument to prove the Resurrection ; for he had been the God of living souls , Abraham , Isaac and Jacob , though there had been no resurrection . Besides , he saith all live unto him : and this saying is ascribed unto the dead : therefore , as well may we argue from thence , that they lived in their bodies , as say , they were dead in body , but alive in soul unto God : for it is impossible to be potentially and actually living at the same time . 

Joh. 12.24 . Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground , and die , it abideth alone : but if it die , it bringeth forth much fruit : compared to 1 Cor. 15.  thou fool , that which thou sowest is not quickened , except it die . Therefore the soul not dying ( as the Soularies fabulate ) nor falling into the ground , must abide alone , and cannot bring forth fruit at the Resurrection , but must abide a bare soul without a body : and the body having no life in it , falling into the ground , cannot die , ( for both vegetative , sensitive , and rational life is ascribed to the soul ) but must likewise abide alone , and cannot be quickened ; which is a flat denial of the Resurrection : yet though fundamentally the Soularies thus deny the Resurrection , yet verbally they say there is a resurrection ; which must needs be a strange one , and as ridiculous as strange , stated after their Imagination : For the soul not falling into the ground , nor dying , must needs abide alone : therefore if the body be raised after their conception , man would be divided into two immortalities , and both alone ; one might be in the North , the other in the South ; the soul in one place , and the body in another ; yea , the soul in Hell , and the body in Heaven : for the body by their grounds is as innocent from sin , as the knife wherewith a man is stabed is free from murder ; and the soul as guilty of all sin , as the murderer is of the murder : & the Scripture condemneth the guilty , & saveth the innocent ; adjudgeth one for heaven , and the other for hell . OH monstrous Resurrection ! I hope the Soulary Champions , the Priests of the Church of England , may be ashamed longer to assert the soul to have all life in it , and the body to be but the souls instrument whereby it acts and moves ; and henceforth cease to delude and stop the mouths of the people with a bare verbal Resurrection ; that the end of their faith may be suitable to Christ Jesus the foundation , on which it is to be built , both real and infallible . 

John 11.43 , 44.  And Jesus cried with a loud voice , Lazarus , come forth : and he that was dead [ four days , vers . 39 ] came forth bound hand and foot with graveclothes , etc.  

If Lazarus soul were in heaven them four days , he received damage and not vantage by that Resurrection : but it is idle to think that he which purchased heaven by his blood , should fetch any out after they were in : and once there , it is impossible to come from thence ; for should they , it were point-blank against the nature of his death ; who could not work against himself , no more than God can lie . 

1 Pet. 1.5 , 7 , 9 , 13. compared ; as , Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto Salvation , ready to be revealed in the Last time ; that the trial of your faith , etc. might be found unto Praise , and honour , and glory , at the appearing of Jesus Christ : receiving the end of your faith , the salvation of your souls : and hope to the end , for the grace that is brought to you at the Revelation of Jesus Christ : whence it is plain , that the end of our faith , the salvation of our souls , is referred to the day of judgement : And Luk. 21.28 . then is our Redemption ; & Rom. 8.23 . our Adoption , to wit , the Redemption of our body ; one with that , which Peter calls the salvation of our souls : & Act. 23.6 . & 24.21 . & . 26.6 , 7.  Paul maketh the end of all his hopes and , faith to be only in the Resurrection : and 1 Cor. 15.18 . saith , If the dead rise not , believers , of all men , are most miserable ; which could not be , if they had souls which went presently into glory , and the wicked had souls went into Torment , though there were no Resurrection : yea , the day of Judgement throughout the whole World , is made both the day of Salvation to the Righteous , Rom. 2.16 . 1 These . 1.5 , 7. 1  Pet. 1.5 , 9 , 13. 2  Pet. 3.7 . Joh. 5.29 . Mat. 25.34 . then shall he say , Come ye blessed ; therefore not before then : And the day of Condemnation to the wicked , Rom. 25 , 9 2  These . 1.6 , 8 ▪ 9  Job 21.30 . Pro. 16.4 . Acts 3.19 , 1 Pet. 1.10 Luk. 21.28 . Joh. 5.29 . Mat. 25.41 . then shall he say , Departed , etc. therefore not before then , Mat. 7.23 . 

John 3.5 . Except a man be born of water and the Spirit , he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven : compared to Rom. 6.3 , 4 , 5.  Know ye not , that so many of us as were baptised into Jesus Christ , were baptised into his death ? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death ; that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the Glory of the Father , even so we also should walk in newness of life , etc. and to these , add 1 Cor. 15.29 . Else what shall they do that are baptised for the dead , if the dead rise not at all ? Why are they baptised for the dead ? These places jointly holding forth the external Ordinance of Baptism , or sign of the new Covenant , which carrieth the full representation of the whole work of Redemption , or perfect figuration of the new Covenant ; do manifestly set forth this Mortality : for the death , burial , & resurrection of Jesus Christ cannot in the external ordinance of baptism be represented , as those places ●old forth it doth ; but by baptising , that is , dipping or submerging the whole man into the water , the evidence that whole man shall die , and whole man be raised again , by the total death and total Resurrection of Jesus Christ . 

1 Cor. 11.26 , For as often as ye eat this bread , and drink this Cup , ye do show the Lords death till he come : The bread and wine signifying his Body and blood , as a sign of his death , show plainly that his death was total ; which could not be , if his life shrunk into his soul , and still lived . But from hence is plain , that not only body , but life itself was offered and died : for Leu. 17.24 . The life of all flesh is the blood thereof : compare Gen. 2.4 , 5.  But flesh with the life thereof , which is the blood thereof , shall you not eat , and surely your blood of your lives will I require , at the hand of every beast will I require , and at the hand of man , etc. will I require the life of man : whoso sheddeth man's blood , by man shall his blood be shed . To these , add 2 Sam. 1.16.8.27 , 28. and 16.8 . Mat. 23.30 , 35. with various suchlike places ; all which plainly show the life of all flesh , as well of man as of beast , is in the blood ; else Christ's death , by the representation of his blood , could not be set forth , nor could any by the effusion thereof die : but his Soul , blood , or life , was poured out unto death : therefore his death was not in part , but of the whole man  

Psal . 89.48 . What man is he that liveth and shall not see death ? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave ? 

Acts 1.13 . He seeing this before , spoke of the Resurrection of Christ , that his soul was not left in hell , neither did his flesh see corruption . 

Eccl. 4.1 , 2 , 3. doth show , that the living do suffer oppression , but to the dead is none : and chap. 9.4 , 5. they know not any thing ; For a living dog is better than a dead Lion : Therefore Psal . 146.2 . David saith , I will sing praises unto my God while I have any Being ; implying , that in death there is no human being . 

James 4.14 . Our life is even a vapour that appeareth for a little time , and then vanisheth away . 

rev. 16.3 . Every living soul in the sea died , chap , 20.4 , 5. dead souls lived again . 

CHAP. IU Objections extorted from Scripture Answered . 

Object . 1.  Therefore we are always confident , knowing that whilst we are at home in the body , we are absent from the Lord : we are confident , I say , and willing rather , to be absent from the body , and to be present with the Lord , 2 Cor. 5.6 , 8.  

Whence is inferred a present enjoyment of Glory immediately after death . 

I Answer , that both the foregoing and subsequent matter deny such an Interpretation , or consequence : for before , wishing to be clothed with our House from Heaven , on which is this expression of being present with the Lord , he expounds , that his meaning is thereby , that mortality might be swallowed up of life ; or as he saith , 1 Cor. 15.53 . that this corruptable ( man ) might put on incorruption , and this mortal put on immortalty : And the following matter of the said words , being laid down as the reason or ground why he so spoke , prove , that by his [ presence with the Lord ] he meant nothing else , but his state after the Resurrection : for saith he , We must all appear before the iudgment-seat of Christ , that every one , etc , vers . 1.  

Object . 2.  For I am in a straight betwixt two , having a desire to depart , and to be with Christ , which is far better : nevertheless , to abide in the flesh is much needful for you , Phil. 1.23 , 14.  

I answer , This is of the same nature , therefore must have the same Interpretation : for Paul did not preach one thing to the Philippians , and the contrary to the Corinthians . Besides , such manner of expressions are not contradictory to this mortality : for though there be long time to the Living till the Resurrection , there is none to the Dead : for from Adam's death to his Resurrection at the end of the World , will be to him , as the twinkling of an eye to the Living : yea , the twinkling of an eye to the living , is more time , than a thousand , yea ten thousand years is to the dead : For Being only commensurates with Time , or length of days : not to Be , cannot possibly be capable thereof : So that the livings tedious anniversary expectation of the Resurrection , and end of their faith , is not a twinkling to the grave : the livings Future is the deads' Present : Therefore , it is well figurated in Scripture by sleep , as , slept with his Fathers , 1 Kings 11.43 . fallen asleep in Christ , 1 Cor. 15.18 . etc. not that it is so long a time to the dead , but that in nature there is nothing so represents death , or nonbeing , as sleep : So that this may take away all carnal security : for who would not watch and pray overnight , that knows he must die in the morning ; live well , and be wary to day , that must rise and answer to morrow ; believe to day , that would not be damned but saved to morrow ? This administers comfort to the righteous , but terror to the wicked . Therefore Christ speakeing of his coming to Judgement , saith , I come quickly , & my reward is with me ; to let all men know , that in death there is no delay , their reward is present , he will not stay an instant : And further to confirm it , saith again , Surely I come quickly , Amen : even so come Lord Jesus . 

Object . 3.  thou fool , this night shall thy soul be required of thee . Luke . 12.20 . 

Answ . The life of the whole person , and not such as is fancied of the soul , except it had a mouth to eat , drink , etc. as vers . 9  

Object . 4.  And it came to pass as her soul was in departing , Gen. 35.18 . Ergo , there is such a thing as the Soul , which continueth its Being after death . 

Answ . no such matter ; for the sense of words is , as she was dying , or life a departing , for the following words say she died ; which could not be , if her soul ( her constitutive part ) lived still , no more than a man can be said to lose his hand , when he loses a finger . 

Object . 5.  And he stretched himself upon the Child three times , and cried unto the Lord , and said , OH Lord my God , pray thee , let this Child's soul come into him again : And the Lord heard his voice , and the soul of the Child came into him again , and he revived . 1 King. 17.21 , 22.  And Job 14.22 . It is said , his flesh upon him shall have pain , and his soul within him shall mourn . 

Ergo , there is such a thing as the soul . 

Answ . If it be meant life or breath , whose Being is consistent and terminated in a corpulent union : For , by that of the Child , is meant his breath or life , the thing that his corpulent matter wanted ; as verse . the 17. implieth , which saith , his sickness was so sore , that there was no breath left in him : Therefore , that which was gone , was prayed for , his breath or life , as his Answer further proveth , which was , and it revived . 

And by Soul in that of Job is meant , his conscience ; whose seat is in the reasonable and memorative Faculties . Therefore , the use of the word Soul in those places , doth not prove such a thing in man as is supposed : For in Scripture it is variously used upon various occasions . It is put for the Stomach . Pro. 27.7 . for the eyes ▪ Jer. 13.17 . for the heart , 1 Sam. 18. for God , Pro. 9.16 . Heb. 10.38 . Jer. 14.17 . for the dead body , Psal . 16.10 . for the whole man , Leu. 7.19 . and 4.1 . Acts 7.14 . Num. 15.39 . Rom. 13.1 . Gen. 12.5 . and 46.  Acts 2.41 . 1 Pet. 3.20 . for breath , Act. 20.10 . for life , Isa . 53.17 . 

Therefore , from those places those parts may as well be proved so many Souls , or Spirits of immortality , as from those where it is put for breath or life , it 's Being be proved , or such an immortal existence to be in the body . 

But to this Objection might be added Christ's raising of Lazarus and others from the dead : and it would make a very good plea for Purgatory , Because from hell there is no returning , and from heaven none could be thankful to be called again : and it cannot be supposed that Christ would work miracles for any , for which they should not have cause to be thankful to him : and therefore these persons raised from the dead , if they shall be supposed to have immortal Souls , their return must needs be from some one of the Pope's supposed Lymbocs or other . 

Object . 6.  For which cause we faint not ; for though our outward man perish , yet the inward is renewed day by day . 

Ergo , there is soul and body in man  

Answ . It is not said , though our flesh perish , yet our souls are renewed ; then 't were something to little purpose : but it is said , our outward man , which compared with what is meant by inward man , must needs be whole man ; for by inward man is meant faith or work of grace , ( 2 Cor. 5.17 . ) which is no part of natural man : so that without it or its renewing we are men perfect , as well as with it . 

Object . 7.  Who knoweth the spirit of man , that goeth upward ; and the spirit of a beast that goeth downward to the earth ? wherefore man hath a soul that goeth presently to Heaven , but the beasts to the earth . 

Answ . It cannot bear the sense ; for immediately before , he saith , their breath is all one , there is no difference : as the one dyeth , so dyeth the other , and goeth to one place , the dust : Therefore , if the beasts be reversed into the elements , so must man's . The meaning I take to be thus , that such a wonderful thing is the breath of a man , that breatheth upward , and the breath of a beast that breatheth downward , ( for spirit signifieth breath ; ) according to that of Ovid : Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram , 
Os Homini sublime dedit , coelumque videre 
Jussit , & erectos ad sidera tollere vultus . 


that its Faculty how it is , is past finding out : for Art in all her imitations could never touch that secret with her pencil . 

Object . 8.  Fear not them which kill the body , but are not able to kill the soul ; but rather fear him , who is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell.  

Answ . This carries the face indeed of the souls immortality : but if the interpretation must be confined to that sense , it overthrows the current of the whole Scripture : wherefore , my opinion of it is , that by [ not able to kill the soul ] is meant , ( as Luke hath it , chap. 12.4 . ) have no more that they can do : that is , though they have power over this life , or the natural Body , that is sown in corruption ; they have none over the Spiritual , that is raised in incorruption : which spiritual Bodies of men raised from the dead , are by Saint John in rev. 20 4 , 5. termed Souls : I saw the Souls ( saith he ) of those that were beheaded for Christ , and they lived and reigned with him a thousand years : But the rest of the dead lived not again , until the thousand years were ended : the Souls then that lived and reigned with him , are none other than the persons that were first raised by him from the dead at his coming , over whom none hath power but God alone , who therefore is most chiefly to be feared . This doth not set forth any immortality before the Resurrection , but shows , that only that is in God's hand , and he only able to touch it , that is , cast it into Hell. That this must be so expounded , I further prove , from the non-entitie of Hell ; for there can be no casting into Hell , before Hell be ; which though it be ordained of old , Isa . 30.33 . it is but in posse , not in esse till the Resurrection : for satisfaction , it is convenient to declare what we mean by Hell : for Hell is diversely used in Scripture : It is put for the grave , Psal . 16.10 . and 55.15 . Isa . 14.15 . for the Whale in which Jonah was , Jon. 2.2 . for Satan's Kingdom leading to Hell , Mat. 16.18 . for Satan , or his malignant Spirits , Jam. 3.6 . for the place of the damned , Mat. 5.29 . and 10.28 . Luke 12.5 . and 16.23 . 2 Pet. 2.4 . & this last [ the place of the damned ] is that which we mean by Hell : and it is likewise variously called : as , outer darkness , Mat. 22.13 . and 23.33 . wrath to come , 1 These . 1.10 . and 5.9 . Chains of darkness , 2 Pet. 2.4 . Judas 6. eternal fire , Judas 23. second death ▪ rev. 20.6 . bottomless pit , rev. 9.2 . place of torment , rev. 14.10 . and 20.10 . Lake of fire , rev. 29.20 . and 21.8 . everlasting punishment , Mat. 25.41 , 46 blackness of darkness for ever , Judas 13.  Those several expressions are generally taken to set forth the end of the Reprobate , or the execution of God's wrath upon them : Therefore if none of the forementioned places that Hell is put for , save that of the place of the damned , be taken for Hell , than most of those several expressions suit with it , yea , declare it : but the expressions in general grant no immediate execution after this death , but imply the contrary : as we may see , if we examine them . 

First , in Mat. 22.13 . when it is called outer darkness , and 23. vers . 33. damnation of Hell , compared with cap. 25.41 . where it is said , then shall he say unto them on the left hand , Departed from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels : to this add 2 Cor. 5.10 . For we must all appear before the Judgement-seat of Christ , that every one may receive the things done in the flesh , whether good or evil : and to these add 1 These . 1.10 . and 5.9 . where it is called , wrath to come : which thus compared , show plainly , it is to come : else execution must go before Judgement ; which in a Commonwealth would be ridiculous injustice , as first to hang men , and then judge them . At the day of Judgement we all must receive our reward according to our deeds good or bad , THAN shall he say unto them on his left hand , etc. and not before THAN : for it cannot be twice received : therefore , it is fitly called wrath to come , and the very Devils confirm this themselves , Mat. 8.25 . art thou come to torment us before the time ? which proveth plainly , that the time of their torment was not come : and if the Devil cannot be believed , God further clears it , 2 Pet. 2.4 . For if he spared not the Angels that sinned , but cast them down to Hell , and delivered them into Chains of darkeness , to be reserved unto Judgement . And Judas 6.  The Angels which kept not their first estate , but left their own habitation , he hath reserved in everlasting Chains , unto the Judgement of the great day : In both which places it is said , they are reserved unto Judgement : and Judas vers . 7. to the Reprobate is reserved the blackness of darkeness for ever : and to this add rev. 20.10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15. which clearly show , that at the day of Judgement both Devils and Reprobate together shall be cast into the Lake of fire : Therefore , if reserved for both till then , I 'll be bold to say , it shall not be till , nor before then . 

Moreover , rev. 19.20 . it is said , the beast and the false Prophet , and them that worshipped his Image , were cast alive into the lake of fire and brimstone : and chap. 20.10 . And the Devil that deceived them , was cast into the Lake : and this , verse . 6. and 14. is called the second death : therefore , this casting into the Lake must be after the Fall of Antichrist ; and after he hath done deceiving , and not before : for if he be there now , he hath done deceiving : for once there , it is impossible he should deceive : but that he hath not , there is more witnesses , than stars in the Sky , or sand in the Sea ; our innumerable sins , whose just reward is the second death . 

If it be Questioned , where then the Devils are ? 

Observe , they are but Creatures , and such as are fallen from their Heavenly mansions , therefore , within the Sublunary compass ; so that as the Earth is the proper place for ponderous and gross bodies ; and the Devils being more subtle and aiereal , may be referred to the air ; and not without ground from Scripture : for Ephes . 2.2 . the Devil is called the Prince of the power of the air : so that their casting into Hell , must be the air : and Hell may as well be put for the air in those places , as in other for the grave , etc. their prison , or place of custody , as the grave to the dead . And rev. 12.9 . 't is said , he was cast into the earth , and his Angels , etc.  

This premised , Hell and Damnation not yet ; well might Ignorance strain itself into such incertain conceits about the place of its Being , and it not as yet : Some have feigned it in Mount Aetna , some in the Element of Fire , which is betwixt the upper Region of the Air and the Globe of the Moon ; some to be in the Caves of the Earth , and Conduits of the Sea ; some only in the Sea , as Archer in his Personal reign of Christ mentions , because the Devils were cast into the Swine , which ran violently down a steep place into the Sea , Mar. 5.3 . surely , they might as well say , they have Millstones about their necks , because it is also said , Better a millstone were tied about his neck , and he cast into the bottom of the sea : for the one followeth no more than the other : Some say , it is in the Earth , equally so far distant from the surface , as Heaven is above it : as Phillips , etc. and this he labour's to confirm with Scripture : as Pro. 15.4 . The way of life is above to the wise , that he may depart from Hell beneath : and Phil. 2.10 . That in the name of Jesus every knee should bow , of things in Heaven , and things in Earth , and things under the Earth : i e. in Hell , saith he . And Luke 16.  The rich man saw Abraham afar off , and Lazarus in his bosom : And Ezek. 31.18 . Yet shalt thou be brought down with the trees of Eden unto the nether parts of the Earth . 

But those and such like places which literally seem to import Hell , conclude the thing no more , than other literal expressions prove God to have corpulent eyes , ears , hands , etc. but are expressions after the manner of men , to show the gradation of condition betwixt the wicked and the righteous , the one the extremest debasement , the other the extremest exaltation ; which could not be better figurated to sense , then by Heaven and Earth . 

And in particular thus : The first , as prov. 15.24 . is literal or figurative , which interpretation can neither be canonical nor rational ; for thereby wise men must not tread upon the ground , but must walk upon the Air , or upon the water , as Christ and Peter upon the Sea , ( Mat. 14.25 , 29. ) and there only the way of life : for it saith , their way is above . For the second ; as , Phil. 2.10 . that is both prophetical and figurative , to show how in process of time all Degrees shall subject to Christ : Angels , Men , Beasts , Devils , and Death , whose Degrees are thus literally expressed to sense , by Heaven , Earth , under the Earth ; or Angels that are highest in dignity , and so celestial ; Men and sublunars the middle , and so terrestrial ; Devils and Death the lowest , and so subterrestrial . 

The third , as Luke 16. is parabolical : ( of which more anon ) and it seems by this , if Hell be so deep in the Earth , the Damned have wonderful good eyes , to see through the earth's gross body , and the Heavens 12.  Spheres into the Coelum Empyreum , to spy Lazarus in Abraham's bosom ; or else Heaven must be there too , even in the centre of the Earth : this is the consequence of such parabolical Arguments . And the 4. or last , as Ezek. 31.18 . is akin to those : for , it is but to show , how that Pharaoh in the height of his pride and fury was brought to confusion , which in the 15. vers . is expressed by , In the day when he went down into the grave ; and verse . 14. unto death , to the nether parts of the earth , to the pit ; and verse . 17. into Hell : all which show but the sudden death and utter confusion of Pharaoh and his Army : and at the utmost , Hell here can be but put for death , or the grave ; and not for any such place of torment . 

Object . 9  Such a one caught up into the third Heavens : how that he was caught up into Paradise , 2 Cor. 12.2 , 4. there Paradise is put for the third Heaven : And to this compare Christ's Answer to the thief upon the Cross : This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise : Therefore , Paradise is the third Heaven , the place for the souls of the righteous , whither the Thief's soul went that day . 

Answ . Christ was not there that day himself ; for he was three days and three nights in the grave after his death : during which time , all the soul he had , was there detained by death , as is evident by Psal . 16.10 . compared with Acts 2.31 . for if it were not so , than Christ's human nature tasted of death ( not wholly ) but partially only , and thereby wrought not a whole , but a partial redemption to human nature ; because the soul , the most considerable part thereof , died not , being immortal ( as is fancied : ) which if true , then believers will not be complete in or by Christ , as Saint Paul affirms them to be , Col. 2.10 . having immortality only to their bodies by Christ , but not to their souls , these being immortal before . And then Christ by the Gospel brought life and immortality to light , only for the bodies of men , and not for their souls , 2 Tim. 1.10 . and then believers at the Resurrection will have two several and distinct lives and immortalities ; the one of their souls , by nature ; and the other of their bodies , by Christ : which is absurd to imagine . 

Besides , if the Thiefe's souls was that day with Christ's Soul in Paradise , a place of glory and exaltation ; then human nature had reward and exaltation before Christ's Resurrection , or his conquest over death , even whilst the Salvation of all mankind was in suspense , yea , and before its justification ; for Christ dying for our sins , rose again for our justification , Rom. 4.25 . And further , if Christ's soul was that day in Paradise , than the Apostles Creed may be questioned as untrue , which together with Scripture affirms , that Christ that day was both dead and buried ; neither of which can be true , if his soul ( the principalest part of his humanity ) remained alive , and ascended that day into Paradise . Besides , if that fancy had been true , than it ought , and without doubt should have been put as an Article of the Creed , to have been believed by all Christians ; and had been as necessary a point to have been known and believed by them , as any other Article there put concerning Christ . 

Object . 10.  But the meaning of the words may be , that the thief's Soul was that day in Paradise with the Godhead , and not with Christ's Soul.  

Answ . If so , than this will follow , namely , that the theifs human nature was exalted before Christ's human nature ; which will contradict St. Paul , Col. 1.18 . where he saith , that Christ was the first born from the dead , that in all things he might have the pre-eminence : and Christ's own reward & exaltation went not before , but followed after ( as an effect of ) his sufferings and conquest over death , as many Scriptures do witness : For when he had by himself purged our sins , he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high , Heb. 1.3 . we see Jesus was made a little lower than the Angels , for the suffering of death , Crowned with glory and Honour , Heb. 2.9 . Christ being found in the fashion of a man , humbled himself , and became obedient unto death , even the death of the Cross : wherefore God also hath highly exalted him , and given Him a name above every name , etc. Psal . 2.8 , 9  And no man in his wits can be so senseless , as not to understand his Resurrection to intervene his suffering , and this his exaltation . 

Besides , since the Godhead is everywhere , how could the Thief be absent from it anywhere ? 

wherefore by no means may it be granted that the thief was in Paradise that day , or can be there before his restoration or Resurrection ; unless he were or can be there with his broken legs : for Christ said not Thy Soul , but thou , i e. thou Thief , or thou man shalt be with me : And he that can make a Thief of him in the sense for which he suffered , or a man either , without his body , is a better workman than I know any . 

And if the soul ( as they say ) have all life in itself , and it not subject to death , and be the humanity and constitution of Man ; and the corpulent matter , the bulk of the body , be but an instrument whereby the soul acts and moves , and all the action and motion of the body be merely instrumental ; then neither Christ nor the Malefactor died that day , nor can any man ( as man ) die : for thereby his Manhood , that which makes him man , his Soul , is made immortal , unsubject to death : But the Scripture speaking of the resurrection of Christ , ( Acts 2.31 . ) saith , His soul was not left in Hell , neither his flesh did see corruption : and Acts 8.33 . For his life is taken from the earth : and Isa . 53.8 . He was cut off out of the Land of the living . All which could not be , by the fabulous conceit of the soul : for the first place ( as Act. 2.31 . ) doth show , that not only his flesh , but life and being was subject or conquered by death : and the second , it was taken from the earth , shows it returned thither , else could it not be raised from thence : the third , he was cut off out of the land of the living , shows no life remained in the soul ; for if his soul retained his life , and entered Paradise , which the Soularies make to be the Land itself of the living ; he never died : But his soul ( even all the soul he had ) was made an offering for sin , yea , he poured it out unto death , Isa . 53.10 , 12.  Therefore , this opinion of the soul cannot stand in competition with the sufferings of Christ , but flatly denyeth his death : So that from the expression of This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise , a present Soulary entrance into glory cannot be wrested under or without the denial of his death . 

Object . 11.  It is said , Heb. 9.24 . That Christ entered into heaven itself ; what 's that , but the third heaven or Paradise , into which Saint Paul was caught up , before mentioned , and whereinto the Thief's soul entered the day of his death ? 

Answ . This place of the Hebrews hath reference to Christ's ascension after his Resurrection , and to his entrance into the highest heaven , and Tabernacle of God , not made with hands , whereof the Holy of holies , into which the high-priest entered once a year , was a figure , made with hands , according to the pattern of this heavenly house or Tabernacle which was showed to Moses in the Mount ; as by comparing Heb. 6.20 . Heb. 8.1 , 5.  Heb. 9.1 , 23 , 24. and Act. 7.44 . with Exo. 25.9 , 40. may be seen : and is the same wherein Christ tells his Disciples are many mansions , and that he will go and prepare a place there for them , and that he will come again , and receive them to himself , John 14.1 , 2 , 3.  And in the interim , he there appears in the presence of God for them ; as Heb. 9.24 . 

Object . 12.  In 1 Pet. 1.3 , 4.  Peter saith that it is an Inheritance incorruptible , and undefiled , and that fadeth not away , reserved in heaven for the Saints : and S. Paul , 2 Cor. 5. says , it is eternal in the heavens : wherefore it being for the Saints enjoyment , the souls of the Saints presently after death , must ascend to enjoy it ; else can they not enjoy it at all : we nowhere read that their bodies shall at any time ascend thither . 

Answ . Saint Paul there saith , It is eternal in the heavens , but saith not that it is eternally there : for Saint Peter in the 13 verse . of the same chap. saith , that it is to be brought thence to the Saints , at the Revelation of Jesus Christ , ( and not that the Saints shall be taken up to it : ) and this will not be so brought down to them for their enjoyment , till after the Resurrection , and when the new Heavens , and the new Earth , are created ; as is evident in rev. 21.1 , 2 , 3. and When mortality is swallowed up of life , then , and not till then , shall the Saints be clothed with this their house from Heaven , as Paul in the same place , vers . 2 , 4. declares . 

Object . 13.  By faith , Enoch was translated , Heb. 11.5 . And Elijah went to heaven in a whirlwind , 2 King. 2.11 , 12.  

Answ . This no way contributes any thing to the fancy of the soul in a Paradise , but rather altogether confounds the conceit : for Elijah left his mantle , not his body behind him , when he ascended ; and Enoch was also wholly taken up . 

And therefore , Christ in the speech of the Theifs being with him in Paradise , did not intend that present day , but at the time of his coming into his Kingdom , he should be there with him ( according to the thief's petition : ) which Kingdom was not then shortly to be expected , but is yet to come ; nor will it be , until after Christ's coming again in the clouds , with power and great Glory , as is evident , Luke 19.11 , 12 , 15.  Luke 21.27 , 31.  

Besides , if Christ himself was that day in Paradise , a place of glory , he was there unglorified , or else being there glorified , he afterwards became unglorified again : for so he told Mary he was after his Resurrection , Joh. 20.17 . neither of which can reasonably be imagined . And it is palpable , that many errors are grounded upon mistranslations of the Scripture ; & this place , though the genuine signification of the words thereof be rendered , yet may it be reputed within the nature of mistranslation : for we have manifestly cleared , that the sense of [ this day thou shalt be with me in Paradise ] cannot , as it is vulgarly taken , stand with the foundation of Religion , or with solid reason : Therefore there must be some fault in the English Text ; which if narrowly examined may appear : for if the words in the Original be thus rendered , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that is , And Jesus said unto him , Verily I say unto thee to day , thou shalt be with me in Paradise ; which differeth from the common copies only in the transposition of a comma , incident to transcribing and printing , and then the objection from hence vanisheth ; i e. To day I tell thee ; not , This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise : And well might he use that expression , [ I tell thee this day ] as a trial of the sincerity of his faith ; for if he could believe in him that day , or present time of his sufferings , he should be with him in paradise ; or when he should appear in his Kingdom , he should appear with him in glory : or thus , [ I tell thee to day , thou shalt be with me in Paradise ] is as if he should say , I tell thee this day , which is the day of my suffering and of thy conversion , that as sure as this is the Day , so sure thou shalt be saved , or be with me at my coming into my Kingdom : where the attestation of [ This Day , ] is as an assurance , pledge , or witness of Christ's mercy towards him , and as a trial of his faith therein . The like expression Paul useth , Acts 20.26 . wherefore I take you to record this day , that I am pure from the blood of all men . 

Obj. 14.  then shall the dust return to the earth as it was , and the spirit shall return to God who gave it . Eccl. 7.12 . 

Answ . By spirit cannot be meant such a thing as the soul , except all souls go to God , and none to the Devil : for it is indifferently spoken of all : but by spirit is meant life , which hath various expressions in Scripture : it is the will of God , that dust shall be made man , and live , and it is done , and he liveth ; and his will that it shall die , and it dyeth , or returns to what it was : he withdraweth his communicated power , and man ceaseth . [ The Spirit shall return ] the communication , power , or faculty of life shall cease : [ to God that gave it ] to him that communicated , or gave it , in whom we live , move , and have our being : no otherwise man's spirit ( or life ) returns to God that gave it : he taketh away the breath , and the creatures die , and return to their dust , Psal . 104.29 . for the life of man is even a vapour that appeareth for a little time , and then vanisheth away . Jam. 4.14 . 

Object . 15.  And they stoned Steven , calling upon God , and saying Lord Jesus receive my spirit . Act. ●7 . 59 . 

Answ . This is a commendation of his life or being into the hands of God , in whom with Christ our lives are hid , Col. 3.3 . as a full assurance of hope and faith in the Resurrection , that when Christ who is our life , should appear , we also might appear with him in glory : For God is not the God of the dead , but of the living : for all live unto him , Luke 20.38 . And thus , and no otherwise , was his spirit commended , or returned to him that gave it , whose spirit goeth forth , & we are renewed , Psal . 104.30 . answerable to that of the two witnesses , in whom the spirit of life from God , after they had lain dead three days and an half , entered into them , and they stood upon their feet . 

Object . 16.  God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life , Gen. 2.7 . Ergo , man hath an immortal soul . 

Answ . then so is the soul of a Beast ; for Solomon saith , their breath is all one , Eccl. 3.19 . and David reckoning up the creatures , and man amongst them , saith indifferently of them all , God hideth his face , and they are troubled ; he taketh away their breath , they die , and retrun to their dust , Psal . 104.29 . and this is further amplified in Gen. 1.33 . to every thing in the Earth wherein there is a living soul , etc. and cap. 7.21 , 22. all flesh died , in whose nostrils was the breath of life : and Num. 31.28 . all which make no difference betwixt them , but as the one dyeth , so dyeth the other , and man hath no pre-eminence above a beast : For what man is he that liveth , and shall not see death , or deliver his soul from the hand of the grave ? Selah . Psal . 89.48 . 

Object . 17.  And it came to pass the Beggar died , and was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom , etc.  Luke 16. from the 22. to the end . 

Answ . There was never such a man as Dives or Lazarus , or ever such a thing happened , no more than Jothams' Trees did walk and talk , Judg. 9.8 . but it was a Parable , to prove , that nothing is more effectual for conversion , than the ordinary preaching of the Word by the true Ministers or Ambassadors of God ; such as Moses , and true Prophets of old ; and as Christ , his Apostles , and Prophets , and true ministers since . Further , the consequence concerning the soul is but drawn from the literal sense , in which sense I shall deny it canonical Scripture ; for it makes in that sense more for bodies then the souls present being in Heaven or Hell , v. 23 , 24. & maketh Abraham the Father of the Damned , vers . 24 , 25 , 27 , 30. and verse . 22.  Dives died and was buried ; and yet vers . 23. he lift up his eyes being in torment , and seeth Abraham , etc. and verse . 25. he cried for Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger to cool his tongue ; which in the literal sense thus applicated , must needs be contradictory , unless his eyes , tongue , and Lazarus finger was not buried , or their souls had corporeal corpulent members ; which to conceit is ridiculous : Therefore , from this place the Resurrection of the body before the day of Judgement ( even as soon as a man is buried ) may better be proved , than such a present Soulary entrance into Heaven or Hell.  

Object . 18.  By which also he went , and preached to them in prison . 

Answ . [ By which ] that is , by that whereby he was quickened , or raised from the dead , his divine Spirit , as the foregoing words ( whereon the sense of those depend ) doth evidence , vers . 18.  Christ once suffered , etc. dead in flesh , but quickened by the spirit , ( verse . 19 ) by which also he went , etc.  So that he went and preached by that , whereby he was quickened or raised : Therefore , the preaching here meant , was not by that which was raised , but by that which did raise ; which was ministerially , as the following words further evidence , showing to whom he preached , even those which were disobedient in the days of Noah , on whom the long-suffering of God waited while the Ark was a preparing : those were the spirits here meant , the wicked of those days , which are now in prison , that is , dead , or imprisoned in the Elements . Here the grave or death is called a prison , as indeed it is , for therein all that die are reserved in the chains of death ( the Elements ) not to be delivered till Judgement , rev. 20.13 . according to Job 3.18 . there the prisoners rest together . 

Object . 19  Joh. 11.26 . Whosoever liveth and believeth on me , shall never die . 

Answ . [ Whosoever liveth ] doth not in this place import the state of this life ; for should it , believers should not die this death : but relateth to the state or life at the Resurrection ; as the foregoing words , on which the sense of these depend , evidence , viz. I am the Resurrection , and the life : he that believeth in me , though he were dead , yet shall he live , ( to which these words are annexed ) And whosoever liveth , & believeth in me , etc. which is to say , Every believer , though dead , shall live , or be raised again ; and living or raised again , shall never die any more ; that is , shall scape the second death , Joh. 5.24 . 

Secondly , This life may be reckoned from the action of belief : for God calleth things that are not , as if they were , Rom. 4.17 . yea all , even the dead , live unto him , Luke 20.38 . And so the believer never dyeth in God's account . Rom. 14.7 , 8 , 9  None of us liveth to himself , and none of us dyeth to himself : for whether we live , we live unto the Lord ; and whether we die , we die unto the Lord : whether we live , therefore , or die , we are the Lords : for this end Christ both died , and rose , and revived , that he might be Lord both of the dead and the living . 

Object . 20.  Therefore glorify God in your body , and in your spirits , 1 Cor. 6.20 . 

Answ . Before , he called the body the Temple of the holy Ghost , verse . 29. and verse . 15. the members of Christ ; which needs must be the whole man , and not his bare carcase : for in death who can praise the Lord ? in it can be no habitation for the holy Ghost , and therein were they to glorify God : to make Christ the head of such members , were to make God , the God of the dead and not of the living : therefore , by body and spirit , is meant whole man , aiming at a thorough and perfect sanctification , as well in that which respecteth thought , [ the spirit ] as in that which respecteth action , [ the body : ] inwardly to glorify God , as well as outwardly to flee fornication , etc.  

Object . 16.  I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God , etc. and they cried with a loud voice , etc. rev. 6.10 , 11.  

Answ . They were such souls as lay under the Altar slain , or sacrificed , or as verse . 11. hath it , were killed ; these therefore being dead souls , or martyred Saints , their cry must be as the cry of the blood of Abel : And the like vision of dead Saints confirms it , as , cap. 20. vers . 4 , 5.  And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus , and they lived , and reigned with Christ a thousand years : but the rest of the dead lived not again till , etc. whence it is plain , that he beheld the Resurrection , or restoration of life unto dead souls , even of them that were beheaded , but the rest lay dead , or lived not again till , etc.  

Thus much of illegitimate Objections from Scripture : Now to the probation hereof from Procreation or Generation , and as near as I can to resolve all occurrent Objections thereon , that shall confront . 

CHAP. v. Of procreation , how from thence this Mortality is proved . 

IT is supposed ( as I conceive ) by none , that what naturally proceedeth from Man simply by the course of nature , can be immortal , but must first taste of mortality : And therefore there are two sorts of Opinions to maintain this Heathenish Invention about the soul , whereon its immortality is grounded , which I shall chiefly encounter : the one , that it is created , and infused at the conception , and so only God's work . The other , that it is concepted by the woman through the concurrence of the seed of both sexes , but not simply by the course of nature , but by the supernatural and extraordinary assistance or efficacy of God in conception more than in other creatures : and so partly man's , and partly God's work . But that I may utterly demolish the structure of this Invention , I shall turn up the foundation of each kind in its place : But first I shall speak a word or two in general of Procreation itself . 

That whole man is generated by man , Observe : That as the whole Tree is potentially in the seed , and actually in time springeth from it ; or as many grains of wheat are in one grain virtually , and perfectly actual in time : so in the seed of mankind , is whole man potentially , and wholly actual in time ; or all Adam's succession , which in time are propagated , were wholly in him , life and limbs , or as 't is more common , soul and body . So that whatsoever in time is actual by procreation , it was at first potentially wholly in its original . 

Further , Generatum sequitur naturam generantis ( he begat a son in his own image , Gen. 5.3 . ) is not not only philosophically , but Theologically true , Mat. 7.16 . Job 4.14 Therefore mortal Adam must beget mortal children in his own likeness , soul and body , except the soul was no part of his likeness : For that which is immortal cannot generatively proceed from that which is mortal , as Christ saith , that which is born of the flesh is ( as itself is , corruptable mutable ) flesh , John 3.6 . so then by this mortal flesh cannot be generated an immortal spirit , or soul that can subsist by itself dissolved from the flesh ; for if it should , in that act it should go beyond itself , which is impossible ; and thereby more should be done by man and woman in generation , than God did or could do in the creation ; for he neither did , or could create any thing greater , purer , or more excellent of nature than himself , and such as could subsist without him . But if this doctrine be true , ( as Woolner in his Original of the soul averreth ) fleshly man by a fleshly generation , or mixture of the seed of both Sexes doth beget or conceive something greater , purer , and more excellent than himself ; an immortal substance , an Angelical entity , the Soul , that can subsist without the flesh by which it is : which is as fire without light , earth without heaviness , grosseness , etc. should be , by which they are : and further , the Effect to be prior dignitate , precedent to the Cause , as if a man because a creature , should be before his Creator . But if it be Replied , that the soul is generated by the soul , as the body by the body ; I answer , then there must be He-souls and She-souls : for without Sexes is no generation . 

But now to the first sort , who say it is by infusion , or as the saying is , Creando infunditur , & infundendo creature . 

To which I Answer , that in conception there is corruption or marring , according the proverb , Corruptio unius est generatio alterius : so that if it be by conceiving or creating infused , and by infusion concepted or created , that is as much to say , it is made in the marring , and marred in the making ; or , infused in the marring , and marred in the infusion : whence followeth , that it is neither conceived , created , nor infused ; neither made , nor marred : but must be , if it be , no man knows what , or how ; whether an Angel , a Beast , or a Monster , any thing , or nothing : Riddle me , riddle me what 's this ? a Soul ! a Soul ! creando infunditur , & infundendo creature ! 

Secondly , if the soul be a creature infused , than Christ did not take the whole manhood from the seed of the woman , but worse than a bare brutish body , a dead carcase : But Christ was made of the seed of the woman according to the flesh , Ram. 1.3 . Acts 2.30 . and was as we are , sin excepted , Heb. 14.15 . and this our Image he received wholly from the woman : Therefore receiving his whole humanity from her , the soul can be no infused creature . 

Thirdly , That which broke the Serpent's head was Christ's humanity : But the seed of the woman broke the Serpent's head . 

Ergo.  

Fourthly , If we consist of soul and body , and are not men without both , and receive not our souls from him , but are daily created : then Adam is the father of no man , 2.  Christ cannot be the Son of man , and so no Saviour , because thereby his manhood , constitutive part , even that which should make him man , could not be by the seed of the woman . 3.  So a man is as much a father of fleas and lice , which receive their matter from him , as of his children . 4.  Whereas God blessed man , and bid him , as the rest of the creatures in their kind , fill the Earth in his kind with men : then he commanded him to do more than he had given him power for : and so to content nature , and supply her imbecility to obey , is forced to a daily creation . 5.  then God finished not the Creation in six days , but rested before he had done creating . 

Fifthly , If the soul be infused , it must be at the conception , or after the conception : If at the conception , than every abortive conception hath an immortal spirit in it , and must rise again : If after , than there is growth before there is life , which is impossible ; for the soul is made the vegetive as well as the motive , sensitive or rational part : and if this immortal spirit be something else , than we are not conceived perfect men ; and as we are conceived , so are we born , trees , brutes , or I know not what , and afterwards are made men , if we be men at all : and so Infants that die in the womb , or in the birth , are little better than trees , and worse than beasts . 

Sixthly , If the soul be not generated with the body , but a creature infused into a dead body , for they say , the soul is forma formans , that giveth life and motion to the body : then it is lawful to be a Necromancer ; for Necromancy is nothing but putting a spirit into a dead body , and so it is but an imitation of God , and God the only Necromancer , and all the men in the word but Nigromatnick Apparitions , whose spirits when they have done the work for which they were put into the bodies , desert them , as other conjured Ghosts do . 

Seventhy , It is granted that the body considered merely sensitive cannot sin , and that the body is but an instrument , or as the pen in the hand of a Writer , to the Soul , whereby it acts and moves : Therefore , if the Soul come immediately from God , or there be an immediate work of his in its production , then of necessity , that immortal thing , and not our mortal flesh , is Author of all sin , and it only prone to all sin , and not the flesh , no more than a conduit , though a meet instrument to convey water , is the author , or fount of water , or prone to spring : And so God's immediate hand is the cause of all sin , that man had better been without this soul ; for it must needs be some damnable wicked spirit , or some Devil that God puts in him ; for such as the fruit is , such must the tree be : but the fruit is damnably wicked : Therefore , the Soul must be some damnable wicked thing : no marvel then if Reprobates must needs sin and be damned , since God infuses such a malignant Soul , that counsel's them with Jobs wife to curse God , and die , yea such a one as wholly works out their condemnation : This is as if a man should break his horses legs , and then knock out his brains for halting . If it be said the soul comes pure from God , and it is the body that corrupteth it ; I answer , that this to excuse God one way , makes him like the tyrant Mezentius , that bound living men to dead bodies , till the putrefaction and corruption of the stinking corpse had killed them . Besides , the mind may sin without the Action of the body , but not the body without the mind , for a man may covet in his mind , and not act with his body , and yet sin ; but if he do with his body , and not consent with his mind , he sinneth not : as for example , a man may accidentally and ignorantly kill a man by a blow , which was never intended or aimed at him , and yet he not guilty of murder : but if he intent it in his mind , though he never do it , he is guilty : Therefore the body may be made sinful by the soul , but not the soul by the body . 

Now to the other kind , who say , that this supernatural work by nature , is effected by God's special supernatural assistance , operating or applicated to this natural aptitude , in whose mutual concurrence this immortal substance is concepted , and in conception united to the flesh , the whole in the whole , and the whole in every part . 

To which I Answer , that there is no more special supernatural efficiency from God in man's procreation then in other creatures , but that special gift or natural instinct to every kind of creature given in the Creation to produce its kind , whether vegetative , sensitive , or rational , Gen. 1.25 . 1 Cor. 15.38 . for the gift or blessing is all one and the same , and alike unto all according to their kinds , as appears , Gen. 1.22 . God blessed the Fowls and Fish , saying , Be fruitful and multiply , and fill the waters in the Seas , and let the Fowls multiply in the Earth : And vers . 28. the selfsame he speaks of man and woman , And God blessed them , and said unto them , be fruitful , and replenish the earth ; and by this blessing , or Nature's general instinct equally unto all , men and all other creatures continue their multiplications and procreations : So that the Fowls , Fish , etc. have as great and special assistance as man in their conceptions and procreations , equally mediate and natural : Therefore , if by man's conception an Angelical immortal Soul is producted , so likewise is there the like in other creatures . The result of all which is this , that as Fish , Birds , and Beasts each in their kind procreate their kind without any transcendency of nature : So man in his kind begets man , corruptable man begets nothing but what is corruptable , not half mortal , half immortal ; half Angel , half man , but complete man totally mortal : for through mortal organs immortality cannot be conveyed , or therein possibly reside . 

If it be scrupled , that this destroyeth the hope of our faith ; I Answer , It doth but remove it from a false principle to a true , from a deceitful fancy to an infallible object , the Resurrection : For though I ascribe nothing actually to nature , but corruption , yet potentially I ascribe incorruption : as to the kernel of an Apple a Tree may not actually , yet potentially be ascribed : So I grant , that nature produceth the Seed , to which when she hath done her elementary work , even all that she can do , and in all things transient finished her course , even from that corrupted seed Christ supernaturally raiseth an incorruptable body , 1 Cor. 15.36 . thou fool , that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die : it is sown in corruption , it is raised in incorruption ; it is sown a natural body , it is raised a spiritual body : Therefore nothing of man can be immortal , but what first hath seen corruption . So that , if that which is made the better and most excellent part of Man , without which he is no MAN ( as is held ) titled the Soul , shall not see corruption , it shall not participate of the immortality purchased by Christ , but must needs perish , except there be Ens extra Deum , as that strange invented Entity must needs be : And so consequently , no MAN shall be saved : And as before it incurred this Absurdity , that the Souls of the Damned shall not perish , but stand as well as the Stative Angels : So by this , the Souls both of the righteous and wicked shall for ever cease , and never be immortalised at the Resurrection : And thence the denial both of Resurrection , Condemnation , and Salvation , Heaven , and Hell , God and Christ , is inavoydable : After rusheth in the Epicurean Blasphemy , Let us eat , and drink , for to morrow we die : And so , so many bellies , so many Gods , and no other . 

It is Objected , That the rareness of conception argues a supernatural immediate assistance essential , without which the soul cannot be . 

Answ . That cometh by a natural defect , and not by withholding of Gods immediate hand , else he should have a special and immediate hand in Adultery : And so Whoremongers and Adulterers set God a work to create Souls for their Bastards , which is to make God a slave to their lusts . 

Further , it is Objected , That God hath from eternity decreed concerning man above all creatures , both who should come into the world , and at what time : Therefore , accordingly he must have a work in man's conception above other creatures . 

Answ . no such thing followeth : for time and number may be appointed , and yet the due course of nature proceed , as well without as with an immediate assistance , towards man in his kind , as in Beasts in their kind . 

Moreover , Woolner in his Treatise on the Soul , pag. 115. saith , That the more spiritual parts , and chiefly the Soul is ( but partly mediately , partly immediately ) conceived at the first instant , or union of the seed of both Sexes : For by it ( pag. 127. he saith , ) the corporeal parts are prepared and perfected : Therefore , it must of necessity be at the first instant , or else no conception : And pag. 129.  That all Souls , as well of Beasts , as of men , are essentially as perfect at the first instant of conception as ever afterwards . And pag. 97. he saith , The Soul can live without the body , and cannot be corrupted by it . 

Answ . That then it followeth , If a woman miscarry , immediately after that very instant , that the Soul of that Effluction or unshapen deformed piece of congealed blood being immortal , must needs continue its immortality ; and that Effluction as well as perfect bodies , shall be raised again : for if degrees of corporal perfection hinder , than those that are born imperfect , as without legs , arms , or hands , or any other member , as diverse are , they shall never be raised again , and so out of the compass of Christ's death : and though it should be granted , that Christ's death is denied an Embryo , yet that souls immortality cannot be nullified ; for immortality once begun , must never have an end : and he saith , it cannot suffer with the flesh : therefore , if not with the whole mass of man's corpulency grown to its full perfection , much lesle with an Embryo , that is ten times lesle imperfect and invalid : for he saith , it is as perfect at the first instant as ever afterwards : therefore , it must be saved or damned ( if there be any for others ) but no man knows how or which way , except it can be proved , Christ died for bare souls , souls without bodies ; which will puzzle the cunningest soul that ever was made in the marring , and marred in the making . 

Further it is objected , Creatures propagated out of kind , as by buggery ; as , Apes , Satyrs , etc. are supposed , are not endowed with reasonable souls : Ergo , souls are created immediately , or however of necessity , God's superficient power is joined to the propagation thereof : 

Answ . As I will not altogether confidently affirm they have rational souls , so will I not altogether deny it : For in man it is some organical deficiency more or lesle , that is the cause , that some men are lesle rational than others ; for some have abundance of wisdom , and some are mere fools : and in children , whose Organs are not come to perfection , there is not so much as there is in an Ape : This premised , why in some measure , as far as by those improper Organs can be expressed , may they not be rational , though not in the same degree as is capable of God , as well as Infants who are as uncapable pro tempore as Apes ? But perchance , it will be replied , that then Christ died for Apes , as well as for Infants . I answer , Christ died not for the rational part separated from the material , nor the material from the rational , if there should be such Buggery-births , or if by that unnatural course they should meet in one , ( which is impossible , for the blessing of procreating any thing in its kind , is to the kind ) for that neither , but for the natural production by the conjunction of both Sexes legitimate from Adam , and not such unnatural by-blows : As for births out of kind , they come within the compass of the Curse , and cannot any ways claim privilege in the Restoration , but must expect with Thorns , Briers , and all manner of Vermin , and Filth which breedeth on corruption , to be done away , when mortality is swallowed up of life . For all other Creatures as well as man shall be raised and delivered from Death at the Resurrection : my Reasons and grounds for it be these . First , that otherwise , the curse in Adam would extend further than the blessing in Christ , contrary to the Scriptures : For as in Adam all dye , even so in Christ shall all be made alive , 1 Cor. 15.22 . For the wages of sin is death , but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord , Rom. 6.23 . Therefore , Death coming upon all the Creatures by the sin of Adam , no death being before sin , life shall come upon all by Christ . Secondly , the Beasts were not given man to eat in the Innocency , but to all flesh wherein was the breath of life was given the green herb for meat : Therefore , the death of the Beasts , etc. was part of the Curse , and so to be done away by Christ . Thirdly , If the other Creatures do not rise again , then Christ shall not conquer death , but when it is said , OH Death where is thy sting , OH grave where is thy victory ? it will be answered , In Beasts , because they are still captivated under its bondage : But as by one man death entered into the world , Rom. 5.12 . and by man came Death , by man shall come resurrection from Death ; and the last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death , and Death shall be swallowed up in victory , 1 Cor. 15.21 , 54.  Therefore Death shall not retain them , but they must be delivered out of its Jaws . Fourthly , these ensuing Scriptures do clearly prove it : Col. 1.15 , to the 23.  All things were created by him and for him , whether they be things in Earth , or things in Heaven : and be not removed away from the hope of the Gospel , which ye have heard , and which was preached to every Creature under Heaven : And Mar. 16.15 . Go ye into all the World , and preach the Gospel to every Creature : that is , Glad Tidings , life and Resurrection from the bondage of corruption to every Creature by Christ : therefore , is he said to be the Firstborn of every Creature , the First that 's born , or raised from the Dead : so that those whereof he is the First , must follow , that is , every creature , else could he not be the Firstborn from the Dead of them all . And rev. 21.5 . after the dissolution of all things , he saith , Behold , I make all things New : And Psal . 104.  David reckoning up Men , Cattles , etc. saith , thou takest away their breath , and they die ; thou sendest forth thy spirit , and renewest the face of the Earth : and Psal . 102. speaking of the Heavens , saith , as a vesture shalt thou change them , and they shall be changed : and Isaiah saith , in the New Earth the Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together , and the Lion shall eat straw like a Bullock : and Paul saith , Rom. 8.19 , 20 , 21.  The earnest expectation of the Creature waits for the manifectation of the sons of God : For the Creature was made subject to vanity , not willingly , but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope : because the Creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption , into the glorious liberty of the children of God : for we know that the whole Creation groaneth , and traveleth in pain till now . Therefore the Gospel or Glad Tidings is unto all ; all are under hope , and all things , men , beasts , etc. shall be made new , or restored at the Resurrection ; and so Death shall be swallowed up in victory , and mortality of life : or Death having given up her dead , shall be cast into the Lake , rev. 20.13 , 15.  Thus much by the by : Now to our matter in hand . 

But be it granted , that those births are not endowed with reasonable souls , yet doth it not follow , that God createth immediately the soul , or immediately assisteth nature in its production more than the body : for this is an instance out of kind● , therefore cannot expect the blessing of the kind , but be as itself is , unnatural and cursed : for to the kind is required Sexes of the kind , & thereto God hath given the blessing to beget its kind , as well for man to beget perfect man , as for the beasts to beget perfect beasts ; so that whatsoever is born of man naturally , is man , though one be ennobled with more excellencies than another . A born Fool would have been a better instance ; for if to them rational Souls were denied , it might be thought , Nature naturally begetteth mere irrational , brutish inhuman bodies , and rationality , or humanity , is a mere supernatural work . To prevent such a cavil , I answer , that by the Soularies grounds there can be no born fools : Infants new born , yea an Embryo should be as actually rational as men of ripeness of years ; for they say , the soul is rationality itself , and that rationality is no more of the body , than ink is of the pen ; and the soul is absolutely perfect at the first instant , yea 't is forma formans : therefore , naturam expellas , furca licet usque recurres , it is made action , which cannot but appear , for all action is apparent : and they say it is an immortal spirit , therefore cannot cease ▪ and if not cease , it must show itself : Now why are not Infants then as rational as others ? nay , let me ask one Question , If this endless soul be forma formans , the maker of our bodies , why have we not endless bodies ? for omne tale generat tale , every like brings forth its like ; so then , if one be immortal , the other must be immortal ; if one mortal , the other mortal . Secondly , I answer , that though some are fools from their birth , yet it doth not follow , that God's immediate hand is required to man's procreation , but rather the contrary : for imperfections in a thing argue the mediate generation thereof ; because no imperfection of any kind can come immediately from the hand of God : imperfections are accidental , or from the curse : therefore not of creation , but of procreation . 

Now seeing all this while we have had to do with this immortal Soul , we cannot find , or the Soularies tell what it is : such likewise is its residence ; for if we ask where it is ? they slap us i'th'mouth with a Riddle ; tota in toto , & tota in qualibet parte , the whole in the whole , and the whole in every part : that is , the whole immortal Soul in the whole body , and the whole Soul wholly in every part of the body . To which I answer , that this extends immortality or impossibility of death to the body ; for if immortality be in every part , than no part of man , from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot can be excepted ; so we are all Soul all over , and every part a whole Soul immortal : So that it must either be held to be ubiquitarie , which is an Attribute peculiar to God ; or else multiplicable by a corpulent division : and so , were a man minced into Atoms , cut into innumerable bits , there would be so many innumerable whole Souls , else could it not be wholly in every part . 

Monstrum horrendum , ingens ; cui quot sunt corpore crines , 
Tota vigiles Animae subter , mirabile dictu ! 


And thus the Riddle is unfolded . 

CHAP. VI Testimonies of Scripture to prove that whole man is generated , and propagated by Nature . 

That this is true secundum actum naturae , observe the sense of these ensuing Scriptures : viz.  

Gen. 1.17 , 18. comparted with the 22 vers . where man and beast have an equal blessing and charge to propagate their like . 

Eccl. 3.19 . there is no distinction betwixt them , etc.  

Gen. 17.7 . I will be thy God , and the God of thy seed after thee : here , by seed must be meant persons and not bare carcases : else he had been the God of dead clots , and not of living souls . 

Gen. 46.26 . All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt , which came out of his loins , etc.  

Job 31.15 . Did not he that made me in the womb make him ? and did not one fashion us in the womb ? Ergo , if his soul were immediately created , so was his body ; for he , that is , his Entity , person , even all that went to make him man , was form and shapen in the womb , both Epithets for procreation and not for creation . 

Job 10.10 , 11.22 . Hast thou not poured me out as milk , and curdled me like cheese ? thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh , and hast fenced me with bones and sinews , thou hast granted me life and favour , and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit . Here Job sets forth exactly the manner of man's procreation , from the act of generation even to his breathing : First , poured out as milk , that is , the seminary evacuation of both Sexes in conjunction : then curdled me like cheese ; that is , the changing of that to a grosser matter , congealed blood : then clothed me with flesh and skin ; that is , the incarnation of that condensed blood : then fenced me with bones and sinews , that is , that carnated matter was form into human shape , and grew into members : then grantedst me life : that is , began to breath : whence observe , that in ascribing the whole work to God , he doth ascribe it to one kind only , and not partly mediate , partly immediate ; for he ascribeth even the evacuation of seed in carnal copulation , and the conception of flesh and bones in as high a measure , ( yea , to take away all cavil , rather a greater , ) as he doth his life : poured , clothed , and fenced , imply a more absolute act then granting , which is but a sufferance , permission , or assenting : therefore , his conception was merely and wholly natural : according to that of David , Psa . 51.5 . Behold , I was shapen in iniquity , and in sin did my mother conceive me . And to this add that of Zach. 12.1 . The Lord formeth the spirit of man within him . Whence it is clear , that whole man flesh and spirit is a second act ▪ form in the womb ; otherwise flesh as well as spirit must be created , which all deny . 

Children are the blessing of the breast and womb , Gen. 49.5 . That came out of the Loins , Exod. 1.5 . Heb. 7.5 . the fruit of the body , Deut. 18.4 . came out of the bowels , 2 Sam. 10.11 . see Gen. 16.11 . & 38.25 . Mat. 1.18 . 

Gen. 5.3 . Adam begat a son in his own likeness . 

Psal . 139.15 , 16.  My Substance was not hid from thee , when I was made in a secret place , and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth : thine eyes did see my mass , yet being imperfect ; and in thy book all my members were written , which in continuance were fashioned , when as yet was none of them : whence is evident , that his whole Person was an act of nature in his mother's womb or secret place : what of him was in the Book of God's providence , he declareth , was made ( not created ) in a secret place , to wit , his substance or mass , all that went to the subject man ; and I hope the Soularies will not blot his Soul out of the Book of God's providence , or say it was no part of him . 

Luke 1.31 . thou shalt conceive in thy womb and bring forth a son : whence observe , that what she was to bring forth , she was to conceive , to wit , a son ; and none will deny , Christ was born complete man , in all things as we are , sin excepted : And if any scruple arise from Rom. 1.3 . He was made of the seed of David according to the flesh ; I Answer , That it is a distinction from other men , in respect of that anointing he received from the Father above his brethren and fellows . 

Gen. 4.1 . She conceived and bare Cain : see the like , cap. 38.3 , 4 , 5.  Judg. 13.3 , 5 , 7.  And Job 3.3 . There is a manchild conceived . And Gen. 17.6 . And Kings shall come out of thee . vers . 17. twelve Princes , shall he beget . And Judg. 8.30 . Gideon had 70 Sons out of his body begotten : And Num. 5.  then she shall be free , and shall conceive seed , and Heb. 11.11 . compared with Gen. 17.8 . and such like , plainly show man's procreation wholly natural . 

Joh. 3.6 . That which is born of the flesh , is flesh ; and that which is born of the spirit , is spirit : Here is the natural birth by nature , and the spiritual birth by grace declared each in his kind , the one a mere natural , the other a supernatural work : It is therefore inavoydablely true , otherwise the Soul cannot be saved ; for what is not born again cannot be saved , as the immediate words testify , except a man be born again , he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God : So then , the Soul as well as the body is born , that is , proceeds from the flesh , except we be born without it : wherefore , they are no more twain , but one flesh . 

I might declare , how Purgatory , Limbo Patrum , Infantum , Prayers unto dead Saints , to the Virgin Mary , and a World of suchlike fancies are grounded upon the Invention of the Soul ; but that I shall leave it to the conception of the ingenious . 

Thus having found Man's Foundation to be wholly in the Dust , from thence taken , and thither to return : Let this then be the use of all : That man hath not wherewith at all to boast , no more then of the dirt under his feet , but is provoked wholly out of himself , to cast himself wholly on Jesus Christ , with whom in God our lives are hid , that when he who is our life shall appear , we might also with him appear in glory , to whom be the honour of our immortality for ever , and for ever . Amen . 

There are many places of Scripture omitted , in this Treatise , which import man to be wholly mortal ; whereof I will here commend these few , to the serious consideration of all such as desire to find out truth . 

The Prophet Isaiah Prophesying of Christ , in chap. 53. vers . 10. saith , Yet the Lord would break him , and make him Subject to infirmities : When he shall make his soul an offering for sin , vers . the 11. he shall see of the travail of his soul , and be satisfied : vers . 12.  Therefore will I give him a portion with the great , and he shall divide the spoil with the strong , because he hath poured out his soul unto death , etc.  

By Saint Matthew it is also recorded , chap. 26. vers . 38.  then said Jesus to them , My soul is very heavy unto the death : Tarry ye here and watch with me ; speaking to Peter and the two sons of Zebedeus , ver . 37.  

rev. 16.3 . ( where it is Recorded ) And the second Angel poured out his Vial upon the sea , and it became as the blood of a dead man , and every living soul died in the sea . Psal . 66.9 . He holdeth our soul in life . 

[ Hear note , ] That Soul and Life are distinct ; the Soul of all are held in Life by Christ , else would they die . 

Psal . 22.29 . For all that go down into the dust shall bow before him , and none can keep alive his own soul . 

Ezek. 18.4 . The soul that sinneth , it shall die . 

Verse . 20.  The same soul that sinneth shall die . 

Job 33.18 . He keepeth back his soul from the pit , and his life from perishing by the sword . 

20.  So that his life abhorreth bread , and his soul dainty meat . 

22.  His soul draweth near unto the grave , and his life to the destroyers . 

28.  He will deliver his soul from going into the pit , and his life shall see the light . 

30.  To bring back his soul from the pit , to be enlightened with the light of the living . 

The diligent Reader is desired to correct the mis-quotations escaped in this little book , as followeth . 

Page 33. line 13. add Gen. 1. p. 34. l. 23. read 1 Cor. 15. p. 46. l. 21. r. Eccl. 3.19 , 20. p. 47. l. 6. r. 2 Tim. p. 48. l. 14. r. Psal . 88 p. 49. l. 5. add 4. p. 56. l. 10. r. Leu. 17.14 . l. 11. r. Gen. 9 p. 57 l. 7. r. Acts 2.31 . p. 59 l. 15. r. Phil. 1.23 , 24. p. 63. l. 6. r. Jer. 53.12 . p. 68 l. 2. r. rev. 19 p. 69. l. 16. r. Mat. 8.29 . p. 72. l. 22. r. prov. 15.24 . p. 93. l. 1. r. Object . 21. p. 98. l. 17. r. Heb. 4.15 . p. 118. l. 24. r. 11 , 12.  

The Postscript . 

IN some ancient Chronicles of England , we read of King Druis , so addicted to learning , that a Sect of Philosophers succeeded him , named , Druids ; and that this King , the better to encourage his Subjects without dread of death to fight his battles , taught them that their Souls were immortal , not subject to death . Hence as some think , came the opinion , that the Souls of men are immortal : but others conceive it to have another rise , namely , The general Doctrine of the Philosophers , being , That Virtue was to be rewarded , and Vice punished ; and these usually seeing Men to die without either punishment or reward , and being ignorant of any Resurrection , taught thence , that men's Souls ( after death ) remained alive , to receive the same : yet this was contrary to the judgement of many of the Ancients , who nevertheless deemed men to be wholly mortal , as is clearly proved by Pliny , in the 55 chap. of the 7 th' Book of his Natural History ; where treating of Ghosts , or Spirits of Men departed , he saith thus : viz. After men are buried , great diversity there is in opinion what is become of their Souls and Ghosts , wandering some this way , and others that ; but this is generally held , that in what estate they were before men were born , in the same they remain when they are dead : for neither Body nor Soul hath any more sense after our dying day , than they had before the day of their nativity : but such is the folly and vanity of men , that it extendeth still even to the future time ; yea , and in the very time of death flattereth itself , with fond imaginations , and dreaming of I know not what life after this : for some attribute immortality to the Soul ; others device a certain transfiguration thereof : and there be again , who suppose that the Ghosts sequestered from the Body have sense ; whereupon they do them honour and worship , making a God of him that is not so much as a man : as if the manner of men's breathing differed from that in other living Creatures ; or as if there were not to be found many other things in the world , that live much longer than men ; and yet no man judgeth in them the like immortality . But show me what is the substance and body , as it were of the Soul by itself ? what kind of matter is it apart from the body ? where lieth her cogitation that she hath ? how is her seeing , how is her hearing performed ? what toucheth she ? nay , what doth she at all ? how is she employed ? or if there be in her none of all this , what goodness can there be without the same ? but I would know , where she settleth , and hath her abiding place after her departure from the body ? And what an infinite multitude of Souls like shadows , would there be in so many ages as well past as to come ? Now surely those be fantastical foolish and childish toys ; devised by men that would fain live always , and never make an end . 

Qualis in novissimo vitae die quisque moritur , Talis in novissimo mundi die judicabitur . 

The Contens . 

CHAP. I Considerations from natural reason disproving the common opinions of the Soul , and proving Man wholly mortal . p. 1.  
CHAP. II Considerations from the creation , fall and resurrection , disproving the opinion of the Soul , imagining the better part of Man immortal ; and proving him , as a reasonable creature , wholly mortal . p. 28.  
CHAP. III Scriptures to prove this mortality . p. 41.  
CHAP. IU. 21 Objections extorted from Scripture answered . p. 58.  
CHAP. v. Of procreation , how from thence this mortality is proved . p. 94.  
CHAP. VI Testimonies of Scripture to prove that whole man is generated and propagated by nature . p. 117.  
FINIS . 





The Argument lies in fallen nature , for the dispute is not of creatures which kept their first station , but of man that is fallen from it . Acts 7.60 . and 13.36 . 1 These . 4.13 . and Psal . 76.6 . it is a Dead sleep . no Hell till the Resurrection .  Living Soul.  