The forbidden frvit . Or a treatise of the tree of knowledge of good & evil , of which Adam at the first , & as yet all mankind do eat death . 

Moreover , how at this day it is forbidden to every one as well as to Adam ; and how this tree , that is the wisdom of the serpent planted in Ada is that great image , and that many headed beast ; mentioned in Daniel and the Apocalypse , whom the whole world doth worship . 

Lastly , here is showed what is the tree of life , contrary to the wisdom , righteousness , and knowledge of all mankind : with a description of the majesty and nature of God's word . 

By August : Eluthenius . Translated out of Latin into English . 

Printed in the year , 1640.  

Chapter i. what is the tree of knowledge of good and evil . 

I will not much contend with them that would have the tree of knowledge of good and evil , acco•ding as it is in the scriptures to be a natural tree , which being planted in paradise , had that nature devinely given unto it , that who should eat thereof , their eyes should be opened to view themselves , and they be made gods , and so know both good and evil : perhaps God would teach Adam both inwardly and outwardly , and what he forbade or taught him inwardly in his heart , that he would propose outwardly to his eyes for greater testimony : but yet I desi•e of them , that they would grant this unto me , that as the thing was done outwardly , so the same to have happened inwardly in the heart of Adam , that there he was tempted by the seed of the serpent to have the guiding of his own will and nature , not to be so void of knowledge and action , as to be subordinate unto God . That i should so think , two reasons or causes do especially move me . 

The 1. is , that the seed of the woman was to break the head of the seed of the serpent ; but as a natural and living serpent , whose head was broken , of that seed we do not read of any : but as even then the seed of the woman was spiritually in the heart of Adam , so in the same manner was the seed of the serpent , for man at the first was create good , not of God but of nothing , and for that cause doth he turn himself always from God , and bend downwards to his own nothing and vanity again ; which nothing i with the ancient fathers , but especially Taulerus , do judge to be sin , Satan , death , & hell ; and this perhaps was that devil , inhabiting in Adam , as also in Lucifer . 

The other reason is this , which the scripture doth testify of the city of God and the heavenly Jerusalem , that paradise to be in us : but God alone and his omnipotent word is our paradise , the tree of life , and the temple wherein we inhabit , walk , serve , pray , &c. as we are on the other part the temple of God and his paradise . In like manner the beast ( Which even now the whole world both great and small ) do worship in their hearts , of which the scriptures make mention in the Apocalips , as also the tree of knowledge of good and evil is in us , for the exterior world , & whatsoever outwardly is to be seen or is done , is only an accident and a certain signifying figure of the true and interior nature : and there is nothing true in all those things which are seen with the eye , that is substantial ; for it behooveth that the form of this world perish , because it is nothing else but an imaginary world , and a figure of the right true eternal and by itself the constant world ; therefore it is expedient that all these things in their course be done over again , which throughout all the bible are related outwardly and significantly to have been done , and yet to this day after their manner , the history of the bible , Moses , and the prophets , are spiritually and truly of force , but all things are brought into the truth by Christ , and it it is expedient , that all the prophecies , which have been from the beginning of the world , which God hath spoken by the mouth of his saints , be again reiterated : therefore that tree was nothing else than the nature , will , knowledge , and life of Adam , whereof he ought not to eat . That is not to attribute any part of it to himself : but freely and willingly submit himself to God ; and know nothing but what God would know in him ; do nothing but what God would do in him ; speak nothing but what God would speak in him , &c.  Whereby without any impediment God Might exercise his kingdom , will , nature , and power in him , that being void of will , wisdom , and knowledge , he Might have nothing of his own , or arrogate any thing to himself , this God would , this was pleasing to him , and thus he commanded . To this opinion the German divinity ascents : theologia Germanica , 3470. cap. which saith that this tree is nothing else but our own will & knowledge , of which alone in the earthly paradise of the world of our hearts , we are not to eat , but acount it is forbidden , unless we desire to die , or eat death from it . And now when Adam was fallen , and had eaten of this tree , then was it planted in his heart , & the same was derived into all his boughts and fruit , so that the same case , word , precept , and interdict , is common to all his posterity , we all have eaten death , whosoever are in Adam , and this uncorrected poison have we received from the serpent , being evil eggs of an evil bird . 

Hence May every man easily perceive , how each man is the greatest enemy to himself , and what he ought to esteem of himself , his will and understanding , wisdom and knowledge , since it is the counsel , seed , wisdom , knowledge and head of the serpent , which by Christ is to be broken in our hearts : it behooveth that all things ( Which circumcision in the old , and baptism in the new covenant doth signify ) which are hereditary and natural from Adam should die in us : that we should labour to unlearn , and put of all things , as if they were death and the devil ; that is our will , wisdom , and righteousness , &c. with which as with figleaves Adam strove to cover himself : for this is sin , and the sting of sin and death , that is to eat of this forbidden tree , and to arrogate any thing to a man's self , as his will , nature , and understanding , or himself ; but alas , alas who knows this , or believes this , who abandons or is weary of his own will , understanding , or knowledge , when will men give a farewell to them : give a Farewll say i , why every one delights himself in his own imaginations , & sweetly slumbering recreats his soul in his own wisdom , knowledge , works , &c. the tree is fair to the eye , and pleasant to the taste : here all mankind as Adam himself do taste death ; but yet no man knows , no man thinks of this , but every man judgeth it to be right , and the flesh esteemeth it to be the tree of life . That is to follow its own pleasure and opinion of good , which is false : to know much , to find out much , to learn many sciences , and finally to become a God ; neither do any consider , that this was Adam's estate and morsel , that bitter morsel of death . 

How do we speak and talk of Adam's misery , and yet not mark that the same is fresh in us ; we can talk of his eating , and wonderfully detest it , when notwithstanding we do the same that he did . 

Oh man , who art thou that thus preparest a staff for thine own shoulders , and pronouncest a sentence against thyself , while thou condemnest thy father Adam , and yet considerest not that thou thyself art ensnared in his net . 

Here propound and consider what our will is , our knowledge is , our wisdom is , &c. in which we so insolently boast ourselves , yea and by which we imagine and suppose that we can come unto God , when notwithstanding it is nothing , nothing else but death itself , and the bitter fruit of the forbidden tree . 

Is there any amongst all men who understand this ? Who can away with this ? To deny , put off , fearful to rest in their own will , wisdom , knowledge , &c.  No : do not most choose and extol them as true gold and eternal life , when notwithstanding they are nothing but eternal death . 

Chap. ii why the tree of knowledge of good and evil is mortal & forbidden . 

This May be easily answered by that which hath been before related . God ( As right it is ) would be in us both Lord and Master ; and in the same , will work , do love , omit , think , &c. therefore should we be free from all these things of this kind : so that we should know , or do nothing , but what God himself would know and do in us . Which reason even against its will , doth confess to be equity to him that concludes and proves it by truth ; for what is more equal than that the potter have so full a dominion over his pots , that none of them challenge any the least authority to themselves , since they were not their own makers ; the same is our condition : God alone is called the god of understanding , knowledge , wisdom , &c. wherefore he alone will know all things in us , and by consequence nothing but himself ; if therefore any man will taste of the forbidden fruit , and so know himself , be made a God , be of himself , stand upon his own bottom , and so be his own god ; it is necessary that together with Lucifer , he fall into the hell of death , and like the dragon be cast down from heaven , because the fruit of that forbidden tree is death . Wherefore God would know only himself in us , and for that cause would have one to know no other science , esteeming this only necessary to life : and will teach the same to us , it so be we will obediently attend him : that is know only God , praise him , pray to , and hear him , which things i say he himself would work in the obedient : for this cause the wise man saith : ( wisdom 5. ) 

Lord to know thee and understand thee is all righteousness . 

in which he justifies many , and by consequence much more his own : let not the wise man boast himself in his wisdom , nor the strong man in his strength , but in this let every man boast that he knows me , 

Isay . 53.  Ier. 9  

which thing God by the mouth of his own Christ , ioh. 17. calleth eternal life ; for from this knowledge , root , and tree of life , proceeds all whatsoever can be called good or is truly good ; this is the only And true key of David , which so openeth that no man shutteth , &c.  

Chap. iii of the abuse of all things , how all things are unclean to the unclean flesh : yea those things which in themselves are clean ; and wherefore that curious flesh desireth to know much ; and on the contrary , how men ought to know nothing but God , and for God , and use all things in God . 

That lost nature of man , who in the scripture is called the flesh , is an instrument so impotent to all things , so vile , & obscure , that it knows neither to have , speak or do any thing , but abuseth and defileth it by touching , because he converts all things ( Which are from God , in whom truly they are ) to himself as his proper own : although he ought never to be his own . No not in that which is his own , but therein to be subject to God . Neither ought he to challenge to himself that wisdom and knowledge that is in him ; but to have all things ••se in his god , as if he himself had them •••t . But this he doth not ; but arrogates ••mselfe to himself , and will needs be , ••ve , and know himself , and this is the fall •nd degeneration of Adam , and his posteri•• , in , and with all things with them . 

Again , the true and only use with , and •n all things , is thus : God would that Adam •hould know nothing but what he would •now in him , should be nothing but what •e would be in him ; should do nothing but what he would do in him ; should have nothing but what he would have in him ; this would not Adam , but all those things •e arrogated to himself , as his own , or •ather he himself would be all these things ; this is the fall of Adam , and the abuse of all things in all things , by all mankind , to the •nd of the world . 

The abuse is , i say , to arrogate any thing to man's self , as his own , & not to possess the same freely , as though he had them not ; but to steal and use them from God , in and •o himself . As for example : if having money , wife , children , knowledge , life •t self , yea myself , i challenge these to my •elfe as my own . 

But since God exacts them , if follows the i would therefore detain them , and as mu•• as in me is , not yield them unto God , b• knit my mind unto them , that i May keep defend , and never loss or forsake them ( When notwithstanding they are God's an• not mine ) this is the fall of Adam and b• theift , being the abuse of all things inbred i• the flesh : until man be translated into  new kind of estate or condition , wherefore it is behooveful that we be born a new• do vomit up the fruit of the tree o• knowledge of good and evil : and al• these things which we having stolen from God as thieves , do challenge to ourselves and so forgetting them restore them again• to God ; this truly is the resurrection and conversion of Adam ; and by this means alone shall the fall of Adam be repaired & amended . 

Therefore the true and only use of all things , known alone to the regenerate and new man is this : that i be altogether free from all things , and alone subject to God : and being void of name , will , and knowledge , etc , remain nothing in myself , no• vindicate , deliver , or claim any thing to myself ( Because whatsoever i have , am , know , do , &c. all are of God , ) no more than the cow doth for her milk , the tree for it fruit , the bird for its long ; but wholly referring all things to God , and have know , do •ove , and be nothing but in him ; thus the redeemed , free , and perfect Christians , have , know , do , &c. all things they possess , wife , children , life , knowledge , wisdom , substance , &c. yea and themselves altogether freely in the Lord : neither do they attribute any thing to themselves ; even as if they were nothing , had nothing , knew nothing ; for they know that God it is , who is , hath , knows , and doth all those things which they are , know , or do ; so the Christian hath his wife in the Lord , that is doth not challenge her to himself as his own , but freely designeth her to God , whose she is , and from whom she is lent unto him , whom he is willing to restore whensoever it shall please God to requir her , & as he never challengeth her to himself as his own , even so he ever enjoys her in God , and in , and for God , loves her ; this Paul & David calls it , to sing , rejoice , marry , & have in the Lord : that is to reduce all things unto God , in him , know , love , have , be , do all things , neither detract any thing from God as my proper own and right . 

And whosoever have not thus their knowledge , wife , children , and themselves in the Lord , they offend in this : because they love them , it being a carnal love out of God ; and so far are all things unclean to the unclean , that even his prayers are sin unto him , yea his praises of God , fasts , orations , supplications , God despiseth according to the prophet : and although he be bountiful to the poor , yet he doth it in vain . Briefly , what he doth , he doth it in vain , it is not pleasing but displeasing unto God : whether he love or hate his wife , children , and neighbours , whether he chide or pray , all things are unclean unto him , wife , children , fields , lands , money , poverty , riches , fame , infamy , life , deathknowledge , learning , yea God himself . And lastly , he is unfit for any thing that is good . By himself , he is evil , sinful , and nothing . And what show of goodness soever is in him , it is stained by an hypocritical eye and affection ; therefore it 's no matter what he hath , knoweth , or doth , he is a vessel of no price , an evil tree ; unprofitable for any good work , since both his mind and conscience is depraved . 

Therefore before all things it is necessary , that with Nicodemus they be born again , that all things with them May be •n new unto them , the flesh must be changed into the spirit , & so cease to be flesh . For it is so impure and every way desirous of its own gain , and so infected and depraved with the poison of sin , that it draweth all things to itself , seeketh itself in all things , and arrogateth that to itself as its own , which it knoweth , loveth , or doth , and hath all things under a false pretence , & out of a love to itself . Neither doth it love any thing but what is pleasant and profitable for itself . But a Christian loveth an unprofitable , sick , and loathsome wife for God , and hath her not for his pleasure or profit only , but for God's will & pleasure . 

The natural and fleshly man doth nothing but out of a love to himself , and whatsoever he doth , he hath an eye and reflecteth upon himself , and in what he sees , he can find to delight himself in , he is willing to meddle with that . 

Hence it is that the house of sorrow , poverty , banishment , troubles , sicknesses and reprehensions , and whatsoever he sees harsh unto him , he hates no less than the devil doth the cross of Christ Jesus ; but whatsoever is excellent , great , pleasant , beautiful , &c. to this he cleaves as fast as the clay to the wheel ; whereby he May enjoy what he saw and desired in them . 

Briefly , he doth nothing but out of a love to himself , and in what he doth he challengeth the chief part to himself ; i say , that in all his actions both with God and man , he respects nothing but his own profit and pleasure , which if he be deprived off , he loseth his cheerfulness and alacrity of spirit , and becomes sorrowful & desists to work any further , what therefore can be done by such a man as this but what is unclean . 

But the regenerate man being born of God ▪ doth quite contrary in all his actions , he is desirous of the common profit , being altogether so affected and disposed as God his father ; he doth nothing but most freely subjected unto God , suffieth him to do and care for all things in him ; so that it follows that in this man is the mere nature & work of God ; and he or rather God in him repairs to the humble poor , sick , and to those that are in the house of sorrow , to help and comfort them : by whatsoever God hath either given him , or doth work in him as his substance , milk , and consolation , and in all those things he looks upon no other thing but only God ; who rather in him only looks upon himself ; neither is it the man , but God in the man , who communicateth to other necessities , loves , prays , hairs , whorships , honours , wills , and possesseth . 

Thirdly , Adam would know , and therefore labours for much knowledge , and so eats of the forbidden fruit , that he May live and become a great one , even God ; and for this only end the whole world now a days applies itself to all studies ; because it desires not to die in obscurity and oblivion , but to live and flourish , not in the lower degrees of estimation , but in the chiefest seat of reputation and honour , and with all to know all things that possible it can , that so it May be made famous , and thereby be glorified and delighted therein ; wherefore every day he works more and more to increase his knowledge , by which he May be more and more eminent , greater , and more like unto God ; that if it were possible to know more than God , that with Lucifer be Might be equal with him ; but that this ambition was the fall of Lucifer no man will consider ; but every man in those prosecutions , disputations and studies for knowledge seeketh for life , when indeed there is in them nothing but bitter death ; which both in Lucifer , as also in Adam most manifestly doth appear . 

Truly it is a wonder that of this forbidden tree of death ; every man should be so much desirous to eat ; God's will is that we know nothing , but what he will know , write , and teach in us ; and that being void of all knowledge , prudence & wisdom in ourselves , we become fools , we remain under him as fools and babes ; but we busy ourselves about the obtaining of many thousands of sciences , and treasure them up unto ourselves , as if in them our life consisted , that like to God we are ignorant of nothing , and all flesh desireth rather to be like unto God then to Christ . 

But on the contrary , God's will it is , that before this bee , we as Christ was , be deprived of every thing that is our own , and be wholly subject unto him : have , know , do , love , be nothing , but what God hath , knows , doth , loveth , is in us ; for by this privation and denial , will God draw us unto himself , make us like God , and teach all men wisdom in him , and not out of themselves . 

Therefore the knowledge of Christ in men is quite contrary unto this ; for he hath known nothing , doth , or wills to know nothing , but only God , this is his rejoicing , for this only cause doth he learn sciences , or rather doth God in him ; and to this with all his endeavour and strength doth he apply himself : that as in Adam he was made something , even so in Christ and with Christ he May be brought to nothing again ; and all his knowledge and sciences , even as it were foolishness & deadly poison , he May vomit up again , & esteem as nothing ; that he May wipe out of the tables of his heart all human arrogancy , having action , knowledge and science : to the end that nothing May remain there , but only that which God teacheth and by his own finger writeth . 

Briefly , a true Christian is a certain bare naked thing , who with Socrates knows nothing but this , that he knows nothing ; in these blessed and unknowing fools , God will know all things , if so it be , man know how to empty himself , and to cast away the baseness of his old rags ; but the fl•s• for this only cause doth learn that it May be something , or rather be all things , know , have , and do all things ; whereas the spiritual man learns only for this cause , that before God he maj be made nothing to himself ▪ & all other creatures whatsoever , that thereby God May be all things in him : know , have , do , love , and live in him ; this is behooveful to be known ; this is the true use of all things , and for this only end ought we to labour to know any thing . 

But every fleshly minded man , who belongs to the kingdom of Satan , and lies captrivated under his power , thinks far otherwise ; and defendeth quite contrary ; and therefore is in the sight of God foolishness , wickedness , sin , and Satan ; from whence it is that he esteemeth their wisdom to be foolishness , their life to be death , and righteousness sin , accounting their love no better than hatred . 

Fourthly , the natural man hath many goods , wife , children , life , riches , knowledge , wisdom , will , glory , honour , name , and all things as his own proper , these he arrogates to himself ; to these he applies his mind ; these are pleasant , profitable , and dear unto him . But if they be taken from him , and God exact his own , than the thief appears , neither will he willingly send them again : he turns himself , and seeketh for all safegards and ways of escape , and means whereby he May retain them still , and award God the proper owner of them , who now exacts them of him : the whole world lies sick in this misery , and those things that are God's , are abused by men . And what is common to all , or rather accommodated from God , he labours as much as in him lies to make it his own , and whensoever he is to restore it again , he doth it very unwillingly . 

But if it be so , that that which he hath stolen from God , is now no longer profitable or delitefull unto him , he than surrenders it of his own accord . And if it so be , God giveth it again into his own bosom , and if it be God's will , he shall retain it longer , yet will he not retain it , if he be able to resist it , by compulsion ; if he have it , it is with great resistance , so that before God he rather wilful casts them away , then retains them . 

So is it that the flesh , which hath all things out of God , offends in all ; and because it apprehends all things out of God , it necessarily follows , that although it have all things , yet hath it nothing . For what can it have who wanteth God , the essence of all things , and in whom all things subsist : surely they can be no other than like tantilus sicicus , & Medea's . again , what can he want who hath God , and in him all things , since that God is all in all . 

Hence it is , that often times those that seem to have all things , have truly nothing , and those that have nothing , May truly be said to have all things . 

On the contrary , the new man hath nothing but only God , wherein he can glory ; neither doth he any way claim any thing to himself but God ; as for that which God gives him , he useth it for God's sake as his gift and reward , ready to render it every moment , as it shall please God to exact it ; for he can willingly restore that which he did never claim as his own , but as God did give , or rather lend it unto him ; so that he willingly permits God at his pleasure to assume it from him . Briefly , he useth all things as the traveller doth his inn , or a friend money , committed to his custody , ready every hour to restore it back . 

This Paul terms so to have any thing as not to have it , or as though thou hadst it not : ( Which in the eyes of the world is accounted mere folly ) that is that thou arrogate nothing unto thyself ; offend in nothing willingly , forsake all things and with God ( As a true wife with her husband have all things common ) wife , children , money , life , and all things else he loveth in God , and for God ; and therefore keeps them , loves them , hath them , and takes them as lent from God ; ready to yield them to God again , whensoever he requires them ; all the gifts of God , as wife , children , and all other things he loveth only for the giver's sake , & the giver above all his gifts ; and although some things are contrary to his nature , as the cross , death , exile , &c. yet he loveth all things alike , and this it is to have , know , love , and marry in the Lord . 

But the world and worldly minded men , are carried headlong unto the gifts of God , as the sow unto the dunghill ; never do they any whit respect the giver but the gift ; with the which they commit adultery , challenging by right unto themselves ; and so long as it is either pleasant or profitable unto them , so long they dearly esteem it : and willingly will not permit God to have it again ; whatsoever is contrary unto them therein , that they unwillingly suffer , though it come by divine providence ; unto them ; for incontinently they look about them which way they May pull their necks out of the yoke : and therefore whatsoever they undertake , do , speak , &c. that they altogether abuse ; and in the abuse it is altogether unfit for any good : until they cease to be that which they are , and being translated into Christ , become in him new creatures . 

Here it will avail nothing to patch up with God , for if thou stop one hole , or fill up one crevist , an other will presently be made ; therefore it is necessary that men be born again , and altogether forget this tree of knowledge of good & evil . And briefly , be quit contrary to what he is or hath been . He is flesh born of flesh unto death , and therefore it is behooveful , that he be made spirit born of spirit unto life . Which before he be all things are unclean unto him ; as he is himself , although all things in themselves are very good ; yet are they perverse & evil unto him , as all things seem blue to him that looks upon them through a blue perspective : all things degenerates into the nature of the possessor , and therefore all things by Adam are made vanity , although by themselves ( As ever they have been ) they are good : for all food is savoury according to the pallet & temperature that receives it : even so is every thing according as he that possesseth and hath it , is clean to the clean , unclean to the unclean ; it cannot be otherwise but that all things be unjustly done , loved , prayed for , known , and retained ; which an unjust man doth love , pray for , know , and retain , as the very words themselves declare ; for how can it be that a wicked man can do any thing justly , a foolish man speak any thing wisely , an unclean man do any thing purely , a lying man speak any thing truly . 

Fiftly , the natural man , as before hath been said , is flesh , born of the flesh , altogether of an unclean nature , perverse , & adulterous , the servant of Satan sprung of the seed of the serpent , seduced and turned away by his word , and the tree of knowledge ; & so infected with poison , that betwixt Lucifer and Adam there is no difference : for as all true Christians are of Christ the sons of God , gods & God himself , so are all the sons of the devil , the devil , being of the same kindred & offspring , appertaining to the same kingdom and covenant , as Princes and subjects to the same , being all in the same estate of condemnation , neither is there any remedy to prevent this jail ; but that a man put of the old man , so as he be no longer man , but a new offspring & creature born of God . Hence we May easily gather what is the natural prudence , justice & knowledge of man , to wit , foolishness , sin and enmity unto God ; because that all flesh is an enemy unto God , friends unto Satan , and altogether of the same wit , nature , will , & birth , & as it were his flesh & blood ; in so much as he is nothing but an enemy unto God ; can perceive nothing that is divine ; would be nothing but with out God , or rather his own god . 

Attributing all that is good to himself , as Adam and Lucifer did , the father of the flesh ; these are the fruits of the forbidden tree . 

But the Christian is born of God , is a spirit and life , altogether of divine nature , and nothing else but the image of God ; or if you will a visible and corporal God ; who being made one with God , is of the same nature : rich in love , desirous of the common profit ; attributing nothing to himself ; like to God ; free , strong , void of propriety , ambition , and anger . 

Briefly , or in a word , whatsoever can be said or May be said of God , May in its kind be said of the true Christian , since now it is not , he that lives but Christ lives in him : not now he is any thing , but God is all things in him : that is , whatsoever he speaks , teacheth , hath , wills , &c. and although they unwillingly carry the old man about them , yet never do they live unto him , but always contrary , earnestly endeavouring themselves against him , until they have quit put him out . 

Therefore to conclude this chapter , the true use of all things is known only to the sincere Christians , and the abuse to the natural man : not yet justified , living in himself : who can neither use , speak , teach , do , love , know , have , or not have any thing truly ; but with all hath a defiled , both conscience & mind . 

Hence it is that he is altogether unfit for any good work , like a black collier ; and in all his actions like a stage player , foolish , blind , dumb , deaf , abscene , and wicked . In a word , whatsoever evil man hath , or title can be invented , it 's proper unto him , until he return from the tree of knowledge of good and evil ; unto the tree of life , and eating thereof , and he be delivered from the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of light : otherwise the flesh doth always retain its proper nature , and hath in all things a false and ungodly cause and end , for which it doth every thing that it doth . In a word , he altogether aims at himself , yea under a pretence of God ; although he think himself to know , love , and desire God only for God , without any respect had to himself . No man hath yet truly learned to know himself , the flesh being so cunning and crafty to excuse itself , no man knows whether or no he sins in all his works , so unsearchable is the craftiness of the heart ; yea no man truly understands , that in all his works , as in his loving , doing , speaking , knowing , praying , giving , willing , having , possessing , &c. he mortally sins , until he be redeemed and pulled out of the dregs of Adam , & translated into Christ , he become a new creature ; of which things read Paul & Boch•us , de consolalatione philosophiae , the third book and the tenth proof : how we must live unto God , and so be made blessed in him . 

Chap. iv. how man being of God could sin ; and what it was that moved him to sin . 

Adam was not taken out of God , or made of a spirit , but of nothing of the earth ; if he had been taken out of God , he could never have fallen by sin ; as those that are born of God cannot sin , jo. 3. but God create him of nothing , and then left him to himself and his own arbitrament whether he could return to his own nothing again , or according to the order of his kind be drawn unto God . Sin in man and in the devil is nothing else but that they do avert themselves from the condition of their creation , and that which they are unto their vanity and nothing again ; the essence of man and Satan is very good , put this is their nature acquired in their fall , that they strive to be not that which they are , to wit , nothing , but that which •hey are not , & so do turn themselv ; from As if it so were , that that nothing of theirs were something in itself . 

This is sin , this is that devil in all our hearts , which stirreth up all sin in us : for as soon as Adam by the instinct of the serpent fell away from God , and returned unto his nothing again , he was indeed made nothing : which thing Satan , who before had fallen into his nothing , did spin and weave into the heart of Adam , by the external object of the tree ; and he made the fruit of the tree so pleasant to behold , that no sooner they beheld it , but they were inflamed with a desire to eat of that fruit ; for which cause it is written ( ier. 9 ) that death enters in by the windows , that is by the sight of the eyes . 

And this moved the schoolmen to define sin to be nothing , that is , no creature of God : neither that death which it produced : both which came into the world by the malice of Satan ; & for the same cause sin brought man back again into his first nothing ; wherefore the devil and Adam are run out of the sight of God ; he not acknowledging them for his own : neither having any commerce or society with them : so long as they do not acknowledge their vanity ; therefore since man by sin is made nothing before God ; and yet will not acknowledge himself to be nothing , but even then esteem himself to be something , it is necessary that so long he be expelled out of the presence of God , till he be made nothing in his own heart : then doth God love his hand , and creates him again of nothing : for God knows not how to create any thing of something , but of nothing , for that is his nature : he that yet is not nothing , he cannot hope that he shall be something ; wherefore behave thyself to godward quietly , like a liveless trunk , as thou didst in thy creation : suffer God to do ; fast , feast , and rest , and do thou nothing at all ; least it happen that thou be taken with a desire of the forbidden tree , or any other thing ; or esteem thyself to be something according as the law commands , yet doth it not cease to curse and condemn us , until it hath brought us unto that spiritual Sabbath ; that so forsaken in ourselves , we do no more work to our new birth than we did to our firs• creation , but only suffer ; so that our actions are only to do nothing , and be like a stone or trunk ; for this desire to be something is always that which brings to nothing . 

Chapter v. wherefore the tree of the knowledge of good & evil was create , then forbidden to Adam , and now to us , since God knew that both he & we should eat death from the same , and what is that tree . 

Wherefore was Adam and Eve forbidden this tree , seeing to know evil• is not evil , but to do evil . If Adam had not known good in himself , God had been alone good in him , and he had not arrogated any thing to himself , but had been as free from pride therein , as a bird is in her song , a horse in his strength , a cow in her milk , and a tree in its fruit ; but assoon as he knew good , and considered it what it was ; as a beautiful woman doth her beauty , he arrogated it to himself , and therein became a thief unto God . 

This God foreknew , and therefore was unwilling that Adam should know good , that so he Might walk in his innocence , and be ignorant both of good and evil : for this cause God said unto him , thou shalt not eat of it , as if he had said beware , least thou thyself desire to know what is good or evil ; but suffer me to be all things , and be thou quiet in all things , that that good which i am , and desire to work alone , i May work it in thee , to my own praise in thee , according as i do it in the rest of the creatures ; and thus he was forbidden to know evil , for God knew , that assoon as Adam had smelled what evil was , it being of its own nature , like to him nothing , would be pleasing to him , and so it would come to pass that he would desire and affect the same . 

Besides this another evil hath rises from hence , that that evil which man according to his nature delighted to do he denyeth that he hath done it . Thus pulling his own neck out of the yoke ▪ he accuseth the serpent that it was done by it . 

Again , the good which God doth in him , and which is not his own , he falsely contendeth that he hath done it himself being deceived with a presumptuous opinion of his own power and strength ▪ this being the perverse estate and condition into which Adam did fall willingly ; therefore after that Adam was fallen into this perverse wisdom , by eating of the forbidden fruit , and his own arrogancy , he was so depraved , that whatsoever he thinks , speaks , or doth , is displeasing unto God ; and we all in him have eaten death , and fallen into the same estate and condition ; but after we are raised from death , and redeemed from it again , by means of Christ , there is the same reason that the tree of knowledge of good & evil , should be also forbidden us , least afterward we fall into the same estate again : wherefore the next way of coming unto God is this : that now Adam with all his children abstain from this tree , that is , deny it , vomit up the forbidden fruit , and repent himself of his wit , as if it were foolishness . 

But when we eat of the forbidden fruit or tree , God forgives us , but upon this condition , that for ever afterward we fast , and always repent ourselves of our first eating . 

This tree is planted in every one of our hearts , & is nothing else but our own wit , reason , flesh , knowledge , and will , to which as long as we adhere , and are not made foolish in ourselves , and as little children , we can have no pardon from God ; wherefore we must either abstain from this wisdom , and become little children again , or else want God ; and that prohibition of God , eat not of the tree : if thou do thou shalt die ; is the same with that saying of Christ , except ye renounce yourselves , and hate your own life , ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God ; for what was spoken unto Adam , the same also was said unto us ; neither is our estate to be amended any other ways then that of Adam's ; the hearts of all are like to a vessel which smells of that matter and meat which Adam did first power into it . 

Therefore as Adam declined from God and inclined towards himself , and made himself as it were a wise deaster , and admired himself like a little God , the same is also fresh in every carnal heart . 

Now therefore , we must labour as it were to go backward , and that inbred wit of Adam's is to be rejected & esteemed of us no otherwise then foolishness . 

Here many things are to be unlearned , and this we are to learn & know , that all our conceit & opinion of wit is foolishness , and that which separates us from God , and hinders us so that we cannot attain the true wisdom indeed ; and we must labour to be freed from the bondage of ourselves . And to this work we should all apply ourselves ; to wit , quietly to rest ourselves , not in knowledge , but in God known ; and so affect knowledge only as an index , which only shows and paints out God unto us , and is of God ; that is the fruit of the tree of life , and not of the tree of knowledge of good & evil ; to wit , that we permit God to be , know , love , & have all things in us , so that he speak , work , know , and love in us nothing but himself , when , where , and wherefore he will . 

Julian th' apostate ignorant of this secret , against whom civil writes , was greatly offended at this : that God would have man to know neither good nor evil , or rather that he would have man to have , teach , be ; and will nothing at all , &c.  He ( I say ) was offended at this . 

But if the matter be brought unto the light of truth , we shall find that all this happened because of us : even as a father forbids and detains a sword from his son , knowing that if he had it , he would hurt himself upon it , or otherwise abuse it ; in the same manner God denied unto Adam , and also unto us , that tree of knowledge , for our profit and good ; neither did he envy us therein , but only did it to prevent the future evil , into which he foresaw we should fall ; for he knew that assoon as Adam , like God should know good and evil , he would challenge the same to himself , & desire to be his own god ; otherwise God had not cared though Adam had eaten of that tree for satiety . For assoon as Adam had eaten of it , there followed thereupon self-love , and arrogating all things to himself , praise , and all other vices . 

So God in all his commandments hath respect not so much to himself as to us and our salvation , which not he but we enjoy : as Job himself doth manifestly confess , that God is neither hurt by our sins , nor profited by our righteousness , but still remaineth an eternal , perfect , and impassible God , to whom nothing can be added or any thing detracted ; though we try , yet can we not make a heaven , neither put the sun out of them ; nor dry up a fountain ; but all these things remain in the same estate and condition wherein God hath placed them : he that assumes to throw a stone against heaven , it will fall upon his own head , 

Therefore we can make God neither richer nor poorer , greater nor lesser , no he is no way advantaged by us , though we all adhere unto him ; only he hath a care on us to help us ; we never deserve to be what we are , therefore we ought to attribute the cause of all our good to him only , and give him the glory : he hath an open hand more ready to give than we are to receive ; rich to all those that call upon him ; neither doth he desire any thing at our hands but only this : that we quietly receive of him that which he is willingly pleased to give , for he that with quietness doth not receive , can have no h•pe that he shall receive ; all our wit we ought only to employ to this end , to the denying of ourselves . 

This should make us nothing , children , fools , and prostrate low at the feet of God . 

And to the effecting of this denying of ourselves , all our knowledge ought to be directed ; but that knowledge only which proceeds from God , can effect it ; it can make a man nothing , a child , a fool , and casts him down at the feet of God ; but that knowledge that puffs up a man , making him great and wise in his own conceit , such being the wisdom of the world , comes not from God , but is rather the serpent's seed & forbidden fruit . Now every one that eateth of the forbidden tree , for no other cause eateth he thereof , but only that he May obtain a great name , honour , titles , and glory , that he May have pre-eminence to be Counted the light of the world . And by this means he eateth death in stead of life . This the holy scriptures testify unto us , for whereas we ought to know and learn nothing , every man learns to know and be wise in all things . 

Now here some man Might inquire , why therefore did God create the tree , if he foreknew that both Adam and we would eat death thereof , and not rather hinder our sin ? 

I answer , that God at the first made us of earth , and assuredly did know that we would not constantly abide in the estate of our creation , and yet he suffered Adam to take his course , & make trial of misery ; that forced through sorrow & death he Might haste to God again ; for so it was to be that God would create him again out of sorrow , and make him again a new , not as before of nothing , but with grace of himself ; this God foresaw from all eternity , and therefore suffered his fall , and gave way that man should first taste of the bitterness of death , before that he would give him the sweetness of eternal life , by which he Might know the better what he hath in God , and what that life is compared with death , which before he tasted . 

Besides it was meet that God suffered the freedom of sin , rather than restrained it , as well for many other causes as more special for this , that otherwise it had been coaction and force , and not liberty , and also the goodness of God & his mercy , having no other object , could never have been manifested in his creature : therefore it behooved that things should come thus to pass by the providence of God , and yield without necessity or any fault in God ; read Brentius lib. 4.  & ambros. in rom. 9  

Chap. vi . Of the 2 kinds of knowledge , and will , and how the one always resists the other . 

There is nothing under the sun but it May be said to be twofold , that is just and wicked , good and evil . Now just , and also that which is evil and wicked , May in like manner be said to the twofold , the one according to the judgement of God , and the other according to the estimation and opinion of men . 

And now seeing God is a spirit , and men flesh , contrary to the spirit , it follows , that all their judgements , wills , knowledges , and actions , be contrary and repugnant one to the other . Whence it is , what man calleth good , right , sweet , light , life , knowledge , wisdom , justice , &c.  God esteems that to be evil , wicked , bitter , darkness , death , foolishness , and sin , according as the scriptures testify of God and of the world . 

Therefore there is nothing in the world but it May be called good or evil , according as the judgement of men are disposed , to whom it is proposed . What God is unto the world , the same is the devil unto God ; and so on the contrary ; so that nothing can be called evil , but all things are in their order right and good , and evil and wicked , according as the touchstone is , by which they are examined . 

If i say , that the word of God is false , foolishness and heresy , the same is true in the judgement and opinion of the world ; and thus all things are twofold , either good or evil ; & good is twofold , as also evil : the one truly good or evil in the sight of God , the other apparently good or evil in the sight of men or their opinion ; so that there is a twofould fasting , praying , willing , &c. to wit , one that is really good in the sight of God , so as is God himself , the author and teacher of all goodness ; the other in the sight of the world good , but in truth evil and wicked ; for what seems holy in the opinion of men , is profane in the sight of God . 

So there is a twofold knowledge and wit , the one divine of the tree of life , the other human of the tree of knowledge of good and evil . Human wisdom is a fruit of the forbidden tree , and the root thereof is the seed of the serpent , and so is mortal . 

These are all the arts which natural men have found out , if no : without God , yet surely not in God . 

Briefly , all wit and arts , which God himself doth not plant in the hearts of men , by the power of his spirit and word , but acquired and gotten outwardly by the industry and help of men are death itself , or rather a deaster ; if man do any manner of way , trust or hope in them , for they do make man no more acceptable to God , or any way more righteous before him , then do his meat , drink , or clothes , for all these things are out of man ; and a certain superstition and worshipping of a false God , if thou restest thyself in them ; thou Mayst seem to thyself to be nearer unto God , because thou knows and understands many things , being more wise and acute than some simple good man , who cares only to know God ; but in very truth , thou art no better than a fool , who art ignorant of these ; for by how much thou art wiser than others hereby , by so much thou art worse ; for since it is so , that all the knowledge of this world , and all the righteousness of the flesh is devilish , according as saint James giveth this and other more opprobrious names unto it . 

It follows , that by how much a man offends and grows higher , and increaseth in this wit , by so much is he the worse and more devilish , so that a good and simple man , who cares and desires to know nothing but God , if he be compared with him in respect of him , he May seem to be a saint or God , and one of those is worth a thousand of others , as holy scriptures do testify , one righteous man is more worth than a thousand wicked men . 

The other wisdom , which in the eyes of the world is foolishness , is that denying wisdom , the fruit of the tree of life , which whosoever hath , he shall never die . 

This springeth up in man out of the seed of the woman , and is given and taught of God alone , being in its own nature , full of love , working divine solace and is called in the holy scriptures the knowledge of God ; because it knoweth nor acknowledgeth nothing but God ; this teacheth and professeth only God in the hearts of his servants ; it arrogateth nothing to itself , but as it merely knoweth God ; so it renders all it receives , to him again ; this renews man , justifies him , enlives him , and makes him like unto God , but it is to be found in no man's heart , but only in his who hath given a farewell to all earthly pleasures , arts , will , and wit , because that since it is so that these two knowledges are so contrary one to another , as fire is to water , it cannot be that they should live together in one heart , but the one will expel the other , as the day the night , and the night the day ; wherefore all fleshly knowledge , will , and wit , must be quite unlearned , and we must become little children and fools again , according as the holy scriptures testify unto us , if we would have the true knowledge & wisdom of God to dwell in our hearts ; for God requires a free and empty soul , which he would fill with his knowledge and goodness , and embrace as a pure & unspotted spouse , possessed with no other love but his : he would be the only father of the family , and cannot endure Satan in his kingdom to be near unto him , who is altogether light and void of all darkness . 

Now this wisdom being human , and a fruit of the forbidden tree , so is it fleshly puffing up the possessor of it , so as it makes him provide self-loving , desirous of his own profit , bold and wicked . 

In a word , it makes a man a Lucifer , and so contrary and abominable to God , that he cannot or will not flow into his soul . 

And indeed nothing so much hurts man as his own knowledge , wit , and righteousness , &c. which makes the word of the everliving God to appear foolishness , and God himself , to seem Satan unto him . 

Therefore as it hath already been said of wit and knowledge , the same May be said of the will of God and man . 

The one cannot endure the other ; no more than the spirit can endure the flesh , life death , fire water ; therefore the wisdom of God aims at the utter destruction of Adam's life , nature , will , and wisdom , labouring to pluck us from the dugs of human wit , by which we are nourished . 

We must therefore learn to forget , and unlearn whatsoever Adam knew , or doth know , wills , loves , &c. and all things must be made a new in Christ , this is the wisdom of God . 

Now let us see how far we are from this , if a man have but only a thought to learn his way presently , he thinks it is well with him , and without any repentance he doth sweetly delight himself in his own knowledge , art , and will , and all men will be good Christians , and if God will , will compose whole books and volumes of Christ , which they neither do nor have known ; and by this means they do so wearily employ and vex their minds through Satan's motion , with so many questions , arts , and idle disputations , that scarcely can they have so much time as to think of the knowledge of God ; whereas the true knowledge of God is not learned by prying into , running over , reading , or hearing a company of doubtful questions ; as the 1. chapt. of the German theology & Taulerus in many places elegantly doth teach ; but by patient and obedient remaining , harkening and attending to that which God doth work in us ; for he that would be divinely wise , and learn the knowledge of God , its needful that he hear and learn the same from God himself , he having detained it to himself , so that it can by no means be taught of man ; for as human arts and sciences proceed from men , and is their work ; so divine science is from God , and is the work of his only word . 

For as John Stapitius saith in a little book of the love of God : that those things that cannot be known but by sense and experience , neither can they be taught by , or learned from others . as for example : 

No man can teach another to see , hear , taste , and touch ; in like manner , and much less can any man teach another , to believe , love , hope , repent , so that divine truth and theology May rather be said to be experience then arts : no man can learn of himself the knowledge of God , love of God , faith , and such like , because the natural man cannot perceive things divine ; nay the letter of the scriptures is not able to do this : it doth not beget in man any new nature , it but shows unto him what a one he ought to be , and what he ought to do ; but yet he is , not such , neither can they make him such , but rather kill him and slay him by showing unto him his want and misery . 

Therefore is the position true , that faith & love cannot be conceived in the heart of man by the letter of the word ; otherwise it would be that none should be more faithful than the learned ; and yet for the most part none are more perverse . 

The letter of the word indeed proposeth faith unto us , but cannot write it in our hearts , that being the work of the holy ghost . Therefore that of saint John is always true : as the anointing teacheth you ; as also this , he that hath heard and learned of the father cometh unto me ; for faith and love cometh into no man's heart but his who is endued with the holy ghost . From whose inhabiting in our hearts , the light of faith and the knowledge of God deduce their original ; yea love itself is not begot or infused in us , but by the holy ghost and an affect of the love of God towards us . Wherefore the conclusion is this : that whom the holy ghost doth not comfort , teach and direct , he cannot be comforted , taught , and directed to the obtaining of life . 

Now all men will say and confess , that the world is darkness , man's wisdom is foolishness : yet if so be you will indulge nothing unto him , but will tax his will , wit , and designs , and say they are all foolishness and darkness , there is no man will confess it of himself , or that it is earthly , but every man will eagerly and earnestly contend , that his wit is heavenly and divine , especially if it be any way exercised about religion , when in very deed it is nothing else but the wisdom of the flesh ; yea even that use of the holy scriptures , which is in the world , which are wrested and turned as every man likes to either hand ; neither can these bare words , these words of God , containing in them the knowledge of God , which are common in every man's mouth , profit him any whit : these must be tried according to the will of God , and accordingly used . Otherwise these very words will become a very snare of Satan , and in stead of the word of God the word of Satan to him . It is not to say how well the wisdom of the flesh knows how to change itself into each shape , and to flatter itself with a form of the word of God ; what cannot men pretend and undertake , to say in the name of God : pretending indeed nothing less than the mere honour , praise and righteousness of God . 

Chap. vii . The testimony of the scripture , how we ought to evacuate the seed of the serpent his counsel & word , and so vomit up the fruit of the forbidden tree , and purge the same away as deadly poison by the fruit of the tree of life . 

This we oftentimes read , that our wisdom is foolishness with God . which form of speech we steal from Paul , & babble of it , when indeed we neither know our own nor Paul's meaning touching it . No man remembers to renounce & give a farewell to his own wisdom . This forsooth every man thinks is spoken of the wisdom of Turks and infidels ; as for his own wisdom , his reason being corrupted and holding some tenants , gathered from the holy scriptures ( Though he miserably wrest them to his own turn ) yet he thinks his wisdom to be the wisdom of God , and divine . 

This every man witnesseth in his own writings , in which for the most part he goes on securely , without any doubting upon the seeming approbation of the scriptures , to his tenants and opinions ; not considering that this is the very presumption of the Turks and infidels , with all sects of false Christians , whom i have known every one hath , or would seem to have the word of God to be the foundation of their tenets , as the Turks and Jews think at this day , their faith is grounded upon the word of God . 

Hence it comes to pass that every man is deceived in himself , and shut up to himself , from the knowledge of himself . This being it which God foresaw , when he said that the serpent should bite the heel of the woman , that is secretly and craftily lay snares , and deceitful gins in the hearts of men . 

Therefore know whatsoever natural man , though wise man in the judgement of the world , yea Adam with all his offspring the whole nature of men unregenerate knows , speaks , doth , thinks , lives , &c. all this is human , the wisdom of reason , and the counsel of the flesh , & the knowledge of that deadly and forbidden tree : only that rare phoenix , which the scriptures call the new man , or the regenerate that hath the knowledge and wisdom of God , being taught it from above ; all other things are the inventions of men , the wisdom of the serpent and fruit of the forbidden tree . 

Now we have said before that the wisdom of man must be forgotten , and we must learn to unlearn it : for as the flesh , even so the wit of the flesh , and the righteousness thereof is nothing but foolishness and wickedness in the sight of God . And on the contrary , the wisdom of God , and his righteousness , is foolishness and wickedness in the sight of the world and to the flesh . So that all arts and sciences , being only fleshly , are altogether vanity , filthiness , and a fruit of the forbidden tree , from the which all men eat death . 

It is no purpose for a man in word to deny his own wit , and yet in his heart to extol the same as the wisdom of God ; or , secretly to be elevated therefrom , these are but the findings out of the deceived heart of man ; outwardly sugared over by Satan with fair words ; and whosoever rests and depends upon these fair pretences , he builds upon hell , which will all damn . For as meat , clothes , time , place , person , and such like do make men neither less or more acceptable to God ; so all human arts and sciences do not make the possessor thereof one jot the better in the sight of God , if he look at them , and ( As Adam did ) arrogate them to himself . 

Therefore the most learned and wise of this world are in this respect in no better a condition than the foolish idiot that is . 

It is necessary therefore that those wise men go out of themselves , and learn to become fools , by going out of their wit , will , knowledge , &c. if they desire to be endued with divine knowledge from above : 

Therefore even as the natural man voluntarily for his own bellies sake doth torture himself day and night , in the finding out of so many covetous , curious , and with God unprofitable arts ; even so it is necessary that with the same pain and labour he learn to forget and forgo the same , and become a child and fool again ; for it is a greater difficulty , and more labour by many degrees to unlearn his fleshly wisdom , and forsake that good he hath got already , then from the beginning to learn it for his profit . 

In so much that this is true , who once hath played the ass , will scarcely learn to leave those doltish tricks . 

Oh how difficult is it for them to become fools , who have grounded themselves in a presumption of their own wit . 

And yet it is necessary that this they must be , or otherwise they shall be nothing less than that which they desire to be . 

Therefore so requisite is this denial , hatred & forgetfulness of himself , that without it no man can be the disciple of Christ ; that is , no man can be endued with divine wisdom , unless in his affections he hath excluded , and given a farewell & adieu to his own . 

Wherefore what wonder is it if the worldly man , who is busied about the things of this life , be altogether ignorant of the knowledge of God ; for since he is not obedient to that wisdom that is spiritual , neither can perceive any divine thing , nor receive the spirit of truth ; nor for the wisdom of God exchange his own ; for he neither cares to nourish that wisdom in his heart , neither desires to learn it , and because he desires it not , he cannot learn it . 

And now it is requisite , that as saint Paul says , if any man will be wise , with God he must be a fool in the world , that thereby he May become truly wise : that is ; he must cease to think , as the world doth labour to get a new mind , and deliver over his senses & thoughts to be renewed by God . 

The cause of which Paul immediately annexeth to the same : for the wisdom of the world ( Saith he ) is foolishness to God . 

And in his epistle to the Romans he calleth it death and enmity to God . And the same Paul bids adieu to all his own wit which he had learned at the feet of Gamaliell , above all his equals and accounts , all his own righteousness and knowledge as dung and dross , in respect of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ . 

And elsewhere he glories in this that he had learned to unlearn and forget all things , and now desired to know nothing but Christ & him crucified . 

In the same manner all the apostles become little children again . 

Besides , Nichodemus , and all other whosoever , ( As Christ had said unto them ) unless they be changed , and become as little children , they cannot see the kingdom of God . 

And a little after , Christ saith , that the kingdom of God is of such little children . 

This is the reason why the scriptures admonish us so often to beware of our own wit , least we do any thing that seems good in our own eyes ; as also that we resist our own wills , neither that we suffer ourselves to be led , and guided by our own affections and desires ; and also those that trust in their own hearts & obey their own cogitations , are foolish and wicked , also that we seem not wise in our own conceits , nor magnify ourselves but fear , and in fear and trembling work out our own salvation . 

And lastly , that we trust not , nor lean not to our own wit ; for what is or can be more wicked than what flesh and blood hath found out . 

Truly the flesh cannot of its own nature seek God , and have him in estimation , unless it renounce itself , and hate its own life and soul ; that is all its own works ; though it gloze them over with a pretence of the word , honour and glory of God ; for he cannot be believed , loved , prayed unto , or found but only in God . 

Therefore all the endeavour , study , art , & diligence of is altogether void of God , and want his grace and spirit . For the word of God requires an humble , submissive trembling , and abjected mind ; and a soul poor in spirit , & free from the bondag of the creatures ; & like to tender wax or clay , pliable in the finger of God to receive the figure and stamp of his image imprinted upon it . 

To these fools and children , such as fear God , and are separated from the dugs of the world , doth he open his secrets , and teach his divine wisdom & knowledge ; if there be any man that fears God , to him the Lord will show the way that he May choose , and he walk in the truth , and his posterity shall inhabit the land : he says not to the learned , and to the wise of the world ; as also in an other place ; the Lord reveals his secrets to the righteous . For this cause Christ the son of God gives thanks to his father , that he had hidden his secrets from the prudent and wise of the world , and had revealed unto children and babes ; that as we have already spoken out of the mouths of sucking babes ; such as were Moses , Jeremias , Amos , and the apostles , &c. he Might speak his praise , and extol his kingdom and glory . 

Again , the rich & proud he sends away empty , and filleth only the hungry with good things . 

Now , no money-master nor rich covetous churl is more swollen up with the vain confidence of his riches ; nor any woman more proud of her beauty , than these wise men pride and boast themselves of their wisdom and knowledge ; persuading themselves that this is the divine wisdom and riches of the soul , which neither thieves can steal , nor rust canker it , nor moth corrupt it , when notwithstanding it is nothing but mere death , foolishness , and enmity against God , and in a word the knowledge of the forbidden tree . 

Therefore the holy scriptures speak expressly of the wise of the world , these righteous men , famous for their arts , priding themselves in their own hearts , who are arrogant and proud , and are endued with nothing less than the spirit of God , who abides only in simple doves . 

By this it appears that no kind of men are farther from the kingdom of God , and do less square and agree with his word , and more disagree from his will , than those who lean and trust to their own wisdom , knowledge , reason , and will . 

Christ in the holy scriptures speaketh not so much against publicans and common sinners as these , who being puffed up with a conceit of their own righteousness , reflect upon themselves with a self pleasingnes ; with these can Christ least accord , & unto them doth so often threaten woes in the scripture , and says that adulterers and publicans shall enter before them into the kingdom of heaven . 

These are those wicked men against whom David so fervently and often prays , and of whom Christ hath so little hope , and unto whom he with his apostles and Steven give so cutting language ; who being men of a wicked mind , would seem nothing less ; but those things which are written concerning wicked men , they ignorantly interpret of others , these are such whom the whole world esteem and accounts to be the shining lights thereof ; such were Nichodemus and Paul before his conversion ; these are those who in David , Moses , Christ's , and all other times of the church have been the righteous scribes & Pharises with the persons ; who having a show of piety , have so lived , as that they were esteemed patrons and examples for others to imitate ; these righteous men of the world , the scriptures call wicked ; who want nothing but only this that they have wicked minds , void of faith and grace ; yet they so cloak their wickedness with a form of godliness , that they seem nothing less . 

Neither think we that the times of Christ and David were only pestered with these kind of persons ; but we May rather conceive , that if those golden days of theirs were full of such , these iron age's of ours are much more abundant . 

All times and ages have had their dissemblers , Pharises and scribes , these our last ages since are the worst , for seldom comes best things last ; for the world as it grows more aged , so it grows more wicked , as both the scripture and experience do testify . 

Wherefore it is behooveful that every man endeavour that he be not of the number of those men , who wresting the word of the scriptures apply and interpret them on others , as most men do ; but in them behold himself as in a glass , if he desire to see a wicked man , and one that is a capital enemy against God ; and let him but question with his own conscience , it is as good as ten thousand witnesses , and then he shall easily know what a one he is . 

For this cause the scriptures are so fyerie against these godly wise men of the world ; yea denying all good to them , God in his just judgement striking them with blindness ; so that they err in their own way , hiding himself and his word from their understanding . 

Besides , the scriptures do brand them with a thousand infamous names ; calling them Wolus , a generation of vipers , bears , bulls , sons of Belial , painted sepulchers , who are glorious in show in the sight of men , and set forth themselves as righteous before men by their sage manners , modest habits , and grave gestures , when in the sight of God they have their hearts full of nothing but filthiness and sin . Of whom Christ saith , that unless we be more righteous than they , and exceed them , we shall never enter into the kingdom of God . Nevertheless they would not seem to be what they are indeed , but cover themselves with a show of sanctity . Wherefore it pleaseth the spirit of God to check and rebuke them to the discovering of their secret holds , and vizards of their faces ; but he who accuseth himself , and denyeth himself before God , and in his presence , shall obtain pardon , as the scriptures testify ; which reprehend those carnal spiritual spirits , or men , who place their state with God , and will be ignorant of nothing , and they are admonished by God in Solomon's proverbs , that they would desist from this their arrogancy ; otherwise they shall be so oppressed with the glory and majesty of God , that they shall not be able to endure and stand ; but those who humbly submit themselves , and creep unto God , and willingly know nothing , nor are nothing but what God knows and is in them , they in not seeking find that which the other seeking with great auxiety of mind shall never obtain ; for all things are theirs , and they know what God is , hath or knows , because they in God and God in them inhabits and dwells : 

Hence it is that Paul saith , the spiritual man searcheth all things , yea the secret things of God ; which is denied to the foolish flesh , according as we May read in the proverbs , and Ecclesiastes , for in counsel of the wicked there is no health , no word of God , knowledge , or love . 

To the same purpose is that saying of Solomon , God made man at the first upright , but he found out to himself many inventions , many difficults , many labours , with which he doth weary and vex himself ; God that is good , simple , & just , commandeth him that he should know nothing but him , and follow and be obedient to him as all the rest of the creatures ; he should ( I say ) be so obedient to him , as to do , know , will , love , omit , and speak nothing but only what God doth know , will , love , omit , and speak in him , by which as in all other creatures so in the heart of man he Might enjoy a plenary kingdom , and ruling and governing him according to his own will , neither should man have any title , claim , power , or privilege over himself . 

Satan suggestion it was that man found out so many ambushes & curious questions , with frivolous difficulties , by which he is degenerated from that simplicity wherein God create him , and subordinated him , being transported with an ambitious desire , to become a Lord & God to himself ; and so remained in the power of his own will ; but how just this is , let man that hath reason judge , that the clay should desire to know or be any thing contrary or besides that which the maker thereof would have it , know , or be ; such similitudes doth not yet fully express the matter . 

Therefore it happens deservedly unto us , that our wisdom , knowledge , and will , should bring upon us all punishment due unto sin , and also make us utterly disquieted , bringing unto us nothing but torture and vexation , since besides and contrary to the will of God we have deserved them . 

Hence it necessarily followeth , that sin is the punishment of itself , and fools are destroyed by their own wisdom and knowledge . 

This is that which Solomon experiment'ly complains off , when he says : where there is much knowledge , there is much vexation ; and he that increaseth learning sorrows . And these wise men are fools , for whosoever endeavoureth to be wise above measure , this man shall endure greiffes and sorrows ; and by how much they become more wise , by so much they are more disquieted : for God will have us to find rest in him only . 

Neither must we rise , come , go , or do any thing before him ; for whosoever cometh before him is a thief , and whosoever speaketh or doth any thing of his own accord , without him , is a devil . 

Therefore it is that all men are deluded , deceived , and fooled by their own wit ; yea even because they profess themselves to be wise , therefore they are foolish . 

And as God did the Caldean , philosophers , and wise men , so he suffers those to be seduced by their own knowledge , and to be wearied with their own inventions , actions , and arts . 

Hence it is that Christ would not have his disciple desire to be esteemed somebody's , or covett that men should call them Masters , Lords , doctors , or rabbins , but only ministers , brethren , and witnesses of him , ioh. 15.  Ye are my witnesses . 

Chap. viii . Of the great deaster of human wisdom and knowledge ; and how all men do kiss their own hand , and all the world adores itself , and its own work ; that is , inventions , actions , and deliberations of fleshly reason and wisdom . 

What other thing is the worshipping of images , superstition , and the institutions of men , than the reason , wit , art , invention , and prudence of man . 

Therefore the worshipping of deasters is nothing but the adoring of the images of God , not according to his word as he doth teach , figure and form it to us , but according to our own opinion and self conceit . 

Again , what other thing is sin then our own will , wit , and counsel , sown unto us with the seeds of the serpent . Consider the institutions , practice , and life of all mankind , when and how you will , you shall find it nothing else then human wisdom ; here every man would be his own god , guide , govern , teach move , revenge , defend , excuse , and enrich himself ; and every man sets his own brain , will , and reason in the place of his God , so that sin & the fall of Adam is nothing else but the human affectation of the art , reason , & knowledge of the flesh ; and therefore deservedly is termed foolishness and enmity , deadly and devilish . 

All men ought with Christ to become nothing , and with a continual decrease & depression of soul , become asses , fools & children ; but now it is quite contrary : every man labours that he May be wise , great , illustrious and mighty ; so many arts and sciences are learned of men , that they May be great , famous , and excellent in the eyes of the world ; and May obtain titles of honour , & names of respect . 

Hence it is that young men are inflamed with a desire of glory , & labour not only to be famous in schools , but to be admired in the pulpit also ; and for that end they seek out learned tutors , who May make them expert , quick , and acute in all kind of literal deceits and exercises of arts . By which it is as clear as the sun that the whole world is contrary and enmity to God . Here every man kissing his own hand and adoring his own wit , esteeming it to be his light & his god ; even it that was the only sin of Adam ; and it from whence other sins came & have their original , as Job confesseth ; ( Job . 33. 31. ) for to admire & worship himself , and to be led by his own will ; in a word , to stand on his own bottom , & to desire to be something of himself without God , is that one mortal sin , which is the fountain of all other ; for the lusts of the flesh , and the wit thereof is very dead . 

And man like a log , is no better than dead ; but while he doth nothing , knows & desires nothing , but keeping a holy Sabbath or rest ; dies wholly unto himself ; and being void of will or wit , resigns himself over unto God , and permits him to know and do in him , what , when , and how he will . 

And now the whole world lies overwhelmed with this sin ; in so much that it doth no other but adore the work of its own hand , that is its own invention , counsels , comments , and wisdom . To this purpose all things are directed , intented , and wrested ; yea the very scriptures themselves , the word of God ; that it May be agreeable to our corrupt reason , and not hinder the course of our carnal and fleshly wit , and knowledge , but all these things must be unlearned and cast away if we will see God . And therefore the scriptures urge so often times , that we should become fools , little children , and purge ourselves with the fruit of the tree of life , that we May vomit up that poisonful wit and knowledge of the forbidden fruit . 

Chapter ix. . That the tree of the knowledge of good and evil , planted in the heart of Adam , is the seed , word , and spirit of the serpent and that great d••aster , Antichrist , sin , death , the devil , & that beast , which is mentioned in Daniel , and the Apocalips , which is the greatest and commonest idolatry . 

1.  What is that beast of which Daniel writeth , which speaketh against the highest , and slayeth the saints of God ? 

2.  What is that serpent who deceived Adam & Eva ? 

3.  What is the tree of knowledge of good and evil ? 

4.  What is that impudent King and Antichrist , of whom Daniel and Paul speaketh , 1 thes. 2 ? 

5.  What is that many headed monster , mentioned in the Apocalypse , whom the whole world doth worship ? 

6.  What is sin ? What death ? What the devil ? 

I answer : it is every man's own carnal wit and reason , righteousness , and the like ; for which cause Paul calleth it death , enmity , & foolishness unto God ; and saint James calls it earthly , human , and devilish , because these three are one ; for whatsoever is human , is worldly , & devilish ; and whatsoever is devilish , is earthly . For the devil and man , Adam and the serpent , are sworn brethren , yea both one ; for the serpent hath so shed his wisdom , and feigned righteousness into the heart of Adam , that the seed of the serpent and his word are incorporated and made man , so that now the same thing May be said of both . 

And even as those that are born of God , and in whom the word of God is incorporated , are called God , or one spirit with God : so all men born of flesh and blood , before they be regenerate & planted into Christ , May be called devils ; and so whatsoever is earthly , May be said to be devilish , and whatsoever is devilish , May be said to be earthly . 

Again , what is the fall of Adam but only the wisdom of the serpent and fruit of the forbidden tree ? What is that old dragon , who ascends out of hell ? and with his tail draws a great part of the stars of heaven after him ? But only the wisdom of the flesh , which doth extol itself against God , and desires to become a god unto itself ? 

What are the thoughts of the flesh ? What is sin ? what pride ? But the wisdom and fruit of the forbidden tree . 

What are the decrees of men ? The works of reason against God ? Men's inventions , knowledge , and books ? But only the are of the devil , eaten of the tree . 

What is all the worship of images and all false religions ? as of Jews , Turks , infidels , and all false Christians . What are all sacraments , assemblies , and ceremonies ? But an apple of this forbidden tree : which bearing a show to be of the tree of life , offers unto men , pleasant fruit to his eye , that is , reason which whosoever eats , he shall find to be deadly . 

No man can fully express that idolatry , with which all the corners of the world and hearts of men are stuffed up ; and who is it that doth not adore himself , and says to his hand , wisdom , and reason , his art and his knowledge , thou art my God , in thee i trust , in thee i hope . 

Indeed men say not this with their mouth , but surely in their lives , works , and hearts , they plainly testify as much . 

Hence all men deny that there is a God , and testify the same by their works ; for if they think there is a God , wherefore do they not resign vengeance unto him ? Wherefore are they so doubtfully distracted ? Wherefore do they forge such wicked deceits , to deceive one another ? Wherefore do they so war upon one another ( Whether with right or injustice it matters not ) and contend together for mine and thine ? Why do they lie , cog , and flatter one another ? Wherefore do they labour night and day to get and heap up riches ? Wherefore are they so forgetful of the word of God , and so little esteem his precepts and commandments ? But that they think God cares not for them , or that he cannot or will not revenge them ; therefore it is necessary that they help and revenge themselves ; or that they think that while to long to wait and expect the help of God , before that he take vengeance and punishment they themselves shall be overthrown ; and because they think that nothing but poverty comes upon them , if they have any commerce and communion with the truth of God ; therefore it is necessary that they help themselves , and labour for their living , by lying , cogging , deceiving , and usury , and the like ; this makes a man rich and honourable . As for the word of God that is but a late help , and deficient in adversity ; it stands us in hand , therefore to adore ourselves , speak big & swelling words ; elevate ourselves as much as we can . Who but myself is God ? saith the world in the course of her life . 

Chapter x. an answer to certain objections , that we ought to be wise , and not fools ; and how we ought to be wise , and how foolish . 

But you will say , that the learned shall shine as the stars or sun in heaven , and in a thousand places we are commanded to apply our hearts unto wisdom , as in the proverbs and eccles. wise men are commended ? 

To which i answer , that it is rightly spoken , if it be rightly understood , to wit , of the tree divine & heavenly knowledge , which God himself doth work & teach in those that are poor in spirit ; i say , it is understood of the wisdom of the tree of life ; and not of the deadly and foolish wisdom of the flesh , which is the knowledge of good and evil ; and the scriptures will have us to acknowledge our folly , and to be made fools in our own judgement , ( And indeed we are so , but we would not be accounted so ) and forget all things whereby we May become truly wise , and receive the influence of divine knowledge into our souls ; for we are all foolish & wicked , and we will not see and perceive it , nor believe it ; and therefore God would have us by confessing our folly in true simplicity , to give a farewell unto it , & by submitting ourselves over unto God , be made truly wise and learned by him . 

Hereupon it is that Solomon calls them fools , whom Paul calls wise & prudent ; Solomon calls them what they are indeed in the sight of God ; but Paul calls them what they seem to be in their own eyes , and in the sight of men : we must unlearn , and therein strive to be fools in that wherein we learn and strive to be wise in ; but as it is given us of God , so it can be learned from none but God ; and as the love of God shed abroad in our hearts , begets a mutual love of him again ; even so God's knowing of us , begets in us a knowledge of him , as Paul witnesseth to the gal : after that ye knew God , or rather are known of him . 

As also to the phill. i desire to know ▪ as i am known . And also 1. ioh. 3.  He first loved us . Also in another place : if any man love God , he is born of God . Out of all these places i gather , that God is never known , loved , sought , or found of us , until we be known , loved , sought and found of God ; as Christ saith to the Pharises : the kingdom of God is in you ; and Paul to the Athenians : he is not far off from every one of us ; for in him we live , move , & have our being . But this is most miserable and lamentable , that those who profess themselves to know God , know him not as they ought ; as Paul testifies of the world : if any man love the world , the love of the father is not in him . And again : if any man seem to know any thing , he knoweth nothing as he ought . 

We should know this , that by nature we know nothing , but are altogether blind , dead , and foolish in spiritual things ; and this knowledge should make us nothing , foolish and children in our own eyes ; but we desire to know , and seem wise , whereby it comes to pass that we know not how , or for what end we ought to learn knowledge , for wisdom is not given unto us for this purpose , that thereby being puffed with pride , we extol ourselves , and become something in the eyes of the world , but on the contrary to make us nothing . This is the knowledge of God , that makes us fools and children to ourselves and the world : it doth not puff us up , making us seem wise in our own opinion ; no , for that is the knowledge of the serpent , both most devilish and deadly . 

Thus you see that the whole world knows not what , how , and for what end they should desire to know , but always strives against God in their knowledge ; and know not of what things they ought to be ignorant off , but chiefly are desirous to know those things they ought to be ignorant off ; and so by their own art and knowledge make themselves fools . 

Briefly , that which they do know and do desire to know , that they should learn to unknown ; and what they resist to know that they should learn to know , otherwise God will never acknowledge them for his own , because God hath determined never to acknowledge , crown or reward any thing in us , but his owns gifts and works , that is never to love or accept any thing in us but himself : for he alone is the light , life , the way , and the truth , so that whosoever is not in him , or he in them , they always wander in the paths of error and shadow of death . Now every man knows what it is to walk in darkness . The walls of Jerusalem were not to be opened before the sun did rise ; even so should no man intend to go forth before the son of righteousness arose in his heart ; since all things depends upon him , and be should be our teacher and example , by whose instruction we should learn , and by whose example we should walk , as the scriptures testify . 

It is an easy thing to say , that the world is in darkness , and uncapable of the spirit of truth : but no man will either acknowledge or believe himself to be the world , or that the whole world to God is all flesh as the sons of Adam all were natural men , with the universal righteousness , reason , and wisdom therein ; but by the world men think to be understood , the Turks , gentles , & heathens ; and i know not what persons of the farthest parts of the world , attributing so much to arts , tongues & scriptures , which they almost prefer above the spirit ; and if a man do read and have a bible , they think it enough , and that by which they May easily obtain the holy ghost ; not considering that either the holy ghost must be their guide , and enlighten them in the knowledge of the word , or otherwise it is but a dead letter ; and is so far from bringing life with it , that it mortifies & kills the reader : as Paul implies , where he saith , the spirit quickens and not the letter . 

The Jews in ancient times , and so men in these days do boast themselves of the word of God , & are strongly persuaded , that out of it they are able to gather life to their souls ; but they are far deceived . 

Wherefore Christ says : in whom think ye to have life . As for the scriptures his testimony of them is this , that they are them which testify of him . 

Therefore all arts and knowledges are no ways the cause of life ; but the knowledge of life to know him in and with God ; wicked nature hath always a perverse end , proposed to itself , and therefore it desires to know all things , not for God but for its own sake ; therefore all things are to the flesh ( As it is its self ) vain and perverse , if the learning of so many arts had been necessary to salvation , God had create and taught them in the beginning ; neither would be have suffered that men should so long have wanted that , without which they were not able to attain to life ; but because they were form out by men , and still are found out by them , though no man be any whit the more unhappy , if so be he never know any thing of them ; yea he were more happy if he could unlearn them , though with greater difficulty than he learned them ; you May by the tree conjecture what the fruit is , what human arts and sciences are : to wit , the fruit of the forbidden tree ; how then can they conduce any thing unto life , being the only precepts & in , ventions of men . 

Therefore very well in praise of that word of God doth Cornelius' Agrippa call all arts and actions of men mere ignorant fables and foolishness , in his book de vanitate scientiarum . the beginning and end whereof we have put in this book , that we May not seem alone with Ernestinus to contemn arts and praise folly . 

Wherefore if thou lean unto arts , please and boast thyself in them , having any hope or accounting thyself any thing better for them , they will prove death unto thee , for they do no more conduce to thy happiness then garments , time , place , or such like circumstances : but as they are the inventions of the flesh , so do they produce no other thing in thee then the works and fruits of the flesh , to wit , self-love , pride of spirit , contempt , disdain , security , & such like ; and this is verified by experience , for no men are more perverse , crafty , & covetous , than these worldly wise and learned men be , being men drowned in their own self-love , esteemed of themselves worthy to be beloved and reverenced of all ; full of rash judgement , lovers of all pleasures , and so full of all vices : that the whole world gives credit to no men less , speaks worse of no men more : being full of taunting & reproaching proverbs against them ; such as these , the better learned , the worse mannered , the better scholar the worse Christian . No man escapes scotfree out of the claws of a priest . He that will have an honest house , must keep it free from priests , apes , & doves . A monk dare do as much as he dare think . These & such like proverbs are common in every man's mouth ; which arise from this that they are so swollen with the poison of the fruit of the forbidden tree , so puffed up with the false opinion of their own wisdom and righteousness , that no rich man is more insolent by reason of his riches , than these perverse wise men are by reason of their arts & knowledge ; so that it is as easy to remove Cyrus out of his kingdom , as one of these wise men out of his opinion and tenant ; and truly it cannot be but by how much a man is more wise in the art of the forbidden tree , by so much he is more miserable , as Christ witnesseth in the gospel : that the multitude of their arts and knowledge is an impediment why they come not into the kingdom of God , and publicans and harlots enter in before them . 

Therefore these men are to perish with their arts , & to depart empty , and so far is any of them from leaving his art , wisdom , knowledge , & righteousness , that he esteemeth these to be the good and riches of the soul , which neither thieves can steal , nor moths corrupt , when in very deed they are nothing but the inventions of Satan , fruits of the forbidden tree , and the death of the soul ; for the life of the soul is the true knowledge of God , which himself doth work & teach in us , to wit , the fruit of the tree of life , whose fruit is that it makes a man gentle , loving , humble , lowly , meek , &c.  By this let a man examine himself , with what wit and righteousness he is endued ; for if day by day , he be less in his own eyes and in the judgement of the world ; if he seem still more foolish in himself , and a child in his own thoughts , his knowledge is divine the seed of the woman , a fruit of the tree of life ; but if he find contrary effects in himself , than is all his wisdom devilish , the seed of the serpent and fruit of the forbidden tree , and so the death of the soul . 

Chap. xi . Of the tree of life , what it is ? why Adam was excluded from it , and not permitted to eat thereof . 

I also grant thus much , that this tree was visible in paradise , and had this divine virtue bestowed upon it , that whosoever eat thereof , should live for ever ; but whereas Adam before had eaten of the forbidden tree , and had incurred death , therefore he should not eat of this tree of life , least otherwise he should have lived for ever ; and in a word , God should have been false in his word , which was that he should die the death , but God who is life itself , would not for ever be angry with his creature , but was unwilling that man should for ever live in that misery , into which he had cast himself , and therefore drove him out of paradise , and afterwards showed him the way by which he should return into paradise again , and eating of this tree live for ever ; and then guarded the tree of life with a cherub and a flaming sword , least man in his exile should have presumed to have come to this tree , and have eaten thereof . 

The will and counsel of God was that it was better that man should die in the flesh , and so put of this miserable life , and change it for a better , then live in it for ever . 

Therefore God who cannot nor will not hate us , dealt every way most merciful with us , if so be we would truly consider of it . 

Now do i think that the same also happened in the true paradise of Adans' heart , the tree of the knowledge of good & evil , is the seed , knowledge , and wisdom of the serpent : and the tree of life , is the seed of the woman , and the wisdom of God ; and these two trees are , as God and Satan ; so contrary one to another , that the one brings life unto us , and the other death . 

Therefore he that eats of the one , its impossible he should eat of the other , because they are divided by a flying cherub and a flaming sword ; which i interpret , sin and disobedience , which sometimes in the scriptures is called a partition wall . 

For he that eats of the tree of knowledge of good and evil , that is he that is possessed with a diabolical wisdom of the flesh , he cannot eat the tree of life ; that is , he is departed from divine knowledge and wisdom that proceeds from God : for these two wisdoms are incompitable , they cannot be in one and the selfsame heart , being as contrary one to the other , as heaven to hell ; he that eateth of the tree of life , and is partaker of divine knowledge , he cannot die , neither sin ; for this fruit eats the eater of it , and changeth him into its own nature , into life , as the scriptures do testify of those that do eat the flesh of Christ . 

For it is one and the same thing , to eat Christ , to live in his word , to eat of the tree of life , to believe in God , &c. as it is also the same thing to be in Adam , to live in Adam , to eat of the tree of knowledge , of good & evil , to obey the word of Satan , and be God . 

Therefore those that eat of this deadly tree , and adhere to the word and wisdom of the serpent , and are born of Satan , these cannot do any thing that is pleasing unto God . As on the contrary the other doth not any thing that is displeasing unto him . 

Therefore he that would be the one , must bid adieu to the other : he must put off the wisdom of the serpent , and Vomit up the fruit of the forbidden tree , who would eat of the tree of life . 

Adam must die in us , and the wit of the flesh must be unlearned of us , if we would have Jesus Christ to live in us , and obtain the direction of the holy spirit ; for the death of the one is the life of the other ; the infirmity of the one is the strength of the other . 

No man can serve two Masters , neither is it possible to unite Adam , God , & the devil together . 

Chap. xii . The praise of the word of God , on which alone man ought to build , rest , reside , and it only know , if he will remain unshaken in adversity , have his faith manifest and approved , and find quietness to his soul . 

Indeed there be many arts profitable to the body , which God the belly hath create , and yet doth daily find out , which truly bring much profit to the kitchen ; and only serve , worship , & obey their god the belly most zealously , as it is expedient they should . But as the common proverb is , that which is profitable to the body : doth often hurt the soul , and that which is the bellies and flesh , as life , food , and plenty , is often times the death of the soul , and a mere poison unto it , because the spirit is contrary to the flesh . 

Hence it comes to pass that table or belly arts , because they be the fruit , offspring , and wit of the flesh , are altogether vain , famine , and death unto the soul . And on the contrary , that only art , the end whereof , was not for God bellies advantage ; which the whole world doth so much slight and little regard , that only true wisdom and theology , to wit , God and the knowledge of his word in him ; together with the knowledge of him divinely infused into our souls , is the sole art only necessary to man's salvation . 

Therefore the true , heavenly , & divine art , the true tree of life , of which whosoever Eateth hath everlasting life . 

Furthermore i say , this art is the food , wine , milk , excellency , defence and all whether the profit , pleasure or advancement of souls ; all other arts being vain , doubtful , and the poison of the soul , hurtful and deadly to the spirit of man , if he lean upon them , rest in them , glory in them , or build his happiness upon their sandy foundation . In a word , they are the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good & evil , of which whosoever eats , as i have amply proved , he shall die the death . 

Therefore i desire that we would not be to righteous nor wise in our own eyes ; as Solomon ( eccles. 8. as also proverbs 3. ) doth faithfully instruct us : that we should esteem nothing to be our wisdom , righteousness , or any other virtue in us , but only to know God in and with himself , and love , praise , worship , fear , honour , and understand him as we ought . Which thing must necessarily proceed from God himself , being the work of his eternal , and in itself everlasting and immutable word , which without spokesman from him proceeds out of his mouth : that he speaks in our hearts , teacheth himself in our souls , imprinting and engraving his image in us , thereby enlightening so our understanding , that to speak in a word , he so teach , love , know , understand , pray unto , hear , guide , govern and worship himself in us . 

All other things whatsoever are to dull , and all the virtue of things are to base , that they should be able to teach us God , and give us everlasting felicity ; or that God by them should give it unto us . 

God will be himself , teach himself , give , and convey himself into our hearts : neither will he suffer his honour to be given to any creature , that by it we should be saved or sanctified ; but he that heareth and learneth it of the father cometh unto him . 

He will himself be the Master of spirits ; and so a spirit shall be taught of a spirit . And all those that are divinely instructed of the all-knowing and understanding God , shall be said truly to be learned and wise . 

The flesh hath teachers , who belonging to the old covenant , have commerce with the flesh . The new covenant , because it is spirit and life , and in like manner hath a spiritual and new birth of God to be instructed , hath also a spiritual word and Master to instruct it , which is the word and spirit of life . 

Therefore if any man would know himself , submit himself quietly to the direction , and permit himself to be spoken too , sought and found in him ; he surely should be elevated to a wonderful light ; if any man i say doth follow the instruction and doctrine of the father in himself , he verily should find God in God and with God . But the world busied and accupied in the creatures passeth away in a confusion , and not considering the hidden and secret treasure that is closed in his heart ; neither seeks for this precious pearl , but covered all over with the earth of the creatures , remaineth in darkness with the multitude of his arts and sciences ; weary , ignorant , and void of all true arts and sciences ; yet doth he in the mean space learn art after art , further and further searcheth into the my fiery of knowledge . 

And to use the words of saint Paul , is always learning , and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth ; but the more he learneth , the more perverse he is ; and to such a madness doth he come at last , through his overmuch wisdom , that he quite forgets what to say , babble , determine , believe , and what opinion to hold ; and so he together with his frail foundation and fickle arts , staggers here and there , slides out of one error into another , until he become vain in all his imaginations , and like to foxes , caught with all their tricks and turnings ; is thereby miserably ensnared in the nets and snares of his own arts and sciences . But the Christian like to the cat , hath but one way , knows but one art , whereby he is able to save himself , yea that a chief one , viz. his God , in whom he hath all things , knows , loves , and comprehends all things ; and therefore he scapeth , when the fox though he know many sleights , & those crafty ones indeed ; yet often together with his sleights , he falleth into the power of the gods and the hands of the hunter . 

Therefore thou canst boast of nothing , nor build upon any other thing whatsoever , but only that sure foundation and art , which is God himself , & his holy word : for all other things forsake man in adversity , except the hope and confession of God ; this is the true preacher in our hearts , if any man will attend and hearken to what he shall speak in him , he hath planted in us the seed of the woman near unto the seed of the serpent , for opposition unto the same ; yea he hath confirmed his spirit , finger , word , and image in us ; his spirit he hath clothed in us with flesh , and hath placed it captive in the midst of its enemies in the tabernacle of the flesh , that it May prevail and overcome , and subduing the flesh May with itself carry it unto God , deify it , engraffe it , & unite it unto God ; for this is the fight between the flesh & the spirit in us , of which Paul speaketh off . 

Therefore if any will yield himself over in the midst of his enemies to the holy spirit , & glory in God , as in a most fortified camp in him : God would ( Without doubt ) once come and vanquish his enemies , and so he should know all things to eternal life . 

But the world doth not attend unto God in himself , always occupied with the sound or noise of the creatures , passeth on with tumult and confusion , and so knows nothing , hears nothing , learns nothing , though in the mean time it compasseth , searcheth , and inquireth out a thousand unprofitable arts , and continually learns , and the longer it learns , it is the more unlearned , until sliding into error at last , it falls quite down . 

But if men as Christians do , would abide with God privately in the school of their hearts ; and with Marie would sit attentively at the feet of their Lord , and would both hear and learn what God would be pleased to speak , teach , & enterprise in them , verily they divinely instructed , would at last vomit up all their arts , as ignorant and folly . And with Paul would forget them , deny them , and account them as dross and dung . 

Standing water is easily made bright with the beams of the sun ; and a rolling stone gathereth no moss ; but the roaring rivers of this world must necessarily be either lukewarm or cold . 

Therefore it is behooveful , that before all things we turn unto God in our souls , and compose ourselves with him in quietness ; daily talking with him , hear him , and learn of him . Which thing the whole world is ignorant off ; it knoweth not how to hear the word , the Master , the teacher , and how to learn of him in himself ; but always it flies out of its own heart into the mouth of man ; who when they be altogether liars , filthy , vain , it comes to pass that they are always deceived ; are always learning , and heaping many arts ; when notwithstanding with all their arts they are ignorant and foolish , because that which they know , is but merely surreptions , thievish , untried , taken upon trust from others , of which they themselves never had experience ; but if any to please the persons have profunctorily believed , yet together with the persons they believe some other thing . 

Then truly like bees they fly out in swarming sometimes , prosecuting a poor weasel , making dear enquiry into a matter of little moment , and fall into some matter of dispute , upon whose , foundation and ground they are altogether ignorant off , until they be satiated with it , than they fall upon some other thing . 

So in times past all Israel ( In whom all the whole world is figured ) together with their Kings and priests did fall , until they wholly erred from the faith , and once taken were led away captive . 

Read the persons painted in my book of the world . 

Now i call with Paul the word of God : that foolish and offensive speech , which to weet doth bring with it the cross , grief , and death of the flesh , and maketh all things which seem something to be nothing , and only looketh upon & regardeth those men who are nothing in themselves , which in the eyes of the world seem the greatest folly that can be . Neither can it be persuaded , that letting pass that which it sees , it should embrace that which it neither hath not sees ; for it would rather have one bird in hand then two in a bush . Neither doth it doubt so it Might keep it to prefer a temporary life before a thousand eternal lives . 

And therefore the word and the preachers of the word have been persecuted for fools . 

Now the word of God is of such a nature and force , that though it hath a vulgar stile so simple in the language of truth , yet it overthroweth all things whatsoever rise against it , it dulleth the edge of all wit , and these enticing and corrupt contemplations , together with the more eloquent kind of lying , it doth bring into such straight , that it maketh them to blush for shame ; although ( As it is always the properties of lies and ungodliness ) they will not confess themselves to be overcome ; for the word of God doth say such strait siege to the heart of man , that every one , if he do not speak against his own conscience , is forced thus to think , and so to determine as the word doth speak , that so it is , and otherwise it cannot be but a lie . 

On the contrary bursts in with a long circumlocution , and one lie doth almost weigh ten lies , that it May seem to be true and have a shadow thereof . 

But the word of God , as i have already said , doth proceed after a most simple manner , but it doth so gird a man , that will he or not , he becometh , amazed , and with admiration astonished & affrighted , doth say , this is the finger of God . 

No man ever spoke thus ; for this word hath such a sharpness , sting , and strength , that it pierceth even into the heart , and seperateth the flesh from the spirit , so as the mind being captivated without all controversy , assents to the same , and confirms the truth thereof with all assurance ; not so crafty subtlety can be objected against the truth , but that May be battered , weakened , and refuted with one word ; neither can any thing so acute be produced , which weakened with the like acute , May not be overthrown , only the word of God overcometh with such force , that even the mind of the enemy is overcome and taken with it ; the outward man alone , and the face of the flesh , which would not be bridled , seeks out all kind of ambushes , tricks and turnings , to escape this thunderclapp . And falsehood , for shame covers its face with its hands , and thereby thinks that the whole body is covered , that it cannot be seen . 

Moreover , it is behooveful , that all other traditions of arts , words , and spirits , be examined by the word of God , as by an index , golden rule , and touchstone . 

I call that the word of God , which is the spirit and life , ( Not the letter ) written without ink and paper in the hearts of believers , which speaks unto the souls of all those that are obedient unto it . This i call the word of God ; not the scriptures . For if we speak properly , the scriptures or letters are not the word of God , but the mind , spirit , and that true divine meaning , which Paul calleth the sense of Christ and mind of the spirit , and Christ the word of God . 

This i say is the word of God , as saint Paul doth testify : the letter ( Saith he ) doth kill , but the spirit , that is the true and spiritual meaning thereof , which only spiritual men are endued with , which doth quicken . 

These alone have the key of David , for the opening of all the seals of this closed book ; to all other the book is sealed with seven seals ; of which mention is made in dan. 7.  Apoc. 5. and mat. 13. by way of parable ; and the veil of the letter doth hang before their eyes , until they turn unto God , and seriously will obey his will . 

The spirit of understanding entereth into no froward scorner , who in the letter only desireth to show his nicety and clarkeship . For the truth is , that word of God , and his secrets , are made manifest to them that fear him . 

Therefore many in our times are snared , who betwixt the writings and the word of God do know no difference , and so do they esteem the scriptures for the word of God , so as beside it they know no other . 

But it appears by the testimony of many divinely taught , that the scriptures are nothing but the husks , the shell , the sheath , the lantern , the shrine , the letter , the cave , the veil of the word of God . From whence it ariseth that they appear so sinister , and in show often repugnant , and are hidden from wicked men . 

But the word of God placed in and under them , is the kernel , the life , fullness , and thing itself , or substance : for otherwise those learned men the scribes and Pharisees had been blessed and happy , if the letter had been the word of God , viz. the light , &c. because they had so well conned the scriptures , that most part of them they could say by heart , yet were they for all that most miserably to perish with this art ; and so death is eaten by the tree of good and evil , while yet men think thereby to have life . 

But Christ doth more ingenuously testify , that they know not the scriptures , that is what in the scriptures is the word of God ; for what otherwise belonged to the letter and grammatical sense they writ , but knew not the mind of Christ , which was the force and meaning of the letters ; and the letters in my judgement are of sett purpose , so sinister and darkly dictated by the holy ghost , comprehended and declared , that those impious swine and dogs May not understand them , according as Christ out of Esay doth allege them , and giveth this reason , why he speaketh so obscurely by similitudes , and demonstrateth the same thing more significantly in John , least we should make an idol of the letter ; and that we should think some other thing more necessary to salvation than bibles : to weet , that of God we should desire the light of his word , which is hidden in this lantern ; and also that true teacher the holy spirit , which May direct , lead , and instruct us in the holy scriptures , and May open the seals thereof , declaring unto us the mystery of this shrine , that is his divine word , law pleasure , will , and meaning , hidden under the dead letter . 

Many think it enough that they have bibles , and know how to read ; here forsooth they find the holy ghost , the word of God , that double sword of the spirit ; yet wrapped up , and closed in the sheath . 

But who can understand , gain , find , and brandish the same ? He answers by the prophet Esay : young children , who will be afraid at this killing letter , they are sore out of heart , tremble and die for fear . 

Therefore it is not enough , although it is good , to have bibles . What to have bibles ? All the Pharises had the same , could say them by heart , and yet they lived no less blind and dead . 

These very bibles are the tree of good and evil , of which they did eat death , although to the godly who consult with God about the meaning of them , and renouncing themselves , pray unto him for the obtaining of his spirit , they be the tree of life ; God will give his glory to none other , no not to the scriptures , but hath made them dark unto us , and hath reserved the interpretation to himself , that he May teach , enlighten , rule , and guide , how , when , and as he will ; and his will is , that we always wax stronger , and by degrees come nearer to the knowledge of the truth , if so be we would do the same by his help ; but he hath not sown his word by the way side for dogs and swine , but hath covered it , the same being hiding in the letter , that we May not rest ourselves contented in the letter , but dig up the hidden treasure ; and with all religion pray for grace and understanding , and consult with his holy spirit , that he May take us into his tuition , guide us , teach us , lead us unto the tree of life , the fruit whereof May feed us up unto eternal life . 

And this is the trial of all arts , doctrines , and spirits , that they be compared and agree with the word of God , that that which is divinely unto us , we find to be true by his word in our hearts . In a word , that our spirits May confirm the same so to be by its testimony , as we have divinely learned the same , and that we sustain for the defence thereof to die . 

Therefore it is likely and so it shall be indeed , what doctrine soever cometh from god , the same is not repugnant to the word , which divinely taught , we have in our hearts , but agreeable , thereunto giveth testimony that we know his word , as we are known of God , and comprehended as we are comprehended of him , otherwise how could we say amen , and assent if the contrary should be fall in us . 

Therefore they are much deceived who think that nothing is the word of God , but what altogether differeth from our minds ; and therefore compel themselves only to believe those things which in their inward man they can perceive , feel , & comprehend to be far wanting in them , and contrary to them . 

Indeed the word of God invadeth our hearts with an exceeding force , because it is spirit , our hearts are flesh ; but where the believing heart addicts itself to the worship of God , the word is soon incorporated in us , and our heart made one with it , is converted into spirit ; so as now the truth it feeleth , yea and what more it witnesseth that to be true , which the spirit doth speak unto it ; and is so bound that it necessarily must assent unto it ; neither doth it so compel or force itself to believe , but it is so compelled , that it cannot but believe , and would a thousand times make a loss of its body rather than believe otherwise . 

So again the mind cannot be believed , and as long as the mind doth not assent , it is a sure argument , that as yet is hath not comprehended , nor as yet is the word incorporated in thee , nor the son of God born . 

For he who comprehendeth the word as he is comprehended , feeleth the same , yea testifieth , & knoweth that the same is true . 

Wherefore compare , or examine all learning with the testimony of the spirit . For if thou art a believer , God dwelleth in thee , and thou art sealed with his word and spirit , but if thou dost not believe , this examination nothing belongeth unto thee ; for it is spoken to the believing Thessalonians , try the spirits . 

If in a wicked man the spirit were to be compared with his heart and with the letters , he could never rightly judge how he doth understand them , because he taketh that to be the word of God whatsoever pleaseth his wicked and perverse heart and eyes . 

On the contrary , it is commanded to the saints , that they try and prove all spirits and doctrines by the word of God , which divinely taught , they have approved in their souls ; not to the wicked who are unfit to every good work , and whose judgement God doth not approve off . 

But if they say , they are to be brought to the touchstone of the word the holy scriptures . I willingly grant the same , so that you understand that of the mind of the scriptures , which is the only word of God ; which also only those who are of God do understand , but if the doctrine and spirit be compared with the letter of the scriptures , it will be compared diversely , every one according to his own understanding , in which they are deceived ; neither is this the true trial , as more clear than light we May see it ; since all desire the letter to be this judge , and think them of themselves to be the same . 

Therefore that which hath not the examination i speak off , which i but now spoke off , is as easily confuted as it is admitted , as Gregory saith . 

Here are cashiered all the arts , explanations , orations , and comments of men , which are boughs and fruits of the forbidden tree , in the paradise of this world , from which as yet all men do eat death , and yet nevertheless with Adam and Eva think themselves to eat life , and hope to be gods . Therefore all men's arts are no other than a plant of the devil , who thinketh by this means to change men into gods , & from hence promiseth life & immortality , when nevertheless death is before their eyes , so soon as they have eaten of this fruit . 

Now that sentence standeth firm : every plant that my heavenly father hath not planted shall be cut down . 

Therefore all those arts must again in their original be brought to nothing . 

That i confess is the only scope of the holy scriptures , which is the word of God , known of them who are of God ; but that the literal and grammatical sense is , this i do not think , which wicked men do understand , and also follow , and yet by Christ are denied to understand the scriptures , but as they expound themselves in the godly , out of the doctrine of the holy ghost ; and this meaning cannot be comprehended in open commentaries and rules , but the holy ghost will have this book & mystery reserved to himself , neither will he have it imprinted but will show , teach , & open to all , according to the measure of every man's faith , as much as is necessary , neither will he have it so committed , that one May teach another , and so encroach upon the privilege of God , but will teach it himself , that all and every one of us May be divinely taught , and May glory that we have learned the word of God from God , and not from men , with pleasant docility , yet so as men ought , and every one May one to another give that testimony which he hath learned from God . 

So it cometh to pass , that with Christ and his apostles we are witnesses of the word , not ministers of the spirit ; for who hath commanded the wind but only the Master of the wind . 

To this belongs that which Job , Jeremy , and Esayas say , that we shall all be taught of God , so as it shall not be necessary for us to be taught of any other , but that so its true as the holy unction shall teach us . 

And whereas God is only true , and all men are liars , it cannot be but it must be a lie and error whatsoever cometh not from God ; and that cannot come from God which all wicked know and understand . Since they are not of God , but are separated from him by the partition wall of sin . 

Now what cometh not from God is sin , and not good ; and what shineth not from his light , is altogether darkness , although it seem to be light and wisdom , as Esay upbraideth the Caldean philosophers , their own wit hath deceived them , and they were wearied with the multitude of their own inventions , &c.  

God speaketh this against all arts , except the art of God , form in us by his word ; which exhibits unto us nothing to be meditated upon , and viewed in the light but only God , to know and understand God , because that word is verily God , without any distinction of nature ; there as God cannot be defined , described , or divided ; but if we speak properly , God is all in all things , and yet nothing of all these things which can be felt , conceived , or comprehended by sense , reason , or understanding , spoken , written , or heard ; so is the word of God infinite , infallible , incomprehensible , eternal , by itself existing , and far exceeding all the writings and words of men , because it , as God cannot properly be written , read , or spoken . Since it is God , and was before writing or man was , and shall  be when man is deceased & writing are ceased . 

Therefore all things are subject unto vanity ; for which cause the nature of all things are called vain and vast , by reason of the accident of vanity , although in itself it be good ; only the word of God , which in itself is perpetual and semperternall , can neither be written in letters , nor expressed in word , endureth for ever . 

Hence it comes to pass , that whatsoever is spoken or written of it , as that which is not of God himself , remains but as a shadow , a figure , and testimony thereof , and is not properly God and his word . 

Now no man can speak or utter this word , therefore it is necessary that it speak itself , in an obedient and willing heart ; and for this cause it is required of every man , that he submit himself under the potent hand of God , void of his own will , free and clear from his own heart , and subordinate to the will of God , that God or his word May speak , teach , seek , love , find , acknowledge , beseech , hear , praise , honour , fear , and adore itself . 

This alone is the art of God , which he himself doth teach in us , without this all other arts are nothing ; for besides this to know all things , is to be ignorant of all things . All arts without this art is vanity , which yet is better conceived in heart than it can be uttered in word ; yea it cannot be expressed or declared in word , therefore no man can teach the same to an other , but it is to be taught and manifested by God , to the teaching of which whosoever are sent , they are not doctors or Masters , but only witnesses of that word , which by the virtue of God is before in our hearts . 

Therefore it hath many names , which oftentimes are used one for an other ; so that as sometimes the father , sometime the son , and sometimes the holy ghost is called the fountain of life or truth ; so the word of God is sometimes called the seed of God , sometimes his soul , sometimes his soonn , sometime his arm , sometimes his hand , sometime his right hand , sometime his law , sometime his will , sometime his image , sometime his inspiration . 

And hither May be referred all the names which the scriptures give to the father , son , and holy ghost , and the word of God , which are all one , and referred unto one , serve to the signification of the same thing . 

And this word which in the new covenant is called Christ , is the essence of all things which are , and all things are create by it , and also are preserved , nourished , and sustained by it , and in it . 

So that all things have their being rather in the word then in themselves . 

And if God should withdraw this word to himself , as was the estate of them before the beginning of the world , while yet the world was not made of him , so should all things necessarily in the same moment be turned to nothing again . 

Therefore doth God even to this day preach this word unto us , and yet it is ineffable , as Taulerus saith , though in him all things have their essence and being in & from God . 

Wherefore to commit and consecrate a man's self to this living word of God , is the only life eternal ; and that true one art and part of Mary which cannot be taken from her ; all other arts are vain and must perish with the inventors and professors , only to know God , & obey his word , which the scriptures calls to eat Christ , to believe in him , to put on the new man , to adhere unto God , to be born a new , to live to the spirit , to hear and receive the word of God , to be baptised , to be engrafted into Christ , to receive Christ , and many other terms : is not only of itself immortal , but preserveth all from death , who are endued with the same . No man can consume this bread , but it preserves him the eater thereof , from eternal death , and hunger unto eternal life . 

This treasure can no thief take away , no rust or moth corrupt . In a word , this eternal word is to a Christian all things ▪ in adversity a sword & weapon against all dangers , meat to him that starves , clothing to the cold , for want of divine grace , and a sure sanctuary to every fugitive . 

But he that knoweth all things , and is ignorant of this , knoweth nothing ; even as he who knoweth and hath all things , and wanteth God , possesseth nothing ; and if it could be , that any man could know all arts , which all men at any time have known and understood ; if he were a Pandora , or a Hippias , knowing all things , yet were he not therefore any whit better in the sight of God ; yea i dare say , he should be so much the worse , by how much he had glutted himself of the tree of knowledge & eaten death ; for the more poison is received , the speedier will the destruction be . 

And even as this was the fall & death of Adam , viz. to become a god , & to arrogate to be something in himself , & to know , i will not say to be ignorant of nothing . That fall cannot be forgiven , or repaired , unless thou vomit up all that diabolical art and curious knowledge ; and besides eat of the tree of life , which shall work in thee an utter forgetfulness of all those arts , and make thee a child , a fool , and reduce thee to innocence under God , that at length thou Mayst know that which God would know in thee ; so he himself should teach and suggest in thee by his word , according as it is said ; otherwise all things are unprofitable , yea though a man know all things , they are not only unprofitable , but also a hindrance to this art of God . He that is ignorant of this , in vain hath he learned & known all things else besides . 

In the word of God alone , which proceedeth out of the mouth of god , is seated the rule of all things , the scope , doctrine , art , life , and truth , teaching what is to be done , what not to be done , what to be spoken , what not to be spoken , whether to enter , from whence to depart and come out . 

All other arts they be variable whatsoever they be to time , fortune , vanity , death , and oblivion ; and not only these arts , but also the letters , books , forms , Masters , tongues , which we use , do perish , and others after them , which succeed in their places , so that nothing is constant & of long continuance in the earth , but all things according to their visible nature , are frail , mutable , and momentary . How often are the tongues themselves changed ; how often the forms being removed , do new succeed in their place ▪ ( As i have said before ) orthography is not ever like itself , and the same with all persons in all times ; yea the true pronunciation of the Latin tongue ( As Cornelius Agrippa in his book , called de vanitate scientiarum , formerly alleged by us ) is perished , and nowhere extant . Moreover , the ancient letters of the Hebrews are gone , so that there is no memory left thereof , but only those which Esdras in their place invented . 

Add moreover , that the tongue is made very lame by the Chaldeans , which also hath been incident to perish of other tongues ; so that no man there is who can find out their ancient form and dialects ; besides this new words do always creep in the old word , being grown out of use . And again , the old words are received , the new being thrust out ; so far forth , that nothing is durable or constant in this life . And if any man would observe , he shall find that our mother tongue in England is daily changed : that at this day they speak otherwise then they did a few years since ; yea and such a curiosity & nicenesses there is in the word and tongues , that what men have a while made use off , suddenly they cast away , as disdaining the same ; every man endeavouring to bring out some new and rare thing , that he seem not to imitate the words of any other : insomuch that the chief inventor of words do now obtain the chief praise and estimation of art.  And by this means all things are confounded in the earth ; and what now is new , is presently grown old , and anon become new again ; and the hearts of men , the kingdoms , peoples , and languages of the world , like to the course of the year . 

In times past France spoke the Dutch language ( As beatus Rhenamis writing of the German affairs , most elegantly proves ) but now it hath gathered a proper speech to itself out of Italy , German , & Spain , but most specially from Italy ; which thing of the tongue was caused , perhaps by their war , because divers persons being mixed together , they made and used a mixed kind of speech . 

Hence it came to pass , that as yet they retain some of the German words : as suppen Sacken kushen , which they almost according to the nether Germains pronounce , after the bastard German Souper , Sacen , cuysten . 

This i speak that we May see , that nothing is constant or new in the earth , and that is true which Terence writ : nothing is spoke now which was not spoke before ; so nothing is done which was not done before . So that Cornelius Agrippa thinks the invention of gunpowder , and •unss was no new invention ; of which opinion in the historian Volatiramis ; and this May be gathered out of the sixt of Virgil's eneads , where thus he writes of salmon : 

I Salmon saw with pain & torment late who would loves flame & thunder imitate , for carried by four steeds , with torch in hand through Elis city & all Grecian land did ride in triumph , and command that all sh•uld give him honour and a deity call ; oh mad man , he who with his chariot's noise would imitate the mighty thunder's voice , 

And Solomon shows the same all along in the 3. chapt. of eccles. as also to the first : that what hath been that shall be , what hath been done , the same shall be done , neither is there any thing new under the sun . 

There is something which is as if it were new , yet was that in ancient times which hath been before us . There is no memory of former ages , neither shall there be of those that are to come ; amongst who are to be ; and a little after things past , and things to come , are all forgotten , and the wise together with the fool do die . In which words what other thing would the preacher show then that all arts are subject to oblivion and death ; neither can they always remain in the soul , but together with the body departs or perisheth by death . For nothing ( I say ) can adhere unto the image of God , ( I mean the soul which is like unto God ) and consist in death and fire ; but what is only God and his word , this is the only endure able creature , and the meat of eternal life : not that opinion and art of philosophers , but the true good of the mind and soul , which can happen to no other thing but the word ; although i do not deny but that word appeared to some of the gentiles , and taught them ; because God is no respector of persons , but as a common light of souls , as the sun is the light of the whole world ; neither is the hand of God shortened , nor his eye envious , that he should not look upon the whole world . With the same love , eye , and grace since we are all alike the same workmanshipp of God , all of the same love , estimation , and authority with him . 

Hence thou Mayst collect , that all arts ( Invented by men ) are death , and fruits of the tree of knowledge of good and evil . For assoon as Adam had eaten of that tree , the same day he died in the eyes of God ; as the history declares ; although afterwards according to the flesh he lived many years ; as from heavenly matters the same day was his eyes shut up , and he eat death , although in his own judgement his eyes were opened , and he seemed to himself to be a living God , knowing good and evil : then began he to exercise his art , his cunning to expound , dispute and seek out a malicious sutle and captious meaning in all things , and also to deal deceitfully with God , and in all things to hide himself , to cover himself with fig leaves , to kiss his own hand ; in a word , to worship himself , by inventing many arts amongst his posterity . 

And out of this root spring up all the precepts of men , their expositions , their arts ; and so excellent a foundation have they , as both the inventor and the author of them was the devil ; and the first scholar that learned them , did eat death therefrom . 

And this science and art is utterly to be abhorred , being no other than a diabolical persuasion , conceived in Adam , form and hide in the seed of the serpent ; and yet all the world , as Adam did , thinks that life is placed in it ; neither doth it receive any instruction from Adam ▪ neither indeed understand the history of Adam's fall , or his rising again ; and that whole matter at this day doth live yet , accounting it but a history long since acted & done , and afterwards dare say the word of God endureth for ever . 

Therefore we must needs confess that nothing is past which in its kind is not yet extant . 

Whole Moses is urged upon Christians , neither is one jot of the word of God lost , which shall not be fulfilled in every moment in spirit & truth . 

Therefore the fall of Adam happeneth daily ; daily doth Adam in his posterity eat of the forbidden fruit ; and therefore his sons in Adam , as in the root , are damned & dead . 

Now this our fall as Adam's , is amended and repaired , if we spurt out and vomit up this knowledge of good and evil as poison , and become as Adam was before his fall , children , fools , and innocent turttles , that we May eat of the tree of life , and suffer the seed of the woman to be engrafted in us . This is not the seed , the art , wit , and counsel of the serpent ; but the seed , word , will , the mind of God , the tree of life , which whosoever eateth , and suffreth himself to be fed therewith , is endowed with eternal life . 

Now in us there is a medicine with poison ; for as by sin the tree of knowledge of good and evil was planted into the heart of Adam , so by his conversion , rising again , and seed of the woman , the tree of life is planted by the tree of death in the heart of Adam . From these two seeds & trees so different , do spring different fruits , so as one is poison and death , the other is medicine & life ; and if any man would know that plant , which is called man , he May easily know what he ought to think of his own art , knowledge , wisdom , and righteousness , how that this pleaseth all men , and is of great respect with them ; for what is current with the world but its own coin ? What but the wisdom , art , and righteousness of the flesh , seemeth holy in the sight of men : only the holy ghost can reprehend the world of sin , righteousness , and judgement . 

It is wonderful to behold how the world doth daily yet eat death of the forbidden tree ; which tree you May call ( As the German theology doth ) our own will ; and although God do daily cry aloud in them , and moreover provideth by the witnesses whom he sendeth to teach them externally , that they abstain therefrom , or otherwise they shall reap death therefrom , yet none believeth but all follow that serpent , which secretly in our heart doth speak thus : not death shall you reap by any means , but if you know many arts , you shall be like unto God , and live for ever ; ( This the whole history of the bible remains in force at this day ; ) & from hence ariseth a certain art and curiosity , enquiring & searching out ; neither will any submit himself docibly and simply unto God , and obey his word . 

But every man will be his own , yea God's Master too , and teach both himself and God , bring him into the school , and there prescribe unto him , with whom , where , what , wherefore he shall do , speak , permit , or omit . 

Hence it cometh to pass that wisdom is justified always of her children ; and those men skilled in a thousand arts , and above measure crafty , God cannot satisfy , neither can he obtain his kingdom , or get any love or right at their hands . Since they will be altogether gods , and kiss their own hands , will , wisdom , prudence , and reason . 

The art of the devil , which is sucked out of the duggs of the serpent , hereupon we compose many books , desiring to teach the whole world , not knowing how to teach ourselves . 

From hence it comes that the proud devil , alas ! is buried deep in learned men , whom their deadly knowledge doth so dangerously puff up , that they think themselves worthy all honour , both from God and men , and oftentimes if not in word , yet indeed they make their estate as Lucifer and Adam did . 

No man understandeth how we daily become Lucifers and Adam's , but think that to be the relation of a thing long since done in Adam , and condemn his wicked pride and fall , when nevertheless we all stick fast over head and ears in the same , and yet deride others who in this kind are foolish . 

Divines preach much the word and his precepts , but when they are to be kept , indeed they are wanting in this ; yea what themselves do sometimes teach they will not suffer others to practise , but contented merely in the bare words , so making the word of God nothing but a mere art , a matter of talk and disputation , & had rather be called knowers and fearers of God , than lovers of him , that not in vain is the proverb , which is verified by experience , teaching and confirming the same : the greater scholar the worse Christian . 

The grammarian is careful that he err not in his speaking , but little regardeth the error of his life . 

In like manner the poets had rather be lame in their lives then halting in their verses . Philosopher's would know all things , but not themselves . The historian describeth all peoples , but neglecteth himself . The orator is more solicitous that he speak not rudely , then that he believe not , or live wickedly . The logician will sooner forsake the truth , then leave his opinion and conclusion . They that have any thing to do with geometry , do sooner measure the earth than their ways . The musician taketh more care that his song be not dissonant then that his carriage be consonant . Astrologers travel over the whole heavens , and foretell things to come , but see not the ditch under their feet . 

The cosmographer relates of all mountains , valleys , woods , and rivers , but that makes him not one hair better in the sight of God . The physician healeth sick men's bodies , but neglecteth the healing of his own soul . Lawyers are alone expert in the precepts of men , but negligently violate the laws of God , so as the proverb from hence hath risen . Neither doth the physician live , nor the civilian die well , because physicians of all men are most intemperate , and civillians the worst Christians ; and for that cause ( As Baldus being an expounder of the law himself doth say ) the most part of them are taken away by sudden death . 

Other arts-men i will not here mention , but refer you to Cornelius Agrippa , chap. 100  

So the devil doth compass us about with the rope of folly ; insomuch that sometime with one question , sometime with another art , we be so amazed ; in the mean time we neglect the only science of God , in which all things consist , even as the adulteress Medea ▪ when her husband Jason pursued her , cut her children in pieces , & dispersed their members in the way , that Jason Might be busied in the gathering of them up , while she escaped out of the country . 

Alas , shall death , sin , and the devil thus please us ? shall we always thus seek God in hell with the devil ? Light with darkness ? The living among the dead ? 

One thing is necessary , and this no man will desire ; many things are unprofitable and unhealthful , yea deadly ; yet these are greedily desired off , and devoured by all men . 

In the word of God alone , and no other thing , are all things placed , neither therefore will it profit thee to have all things , to know , will , speak , surpass in measure , dispute off , number , paint , adorn , judge , teach all things , &c.  To know all things , is nothing else then to know the arts of the devil , eaten by his counsel of the forbidden tree ; only to know the word and will of God , and to live according unto it ; to be fruitful in good works , is the true art and eternal life , eaten of the tree of life ; in vain , it is to know all things , yea rather it is bitter death , as hath been sufficiently spoken off before . 

Since therefore all the arts , wit , and righteousness of men , springeth from the tree of knowledge of good & evil , or rather from the devil ; and therefore is the fall and death of Adam ; it necessarily followeth , that the more any man is learned therein , and experienced ▪ the higher he hath ascended , the worse and more perverse he is ; as he who hath made the greatest proficiency in the wisdom and knowledge of the devil . 

And again , the more foolish a man is in this art , and in the wisdom of the flesh and the serpent , and the more be hath unlearned , forgotten , and emptied himself thereof , the more righteous he is , and wise before God : for we must altogether forget and unlearn this fleshly art , this curious sagacity , this devilish righteousness ; and in steed thereof must learn the only new , contrary , and divine art , wisdom , and righteousness , by the eternal word , by the seed of the woman of the tree of life , of which whosoever eateth , shall have eternal life . For this cause the scriptures do so vehemently urge new birth , childishness , foolishness , hate of a man's life , deny all of himself ; which would not be , if there were any thing that is good or acceptable to God in man before . 

No man thinks of this , but all men being puffed up with their own arts , wit , righteousness , goodness , &c. being secure and without conscience or religion , and yet do eat death of this forbidden tree , that is of their own will , wit , reason , knowledge , goodness , and art , by that seed of the serpent , implanted in them . But God doth exact nothing but the knowledge of himself , and that we would be obedient to his word , and submit ourselves to be taught by him , which the scriptures do sometimes call faith , which bringeth us unto God , begets us anew , and regenerates us , that thence do flow the waters of life , the fruits of the spirit , love , peace , joy , a guiltless mind , and all other good things , which the scriptures do sometimes call faith , which bringeth us unto God , begets us a new , and regenerates us , that than do flow the waters of life , the fruits of the spirit , love , peace , joy , a guiltless mind , and all other good things , which the spirit of God effecteth and poureth into us . 

Therefore theology is the true magic , the worship , & science of God , which God doth equally exact from us all . And this is the same which God doth exact , teach , and effect by his word in them , who offer and submit themselves to that his word and clemency to be taught . 

Therefore doth he so frequently and often admonish us , that he Might make it known , that in him alone is life and all other things to be found , and that he threatneth and inflicteth great punishment on them that despise him , as many places of the scriptures do witness , though the word of God is not tied or bound unto them , as we will prove anon ; yet they give good direction and testimony to the mind , if any man can have the same & use it aright ; and yet do much more , abuse the scriptures then rightly use them . Nevertheless they are not to be forsaken any more than a man's wife , children , meat , drink , &c. all which May be abused , but yet we must learn to use them rightly . 

Chap. xiii . Of the majesty , of the free , constant and eternal word of God , how it can be bound to nothing , included in nothing , nor buried in the letter ; and also the difference betwixt the internal and the external word . 

The word of God is as God , infinite , invisible , ineffiable , a spirit and life , which no mortal man can speak , see , or hear , but as far as is lawful to speak of it after the manner of men , and by similitude . 

The word of God is nothing else than the glistering , the essence , the image , the form and splendour , as well imprinted like a seal into all creatures , as more specially into the hearts of the faithful , which in all things is the cause of their being , in all believers teacheth , in all wicked men reproveth , exhorteth , and contendeth and reprehendeth the world of sin , and which in the beginning did enlighten & inform the hearts of Adam , Abel , Noah , Loathe , Abraham , Job , Mercury , Termigestus , Plotimus , Cornelius , and all other upright-hearted gentiles . 

For though God giveth being , in , above , below , without , and beyond all creatures , and is the essence of all things that be ; yet in nothing is he so clearly to be seen as in man , whom therefore he create after his own image , and perfected in Christ . 

Therefore as brightness doth so proceed from the light of the sun , as yet it is not separated from the sun , but for all that remains in the sun , though it fill the whole world , and enlighten the same ; so is the son in like manner whole in the father , and in all the creatures , as the light is in the sun and in the whole world : 

Therefore it is called the brightness of his majesty , and the image or figure of his divine essence ; of the same nature , substance , and essence with God ; so as nothing can be spoken of the father , which May not also be verified of the word : God is nowhere and everywhere , in all places , in all things , and yet incomprehensible above and beyond all things ; limited to nothing , so far forth that the heavens and earth are not able to contain him , nor all the creatures . So is the word . 

Even as the light of the sun hath an original , from whence it proceedeth , and a force & action into which it tendeth , which original is the sun itself , and which external active force is the heating or enlightening of the whole world , or as the word of every man hath original force and spirit , which original is man , whose expression and image the word is , and of the same essence with him . 

And thirdly , it hath an active force or spirit , which qualifieth this word , and makes it either cheerful , or angry , or sorrowful or displeased . So the original of this divine word is the father , or the action , or active force , or virtue of it is called the holy ghost . 

As therefore the sun , is light , and that active force of that light , is the same ; and as man his word , and the active force of that word , is the same ; so the father , the word , and the holy ghost , are one God . Wherefore nothing that appertains to their essence can be spoken of one , which cannot also be verified of all , that is all three ; and as they are of the same essence , so of the same condition , disposition , and nature . 

As therefore God is in nothing , and yet in all things ; so also is his almighty word , which is the same : as God is so in all things , yet that he can be included in nothing , and so above all creatures , as the earth , heaven , or any other creature is not able to conceive or circumscribe him . And so in all creatures , as nothing is without him , or rather nothing there is that is not full of him . So is also his word . 

As God can neither be spoken or written , nor any man is able to declare what God is , but all things which are said of him , are but images & shadows . I will not say as Taulerus and dr. Eickarius say , seeing if we speak truly and properly , the whole nature of God is far otherwise then man doth or is able to speak of him . 

Lastly , as God is a thing opposite , and contrary to human cogitation , and far otherwise than he is conceived to be in the thoughts of man ; so also is the divine word of God . 

As there is nothing so little in which there is not God ; and again , nothing so great that can receive or circumscribe God . As nothing is so little but God is less , and nothing so great but God is greater , beyond , without , below , & above all creatures ; so also is his divine word . 

As the free , almighty , eternal , immutable , omniscient , incomprehensible , invisible , and unconceivable God is the being of all things ; so as as all things consist rather in him then in , and by themselves ( As Taulerus and the German theology in a 1000 places do avouch ) and is none of these things which can be seen or comprehended by sense or expressed by word ; so his divine word is free in all , and beyond all , bound unto nothing , neither tied to the prison , or letters , or cover of the letter , concluded , included , and so tied unto it , that otherwise it is nowhere ; even as the following position and sentence of a learned man divinely instructed do show . 

As the word is covered and hidden by the letter , so it is opened and revealed by the spirit . 

Hence it cometh to pass that the letters be as a closed or sealed book ; so as the dark letter , except it be opened , doth slay ; but the spirit doth quicken , and the letters are as a certain image , void of life and spirit : that is a printed and dead expression of the spirit ; therefore they want life , ( Except the soul of the spirit be present ) and do err . 

Therefore the letters cannot be the word of God . Since the word is far otherwise an other thing than the letters ; for it is a spirit , truth , & life ; but the letters are contrary : flesh the letter & death ; yea the letters if they want the light of the word , are an offence ; & if they want the soul of the spirit , are a stumbling block . 

Therefore the letters are an otherwise thing then the word ; that is , they are not the sword of the spirit , but a sheath ; for as the womb of the virgin conceived the word , so the letters . 

For the word is clothed both with flesh & with the letters , that seed of abrahem layeth hold of the scriptures or letters , ( For they are both one , ) and again is apprehend by them ; but the spirit is not apprehend in the flesh or letter of the scriptures . 

The cause thereof is this : the flesh or letter cannot contain , conceive , or comprehend the majesty of the word ; yet even as it was so in the flesh , that the majesty thereof did not appear ; so it is in the letter , that true neither to all , or to any one that reads , is it obvious and apparent . 

This is witnessed by all learned men in the mere letter , since the world began , who neither could know , find , or comprehend Christ in the flesh , nor the word in the letter ; which they should have done , if Christ in the flesh , or under the misery of the flesh had been known unto all , not hidden but manifested ; and the letter had been not the covering mystery , but the true living and enlightening word of God itself . 

As therefore the flesh was not the word , but the cover thereof , and a certain great mystery ; so the letters are not the word properly , but the shell , the bark and cover thereof . 

The word was made fleshly assumption , not mixture , and so the same word is made letters , yet not so as the same can be said of the letters , as of the word , but as in a certain seal . 

Therefore so far are the letters from being the word of God , that they only be the figure and bark thereof . 

For the word is not that which is spoken by the letter , but that which is expounded by the holy ghost , and understood only of the faithful . 

Therefore the letters do paint out , & shadow out ; and after a certain manner set forth unto us the word , and express something , but are not the word , although they be spoken and expressed . 

For the word did not assume the flesh that it is not out of the flesh . So it did not so fall into the letter , that it is not out of the letter ; for there was the word when there was no letters ; and the same will remain after the letters are perished . 

Therefore as the word was never included and circumscribed in the flesh , neither is it in the letters . 

For so it was in the body , as it never yet left heaven , and in the same manner it is so in the letter as yet it is everywhere . 

Therefore the word is in the letter altogether , but not all . Hereupon we see that the letters have been exercised with a continual increase and addition . 

Therefore the letters are the image of the word , and not the word itself ; and if they be , they are altogether a written , and a dead , & not a living word ; for there is a twofold word , one that quickeneth , viz. the spirit , another the letter , which is said to kill and slay . 

The living word is that which inwardly teacheth , and maketh us to fructify ; the dead word is that which in the flesh and letter is proposed unto us . 

The living word is a true light , which enlighteneth all men , and therefore a regenerating spirit , because it reneweth all things . In a word , it is the power and might of God , which giveth unto us that knowledge , sense , soul , and life , which is from God . A certain brightness of the face of God , which enlighteneth us from above , & imprints in us the unction of the holy ghost , by which it teacheth and instructeth us in all things ; but the dead word are the letters , that sealed book , and dead letter , sense , and will , which is the word of the flesh , not of the spirit of God . 

The true and living word is that which God begetteth in us , and the spirit of God effecteth in us ; but the dead and literal word is that which the letters show unto us and men propound . 

Therefore he doth not always want the word who hath not the letters : for he May have the interior who wants the exterior word , to wit , the law of God written in our hearts . 

Hence it comes to pass , that no man hath absolute need to be taught of an other , or to admonish his brother concerning the knowledge of God . 

For all these shall know , from the least to the greatest , and are all the disciple of Christ divinely taught . 

This writing is not printed with ink and paper , but written with the finger of God in the tables of our hearts . 

This is the doctrine of the truth , and the inspiration of the spirit , to wit , the prophetical breathing , the inspiration of the spirit , and the true art of God . 

Moreover , he May have the living word of God who wants the dead of the letter ; and the thing itself who wants the sign , that is the life of the word , though he wants the dead letter ; for two things are chiefly to be considered in the word . 

The first is the disposition and nature of the word , which is a certain light intended for the enlightening of men . 

The other is the action of it , that is the spirit , which giveth action and operation to the word . For the word hath not only a knowledge , but also a certain action , it is not only a light and splendour in us given from above but also life . 

The interior word containeth both of these which sometimes is called the kingdom of God , sometimes the spirit , sometimes Christ dwelling in us . For it is not only a light , way , and guide , but also spirit , truth , and life ; that is , which not only teacheth man that he May understand , but also moves him that he works . 

But the exterior word is far from this privilege , and hath far a different nature ; for it is nothing else but a certain form & figure of the interior , i will not say a shadow . Therefore the interior words , as it is the only lively , so it is the only true word , as being the truth and life . 

But on the contrary the exterior is nothing but a killing letter , and a deceitful figure of the word . 

Hence it ariseth , the letter , ( As Christ ) becomes a certain snare to wicked men , a stone of offence , darkness , not light , death , and not life . 

Therefore it is necessary , that beside the exterior word , the interior be sought after and known : since the exterior deceiveth a man with its shape , is death and darkness , unless the light & life of the spirit be together present with it . 

Moreover , the exterior suffereth a man to be sluggously and idle , except the power of the interior be present with it . Therefore the interior word May be without the exterior , as the exterior without the interior . 

Therefore it doth not necessarily follow that a man hath the word of God , because he pretends and hath the letter ; as on the other side it followeth not , that he who wanteth the exterior word or letter , wanteth also the interior , true , and heavenly word , which is God himself . For he doth not always want the word who hath not the letter ; for the letters doth only give a testimony of the word , so far are they from being the word itself ; yea they are scarce the image of the living word ; much less are they it , which neither can be written nor expressed by words both which is incident to the letters . 

Therefore the letters are far from being the word of God , yea all the word , though sometimes they be called the word of God ; as the image and picture of a man is called sometimes by his name , even as God is sometimes called man , & the word flesh : not that God is man , or the word or spirit is made flesh , by imitation , appellattion , and permixion ; so as what is said of one , May be verified of the other , or so as God cease to be God , and to be truly changed into man , as that water in Cana Galilee was changed into wine . 

Or so as the word is so flesh , as not now it is not the spirit , or the word but flesh , in no wise . 

The word is not so in the letter , that they be one and the self same thing , or so as the word should have changed itself into the letter ; and yet well and rightly the letters are called the word of God ; so as God is called man , and the word flesh ; although to speak properly , neither is the word of God changed into letters , nor God into man , nor the word into flesh . 

Therefore both these May be true , the letters are the word of God , and the letters are not the word of God . 

Now although the letters are sometimes in some respect the word of God , yet truly are they not the sole , nor altogether , nor all the word of God ; yea if we speak properly , they are not the word of God , which either can be spoken or written ; and that the letters are not the sole word of God , May be made known by this : that many things besides the scriptures are revealed & inspired unto many , and many things are spoken and written by them which are not contained openly in the letters , yea which sometimes are contrary to the dead letters . 

The prophets , & Moses , & Christ , and his apostles , whose words seem to be contrary to the prophets , what they have written of the temple , the sacrifice , circumcision , and of the vision of God . 

Moreover , the true word of God hath been from all eternity ; yea even before any scripture was , ( As i have said before ) & it will be hereafter when the scriptures are perished . Therefore the word is improperly in the letter and flesh , and therefore it is improperly called flesh or the letter ; for my word ( Saith Christ ) is spirit and life . 

Therefore the word cannot be that word which is flesh or dead letter ; wherefore though the word truly and indeed is only in spirit , as in which it only liveth , yet it is also in the flesh , but yet weak if there it be alone without the spirit and life . 

It is also in the letter , but altogether dead , unless the spirit do quicken it , as the soul doth the body ; and it is in both , and yet not truly , and if truly , yet not all , and only , and lively . 

Now , although the word is in the spirit lively and true , yet after a more peculiar & excellent manner it is in the flesh then in the letter , although the spirit be present with the letter , and lend a hand , it teacheth nothing , but when the spirit dwelleth with the flesh , it not only teacheth , but also maketh alive , and bursteth out into works . 

So the letter of the law brings men to no perfection , although it be the word of God , as also the scriptures spoken by the mouth of God , and written by his finger ; for the word of the law did teach the knowledge of the precept , but did not give man a will and strength to fulfil the same , but the word which is made flesh giveth life to believers . 

Hence it cometh to pass , that the flesh inspired with the word and spirit of God , wills and doth keep the commandment of God . 

Therefore the word in the flesh doth only give an example of life , when on the contrary it leaveth in the letter all things idle and sleepy . 

But in the spirit it truly stirs up the heart and affections towards the law , for the spirit is the life and soul of the word , and therefore the word itself ; but the flesh is a certain imitation of the word , the letters a certain printed picture and copy of the word . Wherefore the written word is not the true word , but a certain image thereof ; yea the scriptures pronounced in words are not the true word of God , but only a testimony thereof : for the scriptures had beginning in time by occasion , but the word was from all eternity . Add to which the scriptures do lead men into error , except the interpreter , viz. the spirit be present . 

And they are a sealed book , and a perplexed labyrinth , unless the spirit be present , as the treede of Theseus' , to guide us , and as the key of David to open unto us . 

Hence it comes to pass , that many men seeing see not , and hearing hear not , and as who know the scriptures , and yet neither know nor understand . 

Therefore we confess that the letters are a certain image and figure of the word , yet they are not truly the very word , because they are but only an image & figure thereof . 

This is the reason wherefore we admit no other word but what is answerable to this image or example of the scriptures , and to the true and spiritual sense . 

Therefore the scriptures are as the index or golden scales of the word , so they be understood not according to the dead letter , but according to the mind of Christ and will of the spirit . 

Therefore we reject not what is agreeable to the true meaning of the scriptures , so we do not deny what is not contrary unto them ; for whosoever is not against us is of us . 

Therefore we deny not the exterior word , written or spoken , so do we confirm the interior or living , so it is we grant the mastery and unction of the spirit , and do not deny the gift of prophecy and interpretation of the scriptures . 

For the word hath something to come and something obscure & difficult to the flesh . That which is to come , the spirit taketh it of the word , and declareth it unto us , that which is obscure & hard to be understood , it daily teacheth unto us , and leadeth us into all truth . Therefore under the name of the word of God , the letters are not only understood , but all prophecies , visions , dreams , unctions , inward speakings , doctrines of the spirit & revelations if they be from God ; also whatsoever holy men by the instinct of the spirit have either spoken or done . 

Therefore no man must adhere peremptorily to the only letter ; where the holy ghost is , there is liberty , and the free word is bound to none . Moreover , the holy ghost suffereth no rule or limit to be prefixed to it in its own ; therefore to nothing it is tied but to itself , that is , be not contrary and disagreeing to itself , as therefore many things come and are spoken from God ; all which ( Nay not the thousand part ) are written in the scriptures ; so many things at this day happen & are spoken by God , which are not written ; and yet nevertheless they are the word of God , and wrought by him . 

Add to which that many things there are not written , nor expressed in words , which we yet receive for the word of God , and only by hand as it were , have received them from our forefathers , of which kind are the abrogation of the precepts of the first counsel , renewed after by the holy ghost to the church ; so as the church was freed from the same ; of which things we notwithstanding have no written or express word . 

Christ himself taught all in word , and writ nothing , and commanded his apostles to preach , not to write . 

And the church is begotten rather by word then by writing . 

Moreover , the doctors & preachers of the new covenant were called and indeed are the ministers of the spirit , not of the letter . 

By all these it is manifest , that the free and swift spirit is not tied unto letters , nor the doctrine of the spirit can be included into the jail , prison and corner of the scriptures . 

Therefore although there be many books of the law , something sometimes May change to come in handling of which there is no express canon or law to be found , but it is to be excogitated and ruled by reason . 

So oftentimes such a rare thing happeneth , the letters do universal forsake a man , that they cannot teach , comfort , guide , or appease him ; but a man must necessarily repair unto God , and consult with the peculiar word of the spirit by prayer , to comfort and strengthen his weakened conscience ; for it is not sufficient to have the common call and word , except a man have special , proper , and inward call , which yet is not contrary unto the common . 

And although the word of God is altogether one , and undivided , yet how much thereof a man hath received by faith , so much of it is his ; and this is his word ; his issue the word of God is , as God himself , must be made every ones by faith . 

No otherwise than whereas the light of the sun is common ; yet as much as every one is enlightened thereby , so much is the sun his , and no more ; so as much as every one hath of God and his word , so far is he his God , and so far hath he God and his word , which are common to all , peculiar to himself . 

Therefore the letters are far weaker than to satisfy a troubled conscience in the offences thereof , and to make quiet again ; the lively word of God must do this , and this honour hath God reserved only to himself , neither will he permit it to the letters , or any creatures whatsoever . Moreover , the holy ghost will not be bound or captivated in those that are his , nor be subject to the mastery of any one , nor suffer that it should be taught by any writing or mouth of man , but will itself be the light , the doctor , Master , captain , and in a word all in all things . 

Moreover , he who useth the scriptures for a testimony of that work & spirit , so he do it according to the mind of Christ ; not interpreting them according to the interpretation of the scribes and Puarisees , doth only use the scriptures aright , according to the will of God , according as he ought ; all others are mere abuses , and the worship of images , as the whole world busies itself in the scriptures , and esteem them to be their Apollo , as if the holy ghost & God were no longer to be consulted with , concerning any affairs , but only the letters . 

In a word , here they inquire and have all things ; here with the Pharisees they think to have life ; neither will they grow by an others man's harm , nor will they see how blind , impious , ignorant , and dead they ever have been in all ages , in divine things , and in the word of God , who have been the most learned , and could all the bible at their finger's ends , having for all that need to hear and learn the truth from Christ ; so dark and deadly are the letters , which they make their idols . 

Paul calleth the letters death , but they life ; but indeed they are eternal darkness , death , aenigma , allegory , and a sealed book . 

Unless thou have the living word of God unto the light , and in them rely upon the holy ghost ; for thy teacher , inspirer , interpreter , guide , and Master ; and yet many of them dare make the book to be open when as yet they cannot agree in the exposition of it . And from thence do as many sects and heresies arise , as readers and heads do attempt to read it . 

But know thou , and have it as a thing most true , that they are clean only to the clean , spiritual to the spiritual , the word of God to them who are of God , and religiously study them by the direction and guidance of the holy ghost , whom they carry always with them , and put as a light into this , otherwise dark lantern ; so as by the the doctrine of the spirit & direction of it they bring more light unto them ; then they receive therfrom ; what they receive therefrom is nothing else or no other but a certain testimony of the spirit of them and all doctrine . 

the Bereans used the scriptures as Christ would have them to be used : ( Acts 17. ) Search the scriptures , ( saith he , ) in which ye think ye have eternal life , ioh. 5.  but he thinks otherwise ; for it follows , they are they which testify of me , that i am the life and word which speaketh unto you , John 8.  

As therefore we grant that the scriptures are the rule of the word & judge of spiritual things ; so in no wise will we remove out of the church , the word of God , and unction of the spirit . 

For even as we defend the majesty and authority of the word of God against the dead letter , so will we maintain the mastery of the spirit against the executioner of the letter . 

And so do we grant the fulfilling of the swift and short word , as in the only precept of love all is contained , both the law and prophets be comprehended therein , we ingenuously confess . 

Wherefore as we do not take away the word of the law , but confirm it : so we do think that something is yet daily to be opened in the church , by the unction of the doctors thereof ; the sign and earnest not of that which is necessary to salvation , but to the gift of prophesying , and the hidden interpretation of the scriptures . 

Since Christ never forsaketh his spouse , but is always present with her unto the end , math. 28. and being ever in the midst of her , doth guide & direct her , 2 cor. 9  

This is the reason wherefore we do not force or include the majesty of the word of God within the narrow prison of the letters . 

Finis . 





Luke 10.  deut. 11.  






















































































































































