A TREATISE concerning the Trinity of persons in Unity of the Deity . 

Written to Thomas Mannering an Anabaptist , who denied that jesus is very God of very God : but man only , yet endued with the infinite power of God. ( ⸪ ) 

Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford , dwelling on Adling hill near Carter-lane . 160● . 

TO MY VERY Loving and dear friend Master Thomas White , a Citizen of Bristol . 

While I was at Norwich , in the year 1597.  I written this Treatise upon such occasion as appears therein , and delivered it unto that Heretic , that by himself , if God would , he might consider and be persuaded Since which time I have kept it by me : and though some of my private friends desired copies ; yet allowing that wisdom of Solon , who would make no law against Patricide , lest the mention of the fact might give occasion to commit it : and withal considering that it is too s●mple and poor for the public view ; I have hitherto refused to make it common . Yet now perceiving a present necessity , because that s ●me of late have wandered in this labyrinth : & withal remembering , that of any weakling shall hereafter entertain this opinion , he may , before he be wholly possessed therewith , find the absurdity of it and be reform ▪ that many a novice in Christianity , who therefore doubts of the trueness of his Religion , because he finds no familiar reason to persuade , but only the rack of authorities to 〈◊〉 him to acknowledge it ; may perhaps be hereby satisfied and find comfort : and that they who are already strong , may by this overplus , triumph in the goodness of God , who requires them to believe no more , than they may by that understanding , which he hath given them , be persuaded of : I have for their sakes , who may reap benefit thereby , set at naught all other Censurers , not guilty unto myself of any offence which I can commit in making it public . Such as it is , accept ( good master White ) as a parcel of that assertion , which may hereafter follow , of every article of our Christian faith ; if God shall vouchsafe me understanding , leisure , and maintenance thereto . I therefore offer it unto you , both because I know you are diligent in reading books of good argument ; and because I have none other means , whereby to show myself thankful for your manifold kindnesses and your love . At London , this 20. of April . 1601.  

Your loving and assured friend , A. G.  

THE TREATISE . 

Though many things discouraged me to write unto you of this Argument in such sort as I intent ; considering that neither your daily reading of the Scripture , neither the persuasion of learned Divines can move you to accord unto the truth ; though by manifest testimony of Scripture they convince your heresy : and most of all , that God hath left you to believe that lying spirit of Antichrist , who denyeth that jesus is that Christ : Yet nevertheless , having some hope that God of his goodness will at last pull you as a brand out of the fire , and quench you with the dew of his grace , that you may grow in the knowledge of his Son ; I will as briefly as I can , lay down some few reasons of that faith , which every one that will be saved must hold . Whereby if I persuade you nothing , yet shall I obtain thus much ; that you , who neither believed his word , nor yet opened your eyes to see the light of reasonable understanding , shall at last confess , that his word and judgements are holy and true . But before I come to the point , let me first persuade you , that although the knowledge of the holy Trinity be one of the most high mysteries which can be known or believed , and that it is the only work of the holy Ghost to work this faith and knowledge in the heart of man , yet nevertheless , God hath not left us destitute of means , whereby to come to this faith and knowledge ; but hath also with his word , given us a reasonable soul & understanding , whereby to grow in the knowledge of himself & his william For when Adam was created , he had given unto him all perfect knowledge meet for him . Now God , who created the world for no other purpose , them the manifestation of his own glory , might not leave that creature without understanding of the Godhead , who being by nature & creation the most excellent in this world , was made for that purpose especially above all other , to set forth his praise and to call on him . Now how could he do this , if he knew him not ? But ( I think that ) seeing it is said , that man was created in the Image of God , you will not deny that man before his fall , had much more perfect understanding of the Godhead , them it is possible for him to have , till he come to know even as he is known , but that by him ( you may say ) this knowledge was lost : not lost , but corrupted only , even as man's william For then it should follow that we were inferior to bruit beasts , who have in them a sensible knowledge meet for that end whereto they were created . Furthermore , it is not possible that man's sin should frustrate the end which God intended in his creation , but it is manifest , that man was created to know and honour the creator . Again , seeing in Christ all things consist , he being ordained of the Father before all worlds , in whom the world should be both created and restored ; it is plain that this light of our understanding both proceedeth from him , and is restored in him , as it is said , joh. 1.  He is that light which lighteneth every man that cometh into the world , not only his chosen with knowledge of his saving truth , but even generally every man with reasonable understanding , whereby we may know whatsoever is to be known of God : & how ? even by the works of God , as it is plainly concluded , Rom. 1. 19 , 20.  Therefore are they not to be heard , who hold any thing without the compass of Faith , which is without the compass of Knowledge . For Faith ought so to be grounded on Knowledge , as Hope is grounded upon Faith. So that as Faith , Heb. 11. 1. is said to be 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , an eviction or proof of things hoped for , though they be not seen ▪ so may I say that Knowledge is the proof of things which are believed . For Faith is nothing else but the Conclusion of a particular Syllogism , drawn from the conclusion of an universal , which the knowledge of God had concluded , as it is manifest , jam. 2. 19  & Heb. 11. 3.  By conference of which two places it appeareth , that this knowledge , of which I speak , this Historical Faith , as to believe that there is one God which made all things of naught , is only such a knowledge , as the devils & wicked men have : but to believe , and have confidence in this God , is that particular conclusion , & that faith which causeth us to have hope in his promises . Therefore said Christ , Have faith in God : that is , strive to know God , that knowing , you may have faith , and believe in him . And we see that in these things , where a bare faith without knowledge might seem to be most required , because as a man would think , there were no reason to be given of them , namely , concerning the maintenance of this life , and the resurrection to the life to come ; both Christ and his Apostles use no other reasons , but such as every reasonable man may easily be persuaded by , though authorities of Scripture were not wanting to both purposes , as it is manifest , Mat. 6. and 1.  Cor 15. yea Paul at Athens , or wheresoever he persuaded the worship of the true God among the Gentiles , he persuaded not by authority of Scripture , which amongst them had been very weak ; but by such arguments as they knew to be sufficient even in themselves . If these things were not so ; how them could the Gentiles which knew not the Scriptures , he without excuse for their ignorance of God ? Therefore I conclude , that there is nothing which is believed , but it may also be known . Now knowledge ( we know ) is engendered by such principles as have truth in them , the which is evident of itself . So that by plain and reasonable understanding , a man may know whatsoever he believeth . You will say , To what purpose then serve the Scriptures ? I answer : That God , infinite in goodness , hath together with this understanding & light of Nature , given us withal his word , as a greater light whereby our lesser lights might become more shining : That he hath given unto us not only an inward word , to wit , our natural understanding ; but also an outward word , as a most illustrious Commentary , both of declaration and amplification of that text ; whereby we may the better understand , whatsoever we ought to understand without it . But how them cometh it to pass , that all men have not Faith ? And how is Faith said to be the gift of God ? The first is answered , Rom. 1 21. and Ephe. 4. 18  For hardness of their heart , who when they knew God , did not glorify him as they ought : therefore their imaginations ▪ become vain , & their foolish heart was full of darkness . And for this cause is Faith also said to be the gift of God. First , in respect of that knowledge whence it doth proceed , which knowledge is his gift . Secondly , because it is the only work of God , to make that knowledge to become fruitful , by laying it so unto man's heart , that the hardness thereof may be removed , that when we know God to be good and just , we also believe and worship him as we ought . Thirdly and most especially , because that God oftentimes pardoning the ignorance which men have of himself and the creature , doth so illumine the heart with 〈◊〉 holy Spirit , that it is suddenly 〈◊〉 without any previant knowledge , to faith and obedience . The truth whereof nevertheless doth not any whit impugn that which I say , That God hath given unto every man so much understanding as to know what he ought to believe , and to be satisfied for the reasons of his Faith , if he could open his eyes to see in the midst of what wondrous light he were placed . This point is manifest both by many Scripture-authorities , and by many reasons which I omit . But taking this as either granted , or sufficiently proved , that God hath given us light of understanding , whereby to yield a reason of the Hope that is in us ; a reason I say even of every article of our Faith : let us with holy reverence come unto the thing in question , and see what reason we have for our defence . I will therefore a while forbear to use the authority of holy Scripture ; not that I esteem the weight or evidence of any reason comparable thereto : but only perceiving by that talk I had with you , that you had read the Scripture , as one of those whom Peter noteth , 2.  Epist . 3. 16.  Not intending to wrangle about your wrested interpretations ; I will first propone the evidence of reasonable proof : and afterwards bring in the assent of holy Scripture , that you may perceive in what wondrous clear light you strive to be blind . And because I know not what your opinion is concerning God , ( for he that denieth the Godhead of Christ , may as well deny the Godhead absolutely : ) that being one step toward the question , I will proceed orderly , and give you also a reason of our faith , concerning that matter : taking this only as granted , which is rife in every man's knowledge , that both the terms of Contradiction , cannot be affirmed of the same Subject : that is , that one and the same thing cannot be both affirmed and denied , of the same Subject , at one time , and in the same respect . 

But first , by the Name of God , know that I mean an Eternal Being , infinite in goodness , in power , in wisdom , in glory , in virtue , and only worthy of endless love and honour . My reason is thus . If there be not a Being which had no beginning , then of necessity , that which was first existent or begun , must be a beginning unto itself , by causing of itself to be , when it was not . But this is impossible , that any thing should be a cause , and not be : for so should it both be and not be ; therefore there is an eternal Being , which is the beginning , middle and end of all things , and himself without beginning , and this eternal Being we call God. My reason is plain to be understood ; and remember what I have said , that I may go on . 

Whatsoever is without beginning , is also without ending ; because it hath no Superior which might bring it to nothing : therefore God is eternal . Again , whatsoever comes to nothing , is corrupted by his contrary ; but nothing can be opposite to God , therefore he is Eternal . Or else I might thus reason . 

Being and Not Being are such contraries , as one of them cannot spring out of another : for every thing , for the preseruations sake of itself , doth repress and corrupt the contrary . Seeing then that there is Being , which could not possibly raise itself out of Not Being , it follows that Being had a primacy or priority before Not Being : and therefore of necessity must be eternal ; for otherwise there was a time , wherein it might be said , that Being is Not Being , & so Not Being should have been first , and contradictories might have stood together : but both these are impossible , therefore there is an eternal Being ; and this eternal Being , we call God. Furthermore we know , that the greatest excellency or perfection of every thing , is in the proximity or approach thereof unto the first cause . But every thing is more excellent in the Being thereof , then in the Not Being : therefore Being was before Not Being ; and for that cause Eternal . Now Eternity is an Infinite Continuance : therefore whatsoever is Eternal , must of necessity be Infinite : and this Infinite Being , we call God. Moreover , whatsoever hath Infinite continuance , hath Infinite Power to continue infinitely ; and this omnipotent or endless Power we call God.  

I might reason likewise of his Goodness , of his Wisdom , Truth , Glory , etc. but one shall serve in stead of the rest , and I will take his Wisdom for my example , and prove unto you , that likewise to be Infinite , and that not only in existence , but in action also . And first that he is wise ; God is most worthy to be such as he is : but if he were not wise , he were not worthy to be God : ergo he is wise . Now mark how these depend one on another . In God is Wisdom , which by reason of his Infinitie , is also infinite : and by his Eternity , is also eternal : so that there is no time , wherein it may be said , that this infinite Wisdom is not infinitely exercised , for than were it not eternally infinite . Therefore his wisdom is infinite , not in existence only , but also in action . 

Again , the wisdom of God is such , as hath no defect or imbecility therein . But if it were not Infinite both in action and in existence , a man might find defect therein , and imagine a more Infinite wisdom than that is , but this is impossible . So might I conclude of all the other Dignities of God , but I haste to the purpose , and I think that you will not unwillingly grant what I have said , but understand the rest . All the Dignities of God being actuated or brought into working , require of necessity an Infinite Object , whereon they work , because they themselves are Infinite : but nothing can be Infinite , but God alone , therefore it followeth that these Dignities are objected or exercised in God alone . And this is that Eternal Son , begotten before the worlds , in whom the Father rests : or as the Prophet speaketh , His beloved , in whom his soul delighteth ; which cannot be applied to any creature , without which , God is happy in himself : therefore saith the Apostle , that in him dwelleth the Godhead bodily . How is that ? not in his manly body eternally ; for his human body took beginning of the flesh of the Virgin , when the fullness of time came , but yet bodily , that is , as essentially , or substantially , as the body of a man is substantial to the man For every Dignity of God being infinite in action ( as was proved ) must of necessity produce such as itself is . As for example ; the Wisdom of God or his Infinite Understanding , must have an Infinite intelligible or understandable object , which is produced thereby , by an infinite understanding . So that ye must know of necessity , and mark three Terms , as I will a while call them : the Term from whence : the Term whereto , or wherein : and the middle Term between them . I will for your capacity , which I know not to be much exercised in these matters , make a comparison meet for your understanding . 

When the mind or understanding of a man conceiveth any understandable object , then is ( you know ) first the understanding in the mind itself , secondly the object understood , and thirdly , the discourse or understanding , whereby that object is apprehended . 

Now give me leave to tell you , what differences you must make , between the understanding of God , and the understanding of man in this comparison . 

First , the mind of man being finite , the understanding is not able to view all that which can be understood thereby at one time , or with one action of understanding , but must conceive of one thing after another : whereas the understanding and wisdom of God is such , as at one sight seeth himself , and every thing else , past , present , and to come ; and this not once only , but even continually , because it is eternally infinite . 

Secondly , the intendment of man worketh nothing in the thing conceived , to make it either to be , if it be a mere conceit , or to be other than it is , if it be existent : but the understanding of God , is by reason of his power so active , as that it causeth that wherein it is exercised , both to be , and that according to his manner of apprehension or understanding of it : which understanding is by his Infinitie so infinite , and by his Eternity so continual , as that of necessity there must be a subsistence or a person , wherein it must be exercised , which must also be Infinite and Eternal . And this is that glorious Son of God , who is thus begotten or produced eternally , both before the world was , even as he is now , and shall not cease to be produced after the world shall cease eternally . 

Thus you see two of the terms spoken of : from whence , & wherein : now you must know the middle term between them . The term whence , is the Wisdom intelligent , God the Father . The term wherein , is the Wisdom intelligible , God the Son . The middle term is , ipsum intelligere , which in my Comparison I called , The discomse itself , which also in this must needs be Infinite . For an Infinite intelligible , cannot be conceived of an Infinite intelligent , but by an Infinite intelligere ; and this is that Holy Ghost , which as you may easily understand , must of necessity proceed from both the Father and the Son , and be also infinite and eternal , and therefore God. Now because they are all Infinite , and of Infinite , essentially there can be but one : therefore are these three in Essence or Being , one , but in Subsistence or clear distinction of persons , three . 

Understand my comparison which I made : I will yet clear the matter further for your conceyving . 

If you take in a mirror , the light of the Sun , and reflect it directly thereon again , in the Sun it is one , in the glass another , and yet the reflection of the beams , is also a third , but for all this , there is but one nature and word of light , which comprehends all three : so is it in this Tri-vnitie of which I speak . My leisure serves me not to dilate these things , but I hope you are able to understand what I say , therefore I will proceed . It is said , that Powers are known by their actions , and actions are limited by their objects . I know the meaning of it , and it is not unfit in this place . But to my reason : The Power of God is infinite , and by his infinite wisdom he knoweth it to be infinite : but God could not know that his Power were infinite , unless he were able thereby to bring forth an infinite action ; and every infinite action must of necessity be exercised in an infinite subject . ( For whatsoever is received , is received according to the capacity of the receiver : ) therefore there is an infinite subject , wherein the power of God is exercised : that is the Son of whom I speak . And here again behold the Tri-vnitie ; an infinite power the Father ; an infinite action the Holy Ghost ; an infinite subject the glorious Son ; all three one infinite Being . Return to your comparison . 

As the understanding of man could no way know his own power , but by his actions , neither can there be any actions of understanding , where there is nothing to be understood , no more is it possible to be in the Deity . Now understand that , as I have reasoned from the Wisdom and Power of God : so might I reason from all his other Dignities : so that for one reason which I have brought . I might have brought you fifty . But I show you the way , if you be guided by the Spirit of Truth , how you may strengthen yourself in the way of Truth : therefore I will go on , and show you yet more plainly by more familiar reasons . 

An Infinite power is not more weak than a finite : but every finite creature which we can cast our eyes unto , doth by nature produce his like , as much as in it is ; as a man begetteth a man ; trees bring forth seed , whereof their like in nature may spring , and in likewise every other thing . Therefore the Infinite Power of God begetteth his like also , which is the Son , the image of the invisible God , the first begotten of every creature , Col. 1. 15.  But none can be like unto God in his Being , who is not very God : therefore Christ the only begotten of the Father is also very God.  

Marvel not , that I make this argument from the creature to the Creator ; for in this very point of the Power & Godhead , the Holy ghost himself teacheth me to reason of the invisible things of God ▪ by the things visible , Rom. 1. 20.  And hereby also learn to help your ignorance , and put away your wonder , how God should be one , and yet three . See you not how the understanding ? the Sun-light also , is one in nature , and yet three in evident and clear distinction ? though in so base and imperfect order , as that which is above all perfection , is possible to be above it . 

And further , see you not in every thing a body , a spirit and a life , which is the knot between them ? 

Or rather , see you not how the very bodily composition is both one , and three ? one body which is united of three bodies ? that is , earth , water , and air , or oil , which yet again in the root of their nature are but one . For oil is but a due mixture of water and earth , meanly fixed , and meanly volatile ; and earth is but fixed water ; so that water which is but one , is the root of the three : as it is manifest , Genesis 1. and 2.  Pet. 3. 5.  They which understand the rules of Pyronomy , know what I say ; and if you understand me well , you would confess , that not only this instance which I have brought , of earth , water and air ; but even the whole frame of Nature did proclaim the Trinity in the Unity . You would , I say , confess , that whatsoever may be known of God , is manifested in the creature . If I should here tell you , how the Heaven , the Earth , & the Deep , Gen. 1. might be understood mystically , and the Analogy between the Creator and the creature therein : and then tell you , what Let the earth bring forth living soul , might mean , and compare it with that place , That which was made in him was life ; and then particularly for man , The Lord God also made the man of the dust of the earth , and tell you , that it was so necessary , because that Christ is Terra ●●●enti●●… : and enforce an argument to prove the Tri-vnitie , by that treble repetition of the man made in the image of God ; comparing it with that place , 1.  Cor. 11. 3. and 7.  If I should then tell you , that it was necessary that the Son of God must become flesh , as well that the infinite justice of God might be actuated in him , which could not be actuated in him being only GOD : as for many other reasons , both from the justice , and Mercy , and Wisdom of GOD , though to a well sighted understanding I might seem to have laid a precious foundation of Philosophy divine and natural : yet to you I might rather seem perhaps to have proponed Cabalistical dreams , than any sound argument to the thing in question . 

Yet this will I tell you , and hold it for good Divinity : that the main drift and scope of the whole Scripture , is to show the Creation of all things in Christ , through him and for him : and the restoring of the whole creature in man by him : That in all things he might have the preeminence , Col. 1.  Neither doth this any whit derogate from the honour of the Father . 

For first , It hath pleased the Father , that in him should all fullness dwell : and besides , it is an honour above all honours unto the Father , to be the Father of so glorious a Son . 

Therefore is this world and all the things therein , created to the Image of Christ , to express his glory , even as he is the expressed Image and glory of the Father . And here is the world's Eternity , which had in Christ an eternal Being ; according to that his Name , esay . 9 6.  The Father of Eternity . 

Here are those separate Ideas , about which Plato and Aristotle could never agree , and which neither both of them , nor many of their followers did perfectly understand : not that they might not by the frame of nature , and the wisdom which GOD had given to man , be understood . 

For is not this world as a book wherein we may read and understand by the created truths , what is the Truth which is increated ? but all true knowledge is the gift of GOD.  

Therefore wrest not that place , Coloss . 2. 8. against the Christian search after the knowledge of Nature , whereby above all other human knowledges a man is brought to know GOD , and to honour him as he ought : but rather be sorry , that your knowledge of Nature is no more . For that will I tell you , to teach you to know yourself , that there is nothing in the creature , which may be known , ( and all may be known that is in the creature ) but man ought to know it , and to glorify the Creator thereby . And this great labour hath GOD given to men , that knowing how short they are of that they ought to be , they might be humbled thereby , Psal . 1. 11.  Eccles. 1. 13.  And why ought this to seem strange ? doth not God require that perfection at man's hand wherein he did create him ? and was he not created with perfect discourse to know the creature , that he might therein behold the Creator , and so glorify his wondrous Power and goodness ? But this question would draw me from the question in hand : & therefore I will briefly add one reason more : and because my leisure is little , I will be as short as I can : but I pray you lend me your ear ; for it is hard in English , an inartificiall language , to express my mind : but because you told me , you could a little Latin , I will be bold here and there , to use a word : my reason is thus . The whole and perfect nature of a Principle or Beginning is in God , who is alone the beginner of all things . Now a Principle is of three sorts , whereof every one is so clearly distinct from another , as that one cannot possibly be that other : therefore in the Unity of the Deity there is also such clear distinction into a Trinity , as that one distinct cannot possibly be that other , from which he is distinguished , yet in the Unity of essence they are all one . The differences of a Beginning stand thus ; It is either Principium principians , non principiatum ; that is , a beginning , which is a Beginner unto another ; yet hath not his beginning from another , lest there should be a process into Infinitie a part ante : this is God the Father , to whom it is peculiar to beget the Son , yet is himself neither made ▪ nor created , nor begotten of any other . 

Secondly , there is Principium principiatum principians ; to wit , a Beginning which hath his beginning of another , and is also a beginning to another , lest there should be any defect or imbecility in the Beginning : and this is the Everlasting Son , very God of very God , begotten of the substance of his Father alone before them worlds , neither made nor created . 

Thirdly , there is Principium principiatum non principians ; that is , a Beginning , which is also begun , but is not a beginner unto another : lest there should be a process into Infinitie a part post : and this is the Holy Ghost , who proceedeth from the very substance and Being of the Father and the Son , and is with them one GOD coeternal and coequal . But you will say , Is not the Holy Ghost a Beginner unto any other ? how is he then the Author of our consolation ? and how is he said to lead us into all truth , & c ? Understand what I mean : He is not a Beginner unto any other of the same Infinite Essence or Being with himself . For the beginnings which I spoke of before , are in the Essence of God alone now our spiritual consolation , whereof the Holy Ghost is said to be the Beginner , is but an or effluence from that Being , which he himself is ; as the light of the Sun doth illuminate every bright body exposed to his light , and yet imparteth not his being thereto . You will again object , that Eternity hath no beginning nor ending : how then can Christ be both eternal and begun ? and how again can he be equal to the Father , whereas he being begotten of the Father , the Father hath a priority before him ? I answer , that this beginning is none other , than that production or begetting , which I before declared , to have been heretofore none other , than it is now and shall be eternally : as the Sun hath brought forth light since his creation , and shall still bring forth light till the world's dissolution . For this action of GOD , whereby he begetteth his Son , is not a transeant action , to cause a passion in the subject , and a repassion in the agent , for in such the subject of necessity should have been existent before the action ; but this action is immanent , and therefore of necessity of the same nature with the agent ; which agent because it is eternal , therefore the production is also eternal , and consequently the product , and so of necessity very GOD. But you must ever remember what difference I made between the action of God , infinite in power , & therefore able to actuate the object ; and the immanent actions of our mind . Now for the Priority or Posterioritie , you may object . I grant there is Priority among the persons of the Godhead ; but of what kind ? not of Being ; for their Essence is one , and therein is none afore or after another , neither is any one of the Trinity more or less God than another : not of time ; for they are all one Eternity : not of dignity , for they are all one Infinitie : and the Son himself being very God , thinketh it no robbery to be equal with God.  

But yet there is Priority , and that of order only ; for the Father is in order before the Son , because the Son is begotten of the Father : and the Son likewise is before the Holy Ghost , because the Holy Ghost is the mutual love between the Father and the Son : and so proceeding from them both . 

I will make a comparison unmeet for the matter of which I speak ; for to whom shall we assimilate the Highest ? but yet meet to help your understanding . When a man doth dream and imagine things which are not , there is , you know , the fantasy , the phantasm or thing imagined or dreamt , and the phansying or working of the fantasy about that object . Now these three are all of one nature , and are one after another only in order , and not in time . 

For the particular fantasy of such an object , is before the object , and makes it to have an intentional being ; then the object being , the discourse of the fantasy followeth in order , which nevertheless was in time as soon as it , observing ever the cautions that are to be observed . 

Thus have I very briefly shown not many reasons , but rather how that many reasons may be shown for this Christian assertion : yet have I shown enough to persuade any reasonable man , to yield meekly unto the truth of that doctrine , which is so evident both in the book of GOD , and in every faithful and true Christian man's confession , and according to that discourse which is evident to every man's understanding . Now give me leave to speak a little to those arguments which have thrown the most learned of the jews headlong to the feet of Christ , to make them acknowledge that the Messiab must be both God and man I will not herein do any thing contrary to that , which in the beginning I protested , that is , not to compel you by authority of Scripture , but to entreat you by reasonable persuasion , to incline your ear to the truth . But because I may not without injury to the cause , leave altogether out such manifest proof , and without injury also to yourself , who might think that I went about to sophisticate a true seeming untrueth , which would not abide the touch : I will only intend my finger to some very few , of many thousand of axioms of the Scripture for this purpose , & leave you to make the conclusion by yourself , hoping that the jews example may provoke you to follow them , so far forth as they have followed the truth . Exod. 13. 21 , it is said , The Lord went before them , etc. Chap. 14. 19  The Angel of God , which went before them , removed : where Christ the Angel of the Covenant , is called The Lord jehovah . Again , Exod. 15. 3.  The Lord is a man of war , his name is jehovah : therefore Christ is God and man : who by his conflict upon the cross , triumphed over Death and Hell , as it is written in the Gospel , the book of the wars of the Lord Again , esay . 9 6.  Unto us a child is born , there is his Manhood : and unto us a Son is given , and they shall call his name , The mighty God. And esay 35. vers . 4.  Your God will come and save you . jerem. 23. 5.  etc. I will raise up unto David a righteous branch and a King shall reign ▪ and this is the Name whereby they shall call him , The Lord our righteousness . And jerem. 33. vers . 16.  judah shall be saved , and be that shall save her , is the Lord our righteousness . Where the name used , is that great Name 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 jehovah , which is never given to any creature . Zach. 9 9 proves him God and man What shall I cyte unto you that of the second Pslam ? thou art my Son , this day have I begotten thee : which place with many more , is brought in the Epistle to the Hebrews , to this purpose , which is your question . 

These authorities the Thalmadists , who stick only to the kill letter and apparent sense of the law , hold sufficient to put this matter out of doubt . 

Now , if leaving this outward sense of the Scripture , we should desire to know what is the quickening spirit thereof , and should ransack the treasuries of the Cabalists , remembering that place of our Saviour , Matth. 5. 18.  One jod , or tittle of the Law shall not pass , till all be fulfilled ; and should examine the question by the letters and pricks of the Scripture , we should more easily find an entrance , than an end thereto . Yet for a taste take only the first 3. words of the Law , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 breshith , bará , elohim : which may not unfitly be thus turned : In the beginning , they the mighty God created . And of that again , take the first 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 bresbith , and see what it may signify by that part of the Cabala which they call Notariacon , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 b. the first letter of ben , signifieth the Son : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 r. the first of ruach , signifies the Holy Ghost : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 n a. the beginning of av . is the Father : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 s. the first of Sabbath importeth rest : ●●… the beginning of the ineffable name of God 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 and not there only , but even of itself it imports the Deity . For we consider of things not obvious to our senses and understanding , as if they were not : and therefore this least of all the letters , nearest unto nothing , doth signify GOD. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . th' . the first of Ta. or Thom. is construed a Closet or a Depth . Which construction if you put together , according to the rules of that excellent Grammar of Divinity , with reference to that which follows , may import thus much . The Word , the Spirit , and the Father , resting eternally in the Closet , or unconceivable abyss , or as Paul calls it , the inaccessible light of the infinite Deity , manifested their almighty power in creating the heaven and the earth . Neither is it without a great mystery that the Son is here put in the first place : for In the beginning was the word : because the chief honour both of the Creation , and restauration of the world is given unto Christ , as the Apostle doth comment upon this text , Coloss . 1.  And in another place , In him is all the treasure both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. As Psal . 104. vers . 24.  In wisdom hast thou made them all . For in Christ were all things together one infinite wisdom , till in the Creation he made them several , according to their distinct Ideas . Therefore saith the Apostle , He sustaineth every thing by his powerful word : that is , the Son : and elsewhere , In him ( Christ ) we live and move ( after the Creation ) and have our Being ( before the Creation . ) And for this cause doth john begin the law of mercy and grace , in the very same words wherewith Moses began the law of justice and condemnation : In the beginning . For we know nothing of God , neither of justice , nor of mercy , etc. but only by Christ ; as he saith , no man knoweth the Father , but the Son , and he to whom the Son will reveile him . And in another place , no man cometh to the Father , but by me . Now , the Holy Ghost is put in the second place , because he is the mutual love of the Father and the Son , and as I may say , the instrument of their actions , both in manent , and transeunt . 

Go forward now , if you will , to the next word , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 bará ; you see , it affords the same argument for the Tri-vnitie , by the three letters before explained , and the number which is the singular . 

Think not this a fancy , neither reproach the divine Cabala , as the ignorant Sophisters use to do , not knowing how above all other knowledges , it doth advance a man's meditation on high . 

And to the present purpose , they which know any thing in the holy language , know that this sentence can no way agree in Grammatical construction , unless the singular verb 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 bará , be thus made plural , that it may have concordance with the plural 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Elohim . 

You will ask , why these letters , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . b. r. a. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . a. are twice put , seeing in this preciseness , no such superfluity should have needed . 

I tell you , that it is not done , but to intimate unto us a most high mystery . 

For in the first place it imports that Eternal and Infinite Being of the Father , the Son , and the Holy Ghost , which they had before the worlds in their endless glory & felicity , in that silence of the Deity , in that supersupreme Entity which is unto the Godhead , perfect above perfection , without any respect unto the creature , it imports that Infinitie , that Eternity , that Power , that Wisdom , which is above all things , and gives unto itself , to be such as it is : that Nothing , as the divine Areopagite seems to speak , which is before and above all things , that may be spoken or thought , without any respect of any emanation , or effluence whatsoever . And therefore follows that letter of rest 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that of unity , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . and that of perfection . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Now in the second place , it signifies the Deity , as exercised in the creature : and therefore follows that Epithyte Elohim , which shows that emanation of Power or Strength ; and is sometimes given unto the creatures , Angels , and men . It were an endless thing , to speak that of these mysteries , which may be spoken , neither can I ; For the Law of the Lord is perfect , and man is full of weakness . I have said so much as I think meet concerning the Tri-vnitie . 

Now a word to that point , that Christ is GOD : which although it appear sufficiently in the Tri-vnity before proved , by this anagogical doctrine : yet to that second person in particular , is that which followeth . esay 7. 14 , it is said of Christ , that his name should be called Immanuel ; but in the history of the Gospel , in Matthew and Luke , both before his Conception , and at his Circumcision , he is called jesus . It is therefore meet that you know , how jesus is Immanuel or God with us. The writing of the Name of JESUS is thus 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ihsuh , though according to the rules of the pronunciation of that tongue , jesu , and according to the ancient abbreviation following the Hebrew orthography IHTS . In which Name you see , are all the letters of the greatest ineffable Name of God , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 jehovah ; with the interposition of that letter of rest 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 s. for then was God reconciled to the world ; then was everlasting righteousness brought in , when the Word became flesh . 

This is that glorious Name , of which God spoke by the Prophet , Behold , I will make my Name new in the earth . For you see how of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is made , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that is , JESUS . 

This is that Name , which is meet for the Son of GOD alone , and cannot be given to any creature , because it is a Name of the DEITY , as it is Hebr. 1.  It is that Name , which is above all names : in which the Angels and the righteous soul's triumph ; at which the powers of Hell are aghast and tremble ; to which the whole creature yieldeth meek obedience . 

This is that Name , of which our Lord spoke , Father , I have manifested thy Name unto men , the Father 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the Son 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

For so long as the mystery of the Incarnation of God was hid , so long that Name remained unsoundable : but when the Word became flesh , and dwelled amongst men , so that the mystery was reveiled ; then the Name , which was before not to be pronounced , was lawfully pronounceable . That as the Word of life was to be seen with eyes , and handled with hands ; so that glorious Name might also be beaten between our lips and teeth ; and this by the interposition of that letter of rest . The jews knowing this reason of this great mystery , & moved with the reverence thereof , durst never pronounce that Name 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 but in stead thereof , Adonai or Elohim . 

Let it not trouble you , that judah the son of jacob was called by such a name , as had these four letters therein , with the addition of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 d , thus 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 jehudah : but rather wonder and learn , how by these sacraments the children of GOD before the Incarnation , exercised their faith , saluted the promises afar off , and saw that our Lord should enter into our earthly tabernacle , by the door of judahs' flesh ; for so much the letter 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Daleth importeth . To which mystery the heavenly Poet alluding , triumphed with that double joy , Psal . 24.  Lift up your heads ye gates , and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors , etc. foreseeing the descension of GOD the Son , by the gate of our flesh , and the ascension of our flesh by Christ , into the heavenly places : both which he celebrated by that repetition . Compare with this place , Gen. 39 35. and 49. 8. 9 10. 11. 12. and Revelat . 5. 5. and other places as you shall read , and understand them : and with all consider , how the ancient Fathers have prided themselves with the several letters of this Name , to keep in remembrance by their own names , a thing never to be forgotten , The Incarnation of our Lord As Abram assumed h. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 and was called Abraham . Oshea took i and was called joshua , as you know . Neither again let it trouble you , that some do write this name thus 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . ISV , because ( say they ) the letter 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 s. turned upward 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is as much as the double he 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 omitted . I know no reason for this , but many authorities against it , as you may know by that which is and shall be said , though I let pass a very great number . Now consider the name in every letter , and see what clouds of witnesses there are , that Christ is God and man : and learn by the Name itself , how Christ is the Character or ingraved Image of the person or subsistence of the Father , Hebrews 1. 13.  

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 i Is the Crown or Diadem of the ineffable Name of GOD , and signifies the Godhead . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . u. Pretends the Tree of life : for it is a thing much noted among the learned of the Hebrew tongue , that this letter is never put radically in any natural Hebrew word , either in the beginning or end thereof , but is as the Tree of life , in the midst of the Paradise of God.  

The double letter h. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . signifieth , that Christ , concerning his Deity , is essentially united to the Humanity ; and concerning his Humanity , united also essentially to the Deity ; and that by the Holy Ghost . For 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . h. is a spirit or breath : therefore is Christ in himself , or in respect of his Deity , the superior Wisdom of the Father , and the Son of GOD , not made , but begotten . Prou. 8. 22.  In the creature , or with respect of his Humanity , the inferior wisdom of GOD ; not begotten , but made , and created , Ecclus. 24. 11. 12.  

Now the letter 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . s. hath many things therein to be considered . 

For you may not think , that it was taken by chance into this Name ; but for the Notory , and for the Geometry . 

For the Notory , I have observed that the Theologians , both of the old and new Testament , have celebrated thereby ; first , the rest or dwelling of the Godhead in him , as esay . 42. vers . 1. and ●o . 1. vers . 33.  then the rest , or ●ie all being of the world in Christ before the creation : and the restoring of the world by his suffering : wherein the justice of God rested , or came to a period , as esay . 53. 11.  He shall see the travel of his soul , and be satisfied . Lastly , that great jubilee or Sabbath of Sabbaths in the world to come , when all the creature shall rest from corruption . Secondly , they learned thereby , the everlasting Anointing of Christ to be our King , our Priest and our Prophet . For 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 is the head of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 which is to anoint . Hitherto belongs that of the 45.  Psal . thou art anointed with the oil of gladness above thy fellows . And in particular ; I have found David ( or my beloved ) servant , with my holy oil have I anointed him : that for his Kingdom . Dan. 9 24 , speaks of his Priesthood : To finish the wickedness , to seal up the sins , etc. and to ancint the most Holy. esay . 61. of his Prophecy ; Therefore hath the Lord anointed me , he hath sent me to preach , etc.  For this cause was there no Anointing in the old Testament , but typical , as a shadow of the good things that were to come ; so that when He came , all these anoyntings ceased ; both of the Leviticall Priesthood , for thou art a Priest for ever . Heb. 7 : and of the Kingdom ; for He shall reign over the house of jacob for ever : Luk. 1. 33.  And for his Prophecy he saith , Whatsoever I have heard of my Father , I have made known unto you . The whole scope of the new Testament is to this effect . 

Now the Geometry hath also many mysteries : first , it is one semicircle with three branches ; the mystery of the Trinity in the Unity : all whose dignities of Virtue and Power , etc. are coequal in all , and in every person , entirely , and indivisibly ; and therefore in our Lord also : according to that saying of the Angel , The holy Ghost shall come upon thee , and the power of the most High shall evershadow thee ; therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee , shall be called the SON of GOD.  

Shall I tell you what Lectures the Divines have made upon the text of this letter : Z●ch . 11. 13 , did read herein that goodly price , at which the wicked jews did value him . For ● . i in the Hebrew Arithmetic is ten ; so the three ten in the triple Crown of this letter , are the thirty pieces of silver , which the traitor took to betray that precious blood , which was too dear a ransom for the whole world . 

And one in another place said ; They have sold the Just for silver . 

Consider the letter and every part thereof . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 This inferior semicircle is the creature , the earthly Paradise , in the midst of which is the Tree of life . And that thus the letter vau● is one part , and signifies in that tongue , a nail , if you will , that nail , that pierced his tender hands and his beauteous feet , to which if you add the jod reversed , 

you may well perceive the figure of the whole Cross , that Tree of life , which bore that heavenly fruit ; that spiritual food , whereof Adam and his faithful children , which overcome , may cate and live for ever . Revel . 2. 7.  

Thus you may see , how the Word became flesh , and dwelled among us. You may see that riddle of the Angel to Esdras , 2.  Book , chap. 5. vers . 37. expounded : The image of that Word , from which , and whereto , the books of both the Testaments do found . 

You may see what confidence we may have in that promise of Christ , who in the days of his flesh said , Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name , he will give is you , joh. 16. 23  But after his Ascension , the miracles that are to be done in that Name , are more stupendious , Mark. 16. 17.  And again , He that believeth in me , greater works than these shall he do , for I go to the Father . Behold the mystery of it , cause it to ascend , and describe that circle , whose centre is every where , whose circumference is no where . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Now are the superior and inferior conduit-pipes soudered together , ( as the Hebrews speak ) now the higher influences , the Spirit and Graces of God are not given by measure : and the refluences so great , as that Whosoever believeth , out of his belly shall arise fountain : of living water , springing up unto eternal life . OH glorious Name ! OH sacred Mystery ! by which you may well perceive , that there is greater Unity between the Deity and the Humanity , then by any words of Contiguitie , or Continuitie , may be expressed . You may well perceive , how according to that place of the 89.  Psalm , He the first born ; or as john saith , Chap. 1.  The only begotten of the Father , is made higher than the Kings of the earth . Here is our righteousness , our sanctification , and redemption complete : here is our adoption and reward : our consolation , our life , and religion : our reverence , and our fear : yet our joy and boldness : all in all : The presence of God. I may not say what experience hath taught me , by this magnificent and admirable Name ; neither an I able to give due honour thereunto . My thoughts are swallowed up , when I consider the other great mysteries which this one letter doth import : the mystery of the triple world ; the mystery of mercy and of justice ; of Election , and Reprobation ; of that great jubilee , or Sabbath of Sabbaths , when that which is above , shall again descend , to restore the creature from corruption and change , into that nimietie or excess of Goodness , wherein it was created . But these things are therefore here to be omitted , because the discourse thereof were long , and because they are rather consequents , than premises to the question . To tell you at once , & to make an end of this argument : The whole Nation of the learned jews confess , that the Messiha should be called by this great Name : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . To which purpose , there are , besides these which have been brought , many places of Scripture , which in the Hebrew verity are most direct , though by our translations they might seem somewhat harsh . They hold , I say , that He must be both God and Man : and in a word , there is nothing which we Christians do affirm concerning our Lord , but the evidence of Scripture doth compel them to confess it . Only they differ in this , from us ; whether This jesus be that Christ that should come into the world ; though this also be a thing not questionable , as you may learn of Daniel 9 vers . 24. 25. 26.  & 2.  Esd . 7. vers . 28. 29.  

Although the common error and expectation of the jews , was of a terrestrial Monarchy ; yet the best learned of them agree , that the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world . For they remember that place in the Testament of jacob : The Sceptre shall not depart from juda , till Shiloh come . By which it follows , that when Messiha shall come , there should be no more show of an earthly kingdom . That of Zach. 9 9 is as direct , jerusalem , behold , thy king cometh unto thee poor . They remember also that in the 21.  Psalm , I am a worm and no man , a shame of men and the contempt of the people . And that also of esay . 53.  He hath neither form nor beauty : when we see him , there shall be no form that we should desire him . He is despised & rejected of men , etc.  Read the whole Chapter and the Psalm , compare them with the histories of his Passion , and behold Him on the Cross , in the horror of his anguish , & extreme perplexity . 

Were it to any purpose to make you know , what the ancient Philosophers , who knew not the Scriptures , have thought of this matter ? all speaking this one thing , which the light that GOD hath given to mankind , did make them know , although they concealed their intendiment by diverse names . Yet Hermes called him plainly the Son of GOD. Zoroaster , the Understanding of his Father . Pythagoras , Wisdom ; as Paul and Solomon , every where , and particularly , Proverb . 8. and in the book of that title . 

Parmenides named him The Sphere of Understanding . Orpheus termed him Pallas , to the same effect as the other , if you know the fable : and yet he speaks more plainly to the Trinity , in his Hymns of the Night , of the Heaven , and of the Air . Plato's separate Ideas mean nothing else : and in fumme , as many of the Philosophers , as were worth any thing , were not ignorant of this thing . But I fear , these authorities are with you of little worth : yet have I brought them , that you may see how we are furnished with all kind of proofs , and how you do contemn all manner of testimony . 

If this which I have said , persuade you to look better to the foundation of your faith , it is sufficient : if it persuade you nothing , then have I done contrary to the Commandment , which forbiddeth to cast pearls before swine . But yet I hope , that God will not suffer you to be led any longer by that Spirit of Antichrist , against which S. john doth so often warn us. For I do you to wit , that this your heresy is no new thing , but even as ancient as the Apostles time . For , the reason of johns' writing of his Gospel , was , to prove the Godhead of Christ , against the Heretics that denied it in his own time . And truly , I marvel that you , who have received this Heresy from the rotten bones of Arrius , should not provide for your safety as he did . He denied the authority of S. johns' writings to be authentical . And why ? because this earth-bred Giant , which would pull Christ , out of the throne of his Deity , should with his lightning be suddenly burned . Believe you the Scripture ? Is johns' authority sufficient ? then the case is plain . We are in him that is true , in his Son jesus Christ , who is very God , and eternal life . 1.  joh. 5. 20.  Can you now confer this Scripture with that place , I have said ye are Gods , and not be ashamed ? I and the Father are one . The jews understood , that he herein professed himself to be very GOD : and are you his enemy more than they ? Read joh. 10. vers . 30. and 33. and 34. and you may understand the meaning of both places . The devils acknowledged him to be GOD of Infinite power : I know thee who thou art , even that Holy one of God : And will not you confess as much as the devils ? But this is more than I thought to say , only you may see hereby , that we speak no other thing than Christ himself , even in his enemy's understanding , said . Now if you could see a little the folly of your own opinion ; that were enough to cause you to put on a better mind . I will touch it as lightning doth touch the ground : for if you be willing to be reform , there is no doubt , but you may propound it to the learned Divines , and be fully satisfied . You say Christ is only man , but yet endued with the infinite Power of GOD. Here first you do injury to the Highest , to make the Power of God to be accidental unto him : whereas he is purus actus , absolute perfection , and without shadow of change : his Being is most simple and pure , not capable of accidents . then his Being is such , as no addition can be made thereto , to make it more them it is : therefore it is necessary , that he be ever actually whatsoever he may be . Besides , His Being is infinitely distant from Not Being ; therefore his Power is inseparable . Again , if there come any thing to God as an accident , it must come unto him from himself , or else from another : not from another , for he is impassable , or such as cannot suffer violence : not from himself ; for all such accidents do proceed a potentia , that is , from the imbecility , or imperfection of the subject : but his Being is most simple , & infinitely perfect . Again , all accidents do rise from the matter , form or composition of the subject . In him is neither matter , form , nor composition . Now all things we see in this world , do consist , ex actu & potentiâ , of Perfection from God , & imperfection from themselves : for of themselves they are non entia , absolutely nothing . Yea , even the very Angels , and the soul itself , are partakers of this composition : ( for nothing is purus actus , but God alone ) therefore are they subject to accidents ; yet they which come nearest to perfection , are most free from accidents ; as that which is mere perfection , hath no accidents at al. Know then , that all the dignities of God are in him essentially one God. For the Goodness of God , his Power , his Wisdom , his glory , etc. being all infinite , do of necessity concur in the nature of Infinity . Whence it followeth , that whatsoever is in him , is essentially himself : therefore the power of God is not accidental , or such as may be imparted to a man The learned Hebrews according to this do hold , that Eusoph or Infinitie , is not to be numbered among the other attributes of God : because it is that abstract Unity , wherinto they all essentially concur , & from which they all essentially proceed . And hence by the way take another strong argument to the former question : for if GOD be essentially a Father , than the term correlative a Son , must be in the Godhead also , and that essentially . But now again see another folly in your supposition . The work of our redemption is a work of infinite goodness , mercy , power , wisdom and glory ; therefore it followeth , that Christ the worker , had infinite mercy , power , wisdom , etc.  

Now I demand ; had Christ this infinite goodness and power , so given to him of God , that the Father himself had in the mean time none ? This you dare not say , for that were to say , that GOD did cease to be GOD ; which cannot stand with his Eternity . 

Now if GOD the Father had , notwithstanding this absolute infinite Power of Christ , of which he spoke , All power is given unto me , both in heaven and in earth : than it followeth that either there were two infinities of Power ; or else that these two which had this infinite Power , were all one Infinite . The first is against the nature of Infinitie : or that is absolutely infinite , which so comprehendeth all things , as that it leaveth nothing without itself , and yet is not comprehended of any other . Besides , if you would say , that the Father and the Son had each of them several indivisible infinite Powers ; it must follow , that neither of their Powers were absolutely infinite : because each of them had not the infinite Power of the other : And besides , that both these infinite Powers must be conjoined with infinite weakness , because they must be mutually subjected to the infinite Power one of the other . but both these things are impossible . So you see , that two Infinities can by no means stand together : therefore it followeth , that these two , to wit , the Father and the Son , are in Being one , and that of infinite Power ; and this is that which I strive for : which , as you see , I have concluded by your own assertion . 

The time would fail me , to lay before your eyes the manifold untrueths , which would ensue of your position which savoureth neither of wit , judgement , nor learning : And therefore I see , how they which have once departed from the truth , must of necessity run into infinite absurdities . Therefore look back , and be ashamed of such new-fangled toys , as you do daily imagine , which in truth do argue the great inconstancy and vanity of your mind , and withal , such palpable blindness of understanding , as the darkness of Egypt . For tell me without selfe-liking , what sound judgement doth this argue , to be driven about with every wind of doctrine ? a Protestant , a Brownist , an Anabaptist , an Antichrist . What bringing up ? what gift of learning and knowledge have you , that you should presume to oppose your sentence , against the faith and doctrine of all the Christian Churches in the world ? Blush , and learn with meekness the truth of that Word , which is able to save your soul . You may see by your own miserable experience , what it is to forsake the Unity of Faith , and the Communion of the Saints , who embrace the truth of God's word , and have manifest tokens that they are the true Church , to wit , The word of God truly taught , and the Sacraments duly administered . What if there want perfection ? The Church militant must ever confess ; I am lovely , yet black ▪ For it is impossible that any Church should be without imperfection , so long as the world standeth : but at the end it shall be presented without spot or wrinkle . Therefore remember from whence you are fallen , & repent , & do the works of righteousness , lest Christ , whom you so despite , come against you shortly . The work of Christianity is not in foolish questions , and disputing about needless subtleties , but in doing the works of truth and righteousness . Pray and endeavour yourself thereto . And till such time as GOD for his Christ's sake , vouchsafe to have mercy on you , the enemy of his SON , and give you grace to repent of this great wickedness , I am neither your friend , nor yet your foe . 

Alecsander Gil.  FINIS . 

