SALOMON'S Divine Arts , Of 1.  ETHICS , 
2.  POLITICSS , 
3.  ECONOMICS : 


That is ; the Government of 1.  BEHAVIOUR , 
2.  COMMONWEALTH , 
3.  FAMILY . 


Drawn into Method , out of his Proverbs & Ecclesiastes . 

With an open and plain Paraphrase , upon the SONG of SONGS . 

By joseph Hall.  

AT LONDON , Printed by H. L. for Eleazar Edgar , and Samuel Macham . 1609.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE AND Hopeful Lord , ROBERT , Earl of Essex , my singular good Lord , all increase of Grace & true Honour . 

RIGHT HONOURABLE , 

whiles I desired to congratulate your happy Return with some worthy present ; I fell upon this : which I dare not only offer , but commend ; the royalest Philosopher and wisest king , giving you those precepts , which the Spirit of God gave him . The matter is all his ; nothing is mine , but the method ; which I do willingly submit to censure . In that he could not err : In this , I cannot but have erred ; either in art , or application , or sense , or disorder , or defect : yet not wilfully . I have meant it well , and faithfully to the Church of God , & to your Honour , as one of her great hopes . If any man shall cavil that I have gone about to correct Salomon's order , or to control Ezekias servants : I complain both of his charity , and wisdom ; and appeal more lawful judgement : Let him aswell say , that every Concordance perverts the Text. I have only endeavoured to be the common-place-booke of that great king , and to refer his divine rules to their heads , for more ease of finding , for better memory , for readier use . See , how that God , whose wisdom thought good to bereave mankind of Salomon's profound commentaries of Nature , hath reserved these his divine Morals , to outlive the world ; as knowing , that those would but feed man's curiosity , these would both direct his life , and judge it . He hath not done this without expectation of our good , and glory to himself : which if we answer , the gain is ours . I know how little need there is , either to entreat your Lo : acceptation , or to advise your use . It is enough to have humbly presented them to your hands ; and through them to the Church : the desire of whose good , is my good ; yea , my recompense and glory . The same God , whose hand hath led and returned you in safety , from all foreign evils : guide your ways at home , & graciously increase you in the ground of all true honour ; Goodness . My prayers shall ever follow you : 

Who vow myself Your Honours , in all humble and true duty , jos . Hall.  

SALOMON'S ETHICS , or MORALS , In four Books . 

The 1.  Of FELICITY , 
2.  Of PRUDENCE , 
3.  Of JUSTICE , 
4. Of TEMPERANCE , 
FORTITUDE . 



Anno Domini , 1609.  

SALOMON'S Ethics , or Government of Behaviour and Manners . THE first BOOK . FELICITY . 

§. 1.  Of Ethics in common : The description , 
The chief end , which is Felicity . 


ETHICS is a Doctrine of wisdom and knowledge to live well , and of the madness and foolishness of vice : or Instruction to do wisely by justice and judgement and equity , and to do good in our life . The end whereof is to see and attain that chief goodness of the children of men , which they enjoy under the sun , the whole number of the days of their life . 

§. 2.  Wherein Felicity is not . Not in pleasure , 
Not in wealth . For herein is 1.  no satisfaction 
2.  Increased expense , 
3.  Restlessness , 
4.  Want of fruition , 
5.  Uncertainty . 
6.  Necessity of leaving it . 



Which consists not in pleasure ; for I said in mine heart , Go to now , I will prove thee with joy , therefore take thou pleasure in pleasant things ; yea , I withdrew not my heart from any joy : for my heart rejoiced in all my labour : and who could eat , and who could haste to outward things more than I ? and behold , this also is vanity . 

Not in riches . 1.  For he that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver , and he that loveth riches shall be without the fruit of them : this also is vanity . 

2.  When riches increase they are increased that eat them : and what good cometh to the owners thereof , but the beholding thereof with their eyes ? yea , much evil ; for whereas the sleep of him that traveleth is sweet , whether he eat little , or much ; contrarily , The satiety of the rich will not suffer him to sleep ; so there is an evil sickness , which I have seen under the Sun , riches reserved to the owners thereof , for their evil , and ofter , not for their good : for there is another evil , which I have seen under the Sun , and it is frequent among men ; A man to whom God hath given riches and treasures , and honour , and he wanteth nothing for his soul , of all it desireth ; but God giveth him not power to eat thereof ; and if he have that , yet how long ? riches remain not always , but taketh her to her wings as an Eagle , and flieth to the heavens . And for their owner , As he came forth of his mother's belly , he shall return naked , to go as he came , and shall bear away nothing of his labour , which he caused to pass by his hand : And this is also an evil sickness , that in all points as he came , so shall he go : and what profit hath he , that he hath traveled for the wind ? 

§. 3.  Not in magnificence of estate royalty , 
great attendance . 

of works planting , 
gathering Treasures , 
building , etc.  



Not in honour & magnificence . I the Preacher have been King over Israel in jerusalem , and I was great , and increased above all that were before me in jerusalem , which also I showed in effect ; for I made me great works , I built me houses , I planted me vineyards , I made me gardens , and orchards , & planted in them trees of all fruits ; I made me ponds of water , to water therewith the woods that grow with trees ; I got me servants , & maids ; and had children born in the house ; also I had great possession of beefs , and sheep , above all that were before me in jerusalem ; I gathered to me also silver and gold , and the chief treasures of kings and provinces ▪ I provided Men-singers , & Women-singers , and the delights of the sons of men , musical comforts of all kinds : Yea , I King SALOMON made myself a Palace of the trees of Lebanon ; I made the Pillars thereof of silver , and the pavement thereof of gold ; the hangings thereof of purple ; whose mids was paved with the love of the daughters of Israel : then I looked on all my works that my hands had wrought , ( as who is the man that will compare with the King in things which men now have done ? and on the travel that I laboured to do ; and behold all is vanity , and vexation of spirit ; and there is no profit under the sun . 

§. 4.  Long life and issue rejected , for certain end , 
unperfect satisfaction , remembrance and continuance of darkness . 


Not in long life , and plenteous issue : for If a man beget an hundreth children , and live many years , and the days of his years be multiplied ; And his soul be not satisfied with good things , and he be not buried , I say that an untimely fruit is better than he . For he cometh into vanity , and goeth into darkness , and his name shall be covered with darkness : Also , he hath not seen the sun , nor known it ; therefore , this hath more rest than the other : And if he had lived a thousand years twice told , and had seen no good ; shall not all go to one place ? and howsoever , the light surely is a pleasant thing , and it is good for the eyes to see the sun ; yet though a man live many years , and in them all he rejoice ; if he shall remember the days of darkness , because they are many , all that cometh is Vanity . 

§. 5. Knowledge Thomas better than folly ; 
yet rejected , upon experience , 
indiferency of events , 
imperfection . 



Not in learning , and human knowledge . I have given my heart to search and find out wisdom , in all things that are done under the heaven , ( this sore travail hath God given to the sons of men to humble them thereby ) yea , I thought in my heart and said , Behold I have amplified and increased wisdom , above all them that have been before me , in the Court and University of jerusalem , and mine heart hath seen much wisdom and knowledge : for ( when I was at the wildest ) my wisdom remained with me : then I saw , inindeede , that there is profit in wisdom more than in folly ; as the light is more excellent than darkness ; For the wiseman's eyes are in his head , but the fool walketh in darkness : but yet , I know that the same condition falleth to them all : then I thought in mine heart ; It befalleth to me as it befalleth to the fool ; why therefore do I labour to be more wise ? For , what hath the Wiseman more than the fool ? There shall be no remembrance of the wise , nor of the fool for ever : for that that now is , in the days to come shall be forgotten ; and how dieth the Wiseman ? as doth the fool : Besides the imperfection of the best knowledge ; for the eye is not satisfied with seeing , nor the ear filled with hearing : I thought I will be wise : but it went far from me ; it is far off ▪ what may it be ? and it is a profound deepeness , who can find it ? yea , so far is it from giving contentment , that in the multitude of wisdom is much grief , and he that increaseth knowledge , increaseth sorrow . 

Lastly , not in any human thing : for I have considered all the works that are done under the sun ; and behold , all is vanity & vexation of spirit . 

§. 6.  Wherein Felicity is i.  In approving ourselves too GOD. From hence Life , 
Blessing Favour , 
joy , 
Preservation , 
Prosperity , 
Long life , etc.  



Wherein then doth it consist ? Let us hear the end of all ; Fear God , and keep his Commandments ; for this is the whole of Man , the whole duty , the whole scope , the whole happiness ; for Life is in the way of righteousness , and in that path there is no death ; and attending thereon , all Blessings are upon the head of the righteous . Wouldst thou have favour ? A good man getteth favour of the Lord : Joy ? The righteous shall sing & rejoice ; and surely to a man that is good in his sight , God giveth wisdom and knowledge and joy ; so that the light of the righteous rejoiceth , but the candle of the wicked shall be put out : Preservation and deliverance ? Lo , the righteous is as an everlasting foundation ; for the way of the Lord is strength to the upright man , so as the righteous shall never be removed ; and if he be in trouble , riches avail not in the day of wrath , but righteousness delivereth from death ; so the righteous shall come out of adversity , and escape out of trouble , and the wicked shall come in his stead : thus every way Righteousness preserveth the upright in heart ; Prosperity and wealth ? The house of the righteous shall have much treasure , and his Tabernacle shall flourish . Long life ? The fear of the Lord increaseth the days ; & not only himself , but his house shall stand ; And though a sinner do evil an hundred times , and God prolong his days , yet know I that it shall be well to them that fear the Lord , & do reverence before him ; and lastly , whatsoever good ? God will grant the desire of the righteous , and he that keepeth the law is blessed . 

§. 7.  In the estate of wickedness our good things are accursed Wealth , 
Life , 
Fame , 
Devotions ; Prayers , 
Sacrifices 


Evil inflicted ; of Loss , 
Paine ; Affliction , 
Death , 
Damnation . 




Contrarily , there is perfect misery in wickedness . Look on all that might seem good in this estate ; wealth . The tresures of the wicked profit nothing ; the L. will not famish the soul of the righteous , but he either casteth away the substance of the wicked , so that the belly of the wicked shall want , or else imploieth it to the good of his : for the wicked shall be a ransom for the just ; & to the sinner God giveth pain to gather , and to heap , to give to him that is good before God. The wicked man may be rich : but how ? The revenues of the wicked is trouble . Life ; The years of the wicked shall be diminished : As the whirlwind passeth , so is the wicked no more ; for God overthroweth the wicked , and they are not . Whatsoever therefore their hope be , the wicked shall be cut off from the earth , & the transgressors shall be rooted out ; It shall not be well to the wicked , neither shall he prolong his days ; he shall be like to a shadow , because he feared not God ; yea , the very house of the wicked shall be destroyed . Fame . Whereas the memorial of the just shall be blessed , the name of the wicked shall rot : yea look upon his best endeavours ; His Prayers . The Lord is far off from the wicked , but heareth the prayer of the righteous : far off from accepting for He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law , even his prayer shall be abominable ; His sacrifice ( though well intended ) as all the rest of his ways , is no better than abomination to the Lord ; how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind ? And as no good , so much evil ; whether of loss : The way of the wicked will deceive them ; their hope shall perish , especially when they die ; their candle shall be put out , their works shall prove deceitful ; Or of pain ; for the excellent that form all things , rewardeth the fool , and the Transgressor ; and he hath appointed , that Affliction should follow sinners : follow ? yea overtake them ; His own iniquity shall take the wicked himself , and cover his mouth ; and he shall be holden with the cords of his own sin : even in the transgression of the evil man is his snare ; so the wicked shall fall in his own wickedness : for of it own self , Iniquity overthroweth the sinner : But besides that , the curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked : though hand join in hand , he shall not be unpunished : behold , the Righteous shall be paid upon earth , how much more the wicked and the sinner ? That than which the wicked man feareth shall come upon him ; both , Death ; He shall die for default of instruction , and that by his own hands : for , by following evil he seeks his own death ; and after that damnation ; The wicked shall be cast away for his malice : Hell and destruction are before the LORD ; and a man of wicked imaginations will he condemn ; so both in life , in death , after it , nothing but Terror shall be for the workers of iniquity : where contrarily , The fear of the Lord leads to life , and he that is filled therewith shall contontinue , and shall not be visited with evil . 

SALOMON'S ETHICS . THE second BOOK . PRUDENCE . 

§. 1.  Of Virtue in common : Wherein it consisteth . 
Whereby it is ruled , and directed . 


Virtue consists in the mean ; vice in extremes . Let thy ways be ordered aright ; Turn not to the right hand , nor to the left , but remove thy foot from evil ; The rule whereof is God's Law : for the commandment is a lantern , and instruction a light ; and every word of God is pure . My son , harken to my words ; incline thine ear to my sayings ; Let them not depart from thine eyes ; but keep them in the midst of thine heart . For , they are life unto those that find them , and health unto all their flesh . Keep my commandments and thou shalt live , and mine Instruction as the apple of thine eye : Bind them upon thy fingers , & write them upon the Table of thine heart . 

All Virtue is either Prudence , 
justice , 
Temperance , 
Fortitude . 


1.  Of Prudence : which comprehends Wisdom , 
Providence , 
Discretion . 


§. 2.  Of wisdom ; the Description , 
Effects . It procures Knowledge : safety from sin , 
from judgement . 

good direction for actions , 
for words . 


Wealth , Honour , Life . 



The prudent man is he , whose eyes are in his head to see all ihings , and to foresee ; and whose heart is at his right hand to do all dextrouslie , and with judgement . Wisdom dwells with Prudence and findeth forth knowledge , and counsels . And to describe it : The wisdom of the Prudent is to understand his way ; his own ; If thou be wise , thou shalt be wise for thyself : An excellent virtue . for Blessed is the man that findeth wisdom , and getteth understanding : The merchandise thereof is better than the merchandise of silver , and the gain thereof is better than gold : It is more precious than pearls , and all the things that thou canst desire are not to be compared to her . Length of days are in her right hand ; and in her left hand riches and glory : Her ways are ways of pleasure , and all her paths prosperity : She is a tree of life to them that lay hold on her , and blessed is he that receiveth her . The fruits of it are singular : for , first , A wise heart doth not only seek , but get knowledge , without which the mind is not good ; & the ear of the wise , learning ; and not get it only but lay it up , and not so only but works by it ; and yet more , is crowned with it . Besides knowledge , here is safety . When wisdom entereth into thy heart , and knowledge delighteth thy soul , then shall counsel preserve thee , and understanding shall keep thee : and deliver thee from the evil way , and from the man that speaketh froward things , and from them that leave the ways of righteousness , to walk in the ways of darkness : and as from sin , so from judgement . The way of life is on high to the Prudent , to avoid from hell beneath . Thirdly , good direction . 1.  For actions ; Wisdom causeth to walk in the way of righteousness , and in the mids of the paths of judgement : 2.  For words , The hart of the wise guideth his mouth wisely , and addeth doctrine to his lips ; So that the words of the mouth of a wise man have grace : yea , he receives grace from others . Either Instruct , or reprove the Prudent , and he will understand knowledge . Not to speak of wealth ; she causeth them that love her to inherit substance , and filleth their treasures : she giveth not only honour : for the wisdom of a man doth make his face to shine , & the wiseman shall inherit glory ; but life : Understanding is a wellspring of life to him that hath it ; and he that findeth me ( saith wisdom ) findeth life , and shall obtain favour of the Lord Wherefore Get wisdom ; get understanding ; forget not , neither decline from the words of my mouth . Forsake her not , and she shall keep thee ; love her , & she shall preserve thee . Wisdom is the beginning ; get wisdom therefore , & above all possessions get understanding : Exalt her and she shall exalt thee : She shall bring thee unto honour , if thou embrace her : she shall give a goodly ornament to thine head ; yea , she shall give thee a crown of glory : 

§. 3.  Of Providence What she is , 
What her objects , 
What her effects , 


Providence is that whereby the heart of the wise foreknoweth the time , and judgement ; the time when it will be ; the judgement how it will be done : both which are appointed to every purpose under heaven : Not that man can foresee all future things : no , he knoweth not that , that shall be ; For who can tell him when it shall be ? not so much as concerning himself . Neither doth man know his time , but as the fishes are taken with an evil net , and as the birds which are caught in the snare ; so are the children of men snared in the evil time , when it falleth on them suddenly ; yea , the steps of a man are ruled by the Lord ; how should a man them understand his own way ? but , sometimes he may : The prudent man seeth the plague afar off , and fleeth ; and as for good things , With the Pismire he provideth his meat in summer ; working still according to foreknowledge ; yet not too strictly , and fearfully ; for he that observeth the wind shall not sow , and he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap . 

§. 4.  Of Discretion : what it is , 
what it worketh for our acts 
for our speeches . 



Djscretion is that whereby a man is wise in his businesses , and whereby the heart of the wise guideth his mouth wisely , & addeth doctrine to his lips . For actions : The Prudent will consider his steps , and make choice of times : for , To all things there is an appointed time ; and a time for every purpose under heaven ; a time to plant , & a time to pluck up that which is planted ; a time to slay , and a time to heal , etc.  A time of war and a time of peace : From hence it is that the wise man is strong , and rich ; for by knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with precious things which he knows how to employ well : The crown of the wise is their riches ; from hence , that his good understanding maketh him acceptable to others . For speeches , The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright , & in the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found ; & his words have grace , both1 for the seasonablenes , A word spoken in his place is like apples of Gold with pictures of silver , & how good is a word in due season ! 2 for the worth of them , The lips of knowledge are a precios jewel ; lastly , for their use : the lips of the wise shall preserv them , & their tongue is health , and with health pleasure ; Fair words are as an honeycomb ; sweetness to the soul ; & health to the bones . 

§. 5.  The extremes Overwise , 
Foolish Who he is : what kinds there be of Fools ; the mere fool : 
the rash fool : 
the wicked fool . 

What success . 



Here are two extremes : On the right hand ; Make not thyself overwise , wherefore shouldst thou be desolate ? on the left : Neither be foolish ; why shouldst thou perish , not in thy time ? The fool is that man that wandreth out of the way of wisdom , which hath none hart , that is , is destitute of understanding , either to conceive , or to do as he ought : Of which sort is , 1.  The mere fool ; That fool who when he goeth by the way , his heart faileth ; whose folly is foolishness , in whose hand there is a price in vain to get wisdom , which is too high for him to atain : lastly , In whom are not the lips of knowledge . 2.  The rash fool , that is hasty in his matters , that poureth out all his mind at once ; which the wise man keeps in , till afterwards ; that hasteth with his feet and therefore sinneth . There is more hope of the other fool then of him . 3.  The wicked fool : That despiseth wisdom and instruction , that maketh a mock of sin ; to whom it is an abomination to depart from evil ; to whom foolishness is joy , yea , it is his pastime to do wickedly , and his practice to spread abroad folly : And this man is obstinate in his courses ; for though thou bray a fool in a mortar among wheat , brayed with a pestle , yet will not his foolishness depart from him : and though it seem to depart , yet as a dog turneth again to his vomit , so returns he to his foolishness . Spare thy labour therefore , speak not in the ears of a fool , for he will despise the wisdom of thy words . To these saith wisdom , OH ye foolish , how long will ye love foolishness , and the scornful take pleasure in scorning , and fools hate knowledge ? Turn you at my correction . Lo , I will pour out my mind unto you ; & make you understand my words . Because I have called and ye refused , I have stretched out my hand , and none would regard ; But ye have despised all my counsel , and would none of my correction ; I will also laugh at your destruction , and mock when your fear cometh ; like sudden desolation , and your destruction shall come like a whirlwind ; when affliction , and anguish shall come upon you . then shall they call upon me , but I will not answer : they shall seek me early , but they shall not find me ; Because they hated knowledge , and did not choose the fear of the Lord ; they would none of my counsel , but despised all my correction ; Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way , and be filled with their own devices : and what is that fruit but sorrow ? Even in laughing their heart is sorrowful ; and the end of that mirth is heaviness : and like the noise of thorns under a pot , so ( short and vain ) is the laughter of fools : what but stripes ? A rod shall be for the back of him that is destitute of understanding : yea , it is proper to him . To the horse belongeth a whip , to the ass a bridle , & a rod to the fools back : wherewith not only himself shall be beaten , but the companion of fools shall be afflicted : Lastly , what but death ? Fool's shall die for want of wit , and remain in the congregation of the dead ; yea the mouth of the fool is present destruction ; and The lips of a fool shall devour himself , and that which should seem to preserve him , Very ease slayeth the foolish , and the prosperity of fools destroyeth them . 

SALOMON'S ETHICS . THE third BOOK . JUSTICE . 

justice gives to each his own ; To God , Piety : which comprehends Fear , 
Honour and respect , 
Obedience . 

To God & man Fidelity , 
Truth in words , 
in dealings . 

Love.  

To man only others Mercy , 
Liberality . 

ourselves ; Diligence in our vocations . 



§. 1.  1.  Of justice in general . 
2.  Of the fear of God what it is 
what fruits it hath present 
future 




Next to Prudence , is Justice . A man of understanding walketh uprightly : The just man , therefore , is he that walketh in his integrity ; and whose path is to decline from evil ; and briefly , he that deals truly , in giving each his own . 

Whether to God ; unto whom justice challengeth Piety : which comprehends , first , the fear of the Lord ; and this fear of the Lord is to hate evil , as pride , arrogancy , and the evil way ; and in all our ways to acknowledge God ; that he may direct our ways ; so that , he that walketh in his righteousness , feareth the Lord ; but he that is lewd in his ways despiseth him : which grace , as it is the beginning of knowledge , & the very instruction of wisdom , so in some respect knowledge is the beginning of it ; for If thou callest after knowledge , and criest for understanding ; If thou seekest her as silver , and searchest for her as treasures ; then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord , and find the knowledge of God ; And this fear gives both contentment ; Better is a little with the fear of the Lord , then great treasure , and trouble therewith ; and 2. future hope . Fear the Lord continually : for surely there is an end , & thy hope shall not be cut off . In which regard , This fear of the Lord is an assured strength to depend upon ; because his children shall have hope yea & present health & joy . Fear the Lord , & depart from evil ; so health shall be to thy navel , and marrow to thy bones : and with health , life eternal ; The fear of the Lord leads to life , yea is a wellspring thereof , and he that is filled therewith , shall continue , and shall not be visited with evil ; so that Blessed is the man that feareth always : whereas on the contrary , He that hardeneth his hart , and denies God , and saith who is the Lord , shall fall into evil . 

§. 2.  Honour in the best things , 
in the best times . 

Obedience in attending on his will , 
in performing it . 



2.  Honour & respect ; both from the best things : Honour the Lord , with thy riches , and the first fruits of all thy increase ; so shall thy barns be filled with abundance , and thy presses shall burst with new wine : and in our best times ; Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth ; while the evil days come not , nor the years approach ; wherein thou shalt say , I have no pleasure in them . 

Thirdly , Obedience . He that obeyeth me , shall dwell safely ( saith wisdom ) and be quiet from fear of evil : whether in attendance to the will of God ; My son harken to my words , incline thine ear unto my sayings ; Let them not depart from thine eyes , but keep them in the midst of thine heart : for , He that regardeth instruction is in the way of life : whereas he that turneth away his ear from it , his very prayer shall be abominable ; or in executing of it . He that keepeth the commandment is a child of understanding ; yea he is blessed , & thereby keepeth his own soul ; where they that forsake the law praise the wicked : and he that despiseth his ways shall die . 

§. 3. Fidelity in performances To God , 
To man  

in faithful eproofe . 


OR whether to GOD and man 1.  FIDELITY : both , first in performing that we have undertaken : If thou have vowed a vow to God , defer not to pay it ; for he delighteth not in fools ; pay therefore that thou hast vowed ; It is better that thou shouldst not vow ; then that thou shouldst vow , and not pay it : Suffer not thy mouth to make thy flesh to sin ; Neither say before the Angel that this is ignorance : wherefore shall God be angry by thy voice , and destroy the work of thine hands ? For , It is destruction to a man , to devour that which is sanctified ; and after the vows to inquire . Neither this to God only , but to man ; They that deal truly are his delight ; and the upright shall inherit good things : yea , The faithful man shall abound in blessings ; whereas the perfidious man as he wrongs others ( for Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble , is like a broken tooth , and a sliding foot ) so be gaineth not in the end , himself ; He that rewardeth evil for good , evil shall not depart from his house . 

2.  In a faithful reproof : Open rebuke is better them secret love : The wounds of a lover are faithful , & the kisses of an enemy are pleasant , but false : so that he that reproveth shall find more thank at the last : and how ever the scorner take it , yet he that reproveth the wise , & obedient ear is as a gold earring , and an ornament of fine gold . 

§. 4. truth in words The quality , 
The fruit to himself 
to others 

The opposites 1.  Lies , 
Slander . 

2.  Dissimulation , 
Flattery . 




He that speaketh truth will show Righteousness . Wherein ? A faithful Witness delivereth souls : but a deceiver speaketh lies ; A virtue of no small importance : for , Death and Life are in the hand of the tongue ; and as a man loves , he shall eat the fruit thereof , to good , or evil ; to himself , others : Himself ; A wholesome tongue is as a Tree of life , and the lip of Truth shall be stable for ever : others , The tongue of the just man is as fined silver , and the lips of the Righteous do feed many : therefore Buy the truth , and sell it not ; as those do , which either 1. lie , 2. slander , 3. dissemble , or 4. flatter . 

§. 5.  The Liar His fashions , 
His manifestation , 
His punishment . 


A Faithful witness will not lie , but a false record will speak lies . Of those six , yea seven things that God hates , two are , A lying tongue , and a false witness that speaketh lies ; for such a one mocketh at judgement , and his mouth swallows up iniquity ; yea , a false tongue hates the afflicted . He is soon perceived ; for a lying tongue varieth incontinently : & when he is found , A false witness shall not be unpunished , & he that speaketh lies shall not escape ; for the lying lips are abomination to the LORD , therefore a false witness shall perish : and who pities him ? Such a one is an hammer , a sword , a sharp arrow to his neighbour ; he deceiveth with his lips and saith , I will do to him as he hath done to me . Two things then have I required of thee , deny me them not until I die etc.  Remove far from me vanity , & lies . Let me be a poor man rather than a liar . 

§. 6.  The slanderer what his exercise in misreports , 
in unseasonable meddling . 

what his entertainment . 


This wicked man diggeth up evil , & in his lips is like burning fire ; He shutteth his eyes to devose wickedness : he moveth his lips , and bringeth evil to pass : and either he inventeth ill rumours ; A righteous man hates lying words : but the wicked causeth slander and shame ; or else in true reports he will be foolishly meddling , and goeth about discovering secrets ; ( where he that is of a faithful heart concealeth matters ) and by this means raiseth discord . Without wood the fire is quenched , and without a tale-bearer strife ceaseth ; for the words of a tale-bearer are as flatter , and go down into the bowels of the belly : therefore as on the one side , thou mayst not give thine heart to all that men speak of thee ; lest thou hear thy servant cursing thee ; so on the other , no countenance must be given to such : for As the Northwind drives away rain ; so doth an angry countenance the slandering tongue . 

§. 7.  The dissembler of four kinds malicious , 
vainglorious , 
covetous , 
impenitent . 

The flatterer his success to himself , 
to his friend . 

his remedy . 



The slanderer and dissembler go together : He that dissembleth hatred with lying lips , and he that inventeth slander , is a fool ; There is then a malicious dissembler : He that hates will sergeant with his lips , and in his heart he layeth up deceit ; such one , Thomas he speak favourably , believe him not ; for there are seven abominations in his heart . Hatred may be covered with deceit ; but the malice thereof shall ( at last ) be discovered in the congregation . There is a vainglorious dissembler , that maketh himself rich & is poor ; and 3. a covetous : There is that makes himself poor having great riches ; & this both in bargains : It is naught , It is naught , saith the bu●er ; but when he is gone apart ; he boasteth ; and 2.  In his entertainment ; The man that hath an evil eye , as though he thought in his heart , so will he say to thee , Eat and drink , but his heart is not with thee : Lastly , an impenitent ; He that hideth his sins shall not prospero : but he that confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy . The flatterer praiseth his friend with a loud voice , rising early in the morning ; but with what success ? To himself ; It shall be counted to him for a curse : To his friend ; A man that flattereth his neighbour , spreadeth a not for his steps ; he spreadeth and catcheth : For a Flattering mouth causeth ruin . The only remedy than is ; Meddle not with him that flattereth with his lips ; for It is better to hear the rebuke of wise men , than the song of fools . 

§. 8.  Truth in dealings : wherein is the true-dealers Practices To do right , 
with joy . 

Reward God's love , 
good memorial . 



The uprightness of the just shall guide them , and direct their way ; which is ever plain and strait ; whereas the way of others is perverted , & strange . Yea , as to do justice and judgement is more acceptable ( to the Lord ) than sacrifice ; so it is a joy to the just himself , to do judgement : all his labour therefore tendeth to life ; he knoweth the cause of the poor , and will have care of his soul : His work is right , neither intendeth he any evil against his neighbour ; seeing he dwelleth by him without fear ; and what loseth he by this ? As the true balance , and weight are of the Lord , & all the weights of the bag are his work : So God loveth him that followeth righteousness : and with men ; The righteous is more excellent than his neighbour : and Better is the poor that walketh in his uprightness , than he that perverteth his ways , though he be rich . Yea finally ; The memorial of the just shall be blessed . 

§. 9 Deceit The kinds Coloured , 
Direct Private , 
Public . 


The judgement attending it . 


Contrary to this is Deceit : whether in a colour ; As he that feigneth himself mad , casteth firebrands , arrows , and mortal things ; so deals the deceitful man , & saith , am I not in sport ? As this deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil : so in their hands are Diverse weights , and diverse balances : or directly , He that is partner with a thief , hates his own soul , and dangerous are the ways of him that is greedy of gain ; much more publicly , I have seen the place of judgement , where was wickedness ; and the place of justice where was iniquity : I thought in mine heart God will judge the just and the wicked , yea ofttimes speedily ; so as The deceitful man roasteth not what he took in hunting : or if he eat it ; The bread of deceit is sweet to a man , but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel . 

§. 9 Love To God , rewarded with his love , 
with his blessings . 

To men In passing by offences , 
In doing good to our enemies . 



Love to God : I love them that love me : and they that seek me early shall find me ▪ & with me , blessings : I cause them that love me to inherit substance , and I will fill their treasures . 2.  To men , 1.  In passing by offences ; Hatred stirreth up contentions , but love covereth all Trespasses , and the shame that arises from them : so that he only that covereth a transgression seeketh love . 2.  In doing good to our enemies , If he that hates thee be hungry give him bread to eat ; and if he be thirsty , give him water to drink . Here therefore do offend , 1. the contentious . 2. the envious . 

§. 10.  The contentious whether in raising ill rumours , 
or whether by pressing matters too far . 


THE first is he that raiseth contentions among brethren : which once raised are not so soon appeased . A brother offended is harder to win them a strong city : and their contentions are like the bar of a palace . This is that violent man that deceiveth his neighbour , and leads him into the way that is not good , the way of discord : whether by ill rumours ; The fool's lips come with strife ; and as the coal maketh burning coals , and wood a fire , so the contentious man is apt to kindle strife ; and that even among great ones , A froward person soweth strife , and a talebearer maketh division among Princes ; or by pressing matters too far : When one churneth milk , he bringeth forth butter ; and he that wringeth his nose , causeth blood to come out : so he that forceth wrath , bringeth forth strife , the end whereof is never good : for it a wise man contend with a foolish man , whether he be angry or laugh , there is no rest . 

§. 11. Envy The kinds At our neighbour , 
At the wicked . 

The effects To others , 
Itself . 



THE second is that injustice whereby the soul of the wicked wishes evil , and his neighbour hath no favour in his eyes ; that moveth him to be glad when his enemy falleth , and his heart to rejoice when he stumbleth ; and this is a violent evil . 1.  To itself ; A sound heart is the life of the flesh ; but envy is the rotting of the bones . 2.  To others ; Anger is cruel , and wrath is raging : but who can stand before envy ? But of all other it is most unjust , when it is set upon an evil subject . Fret not thyself because of the malicious , neither be envious at the wicked , nor choose any of his ways ; neither let thine heart be envious against sinners , nor desire to be with them ; for , as their heart imagineth destruction , and their lips speak mischief , so the forward is an abomination to the Lord ; and there shall be none end of the plagues of the evil man ; and his light shall be put out . 

§. 12.  justice To man only : First to others 1. in Mercy The quality , 
The gain of it . 




Let not mercy and truth forsake thee : bind them on thy neck , and write them upon the table of thine heart ; this suffereth not to stop thine ear at the cry of the poor : yea , the righteous man regardeth the life of his beast ; no virtue is more gainful : for By mercy and truth iniquity shall be forgiven ; and By this thou shalt find favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man : Good reason ; For he honoureth God that hath mercy on the poor : yea he makes God his debtor ; He that hath meron the poor dareth to the Lord , and the Lord will recompense him : So that The merciful man rewardeth his own soul ; for He that followeth righteousness and mercy , shall find righteousness , and life , and glory ; and therefore is blessed for ever . 

§. 13.  Against mercy offend 1.  Vnmercifulnesse , 
2.  Oppression , 
Bloodthirstiness . 


1 That ( not only ) the rich ruleth the poor , but that the poor is hated of his own neighbour ; whereas the friends of the rich are many : Of his neighbour ? Yea All the brethren of the poor hate him : how much more will his friends departed from him ? though he be instant with words , yet they will not . 

2.  There is a generation , whose teeth are as swords , and their jaws as knives , to eat up the afflicted out of the earth . These are they that oppress the poor to increase themselves , and give to the rich ; that rob the poor , because he is poor , and oppress the afflicted in judgement ; that take away the garment in the cold season , & therefore are like vinegar poured upon nitre , or like him that singeth songs to an heavy heart ; That trouble their own flesh , and therefore are cruel ; An ordinary sin . I turned and considered all the oppressions that are wrought under the Sun ; and behold the tears of the oppressed , and none comforteth them ; and the strength is of the hand of those that oppress them , & none comforteth them . None ? Yes surely , above . If in a country thou seest the oppression of the poor , and the defrauding of judgement , and justice , be not astonished at the matter ; for he that is higher than the hyest regardeth , and there be higher than they , which will defend the cause of the poor , to cause the oppressor to come to poverty : in which estate he shall cry and not be heard . 

3.  The bloody man is he which not only doth hate him that is upright , but layeth wait against the house of the righteous , and spoileth his resting place ; yea that doth violence against the blood of a person , Such as will say , Come with us , we will lay wait for blood , and lie privily for the innocent without a cause . We will swallow them up alive like a Grave , even whole ; as those that go down into the pit ; But , my son , walk not thou in the way with them : refrain thy foot from their path : For their feet run to evil , and make haste to bloodshed . Certainly as without cause the net is spread before the eyes of all that hath wings : So they lay wait for blood , & lie privily for their lives ; Thus the mercies of the wicked are cruel : But shall they prevail in this ? The causeless curse shall not come : The just man may fall seven times in a day , but he riseth up again , whiles the wicked shall fall into mischief ; Yea into the same they had devised : He that diggeth a pit shall fall therein ; and he that rolleth a stone , it shall fall upon him , and crush him to death : for He that doth violence against the blood of a person , shall flee unto the Grave , and they shall not stay him . 

§. 14.  The second kind of justice to others , is Liberality Described , 
Limited , 
Rewarded , with his own , 
with more . 



Liberality or beneficence , is to cast thy bread upon the waters ; to give a portion to seven , and also to eight ; in a word , to give of his bread to the poor , and not to withhold his goods from the owners thereof ( 1 the needy ) though there be power in his hand to do it , and not to say to his neighbour , Go and come again , to morrow I will give thee , if he now have it ; Not that God would not have us enjoy the comforts he gives us , ourselves ; for , to every man to whom God hath given riches and treasures , and giveth him power to eat thereof , and to take his part , and to enjoy his labours , this is the gift of God ; but if the clouds be full , they will pour out rain upon the earth , and yet they shall be never the emptier . The liberal person shall have plenty , and he that watereth , shall also have rain : yea not only he that giveth to the poor , shall not lack , but shall find it after many days ; whereas he that hideth his eyes , shall have many curses : but , There is that scattereth and is more increased ; thus He that hath a good eye is blessed of God.  

§. 15.  The extremes whereof are Covetousness The descripon of it , 
The curse . 

Prodigality . 


The covetous is he , that is greedy of gain , that having an evil eye , and coveting still greedily , traveleth too much to be rich ; and therefore both spares more than is right , and increaseth his goods by usury and interest ; There is one alone , & there is not a second , which hath neither son , nor brother ; yet is there none end of his travel , neither can his eyes be satisfied with riches , neither doth he think for whom do I travail and defraud my soul of pleasures . This man is unsatiable , like to The horseleeches two daughters , which cry still , Give , Give : especially in his desires ; The Grave and destruction can never be full ; so the eyes of a man can never be satisfied : All the labour of man is for his mouth , and yet the soul is not filled : yea this is the curse that God hath set upon him ; He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver : and he that loveth riches shall be without the fruit thereof ; and whereas the rich man's riches are his strong City , he that trusteth in riches shall fall , and by his sparing cometh surely to poverty . All this while he sets his eyes on that which is nothing , and doth but gather for him , that will be merciful to the poor : wherefore , Better is a little with right , then great revenues without equity . Give me not poverty , nor riches : feed me with food convenient for me , lest I be full and deny thee , and say , who is the Lord : or lest I be poor and steal , & take the name of God in vain . 

§. 16.  Prodigality in Too much expense : whereof The quality , 
The end . 

Carelessness of his estate . 


THE prodigal is the man that boasteth of false liberality , that loveth pastime , and wine and oil , that feedeth gluttons , and followeth the idle ; The unthriftie man and the wicked man walketh with a froward mouth ; Lewd things are in his heart , he imagineth evil at all times ; Therefore ( also ) shall his destruction come speedily , and he shall be destroyed suddenly without recovery ; and in the mean time , The riches of vanity shall diminish ; so that he shall be a man of want ; yea filled with poverty , and a shame to his Father ; Of this kind also is he that is otherwise careless of his estate : Be not thou of them that touch the hand , nor among them that are surety for debts : If thou hast nothing to pay ; why causest thou that he should take thy bed from under thee . 

§. 17. Diligence what it is , 
how profitable in Health , 
wealth & abundance 
Honour . 



Justice to a man's self , is Diligence ; for he that traveleth , traveleth for himself : The diligent is he , who all that his hand shall find to do , doth it with all his power . I have seen ( indeed ) the travel , that God hath given the sons of men , to humble them thereby , that all things are full of labour , man cannot utter it ; But what profit hath he that worketh , of the thing wherein he traveleth ? Much every way : first , Health : The sleep of him that traveleth is sweet , whether he eat little or much ; Secondly , wealth : Open thine eyes , and thou shalt be satisfied with bread : yea , The hand of the diligent maketh rich , and his soul shall be fat : and not sufficiency only ; but in all labour there is abundance , but the talk of the lips bringeth want : yet more , the riches that the diligent man hath , are precious . 3.  Honour . A diligent man shall stand before kings , and not before the base sort ; and The hand of the diligent shall bear rule , but the idle shall be under tribute . 

§. 18. Slouthfulness The properties , 
The danger of it . 


The slothful , is he that foldeth his hands , and eateth up his own flesh ; That hideth his hand in his bosom , and will not pull it out again to his mouth ; that turneth on his bed , as a door turneth on his hinges , and saith , Yet a little steep , a little slumber , a little folding of the hands to sleep . Every thing that he ought to do is troublesome , The way of the slothful man is an hedge of thorns ( which he is loath to set foot in ) : There is a lion without ( saith he ) I shall be slain in the street : who although herein he be wiser in his own conceit , than seven men that can render a reason : Yet ( the truth is ) he that ( so much as ) follows the idle , is destitute of understanding . He lusteth ( indeed ) & affecteth great things , but his soul hath naught ; so , The very desire of the slothful slayeth him , for his hands refuse to work . And not only he that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a great waster ; but he that sleepeth ( and Slothfulness causeth to fall asleep ) in harvest , is the son of confusion : and He that will not plough , because of winter ; shall beg in Summer , and have nothing : Love not sleep therefore , lest thou come to poverty ; for , what is it , that hence cometh not to ruin ? For , the house : By slouthfulness the roof of the house goeth to decay , and by idleness of the hands , the house droppeth thorough For the land ; I passed by the field of the slothful , & by the vineyard of the man destitute of understanding ; And lo , it was all grown over with thorns , and nettles had covered the face of it ; and the stone wall thereof was broken down . then I beheld and considered it well ; I looked upon it , and received instruction ; so in every respect the slothful hand maketh poor . Go to the Pismire therefore thou sluggard , and behold her ways , and be wise : For , she having no guide , Governor , nor Ruler , prepareth her meat in summer , and gathereth her food in harvest ; How long wilt thou sleep OH sluggard ? when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep ? Yet a little sleep , yet a little slumber , yet a little folding of the hands to sleep : Therefore thy poverty cometh as a speedy Traveller , and thy necessity as an armed man  

SALOMON'S ETHICS . THE fourth BOOK . Temperance & Fortitude . 

Temperance is the moderation of our desires : whether in Diet ; Sobriety . 
in words & actions Modesty , & 
Humility . 

in affections , continency , 
refraining of anger . 



§. 1.  Temperance in diet , 
excess : how dangerous to Body , 
Soul , 
Estate . 



THE temperate in diet , is he that refrayneth his appetite , that looks not on the wine when it is red , that puts his knife to his throat , when he sits with a Ruler ; that when he finds honey , eats but that which is sufficient for him ; lest he should be over-full : It is true , that a man eateth , and drinketh , and seeth the commodity of all his labour ; this is the gift of God : yea , this I have seen good , that it is comely to eat and to drink , and to take pleasure in all his labour wherein he traveleth under the Sun , the whole number of the days of his life which GOD giveth him ; for this is his portion ; God allows us to eat our bread with joy ; and drink our wine with a cheerful heart , and there is nothing better than this , yea there is no profit but this : But not that a man should be given to his appetite ; that he should seek in his heart to draw his flesh to wine ; or that whatsoever his eyes desire he should not withhold it from them : Such a man when he is full , despiseth an hony-comb ; whereas to the hungry , every bitter thing is sweet ; and in his excess is outrageous : One of the three things , yea four , for which the earth is moved , and cannot sustain itself , is a fool when he is filled with meat . Neither doth this prospero , with himself . For his body ; The satiety of the rich , will not suffer him to sleep : To whom is woe ? to whom is sorrow ? to whom is murmuring ? to whom are wounds without cause ? and to whom is the redness of the eyes ? Even to them that tarry long at the wine ; to them that go and seek mixed wine : For his soul ; Look not on the wine when it is red , and showeth his colour in the cup , or goeth down pleasauntly . In the end thereof , it will bite like a serpent , and hurt like a cockatrice : thine eyes shall look upon the strange woman , and thy lips shall speak lewd things : And thou shalt be as one that sleepeth in the midst of the sea , and as he that sleepeth in the top of the mast : They have stricken me ( shalt thou say ) but I was not sick : they have beaten me , but I knew not when I awoke ; therefore will I seek it yet still : For his estate , He is like a City which is broken down , and without walls : Keep not company therefore with drunkards , nor with gluttons ; for the glutton and drunkard shall be poor , and the sleeper shall be clothed with rags ; and in all these , Wine is a mocker , & strong drink is raging , and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise . 

§. 2.  Modesty In words what it requires : that they be few , seasonable . 
what it profits argues wisdom , 
gives safety . 


In actions . 

Contrary to it , Loquacitie , 
Ill speech , 
Immoderate mirth . 



The modest ( for words ) is a man of a precious spirit , that refraineth his lips , and spares his words . The words of a modest man are like deep waters , and the wellspring of wisdom like a flowing river : but when he doth speak , it is to purpose ; for , The mouth of the just shall be fruitful in wisdom : & the lips of the righteous do feed many , yea himself ; A man shall be satiate with good things by the fruit of his mouth ; & with the fruit of a man's mouth his belly shall be satisfied : but still be speaketh sparingly ; A wise man concealeth knowledge , and a man of understanding will keep silence : which as it argues him wise ( for even a fool when he holdeth his peace is counted wise ; and he that stoppeth his lips , as prudent ) ; so it gives him much safety . He that keepeth his mouth , and his tongue , keepeth his foul from affliction ; yea , he keepeth his life ; where contrarily , The mouth of the fool is in the multitude of words , it babbleth out foolishness ; as it is fed with it : neither hath he any delight in understanding , but that which his heart discovereth ; and while he bewrayeth it , The heart of fools publisheth his foolishness : And as he multiplieth words , so in many words there cannot want iniquity : his mouth ( still ) babbleth evil things ; for either he speaketh froward things , or how to lie in wait for blood , or in the mouth of the foolish is the rod of pride ; And what is the issue of it ? He that openeth his mouth , destruction shall be to him . And he that hath a naughty tongue shall fall into evil ; for , both it shall be cut out , and the frowardness of it is the breaking of the heart . Lastly , A fool's mouth is his own destruction , and his lips are a snare for his soul . 

For Actions : The modest shall have honour : And though we need not say , Of laughter , thou art mad , & of joy , what is this thou dost ; yet Anger is better than laughter , for by a sad look the heart is made better . The heart of the wise , therefore , is in the house of mourning , but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth . Rejoice then , OH young man , in thy youth , and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth , & walk in the ways of thine heart , and in the sight of thine eyes ; but know , that for all these things God will bring thee to judgement . 

§. 3.  Humility , 
Pride — overweening Wherein it is , 
How absurd , 
How dangerous . 

scornfulness . 



Next to the modest , is the humble in spirit ; He saith , Surely , I am more foolish than aman , & have not the understanding of a man in me ; for I have not learned wisdom , and have not attained to the knowledge of holy things : But doth he want it ere the more ? no : With the lowly is wisdom , and The ear that hearkeneth to the corrections of life , shall lodge among the wise : Better it is , therefore , to be of an humble mind with the lowly , then to divide the spoils with the proud : for before honour goeth humility ; and he that confesseth and forsaketh his sins , shall have mercy ; yea , the humble of spirit shall enjoy glory : and the reward of humility , & the fear of God , is riches , and glory and life . 

Contrary whereto ; There is a generation , whose eyes are haughty , and their eye lids are lift up ; There is a generation that are pure in their own conceit , and yet are not washed from their filthiness . Yea , All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes : but the Lord pondereth : the spirits ; and not sonly , but Many men will boast of their goodness ; but It is not good to eat much honey , so to search their own glory is not glory ; Let another man praise thee , and not thine own mouth ; a stranger and not thy own lips : This overweening is commonly incident to great men . The rich man is wise in his own conceit , but the poor that hath understanding can try him : Hence it is , that he affects singularity ; According to his desire , he that separates himself , will seek , and occupy himself in all wisdom : but Seest thou a man thus wise in his own conceit , there is more hope of a fool then of him : yea , he is a fool in this : In the mouth of the foolish , is the rod of pride ; I thought , I will be wise , but it went far from me ; it is far off , what may it be ? and that , a wicked fool ; A haughty look , and a proud heart which is the light of the wicked is sin : If therefore thou hast been foolish in lifting up thyself , and if thou hast thought wickedly , lay thy hand upon thy mouth , for God hates an haughty eye ; yea he so hates it , that all that are proud in heart , are an abomination to the Lord : and though hand join in hand , they shall not be unpunished ; and what punishment shall be bane ? The Lord will destroy the house of the proud man ; and his very pride is an argument of his ruin : Before destruction the heart of a man is haughty : Pride goeth before destruction , and an high mind before the fall : Before it ? yea with it : When pride cometh , then cometh shame . Now the height of pride is scornfulness . He that is proud and haughty , scornful is his name , who worketh in the pride of his wrath : and this man despiseth his neighbour , and therefore is destitute of understanding : when the wicked cometh ▪ then cometh contempt ; and with the vile man is reproach , but ▪ of all , him that reproves him : He that reproveth a scorner , purchaseth to himself shame , and he that rebuketh the wicked , getteth himself a blo● ; therefore judgements are prepared for the scorners , and stripes for the back of fools ; so , as others are hurt by his sin ; for a scornful man bringeth a whole city into a snare : so they shall be likewise bettered by his judgement ; when the scorner is punished , the foolish is wise . 

§. 4 . Continency of Lust , 
of Anger , 
with their contraries . 

OF the first kind , is he that drinks the waters of his own cistern ; that desire's not the beauty of a stranger in his heart ; neither let's her take him with her eyelids : contrarily , the incontinent is he that delights in a strange woman , & embraces the bosom of a stranger ; or she that forsakes the guide of her youth , and forgetteth the covenant of God ; she lieth in wait for a pray , and she increaseth the trangressers amongst men . For a whore is as a deep ditch , & a strange woman as a narrow pit : Yea , I find more bitter than death the woman whose heart is as nets and snares , and whose hands as bands : he that is good before God shall be delivered from her , but the sinner shall be taken by her . 

Of the second , is he that is slow to anger , slow to wrath ; whose discretion differreth his anger , and whose glory is to pass by an offence : which moderation , as it argues him to be of great wisdom ( for wise men turn away wrath ) so it makes him better than the mighty man , and procures him just honour ; for It is the honour of a man to cease from strife : contrary to which , is he that is of an hasty spirit to be angry ; which as it proves him foolish : ( for anger rests in the bosom of fools , and he that is hasty to anger , not only committeth folly , but exalteth it ) So it makes him dangerous : Anger is cruel , and wrath is raging ; and a furious man aboundeth in transgressions : wherefore make no friendship with an angry man , lest thou learn his ways , and receive destruction to thy soul . 

§. 5. Fortitude In general , 
The specials of it ; Confidence , 
Patience in God's afflictions , 
in men's injuries . 




Fortitude is that , whereby The spirit of a man sustains his infirmities ; which makes the righteous bold as a lion : contrarily the weak of strength is he that is faint in the day of adversity ; whose fear bringeth a snare upon him ; and that , desperate : A wounded spirit who can bear ? which is often caused through guiltiness : The wicked fleeth , when none pursueth him . Confidence is , to trust in the Lord with all thine heart , and not to lean to thine own wisdom ; but in all thy ways to acknowledge him , and to commit thy works to the Lord , and to have hope in thy death : and though in other things , The hope that is deferred is the fainting of the heart ; yet in this , he that trusteth in the Lord shall be fat ; for , from hence , not only his thoughts and ways are directed , but he receiveth safety , and protection ; He is a shield to those that trust in him . The horse is prepared for the day of battle , but salvation is of the Lord Yea , The name of the Lord is a strong tower : the righteous runneth to it , and is exalted . So that , He that trusteth in the Lord , he is blessed ; whereas He that trusteth in his own heart , is a fool : and it is a vain thing , to boast thyself of to morrow ; for thou knowest not what a day will bring forth . 

Patience is , not to refuse the chastening of the Lord , neither to be grieved with his correction : The patient man , in the day of wealth , is of good comfort , and in the day of affliction considereth , God also hath made this contrary to that , that man should find nothing after him whereof to complain : knowing that the Lord correcteth whom he loveth ; and that the patient abiding of the righteous shall be gladness : Contrarily , The heart of the fool , fretteth against the Lord ; he is careless and rageth : but to what purpose ? Man cannot strive with him that is stronger than he : Yea rather , the man that hardeneth his neck when he is rebuked , shall suddenly be destroyed , and cannot be cured : in respect of men's injuries , He saith not , I will recompense evil ; but waits upon the Lord , and he shall save him . In which regard , the patient in spirit that suffers , is better than the proud of spirit , that requites . 

SALOMON'S POLITICS , Or Commonwealth : 1.  BOOK , His KING , 
COUNSELLOR , 
COURTIER , 
SUBJECT . 


Anno Domini , 1609.  

SALOMON'S POLITICSS , or Commonwealth : 

And , first , HIS KING . 

§. 1. Degrees must be and are subordinate , 
hyest not many , 
but one . 


and those from God.  


IN all well ordered goverments there are degrees , An higher than the hyest , and yet an higher than they : and these , of God's appointment ; not only in the inferior ranks , The rich & poor meet , and the Lord is the Maker of them all : but in the supreme : By me King's reign ( saith Wisdom ) and Princes decree justice : and not they only , but the Nobles & all the judges of the earth ; so , it is a just wonder , that The grasshoppers have no King ; yet they go forth by bands . And as no King is a judgement ; so , many : for Because of the Transgression of the land , there are many Princes , many , not only in frequent succession , but in society of regiment . 

§. 2.  In a King are described Quality of his person Natural , 
Moral . 

Actions . 


A King must be high ; as in place , so in blood : Blessed art thou OH Land , when thy King is the son of Nobles ; not of any servile condition ; for , nothing can be more uncomely , then for a servant to have rule over Princes : and it is a monster in State , to see servants ride on horses , and Princes ( of blood ) to walk as servants on the ground ; neither more monstrous , then intolerable . There are three things for which the earth is moved , yea four which it cannot sustain : whereof one is , A servant when he reigneth . 

§. 3.  Moral qualities Negative ; what one he may not be : Not lascivious , 
Not riotous , 
Not hollow and dissembling , 
Not childish , 
Not imprudent , 
Not oppressing . 

Affirmative . 


And as his blood is heroical , so his disposition ; not lascivious . What , OH son of my desires , give not thy strength to women , nor thy ways : But why should he withhold from his eyes whatsoever they can desire , and withdraw his heart from any joy ? why may he not have all the delights of the sons of men : as women take captive ; as Queens and Concubines , and Damosels without number ? This is to destroy Kings ; He shall find more bitter than death the woman whose hart is as nets and snares . Not riotously excessive ; whether in wine : for It is not for Kings to drink wine , nor for Princes strong drink : What , not at all ? To him alone is it not said , Go eat thy bread with joy , and drink thy wine with a cheerful heart ? who should eat or drink , or hast to outward things more than he ? Not immoderately : so as he should drink and forget the decree , and change the judgement of all the Children of affliction : Or in meat ; for , Woe be to thee o Land , when thy Princes eat in the morning : and if he be not the master of his appetite , his dainty meats will prove deceivable . Not hollow , not double in speeches , in profession : The lip of excellency becomes not a fool ; much less , lying talk a Prince : Not childish ; Woe to thee , OH Land , whose King is a child : not so much in age , which hath sometimes proved successful ; but in condition : Not imprudent , not oppressing ; two vices conjoined : A Prince destitute of understanding is also a great oppressor ; And to conclude , in all or any of these , not wilfully inflexible : A poor and wise child is better than an old & foolish king , that will no more be admonished . 

§. 4 Affirmative ; what one he must be : To others Just , 
Merciful , 
slow to anger , 
Bountiful . 

In himself Temperate , 
Wise , 
Valiant , 
Secret.  



Contrarily , he must be Temperate . Blessed art thou , OH Land , when thy Princes eat in time , for strength and not for drunkenness : Just and righteous ; for false balances ( especially in the hand of government ) are an abomination to the Lord : but a perfect weight pleaseth him ; A virtue beneficial , both 1 to himself ( for the throne is established by justice ) & 2 to the State. justice exalteth a Nation ; than which , nothing doth more bind and cheer the hearts of the people : for , When the righteous are in authority the people rejoice , but when the wicked bears rule the people sigh : and with truth & justice , must mercy be joined inseparably ; for Mercy and truth preserve the King : and his Throne shall be established , also , by mercy . And all these must have wisdom to menage them : By it , Princes rule , & are terrible to the ill-deserving . A wise King scattereth the wicked , & causeth the wheel to turn over them . To all these must be added bounty ; A Prince that hates covetousness shall prolong his days ; where contrarily , A man of gifts destroyeth his country : and yet further , a conquest of his own passions ; a princely victory : for He that is slow to anger , is better than the mighty man ; and he that ruleth his own mind better than he that winneth a City ; because of all other , The king's wrath is like the roaring of a lion : and what is that but the messenger of death ? and if it may be , a conquest of all others , through valour . There are three things that order well their going , yea four are comely in going : whereof the last and principal is , A King against whom no man dares rise up : Lastly , secrecy in determinations . The heaven in height , and earth in deepness , and the king's heart can no man ( no man should ) search out : neither should it be in any hands , but the Lords ; who as he knows it , so he turns it whither soever it pleaseth him . 

§. 5.  His actions common , 
special to his place : To judge righteously 1. according to the truth of the cause . 
2. according to the distress of the party , unpartially . 

remit mercifully . 



His actions must suit his disposition ; which must be universally holy : for , It is an abomination to Kings ( of all other ) to commit wickedness . Which holiness alone is the way to all peace : When the ways of a man please the L. he will make his enemies at peace with him : Peculiarly to his place ; he must first judge his people : a king that sitteth in the throne of judgement , chaseth away all evil with his eyes ; & by this , he maintains his country : & while he doth sit there , A divine sentence must be in the lips of the king , & his mouth may not transgress in judgement . for , A king that judgeth the poor in truth , his throne shall be established for ever : Neither may his ear be partially open : which disposition shall be sure to be fed with reports ; for , Of a Prince that harkeneth to lies , all his servants are wicked : nor his mouth shut ; especially in cases of distress : Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all the children of destruction : open thy mouth , judge righteously , & judge the afflicted & the poor : yet , not with so much regard to the estate of people , as the truth of the cause ; for Surely it is not good to condemn the just in whatever condition ; nor that Princes should smite such for equity : wherein he shall wisely search into all difficulties . The glory of God is to pass by infirmities , but the king's honour is to search out a thing ; yet so , as he is not seldom merciful in execution , Delivering them that are drawn to death , and preserving them that are drawn to be slain : These observed , it cannot be , that man should rule over man to his hurt . 

SALOMON'S COUNSELLOR . 

Sect. 6. Counsel For the soul How given : The necessity of it , 
The quality wise , 
righteus 
pleasant . 


How received . 

For the State.  


AS where no sovereignty , so where no counsel is , the people fall ; and contrarily , where many Counsellors are , there is health ; and more than health , Steadfastness : Counsel for the soul , Where no vision is , the people perish : which requires both holiness and wisdom : The fruit of the righteous is as a tree of life , and he that winneth souls is is wise ; and the more wise the Preacher ( is ) the more he teacheth the people knowledge , and causeth them to hear , and searcheth forth , and prepareth many parables : & not only an upright writing ( & speaking ) even the word of truth ; but pleasant words also ; so that the sweetness of the lips increaseth doctrine ; & not more delightful , then effectual : for , The words of the wise are like goads , and nails fastened by the masters of the assemblies , that are given by one Pastor : which again , of every hearer , challenge due reverence & regard ; who must take heed to his foot , when he entereth into the house of God , and be more near to hear , them to give the sacrifice of fools : for , He that despiseth the word , shall be destroyed : but he that feareth the commandment , shall be rewarded . 

§. 7.  In a Counsellor of State , or Magistrate , is required Wisdom , Discussing of causes , 
Providence , and working according to knowledge . 

Piety , 
justice , and freed from Partiality , 
Bribes , 
Oppression ▪ 



Without Counsel , all our thoughts ( even of policy & state ) come to naught : but in the multitude of Counsellors is steadfastness : & no less in their goodness ; 〈…〉 their wisdom , which alone gives strength to the owner , above ten mighty princ . that are in the city ; a virtue , which though it rests in the heart of him that hath understanding , yet is known in the mids of fools . For wisdom is in the face of him that hath understanding , and in his lips : for , howsoever he that hath knowledge spares his words , yet the tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright ; and the fool cannot open his mouth in the gate ; and therefore is unfit for authority . As snow in summer , and rain in harvest ; so is honour unseemly for a fool . And though it be given him ; how ill it agrees ? As the closing up of a precious stone in an heap of stones , so is he that gives glory to a fool . From hence , the good justicer both carefully heareth a cause , knowing , that He which answereth a matter before he hear it , it is a folly and shame to him ; and that related on both parts ▪ for He that is first in his own cause is just : then cometh his neighbour and maketh inquiry of him ; and deeply sifteth it : else he loseth the truth ; for The counsel of the heart of a man is like deep waters : but a man that hath understanding will draw it out . From hence , is his providence for the common good ; not only in seeing the plague , and hiding himself , but in delivering the city : and as he forseeth , so he worketh by knowledge : and not in peace only ; as , The words of the wise are more heard in quietness , than the cry of him that ruleth among fools ; but in war : A wise man goeth up into the city of the mighty , and casteth down the strength of the confidence thereof . For , wisdom is better than strength , yea than weapons of war ▪ I have seen this wisdom under the sun , and it is great unto me ; A little city and few men in it , and a great king came against it , and compassed it about , and builded forts against it ; and there was found , in it , a poor and wise man , and he delivered the city by his wisdom : neither can there be true wisdom in any Counsellor , without piety . The wise man feareth , & departs from evil ; being well assured , that there is no wisdom , nor understanding , nor counsel against the Lord ; & that , Man cannot be established by wickedness : and indeed bow oft doth God so dispose of estates that the evil shall bow before the good , & the wicked at the gates of the righteus ? neither is this more just with God , the● acceptable with men ▪ for , when the righteous rejoice , there is great glory , & when they are in authority the people rejoice ▪ contrarily , when the wicked comes on , and rises up , & bears rule , the man is tried ; the good hide themselves , & all the people sigh : & the righteous man falling down before the wicked , is like a troubled Well , and a corrupt spring . 

Neither is justice less essential , then either ; for to do justice and judgement is more acceptable to the Lord , than sacrifice : To know faces , therefore ( in a judge ) is not good ; for that man will transgress for a piece of bread ; much less to accept the person of the wicked , to cause the righteous to fall in judgement : He that saith to the wicked thou art righteous , him shall the people curse , and the multitude shall abhor him : Yea yet bier ; He that justifieth the wicked , & condemneth the just ▪ both are an abomination to the Lord wherefore , howsoever . The wicked man taketh a gift out of the bosom , to wrist the ways of judgement ; and commonly , A man's gift enlargeth him , and leads him ( with approbation ) before great-men : yet he knoweth , that the reward destroyeth the heart ; that the acceptance of it is but the robbery of the wicked ; which shall destroy them , because they have refused to execute judgement : he hates gifts , then , that he may live , and it is a joy to him to do judgement : He doth unpartially smite the scorner , yea severely punish him , that the wickedly foolish may beware and become wise . And whereas Every way of a man is right in his own eyes , and a false record will speak lies , and use deceit ; he so maketh inquiry , that a false witness shall not be unpunished : and he that speaketh lies shall perish : Lastly , his hand is free from oppression of of his inferiors : which as it makes a wiseman mad ; so the actor of it , miserable : for He that oppresseth the poor , reproveth him that made him ; and if the afflicted be oppressed in judgement , the Lord will defend their cause , & spoil the soul ▪ that spoileth them ; and upon all occasions , 〈◊〉 so determineth , that they shall kiss the lips of him that answereth upright words . 

SALOMON'S COURTIER 

§. 8.  Must be Discreet , 
Religious , 
Humble , 
Charitable , 
Diligent , 
Faithful . 


IN the light of the King's countenance is life , and his favour is as the cloud of the latter reign , or as the dew upon the grass : which that the Courtier may purchase ; he must be 1.  Discreet : The pleasure of a king is in a wise servant , but his wrath shall be towards him that is lewd ; 2.  Religious , both in heart , He that loveth pureness of heart for the grace of the lips the king shall be his friend : & in his actions , He that seeketh good things getteth favour ; in both which , the righteous is more excellent than his neighbour : and besides these , humble ; The reward whereof is glory : for , before glory goeth humility . He dare not therefore boast himself before the king , and thrust himself overforward in the presence of the Prince , whom his eyes do see : whom if he see moved , he pacifieth by staying of anger , and by a soft answer breaketh a man of bone ; not aggraunting the faults of others : He that covereth a transgression seeketh love ; but he that repeateth a matter separateth the Prince . To these , he is diligent , taking heed to the mouth of the King ; & therefore worthily standeth before kings , and not before the base sort : and withal , true and faithful ; when he undertakes another's suit he lingers not : knowing , that The hope that is differred is the fainting of the heart ; and though A bribe or reward is as a stone pleasant in the eyes of them that have it , and prospereth whither soever it turneth , ( for , every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts ) : yet he accounteth the gathering of treasures by a deceitful tongue , to be vanity , tossed too and from , of them that seek death . 

SALOMON'S SUBJECT . 

§. 9  His Duery to His Prince ; Reverence , 
Obedience . 

Fellow Subjects . 


Every government presupposeth Subjects . In the multitude of the people is the honour of the King ; and for the want of people , cometh the destruction of the Prince : Of whom God requires , in respect of the Prince , Reverence , Obedience ; That they should reverence , and seek the face of the Prince ; not cursing the King , so much as in their thought , nor the rich in their bedchamber ; but fearing the Lord , and the King , and not meddling with the seditious , which only seek evil . For , as the foul of the heaven shall carry the voice , and the master of the wing declare the matter : so ( for revenge ) a cruel messenger shall be sent against them ; their destruction shall arise suddenly , and who knoweth their ruin ? For their due homage therefore and obedience to laws , they take heed to the mouth of the King , and the word of the oath of God ; and if a law be enacted , they violate it not , nor strive for innovation . He that breaks the hedge , a serpent shall bite him . He that removeth stones , shall hurt himself thereby : and he that cutteth wood shall be in danger thereby . And if they have offended , they haste not to go forth of the princess' sight , nor stand in an evil thing : for he will do whatever pleaseth him ; but rather if the spirit of him that ruleth rise up against them , by gentleness pacify great sins . 

§. 10.  To his fellow Subject , In respect of more public society , is required , 1.  Regard to Superiors in Estate , 
Desert . 

Inferiors , 
Equals . 

2. Commerce 

more private society , Just maintenance of each man's propriety , 
Truth of friendship . 



IN respect of themselves , he requires due regard of degrees : whether of superiors . The rich ruleth the poor ; and as the fi●ing pot is for silver , and the furnace for gold , so is every ma●otryed according to his dignify ; so as they that come from the holy place be not forgotten in the city where they have done right : or whether of inferiors ; for , A poor man , if he oppress the poor , is like a raging rain that leaveth no food ; yea ( less than oppression ) He that despiseth his neighbour is both a sinner and destitute of understanding : or lastly , of equals ; & therein , quiet & peaceable demeanour , not striving with others causeless ; not to begin comentions , for , The beginning of strife is as one that openeth the waters ; therefore ere it be meddled with , he leaveth off ; and being provoked , debateth the matter with his neighbour . And as he goes not forth hastily to strife : so much less doth he take part in impertinent quarrels : He that passeth by , and meddleth with the strife that belongs not to him , is as one that takes a dog by the care ; and one of the six things that God hate's , is he that raiseth up contentions among neighbours . 

Secondly , mutual commerce , and interchange of commodities ; without which , is no living : The abundance of the earth is over all : and the King consists by the field that is tilled . The husbandman therefore must till his land , that he may be satisfied with bread ; for , much increase cometh by the strength of the Ox : and moreover , he must sell corn , that blessings may be upon him ; which if he withdraw , the people shall curse him ; so that , the slothful man whose field is overgrowen with thorns , and nettles , is but an ill member : And again , the Merchant must bring his wares from far ; and each so trade with other , that both may live . They prepare bread for laughter , & wine comforts the living ▪ but silver answereth to all . F●r less public society , it required due reservation of propriety ; not to remove the ancient bounds which his fathers have made ; not to enter into the field of the fatherless ; for ▪ he that redeemeth them is mighty , not to increase his riches by usury and interest , not to hasten overmuch to be rich : for such one knoweth not that poverty shall come upon him ; & that an heritage hastily gotten in the beginning , in the end thereof , shall not be blessed : and that in the mean time , The man that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house . 2.  Truth of friendship . A man that hath friends , aught to show himself friendly : for a friend is nearer than a brother ; Thy own friend therefore , and thy father's friend forget thou not : for whether he reprove thee ; The wounds of a lover are faithful or whether he advice ; As Ointment and Perfui●●e rejoice the heart , so doth the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel : or whether he exhort ; Iron sharpens iron , so doth a man sharpen the face of his friend ; and all this , not in the time of prosperity only , as commonly , riches gather many friends , and the poor is separated from his neighbour : but contrarily , A true friend loveth at all times , & a brother is born for adversity ; in all estates therefore , as the face in the water answers to face , so the hart of man to man ; who yet , may not be too much pressed : Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbour's house , lest he be weary of thee , and hate thee ; neither enter into thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity : nor again , too forward in proffering kindness to his own loss ; A man destitute of understanding toucheth the hand , and becometh surety for his neighbour : If therefore thou art become surety for thy neighbour ( much more if thou have stricken hands with the stranger ) thou art snared with the words of thine own mouth , thou art even taken with the words of thine own mouth . Do this now my son , seeing thou art come into the hand of thy neighbour ( not having taken a pledge for thy suretyship ) go and humble thyself and solicit thy friends , Give no sleep to thine eyes , nor slumber to thine ey lids . Deliver thyself as a Do from the hand of the hunter , & as a bird from the hand of the fouler ; & take it for a sure rule , He that hates suretyship is sure . 

SALOMON'S ECONOMICS , or Government of the FAMILY . 

1.  HUSBAND , 
WIFE . 

2 PARENT , 
CHILD . 

3.  MASTER , 
SERVANT . 

Anno Domini , 1609.  

SALOMON'S ECONOMICS , Or FAMILY . 

§. 1.  The head of the Family in whom is required , Wisdom , 
Staidness , 
Thrift . 


The man is the head , and guide of the family ; In whom wisdom is good with an inheritance : for Through wisdom an house is builded , and established : which directs him to do all things in due order ; first , to prepare his work without , and then after to build his house ; and therewith , stayednes . For , as a bird that wandreth from her nest , so is a man that wandreth from his own place ▪ and ( which is the chief stay of his estate ) thriftiness ; for , He that troubleth his own house ( by excess ) shall inherit the wind : and the fool shall be servant to the wise in hart : for which purpose , he shall find , that The house of the righteous shall have much treasure , while the revenues of the wicked is but trouble : or if not much ; yet , Better is a little with the fear of the Lord , then great treasure and trouble therewith : Howsoever , therefore , let him be content with his estate : Let the lambs be sufficient for his clothing ; and let the goats be the price of his field . Let the milk of his goats be sufficient for his food , for the food of his family , and the sustenance of his maids : and if he have much revenue ; let him look for much expense . For , When goods increase , they are increased that eat them : and what good cometh to the owners thereof , but the beholding thereof with their eyes ? 

THE HUSBAND : §. 2.  Who must bear himself wisely , 
chastely , 
quietly , and cheerfully . 


HE that findeth a wise , findeth a good thing , and receiveth favour of the Lord : Who must therefore behave himself , 1. wisely , as the guide of her youth : as the head to which she is a crown : 2. chastely . Drink the water of thy own Cistern , and the rivers out of the midst of thine own Well . The matrimonial love must be pure , and clear , not muddy and troubled ; Let thy fountains flow forth , and the rivers of waters in the Streets ; the sweet & comfortable fruits of blessed marriage , in plentiful issue : But let them be thine alone , and not the strangers with thee . This love abides no partners : for , this were to give thine honour unto others , and thy strength to the cruel ; so should the stranger be filled with thy strength , and ( as the substance will be with the affections ) thy labours should be in the house of a stranger ; and thou shalt mourn ( which is the best success hereof ) at thine end , when thou hast consumed ( besides thy goods ) thy flesh , and thy body , and say : How have I hated instruction , and mine heart despised correction . I was almost plunged into all evil , of sin and torments , and that which is most shameful , in the midst of the assembly , in the face of the world . Let therefore that thy own fountain be blessed , and rejoice with the wise of thy youth : Let her be as the loving Hind , and pleasant Roe ; let her breasts satisfy thee , at all times , and err thou in her love continually ; For why shouldst thou delight my son , in a strange woman ; or ( whether in affection , or act ) embrace the bosom of a stranger ? For , the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord , and he pondereth all his paths : and if thy godlessness regard not that , yet for thy own sake , Desire not her beauty in thy heart , neither let her take thee with her eyelids ; for , because of the whorish woman , a man is brought to a morsel of bread , yea to the very husks : and more than that ; a Woman will hunt for the precious life of a man thou sayest , thou canst escape this actual defilement . Can a man take fire in his bosom , and his clothes not be burned ? Or can a man go upon coals , and his feet not be burned ? So , he that goeth in , to his Neighbour's Wife , shall not be innocent , whosoever toucheth her : This Sin is far more odious than theft : For , men do not despise a Thief when he steals to satisfy his soul , because he is hungry . But if he be found , he shall restore seven fold , or he shall give all the substance of his house ; and it is accepted . But , he that commits adultery with a woman , is mad : he that would destroy his own soul , let him do it : For , he shall find a wound and dishonour , and his reproache shall never be put away : Neither is the danger less than the shame . For , jealousy is the rage of a man : therefore ▪ the wronged husband will not spare , in the day of vengeance . He cannot bear the sight of any ransom ; neither will he consent to remit it , though thou multiply thy gifts . And though Stolen waters be sweet , and hid bread be pleasant to our corrupt taste ; yet , the adulterer knows not that the dead are there : and that her guests are in the deeps of hell , that her house tendeth to death ; And howsoever her lips drop as an honeycomb , and her mouth is more soft than oil ; yet the end of her is bitter as wormwood , & sharp as a two edged sword : her feet go down to death , and her steps take hold of hell : yea , The mouth of the strange woman is a deep pit , and he with whom the Lord is angry shall fall into it . 

3.  Quietly and lovingly : for , Betteris a dinner of green herbs where love is , than a stalled ox , and hatred therewith . Yea , Better is a dry morsel , if peace be with it ; then an house full of sacrifices with strife . And if he find sometime cause of blame ; The discretion of a man differreth his anger , and his glory is to pass by an offence : and only He that covereth a transgression , seeketh love : Rejoice with thy wife , whom thou hast loved all the days of the life of thy vanity , which God hath given thee under the Sun . For , this is thy portion in this life , and in the travels wherein thou labourest under the Sun . 

THE WIFE . §. 3.  She must be 1.  Faithful to her husband ; Not wanton . 
2.  Obedient , 
3.  Discreet , 
4.  Provident and hous-wife-like . 


A Virtuous Wife is the Crown of her husband : Who shall find such a one ? for her price is far above the pearls . She is true to her husband's bed ; such as the heart of her husband may trust to , as knowing that she is tied to him by the covenant of God ; not wanton and unchaste : such one as I once saw from the window of my house : I looked through my window , & saw among the fools , & considered among the children a young man wanting wit , who passed through the street by her corner , and went toward her house , in the twilight , in the evening , when the night began to be black and dark , so as he thought himself unseen ; and behold there met him ( the same he sought for ) a woman with an harlot's fashion , and close in heart , as open in her habit . She is babbling and perverse ; whose feet ( contrary to the manner of all modest wives , which only attain honour ) cannot abide in her house ; but are over gadding . Now she is without the gates , now in the streets , and lieth in wait in every corner ; or at the least , sitteth at the door of her house , on a seat in the high places of the city : so she ( not staying to be solicited ) caught him by the neck , and kissed him , and with an impudent face , said unto him , I have the flesh of peace offerings , ( both good cheer , and religion pretended ) this day have I paid my vows : therefore I came forth , on purpose to meet thee , that I might earnestly seek thy face , of all others ; and now , how happy am I that I have found thee . I have decked my bed with ornaments , with curtains , and strings of Egypt . I have perfumed my bed with myrrh , aloes , and cinnamon , that we may lie sweet ; Come go , let us take our fill of loves , until the morning , let us take our pleasure in dalliance ; fear nothing , For my husband is not at home , he is gone a journey far off , neither needest thou to doubt his return ; for he hath taken with him a bag of silver , and will come home at his set day : sooner he cannot ; this she said : what followed ? By the abundance of the sweetness of her speech , she caused him to yield : and with the flattery of her lips , she enticed him ; and strait ways he follows her as an ox goeth to the slaughter , and as a fool to the stocks for correction , till a dart strike through his liver , the seat of his lust : or as a bird hasteneth to the snare , and knoweth not that it is against his own life : thus she doth , and when her husband returns , she wipeth her mouth , and saith I have not committed iniquity . ( 2. ) She is dutiful and obedient ; by a soft answer appeasing wrath : not hateful ; for whom , a whole world is moved ; not stubborn , not quarrellous : for , the contentions ( and brawling ) of a wife , are like a continual dropping in the day of rain ; a discomfort to the husband , a rotting to the house . So , It is better to dwell in a corner of the house top , then with a contentious woman in a wide house . And though , for society , Two be better than one ; yet It is better to dwell alone in the wilderness , then with a contentious , and angry woman . For , herein as his grief cannot be avoided , so his shame cannot be conceived . For , He that hideth her , hideth the wind ; and she is as oil in his right hand , that uttereth itself . 

§. 4.  The good housewife ( Pro. 31. ) set forth by her Actions , In her own person ; Labours , 
Bargains , 
Liberal provision , for Herself , 
The poor , 
Her family ; husband 
servants . 



In the oversight of her family . 

Speeches , 
Disposition . 


3.  She is moreover prudent , and discreet . A wise woman buildeth her house ; but the foolish destroyeth it with her own hands : and As a ring of gold in a swine's snout , so is a fair woman which lacketh discretion . 4.  Lastly , she is careful and hous-wifelike ; so as She will do her husband good , and not evil , all the days of her life : For , as for her actions , in her own person , whether you look to her labours ; She seeketh wool and flax , and laboureth cheerfully with her hands . She riseth while it is yet night : She girdeth her loins with strength , and strengtheneth her arms . She putteth her hands to the wheel ; and her hands handle the spindle : or whether , to her bargains ; She considereth a field , and getteth it , and with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard . She is like the ship of merchants , she bringeth her food from far ; she feeleth that her merchandise is good , her candle is not put out by night : she maketh sheets & selleth them , and giveth girdles unto the merchants ; or whether , to her liberal provision ; For her husband , who is known in the gates ( by her neat furnishing ) when he sits with the Elders of the land ; 2.  For herself , She maketh herself carpets : fine linen & purple is her garment ; 3.  For her servants , She feareth not the snow for her family , for all her family is clothed with scarlet ; 4.  For the poor , She stretcheth out her hands to the poor , and putteth forth her hands to the needy ; For her oversight of her family , she giveth the portion to her household , and the ordinary ( or stint of work ) to her maids : she overseeth the ways of her household , and eateth not the bread of idleness . For her speeches ; she openeth her mouth with wisdom , and the law of grace is in her tongue . Lastly , Strength and honour is her clothing , and in the latter day she shall rejoice . So worthy she is in all these , that her own children cannot contain , but rise up and call her blessed ; and her husband shall praise her , and say , Many daughters have done virtuously , but thou surmountest them all : Favour is deceitful , and beauty is vanity ; but a woman that feareth the Lord , she shall be praised : Since therefore she is so well deserving , Give her of the fruit of her own hands , and let her own works praise her . 

PARENTS : §. 5.  Who owe to their children Provision , 
Instruction , 
Correction . 


Parent's and Children are the next pair ; which do give much joy to each other : children's children are the Crown of the elders , and the glory of the children are their fathers : To which purpose , the Parent oweth to the Child , 1.  Provision . A good man shall give inheritance to his children's children . All the labour , wherein he hath traveled , he shall leave to the man that shall be after him . And who knoweth whether he shall be wise or foolish : yet shall he rule over all his labour wherein he hath laboured , and showed himself wise , under the sun . Here are therefore two gross vanities , which I have seen : the one , There is one alone , & there is not a second , which hath neither son nor brother : yet is there none end of his travel , neither can his eye be satisfied with riches ; neither doth he think , for whom do I travel , and defraud my soul of pleasure . The other , contrary ; riches reserved to the owners thereof for their evil . And these riches perish in his evil business ; and he begetteth a son , and in his hand is nothing . 2.  Instruction and good education : for , He that begetteth a fool ( whether naturally , or by ill breeding ) begetteth himself sorrow : and the father of a fool can have no joy . And therefore , Teach a child in the trade of his way : and when he is old , he shall not depart from it . 3.  Correction : He that spares his rod , hates his son : but he that loveth him , chasteneth betime ; for foolishness is bound in the heart of a child : the rod of correction shall drive it from him : yea , there is yet great benefit of due chastisement ; for , The rod and correction give life : but a child set at liberty makes his mother ( who is commonly faulty this way ) ashamed ; yea , more them shame , death and hell follow to the child upon indulgence : ( only ) If thou smite him with the rod , he shall not die : if thou smite him with the rod , thou shalt deliver his soul from hell . Thomas thy son therefore be tender and dear in thy sight ; Correct him , and he will give thee rest , and will give pleasures to thy soul : wherefore , Chasten him while there is hope ; and let not thy soul spare , to his destruction . The son that is of a great stomach , shall endure punishment : and though thou deliver him , yet thou shalt take him in hand again . 

CHILDREN : §. 6.  Their duties ; obedience to instructions , 
commandments . 

submission to correction . 
care of their Parent's estate , 
of their own carriage . 



A Wise Son rejoiceth the Father , and The Father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice ; whereas , The foolish is the calamity of his Parents : Contrarilie , if thou be a wise son , or lovest wisdom , thy father & thy mother shall be glad , and she that bore thee shall rejoice . Such a one is , first , Obedient ; for , A wise son will hear and obey the instruction of his father , and not forsake his mother's teaching ; yea , in every command , he will obey him that begot him , and not despise his mother when she is old ; not upon any occasion cursing his parents ( as there is a generation that doth ) : for , He that curseth his father , or mother , his light shall be put out in obscure darkness ; not mocking & scorning them ; for , The eye that mocketh his father , and despiseth the instruction of his mother , the ravens of the valley shall pick it out , and the young Eagles eat it : and not obedient to counsel only , but to stripes ; He that hates correction is a fool : and he that regardeth it , is prudent . For , those corrections that are for instruction , are the way of life : therefore , he that hates them shall die . Secondly , Careful both 1 of their estate : He that robbeth his father & mother , and saith it is no transgression , is a companion of a man that destroyeth ; and 2 of his own carriage : for a lewd and shameful child destroyeth his father , and chaseth away his mother . Let therefore even the child show himself to be known by his do , whether his work be pure and right : so his father's reinss shall rejoice , when he speaketh & doth righteous things . 

The MASTER , & SERVANT . §. 7.  The master must be Provident for his servant : 
Not too severe , 
too familiar . 


The servant must be faithful , 
diligent . 



The servant is no small commodity to his master . He that is despised , & hath a servant of his own is better than he that boasts ( whether of gentry , or wealth ) & wanteth bread . The master , therefore , must provide sufficiency of food for his family , and sustenance for his maids : who also as he may not be overrigorous in punishing , or noting offences ; sometimes not hearing his servant , that curseth him : so not too familiar ; for he that delicately bringeth up his servant from his youth , at length he will be as his son . He must therefore be sometimes severe , more than in rebukes ; ( For , A servant will not be chasticed with words : and though he understand , yet he will not regard ) yet so , as he have respect ever to his good deservings . A discreet servant shall rule over a lewd son : and he shall divide the heritage among the brethren . In answer whereto , the good servant must be faithful unto his master ; As the cold of snow in time of harvest , so is a faithful messenger to them that send him , for he refresheth the soul of his master . A wicked messenger falleth into evil : but a faithful ambassador is preservation ; and 2 diligent , Whether in his charge ; Be diligent to know the estate of thy flock ( or rather , the face of thy cattles ) and take heed to the herds : or in his attendance , He that keepeth his figtree shall eat of the fruit of it : so he that carefully waits on his master , shall come to honour , where contrarily , in both these , As vinegar to the teeth , and smoke to the eyes : so is a slothful messenger to them that send him . 

FINIS . 

AN OPEN AND plain Paraphrase , upon the SONG OF SONGS , Which is Salomon's . 

By JOS . HALL. . 

Anno Domini , 1609.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE , MY Singular good Lord & Patron , EDWARD Lord Denny , Baron of Waltham , All Grace & Happiness . 

RIGHT HONOURABLE : 

When I would have withdrawn my hand from divine Solomon : the heavenly elegance of this his best Song drew me unto it ; and would not suffer me to take off mine eyes , or pen. Who can read it with understanding , & not be transported from the world ; from himself ? and be any other where , save in heaven , before his time ? I had rather spend my time in admiration , than Apology : Surely , here is nothing that savours not of ecstasy , and spiritual ravishment ; neither was there ever so high and passionate a speculation delivered by the spirit of God , to mankind : which by how much more divine it is , by so much more difficult : It is well , if these mysteries can be found out by searching . Two things make the Scriptures hard : Prophecies , Allegories ; both are met in this : but the latter so sensibly to the weakest eyes , that this whole Pastoral-mariage-song ( for such it is ) is no other than one Allegory sweetly continued : where the deepest things of God are spoken in riddles , how can there be but obscurity & diverse construction ? All judgements will not ( I know ) subscribe to my senses ; yet I have been fearful and spiritually nice in my choice , not often dissenting from all interpreters ; always , from the unlikeliest . It would be too tedious to give my account for every line : let the learned scan and judge . Whatever others censures be , your Honours was favourable ; and ( as to all mine ) full of love and encouragement . That , therefore , which it pleased you to allow from my pen , vouchsafe to receive from the Press ; more common , not less devoted to you . What is there of mine that doth not joy in your name , and boast itself in serving you ? To whose soul and people , I have long agone addicted myself , and my labours ; and shall ever continue 

Your Lordships , in all humble & unfeigned duty , JOS . HALL. . 

SALOMON'S Song of Songs , paraphrased . 

CHAP. I  

Dialog . The Church , to CHRIST . O that he would bestow upon me the comfortable testimonies of his love , and that he would vouchsafe me yet a nearer conjunction with himself ; as in glory hereafter , so for the mean time in his sensible graces . For , thy love , OH my Saviour , and these fruits of it , are more sweet unto me , than all earthly delicates can be to the bodily taste . 

Yea , so wonderfully pleasant are the savours of those graces that are in thee , wherewith I desire to be endued ; that all , whom thou hast blessed with the sense thereof , make as high and dear account of thy Gospel , whereby they are wrought , as of some precious ointment , or perfume : the delight whereof is such , that ( heereuppon ) the pure and holy souls of the faithful , place their whole affection , upon thee . 

Pull me therefore out from the bondage of my sins : deliver me from the world , and do thou powerfully incline my will , and affections toward thee : and in spite of all tentations , give me strength to cleave unto thee ; and then both I , and all those faithful children thou hast given me , shall all at once with speed and earnestness walk to thee , and with thee : yea , when once my royal and glorious husband hath brought me both into these lower rooms of his spiritual treasures on earth , and into his heavenly chambers of glory , then will we rejoice and be glad in none , but thee ; which shalt be all in all to us : then will we celebrate and magnify thy love , above all the pleasures we found upon earth ; for , all of us thy righteous ones , both Angels and Saints , are inflamed with the love of thee . 

Never upbraid me ( OH ye foreign congregations ) that I seem in outward appearance discoloured by my infirmities , and duskish with tribulations : for , what soever I seem to you , I am yet inwardly well-favoured in the eyes of him , whom I seek to please ; and though I be to you black like the tents of the Arabian shepherds : yet to him and in him , I am glorious and beautiful , like the curtains of Solomon . 

Look not therefore disdainfully upon me , because I am blackish , & dark of hue : for , this colour is not so much natural to me ; as caused by that continual heat of afflictions wherewith I have been usually scorched : neither this , so much upon my own just desert , as upon the rage and envy of my false brethren , the World : who would needs force upon me the observation of their idolatrous religions , and superstitious impieties ; through whose wicked importunity , and my own weakness , I have not so entirely kept the sincere truth of God committed to me , as I ought . 

Now therefore , that I am some little started aside from thee , OH thou whom my soul notwithstanding dear loveth , show me , I beseech thee , where , and in what wholesome & divine pastures thou ( like a good shepherd ) feedest , & restest thy flocks with comfortable refresh , in the extremity of these hot persecutions : for , how can it stand with thy glory , that I should through thy neglect , thus suspiciously wander up and down , amongst the congregations of them that both command & practise the worship of false gods . 



CHRIST , to the Church . IF thou know not , o thou my Church , whom I both esteem and have made most beutifull by my merits , and thy sanctification : stray not amongst these false worshippers , but follow the holy steps of those blessed Patriarches , Prophets , Apostles , which have been my true & ancient flock ; who have both known my voice , & followed me : & feed thou my weak & tender ones with this their spiritual food of life ; far above the carnal reach of those other false teachers . 

Such is mine estimation of thee , OH my Love , that so far as the choicest Egyptian horses of Pharaoh , for comely shape , for honourable service , for strength and speed , exceed all other , so far thou excellest all that may be compared with thee . 

Those parts of thee , which both are the seats of beauty , and most conspicuous to the eye , are gloriously adorned with the graces of my sanctification ; which are for their worth as so many precious borders of the goodliest stones , or chains of pearl . 

And though thou be already thus set forth : yet I and my father have purposed a further ornament unto thee , in the more plentiful effusion of our spirit upon thee : which shall be to thy former deckings , in stead of pure gold curiously wrought with specks of silver . 



The Church .  Behold ( OH ye daughters ) even now , whiles my Lord and King seems far distant from me , & sits in the throne of heaven amongst the companies of Angels ( who attend around upon him ) yet now do I find him present with me in spirit ; even now , the sweet influence of his graces , like to some precious ointment , spreads itself over my soul ; and returns a pleasant favour into his own nostrils . 

And though I be thus delightful to my Saviour , yet nothing so much as he is unto me : for lo , as some fragrant pomander of myrrh , laid between the breasts , sends up a most comfortable sent ; so , his love , laid close unto my heart , doth still give me continual & unspeakable refresh . 

Or if any thing can be of more excellent virtue , such smell as the clusters of cypersberries , within the fruitfulst , pleasantst , & richest vineyards , & gardens of judaea , yield unto the passengers ; such and more delectable do I find the savour of his grace to me . 



CHRIST .  Neither dost thou on my part lose any of thy love , OH my dear Church : for , behold ; in mine eyes , thus clothed as thou art with my righteousness , o how fair & glorious thou art ; how above all comparison glorious and fair ! thine eyes ( which are thy seers , Prophets , Apostles , Ministers ) and those inward eyes , whereby thou seest him that is invisible , are full of grace , chastity , simplicity . 



The Church .  Nay then ( OH my sweet saviour and spouse ) thou alone art that fair and pleasant one indeed , from whose fullness I confess to have received all this little measure of my spiritual beauty : and behold , from this our mutual delight , & heavenly conjunction , there ariseth a plentiful and flourishing increase of thy faithful ones , in all places , & through all times . 

And behold , the congregations of Saints , the places where we do sweetly converse and walk together , are both firm and during ( like cedars amongst the trees ) not subject through thy protecting grace to utter corruption ; & through thy favourable acceptation and word ( like to galleries of sweet wood ) full of pleasure and contentment . 



CHAP. II  

Christ .  Thou hast not without just cause magnified me , OH my Church : for , as the fairest & sweetest of all flowers which the earth yieldeth , the rose & lily of the valleys , excel for beauty , for pleasure , for use , the most base and odious weeds that grow ; so doth my grace , to all them that have felt the sweetness thereof , surpass all worldly contentments . 

Neither is this my dignity alone : but thou OH my spouse ( that thou mayest be a fit match for me ) art thus excellent above the world , that no lily can be more in goodly show beyond the naked thorn , than thou in thy glory thou receivest from me , overlookest all the assemblies of aliens and unregenerates . 



The Church .  And ( to return thine own praises ) as some fruitful & wel-growen Appletree , in comparison of all the barren trees of the wild forest : so art thou ( OH my beloved saviour ) to me , in comparison of all men , and angels ; under thy comfortable shadow alone , have I ever wont to find safe shelter against all mine afflictions , all my tentations and infirmities , against all the curses of the Law , and dangers of judgement , and to cool myself after all the scorching beams of thy father's displeasure , and ( besides ) to feed and satisfy my soul with the sovereign fruit of thy holy word ; unto eternal life . 

He hath graciously led me by his spirit , into the midst of the mysteries of godliness ; and hath plentifully broached unto me the sweet wines of his Scriptures , & sacrament . And look how soldiers are drawn by their colours , from place to place , and cleave fast to their ensign : so his love , which he spread forth in my hart , was my only banner , whereby I was both drawn to him , directed by him , and fastened upon him . 

And now , OH ye faithful Evangelists , Apostles , Teachers apply unto me , with all care & diligence , all the cordial promises of the Gospel : these are the full flagons of that spiritual wine , which only can cheer up my soul ; these are the apples of that tree of life , in the midst of the garden , which can feed me to immortality . O come and apply these unto my heart : for , I am even overcome with a longing expectation and desire of my delayed glory . 

And whilst I am thus spiritually languishing in this agony of desire ; let my Saviour employ both his hands to relieve mine infirmity : let him comfort my head & my heart , my judgement and affections ( which both complain of weakness ) with the lively heat of his gracious embracements : and so let us sweetly rest together . 

In the mean time , I charge you ( OH all ye that profess any friendship or affinity with me ) I charge you , by whatsoever is comely , dear , and pleasant unto you , as you will avoid my uttermost censures , take heed how you vex and disquiet my merciful Saviour , & grieve his spirit , and wrong his name , with your vain and lewd conversation ; & do not dare by the least provocation of your sin to interrupt his peace 

Lo , I have no sooner called , but he hears and answers me with his loving voice : neither doth he only speak to me afar , but he comes to me with much willingness & celerity ; so willingly , that no human resistance can hinder him , neither the hillocks of my lesser infirmities , nor the mountains of my grosser sins ( once repent of ) can stay his merciful pace towards me . 

So swiftly , that no Roe , or Hind , can fully resemble him in this his speed & nimbleness : and lo , even now , before I can speak it , is he come near unto me ; close to the door and wall of my heart . And though this wall of my flesh hinder my full fruition of him : yet lo , I see him by the eye of faith , looking upon me ; I see him as in a glass ; I see him shining gloriously , through the grates and windows of his Word and Sacraments , upon my soul . 

And now , me thinks , I hear him speak to me in a gracious invitation & say , Arise ( OH my Church ) rise up , whether from thy security , or fear : hide not thy head any longer , OH my beautiful Spouse for danger of thine enemies : neither suffer thyself to be pressed with the dulness of thy nature , or the careless sleep of thy sins ; but come forth into the comfortable light of my presence , and show thyself cheerful in me . 

For behold , all the cloudy winter of thy afflictions is passed , all the tempests of tentations are blown over ; the Heaven is clear , and now there is nothing that may not give thee cause of delight . 

Every thing now resembles the face of a spiritual Spring ; all the sweet flowers and blossoms of holy profession put forth , and show themselves in their opportunities : now is the time of that heavenly melody , which the cheerful Saints and Angels make in mine ears ; while they sing songs of deliverance and praise me with their Alleluiahs' and say , Glory to God on high , in earth peace , goodwill towards men . 

What speak I of blossoms ? behold , those fruitful vines , and figtrees of my faithful ones , whom my husbandry hath carefully tended & dressed , yield forth both pleasant ( though tender ) fruits of obedience , and the wholesome and comfortable savours of better desires : wherefore , now OH my dear Church , shake off all that dull security , wherewith thou hast been held ; and come forth , and enjoy me . 

OH my beautiful , pure , and chaste spouse , which like unto some solitary dove hast long hid thine head in the secret & inaccessible cliffs of the rocks , out of the reach and knowledge of thy persecutors ; however thou art concealed from others , show thyself in thy works and righteousness , unto me : and let me be ever plied with thy words of imploration , and thanksgiving : for thy voice ( though it be in mourning ) and thy face ( though it be sad and blubbered ) are exceedingly pleasing unto me . 

And in the mean time ( OH all ye that wish well to my Name and Church ) do your utmost endeavour , to deliver her from her secret enemies ( not sparing the least ) who either by heretical doctrine , or profane conversation , hinder the course of the Gospel ; and pervert the faith of many ; especially of those , that have newly given up their names to me , and are but newly entered into the profession of godliness . 

My beloved Saviour is mine , through my faith ; and I am his through his love : and we both are one , by virtue of that blessed union on both parts ; whereby we mutually enjoy each other , with all sufficient contentment . And how worthily is my love placed upon him , who leads me forth into pleasant pastures ; and at whose right hand there is the fullness of joy for evermore ? 

Come therefore ( OH my Saviour ) and until the day of thy glorious appearance shall shine forth to the world , wherein our spiritual marriage shall be consummate , and until all these shadows of ignorance , of infidelity , of troubles of conscience , and of outward tribulations be utterly dispersed , and chased away ; come and turn thee to me again : thou which to the carnal eyes of the world seemest absent ; come quickly and delay not : but , for the speed of thy return be like unto some swift Roe , or Hind , upon those smooth hills of Gilead , which jordan severs from the other part of jury.  



CHAP. III  

MY security told me that my Saviour was near unto my soul , yea with it , and in it : but when by serious and silent meditation I searched my own heart , I found that ( for aught my own sense could discern ) he was far off from me . 

then thought I with myself , Shall I lie still contented with this want ? no , I will stir up myself : and the help I cannot find in myself , I will seek in others ; Of all that have been experienced in all kind of difficulties : of all deep Philosophers , of the wisest and honestest worldlings , I will diligently inquire for my Saviour : amongst them I sought him , yet could receive no answer to my satisfaction . 

Missing him there , I ran to those wise and careful Teachers , whom God hath set , as so many watchmen upon the walls of his jerusalem , who sooner found me then I could ask after them ; to whom I said , ( as thinking no man could be ignorant of my love ) Can you give me no direction where I might find him , whom my soul loveth ? 

Of whom when I had almost left hoping for comfort , that gracious Saviour who would not suffer me tempted above my measure , presented himself to my soul : Lo then , by a new act of faith , I laid fast hold upon him , and will not let him any more part from my joyful embracements ; until both I have brought him home fully into the seat of my conscience , and have wone him to a perpetual cohabitation with me ; and a full accomplishment of my love , in that jerusalem which is above , which is the mother of us all . 



CHRIST .  Now that my distressed Church hath been , all the Night long of my seeming absence , toiled in seeking me , I charge you ( OH all that profess any friendship with me ) I charge you by whatsoever is comely , dear , and pleasant unto you , that ( as you will answer it ) you trouble not her peace with any unjust or unseasonable suggestions , with uncharitable contentions , with any Novelties of doctrine ; but suffer her to rest sweetly , in that divine truth , which she hath received , and this true apprehension of me wherein she rejoiceth . 

O who is this , how admirable ? how lovely ? who but my Church , that ascendeth thus gloriously out of the wilderness of the world , wherein she hath thus long wandered , into the blessed mansions of my father's house ; all perfumed with the graces of perfect sanctification , mounting right upward into her glory , like some strait pillar of smoke , that ariseth from the most rich and pleasant composition of odours that can be devised . 



The Church .  I am ascended ; and lo how glorious is this place where I shall eternally enjoy the presence and love of my Saviour ; how far doth it exceed the earthly magnificence of SALOMON : about his bed do attend a guard of threescore choicest men of Israel . 

All stout Warriors , able and expert to handle the sword ; which , for more readiness , each of them wears hanging upon his thigh , so as it may be hastily drawn upon any sudden danger : but about this heavenly pavilion of my Saviour , attend million of Angels , spiritual Soldiers , mighty in power , ready to be commanded service by him . 

The Bridebed that SALOMON made ( so much admired of the World ) was but of the Cedars of Lebanon . 

The Pillars but of silver , and the bedsteed of gold ; the Tester or Canopy but of purple ; the coverlet wrought with the curious and painful needlework of the maids of JERUSALEM : but this celestial resting place of my GOD is not made with hands , not of any corruptible metal , but is full of incomprehensible light , shining evermore with the glorious presence of GOD.  

And as the outward state , so the majesty of his person is above all comparison . Come forth ( OH ye daughters of Zion ) lay aside all private and earthly affections , look upon king SALOMON as he sits solemnly crowned in the day of his greatest royalty and triumph , and compare his highest pomp with the divine magnificence of my Saviour ; in that day when his blessed marriage shall be fully perfited above , to the eternal rejoicing of himself , and his Church ; and see whether there be any proportion betwixt them . 



CHAP. FOUR  

CHRIST .  O how fair thou art and comely , my dear Spouse ; how inwardly fair with the gifts of my Spirit ; how fair outwardly in thy comely administration , and government : thy spiritual eyes of understanding , and judgement , are full of purity , chastity , simplicity ; not wantonly cast forth , but modestly shining amid thy locks : all thy gracious profession and all thy appendances , and ornaments of expedient ceremonies , are so comely to behold , as it is to see a flock of well-sed goats grazing upon the fruitful hills of Gilead . 

Those that chew and prepare the heavenly food for thy soul , are both of gracious simplicity , and of sweet accordance one with another ; having all one heart , and one tongue : and both themselves are sanctified , & purged from their uncleannesses , and are fruitful in their holy labours unto others ; so that their doctrine is never in vain , but is still answered with plentiful increase of souls added to the Church . 

Thy speech ( especially in the mouth of thy teachers ) is both gracious in itself , and such as administers grace to the hearers ; full of zeal and fervent charity , full of gravity and discretion : and that part of thy countenance , which thou wilt have seen ( though dimly and sparingly ) is full of holy modesty and bashfulness ; so blushing , that it seemeth like the colour of a broken piece of pomgranate . 

Those , who by their holy authority sustain thy government ( which are as some strait and strong neck to bear up the head ) are like unto David's high tower of defence , furnished with a rich armoury ; which affords infinite ways of safe protection , and infinite monuments of victory . 

Thy two testaments ( which are thy two full & fair breasts whereby thou nursest all thy faithful children ) are as two twins of Kids : twins , for their excellent and perfect agreement , one with another , in all resemblances : of Kids , that are daintily fed among the sweet flowers , for the pleasant nourishment , which they yield to all that suck thereof . 

Until the day of my gracious appearance shall shine forth , and until all these shadows of ignorance , infidelity , afflictions , be utterly and suddenly dispersed , OH my spouse , I will retire myself ( in regard of my bodily presence ) into my delightful and glorious rest of heaven . 

thou art exceeding beautiful , OH my Church , in all the parts of thee : for , all thy sins are done away , and thine iniquity is covered , and lo I present thee to my father without spot , or wrinkle , or any such deformity . 

And now , ( OH thou which I profess to have married to myself in truth and righteousness ) thou shalt be gathered to me from all parts of the world : not only from the confines of judea , where I planted and found thee , but from the remotest and most savage places of the nations ; out of the company of infidels , of cruel & bloody persecutors , who like Lions and Leopards have tyrannised over thee , & mercilessely torn thee in pieces . 

thou hast utterly ravished me from myself ( OH my sister and spouse ; for so thou art , both joined to me in that spiritual union , and coheir with me of the same inheritance , and glory ) thou hast quite ravished my heart with thy love : even one cast of one of thine eyes of faith ; and one of the ornaments of thy sanctification where with thou art decked by my spirit , have thus stricken me with love : how much more , when I shall have a full sight of thee , and all thy graces , shall I be affected towards thee . 

OH how excellent , how precious , how delectable are those loves of thine , OH my sister , my spouse ; how far surpassing all earthly delicates ; and the savour of those divine virtues , wherewith thou art endued , more pleasing to my scent , than all the perfumes in the world . 

The gracious speeches that proceed from thee , are as so many drops of the honiecombe that fall from thy lips : and whether thou exhort , or confess , or pray , or comfort , thy words are both sweet and nourishing ; and the savour of thy good works , and outward conversation , is to me as the smell of the wood of Lebanon to the sense of man  

My sister , my spouse , is as a garden or orchard full of all variety of the heavenly trees , & flowers of grace ; not lying carelessly open , either to the love of strangers , or to the rage of enemies , which like the wild Boar out of the wood , might root up , & destroy her choice plants : but safely hedged and walled about , by my protection , and reserved for my delight alone ; she is a spring and Well of wholesome waters , from whom flow forth the pure streams of my word ; but , both enclosed and sealed up : partly , that she may the better ( by this closeness ) preserve her own natural taste ; and vigour , from the corruptions of the world ; and partly , that she may not be defiled & mudded by the profane feet of the wicked . 

thou art an orchard , yea a paradise , whose plants ( which are thy faithful children that grow up in thee ) are as pomgranate trees ; the apples whereof are esteemed , for the largeness , colour and taste , above all other : or ( if I would feed my other senses ) the plentiful fruits of thy holy obedience ( which thou yieldest unto me ) are for their smell as some composition of Cypress , Spikenard , Saffron , sweet Cane , Cinnamon , Incense , Myrrh , Aloes , and whatsoever else may be devised , unto the most perfect sent . 

thou art so a spring in my garden , that the streams which are derived from thee , water all the gardens of my particular congregations , all the world over : thou art that fountain , from whose pure head issue all those living waters , which whoso drinketh , shall never thirst again ; even such clear currents , as flow from the hill of Libanus , which like unto another jordan , water all the Israel of God.  



The Church .  IF I be a garden , as thou sayest ( OH my Saviour ) then arise , OH all ye Sovereign winds of the spirit of God , and breath upon this garden of my soul ; that the sweet odours of these my plants , may both be increased , and may also be dispersed afar , and carried into the nostrils of my well-beloved : & so let him come into this his own garden ( which his own hand hath digged , planted , watered ) and accept of the fruit of that service & praise , which he shall enable me to bring forth to his name . 



CHAP. v.  

CHRIST .  Behold , according to thy desire , I am come into my garden , OH my sister , my spouse ; I have received those fruits of thine obedience which thou offerest unto me , with much joy : and pleasure . I have accepted not only of thy good works , but thy endeavours & purposes of holiness : both which are as pleasant to me , as the honey and the honey comb . I have allowed of the cheerfulness of thy service , and the wholesomnesse of thy doctrine . And ye , OH my friends , whether blessed Angels , or faithful men , partake with me in this joy arising from the faithfulness of my Church : cheer up and fill yourselves , OH my beloved , with the same spiritual dainties wherewith I am refreshed . 



The Church .  When the world had cast me into a secure sleep , or slumber rather ( for my hart was not utterly bereaved of a true faith , in my Saviour ) even in this darkness of my mind , it pleased my gracious Redeemer not to neglect me ; he came to me , and knocked oft , and called importunately at the door of my heart , by his word and chastisements , and said ; Open the door of thy Soul , OH my sister , my dear , chaste , comely , unspotted Church : let me come in , & lodge & dwell with thee , in my graces ; shut out the world , and receive me with a more lively act , and renovation of thy faith . For lo , I have long waited patiently for this effect of thy love , and have endured all the injuries both of the night , and weather of thy provocations , that I might at last enjoy thee . 

I answered him again , pleading excuses for my delay ; Alas Lord , I have now , since I left my forward profession of thee , avoided a great number of cares and sorrows : must I take them up again to follow thee ? I have lived clean from the soil of these evils : and shall I now thrust myself into danger of them ? 

When my Saviour heard this unkind answer of delay : he let his hand fall from the keyhole , which he had thus before without success laboured about ; & withdrew himself from soliciting me any more : whereupon my hart & bowels yearned within me for him , and for the remorse of my so long foreslowing his admittance unto me . 

And now I roused up my drowsy hart ( what I could ) that I might in some cheerful manner desire to receive so gracious a Saviour : which when I but endeavoured , I found that he had left behind him such a plentiful blessing ( as the monument of his late presence ) upon the first motions of my heart , as that with the very touch of them I was both exceedingly refreshed , and moved to further indignation at myself for delaying him . 

I opened to my beloved Saviour : but my Saviour had now ( in my feeling ) withdrawn himself , & hid his countenance from me , holding me short of those gracious offers , and means which I had refused ; and now I was almost past myself with despair , to remember that sweet invitation of his , which I neglected : I sought him therefore in my thoughts , in the outward use of his ordinances , and of my earnest prayers ; but he would not as yet be found of me , or let me find that I was heard of him . 

Those which should have regarded me , and by their vigilancy have secured me from danger , proved mine adversaries : instead of comforting me , they fell upon me , and wounded me with their false doctrines , drawing me on into further errors , spoiling me of that purity and sincerity of profession , wherewith as with some rich & modest veil I was formerly adorned , and covered . 

I advice you solemnly , OH all ye that wish well to me ( for I care not who knows the vehemency of my passion ) if you shall find my Saviour's presence in yourselves before me , pray for the recovery of his love to me ; and bemoan my estate to him , tell him how I languish with the impatient desire of his love , & presence to be restored unto me . 

OH thou which art the most happy , most gracious , & most glorious of all creatures , the chosen of the living God ; what is thy well-beloved whom thou seekest , above all other the sons of men ? what such eminency is there in him above all saints and angels : that thou art both so far gone in affection to him ; and dost so vehemently adjure us to speak unto him for thee ? 

My well-beloved ( if you know not ) is of perfect beauty ; in whose face is an exact mixture of the colours of the purest & healthfullest complexion of holiness : for , he hath not received the spirit by measure ; and in him the godhead dwells bodily ; he is infinitely fairer , than all the sons of men ; & for goodliness of person may bear the standard of comeliness and grace among ten thousand . 

The deity which dwelleth in him , is most pure and glorious : and that fullness of grace which is communicated to his human nature is wondrously beautiful , and so sets it forth , as the black curled locks do a fresh and well-favoured countenance . 

His judgement of all things , and his respect to his Church ( which are as his eyes ) are full of love , and full of pity , shining like unto doves washed in water , yea in milk , so as there is no spot , or blemish to be found in them : and they are withal so fully placed ; as is both most comely and most expedient for the perfect sight of the estate , and necessities of his servants . 

The manifestation of himself to us in his word , is sweet to our spiritual feeling , as an heap of spice , or those flowers that are used to make the best perfuming ointments are to the other senses : his heavenly instructions and promises of his Gospel are unspeakably comfortable , and plenteous , in the grace that is wrought by them . 

His actions , and his instruments ( which are his hands ) are set forth with much port & majesty , as some precious stone beautifies the ring wherein ▪ it is set : the secret counsels of his breast , and the mysteries of his will are most pure and holy , and full of excellent glory . 

All his proceedings are firm and stable ; and withal , as pillars of marble set in sockets of tried gold ; so as they are neither subject to wavering , nor to any danger of infirmity and corruption : the show and carriage of his whole person whereby he makes himself known to his chosen , is exceeding goodly , & upright like to the straight and lofty Cedars of Lebanon . 

His mouth out of which , proceedeth innumerable blessings & comfortable promises , is to my soul even sweetness itself ; yea ( what speak I of any one part ? ) as you have heard in these particulars , he is as sweets : there is nothing but comfort in him ; and there is no comfort but in him ; and this ( if ye would know ) is my well-beloved ; of so incomparable glory and worthiness , that ye may easily discern him from all others . 



Foreign Congregations .  Since thy Well-beloved is so glorious , and amiable ( OH thou which art for thy beauty worthy to be the Spouse of such an husband ) tell us ( for thou only knowest it ; and to seek Christ without the church we know is vain ) tell us where this Saviour of thine is to be sought ; that we ( ravished also with the report of his beauty ) may join with thee in the same holy study of seeking after him . 



CHAP. VI  

MY Well-beloved Saviour ( if you would know this also ) is to be sought and found in the particular assemblies of his people , which are his garden of pleasure , wherein are varieties of all the beds of renewed souls , which both he hath planted , and dressed by his continual care , and wherein he walketh for his delight ; feeding and solacing himself with those fruits of righteousness , and new obedience , which they are able to bring forth unto him . 

And now lo , whatsoever hath happened cross to me , in my sensible fruition of him ; in spite of all tentations , my beloved Saviour is mine through faith ; and I am his through his love ; and both of us are by an inseparable union knit together ; whose conjunction and love is most sweet , and happy for , all that are his , he feedeth continually with heavenly repast . 



CHRIST .  Notwithstanding this thy late blemish of neglecting me , OH my Church : yet still in mine eyes , through my grace ; upon this thy repentance , thou art beautiful , like unto that neat and elegante City of ●irzah , and that orderly building of jerusalem , the glory of the world : and with this thy loveliness , thou art awful unto thine adversaries , through the power of thy censures , and the majesty of him that dwelleth in thee . 

Yea , such beauty is in thee , that I am overcome with the vehemency of my affection to thee : turn away thine eyes a while from beholding me ; for , the strength of that faith , whereby they are fixed upon me , ravishes me from myself with joy . I do therefore again renew thy former praise ; that thy gracious profession , and all thy appendances & ornaments of expedient ceremonies , are so comely to behold , as it is to see a flock of well-fed goats grazing upon the fruitful hills of Gilead . 

Thy Teachers , that chew & prepare the heavenly food for thy soul , are of sweet accordance one with another , having all one heart , and one tongue ; and both themselves are sanctified & purged from their uncleannesses , and are fruitful in their holy labours unto others : so that their doctrine is never in vain , but is still answered with plentiful increase of souls to the Church . 

That part of thy countenance which thou wilt have seen ( though dimmely and sparingly ) is full of holy modesty and bashfulness ; so blushing , that it seemeth like the colour of a broken piece of Pomgranate . 

Let there be never so great a number of people and nations of Churches and assemblies , which challenge my name and love , and perhaps by their outward prosperity may seem to pled much interest in me , and much worth in themselves : 

Yet thou only art alone my true and chaste Spouse , pure and undefiled in the truth of thy doctrine , and the imputation of my holiness ; thou art she , whom that jerusalem which is above , ( the mother of us all ) acknowledgeth for her only true , and dear daughter . And this is not my commendation alone , but all those foreign assemblies , which might seem to be rivalles with thee of this praise , do applaud and bless thee in this thine estate , and say ; Blessed is this people , whose God is the Lord  

And admiring thy goodliness shall say ; Who is this that looks out so freshly as the morning new risen ; which from these weak beginnings is grown to such high perfection , that now she is as bright , and glorious , as the sun in his full strength ; and the moon in a clear sky ; and withal is so dreadefull through the majesty of her countenance , and power of her censures , as some terrible army , with ensigns displayed , is to a weak adversary . 

thou complainest of my absence , ( OH my Church ) : there was no cause ; I meant not to forsake thee : I did but only walk down into the well-dressed Orchard of thine assemblies , to recreate and joy myself , with the view of their forwardness : to see the happy progress of the humble in spirit , and the gracious beginnings of those tender souls , which are newly converted unto me . 

So earnestly did I long to revisit thee , and to restore comfort unto thee ; that I hasted I known not which way : and with insensible speed , I am come back , as it were upon the swiftest chariots , or the wings of the wind . 

Now therefore return ( OH my Spouse , the true daughter of jerusalem ) return to me , return to thyself and to thy former feeling of my grace : return , that both myself , & all the company of Angels , may see , and rejoice in thee : and what shall ye see ( OH all ye host of heaven ) what shall ye see in my Church ? even such an awful grace and majesty , as is in a wel-marshalled army , ready to meet with the enemy . 



CHAP. VII . 

How beautiful are thy feet OH daughter of the hyest ; being shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace , and readily addressed to run the way of the commandments of thy God : thou art compassed about thy loins with the girdle of verity ; which is both precious for the matter of it , and cunningly framed by the skill of the spirit of truth . 

The navel , whereby all thy spiritual conceptions receive their nourishment , is full of all fruitful supply , and never wants means of sustenance , to feed them in thy womb : which also is so plenteous in thy blessed increase , that it is as an heap of wheat , consisisting of infinite pure grayns which consort together with much sweetness , and pleasure . 

Thy two testaments ( which are thy two full and comely breasts ; by whose wholesome milk thou nourishest all thy faithful children , once born into the light ) are for their excellent & perfect agreement , & their amiable proportion , like two twins of Kids . 

Those , who by their holy authority support thy government ( which are as some strait and strong neck to bear up thy head ) are for their height and defence like a tower ; for their order , pureness , and dignity , like a tower of ivory : thy teachers and ministers ( which are thine eyes ) are like unto some clear and artificial ponds of water , in a place of greatest resort : wherein all comers may see the faces of their consciences ; & whence they may plentifully draw the waters of life . Thy nose , by which all spiritual scents are conveyed to thee , is perfectly composed , and featured like some curious turret of that goodly house in Lebanon ; so as thy judgement , and power of discerning the spirits , is admirable for the order and excellency thereof . 

The whole tire of thine head ( which are the ceremonies used by thee ) are very graceful , and of high estimation and price to all the beholders : and as for me , I am so enamoured of thee , that I am even tied by my own desire , to a perpetual presence in thine holy assemblies . 

O how beautiful & lovely art thou therefore ( OH my Church ) in all thy parts and ornaments ? how sweet and pleasant art thou ( OH my love ) in whatsoever might give me true contentment ? 

Thy whole frame is , for goodliness & straight growth , like unto some tall palm-tree ; which the more it is depressed by the violence of persecutions , riseth the more ; and the two breasts of thy Testaments are like two full ivicie clusters , which yield comfortable and abundant refreshing . 

Seeing then thou art my Palmtree , I have resolved in myself to adjoine myself to thee ; to enjoy thee , to gather those sweet fruits of thy graces , which thou yieldest ; and by my presence also will cause thee to be more plentiful in all good works , and doctrine ; so as thou shalt afford abundance of heavenly liquor unto all the thirsty souls of thy children ; and an acceptable verdure of holiness and obedience unto me . 

And the delivery of my word , by the mouths of thy ministers , shall be as some excellent wine , which sparkleth right upward : being well accepted of that God , in whose name it is taught , and looketh most pleasantly in the glass , being no lesle highly esteemed of the receivers : which is of such wonderful power , that it is able to put words both of repentance , and praise into the lips of him , that lies asleep in his sins . 



The Church .  Behold , such as I am , I am not my own ; much less am I any others : I am wholly my Saviour's ; and now I see , and feel , whatsoever I had deserved , that he is mine also , in all entire affection ; who hath both chosen me , and given himself for me . 

Come therefore , OH my dear Saviour , let us join together in our natural care : let thy spirit and my service be intent upon thy congregations here below on earth ; and let us stay in the place where our spiritual husbandry lieth . 

Let us with all haste & cheerfulness visit the fruitful vines of our believing children ; & to our mutual comfort , be witnesses and partakers of all the signs and fruits of grace , of all those good works , and thankesgiving , of those holy endeavours and worthy practices , which they yield forth unto us : let us judge of their forwardness , and commend it : whereupon it will easily appear , that the consummation of our happy marriage draweth near , in which there shall be a perfect union betwixt us.  

Behold : thy godly servants , which not only bear fruit themselves , but are powerful in the provocation of others , present their best services unto thee ; and even at our doors ( not far to seek , not hard to procure ) is offer made unto thee , of all variety of fruit ; whether from thy young converts ▪ or thy more settled professors : & all these I spend not lavishlie ; but , in my loving care , duly reserve them for thee , and for the solemn day of our full marriage . 



CHAP. VIII . 

The jewish Church .  O that I might see thee ( my Saviour ) clothed in flesh : O that thou which art my everlasting husband , mightest also be my brother , in partaking the same human nature with me ; that so I finding thee below upon earth , might familiarly entertain thee , and converse with thee , without the reproach of the world ; yea , might be exalted in thy glory . 

then would I ( though I be now penned up in the limits of judea ) bring thee forth into the light , and knowledge of the universal Church , whose daughter I am : and then and there , thou shouldst teach me how perfectly to serve & worship thee , & I shall gladly entertain thee with a royal feast of the best graces that are in my holiest servants ; which I know thou wilt accounted better cheer , them all the spiced cups , and pomgranate wines in the world . 

then shall I attain to a nearer communion with him ; and both his hands shall be employed to sustain , and relieve me : yea , he shall comfort my head and my heart ( my judgement , and affections ) with the lively heat of his gracious embracements . 

I charge you ( OH all ye that profess any friendship to me ) I charge ye deeply , as ye will avoid my uttermost censures ; take heed how ye vex and disquiet my merciful Saviour , and grieve his spirit : and do not dare , by the least provocation of him , to interrupt his peace . 



CHRIST .  Who is this , that from the comfortless deserts of ignorance , of infidelity , of tribulations , ascendeth thus up into the glorious light & liberty of my chosen ? relying herself wholly upon her Saviour , and solacing herself in him ? Is it not my Church ? it is she , whom I have loved , & acknowledged of old : for , even under the ●ree of offence , the forbidden fruit which thou tastedst to thy destruction , I raised thee up again from death ; Even there , thy first mother conceived thee ; while by faith she laid hold on that blessed promise of the Gospel , whereby she , and her believing seed were restored . 



jewish Church .  And so have thou me still ( OH my Saviour ) in a perpetual and dear remembrance : keep me sure in thine heart , yea in thine arms , as that which thou holdest most precious ; and let me never be removed from thy love ; the least show and danger whereof I cannot endure : for , this my spiritual love is exceeding powerful , and can no more be resisted then death itself : & the jealous zeal which I have for thee , and thy glory , consumes me , even like the Grave , and burns me up like unto the coals of some most vehement and extreme fire . 

Yea , more than any fire ; for any flame yet may be quenched with water : but all the water of afflictions & terrors ( yea whole streams of persecutions ) cannot quench this love : & for all tempting offers of wealth , of pleasures & honour , how easily are they all contemned for the love of my Saviour ? 

We have yet a sister ( as thou knowest OH Saviour ) ordained through thy mercy to the same grace with me : the uncalled Church of the Gentiles ; small ( as yet ) of growth , through the rareness of her converts , & destitute of the help of any outward ministry ; whereby she might either bear , or nourish children unto thee : when she grows unto her maturity ; and the mystery of calling her universally to thee , shall be revealed to the world , and herself ; what course will it please thee to take with her ? 



CHRIST .  IF she shall continue firm and constant , in the expectation of her promises , and the profession of that truth which shall be revealed ; we will beautify and strengthen her , with further grace , and make her a pure and costly palace , fit to entertain my spirit : and if she will give free passage & good entrance , to my word and grace ; we will make her sure and safe from corruption , and reserve her to immortality . 



jewish Church .  Behold : that condition which thou requirest in the Church of the Gentiles , thou findest in me ; I am thus firm and constant in my expectation , in my profession : and that want thou findest in her of ability to nourish her Children , by the breast of thy WORDE , is not in me ; who have abundance both of nourishment & defence : upon which my confession and plea , I found grace and peace in the eyes of my Saviour ; and received from him assurance of his everlasting love to me . 



CHRIST .  MY Church is my Vine , & I am the owner , and husbandman : our thrift and profit thereof far exceedeth the good husbandry of Solomon : he hath a rich vineyard indeed in a most fruitful soil ; but he let's it forth to the hands of others , as not being able to keep and dress it himself : and therefore he is fain to be content with the greatest part of the increase , not expecting the whole . 

But my vine is ever before me , I am with it to the end of the world , I reserve it in mine own hands , and dress it with mine own labour : and therefore if thou ( OH Solomon ) canst receive from thine , to the proportion of a thousand , thy workmen and farmers will look for the fifth part to come unto their share ; whereas the gain of my vineyard ariseth wholly , and only , unto myself . 

sith therefore such is my care of thee , and joy in thee ( OH my Church ; which consistest of the particular assemblies of men professing my name ) see thou be diligent in declaring my will , & giving holy counsels to all thy fellow-members : speak forth my praise in the great congregations , ( which all attend willingly upon thee ) and let me hear the voice of thy constant & faithful confession of me before the world . 



The Church .  I Will most gladly do what thou commandest , OH my Saviour but , that I may perform it accordingly ; be thou ( which art , according to thy bodily presence , in the hyest heavens ) ever present with me by thy spirit , & hasten thy glorious coming , to my full redemption . 



FINIS . 





Ecc. 1.17  Ecc. 7.27 . 1.1.3 . Ec. 3.12 . Ec. 2.3 . Ec. 2.1 . Ec. 2.10 . Ec. 2.25  Ec. 2.1 . Ec. 5.9 . Ec. 5.10 . Ec. 5.11 . Ec. 5.12 . Ec. 6.1 . Ec. 6.2 . Pr. 27.24 . Pr. 23.5 . Ec. 5.14 . Ec. 5.15 . Ec. 1.12 . Ec. 1.16 . Ec. 2.9 . Ec. 2.4 . Ec. 2.5 . Ec. 2.6 . Ec. 2.7 . Ec. 2.8 . Cant. 3.9  Cant. 3.10 . Ecc. 2.11 . Ecc. 2.12 . Ec. 2.11 . Ec. 6.3 . Ec. 6.4 . Ec. 6.5 . Ec. 6.6  Ec. 11.7 . Ec. 11.8 . Ec. 1.13 . Ec. 1.16 . Ec. 2.9 . Ec. 2.13  Ec. 2.14 . Ec. 2.15 . Ec. 6.8 . Ec. 2.16 . Ec. 1.8 . Ec. 7.25 . Ec. 1.18 . Ec. 1.14 . Ec. 12.13 . Pr. 12.24 . Pr. 11.19 . Pr. 10.6 . Pr. 12.2  Pr. 20.6 . Ec. 2 26.  Pr. 13 9  Pr. 10.25 ▪  Pr. 10.29  Pr. 10.30 . Pr. 11 4.  Pr. 12.13 . Pr. 11.8 . Pr. 13.6 . Pr. 15.6  Pr. 14.11 . Pr. 10.27 . Pr. 12.7 . Ec. 8.12 . Pr. 10.2.4  Pr. 29.18  Pr. 10.2  Pr. 10.3  Pr. 13.25 . Pr. 21.18 . Ec. 2.26 . Pr. 15.6 . Pr. 10.27 . Pr. 10.25 . Pr. 12.7 . Pr. 2.22 . Ec. 8.13 . Pr. 14.11 . Pr. 10.7  Pr. 15.29 . Pr. 28.9  Pr. 15.8  Pr. 15 9  Pr. 21.27 . Pr. 12.26 . Pr. 10.28  Pr. 13.9 . Pr. 11.18 . Pr. 26.10  Pr. 13.21  Pr. 5.22 . Pr. 10.6 . Pr. 29.6 . Pr. 11.5  Pr. 13.6 . Pr. 3.33  Pr. ●  Pr. 11.31 . Pr. 10.24 . Pr. 5.23 . Pr. 11.19 . Pr. 14.32 . Pr. 15.11 . Pr. 12.2 . Pr. 10.29 . Pr. 19.29 . 

Pr. 4.26 . Pr. 4.27  Pr. 6.23 . Pr. 30.5 . Pr. 4.20 . Pr. 4.21 . Pr. 4.22 . Pr. 7.2 . Pr. 7.3 . Ec. 2.14 . Ec. 10.2 . Pr. 8.12  Pr. 14.8 . Pr. 9.12 . Pr. 3.13 . Pr. 3.14 . Pr. 16.16  Pr. 3.15 . Pr. 3.16 . Pr. 3.17 . Pr. 3.18 . Pr. 15.14 . Pr. 18.15 . Pr. 19.2  Pr. 10.14 . Pr. 13.16 . Pr. 14.18 . Pr. 2.10 . Pr. 2.11 . Pr. 2.12 . Pr. 2.13 . Pr. 15.24 . Pr. 8.20 . Pr. 16.23 . Pr. 10.12 . Pr. 19.25  Pr. 8.21 . Ecc. 8.11 . Pr. 3.35  Pr. 16.22  Pr. 8.34  Pr. 4.5 . Pr. 4.6 . Pr. 4.7 . Pr. 4.8 . Pr. 4.9 . Ec. 8.5 . Ec. 8.6 . Ec. 8.7 . Ec. 9.12 . Pr. 20.24  Pr 22.3  Pr. 30.25 . Ecc 11.4  Pr. 16.20 . Pr. 16.23 . Pr. 14.15 . Ec. 3.1 . Ec. 3.2 . Ec. 3.3.3.4 . Ec. 3.8 . Pr. 24.5 . Pr. 14.24  Pr. 13.15  Pr. 15.2 . Pr. 10.13 . Pr. 10.12 . Pr. 25.11 . Pr. 15.23 . Pr. 20.15 . Pr. 14.3 . Pr. 12.18  Pr. 16.24 . Ec. 7.18 . Ec. 7.19 . Pr. 21.16  Pr. 17.16  Pr. 15.2 . Pr. 14.24 . Pr. 17.16 . Pr. 24.7 . Pr. 14.7 . Pr. 29.20 . Pr. 29.11 . Pr. 19.2 . Pr. 29.20  Pr. 1.7 . Pr. 14.9 . Pr. 13.19  Pr. 15.21 . Pr. 10.23 . Pr. 13 16.  Pr. 27.22 . Pr. 26.11 . Pr. 23.9 . Pr. 1.22 . Pr. 1.23 . Pr. 1.24  Pr. 1.25 . Pr. 1.26 . Pr. 1.27 . Pr. 1.28 . Pr. 1.29 . Pr. 1.30 . Pr. 1.31 . Pr. 14.13 . Ec. 7.8 . Pr. 10.13 . Pr. 26.3 . Pr. 10.8.10 . Pr. 13 20.  Pr. 10.21 . Pr. 21.16 . Pr. 10.14  Pr.  Pr. 1.32  

 Honour and Obedience are indeed mixed duties of justice both to God & man : but because as they belong to man , they are politic virtues & there handled ; here we consider the only as due to God.  Pr. 15.21 . Pr. 20.7  Pr. 16.17  Pr. 12.22  Ec. 8.13 . Pr. 3.6 . Pr. 14.2  Pr. 1.7 . Pr. 15.33  Pr. 2.3 . Pr. 2.4 . Pr. 2.5 . Pr. 15.16 . Pr. 23.18 . Pr. 14.26  Pr. 3.7 . Pr. 3.8 . Pr. 19.23  Pr. 14.27 . Pr. 28.14  Pr. 30.9 . Pr. 28.14 . Pr. 3.9 . Pr. 3.10 . Ec. 12.1 . Pr. 1.33 . Pr. 4.20 . Pr. 4.21 . Pr. 10.17 . Pr. 28.9 . Pr. 28.7 . Pr.  Pr. 28.4 . Pr. 19.16  Ec. 5.3 . Ec. 5.4 . Ec. 5.5 . Pr. 20.25  Pr. 12.22 . Pr. 28.10 . Pr. 28.20 . Pr. 25.19 . Pr. 17.13  Pr. 27.5 . Pr. 27.6  Pr.  Pr. 15.12 . Pr. 25.12  Pr. 12.17 . Pr. 14.25 . Pr. 18.21 . Pr. 15.4 . Pr. 12.19  Pr. 10.20 . Pr. 10.21  Pr. 23.23 . Pr. 14.5 . Pr. 6.16 . Pr. 6.17  Pr. 6.19 . Pr. 19.28 . Pr. 26 . 28·  Pr. 12.19  Pr. 19.5  Pr. 12.22 . Pr. 21.28 . Pr. 25.18 . Pr. 24.28 . 29.  Pr. 30.7 . Pr. 30.8 . Pr. 19.22 . Pr. 16.27 . Pr. 16.30 . Pr. 13.5 . Pr. 20.3 . Pr. 11.13 . Pr. 26.20 . Pr. 18.8 . Ec. 7.23 . Pr. 25.23 . Pr. 10.18  Pr. 26.24 . Pr. 26.25  Pr. 26.26 . Pr. 13.7 . Pr. 13 7.  Pr. 20.24  Pr. 23.6 . Pr. 23.7  Pr. 28.13  Pr. 27.14 . Pr. 29.5 . Pr. 26.28 . Pr. 20.19 . Ec. 7.7 . Pr. 11.3 . Pr. 11.5 . Pr. 15.19 . Pr. 21.8 . Pr. 21.3 . Pr. 21.15 . Pr. 10.16  Pr. 29.7 . Pr. 29.10  Pr. 21.8 . Pr. 3.29 . Pr. 16.11 . Pr. 15.9 . Pr. 12.26  Pr. 28.6 . Pr. 10.7 . Pr. 26.18 . Pr. 26.19 . Pr. 12.20 . Pr. 20.10 . Pr. 29.24 . Pr. 1.19 . Ec. 3.16 . Ec. 3.17 . Pr. 12.27 . Pr. 20.17 . Pr. 8.17 . Pr. 8.21 . Pr. 10.12  Pr. 12.16 . Pr. 17.9 . Pr. 25.21 . Pr. 6.19 . Pr. 18.19 . Pr. 16.29 . Pr. 18.6 . Pr. 26.21 . Pr. 16.28 . Pr. 30.33  Pr. 29.9 . Pr. 21.10 . Pr. 24.17 . Pr. 14.30 . Pr. 27.4 . Pr. 24.20 . Pr. 3.31 . Pr. 23.17 . Pr. 24.1 . Pr. 24.2 . Pr. 3.32  Pr. 24.20 . Pr. 3.3 . Pr. 21.13 . Pr. 12.10 . Pr. 16.6 . Pr. 3.4 . Pr. 14.31 . Pr. 19.17 . Pr. 11.17 . Pr. 21.21 . Pr. 14.21  Pr. 22.7 . Pr. 14.20 . Pr. 19.7 . Pr. 30.14 . Pr. 22.16 . Pr. 22.22 . Pr. 25.20 . Pr. 11.17 . Ec. 4.1 . Ec. 5.7 . Pr. 22.23 . Pr. 22.16 . Pr. 21.13 . Pr. 29.10 . Pr. 24.15 . Pr. 28.17 . Pr. 1.11 . Pr. 1.12 . Pr. 1.15 . Pr. 1.16 . Pr. 1.17 . Pr. 1.18 . Pr. 12 10.  Pr. 26.2 . Pr. 24.16 . Pr. 26.27 . Pr. 28.17  Ec. ●1 . ● . Ec. 11.2 . Pr. 22.9 . Pr. 3.27 . Pr. 3.28 . Ec. 5.18 . Ec. 11.3 . Pr. 11.25 . Pr. 28.27 . Ec. 11.1 . Pr. 11.24 . Pr. 22.9 . Pr. 1.19 . Pr. 23.6 . Pr. 21.26 . Pr. 23.4 . Pr. 11.24 . Pr. 28.8 . Ec. 4.8 . Pr. 30.15 . Pr. 27.20 . Ec. 6.7  Ec. 5.9  Pr. 18.11 Pr. 11.28  Pr. 11.24  Pr. 23.5  Pr. 28.8  Pr. 16.8  Pr. 30.8  Pr. 30.9  Pr. 12.9  Pr. 21.17  Pr. 28.7  Pr. 28.19 Pr. 6.12  Pr. 6.14 . Pr. 6.15  Pr. 13.11  Pr. 21.17 Pr. 28.19  Pr. 28.7  Pr. 22.26  Pr. 22.27 . See more of this rule in the two last pag. of Politics , following . Pr. 16.26 . Ec. 9.10  Ec. 3.10  Ec. 1.8  Ec. 3.9 . Ec. 5.11 . Pr. 20.13  Pr. 10.4  Pr. 13.4  Pr. 14.23  Pr. 12.27  Pr. 22.29  Pr. 12.24  Ec. 4.5  Pr. 19.24  Pr. 26.24  Pr. 6.10  Pr. 15.19  Pr. 22.13 Pr. 26.13 . Pr. 26.16  Pr. 12.11 . Pr. 13.4  Pr. 21.25  Pr. 18.9  Pr. 10.5  Pr. 19.15 . Pr. 20.4  Pr. 20.13  Ec. 10.18  Pr. 24.30  Pr. 24.31  Pr. 24.32  Pr. 10.4  Pr. 6.6  Pr. 6.7  Pr. 6.8  Pr. 6.9  Pr. 24.33  Pr. 6.11  

Pr. 25.28  Pr. 23.31  Pr. 23.2  Pr. 23.1 . Pr. 25.16  Ec. 3.13 . Ec. 5.17  Ec. 9.7  Ec. 3.22  Ec. 2.24 . Pr. 23.2  Ec. 2.3 . Ec. 2.10  Pr. 27.7  Pr. 30.21  Pr. 30.22  Ec. 5.11  Pr. 23.29  Pr. 23.30 ▪  Pr. 23.31 . Pr. 23.32 . Pr. 23.33 . Pr. ▪ 23.34 . Pr. 23.35  Pr. 25.28  Pr. 23.20  Pr. 20.1  Pr. 17.27  Pr. 10.19  Pr. 17.27 . Pr. 18.4 . Pr. 10.31 . Pr. 10.21 . pr. 12.14 Pr. 13.2  Pr. 18.20 . Pr. 12.23 . Pr. 11.12 . Pr. 10.19 Pr. 17.28  Pr. 21.23 . Pr. 13.3 . Ec. 5.2 . Pr. 15.2 . Pr. 15.14 . Pr. 18.2 . Pr. 12.23 . Ec. 10.14 . Pr. 10.19 . Pr. 11.28 . Pr. 15.32 . Pr. 12.6 . Pr. 14.3 . Pr. 13.3 . Pr. 17.20 . Pr. 10.31 . Pr. 15.4 . Pr. 18.7 . Pr. 11.16 . Ec. 2.2 . Ec. 7.5 . Ec. 7.6 . Ec. 11.9 . Pr. 29.23 . Pr. 30.2 . Pr. 30.3 . Pr. 11.2 . Pr. 13.31 . Pr. 16.19 . Pr. 15.33 Pr. 18.12  Pr. 28.13 . Pr. 29.23 . Pr. 22.24 . Pr. 30.13 . Pr. 30.12 . Pr. 16.2 . Pr. 21.2 . Pr. 20.6 . Pr. 25.27 . Pr. 27.2 . Pr. 28.11 . Pr. 18.1 . Pr. 16.12 . Pr. 14.3 . Ec. 7.25 . Ec. 7.26 . Pr. 21.4 . Pr. 30.32 . Pr. 6.17 . Pr. 16.5 . Pr. 15.25 ▪  Pr. 18.22  Pr. 16.18 . Pr. 11.2 . Pr. 21.24 . Pr. 11.12 . Pr. 18.3  Pr. 9.7 . Pr. 19 . 2● . Pr. 29.8 . Pr. 21.11 . Pr. 5.15 . Pr. 6.25 . Pr. 5.20 . Pr. 2.17 . Pr. 23.28 . Pr. 23.27 . Ec. 7.28 . See more of this vice , Oecon. sect . 2.  & 3  Pr. 16 32.  Pr. 14.29 . Pr. 19.11 . Pr. 14.29 . Pr. 29.8 . Pr. 16.23 . Pr. 20.3 . Ec. 7.11 . Ec. 7.11 . Pr. 14.17  Pr. 14.29 . Pr. 27.4 . Pr. 29.22 . Pr. 22.24 . Pr. 22.25 . Pr. 18.14 . Pr. 28.1 . Pr. 24.10 . Pr. 29.25 . Pr. 18.14 . Pr. 28.1 . Pr. 3.5 . Pr. 3.6 . Pr. 16.3 . Pr. 14.32 . Pr. 13.12 . Pr. 28.25 . Pr. 16.3 . Pr. 3.6 . Pr. 30.5 . Pr. 21.31 . Pr. 18.12  Pr. 16.20 . Pr. 28.26 . Pr. 27.1 . Pr. 3.11 . Ec. 7.16 . Pr. 3.12 . Pr. 10.28  Pr. 19.3 . Ec. 6.10 . Pr. 29.1 . Pr. 20.22 . Ec. 7.10 . 

Ec. 5.7  Pr. 22.2  Pr. 8.15  Pr. 8.16  Pr. 30.27  Pr. 28.2  Ec. 10.17  Pr. 19.10  Ec. 10.17  Pr. 30.21  Pr. 30.22  Pr. 31.23  Ec. 2.10 . Ec. 2.8  Cant 6 7.  Pr. 31.3  Ec. 7.28  Pr. 31.4  Ec. 9.7 . Ec. 2.25 . Pr. 31.5  Ec. 10.16 . Pr. 23.2  Pr 23.3  Pr. 17.7  Ec. 10.16 . Pr. 28.16  Ec. 4.13  Ec. 10.17  Pr. 11.1  Pr. 16.12  Pr. 14.34  Pr. 29.2 . Pr. 20.18  Pr. 8.16 . Pr. 20.26  Pr. 28.16  Pr. 29.4 . Pr. 16.32  Pr. 19.12  Pr. 30 29  Pr. 30.31  Pr. 25.3  Pr. 21.1 . Pr. 16.12  Pr. 16.7 . Pr. 20.8  Pr. 29.4  Pr. 16.10  Pr. 29 14.  Pr. 29 12.  Pr. 39.8  31.9 . Pr. 17.26  Pr. 25.1  Pr. 24.11 . Ec. 8.9  Pr. 11.14  Pr. 24.6  Pr. 15.22  Pr. 29.18  Pr. 11.30  Ec. 12.9  Ec. 12.10  Pr. 16.21  Ec. 12.11  Ec. 4.17  Pr. 13.13 . Pr. 15.22 . Pr. 24.5 . Ec. 7.2 . Pr. 14.33 . Pr. 17.24 . Pr.  Pr. 15.2 . Pr. 24.7 . Pr. 26.1 . Pr. 26.8 . Pr.  Pr. 18.17 . Pr. 20.5 . Pr. 22.3 . Ec. 9.15 . Pr. 13.16  Ec. 9.17 . Pr. 21.22 . Ec. 9.16 . Ec. 9.18 . Ec. 9.13 . Ec. 9.14 . Ec. 9.15 . Pr. 14.16 . Pr. 21.30 . Pr. 12.3 . Pr.  Pr. 28.12  Pr. 29.2 . Pr. 28.  ●● . Pr. 28.28 . Pr. 29.2 . Pr. 25.26 ▪  Pr.  Pr. 28.21 Pr. 24.23  Pr. 18.5 . Pr. 24.24 . Pr. 17.15 . Pr. 17.27 . Pr. 18.16 . Ec. 7.9 . Pr. 21.7 . Pr. 15.27 . Pr. 21.15 . Pr. 19.25 . Pr. 21.11 . Pr. 21.2 . Pr. 14.5 . Pr. 12.17 . Pr. 18.17 . Pr. 19.5 . Pr. 19.9 . Pr.  Pr. 14.31 . Pr. 22.22 . Pr. 24.26 . Pr. ●6 . 15 . Pr. 19.12 . Pr. 14.35 . Pr. 22.11 . Pr. 11.27 . Pr. 12.26 . Pr. 22.4 . Pr. 15.33 . Pr. 25.6 . Pr. 25.7 . Pr. 25.15 . Pr. 17.9 . Ec. 8.2 . Pr. 22.29  Pr. 13.12 . Pr. 17.8 . Pr. 19.6 . Pr. 21.6 . Pr. 14.28 . Pr. 19.6 . Pr. 29.26 . Ec. 10.20 . Pr. 24.21 . Pr. 17.11 . Ec. 10.20  Pr. 17.11 . Pr. 24.22  Ec. 8.2 . Ec. 10.8 . Ec. 10.9 . Ec. 10.9 . Ec. 8.3 . Ec. 10.4 . Pr. 22.7 . Pr. 27.21 . Ec. 8.10 . Pr.  Pr. 11.12 Pr. 14.21  Pr. 3.30 . Pr. 17.14 . Pr. 25.9 . Pr. 25.8 . Pr. 26.17  Pr. 6.16 19  Ec. 5.8  Pr. 28.19  Pr. 14.4  Pr. 11.26  P. 24.30 . Pr. 31.14 . Ec. 10.19  Pr. 22.28  Pr. 23.10  Pr. 23.11 . Pr.  Pr. 23.4  Pr. 28.22  Pr. 28.20 Pr. 20.21  Pr. 15.27  Pr. 18.24  Pr. 27.10  Pr. 27.6  Pr. 27.9  Pr. 27.17  Pr. 19.4 . Pr. 17.17  Pr. 27.19  Pr. 25.17 . Pr. 27.10  Pr. 17 . 1●  Pr. 6.2 . etc.  Pr. 6.3  Pr. 27.13  Pr. 6.4  Pr. 6.5 . Pr. 11.15  

Ec. 7.13  Pr. 24.3  Pr. 24.27  Pr.  Pr. 11.29  Pr. 15.6  Pr. 15.16  Pr. 27.26  Pr. 27.27  Ec. 5.10  Pr. 18.22  Pr. 2.17 . Pr. 12.4 . Pr. 5.15  Pr. 5.16  Pr. 5.17  Pr. 5.9 . Pr. 5.10  Pr. 5.11  Pr. 5.12  Pr. 5.14  Pr. 5.18  Pr. 5.19  Pr. 5.20  Pr. 5.21  Pr. 6.25  Pr. 6.26 . Pr. 6.26  Pr. 6.27  Pr. 6.28  Pr. 6.29  Pr. 6.30  Pr. 6.31  Pr. 6.32  Pr. 6.33  Pr. 6.34  Pr. 6.35  Pr. 9.17 . Pr. 9.18 . Pr. 2.18.19 . Pr. 5.3 . Pr. 5.4 . Pr. 5.5 . Pr. 23.27 . Pr. 22.14 . Pr. 15.17  Pr. 17.1 . Pr. 19.11 . Pr. 17.9 . Ec. 9.9 . Pr. 12.4 . Pr. 31.10 . Pr. 31.11 . Pr. 2.17 . Pr. 7.6 . Pr. 7.7 . Pr. 7.7 . Pr. 7.8 . Pr. 7.9 . Pr. 7.10 . Pr. 7.11 . Pr. 11.16 . Pr. 7.11 . Pr. 7.12 . Pr. 23.28 . Pr. 9.14 . Pr. 7.13 . Pr. 7.14 . Pr. 7.15 . Pr. 7.16 . Pr. 7.17 . Pr. 7.18 . Pr. 7.19 . Pr. 7.20 . Pr. 7.21 . Pr. 7.22 . Pr. 7.23 . Pr. 30.20 . Pr. 15.1 . Pr. 30.23.21 . Pr. 19.13 Pr. 27.15  Pr. 25.24 . Ec. 4.9 . Pr. 27.19 . Pr. 27.16 . Pr. 14.1 . Pr. 11.22 . Pr. 31.12 . Pr. 31.13 . Pr. 31.15 . Pr. 31.17 . Pr. 31.19 . Pr. 31.16 . Pr. 31.14 . Pr. 31.18 . Pr. 31.24 . Pr. 31.23 . Pr. 31.22 . Pr. 31.21 . Pr. 31 . 20·  Pr. 13.15 . Pr. 13.27 . Pr. 31.26 . Pr. 31.25 . Pr. 31.28 . Pr. 31.29 . Pr. 31.30 . Pr. 31.31 . Pr. 17.6 . Pr. 13.22 . Ec. 2.18 . Ec. 2.19 . Ec. 4.8 . Ec. 5.12 . Ec. 5.13 . Pr. 1.8 . Pr. 17.21 . Pr. 22.6 . Pr. 13.24 . Pr. 22.15 . Pr. 29.15  Pr. 23.13  Pr. 25.14  Pr. 4.3 . Pr. 29.17  Pr. 19.18 . Pr. 19.19 . Pr. 15.20 Pr. 10.1 . Pr. 23.24  Pr. 19.13 . Pr. 29.3  Pr. 23.25  Pr. 13.1  Pr. 1.8 . pr. 23.22 Pr. 6.20  Pr. 30.11  Pr. 20.20  Pr. 15.20 . pr. 30.17  Pr. 12.1  Pr. 15.5  Pr. 6.23  Pr. 15.10  Pr. 28.24  Pr. 19.26  pr. 20.11  Pr. 23.16 . Pr. 12.9 . Pr. 27.27 . Ec. 7.23  Pr. 29.21  Pr. 29.19 . Pr. 17.2 . Pr. 25.13  Pr. 13.17 . Pr. 27.23 . Pr. 27.18  Pr. 10.26  

1 Let him kiss me , with the kisses of his mouth ; for , thy love is better than wine . 2.  Because of the savour of thy good ointments , thy name is as an oinment poured out : therefore the Virgins love thee  3.  Draw me , we will run after thee : the king hath brought me into his chambers , we will rejoice , & be glad in thee : we will remember thy love , more than vine , the righteous do love thee . 4.  I am black OH daughters of jerusalem , but comely : If I be as the tents of Kedar , yet I am as the curtains of Solomon . 5.  Regard ye me not , because I am black : for the sun hath looked upon me ; the sons of my mother were angry against me : they made m● keeper of the vines : but I kept not min● own vine . 6.  Show me , OH thou whom my soul loveth , where thou feedest , where thou liest at noon : for why should I be as she that turneth aside to the flocks of thy companions ? 7.  If thou know not , OH thou the fairest among women , get thee forth by the steps of the flock : & feed thy Kids above the tents of the shepherds . 8.  I have compared thee , OH my Love , to the troops of horses in the chariots of Pharaoh . 9  Thy cheeks are comely with rows of stones , & thy neck with chains . 10.  We will make thee borders of gold , with studs of silver  11.  While the king was at his repast , my spiknard gave the smell thereof . 12.  My well-beloved is as a bundle of myrrh unto me , lying between my breasts . 13.  My well-beloved is as a cluster of Cypers unto me among the vines of Engeddy . 14.  My Love behold thou art fair , thine eyes are like the doves  15.  My well-beloved , behold , thou art fair & pleasant : also our bed is green . 16.  The beams of our house are cedars , our galleries are of fir . 1.  I am the Rose of the field , and the Lily of the valleys . 2.  Like a lily among the thorns , so is my Love among the daughters . 3.  Like the Appletree among the trees of the forest , so is my well-beloved among the sons of men : under his shadow had I delight , & sat down ; and his fruit was sweet unto my mouth . 4.  He brought me into the wine cellar , and love was his banner over me . 5.  Stay me with flagons , and comfort me with apples : for , I am sick of love . 6.  His left hand be under my head : and let his right hand embrace me . 7.  I charge you OH daughters of jerusalem , by the roes & by the Hinds of the field , that ye stir not up , nor waken my Love , until he please . 8.  It is the voice of my well-beloved : behold he cometh leaping by mountains and skipping by the hills . 9  My Well-beloved is like a Roe , or a young Hart : lo , he standeth behind our wall , looking forth of the windows , showing himself through the grates . 10.  My Well-beloved spoke , & said unto me , arise my Love , my fair one , and come thy way  11.  For , behold winter is past , the rain is changed and gone way . 12.  The flowers appear in the earth : the time of the singing of birds is come , and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land . 13.  The figtree hath brought forth her young figs and the vines with their small grapes have cast a savour : arise my Love , my fa●re one , and come away . 14.  My Dove , thou art in the holes of the rock , in the secret places of the cliffs : show me thy sight , let me hear thy voice : for thy voice is sweet and thy sight comely . 14.  Take us the foxes , the little foxes which destroy the vines : for our vines have small grapes . 16.  My Well-beloved is mine , & I am his : he feedeth among the Lilies . 17.  Until the day break and the shadows flee away ; return my Well-beloved , & be like a Roe or a young Hart upon the mountains of Bether . 1.  In my bed , by night I sought him that my soul loved : I soght him , but I found him not . 2.  I will rise therefore now , and go about in the City by the streets , and by open places , and will seek him that my soul loveth : I soght him , but I found him not . 3 , The watchmen that went about the City , found me : to whom I said , have you seen him whom my soul loveth ? 4.  When I had past a little from them , than I found him whom my soul loveth : I took hold on him , and left him not , till I had brought him unto my mother's house into the chamber of her that conceived me . 5.  I charge ye o daughters of jerusalem , by the roes , & by the Hinds of the field , that ye stir not up nor waken my love until she please . 6.  Who is she that cometh up out of the wilderness , like pillars of smoke perfumed with myrrh and incense , & with all the chief spices ? 7.  Behold his bed better than Salomon's : threescore strong men are round about it , of the valiant men of Israel . 8.  They all handle the sword , and are expert in war every one hath his sword upon his thigh , for the fear by night . 9  King Solomon made himself a bed of the trees of Lebanon . 10.  He made the pillars thereof of silver , and the stead thereof of gold , the hangings thereof of purple , whose midst was inlayde with the love of the daughters of jerusalem . 11.  Come forth ye daughters of Zion , and behold the King Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his marriage , and in the day of the gladness of his heart . 1.  Behold , thou art fair my Love , behold thou art fair , thine eyes are like the doves within thy locks , thine hair is like a flock of goats which look down from the mountains of Gilead . 2.  Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep in good order which go up from the washing : which every one bring out twins , and none is barren among them . 3.  Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet , and thy talk is comely ; thy temples are within thy lock as a piece of a pomgranate . 4.  Thy neck is as the tower of David , built for defence : a thousand shields hang therein , & all the targets of the strong men . 5.  Thy two breasts are as two young Kids that are twins , feeding among the Lilies . 6.  Until the day break and the shadows fly away , I will go into the mountain of myrrh , and to the mountain of incense . 7.  thou art all far my love , & there is no spot in thee . 8.  Come with me from Lebanon , my spouse , even with me from Lebanon , and look from the top of Amanah , from the top of Shenir and Hermon , from the dens of the Lions , & from the mountains of the Leopards . 9  My sister my spouse , thou hast ●ounded my hart with one of thine eyes : and with a chain of thy neck . 10.  My sister , my spouse ; how fair is thy love ; how much better is thy love them wine , and the savour of thine ointments then all spices ? 11.  Thy lips , my spouse , drop as hony-combs : honey and milk are under thy tongue , & the savour of thy garments is as the savour of Lebanon . 12.  My sister my spouse , is as a garden enclosed , as a spring shut up , & a fountain sealed up . 13.  Thy plants are as an orchard of pomegranates with sweet fruits : as Cipers , Spikenard , even Spikenard & Saffron , Calamus and Cinnamon , with all the trees of Incense , Myrrh & Aloes with all the chief spices . 14.  OH fountain of the gardens , OH well of living waters & the springs of Lebanon . 15.  Arise OH North , & come OH South , and blow on my garden , that the spices thereof may flow out : let my well-beloved come to his garden , and eat his pleasant fruit  1.  I am come into my garden , my sister , my Spouse : I gathered my myrrh with my spice ; I eat my honey with my honey comb , I drank my wine with my milk : eat OH my friends drink , and make you merry OH well-beloved . 2.  I sleep , but my heart waketh : it is the voice of my Well-beloved that knocketh , saying , open unto me my sister , my Love , my dove , my undefiled : for mine head is full of dew , & my locks with the drops of the night . 3.  I have put off my coat : how shall I put it on ? I have washed my feet : how shall I defile them . 4.  My well-beloved put his hand from the hole of the door ; & my bowels yearned toward him . 5.  I rose up to open to my well-beloved , and my hands did drop down myrrh , and my fingers pure myrrh upon the handles of the bars . 6.  I opened to my Well-beloved : but my Well-beloved was gone and passed ; mine hart was gone when he did speak : I soght him but I could not find him ; I called him , but he answered me not . 7.  The watchmen that went about the City found me , they smote me and wounded me : the watch men of the walls took away my veil from me . 8.  I charge you o daughters of jerusalem , if you find my well-beloved , that you tell him I am sick of love . 9  OH the fairest among women , what is thy well-beloved , more them another well-beloved ? what is thy well-beloved , more than another lover , that thou dost so charge us ? 10.  My well-beloved is white & ruddy , the standerdbearer of ten thousand . 11.  His head is as fine gold , his locks curled , and black as a raven . 12.  His eyes are like doves upon the rivers of waters , which are washed with milk , and remain in their fullness . 13.  His cheeks are as a bed of spices and as sweet flowers , and his lips like lilies dropping down pure myrrh . 14.  His hands as rings of gold set with the chrisolit ; his belly like white ivory covered with saphires . 15.  His legs are as pillars of marble , set upon sockets of fine gold : his countenance as Lebanon , excellent as the Cedars . 16 His mouth is as sweet things , & he is wholly delectable : this is my well-beloved , and this is my lover , OH daughters of jerusalem . 17.  OH the fairest among women , whether is thy Well-beloved gone ? whither is thy Well-beloved turned aside , that we might seek him with thee  1.  My well-beloved is gone down in to his garden to the beds of spices , to feed in the gardens and to gather lilies . 2.  I am ●y welbeloveds , and my well-beloved is mine , who feedeth among the Lilies . 3.  thou art beautiful my Love as Tirzah , comely as jerusalem , terrible as an army with banners . 4.  Turn away thine eyes from me , for they overcome me : thine hair is like a flock of goats which look down from Gilead . 5.  Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep which go up from the washing , which every one bring out twins , and none is barren among them . 6.  Thy Temples are within thy locks as a piece of a Pomgranate . 7.  There are threescore queens , and fourscore concubines , and of the dansels , without number . 8.  But my Love is alone , and my undefiled , she is the only daughter of her mother , & she is dear to her that bore her : the daughters have seen her , and counted her blessed , even the queens and the concubines and they have praised her . 9  Who is she that looketh forth as the morning , fair as the moon , pure as the sun , terrible as an army with banners . 10.  I went down to the dressed Orchard , to see the fruits of the valley , to see if the vine budded , and if the Pomegranates flourished . 11.  I knew nothing , my soul set me as the charets of my noble people . 12.  Return , return , o Shulamite : return , return , that I may behold thee : what shall you see in the Shulamite , but as the company of an army ? 1.  How beautiful are thy goings with shoes , OH princes daughter ? the compass of thy hyps like jewels : the work of the hand of a cunning workman . 2.  Thy navel is as a round cup , that wanteth not liquor : thy belly is as an heap of wheat compassed about with Lilies . 3.  Thy two breasts are as two young Kids that are twins . 4.  Thy neck is like a tower of ivory : thine eyes are like artificial pools in a frequented gate : thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon , that looketh toward Damascus . 5.  thine head upon thee is as scarlet , and the bush of thine head like purple : the king is tied in thy beams . 6.  How fair art thou & how pleasant art thou , OH my love , in pleasures ? 7.  This thy stature is like a palm-tree , and thy breasts like clusters . 8.  I said , I will go up into the Palmtree . I will take hold of her boughs : thy breasts shall now be like the clusters of the vines , and the savour of thy nose like apples . 4.  And the roof of thy mouth like good wine , which goeth strait up to my well-beloved ; & causeth the lips of him that is asleep , to speak . 11.  I am my welbeloveds , and his desire is toward me . 11.  Come my well-beloved , let us go into the fields let us lodge in the villages . 12.  Let us go up early in the morning to the vines , and see if the vine flourish , whether it hath disclosed the first grapes , or whether the pomegranates blossom : therewill I give thee my love . 13.  The mandrakes have given a smell , and in our gates are all sweet things , new and old ; my well-beloved , I have kept them for thee . 1.  O that thou werest as my brother that sucked the breast of my mother . I would find thee without , I would kiss thee , than they should not despise me . 2.  I will lead thee , and bring thee into my mother's house ; there thou shalt teach me : I will cause thee to drink spiced wine , & new wine of the pomgranats . 3.  His left hand shall be under my head , and his right hand shall embrace me . 4.  I charge you OH daughters of jerusalem , that you stir not up , nor waken my love , until he please . 5.  Who is this that cometh out of the wilderness ; leaning upon her well-beloved ? I raised thee up under an appletree : there thy mother conceived thee : there she conceived that bore thee . 6.  Set me is a seal on thy hart , and as a signet on thine arm : for love is strong as loath ; jealousy is cruel as the Grave : the coals thereof are fiery coals , and a vehement flame . 7.  Much water cannot quench love , neither can the floods drown it : if a man should give all the substance of his house for love , they would greatly contemn it . 8.  We have a little sister , and she hath no breasts : what shall we do for our sister , when she shall be spoken for ? 9  If she be twall , we will build upon her a silver palace : and if she be a door , we will keep her in with boards of cedar . 10.  I am a wall , and my breasts are as towers : then was I in his eyes as one that findeth peace . 11.  Solomon had a vine in Baalhamon : he gave the vineyard unto keepers : every one bringeth for the fruit thereof a thousand pieces of silver . 12.  But my vineyard which is mine is before me : to thee o Solomon appertaineth a thousand pieces of silver , and two hundreth to them that kept the fruit thereof . 13.  OH thou that dwellest in the gardens , the companions harken unto thy voice , cause me to hear it . 14.  O my well-beloved , flee away , and be like unto the Roe , or to the young Hart upon the mountains of spices . 