THE Reformation of Covetousness . Written upon the 6.  Chapter of Matthew , from the 19 verse to the end of the said Chapter . 

By William Perkins . 

Imprinted at London , for Nicholas Ling , and john Newberry . 1603.  

In memoriam Perkinsi . 

Is Perkins gone , that whilom was a Lamp , 
A Cantabrigian Phôspher shining far ? 
Gone , gone indeed . And yet his deeds remain 
As monuments of such a writers worth . 
Hei-papist snarl , contend his works to dim , 
thou bites & blots thy wretched self , not him . 
Herald Clapham . 

To the Christian Reader . 

IT shall not greatly need ( well disposed Reader ) to commend to thy kind allowance , this godly , learned and necessary Treatise , of the reformation of that sin , which of our ancient Philosophers and Divines , hath been condemned for the original and root of all evils ; since the Author thereof ( now dead ) while he lived , received a true approbation of his faithful labours from the most judicial , grave and learned censures of our time . The never-wearied virtues of his inward soul , still labouring like the Sun to illuminate and enlighten the darkness of our understandings , amongst other of his industrious studies , have left this token to the world , that his whole care and endeavour was always bend to the begetting of a general profit . How necessary the publishing of such a subject is , in respect of the Idolatrous worshipping of the wicked Mammon , I refer me to the truly ▪ zealous & soule-labouring Ministers in the Lord's vineyard ; whose voices like brazen trumpets continually sounding in the obdurate and stifnecked worldlings , work little or no motion at all in them , either for compassion of their poor distressed brethren , or salvation of their own souls . My request therefore is , that thou wouldst reach thy gentle hand of acceptance to the New-year's gift of a dead man , who by a virtuous and godly life , hath chased oblivion from his grave , and now suruiveth in the hearts and tongues of all godly Christians . 

fare ye well . 

THE Reformation of Covetousness . 

Math. 6. 19 20.  

19  Lay not up treasures for yourselves upon the earth , where the moth and canker corrupt , and where thieves dig through , and steal . 

20.  But lay up treasures for yourselves in heaven , where neither the moth nor canker corrupteth , and where thieves neither break through , nor steal . 



Here begins the fifth part of Christ's Sermon , containing a several distinct doctrine from the rest . From this 19 verse to the 25. is contained a discourse touching the reform of covetousness : that is , the disordered and inordinate care of earthly things . The ground of which discourse , lieth in this 19 and 20. verses . In them Christ layeth down a double commandment . 

1 First , what we must not do , with a reason of the same . 
2 Secondly , what we must do , with a reason thereof . 
The things forbidden , are the practices of covetousness : of which that we may speak in order , first let us see the sense and meaning of the words . 

There be two things contained in them . 

Lay not up , ] hoard , heap : The greek word signifieth more than the translation expresseth ; and namely , two things : first , to gather together : secondly , to store up things gathered together against the time to come . 

That it hath these two significations , see romans . 2. verse 5.  

Treasures , ] abundance of worldly wealth , and excellent things of great price , as Gold , Silver , Plate , jewels , Rings , precious stones , etc.  

Upon the earth , ] Here he noteth not so much the place of treasure , as the kind of treasure , earthly . 

For yourselves , ] for your own private gain and commodity , all respects of the good , either of the Church or Commonwealth set aside . 

Now that we may see what is forbidden , we must first see what he forbade not . 

First , he forbids not here labour in our calling , whereby we provide things necessary for us and ours : for that were against himself . Gen. 3. 19 , In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread . 

Secondly , he forbids not the possession of goods and riches , for they are the blessings of God. job.  

Thirdly , he doth not forbid the gathering or keeping of treasure , for the word of God alloweth of some treasure : as 2.  Cor. 12. 14. for the child : and for the Church . And joseph is commended for hoarding up corn in the seven years of plenty , against the seven years of dearth . Gen. 41. 48.  Yea in the Temple there was a treasure by the appointment of God , made , maintained , and continued from time to time . Therefore he doth not simply condemn the gathering of riches , or the laying up of them . 

What forbids he then ? Sundry practices of covetousness , employed in the 19 verse . 

The first practice is excess in seeking worldly wealth , when men know & keep no mean , moderation , or measure . And that we may see the danger of this vice , I will answer this question : 

How far a man may seek and provide for worldly wealth . 

In answer whereof , I lay this ground for a foundation ; that is , men's goods must be distinguished into three sorts : viz. necessaria , abundantia , superflua , that is , necessary , abundance , and superfluous . 

Necessary goods are twofolde : some are necessary to the nature , and some are necessary to the person and condition of man Those which are necessary to nature , are such , as without which , neither a man himself , nor his family can live : as meat , drink , cloth , and lodging . 

Those which are necessary to the person ; that is , to any man's state , condition , calling , or kind of life , are such as the Artificers Instruments , the Tradesman's tools , and the Students books . 

Now here ariseth a question or two by the way : 

What goods , and how much is necessary for the person . 

For answer whereof , the opinion and judgement of the covetous must be no rule , because his heart is a sea unsatiable , or that cannot be filled . 

What then must be the rule thereof ? 

There is no certain rule : therefore the judgement of the wise , learned , godly , and Christian frugal men , must be the rule to judge what is necessary : and whatsoever is in their judgement necessary , must be so accounted . 

Further , things necessary must not be judged only by the present use , but also by the use in time to come . As for example : A Tradesman groweth in years , and hath nothing to live on besides his Trade : his hands and sight fail him , therefore he provides something to maintain him in his old age , and layeth it up for a certain and necessary use in time to come , until his death . 

Again , a man that hath children : the time will come , when he must give them their portions , and therefore he may provide for them against they come to age , and he sinneth not , but doth well , because it serveth for a certain use in time to come . Thus far of the first sort , that is , of necessary goods . Now of the next . 

The second kind is abundance , that is , plenty of worldly riches , wherewith a man is so stored , that he hath both for a necessity , and also for an holy delight and hearts-ease . 

The third are superfluous . These are such , whereof a man hath neither present use , nor any certain use in time to come . Now I answer to the first question : viz. How far a man may seek & provide for worldly wealth ? I say , that things necessary for nature , for a man's person & place , may be sought for , and laid up . 

But here is a bar put in by God himself ; we may go no further ; we may not seek for abundance or superfluity : The reason hereof is alleged in the 30.  Chapter of the Proverbes , the 8. and 9 verses , where it is said : Give me not poverty nor riches : feed me with food convement for me , lest I be full , and deny thee , and say , who is the Lord ? etc.  

That which we must ask of God , that we may seek for , and no more : But we have no warrant to ask at God's hands abundance or superfluity ; Therefore we may not seek for them . Again , if we have meat and drink , we must therewith be content . 1.  Tim. 6. 8.  

Ob.  If we must pray for nothing , or labour for nothing more than is necessary , then what shall we do if God give abundance ? 

Resp.  We must not seek abundance . But if God cast it upon us without seeking , we must thankfully receive it , lay it up , and use it for the good of the Church and Commonwealth , and for the good of our own families . 

If this be so , that we must seek for nothing but necessaries , than we must learn contentedness therewith , which that we may do , weigh these reasons following . 

First , it is God's commandment , that we should be content with things necessary , and seek no further , therefore we must be obedient and content . 

Secondly , a man that is too greedy to lay up much , can hardly keep a good conscience , but must needs use some unjust means . 

Thirdly , such are subject to the devil's snare . 1.  Tim. 6. 9  

Fourthly , in persecution and times of trial , the richest will hardly confess Christ , & hold out , but will be the more easily drawn from Christ , and the confession of the truth , because their minds are glued to the things of this world . Hereunto may be added the examples of many Saints , who have been contented with little , that they might serve God the better . And also Christ's admonition , How hard it is for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven . Thus much of the first practice of covetousness , which is excessive seeking of goods , without all measure . 

The second practice is , when worldly goods are sought only and principally : which practice Christ meets withal , when he saith : First seek the kingdom of God.  

This was Esau's sin , and the sin of the Gadarens , Math. 8. who preferred worldly goods before spiritual treasure . And this may be called unreasonable disorder , preposterousnesse , worldliness , etc.  

The third practice is , to put our trust and confidence in riches laid up , and to make them our God , and rather to forsake God , then them . 1.  Tim. 6.  Psal. 62.  

The fourth practice is , when a man layeth up for himself only , and not for the Church nor Commonwealth , but sibi soli , this man may be called churl , niggard . etc. All these practices of covetousness Christ condemneth . 

Thus much concerning that which is forbidden . Now followeth the reason . 

Where moth , rust , and thief , etc. ] The reason standeth thus : That which is subject to vanity , to casualty and corruption , must not be our treasure : But earthly goods , gold , silver , riches , clothes , etc. are subject to such things ; Therefore they must not be our treasure . 

The Greek word ( Sès ) is a moth or worm , that wastes and consumeth the best garments , & may be taken here for any worm , that doth destroy and consume any creature . 

Brôsis , a canker . This translation is too strict , for it signifieth any thing that wastes any creature whatsoever . here than is set down the vanity of the creatures , which vanity stands in two points . 

First , in the corruption . 

Secondly , in the abuse of the creature . 

Touching the corruption , it teacheth us , that gold and silver , yea that all riches have some diseases to waste them , or some canker to rust and consume them . 

Touching the abuse of the creature , it stands in this , that it is subject to the injury and ill usage of men , as riches are when they are hoarded up , and serve for no use . 

From whence comes this vanity ? 

From man's sin . Rom. 8. 20. which when we consider , it puts us in mind of our sins , how loathsome they are , that they are causes of vanity to the creatures , both by corruption and abuse . 

Christ seeing men bend and disposed to treasure up wealth in abundance , calls them back to an other kind of treasure , better than that , as much as heaven is better than earth ; and an heavenly life better them a little money or muck . And therefore he saith : Lay not up treasure in earth : That is , let not all your heart and mind be set upon this , I can tell you a little better treasure . Here I might take occasion to inveigh against men's ill dispositions and affections , who will not follow this good counsel , but still prefer earth before heaven , for all this admonition . 

Every man by nature is greedy to gather goods , and desirous to be rich , but few care to be rich in God. What profit did the rich men receive by all their treasure . Luk. 16. and 12.  Had it not been a great deal better , if they had possessed less , so they had enjoyed this ? But let us come to the 20. verse . 

20.  But lay up treasures for yourselves in heaven , etc.  

Ob.  This is a strange instruction and precept , to lay up treasure in heaven . Why ? How should we come there ? 

Resp.  Indeed Christ saith , it is hard for rich men to come there , and yet they have means to make it easy , if they william  

How shall we lay up therefore ? 

Thus. Lay out here , and lock it not up , and so you shall lay up treasure in heaven . 1.  Tim. 6.  Otherwise , if you lay up here , and imprison the coin , that it cannot be currant , you lay up a treasure in hell . Rom. 2.  For by your hardness of heart , what do you else , but treasure up wrath against the latter day . So that this place seemeth to be a special motive to charity and liberality : but yet it is not to be restrained to that , as if it pertained only to rich men . 

then how shall the poor lay up treasure in heaven , who want it in earth ? 

Very well : for they must make God their treasure , and Christ and his word , and so all their treasure is spiritual and heavenly . And this David made more account of then any treasure whatsoever . Ps. 119. . 72. 127.  And say with him , Psal. 57  thou art my portion o Lord.  

Rich men use at every years end to cast up their accounts , to see how their store and treasure increaseth , and it is not amiss . But it were better if they would take a time for this account , and see how this increaseth . 

The rich man in the Gospel had gold enough , silver & corn great store , even by his own confession , and yet he was but a fool , & that a miserable fool , because he sought not this . Say that a man could get all the world into his hands , ( though it be not possible , ) I pray you what would it profit him , if he lose his soul for his labour ? What madness is it then to heap up treasure in earth , and not to regard the true treasure in heaven ? 

But lay up treasures in heaven , etc.  

In this last part of this chapter , Christ goeth about to reform his hearers , in regard of the practice of covetousness , and begins at the 19 verse , teaching them first what to eschew , not forbidding them to have riches , but forbidding to seek and get them , and to gather them without measure , moderation , and with excess . 

Secondly , when they seek them only and principally . 

Thirdly , when they make them their felicity . 

Fourthly , when they gather riches for themselves , without respect of the common good , either of the Church , or of the Commonwealth . 

These four abuses are here forbidden . 

Now because it is man's nature to seek treasure , and men cannot be broken from it , but they will have a treasure , Christ adds this commandment , in which he teacheth his servants in all ages , what to do in this case . 

But lay up treasures in heaven , etc.  These words contain a commandment , informing us in our duty , and a reason of the same . Lay up , etc.  As if he should have said , seeing your natural disposition is such , that you will , and must neeeds have a treasure , I will show you what you shall do , if you will be ruled by mine advice , and follow my counsel , you shall lay up treasure in heaven , because there neither moth nor canker can come to corrupt . 

Quest.  Touching the commandment , it may be demanded , why Christ gave it to his Disciples , seeing it is not in the power of any creature to do this , no more then to save himself , but the beginning , progress , and end of salvation , is from God. Therefore why doth he propound the commandment in this form and tenure ? 

Answer . It is an usual thing in the scriptures , to ascribe and attribute the work and effect of the principal cause to the Instrument , whereby a thing is effected . Thus in the last verse of Obadiah , Preachers are expressly called Saviour's . So 1  Tim. 4. 16.  Paul saith : In doing this , thou shalt both save thyself , and them that hear thee . Yet salvation is the proper work of God alone : but because Preachers are Gods Instruments for the salvation of his people , therefore they are called saviours . So here to gather and lay up treasure in heaven , it is the work of God alone , it is not in the power of any man : nay , as much as in us lieth , we treasure up nothing but wrath . Rom. 2.  And yet because we are instruments of it , it pleaseth God to ascribe his own work to us , who are but instruments , & that by his grace . 

Now they to whom the commandment is given , must be conceived as members of Christ , and instruments of God. That we may the better conceive of this commandment , and practise it , two points must be considered . First , what this treasure is . Secondly , how every one may lay it up for himself . Of these in order with reverence , for they are points of great weight and moment . 

The very main point of our salvation standeth in the practice of these . 

Consider what is erroneously counted to be this treasure , and then search the word , to find out the truth . The Papists have long abused the world with showing the false treasure : for they make it a common chest , in which is gathered and stored all the overplus of Christ's merits , and of the Saints merits of all ages . And this chest is in the Pope's custody ; and he only hath the ordering & disposing ; opening and shutting ; giving out of indulgences & pardons , when , where , and to whom he listeth ; and by this treasure he upholdeth and maintaineth his kingdom : hereby comes his riches and revenues . But this treasure is not good and currant , for it hath two defects . 

First , they make Christ his merits to be unsufficient . For if his passion must have an addition and supply from men , it is a poor treasure . 

Secondly , they make the merits of Saints deceased to be our merits , and that is not possible : for if men could merit , yet it should but be for themselves alone . All men are but private men in regard of salvation ; and so their merits , if they were any , should be proper and personal . 

Thus you see their treasure is defective in a double respect : and therefore to let it pass , we are to renounce it , and leave it to them . 

Now let us with reverence come to consider , what is indeed the true treasure here meant and mentioned . It is the true God , to speak in few words , one God in three persons ; Creator of all things , in whom all the treasures of happiness are to be found . Gen. 17. 1.  I am God all sufficient . And Gen. 25.  Thy exceeding great reward . And Psal. 16.  A large & beautiful portion . And this is as much as if he had said ; The Lord is my treasure : I will not stand long upon this , for men by light of nature have seen and said this . And S. Paul saith : God is all in all to the elect , Cor.  

But mark how he must be considered , that he may be our treasure . 

To this end we must conceive of God as he hath revealed himself to us in Christ : for God in Christ made manifest , is our treasure , and not otherwise without Christ. This the Gentiles never knew . Col. 2. 3.  In him is the treasure of all wisdom and knowledge . There he is made the Church's treasure . And Coloss. 3  Our felicity and life eternal is hid with God in Christ. There he is made the treasure , fountain and store-house of our eternal happiness . john . 1.  john Baptist saith : Of his fullness we receive grace for grace . He makes Christ that treasure , whence we receive that grace which we have . And 2.  Corinthians . 1. 31.  Christ is our treasure , whence we receive our righteousness , wisdom , sanctification , and redemption . 

Therefore it remaineth , that GOD revealing himself in Christ , or God incarnate , or Christ , God and man , is the treasure of the Church . 

Now that he may be our treasure , we must consider him , as he is revealed and set forth unto us in his word and Sacraments : for so is he a treasure , and no otherwise . Therefore Christ crucified , dying , and rising again , is our treasure . Our treasure lieth all in his suffering , death and bloodshed : and for this cause we must so conceive of him , as crucified for our sins . 

Quest.  Why is Christ called our treasure ? 

He is the fountain of all true blessedness that is conveyed from God to man , and from him doth proceed all our felicity & happiness whatsoever . Wouldst thou have remission of sins , & life eternal ? Wouldst thou have any temporal blessings , or comfort by them , or comfort in distress ? thou must have it from Christ crucified . The good things that come unto us , if they come not as from Christ , they are no blessings unto us. If he then be the fountain of all true happiness , he is the true treasure . Besides , or without him , there is none . 

In a word than remember this , that the treasure here spoken of , is God , revealing himself unto us in Christ , by whom he conveyeth all good things to us. And this is that which Christ aimeth at in this place . 

Now , having found what the true treasure is , let us see how every one of us may lay it up for ourselves , as we are here commanded . And that we may so do , some particular things are to be performed , insinuated in Math. 13. 44. you may read them there , where the kingdom of God is compared to a treasure hid in the field , etc.  Concerning which , five things are to be noted . First , finding it . Secondly , the price or value of it . Thirdly , getting it . Fourthly , keeping it . Fiftly , using it . 

The first of these is necessary , for until it be found , we can neither value it , get it , keep it , nor use it . Therefore this is first to be done of us.  

We must find it before we can have it and enjoy it . It is called a hidden treasure , because the natural man cannot discern it , and the finding of it is , when God reveals it to men , and makes them feel that themselves stand in need of it . This is the right finding of it , when God makes a man in his conscience to feel the want of it , than he begins to seek that which he never saw before . 

Not every revealing of the treasure is a finding of it ; for God enlightens men two ways . 

First , generally , whereby a man reading the word , is able to understand the meaning of it , and to conceive the general sense . 

But besides this , there is a second kind , when God makes a man to discern the word in his own soul and conscience , that is , a special and distinct kind of illumination , and it appertaineth unto few to be able to discern the power of the word in our own consciences . But when this is once wrought in us , then doth a man find this treasure . The outward senses cannot discern it , for it is hidden . And then it is found only , when men feel the want of it . 

This is a great blessing of God , and not common to all , nor to many : for our eyes are dazzled with the pomps , pleasures , and vanities of the world . Nay , they that are learned , are blinded with human wisdom . Not every one that can preach , hath found out this treasure . Men may have great gifts and yet want this , and fail in finding it , till they feel themselves to stand in need of Christ's righteousness . God hath hidden this from the wise and great ones often , and revealed it to the simple . 

Before we proceed any further , let us descend into our own hearts , and try whether we have yet found this treasure : for we may persuade ourselves amiss , as the jews , who have a veil before their eyes these many years . If we find that we acknowledge Christ to be the principal treasure , and that we want him , than we find him . But if our eyes be not opened , yet let us labour for it , for otherwise we can never get it , or have use of it , if we never find it . And the cause why there is so little joy in the word , and so little comfort and sweetness in the doctrine of the Gospel , is , because we never yet found the treasure which it speaketh of , & hath hidden in it . 

The second action to be performed is , when our hearts and eyes are enlightened , so that we have found it , then to estimate and prize it , for than it begins to be a treasure to us , when we prize it , as the man doth Matt. 13. 44. who valued it at more than all his goods . Nay , if a man had a whole world of wealth , all were nothing in comparison of this ; this is more worth than all the world , or all things in the world . Philip. 3.  Paul valued it at such a price , that he counted all things loss and dung , and no better in regard of Christ : mark what a high price he sets it at , all his good works were nothing to it . 

This second thing is necessary for all them that would lay up treasure in heaven . Therefore let us have a care of this duty , and learn to value Christ above all things whatsoever , how excellent soever they be . We have well profited in the School of Christ , and begin to make good proceedings , when we can prize this treasure at a due and true rate . 

To proceed . The Scripture doth reveal this treasure , therefore as this treasure must be valued above all : so this word which reveals it , must be preferred above all things , as David did , Psal. 119.  It is better to him then much riches ; yea , the finest gold of Ophir or India , was not comparable unto it . And Christ saith : His fruits are better than fine gold . Therefore this must be valued above all writings , for it showeth more than any other can do . 

It were to be wished therefore , that it had his due estimation and value amongst us. Many make but one truth , and it is all one with them , whether it be out of men's writings , or God's word . But they are far deceived : for the word of God alone is the truth , according to godliness , which doth discover the heavenly treasure , and it is to be honoured above all writings , though it be brought in earthen vessels . 

If we had learned to value this treasure , & the word which revealeth it , we should profit more for knowledge and obedience than we do ; we would reverence it more , and rejoice in it more than we do , etc.  

When we have found it , and valued it , we must seek to get it , and make it our own : for so it is in that parable . We must use all means to purchase it to ourselves ; for so the commandment is here : Lay up treasures for yourselves . 

That we may get it to ourselves , we must use such means as God hath appointed for this end , and they are these . 

First , we must hear the word with all care , diligence , and reverence , and mix it with faith . 

Secondly , we must receive the Sacraments with due preparation and reverence . 

Thirdly , we must pray earnestly and constantly with faith : and amongst all other means this especially must be used by us.  

The reasons hereof are these . The Word and Sacraments are God's hand , wherewith he gives this treasure unto us. And our faith showing itself in our prayers , is a hand whereby we receive it . God in his word doth offer it with his hand ; and we by faith earnestly ask it , do receive it . By faith we make Christ's right to be ours , & also his obedience & merits ; therefore use all these good means . First , of hearing the word . Secondly , of receiving the Sacraments . Thirdly , of prayer in faith . And be constant in these duties , and thou shalt have this treasure as thine own : for faith is the only means whereby we attain it . 

After that we have some testimony in our consciences , that we have gotten it , we must labour to assure ourselves of it . 

How must we do this ? 

For this purpose read 1.  Tim. 6.  Charge the rich that they be not high minded , etc.  Mark there how by liberality and bounty we are exhorted to lay a good foundation . 

What ? must we be saved by our almsdeeds ? 

no , this foundation is not laid in heaven , for that is our election which God layeth up there . But our foundation is our conscience , & that is by good works , by which , as by fruits , men may assure themselves , that eternal life appertaineth unto them . Works of mercy , done with simplicity & singleness of heart , are marks of the children of God , signs of true faith , and of the true treasure . For this cause Paul would have rich men to lay up a foundation in their consciences . 

Lastly , we must use it as a treasure , when we have done the four things before mentioned , then come to this . To this end diverse duties are required at our hands , to be performed of us.  

First , we must have our conversation in heaven . If Christ be our treasure , than our affection , joy , comfort , our heart , mind : and all the whole man living on earth , must be in heaven . If Christ be thy treasure , and his blood and passion , than all thy hart , hope , joy and comfort is there . Therefore we must send up our hearts to heaven : otherwise he is not our treasure . If we will use him as our treasure , let all our care and joy be in , and for heaven . 

Secondly , we must turn earthly goods into heavenly treasure . How ? why he that giveth to the poor , dareth unto the Lord : The Lord becomes a debtor to him , and boroweth of him for the poor . The poor is but the Lord's bailiff and messenger , whom he sends to the rich , and he returns a reward of heavenly treasure for it . Mark there how by giving alms to the Lords poor , we turn earthly blessings into heavenly . Luke . 12. 43. expressing these words , saith : sell all that you have , and give to the poor : make yourselves purses which shall last for ever . When men do so , them they turn their temporal goods into heavenly treasure ; and so men that have this world's goods , may by the blessing of God , make great increase of them . 

Thirdly , we must part with all for this ; the best thing in the world must not be too dear , though it be our own blood and our life , we must part with them rather than with th●● . And when we are thus minded , than we carry ourselves to Christ , esteeming him as our treasure . 

When we esteem any thing above him , or prefer aught before him , he is not our treasure . 

Thus you see five duties , all necessary to be performed , that we may keep this commandment . And when by God's grace we are enabled to do these , than we shall obey and practise this commandment . Therefore let us remember them , and be careful to perform them so long as we live . 

And mark what will follow : If we can find it , and value it , etc. we will be content to endure whatsoever Gods hand shall lay upon us in body or soul , and never be dismayed , nor discouraged with any thing that befalls us. Nothing can daunt or discourage a man's heart , that hath this treasure , but they shall vanish all in time . 

Further , it will make that we shall never fear death nor judgement , all pains will be nothing , great comfort , ease , and contentation , shall be to us so long as we live , if we can do thus . 

Now a word or two of the reason . 

Where neither moth , etc.  

The reason is drawn from the certainty and unchangeableness of the treasure . Earthly riches are subject to worms and cankers ; and if no canker can come to corrupt them , yet the thief will have them . But there is no canker , moth , nor thief , that can hurt Christ and his merits . 

Ob.  Why ? the highest heavens , the place of happiness should be free from that vanity and corruption , which the lower heavens and all other creatures be subject unto . All that we see over our heads , is subject to vanity , even the stars . 

Answer . To man by right of creation , belongeth the earth and the heavens , and they were all man's by creation , even the highest heavens , to the very firmament , by creation all were man's . They were made for him , and he was Lord of all . They were his palace , all saving God's throne . And when he fell , he was punished in all these creatures , but not in the highest heaven , because the right unto it is not by nature , but above nature , and is ours by right of redemption , and not by right of creation . 

Secondly , by Christ's death and passion they are made ours , and not by nature : but by grace only , and that after the fall . Therefore the heavens and the stars , and all creatures visible are subject to vanity and corruption . 

And so much of the commandment and the reason . I beseech you remember it , and learn it , and put it in practice both in life and death . 

21. verse . For where your treasure is , there will your hearts be also . 

In the two verses next before going these words , Christ gave two commandments . First , what we should not do , and the reason of it . Secondly , what we should do , & a reason thereof . The first , a corruption & mutabilitate . The second , ab incorruptione & immutabilitate : Now he renders a common reason pertaining to both , and serves to confirm both , which is thus framed : Where your treasure is , there your hearts will be : But your heart must not be on earthly treasure , but on heavenly : Therefore lay not up treasure in earth , but in heaven . 

Now touching the words and the meaning of them . 

By treasure , understand things excellent and precious in our estimation , laid up for time to come , in which men place and put their principal joy and comfort , where your treasure is , that is your special joy and felicity . For so much the word treasure imports . 

By heart , understand the principal powers and actions of the soul , as the thoughts and affections , love , joy , fear , etc. yea , the labour , pains , study , care , and endeavour , all these are to be understood by this word heart . 

As if he should have said : Thus your treasure and heart are things joined together , and inseparable : therefore where your treasure is , there is also your care and study . For that which men judge to be their principal good and felicity , in seeking it , they spend all their pains and time . 

Now for our further edification , let us see what uses may be made of this reason . First , we learn here how to judge aright of our own hearts . Indeed it is a bottomless gulf , as jeremy saith , yet we may in some sort search it , and judge of it by this sentence . For an earthly treasure , and a carnal heart go together . And on the contrary part , a heavenly treasure , and a spiritual heart go together : These cannot be severed . Therefore look upon what you spend your thoughts and cares , and accordingly judge of yourselves , If upon earthly things your mind be set and fixed , than your heart is earthly and carnal , it is most certain , Christ hath given the sentence . 

If you plead , that it cannot be , because you hear the word , receive the Sacraments , and pray , etc. all this is nothing , if your mind and affection be in this world : you deceive yourselves , for where your heart is , there your treasure is . And contrary , if our principal thoughts and affections be in heaven , and our care be for that principally , than our heart is he avenly , and our treasure heavenly . And thus we may judge of ourselves , and search our hearts , whether they be carnal or spiritual . 

Secondly , hereby we may all try ourselves without deceit plainly , whether we have any portion in heaven , or no : for if our hearts be on the earth only or chiefly , all our portion is here , and none in heaven . The man , whose portion is in heaven , hath his heart and affections there . Though you profess Christ , though you hear the word , pray , receive the Sacraments , yet you may be deceived . Therefore look to this , for if thy heart be here , thou hast yet no treasure laid up in heaven . 

Thirdly , by this coupling of the hart and treasure , we learn that we must not regard this world & temporal life . Nay , we must despise it so far forth , as it may be done without hatred of a good blessing , & unthankfulness to God. For this life is a blessing of God , given us to prepare ourselves for a better . Therefore simply we are not to despise it , but in respect of heaven . 

And as we must not regard this life , so our meditation must be of heaven , and not of the earth : for heaven cannot be thy treasure , except thy heart be there . Therefore draw thy delight from worldly things , and wean it to heaven . 

So much for this verse . 

22.  The light of the body is the eye : if then thine eye be single , thy whole body shall be light . 

23.  But if thine eye be wicked , than all thy body shall be dark . Wherefore if the light that is in thee be darkness , how great is that darkness ? 



This part hath diverse expositions . First , I will touch one of the principal , though I take it not to be the rightest , and them I will set down that which I take to be the best . And thirdly , I will show how this depends on those things that go before , which will then best appear , when the sense is made manifest . 

By single eye some understand a liberal mind . And by a wicked eye , an envious and covetous mind : and so they expound these words of envy and covetousness . And this exposition is to the purpose . And the words of good and evil eye will bear this sense : For Solomon puts the good eye for a liberal heart , & an evil eye for a covetous heart , Proverbes , 22.  Therefore this is a good sense , but not the proper meaning of this place , as I take it ; because the single eye , and the light of the body , are put for one and the selfsame thing : 

Now the light that is in us , is the understanding & judgement . Again , it is said here , that the eye is the light of the body . Now a liberal eye cannot be the light of the body for all actions , but for liberal actions only . Therefore though it be true , that the single eye is a liberal mind , and the evil eye a covetous mind , yet it is not proper to this place . Wherefore we must search further . 

The words be similes , and there be diverse similes in them . The comparison is borrowed from a candle , which serves to lighten all that be in the house : so the eye serves to light all the body , and give direction to all the actions . 

If thine eye be single , ] To the end of the 23. verse , there is a double Simile , which goeth thus : As a man that hath a good and clear sight in his bodily eye , can carry his body any way right , and keep it without wand'ring and stumbling : But if the bodily eye have any default or defect , if it be dim and corrupt , than a man cannot walk without falling or stumbling . Nay further , if a man have an eye , and it be blind , he cannot find one step of his way . In the same manner ( saith Christ ) if you have a mind to judge rightly , all is well ; but if the judgement be corrupted , there is much darkness , many wants and faults . This is the plain comparison here used . 

To come to the words . The light of the body is the eye . These words are plain . If thine eye be single . Here understand the mind resembled by the bodily eye . The single eye is the mind , able to judge of things to be done , or not to be done , good or bad . 

The whole body shall be light , ] That is , the whole life , For look , as the eye is to the body : so is the mind to the life . 

Bright , ] That is , the whole course of our life shall be well ordered , if God give man a mind well disposed . 

But if thine eye be wicked , ] That is , if the mind be corrupted , the judgement depraved , the understanding darkened , so that a man cannot rightly discern of things to be done , though there be some light remembrance . 

All thy body shall be dark , ] That is , thy life will be full of sin and disorder . For therein stands the darkness , when the understanding is dimmed and darkened , there the life is out of order . 

If the light that is in thee be darkness , ] That is , if the natural light of reason , understanding , and judgement , which is left after the fall , and which God hath put into every man  

How great is that darkness ? ] That is , than there is no difference between the life of a man and a beast , when the light of natural reason is put out : so as there is no power of judgement or discerning , etc.  This I take to be the truest and fittest exposition . 

Now having found the meaning , let us come to consider how this depends on the words going before . I take it , they depend as an answer to an objection : for the two former commandments are hard to flesh and blood , men cannot brook them . Therefore Christ before he leaves it , cuts off all the cavils which might be made against it . 

Quest.  If treasure must be laid up in heaven , why do all the wisest men seek earthly treasure so much ? 

Answer . The effect of the answer is this , we need not to marvel at it , for they want the gift of discerning , their eye is blind , and they cannot discern things that differ , earthly and heavenly . And so it comes to pass , that they omit the seeking of heavenly treasure . 

Here some things must be supplied by the reader's mind . 

Every man's eye is either a blind , 
corrupt , 
or single 
eye 

1.  The single eye befalls not all , but those only , to whom it is given of God. 2.  The corrupt eye appertains to all . 3.  And some by sin put out the light of nature : and hence it is , that men omit heavenly treasure . 

This I take to be the true and right meaning , and thus the dependence is in good order , giving us the main cause of covetousness , which is a blind eye : so that they cannot see to put difference between heavenly and earthly treasure . 

Here three things are to be considered , the single eye , the wicked eye , and the blind eye ; with the fruits and effects of every one . 

The single eye is the light of the body ; There is expressed and noted the single eye , with the fruits thereof , viz. to give light to all the body . 

The wicked eye makes the body dark . Of these in order , and first we will begin with the single eye . And that you may know what is meant hereby , I will describe it plainly . 

By single eye , understand the mind of a man endued with true and heavenly wisdom , for it is the single eye , the mind that hath this gift , which is enlightened with true wisdom . then if we shall know what true wisdom is , we shall know what this eye is . 

Therefore touching wisdom , it is a gift of God in Christ , no common gift which every professor may have , but a special gift from God to them that are in Christ. 1.  Corinthians . 1. 31.  Christ is made of GOD to us wisdom , not only because he is the maker and author of wisdom , but also because he is the root from whence all our wisdom spring's : we must be set to him and engrafted in him : we must be made bone of his bone , and flesh of his flesh . As his righteousness is made ours by imputation , and our holiness is from his holiness , as from the root : so our wisdom is from his wisdom , as the branch from the stock , and the fruit from the tree . 

This wisdom befalls not the devil and his angels , not all men , nor all Christians in name , but only those that are in Christ truly : for from his wisdom proceeds the true wisdom . So then we must conceive of it , that this wisdom is a gift of God to them that are in Christ.  

This spiritual wisdom hath two actions . First , to discern things that differ , Secondly , to discern one thing from an other spiritually . 

S. Paul prayeth that the Philippians may be enriched with knowledge , and sense , or judgement . What is this sense ? that we might be able to discern things differing , and be sincere : Mark how he joined with knowledge , sense : that is , a gift of discerning good and bad : earthly and heavenly : what we must do , and what we must leave undone . We ought to have our senses exercised to discern good and evil : that is , we ought to be endued with the property of true wisdom , to have our senses enured to put difference between things good and evil . 

And this is the first point of heavenly wisdom , to put such a difference . As for example : He that is in Christ , and hath this spirit of discerning , he can discern the voice of his shepherd , and can put a difference between it , and all the voices of false shepherds . 

Again , by this men can distinguish between the water in Baptism , and other waters : between the bread and the wine on the Lord's table , and common bread and wine . And the discerning of these is by this gift of wisdom . 

Thirdly , by this the Church of God is able to discern of afflictios ; between crosses and curses ; chastisements & judgements . He can take the hand of God for a fatherly correction , and for no curse nor judgement : and he knows what use to make of them . 

Fourthly , by this gift the child of God can discern the things of God , namely , his own election , vocation , adoption , justification , etc.  He can know them & perceive them , more or less . In a word , by this men are able to put a difference between earthly riches and heavenly treasure . He can discern the excellency of heavenly things above earthly , and put a plain difference between them , which the carnal man can not do . The spiritual man discerns all things truly ; Virtue from vice ; Heavenly things from earthly things , and so all other things whatsoever . 

here then , mark what is the first action and property of this wisdom , to discern things that differ . 

I add further this the Providence , Wisdom , and justice of God in all things , which the natural man cannot do . Hereby you see how excellent and necessary a thing this is , serving to many excellent uses . 

The second action , is to judge determine , & give sentence of things , what we must do , and what we must not do : what is good , and what is evil : what is heavenly and what is earthly . 

here one thing must be remembered . It is a principal point of wisdom , to determine what is the chief happiness of man , and the scope unto which all our life is to be directed . It is the love and favour of God in Christ : see examples of this judgement . Psalm . 4. 6.  Many say who will show us any good , & c. ? Mark there David's judgement of this matter , and how he differs from others . He determines that it is true happiness to be in the favour of God. So Paul cared for nothing but Christ crucified , showing what was his wisdom , when he came amongst the wisest of the world : ( viz ) Christ crucified for the sins of the world . And indeed if a man had all the wisdom and policy in the earth , and fail in this ; if he cannot determine where to place his happiness , and what is the scope of his life , his wisdom is but folly . Therefore remember , this is a principal point of true wisdom , to be able to judge of our true happiness , what it is , and the scope of our life . Thus you see the spiritual wisdom hath two actions , & what they be : ( viz ) First , to discern things that differ . Secondly , to discern onething from another spiritually . 

here , mark further , that a principal part of this wisdom is heavenly providence . When a man discerns what is the principal good : then cometh providence , and useth all means for the compassing of that principal good . She forecasteth all the ways and means to come unto it : without this our wisdom is not perfect . 

And thus you see what is meant by wisdom . It is a gift of God's spirit , to them that be in Christ , whereby they are enabled to discern of things that differ , & the scope of our life , & of true happiness : and withal to forethink and forecast all the means to come unto it . And the single eye , that is the single mind , which is able to discern of this wisdom . 

Now in the next place , mark the fruit of it : The whole body shall be light . That is , the whole life shall be full of righteousness , & of good success . Prou. 8. 19 20.  My fruit is better than gold and fined silver : I make a man walk in the ways of righteousness and the paths of judgement . 

To make some use of it considering this is thus here commended , we are first admonished to labour for this heavenly wisdom & single eye . The singular commendation of it , should be a spur and inducement to every one to seek for it . The commodity should move us to affect it above all . 

That you may the better do it , remember two things . 

First , that you get the beginning of this wisdom , that is , the fear of God , to reverence his Word , and to tremble at his presence : which you shall have if you lay the Word to your consciences , when you hear and read , never storm at it . When the whole man doth bow himself , the mind , conscience , and will , without replying & repining , raging or chafing , than we are gone a good way , and have made good beginnings & proceedings . When the word checketh us , crosseth & controlleth our faults , strive not against it , but obey it . 

Secondly , we must all close our eyes , the eyes of our mind , ( I mean , ) and suffer ourselves to be led in all things by the written Word , to be ordered and ruled by the Laws and Commandments of God.  

Mark this point : For if we can practise this , we shall get true wisdom and happiness . Therefore give attendance to it in the whole course of your lives , and let the Lord overrule you by his Word . Read Psalm . 119.  David's example is most excellent . By meditating in the Law , he became wiser than the ancient , and those that were his teachers . He passed them in wisdom , that were chief among men for wisdom , because he shut his own eyes and submitted himself to the regiment of the word . In a word , Remember to renounce thine affections , and to shut up thine eyes , & let the Lord perform his work in thee . 

Again , in that the single eye is here thus commended , we are taught to walk wisely , whereunto Paul in most of his Epistles exhorteth . And we walk wisely when we practise all things in wisdom , & that is done by remembering these four things following : 

First , the thing to be done , must be just . 

Secondly , the means of doing it , must be just also . 

Thirdly , we must keep our selves within the limits of our calling . 

Fourthly , we must do it with a single , honest and upright heart . 

And that these four may concur , we must have the written word to tell us every one of them . We must have the word to tell us , that the thing we are to do , is just . 2.  That the means we use , is just also . 3.  That we do keep ourselves within the limits of our calling . And 4. that we do it with a single , honest and upright heart . then when our action is just , and the means just , the heart upright , and we within the compass of our calling , according to God's word , the action shall be done in wisdom , so as it shall be praised and approved by God.  

Thirdly , in that this wisdom makes a man's light shine with righteousness , we are all taught to season our natural wisdom with spiritual wisdom . 

God hath given all men wisdom by nature , more or less . It is a gift of God to be commended : but that it may be holy and approved , and used well , it must be seasoned , and then natural wisdom joined with it , is good , and a blessing of God , and tends to the honour and glory of God.  

It is the sin of these days , that men of wisdom use natural wisdom without spiritual wisdom , whereby they fall into many sins and inconveniences , because they sever these . 

Fourthly , seeing this is so , let us have regard principally to this part of wisdom , which is concerning providence ; after judgement , which is best how to forecast , how we may come by it . Consider Luke the 12. what was the rich man's fault , his riches increased , and he was provident to lay up his store : yet Christ calls him fool , because he wanted this heavenly wisdom . He could forecast for the enlarging of his barns , but not for his soul ; he had no respect of it , nor regard of this spiritual wisdom and providence . 

It was the fault of the foolish virgins , therefore called foolish : they had some Oil and blazing Lamps , but they wanted sufficiency of Oil , because they wanted this providence . 

They had not a sufficient forecast of their salvation , and the means thereof . Though one had all the wisdom in the world , and fail in this , he were but a mad man Mark the end of Achytophel ; his wisdom was great , but yet naught , because he wanted the principal , viz. the fear of God , and therefore he hanged himself . 

wherefore consider : There can be no wisdom , when we do not determine of the end and scope of our life . Let us now in the time of our life and days of grace and peace , forecast all the means of salvation , and never content ourselves , till all be accomplished . 

If we have all the learning in the world , it is nothing without this . Therefore above all things , let us set our hearts to seek it : for the want of it , makes men to seek nothing but earthly treasure , because they cannot discern things that differ . wherefore now practise this providence , learn this wisdom : be not like the foolish Virgins : content not yourselves with outward profession . Be not like that rich man , that had no care nor forecast of his soul and salvation . 

Consider the end of our life : let this be the first and principal thing , for it is the principal part of heavenly wisdom . 

23.  But if thine eye be wicked , etc.  

Hitherto of the single eye : Now of the corrupt and wicked eye . As in handling the former , so in this I will consider : First , what is the wicked eye : Secondly , what is the fruit and effect thereof . 

The wicked eye is the mind and understanding , having some light , but darkened , dimmed , and corrupted by Adam's fall . That you may yet the better conceive what this wicked eye is , you must know that the mind is corrupted two ways , and in two respects . 

First , it hath lost the gift of discerning and judging and in this respect it is an evil eye , and mistakes one thing for an other ; good for evil , and evil for good . 

And that the mind hath lost the gift of discerning in many things , appears thus : Many of us by nature know not God as we ought , nor ourselves . Touching God , it appears by diverse reasons : we know naturally that there is a God , yet we cannot acknowledge the presence of God.  

Men naturally when they sin , fear not the presence of God , and that proves plainly , that the eye of the mind is an evil eye . 

Though by nature we know that there is a God , yet we acknowledge not his particular providence : we cannot discern it as we should , and it appears in this : that men naturally trust men before God , the creature , above the Creator , which showeth that we do not acknowledge a particular presence a for if we did , we would rather distrust men , and trust God.  

Though the conscience tell a man of the punishment of sin , yet the mind doth sooth and flatter us naturally , and telleth us we shall escape without due punishment , and so denies God's justice . 

We know that God must be worshipped , yet the mind cannot discern & judge of it : when we come by the light of nature to worship God , we turn God to an idol The natural man doth not perceive the things of God , that is the mind naturally knows them not , nor gives any approbation or consent unto them . 

Now as man cannot know God sufficiently by nature , so he cannot discern himself and his own sins . We have all this evil eye by nature , we can not perceive that we are dim and dark sighted , not blind . 

A man by nature cannot discern the vileness of sin , though the conscience can judge somewhat of it : yet the right judgement of sin the mind cannot perceive by nature , for if men could do this , they would not sin . 

We are not able by the natural eye of our understanding , to judge of our own frailty . Hence it is , that the aged man thinks he may yet live longer . Because the mind is corrupted , we cannot discern the frailness of our own eyes . 

We cannot judge aright of the scope of our own lives : but nature teacheth us to seek ourselves more than God , or our own good , more than his glory . 

The mind is unable to judge of our own happiness : for this is all the wisdom of man , to think that felicity doth consist in outward and earthly things , as riches , honour , etc. so that we accounted the rich happy , and the poor miserable . 

Therefore the first point is clear , that the mind hath lost the gift of judging and discerning . 

The second way that man is corrupt , is in obedience , That it is made subject to that which should be subject to it , namely , the flesh : Yea , it doth not only follow the flesh , but also the evil temptations of Satan , which are cast into it : The mind is ready to follow them , and therefore it is evil . 

It followeth the example of the world . And for these cause's Christ calleth it an evil eye . First , because it wanteth judgement . Secondly , because it obeyeth that which it should rule . 

Totum corpus tenebrae , ) Now he shows the fruit of it ; which is , to make the whole body dark , that is , the whole life full of unrighteousness and darkness . Though the natural understanding have some light , yet it is an evil eye , it cannot discern in many things . And though it discern in many things , yet it obeyeth not , but followeth the william  

Thus much of the meaning . 

Now of the instructions , which truly and naturally proceed from hence . 

First always remember this , that Christ left somewhat to be supplied , namely , that this evil eye is in all men by nature , and that is the cause why men cannot discern : wherefore we are to labour to see and discern this wickedness of the eye in the mind . 

It is the first step to knowledge , to see that we cannot see , that we cannot judge and discern of heavenly things as we ought : we shall never know GOD aright nor ourselves , till we see that we cannot see . 

Also we must bewail this blindness , and tremble for it . 

The sense and apprehension of bodily darkness is grievous unto us , much more ought this . 

And as that , etc. so we ought to labour for the good eye-salue , that makes the blind eye to be a good eye , and this salve is nothing else but the word of God , applied by the spirit of God.  

When the holy Ghost opens the eyes of the understanding , than our eyes will be made single . 

Secondly , we are taught to amend a fault . We have here just occasion to rebuke a damnable fault , which is common here and every where , namely , that men content themselves with the light of nature : for by this evil eye , any man knoweth thus much ; namely : 

1 That there is a God.  
2 That God is good , and merciful . 
3 That we must love him above all , and our neighbour as ourself . 
4 That we must live well . 
All this we know by nature . 

If a man were brought up in the wilderness he might know all this without a teacher : and yet herein stands all the knowledge that many have ; but all this is nothing : wherefore content not yourselves with this . Think not yourselves good scholars in Christ's school , until you know more than this comes to . 

That it is not sufficient to know these things , it is manifest , because it is here called an evil eye , and makes the life full of darkness . For all this , if we do no more than this , with this we may perish , live in darkness , and die in darkness , and go to everlasting darkness . 

And though some plead , that Preachers can teach them no more than this , yet they deceive themselves grossly . Therefore remember this , with natural knowledge join spiritual knowledge : Put grace to nature , to help the blind eye : Add piety and supernatural knowledge to nature . 

For this cause have care to read and search the scriptures , that you may attain to more knowledge than you have by nature , if it be for nothing else , but to know God's commandments and promises : for that knowledge serves for nothing else , but to make a man without excuse , and not to save . 

This fault and sin is the fall and bane of many a soul , and brings them to hell : That men think themselves furnished sufficiently for salvation , if they have but a natural knowledge . 

Men content themselves with reformation , so far forth as nature teacheth : and look what nature teacheth , the very blind eye seeth . 

First , that God must be worshipped , the blind eye seeth and knoweth , but how he is to be worshipped , he cannot tell . 

Secondly , that we must love God , and live well , & deal justly , is known by nature , and this we content ourselves withal , even with evil conversation and natural reformation . 

But this is not enough , for the blind eye cannot teach us so much , and they learn it and know it , whose lives are nothing but darkness . Wherefore never content yourselves with natural reformation , for if you have no more , all your civil life is nothing but darkness before God , how faite soever it seem to men : but labour for a spiritual life , that thy heart may be renewed , and thy life reform , according to the Gospel . 

That this is necessary , it is plain , because Christ saith , the whole body is dark without it . 

The blind eye is not able to free it from darkness . Civility will never save thee , thou must perish with it . 

To proceed : We learn that we must not be wise in the matter of salvation for ourselves , and by ourselves . 

The Lord saith by Moses to the Israelites : thou shalt not do that which is good in thine own eyes , but that which I command thee . Deut. 12.  

We must not take upon us to set down how we would be saved , and by what means , this way or that way , for we have but a blind eye . And yet this hath been , and is a common fault . The Turk with his religion : the jew his : and the Papist his : and there is no man , but he prescribes to himself a way of worshipping God , and how he will be saved . And by this the devil destroys many , because they will be wise by themselves , and to themselves . For example sake , it is the manner of wise men , to prescribe how they will be saved : they take it for a small matter to come to salvation , if they can but make a prayer at the end of their life . I speak of them which are not guided by the word : some by their works : and others by their faith : and all is one , for they understand nothing by faith , but their good intent and well meaning . 

Naturally and commonly men prescribe to themselves how they will be saved , & how they will worship God , and in using what means they will live and die : But they do ill . wherefore in a word , be not wise to thyself in this for the matter of thy salvation . Let God be wise , be thou a fool : prescribe no religion to thyself : content thyself to be wise , according to the word ; for by nature thou hast an evil eye , and this eye cannot show thee the way of life . Away therefore with this damnable practice . 

Lastly , our duty is to seek for a better eye , that is , the eye of faith , that which is wanting in this eye , may be supplied . And this is faith , by which we rest on the mercy & goodness of God , on his providence and protection in life and death . This eye is able to see a far off , and to discern things that cannot otherwise be discerned , the evidence of things not seen : And the patriarchs saw the promises a far off . Let us all be careful to seek this eye of faith , without the which we cannot walk the way to everlasting life . So much of the second kind of eye . 

Now of the third eye briefly , according to the compass of the time . Wherefore if the light that is in thee , etc.  This is the blind eye , yea stark blind , that hath no power to discern or judge : that is , to see what is meant by ( light ) natural knowledge of God , and justice , which is in the mind . 

It is further said , that if this light be darkness , it is only buried , so as there shall be no use of it , but it cannot be quite put out & extinguished . Some light of nature is remaining in the most wicked men , because conscience remaineth . 

Now here it is said to be none but darkness , because it may be buried , hid & covered , but not wholly put out . The veriest Atheist that lives , hath this light in him . 

This must be remembered for the understanding of these words , as it is plain in them that have a reprobate mind , they are as if they had no light of nature remaining , because it is buried . 

What is the cause that the light of nature is turned into darkness ? 

The cause is in the will and affections of men , the desires and lusts of the heart : it is sin that puts out the light of nature , actual sin : the will and affections make men to sin against the light of nature , and against conscience , and so put out both , and bury them . This makes a man not to know that , which by nature he might know . 

Now see the fruit of it , Rom. 1. in most horrible and brutish sins upon the blind mind , and reprobate sense . 

The consideration of this point , that the understanding may be quite buried by actual sin , teacheth us to enter into an examination of ourselves . We have in us ( even the best of us all ) wretched , devilish , and damnable desires , such as would put out the light of nature in the understanding . This teacheth us to be vile in our own eyes , who have such vile hearts , that they can put out that light , which Adam's fall did not . 

Secondly , in that the will and affection blind the mind , dazzle and dim the light of our understanding , we learn to look to these principally , that they be mortified and brought in subjection , to the obedience of God's commandments , for now the case is altered . Before the fall , the mind ruled the will , but now the will overrules the mind . Therefore a special regard must be had of this : we must renounce our own wills and affections , they are those that bring the ruin of the soul and conscience . Therefore above all things , look to them , that they be tempered , ordered , and squared . It is best with men , when God breaketh them of their wills : for when they have their wills in all things of this life , they carry the whole man headlong like a wild and untamed colt . 

Though thou hadst all the wisdom , knowledge , and learning in the world ; if thy will and affection be naught , they will cast a mist , a veil , and a cover or scarf over it , wherefore bring these into order and subjection , than a little understanding out of the word will give great light . 

Remember this : It is not knowledge principally that should be sought for , or the mind to be instructed , and no more : but the will and affection must especially be regarded : for from the heart comes life and death , salvation or damnation . There is the beginning of thy comfort or woe : for if they be out of order , they will master & overrule the understanding . 

Further , I gather hence , that the doctrine of salvation may be turned to darkness . If the light of nature , which is so deeply imprinted & engraven in the heart , then much more this . And this is plain , by experience of all them , which begin in the spirit , and end in the flesh , which are worldly & wicked . 

This could not be otherwise . See Heb. 3. 12. there is a most excellent place of scripture , which doth show how this light by little and little is put out , going back from the last to the first , there be five degrees . 

1 First , the deceitfulness of sin . 
2 Secondly , the hardness of the heart , when sin hath deceived . 
3 Thirdly , infidelity or incredulity , when the heart being hardened , is made unbelieving , which begins to doubt of the word , and to call the truth into question . 
4 Fourthly , the evil heart , when the Gospel begins to go to decay . 
5 Fiftly , falling from God , Apostasy . And so the light of nature , and of the Gospel , is put out . 
then furthermore , there is declared , how we having received the light of the Gospel , may preserve it , namely , by observing and watching the lives of one an other ; and by exhorting one an other . 

Quest.  Lastly , if the light of nature may be turned into darkness , it may be demanded whether saving grace and faith may be lost ? If the light of nature , which is so deeply imprinted in the heart , may be extinguished , why may not the grace of regeneration be lost ? 

Answer . There is no grace of God considered in itself , but it may be lost : for it is a creature , and therefore changeable , because nothing is unchangeable but God : wherefore if you consider faith and regeneration in their own nature , they are changeable , and may be lost ; it cannot be denied , but in regard of the promise of God , to continue and preserve it to us , than it is unchangeable , and cannot be lost . 

God gave Adam grace , but it was changeable , he did determine to permit the fall : but now the gifts and graces of God are without repentance , and the man that is a believer , shall never be moved . Psal. 15.  

Though the nature of grace be such , that it may be lost , yet God gives the second grace to the first : and thereby it is made sure , that it shall not be moved or lost . The gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church . 

By reason hereof , upon this and such like promises it is , that faith is not lost , and not by any virtue , which it hath in itself , or by it own nature . 

Let this be the first answer . 

Secondly , as I said , this light of nature cannot be quite put out , but only buried : so faith may be buried , hidden , and driven into some corner , but it cannot be wholly put out , where it is once truly kindled . 

So much of the third eye . In which the light of nature seems to be quite put out , because it cannot discern at all , but takes evil for good , and good for evil : it seeth not so much , as there is a God , or that God is to be worshipped . 

Now to come to the very scope of these words , mark the end of them , why Christ used them . It was to show that men could not discern , when they seek for earthly riches before heavenly . And the evil eye , corrupt and blind by nature , is the cause why men cannot distinguish things that differ . 

From the scope one profitable admonition must be renewed , that is , to labour to attain the gift of discerning , to put a difference between earthly and heavenly things : therefore let us search the scripture , that we may have our eyes enlightened , and so see the right way to eternal life . For the want of this discerning is the cause of all disorder , and particularly of this disorder in preferring temporal and earthly things before eternal and heavenly . And by this you may walk with comfort and peace of conscience , the way to life eternal . Whereas without it , you wander in darkness all the days of your life . 

24.  no man can serve two masters : for either he shall hate the one and love the other , or else he shall lean to the one , and despise the other : ye cannot serve God and Mammon , or riches . 

We have heard of two commandments of Christ : first negative in the 19 verse : the second affirmative in the 20. verse : and afterwards an objection answered in the 22. verse . now he removes another impediment . 

The former objection was this : If our treasure must be laid up in heaven , and not here on earth , it is marvel that so many lay up treasure here , and not in Heaven ▪ 

The answer hereof is : They have either a blind eye , or an evil eye , and so want the gift of discerning . 

Now in this verse he meets with an other objection , which the carnal wisdom of man makes commonly , and hath ever made against these commandments , and it is thus . 

Why may we not love and serve God , and serve Mammon too ? 

Some men flatter and persuade themselves , that they may serve God , & yet set their hearts to seek riches too . And therefore they think , that they may seek earthly riches & heavenly riches both together ; and that one doth not hinder an other , but that one may have both treasure in earth , and treasure in heaven . Here therefore Christ meets with this carnal conceit of natural men , and proves it to be impossible that one man should practise both these . Thus you see how this verse doth depend on the former , and this will the better appear , if we seek the true meaning of the words . 

no man can serve two masters , etc.  It may seem at the first to be otherwise , for both in reason , and also by experience , one servant may serve two divers masters , as we see one Factor may , and doth well serve diveser Merchant's : Therefore how can this be that Christ saith here ? 

Some answer it thus : That the words must be conceived after this manner , as if he had said : Two divers or contrary masters . As for example , when one shall say come , and an other shall say come not : when two masters are thus contrary & divers in their minds and wills , one servant cannot serve both . And so these words carry a holy truth . 

But this clause of divers and contrary is not expressed , therefore I say further , that this sentence was a common proverb among them . Now in a Proverb , if it be usually or generally true , though it hold not always , if it have effect ordinarily , it is enough . As no Prophet is honoured in his own country , that is , usually and commonly it is so : So this Proverb is true ordinarily . And thus this sentence must be understood as a familiar proverb , usual and common among the jews , which Christ taketh for the ground of his speech . 

Now it followeth : For either he shall hate the one , ] that is , as he is a master , or in regard of his commandment : And he shall love the other , ] in respect of his commandment , in that he doth embrace it and perform it . Or else he shall lean to the one , ] This is an illustration of the former words : for it might be demanded : How shall he be known to love or hate them ? 

The answer is thus : Love will cleave to the one , and contemn the other . That is , a servant is known to love his master in his commandment . First , if he cleave unto him . Secondly , if he give himself as a servant , to the obedience of his commandment . 

And he will despise the other , ] That is , he will neglect his commandments . Thus he testifieth his love or hatred by omitting and neglecting : or by performing and practising the commandments enjoined him . 

Now the words that follow : You cannot serve God and Mammon , are the application of the argument : you cannot serve God and riches , treasure , profit , gain . A man cannot serve God , and give himself to get , and lay up riches . 

It is not said , you cannot serve God , and have riches , for Abraham , joseph , & job served God , and yet had riches : But thus , you cannot serve God , & serve riches ; that is , give yourselves to seek them , and set your hearts upon them . Thus the sense and meaning is plain , and now the scope of the words will the better appear . 

The objection is this : Why may we not do both , viz. lay up treasure in heaven and in earth ? 

The answer is : no man can serve two masters . 

But God and Mammon are two masters : therefore you cannot serve both these . 

The proposition is confirmed by a reason which is added . And thus you see the scope and the sense of this verse . 

Now see what doctrines naturally arise hence . 

First , it is to be marked , that Christ doth here set down what it is to serve God. A thing that every man speaks much of , yet a thing that few know , and fewer do practise : therefore in a word , it is this : To serve God , is to love him , and to cleave unto him , and he serveth God , that doth these two . 

For the first , every man will say that he loves God , and ever did . Well then , take heed you be not deceived : for God must be loved , not only as he is a bountiful Lord , but as he is a Master , and doth command us service , he must be loved in his word and commandments in his authority of commanding . The written word is his will and commandment , therein he prescribes what we should do , though he should never bestow benefits upon us , that we should love him because he is our Master . 

For the second part of God's service , it is to cleave unto him , whereby what is meant , you may see in the Parable of the prodigal son ; He clave to a Farmer , that is , gave himself to his service . 

So here , to cleave unto God , is the resigning up of a man's self to serve God , and to obey him in every commandment : And to take heed that he suffer not himself to be drawn away from obeying any commandment , and believing any promise . 

This is done when we will not suffer ourselves to be separated from God , but yield obedience to his commandments . This is the right cleaving to God.  

chose , to disobey his commandments , is to hate God , & to despise him . Though no man will say he hate's God , yet he that doth neglect his commandments , and gives himself to seek the things of this life , is a hater of God. He that is crooked in his way , despiseth God , let him protest what he will , If he do not cleave unto God by obedience to his commandments , he is a hater of God , & his utter enemy . 

The consideration of this part , serves to let you understand the great blindness of the world . For commonly if a man can but rehearse the Lords prayer , the ten commandments , and the Creed , howsoever he live , he serves God well enough . What gross ignorance , blindness , and superstition is this ? The service of God is in obedience to his commandments , to cleave unto him as Abraham did , when God said : thou shalt not kill , he obeyed . Again , when God said , Kill thy son , he obeyed . 

See them how this age abounds with Atheism in all places : for what is he that hates God , and despiseth him , but an Atheist ? Now all they that seek the things of this life so much , they are very Atheists , and no better , because they hate him and despise him . 

Atheism is a common sin of our time . The world is loved : Mammon embraced , God hated , and the Lord despised . I know that men will abhor this to be challenged for Atheists . But Christ hath given the sentence , that whosoever he be that doth not cleave unto him in obedience , doth despise and hate God , and what is that but Atheism ? This is a mother sin , & the cause of many more . 

So much of the first point of the service of God.  

Secondly , Christ takes it for granted , that Mammon is a Lord : That riches is a God , and that men serve and obey him , As there is a true God and Master , by right of creation : so there is an other by reason of corruption : and that is riches , treasure , profit and gain . Of this he forewarns his disciples , because the danger is great . 

Question . How can this be , may some say ? 

Answer . riches in itself is a good creature of God , and therefore is not indeed a master . Only the wicked and wretched hart of man , sets up an Idol in the heart , in stead of the true God : And therefore covetousness is called Idolatry . Now it is made an Idol & a Master thus : Men esteem of riches as of their principal happiness : And it is the mind of man that makes the God : look where the heart is , there is the Lord and God.  

Secondly , it is the nature of man to trust in riches , and to love them more them God. Hence it is , that men are the servants of riches , whereof they should be masters . I will make it plain , that it cannot be denied . 

First , men lay aside the service of God , & neglect his worship for gain : what argues this , but that they accounted riches the principal good , about which they spend most time ? 

Secondly , let a man have riches , and he is content exceedingly with the abundance that God gives him , he is at peace . Let the same man lose his goods , and all the promises in the Bible will not quiet him . 

Again , let him lose any part of his riches , & he will be more grieved and vexed , then for the loss of heaven , by breaking Gods commandments . What argues this , but that the hearts of men do honour riches as their God ? 

Lastly , I appeal to all men's consciences . Is not every man more sharply set to gather earthly things , then to call upon God ? Why all men can tell every one is more eager and earnest in seeking riches : So that we have as many Idols now as ever we had , and as many Idolaters : for every man sets up this Idol in his heart , and puts his trust in it . Therefore it is true which Christ takes for granted : That riches is a Lord  

If any think themselves hardly dealt withal , that they should be accounted Mammonists and Idolaters serving riches ▪ Let them consider the lives of men , what mean else the common oppressions , extortions , usuries , engrossing of necessaries ? What do all these argue but this , that Mammon is a great Lord , and hath many servants and slaves , for all these are his attendants and retainers unto him ? 

Further , what is the cause of a dearth in time of plenty ? when God in mercy hath vouchsafed us plenty and store , what is the cause our dearth continues ? but this , that Mammon is a great Lord  

Mammon is the cause , gain and lucre . Let it be considered with reverence , when we have a made-famine by the wicked men , who are slaves and vassals of Mammon . There is no question , but the dearth in former years , which was caused by God's hand , was also increased by wicked men . 

All these things being laid together and considered , it is plain , that though all men would seem to embrace the Gospel , yet this is a common sin , men give themselves to serve Mammon . Indeed God hath his servants here and elsewhere , yet it is but an handful : The multitude are all Mammonites . Therefore this is a certain truth , and may well be taken for granted . 

Here therefore see the vile nature of man : He was made to be Lord of Mammon , & yet he is content to become his slave and vassal , though his state and condition be to be a Lord , yet thus he abaseth himself . 

Secondly , in that men are commonly slaves to Mammon , we learn an other lesson , which Christ teacheth us : We must learn to be faithful in the having , using , keeping , and dispensing of the wicked Mammon . It is a vile and a miserable thing for a man to subject himself to it , to become his slave and vassal . 

He that seeks to be rich , forsakes God. Remember it , for it is the principal point that Christ proves here . A man may have riches , and use them ; and may live & die rich : but he may not seek to be rich , because than he forsakes God , when he sets his hart upon riches . I will make this more plain . 

In riches three things are to be considered . First , the getting . Secondly , the keeping . Thirdly , the spending . 

First , he that seeks to be rich in getting of goods , must needs use much lying , deceiving , and breaking the Sabbath . 

In keeping of them , if persecutioncome , he forsakes Christ , and denies the Gospel : and if any loss befall him , he will resort to the witch , wizard , soothsayer , conjurer , and Astrologer , and all to keep himself rich . 

Again , he can part with nothing to the poor , because he must be rich , therefore he cannot spare a penny . None shall get aught at his hands , they may starve at his door first , and all is because he will be rich : he hath set it down , and determined it with himself . 

Men have a mild & moderate opinion of covetousness : if a man be covetous , they will say he is a good honest man , but somewhat hard and near . But mark the sentence of Christ : Here these worldly persons are forsaken of God. So that it is no small fault ( as the world takes it ) for a man to be worldly . 

First , it is a renouncing of God himself , a practising of Atheism , therefore we must learn to think worse of these worldly persons . 

Secondly , it is the manner of men to make laws to themselves for the getting of riches : I will have an 100 or 200. or 300. or if he have a greater stock , a 200. or 2000 etc. and thus much lands , rents , and revennewes , I must needs have it , I cannot live else . Take heed of this ; make no such law to yourselves , for then follow all the practices that tend to the compassing of this resolution . It is a common practice among men , they will have thus much in stock , and thus much in revenues ; whereas indeed , a little with God's blessing , is wealth enough . 

Thirdly , let every man be contented with that portion which God hath allotted him : evermore remember that godliness is great gain , if we be content . Therefore away with this covetous mind , and be content with God's good providence . 

The heart must not be divided between God and the creature : God must have all , or none : you cannot serve both ; there is no parting of stakes , God to have one part , and Mammon the other . Many are deceived herein , who think they may part stakes , and give God one half , and the creature the other ; nay , sin and Satan . 

The use of this is , to discover hypocrites . When men live in many sins , if they come to the Congregation , to hear and pray , and receive the Sacrament , though they lie and live in sin , they may be the servants of God for all that : as the drunkard , adulterer , etc.  And so every man blesseth himself in his sin . 

Hence it is , that so many flatter themselves while they live in sin , against their own conscience : but they deceive themselves . If they serve the devil in any sin , they cannot serve God.  

Secondly , every servant of God is so far forth regenerate , renewed , and sanctified , that not one sin reigns in him , for than he must serve two masters . So many sins reigning in any man , so many Lords . This doctrine must be received , regarded , reverenced , & remembered . 

Thirdly , if the heart cannot be divided between God and the creature , let us all in the fear of God , worship God , serve him , and profess ourselves to be his servants , with our whole souls and bodies : for we cannot serve God and Mammon . God alone is to be served : therefore let every affection bow the knee to God : let the body and soul do their parts in this homage , so long as thou livest . 

Remember Rom. 6.  The servant of God hath his fruit in holiness , and the end everlasting life . 

The Queen of Sheba pronounced the servants of Solomon happy , because they served such a Lord How much more them are they happy , who in body and soul give themselves to the service of the living God ? 

Ob.  It will be said : I desire with all my heart to serve God , but the corruption of my nature makes me disobey and rebel against the commandments of God. The flesh makes me do that which I would not . When I would fain honour God , my corrupt nature makes me dishonour him . Some may thus complain , that their case is miserable , and they serve two masters . 

Answer . All that have grace must needs say thus , that their wicked nature doth carry them an other way , but they must stay their mind on this manner : When they fail in obedience , let them consider , whether they do it willingly , or against their wills . thou wilt say unwillingly , and it grieves thee , and thou art displeased with thyself . Well , if thou canst say this , be of good courage , thou dost not serve two masters , though there be in thee two contraries , flesh and grace , yet they are not two masters . Therefore be not discouraged , for thou servest not both , thou servest God , and not the flesh . Nay , if thou fail in obedience , and be grieved for it , God doth accept thy will and endeavour for the deed . 

Remember this : for every child of God may say , I serve two masters , but it is against my will , and with grief of heart , with groaning under this bondage . Labour and endeavour to keep a good conscience , and then if thou fail , it is because thou art overruled and mastered . Walk in all the ways of God , and the wants and defects of thy nature , are all covered in the death of Christ , if thou dost thine endeavour to obey . Search the scripture , where the will of this master is set down ; and when thou knowest what his will & commandments are , endeavour to obey them , and thou shalt be the servant of God. Thy service is a kingdom , it is a true liberty . But chose , serve Mammon , and thy end will be everlasting destruction in hell . 

25.  Therefore I say unto you , be not careful for your life , what ye shall eat , or what ye shall drink : nor yet for your body , what ye shall put on . Is not the life more worth than meat ? & the body than raiment ? 

At the 19 verse Christ began to forbid covetousness ; and because men are ready to make many excuses and objections , therefore Christ hath answered two before . Now he proceeds , and strikes at the root of covetousness , which is immoderate and inordinate care for y e things of this life . And his intent is to remove that ; yea , the distrustful care of things necessary : and this he doth to the end of the chapter : he labour's to take away the cause of all covetousness . 

These words depend on the former , from the 19 verse , as I take it ; and they are a conclusion of all the doctrine delivered before from the 19 verse , and not from the 24. only . In this manner , seeing they want a good eye , and the gift of wisdom & discerning : therefore , I say yet further to you , be not careful more than needs for things necessary . Thus these words depend on the former , and withal he meets with a conceit of carnal men : for men might say , they seek not treasure , but only things necessary . Thus might the covetous pled , and therefore Christ comes home to them , and saith : Be not careful with any immoderate or inordinate care , for so much as meat , drink and clothing , etc.  So much shall suffice for the scope and coherence . 

Now let us consider the words , the sense , and the use of them . 

Therefore I say unto you , ] In that Christ begins his commandment on this manner : ( Therefore I say unto you , I that am your Master , on whom you depend for all heavenly instruction : ) he doth prepare them to attention , and to a diligent marking of this commandment and instruction . And he useth this form of speech , to declare that the commandment following , is a weighty thing , and to be regarded and obeyed , and which if it be kept , covetousness cannot seize on us , and this is the substance and pith of all this doctrine . And this clause prefixed , must be a warning to us to mark the doctrine ; Therefore let us see what it is . 

Be not careful ] When he saith , be not careful what ye shall eat , etc. the commandment must be considered , lest it be mistaken , therefore the true sense is to be searched out . 

There be two kinds of care . 

First , a godly and honest care . 
Secondly , a distrustful care . 
The first is commended in diverse places . Wisdom sends to the Ant , to learn diligence & providence in earthly things . And the place of Paul is well known : He that is not provident for himself and his , is worse than an Infidel . Where the holy Ghost commends unto us a provident care and circumspection , for the things of this life . Therefore there is a lawful care , and it is this : when men walk in their callings , and do the duties of it diligently , with good and upright dealing to every man , minding to seek no more than is necessary in the judgement of all men for this life . 

This is one principal point of this godly care . 

The second point ( after we have used due diligence ) is , to leave the success and issue to GOD , we must leave the disposing of our labours to the Lord : for it belongs to GOD , and is proper to him , to dispose of the success and event of our labours ? we must not frame the success to ourselves how we will have it , but refer it and ourselves to God's good providence . 

Take Moses for an example : he was called to be a deliverer of the Israelites out of Egypt : He obeys Gods commandments , and comes when he is called , and goes when he is sent , and doth his endeavour to bring them from Egypt to Canaan : and though he had many crosses , yet he goes forward , and leaves the success to God , as we see , Exod. 14. when he was driven into such strait , that he had the Sea before him hills on the one side , and woods on the other , he saith : Fear not , but stand still , and behold the salvation of the Lord  

So Abraham being commanded to sacrifice his son Isaac , obeys and goes about it : And when Isaac asked him where the sacrifice was , he saith : God will provide . Therefore in a word , the godly care is , when men do the works of their callings with diligence , leaving the success of their labours to God. This care is of the duty only , and not of the success ; and this is not here condemned . 

But the second kind is a distrustful care , which doubteth of God's providence , when men do the works of their callings diligently : but so as they distrust God's providence , and dare not commend and commit the fruit and event thereof to God.  

This is a distrustful and an unlawful care . That you may the better conceive of it , it hath these fruits following . 

First , it oppresseth the heart with fear and grief : with fear of poverty and want , and so fills the heart with grief . 

Note secondly , when men keep not themselves to the word of God , and lawful means , but use unlawful means to get their livings with . 

Note thirdly , when men are so careful for the world , that they neglect prayer and the service of God in hearing the word , the heart is overladen and oppressed : and it argues that there is care not only for the duty , but for the success , which belongs to God : and thus you see what a distrustful care is . 

And this is the care that is here forbidden , when men distrust God , and use unlawful means to enrich themselves . It is a care that is joined with neglect of God's worship , and with grief and fear . For the Greek word doth signify such a care , as distracts the mind , divides it , and brings it into perplexity . So that it is as much as if he had said : Be not careful in such sort that your minds be troubled and perplexed . His meaning is not to forbid labour , or lawful care , for than he should speak against all callings . 

So much of the sense and meaning of this heavenly commandment . 

Now let us apply it to ourselves . That which is here forbidden , is the common sin of most men now : and it is not in a few , but it is a common and ordinary thing . It lurks in the heart , and shows itself in the life . 

One kind of ground receiveth the seed , but when it spring's up , it is choked with worldly cares ; and this is common among us , and therefore the world hath so little fruit . If we would examine ourselves what profit & proceedings we have made in Christ's school , we should see little fruit : for this immoderate care doth divide the heart , and distract the mind : worldly cares toss it and turn it , like the waves of the Sea.  

This is one argument of it , and an evident proof , that this sin is common . 

Secondly , there is no trade or calling , but it hath conveances of craft and deceit : though the practices of men be not commonly known , yet the thing is certainly true and manifest . He that hath but half an eye , may see into the abuses which are daily practised . And it is hard to find them that seem religious , to make conscience of this in their callings , and to avoid the common crafts . What argues this , but that our hearts are possessed with immoderate care ? we depend not on God's providence , we dare not trust him with the success , we fear he will not give so good a blessing as we look for 

Now Christ gives us warning of this , & doth command us to take heed of it , that we have no distrustful care , so much as for things necessary . 

Question . What must we do then ? 

Answer . Our duty is declared elsewhere . See a most excellent commandment , it is repeated by David , Ps. 55. and Ps. 37. 5.  And by Solomon , Prou. 16.  And by Peter . I is a most weighty instruction , and hath this sense : Walk in thy calling , do the duties of it diligently , truly , and justly : yet remember when thy labour is done , to commit the success unto God , leave the blessing to his providence . The meaning is not to forbid us to walk in our ways , and to practise the works of our calling : but only to teach us to leave the success to God. To make this more plain : put the case of any tradesman , he is to practise the works of his calling : as if it be to buy or sell , he may do it with diligence without wronging any : but the success must be referred to God , for that take no care , but leave all to him . 

The like commandment we have , Phil. 4. 6.  Be not careful , etc , What then ? But in all things let your prayers be made to God , with supplication and thanks giving . Mark there how care is opposed to prayer and thanks giving . All care is not forbidden there , but immoderate care only . We must be careful of our duties , but not of the success of our labours : For the blessing be not careful , but commend it to God.  

It is an excellent commandment to be remembered and practised of all men in all callings . It is the double care that is forbidden . Thus you see what you are to do in the compass of your callings . 

Quest.  How can we do this ? It is too hard a commandment , flesh and blood cannot keep it . 

Answer . Do but remember what blessed promises God hath made to them that obey him , and we cannot but make conscience to obey this . Some rise early , go late to bed , and yet are never the richer : But God gives sleep to his beloved : such as obey him , shall have rest and sleep ; they shall with quietness reap the fruit of their labours . 

The Lions shall be starved , but they that fear God , shall lack nothing . Though the Lions use ravening , and get their prey by violence , yet they shall want , sooner than the children of God.  

If we had no more commandments in all the Bible but this , it should be sufficient to work this effect in us , after due labour and diligence used in our callings , to refer the success thereof unto God. We ought to trust God , and believe his promises , and not distrust his providence . If we will not trust God in these outward things , how shall we trust him in the keeping of our souls in time of temptation , and in death ? Therefore commend all to God , and for the success , live by faith . 

Quest.  How if all things go cross ; and we find no blessing in our labours ? may we not provide for ourselves ? 

Answer . Cast thy care on the Lord , and he knoweth what is good for thee , better than thyself : wherefore if he deny thee that blessing which thou desirest , be content and obedient . For the servants of God to be crossed , it is better oftentimes than we are aware of . 

Good josias was puffed up with pride , and would needs fight with Pharaoh Necho , without any warrant , and it cost him his life for it . And good Ezechias likewise , in a pride showed the strangers his treasure , and was punished for it . Therefore if thou want any blessing , the best way is to pray for it , and to depend upon God , and if God see it to be good for thee , thou shalt obtain thy desire . 

So much of this main commandment , which is a commandment always to be remembered , and written in our hearts , and to be practised in our lives . 

Now one point further is to be marked , viz. how Christ distinguisheth between the life and the body : he makes the meat and drink to appertain to the life and soul , and apparel to the body : yet we know that the apparel is a means to preserve the life too , as well as meat and drink , and yet Christ concludes it , and that for just cause : for though in some countries the use of apparel be to cherish the body , and to continue life , yet the general and first use of it , is not for the life , but it respects a higher matter , it serves for the body itself . I say , in respect of a certain shame that is set upon it , the majesty of the body is lost , and the nakedness of it , is now a thing full of shame and confusion , and our apparel serves to cover this shame . 

So the proper and principal end of apparel is this , to cover the body in regard of the shame which befell us after the fall : yea , the truth is , we should be all covered , hands and face and all , if it were not for other necessary uses : in regard of which , we keep them bare and uncovered . And if that fall had not been , the naked body had been full of majesty . 

This point being considered , we must learn never to be puffed up in regard of our apparel : but rather to be abashed and confounded , so oft as we put it on , or look upon it ; for it is nothing but a badge to cover the shame of our bodies with : therefore it is as great a madness for any to be puffed up because of their apparel , as it were for a prisoner to be proud of the bolts on his legs , the brand on his hand , or the hole in his care : Therefore we must learn to think of our sin , when we look on our apparel , and to be abashed , abased and humbled in remembrance of it . 

We must express all the graces and gifts of God that be in us , so much as we can , even in our apparel ; as sobriety , temperance , frugality , & such like : they are to be declared in the very garments . So much of that point . 

Now it followeth : Is not the life more worth , etc.  After he had given a most excellent commandment , to the end it may not go without his effect , he enforceth it with diverse arguments of weight . First , saying : Is not the life more worth than meat ? etc. The reason stands thus : The life is more excellent them meat and drink , and the body is better than the apparel . 

Now God gives the life and the body , and doth preserve them : therefore he will much more give food and apparel . 

The reason is taken from the creation . He that is a Creator , will preserve his work . 

In this reason Christ teacheth us how we should make use of our creation : by a consideration of it , we must learn to come to a confidence of God's providence , and to trust in him for all the things of this life : for he will preserve his workmanship . 

job in the beginning of his tenth Chapter , persuades himself that the Lord will not destroy him , because he is the workmanship of his hands , he makes that an argument , Mark what use he makes of his very creation . Commend yourselves to God , as to a faithful Creator , sayeth S. Peter . 1.  Pet. 4.  Mark that he calls God a faithful Creator , and for that cause we must commend ourselves unto him . 

We see also by common experience , that no man is so tender and careful for any thing as is the workman : therefore in this respect , we are to put our trust in God. Hath God given us life and a body , and will he not give us food and raiment ? It cannot be . Thus God teacheth us his providence by the creation , and confidence in it . 

26 Behold the fowls of the heaven : for they sow not , neither reap , nor carry into the barns : yet your heavenly father feedeth them . Are ye not much better than they ? 

here is a second reason of the commandment . Be not careful for such necessaries , for if God feed the fowls , much more will he do you . 

The Proposition is confirmed thus : Because you have means , and they have none . Again , you are better than they , for you are God's children , and so are not they : therefore if he feed them , much more will he do you . A very good reason , which may induce all men to obey the commandment , for it is a very sensible reason , and may easily be understood of all . 

Before he proposeth his reason , he bids us behold them , that is , to look upon them wisely , with consideration , for so the word signifieth . Here is a general duty to be learned : namely , to consider the works of God , for this may be said of all the creatures . Behold them . The duty therefore is to mark them , and to view them well , that we in them may see the wisdom , goodness , mercy , justice , and providence of God. Solomon gives the same lesson , to consider the works of God.  

God made one creature after an other severally in 6. days , and rested the 7. and sanctified it . One cause was , that men might consider severally of these works of God. Our rest must be consecrated to the consideration of the works of God ▪ The heaven is compared to a great book , which all may read . Ps. 19  And so we may say of all the creatures , so many creatures as there be in y e world , so many books , wherein we may read sensibly & distinctly , the power , wisdom , & goodness of God. Therefore we ought to look upon them , and even to spell them out , till we can read them perfectly . Now what is the thing to be looked upon in them ? They sow not , nei-neither reap . They have not that care for meat and drink which we have . Men do this and that , sow & reap by God's commandment , & their labour is approved . The birds do not so much , they take no care at all . 

How then do they live ? 

The young ravens cry to God for food , and the lions seek to him , & the eyes of all things look up to him . 

How can this be ? can the unreasonable creatures do so ? It cannot be . 

That which the holy Ghost saith , hath his sense , meaning , and force : for they do not use prayer indeed as men do , but that which men do by prayer , they do the same in their kind by a natural instinct , imprinted in them by their creation . They seek the food that God hath ordained for them , and rest contented with his providence , and so they call upon God and depend on him : and therefore the holy Ghost hath of purpose used these phrases , to show how they content themselves with God's providence . 

Here mark one point : The creatures are subject to vanity & corruption by the sin of man , and yet they come nearer the first state than man , and the order of nature remains in them : for this is their part by order of creation , and it is to be seen in them to this day . But man is fallen from the order set in his creation , even in these temporal things , whether we regard the getting or the keeping , or the dispending of them : men are grown to a distrustful care , against the will and providence of God.  

This point is to be marked , that the other creatures keep the order of nature in this thing & man doth not : which showeth that man is more vile than base creatures , and more corrupt than they : for they keep the law of nature . This serves to humble us , and to make us think basely of ourselves , who have not in us by nature , that good which they have . Yet your heavenly father feedeth them . ] here be excellent points set down , which I will but touch . First , here is a reason why we ought to rest on God's providence : and afterwards a way showed , whereby we may do it . 

There be two kinds of promises in the word . 

1 First of spiritual and eternal things . 

2 Secondly , of corporal , temporal , and external things . 

Now how may we put our trust in God for these temporal things ? 

Thus : we must take hold of the main promise of salvation , and reconciliation with God in Christ : and when we are resolved of that , than we shall begin to believe the promises of temporal things , and rest upon the goodness of God. So that if you would know how to put your trust in GOD for these things , you must first labour for this , to be assured by faith , that you are the children of God , and reconciled in Christ. This is the right way & the ground of all , to believe our adoption & reconciliation , and where this is not , there can be no true trust in his providence , so much as for a bit of bread . 

Further , mark here a special & particular providence of God. The birds provide nothing for themselves and therefore in all reason they should perish in winter : yet daily experience showeth this , that they are both fatter and in better liking in winter . This argues , that there is a God that doth feed them , and a particular providence which tends upon the least foul and brings it meat in winter . 

This is a sensible persuasion to all God's servants , that God will send them food and raiment : for can it be possible , that God should feed the fowls , and neglect his children ? 

Again , this serves not to bolster up any man's idleness & negligence , that will neither reap nor sow : but to teach us , that when all means fail , we must rest upon God.  

In a word ; we must learn here to be like God , to be merciful as he is merciful : he is a saviour of all , specially of them that believe . This was never more needful to be learned then now , when men make themselves rich , even with the blood of the poor . If we be God's children , we must be like him . 

27 Which of you by taking care , is able to add one cubit unto his stature ? 

We have heard the commandment in the 25. verse , and two reasons of it : First , If God give life and the body , much more food and raiment : Secondly , If he feed the fowls , much more will he feed you . Now followeth a third reason to move us to obey the commandment . The words are propounded by way of interrogation : And it is the manner of the holy Ghost , to affirm or deny something , and that more effectually under the form of an Interrogation . And this is all one , as if he had said : There is not one of you , that by taking care , can add one cubit unto his stature . 

The cubit here mentioned , is a certain kind of measure borrowed from a man's arm , which is the length from the bowing of the arm or elbow , to the end of the longest finger , about which length , we are commonly when we come into the world . So that the meaning is this : As God makes a man a cubit long at the first , and afterwards adds many cubits one after another to his stature : so man himself cannot by all his care increase his stature one cubit : nay , all the cunning , wit , labour , & industry of man , is not able to add any thing to his stature , because it is the proper work of God , and of the same nature with the work of the creation . 

After a thing is created , to make it grow and increase , is a work that proceeds from the same power , by which it was created . Therefore , as none but God doth or can create the body : so it is God alone that increaseth the stature , and adds length , and makes it grow from stature to stature . And so this is a reason from the like . As man by taking care cannot increase his stature one cubit , no nor any thing at all , as it is in Luke : So he cannot by taking care increase his worldly state , or better it . 

This is the sum and substance of this reason , and it is very forcible and effectual , to make us use moderate care , and to move us to put away distrustful care , so much as for necessaries . For we can no more increase our maintenance by taking care , than we can increase our stature by it , which is impossible to any creature . 

And so much for the sense of this verse . 

Now let us see what doctrines and instructions arise from the words : All our labour , care , and industry , is altogether vain & unprofitable , considered a part from the blessing of God and his providence . Ps. 127.  All the pains that men take for the things of this life , is but lost labour without God's blessing , the planter and waterer is nothing . If such excellent men as they were , that were the founders of the Church , laboured in vain without God's blessing , much more we . 

This is the first point which teacheth us one special duty , always to commend our labours to God by prayer , to offer them up to him , that he may bless them : because without this , all our care and labour is in vain . 

Secondly , as God by his decree & counsel set down what shall be every man's stature : so he hath set down in his decree , what shall be every man's success and worldly state , good or bad , better or worse . God hath decreed it , & set it down , and it is unchaungeable , as a man's stature is when he is come to his full height . 

This conclusion Christ would teach us , here we cannot make our worldly state better or worse , as we will : we cannot be high or low at our pleasure ; but we must have that stature and state which God hath appointed . Look what success he hath appointed shall be , and must be : we cannot alter it by carking and caring . 

This serves to teach us to depend upon God , and to rest upon him in our lawful labours , for the success of them . 

This overthrows divers fond opinions . 

First , that by art and skill a man may prolong his natural life , and make a supply when he is come to his end . This is false : for if a man cannot make himself higher , nor alter his stature , he cannot enlarge his life : for of the two , that were the easier , viz. to increase his stature , rather than to lengthen his life beyond the natural period . Therefore man cannot do this by all his Art or wit. He cannot piece out his life , and refrain his spirit as Ecclesiastes speaketh . The soul and the body must be separated . 

Indeed Art may preserve life till his natural end , but when that is come , no Art can prolong it . 

Secondly , the opinion that Witches and Sorcerers can transform themselves , and pass through keye-holes , is false . If they cannot do this , viz. add one cubit to their stature , much less can they do that . If they cannot add so much to their stature , how can they change and abolish nature ? If they cannot increase nature , they cannot change it into an other kind . 

Though Satan hath many illusions , yet he cannot by all his skill , turn a man's body into a beasts . 

And it is a forgery , to say that Nabuchadnezzers' body was changed into a beasts ; but only he had a frenzy , and became like a beast . 

Thirdly , they are deceived , and deceive , that say they can by Art turn base metals into better , as brass into gold ; a creature of one kind into an other . If this be not possible , viz. to add one cubit , etc , no more is that . 

Likewise we must remember , that all these things are the work of the Creator , and a man can no more do them , than he can increase his own stature , which he can never do . If this be so , that we cannot add , etc. then it is false which the Papists teach , that a man may be glorified and justified , and increase his glory in heaven by his works . He cannot do it , for it requires a greater power to increase glory in heaven , then to increase the stature of the body . As it is the work of God to give stature , and to increase it : so it is his work to give glory , and to increase it . And if men cannot do that which is less in nature ; how shall they do that , which is above nature ? 

28 And why care you for raiment ? Learn how the Lilies of the field do grow . They are not wearied , neither spin . 

The meaning is , and do not care for raiment : the interrogation still having the force of a Negation , or Prohibition . And here he repeats the commandment before delivered in the 25. verse . Yet not altogether , but by piecemeal , he parts it and proves it , and urgeth it point by point . 

What should be his meaning to take this course in handling this heavenly doctrine ? 

He shows himself here to be the Doctor of the Church , and proves himself a faithful teacher : Therefore not content only to propound his doctrine , ( lest it should take no fruit or profit in the hearers , ) he urgeth it point by point , that by this means he may set an edge upon it , and make it take place in the hearts of his hearers , that it may be engraven there , and be effectual . 

And this is the duty of all that are enjoined to teach . viz. to be careful to deliver the will of God , and then be careful that it may be remembered . 

The father is commanded to whet his child , as the soldier doth sharpen his sword , that it may enter into the body of the enemy . 

This is the duty of every one , to whom it belongs to teach others , whether they be ministers , masters , or fathers , every teacher hath his duty enjoined him . First , to teach the will of God. Secondly , to set it on an edge . 

So here Christ gives example , and teacheth by his own practice . First , he commands , than he confirms , and urgeth it by piecemeal : and then he repeats the commandment diverse times . So much for the manner and form of teaching . Now let us come to the words , as they lie in order . 

And why care you for raiment ? etc. These words must have the same exposition that the 25. verse had , where this doctrine was propounded in general . 

There is a moderate care for raiment , which is not here forbidden ; but the other , that is , the inordinate & immoderate care : and it may be conceived diversely . 

First , care for raiment is then inordinate , when men care not only for apparel necessary , but for abundance and superfluity , for that which is more than necessary . As , when men desire always to be in the fashion , and to change their apparel as the fashion changeth . They are carried with an ungodly care . 

Secondly , when men care for costly apparel , beyond their degree , state , and ability : that is also inordinate care for apparel . Example of this also is risen in our time , when every ordinary man desire's to be fine in apparel , and no man is content with that which is decent and fit for his calling . But the Tradesman , his care is to be apparelled like the Gentleman : the Gentleman like the Knight : the Knight like the Noble man And thus every person affects the apparel of a higher state . Yea , every servant ( so the times are now ) spends the greatest part of his wages , yea , and more than his wages comes to , in apparel . 

Thirdly , when much time is spent in the curious apparelling of the body , as though we could mend the form of our bodies , and as if the Lord had not done his part sufficiently . The time and pains might be much better employed & spent in matters of salvation . 

Now , to come to the point : Christ forbids not here a moderate care for raiment , but the inordinate care to provide apparel superfluous , sumptuous and curious , which is joined with the mispending of much time , and money , beyond our estate and ability . 

Now ( as I said before ) this inordinate and immoderate care is the common sin of these times in all places : this is manifest , and cannot be denied . Therefore let us all remember and reverence this commandment , and take heed , that we be not careful inordinately for raiment . 

Now he comes to confirm the commandment by a fourth reason , set down in this 28. verse , and in the 29. and the 30. verses : Learn how the Lilies grow , etc.  The reason is worthy and excellent , though it be borrowed from sensible things , and thus it is framed : If God clothe Lilies , much more will he do you , etc.  

The first part is confirmed in the 30. verse thus : The Lilies and so all the herbs of the field , are ordained for man's use , and for the furnace : Therefore man is more excellent than they are . 

then if he clothe them , much more will he clothe you ; for they are made for your use . 

The second part is thus ; contained in the 28. and 29. verses : They are clouthed more gorgeously than Solomon . Nay , it is added that God doth this : for he speaks it of the herbs of the field , ( not of the garden ) which are not dressed by man  

Again : They labour not : That is , they themselves are not the causes of it : it is not man , nor the herb itself , but God alone that clothes it . And he adds , that they are clothed more than Solomon was in all his royalty . The conclusion therefore followeth : If God so clothe them , much more you , and that with a check , Oligopistoi , Oyee of little faith . 

Thus you see the fourth reason , which doth contain many notable instructions . Now to the words . 

Learn of the Lilies , ] When he saith this , he maketh the Lilies and every herb to be a schoolmaster unto us , he sends us unto them to learn . And though we be the scholars of Christ , yet we must not think scorn to learn of them which grow without the hand of man , or any labour of their own . And this he doth for special causes . 

For first , that creature in the field doth more obey God in it kind than man doth ; and that the holy Ghost doth often testify , esay . 1.  Hear o heavens , and harken , etc.  And Ezechiel spoke to the mountains . And the Prophet that was sent to reprove jeroboam ; when he came where jeroboam was , he leaves him , and cries to the Altar to hear him . 

All this is to show that these unreasonable and unsensible creatures , if they had that reason that man hath , would be more obedient and careful than man is of his duty . Therefore to check man's rebellion , the Prophets called upon these things , when men would not bear them ; and this is the cause why Christ sends men here to the Lilies of the field . 

The second reason of this is , because we do not learn the good things which the creature can teach us. Though we have them , see them , and use them daily , yet we do not learn all that of God which nature teacheth : wherefore for good cause we are sent to them to learn . That which may be learned of the wisdom , power , providence , mercy , justice , and goodness of God , is manifested in them , & yet we mark it not . For this cause Christ knowing our want and behaviour , saith thus : Learn of the Lilies , etc.  

This serves to check us , who do not learn so many good things of God , as these creatures can teach . How then shall we learn the doctrine of salvation ? So much for this point that Christ saith : Learn of the Lilies , and by learning consider . 

Now what is the thing to be learned of the Lilies ? How they grow . This is the point to be learned and considered . They grow , though they labour not nor spin : and Solomon himself was not clothed like one of these . And it is a thing worth the marking ; for in the winter they are buried in the earth , & appear no more than if they should never be seen : And yet in the Spring time of the year , they grow up with stalks , leaves , flowers , and goodly colours . Now the point to be marked , is this : How all this comes to pass . 

They themselves do nothing , neither doth man any thing to make them grow . What is it then that makes them grow ? 

The cause is the word of creation , which was given out by the Creator in the beginning , to the herbs : Let the earth bring forth herb and tree . By virtue of that commandment then delivered to the earth , the earth now though it be frozen in the winter , covered with snow , and hardened with frost , as though there should never be any hope for the Lily , or other herbs to grow , yet it brings forth all in the Spring , and that with beautiful colours , and all by virtue of God's commandment . In the same manner ( to come to the point ) God hath given a word of providence over his servants , that if they trust in him , he will provide them necessaries , all necessaries whatsoever . So as there shall be nothing wanting that is necessary , if they trust in him . 

This word is certain , set down , and as unchangeable as the word of creation . If men believe it , they shall have meat , drink , and cloth , as certainly as the flowers and herbs , and grass , come out of the earth . 

This is the point here offered to our consideration . They grow by the virtue of God's word in the creation , & so they should do to the end of the world . So in the matter of providence , trust in God , and walk in the compass of thy calling , and doubt not the issue . 

If there were no more reasons to persuade us to a moderate care for necessaries , this one sensible reason , borrowed from the Lilies , were sufficient . 

When he saith : They labour not , etc. his meaning is not by their example to maintain idleness , or to neglect our calling , but to teach us , that when all helps fail us , walking in our calling , and having done what we can , without our default God's blessing shall not be wanting , we shall have meats , drink , and cloth , though all means fail us : And for this end these words are set down 

29.  Yet I say unto you , that even Solomon in all his royalty , was not arrayed like one of these . 

Herein one special amplification is to be marked . They are clothed by God , and that more gloriously than Solomon himself was : yet Solomon had promises of great honour and glory without his seeking : for he desired but wisdom , yet with wisdom God promised him honour . For all this Christ saith of the Lilies , that Solomon was not clothed like them , and he speaks not of some one , but of every one , and of the Lilies of the field too , not of the garden : And every one of them is clothed more gloriously them Solomon was , when he was in his chiefest glory . 

First , this serves to check and control us for our pride in apparel , and to teach us that we ought not to be so curious in attiring ourselves : for when we have done all we can , we cannot match one of these flowers , but they will go beyond us. Why then should we puff up ourselves in regard of our apparel , when as the least herb in the field is more gay ? What cloth in whiteness comes near the Lily ? What purple like the Violet ? And what crimson or scarlet is like diverse other flowers ? Art may do much , but it cannot match nature . Do what we can , the herbs will go beyond us. And if it be so , why are we so proud of our apparel ? The herb which thou treadest under thy feet , and puttest into the furnace , is finer than thou art . 

I nunc , effer te , quòd pulchro incedis amictu , 
Te long superat fertile gra●um agri . 


The second use is , to teach us that all our pomp is but vain : for what is more frail than the herb , which is to day in the field , and to morrow is cut down ? So the whole nature of man is frail and brittle , as Paul saith : All the glory and pomp of this world is vain and passeth away , subject to change and alteration . 

And yet when Christ speaks this of Salomon's glory , and makes it inferior to the herb , preferring this before that , he condemns not Salomon's glory ; for it was promised him & given him by God. And the word , though it condemn curiosity and superfluity of apparel , yet it condemns not gorgeous apparel in Princes and great personages . The pomp in apparel is not simply condemned in the word : for joseph refused not the ring and fine garment : And whereas Luke saith of Agrippa and Bernice , that they came with much pomp , the words may be taken as well in good part as ill . 

30.  wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field , which is to day , to morrow is cast into the Oven , shall he not do much more unto you ? OH ye of little faith . 

In these words Christ abaseth the creatures in regard of man , & the difference between man and the herbs is in these things . 

First , they serve for man's use : Therefore they are inferior to him , they serve for the making of his fire , and the heating of his furnace . 

Secondly , the herb is to day , and hath a being ; to morrow it hath no being , but ceaseth to be an herb ? so frail and vain is the creature that excels man in glory . But man hath a being to day , and his being continueth . 

The trees and herbs have a kind of life and soul , as men have ; but there is a great difference : for their souls are mortal , and arise from the matter whereof the plant is made : but the soul of man is immortal , be it of the righteous or the unrighteous . 

The difference is plain in Genesis , where God commands the earth to bring forth herbs and trees , with life and substance . 

But when he made man , the earth brought not forth his soul , but God breathed into him a living soul . As for the souls of beasts & plants , whether they be qualities or substances , it is not known , but they perish & are corruptible , and they cease to be that they were . But it is not so with man , for when he dies , he ceaseth not to be a man : a dead man is a man still , though not a living man , and his soul shall be reunited to his body , yea the body that is dead and lieth in the grave , is united to Christ , as well as the soul , and by virtue thereof it shall rise again . I speak now of the righteous especially , and therefore dead Abraham is Abraham still . Now it is not so with the other creatures : The herb or tree being burned , ceaseth to be an herb or tree : But man when he dies ( because he is in the covenant ) he is still a man , for he that is once in the covenant , is in it for ever : and the virtue of the covenant shall be as effectual to raise the servant of God to glory , as the word of creation is effectual to bring the creature out of the earth . Therefore the diversity & difference is to advance man above the creature . 

Shall he not do much more unto you , OH ye of little faith ? 

These words were spoken to all the Disciples and other hearers : wherein ( for our further edification ) these two circumstances are to be considered , First , the persons rebuked : Secondly , the causes why they are rebuked . 

The people are the Disciples , when Christ speaks thus to his Disciples , o ye of little faith : he doth not rebuke them simply for want of faith , but because their wicked unbelief was more , and the distrust of God's mercy and providence greater than their faith and belief : so that not the want of faith , but the smallnesse of it is here rebuked . 

here observe , that besides the full persuasion which is the highest degree of faith , there is a lower degree and a lesser measure , which is here called the lesser faith . 

And this little faith is not here condemned , but the unbelief that goes with it , for this little faith in them , was a true faith : and Christ confessed before , that God was their father . And it is a true faith that brings a man to the little adoption , it brought them into that state , that they had God for their father , and they were his children . 

Objection Considering that in the Disciples & others , that their unbelief was more than their faith : their faith cannot save them , the sin being greater than their grace . 

Answer . Faith doth not save any , because it is perfect , but because it rests on God's mercy : and though a man's unbelief be greater than his faith , yet it will not condemn him , if he do bewail it , and use means diligently , that it may increase . 

This first point of doctrine is to be remembered , because every child of God cannot attain to Abraham's faith , and to a full persuasion : And therefore all such as have but the beginning of faith , must not be discouraged : for thou mayst be the child of God with thy little faith , if thou bewail it , and be diligent to attain to strong faith . Endless & unspeakable is the mercy of God in this behalf , he pardoneth manifold doubtings , distrust and unbelief , to them that bewail it , and desire to increase in faith . 

Secondly , the cause why Christ reproves his own disciples thus sharply , is because they did not believe in God for raiment . As if he had said : Because you believe not this , therefore you are to be blamed , as having little faith , and therefore he calls them thus : because they did not believe in God for meat , drink , and cloth . 

Here a second point of doctrine is to be observed , that true saving faith doth not only apprehend God's mercy for life eternal ; but 〈◊〉 for the temporal blessings of this life . The very same faith whereby remission of sins and life eternal is apprehended , lays hold on temporal blessings . This must not seem strange : for ( to make it plain ) there be two kinds of blessings promised in the scriptures , viz. principal , and less principal . The principal is Christ , God and man : the redeemer of mankind , with righteousness and life eternal in him . This is the main & principal blessing . Now upon this there follow blessings less principal , which are also promised as well as the principal , and these are meat , drink , clothing , health , etc. and these are promised us so far forth , as they are for our good : In Christ , and by Christ , all these are promised . 

To this purpose Paul saith : All the premises in him , are yea , and Amen . Not only remission of sins , is yea , and Amen , that is , a thing granted and accomplished , but all other temporal blessings . This being so , now mark what follows . When true faith lays hold on the main and principal blessing , then withal it apprehends all other temporal blessings necessary . They are all apprehended in , and with the principal . 

It is said of Abraham , that by his very justifying faith , he did believe that God would give him a son , when he was an hundreth years old . It was not a divers faith . 

Noah by the same faith , whereby he was saved , believed that he should be preserved and his household , in the flood . In like manner , by one and the same faith we believe our reconciliation with God in Christ , & remission of sins ; and that God will give us necessaries , meat , drink , cloth ; one and the same faith lays hold first on the main and principal promise , and then on the less principal . This point must be marked , and this point remembered ; first mercy , than providence ; first the principal blessing , and then the temporal . 

Every man saith , he looks to be saved by faith , when he dies , and it is well . But we must add this , we must live by faith too , we must lead our lives by the same faith , by which we look to be saved after this life : and we must depend on God's providence as certainly for these necessaries , as we do upon his mercy for our salvation : we must not live by sense or reason , but by faith . How this is to be done , you shall see afterwards . It is impossible for us to be saved by faith when we die , if we do not live by faith . He that cannot cast himself upon God's providence for the necessaries of this life , can much less cast himself on God's mercy , for the salvation of his soul . So much for the second point . 

Thirdly , Christ gives us here a note and mark whereby we may try our faith , whether it be a saving faith or no ; true or feigned ; great or little . For he gives us to understand , that the more men are distracted with worldly cares , the less is their faith . And the reason is plain : The more men's care is , the less their trust is in God's providence : And the less their trust is in God's providence , the less faith in his mercy for their salvation . So that where worldly care bears rule , there is no faith in God's providence . As long as men be in prosperity , they think they have great faith : but in poverty and affliction their faith is tried : for then commonly the hart is swallowed up with grief and fear ▪ He that cannot rest on God's providence for the things of this life , how shall he rest on God's mercy in the pains of death ; And thus much of the reproof . 

31.  Therefore take no thought saying ; What shall we eat ? or what shall we drink ? or wherewith shall we be clothed ? 

These words are a repetition of the commandment delivered in the 25. verse , and here the commandment is the second time repeated . Once before it was repeated . The causes of this repetition are diverse . One I have declared before ; and that was , that he might set an edge upon the commandment , and make it take place in their hearts . Secondly , that they might learn their duties how they ought to confirm their faith : for as Christ urgeth it by a repetition , so men must by meditating upon it the oftener increase their faith . 

Faith is wrought in the heart , as the print of a seal in the wax , or as a vision or revelation in the night , where the man doth nothing : but faith is wrought by these means ordinary , viz. the word read , heard , preached , or meditated . 

Further , that these means may be effectual , there must be a motion in us , whereby we must strive against doubting , distrust , and unbelief , & therefore we are often to urge the commandment to ourselves , and exercise ourselves in it , and apply it : strive & struggle , wrestle & labour for this end that we may more constantly and heartily apply the promises of mercy and providence to ourselves . This is the second cause of the repetition , that we may master our unbelief , by striving and labouring . 

You must do that which you can do by nature and grace ; that is , come to the assemblies , and endeavour to put away unbelief , and by this means you shall increase in faith . 

So much for the repetition of the commandment : Now to the words . 

Therefore take no thought , etc.  These words tend to this end , not to breed idleness or carelessness in any : but as I declared in the 25. verse . Therefore I will show you how far forth we may care for the things of this life , and where it must end : 

First , it goeth thus far : Every man must have a care to do the good and profitable duties of his calling , with diligence and painfulness : from that care Christ frees no man , therefore every man must consider , what be the duties of his calling , and the most necessary works , and these he must have a care to perform . 

Secondly , a man may have care to provide for himself and his , such things as be necessary : that is , meat , drink , & cloth : For these a man may ; nay , he must have a care , so much as is necessary in the judgement of any : this care is not condemned . 

After this , he must give place to God's providence , and God must have his work . The blessing and success of all his labour must be left to God. And then in the neck of these two cares comes faith , that God will give a necessary blessing . Where care ends , there faith begins . We must not care for the blessings and success of our labours , but refer that to the providence of God. If God give more than is necessary , we must be the more thankful : But if he withhold his blessings , we must not live by care , but by faith . 

Thus far we may care , and no further : And this hath been the practice of all God's servants . 

The distrustful care is that , which is here forbidden , when men take all care upon themselves , and vex themselves , so as they are fit for nothing , no not for the service of God , but only to care . And it is care that tears the heart , and distracts it , and makes a man unmeete for any thing else , but only to care . 

This is the thought which Christ condemns , when we vex , grieve , and consume ourselves day and night with care for the world . And this is the common sin of our time . 

This care doth possess and poison the hearts of many , and it appears by experience . 

For what care is that which breaks your sleep , and awakes you at all hours of the night ? And what care is that which cometh first into your hearts in the morning when you rise ? And when the whole day is at an end , consider with yourselves , what is the thing you have most thought of , or altogether , whereon hath all your care been ? Look back , and see if it hath not been for the world , all the day long , from the morning till the evening . The care for the world takes the first place , and fills up the whole day . Why ? This can never be but a distrustful care ; and yet this is the ordinary and common care , therefore Christ speaks this to us all : you may care for necessaries , but live by faith , & be content with God's good will and pleasure . Let this commandment take place in your hearts , and let care be joined with faith , and so lead your lives . 

Saying : What shall we eat , etc.  

Now Christ doth describe this care by the fruits and effects : for these be the speeches of them that be possessed with worldly care , especially of them that have great charges and mean living , or which suffer great losses ; then men make such questions : but how shall we maintain ourselves ? How shall we live ? And thus you see how Christ condemns not all care , but that which is joined with distrust , when men complain and murmur , as if there were no God nor providence . These speeches are condemned , as proceeding from distrust and unbelief : And good reason , for they are complaints of Gods dealing towards us : we ought to shut our mouths in this respect , and take heed how we murmur against God.  

When Aaron had both his sons burned , he comes to Moses , and would needs know the cause ; and when he heard it was Gods doing , he held his peace : The place is worth the marking . Likewise David saith : I held my tongue and said nothing , for it was thy doing , Lord. Our confidence is in peace and strength ; that is , a man hath confidence in God , when he complaineth not . Therefore this is our duty , never to complain of God's providence , be the judgement never so grievous that befalls us. We must learn of the servants of God to hold our tongues , and with peace and quietness to submit ourselves to God , when we are distressed and afflicted , when we lose our living or friends : for these are sinful speeches , speeches that bewray distrust , unbelief , discontent , and impatiency . 

32.  ( For after all these things seek the Gentiles ) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things . 

Here is a fifth reason : For after all these , etc.  Therefore take no thought . These words are a new reason , to move us to flee all such care . The practice of the Gentiles must be shunned ; but this is a practice of the Gentiles : Therefore it must be shunned . 

The words have a further sense them the translation importeth : for it is thus , They seek with all their might , they set themselves or give themselves to seek them ▪ For the seeking of these necessaries is not a fault , but y e giving of ourselves to seek them with all our power . then we sin , when we do so : for they set their hearts to seek them , all their care is for them : So much the words import : you are a peculiar people of God , and therefore you must not conform yourselves unto the Gentiles . 

Quest.  What is the cause the Gentiles do so ? 

Answer . All the Nations of the world before Christ , besides the jews , knew not God : only here and there some one man that was a Prophet , excepted . All the rest knew not God , no providence , nor any other life but this : now if the Gentiles did thus because they knew not God , it followeth , that universal grace is but a fancy , and a mere device of man's brain : for the Gentiles before Christ's incarnation , knew not the true God , but were without God : How then could they have grace , which is a gift to be able to believe , if they would . If they failed in the knowledge of life eternal , and God's providence , how was it possible y t they should have this gift ? Indeed in diverse Countries that were near the jews , some lived as the jews did , and got some knowledge of God : But the countries that were far off , had no knowledge of God , therefore there was no common grace given them all . 

Secondly , Christ shows here , that they which set themselves to seek riches and worldly blessings , they are as Gentiles , and have not learned the principles of religion , though they come to Church , hear the Word , and receive the Sacraments , yet they are but as Paynims . They make themselves their own God , and they see no providence . They are Christians in show , but Gentiles in deed , even as the Turks are , for they have not learned the foundations of religion , by faith to rest on God's providence . This reason alone might move us to a moderate care for the temporal things . 

Now mark the ground of this reason : The Church of God is a peculiar people , therefore they must not be like the Gentiles in evil things : and in good things they must be better than they . then mark and consider what a shame it is for the people of our time : for the very main sins of the Gentiles , are risen amongst us : as drunkenness , oppression , usury , slandering , engrossing of the necessary commodities of this life : and these sins be as common amongst us , as they are amongst the Infidels . It is a shame for us that are separated from them in profession , and bear the name of Christians , to live in the same sins . Nay , in regard of oppression and cruelty , there was never more found among the Heathen . The poorer sort die for want of relief : Hardhearted men get their living by God's judgements , and fill their purses then , and take the vantage of his judgements , when he sends them for our sins . 

Though Christ himself say in the person of the poor , I am hungry and cold , etc. yet few or none have the bowels of compassion , to feed & clothe him in his members . Well , remember we are a chosen people , and therefore must not be like the Gentiles . 

For your heavenly Father knoweth , etc.  

You have a Father in heaven , and he knows your need . This is an answer to an objection . For some might say : what may we not care for things needful ? These are things needful . Christ answers no. Though they be necessary , yet you must have no distrustful care : your heavenly Father knoweth best what and how much of these temporal blessings are needful for you . A most excellent reason , and alone sufficient . 

If this be so , we ought to content ourselves in every state of life , and use a moderate care : yea , we ought to be as well content with sickness ( when God sends it ) as with health , and give thanks alike for both . We have a Father in heaven , when he sends sickness , he knows it is better for us then health . So when we are in poverty , we ought as well to be content , as with health : for our Father knoweth this to be more for our good , than plenty and abundance . 

This aught also to make us content even when we lie a dying , and yielding up the ghost : for our Father seeth it to be for our good , when we die , that we should live no longer . So in any judgement of God , whatsoever it be , this aught to content us , that we have a Father , and he knows what is good for us.  

Therefore be it whatsoever it will be that God sends , it is good in the wisdom of our Father , though not in our carnal reason . wherefore remember this , for it will serve to pacify us. For what is the cause we are so impatient in adversity and sickness ? but because we do not remember this . Therefore hold this by faith , that we have a Father in heaven , & he knoweth in his wisdom what is good for us , better than we ourselves : and in this faith and persuasion let us live and die , and learn to be content in every estate . 

33.  But first seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness , and all these things shall be ministered unto you . 

Hitherto hath been showed what care is to be eschewed : Now followeth the care to be used . And this verse hath two parts , viz. A commandment or an exhortation , and a promise . I will speak first of the meaning and then of the instructions . 

The commandment is two fold : First , Seek the kingdom of God : Secondly , his righteousness , viz. the righteousness of God.  

To seek the kingdom of God , is nothing else but to have a care to get it , to labour and endeavour to obtain it : seek this first , this is above all things whatsoever , have a care of this . 

What is meant here by the kingdom of God ? 

It signifieth a state and condition of certain men which are in the favour of God in Christ , and have right to life eternal by Christ.  

This very state is called in the scriptures the kingdom of God and of heaven ; and this kingdom is only one . There be not two distinct kingdoms of God , but only one perfect and complete kingdom , yet it hath diverse degrees , viz. First , of grace . Secondly , of glory . 

The kingdom of Grace is that in which a man is ruled by God's word and spirit , and that is the first step and entrance into the kingdom of glory . 

The kingdom of glory is to have fellowship with the Trinity after this life . Now both these degrees are here understood by the kingdom of God.  

It is further added : And his righteousness , ] The second thing that is to be sought for above all , and before all other things whatsoever , is the righteousness of God , whereby he makes us righteous . 

Some have read it thus : And the righteousness thereof : But the words will not bear the translation : it must be as it is , and no otherwise , viz. The righteousness of God. And this is added for a weighty cause : for God's kingdom stands in righteousness . 

God then reigns in the hart of men , and sets up his kingdom there , when he enables them to serve God in righteousness , & then men are Gods subjects , and therefore these words are an excellent exposition of the former , when God justifieth a sinner by the obedience of Christ , and enables him to obey God's commandments ▪ This righteousness Paul speaketh of , Rom. 1. 18. 2.  Cor. 5. 21.  He that knew no sin , was made sin for us , that we might be made the righteousness of God. & 1  Cor. 1. 3.  In all these and other places , the righteousness of God is nothing else , but the obedience of Christ , God , and man , which he performed in our behalf in his sufferings and fulfilling the law . 

This is the righteousness of God , and is so termed in the scriptures , and is indeed the groundwork and substance of the kingdom . 

Now it is so called for diverse causes . 

First , because it is given of God freely , and man cannot get it , neither by nature nor grace . 

There is a civil righteousness which men have by nature , and a religiousnesse before men , which is of grace , but this is neither of them , it is out of the reach of nature and grace , and therefore it is called God's righteousness , as a gift freely given of God.  

Secondly , because at the day of judgement God will approve of it , and accept it as a perfect satisfaction of his law , and nothing else is answerable to the rigour of the law , and therefore it is also thus called , because it is a righteousness , which may be opposed to the justice of God in the last judgement . 

Thirdly , the obedience of Christ , is called God's righteousness , because he is such a person as is both God & man : The son of the father is God as the father : and though this obedience were performed in the manhood , yet it was performed by a person that was both God and man : and in respect of that person it is so called . 

Adam's righteousness was in himself , and he lost it : therefore now our righteousness is in Christ , who is God , and therefore it is called God's righteousness . 1.  Cor. 1. 30.  

Now how is this obedience made ours ? or how shall we come by it ? 

By imputation : for God is content to accept it for us. And here we must further understand sanctification to be joined with it ; for it must not be separated from the fruits thereof . These go together , justification , sanctification , and regeneration . At the same time that we are justified , the heart is renewed , changed , and sanctified , whereby we are enabled to serve God in righteousness and holiness . The sense than is this : let all your care be to get this kingdom , to serve God in holiness and righteousness all the days of your lives . This is the meaning of these words . Now follow the instructions . 

Hence it is to be gathered plainly , that we are all out of God's kingdom by nature , and we are in the devil's kingdom : for what need we to seek it , if we were not out of it by nature ? 2.  Cor. 4. 4.  Satan is called the God of this world , that is , of the greatest part of mankind . And he is called the Prince of this world , joh. 12. 31.  Now he is so termed , because men by nature are his slaves , and have their hearts tied and chained , so as they can do nothing but his william See Ephes. 2. 3.  Children of wrath ; and the devil works in the children of disobedience . The reason is plain : when men cannot be content , but refuse to be under God , and in his kingdom , he leaves them to the devil , that he may reign and rule in their hearts ; and the truth of this we show in the course of our lives . 

Though men wear the livery of Christ , yet in heart they do homage to the devil . We hear the Word , and receive the Sacraments , but when it comes to obedience of the commandments , when we are to put our necks under Christ's yoke , we make light account of it . And the very performance of moral duties is counted and called niceness , preciseness , and curiousness . What is this in effect , but as if men should say to Christ : Departed from us , we will not have this man to reign over us. It is a grievous and a fearful sin , and such as argues , that although we profess ourselves to be Christ's servants , yet are we Satan's vassals . 

If a man labour to draw them from their unlawful pleasures and profits , they will not spare to speak it with open mouth ; Departed from us , we will none of thy ways , as the wicked man is brought in speaking in job. 21. 14.  Therefore it is not without just cause , that Christ makes this exhortation here , saying : First seek . 

Secondly , we are taught here an excellent point , never to be forgotten : for it is the principal point , and it is this : our principal care must be to win the kingdom of heaven ; That is the point which Christ shoots at , I need not stand to prove it , for this one commandment declares it , the words are plain : therefore I beseech you embrace this commandment , and obey it , and let this be our principal care now and ever till death . 

You will say ; How shall we do this ? How shall we learn to practise it ? That you may do it , three things must be remembered . First , you must come to the place , where this kingdom is to be found . Secondly , when you are come thither , you must enter into it . Thirdly , you must wait for the possession of it . Touching the first , when men cannot find the kingdom of God in all places , there be set and certain places in which it is to be found . God hath appointed public assemblies and a public ministry , in which the doctrine of reconciliation and salvation is delivered . And these be the places where this kingdom is to be found : and these be the means whereby it is attained . 

In the Gospel the kingdom of heaven is thus taken often , especially Math. 13.  The very ministry of the word , and the dispensation of the doctrine of salvation , is called the kingdom of God , because it is the only means , by which God doth give this kingdom , and offer it . 

In the Canticles the Church asketh Christ where his kingdom is : And he answers by the shepherd's tents . Therefore we must come to hear the word , and labour to profit by it , because it is the sole and solemn means , by which God gives his kingdom . And you must take heed how you neglect this duty , because you know not when the Lord will open your hearts , & not only offer , but give you this kingdme . 

The second duty is to enter into it ; for it is not enough to come where God's kingdom is , & to have the kingdom of God amongst us , as the Pharisies had when Christ preached ; but we must go one step further and enter into it , for till we enter , we shall never have benefit by it . 

How shall we enter ? Math. 18.  Except ye be changed , and become as little babes , ye cannot enter . That a man may enter , he must become like a little child . Now y e manner of a child is this : The child of a Prince , without any disdain or affectation of superiority , will play with a poor man's child . 

That is the property of children , and so must we become children , begin to be displeased with ourselves , lay aside all self-love , and selfe-liking . We are never capable of the kingdom of God , till we cast down ourselves , and see that we are traitors and rebels against God , we cannot come to God's kingdom before . 

And to this purpose Christ saith to Nicodemus , Except a man be born a new of water , and of the spirit , he cannot see the kingdom of God. This regeneration is , when we are changed , not in the substance of body or soul , but when the devil's Image is defaced , and we are sanctified in our minds and thoughts , wills and affections , and in all our actions . 

Now then , that we may enter into God's kingdom , we must be humbled like little children : and when a man begins to be regenerated and converted , than he begins to enter into the kingdom of God , and not when he dies , as many think . 

Now a man must always after show himself to be entered , by holiness and righteousness , and by duties of love and mercy , and that is the reason of this addition ( And his righteousness ) and by that we declare ourselves to be of God's kingdom , and to belong unto it , for that stands in righteousness . The question being , Who shall dwell in God's kingdom ? The answer is ; He that worketh righteousness . Psal. 15.  

The third thing to be done for the obtaining of God's kingdom , is to wait for the possession , and that is never given till the day of death . And this waiting is performed , when a man converted & regenerated , hath a care to keep faith and a good conscience till death . He that doth thus , waits for the kingdom of God : as joseph of Arimathea is said to have done . Luke 23. 51.  

Now than we see how the kingdom of GOD is to be sought for : it is by doing these three things : First , by coming into the place where this kingdom is to be found : Secondly , by entering into it : And thirdly , by waiting for the possession of it . These are to be distinguished one from an other ? Now let me renew my exhortation : Let your principal care be to perform these duties , & to practise these three things so long as you live : for in the kingdom of God stands all your happiness , joy , peace , felicity , and blessings : out of it , is nothing but grief , woe and horror unspeakable . All joy and comfort whatsoever can be wished or thought of , is in the kingdom of grace and glory . Therefore if you desire happiness , let your care be for these things : for out of this kingdom , there is nothing but misery , and the wrath of God hangs over every one that is not in it , every hour he is in danger of God's heavy judgements . O fearful state ! o wretched people that fear it not ! 

wherefore to conclude , that we may escape the plagues and punishments of the damned , and have the comforts of the subjects of this kingdom , let this be the main and principal care to be of this kingdom , and to live in it : for if you live out it , still eternal woe will befall you . 

Let this heavenly doctrine take place in all your hearts , and do not flatter and sooth yourselves , persuading yourselves that if you lead a civil life , and come to Church , all is well , and you are safe . For mark , the kingdom of God is like a City , and it hath his suburbs and sundry gates . The first gate is the ministry of the word ; when you are come so far , than you are in the suburbs : but yet you are not in the city : All sorts of men come thus far , both good and bad . 

But there is a second gate , and that is when a man is regenerated and converted , than he first sets his foot within the city : All before is but the suburbs , and may be performed of hypocrites : Only the children of God pass this gate . Therefore content not yourselves to hear the Word , and receive the Sacraments , and to be counted Christians , for all this is nothing more than the hypocrites may do : but labour to become new creatures , that you may be freedenisons in the kingdom of heaven , and then indeed we seek the kingdom of God aright , when we strive to enter in at this gate . Thus much of the duty commanded , which I will repeat , because it is a matter of weight : First seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness . This must be the principal care of all persons whatsoever , young or old , high or low , to come within this kingdom . 

Here is then a just rebuke for worldlings who do the contrary , and set the cart before the horse . Now a little of the promise , which is a most worthy and heavenly promise . And all these things shall be ministered unto you . The Greek word is very significant , & the translation hath not expressed all the sense . It is borrowed from bargayners , but especially from sellers of wares . When men have made a bargain , especially of any great quantity , commonly the seller will give some overplus , and additament for amendss , for the further contentment of the buyer : so let us seek the kingdom of God , and all temporal blessings shall be added as an overplus and amends , to the full contentment of all our hearts . 

Besides , the word signifieth , that they shall be cast or flung , or added , as an overplus and an increase besides the kingdom . Here you see a most heavenly promise , which is to be considered of with all reverence . 

Quest. How can this be true , seeing we read of many worthy servants of God , which have been starved & pined , and destitute of garments , whereof diverse examples might be brought ; but one or two shall serve . Paul saith it of himself . 2.  Cor. 11.  And the holy Ghost , Hebr. 11. of all Christians . 

All the promises of temporal blessings must be understood with this exception , unless it please God to prove us , and try our faith and patience , and exercise and chastise us by want . Thus much concerning the exposition and meaning : Now follow the instructions . 

This shows us the right way to get wealth and all temporal blessings whatsoever , therefore mark it ; for Christ the fountain of wisdom hath taught it . The right way commended by Christ , is above all things to seek the kingdom of God , to seek to be governed by God's spirit , and to serve him in holiness and righteousness : This is the right way , and none other , therefore let every one mark it . 

And the reason is plain : The kingdom of God is the principal good of man : meat , drink , and cloth , and such like , are but dependences which appertain unto it , this is the principal . Therefore he that would obtain these , and have good success with them , should first seek Gods kingdom : for these are entailed together . When the Ark was in the house of Obed. Edom , his house prospered all the while : If the presence of the Ark brought such a blessing , much more God's kingdom . Yea , as David saith , Whatsoever he doth , it shall prospero . Psal. 1  

To come near ourselves : We have had great peace a long time , and the main and principal blessing of all is this , that the Kingdom of God is amongst us , and this hath brought with it peace and protection . 

And because it hath not had so good success amongst us as it ought , therefore God's hand is amongst us , and will be more , if we continue to reject the obedience of his commandments . 

This being so , mark this lesson : Art thou a poor man , and wouldst thou have sufficient wealth to live to thy comfort and contentment ? set thy heart upon this kingdom first , and labour for repentance and regeneration , and thou shalt find God's blessing . 

Object . How comes it to pass then that we have so many beggars ? 

Answer . They are a cursed generation , which live out of all order , neither obeying God's law , nor man's , and therefore God's curse is upon them to death . 

Art thou a rich man , and wouldst thou continue so , and maintain thy estate ? then let thy peincipall care be to seek the kingdom of God , and to bring thy family to it ; nay , to set it up in thine house . 

Art thou a student , & wouldst thou have the blessing of God upon thy labour ? Let thy first care be to seek God's kingdom , labour to enter into it in this life , and the Lord will provide for thee . 

The like may be said to all Merchants , Tradesmen , and Handicrafts , Artificibus , & opificibus , who live by buying and selling , or working . 

In a word , whatsoever you be , man or woman , high or low , old or young , make conscience of this : Hast thou children , and wouldst thou make them portions , and maintain them , to thine own and their comforts ? Labour for this , and this is the best dowry and inheritance that thou canst give them . Therefore seeing this is so , I must renew mine exhortation : Let not the devil steal away this doctrine , nor your own corruption banish it . 

Let Masters , Ministers , and Magistrates , every one in his place , labour to set up the kingdom of God.  

Lastly , let all persons , whether public or private , labour for this while they live . Every man talks of the kingdom of God when he dies , but we must enter while we live , or never . 

To this add the particular belief of such promises , the want whereof , is the cause that we fail in the duties commanded . 

Now there are other instructions to be learned here . When Christ saith : All these things shall be ministered unto you , to wit , all these things , meat , drink , and cloth , and all temporal blessings necessary whatsoever : he gives us to understand , that all these things , all temporal blessings , are certain dependences , things that depend upon the kingdom of God.  

This is the second point to be remembered , that all these are annexed to that . 

This appears thus : When men seek the kingdom of grace , and the kingdom of glory , God will give them these and more too . Besides , the kingdom ( which is the only thing which he must aim at ) he doth cast unto them sufficient blessings for the preservation of this temporal life . So that all temporal blessings appertain to the kingdom of God , they depend upon it , & are annexed unto it . And hereupon sundry other instructions may be gathered . 

If this be so , that all temporal blessings depend on God's kingdom , them we for the most part live after a most preposterous order and manner : for we care more for the body than we do for the soul : for this life , more than for the life to come : more for meat and drink , then for the kingdom of heaven . 

Generally , the care of most men is all for the world , and there is little or no care for the life to come . 

We may see our folly in the folly of children , they are better pleased with a Nut or an Apple , then with a promise of great revenues , or of a great inheritance . And we have more regard of temporal blessings , than we have of the kingdom of God , and yet these are but dependences to that . 

Secondly , we are taught to seek for riches and temporal blessings with the same mind , with which we seek the kingdom of God ; that is , with an honest heart , for they depend one upon an other . We must seek this kingdom of God with an upright heart , and so we must seek riches with a good heart , and honest dealing , using no unjust means . And as we are to seek them thus : so we must use them when we have them , for this end , to further Gods kingdom with the same : for riches are things that depend upon that , & therefore aught to serve to this end . 

Thirdly , if this be so , that riches are dependences on God's kingdom , than he that hath no right to the kingdom of God , and is not in it , hath no right to any temporal blessings : for they are annexed one to an other . 

Turks and Infidels have temporal blessings from God , and enjoy them . 

An. They have them but by permission from God : they have no right nor title to them indeed , and in conscience . I grant in civil courts , and in a civil respect , they have a right unto them , and a propriety in them : but in conscience & before God , they have none at all . 

As many as are out of God's kingdom , whatsoever they be , they have no right to any temporal blessings , nor to any creature , but are very thieves , and mere usurpers before God , though they have right to them before men . Let this be remembered , that they have no right to the meat that they eat , to the clothes they put on , nor to the ground they go on . 

This shows what vile and miserable wretches we are , so long as we are out of God's kingdom : we have no right so much as to the very breath which we draw in at our nostrils , nor to the bread we put into our mouths , etc. but all the creatures are against us.  

And this is without question , the state of all and every man that is out of God's kingdom . By which we see what miserable wretches we are ; much less have we any spiritual blessings , wherewith to comfort ourselves . 

Further , if this be a truth , this must be an inducement to every one to remember the lesson taught before ; namely , above all things to seek to get the kingdom of God : for till then we are most miserable , we have no comfort in any creature or blessing of God : nay , the creatures that be in our hands , we have no right unto them , we have not so much right as the beasts have . 

If there were no more reasons but this one taken from our miserable state , so long as we are out of the kingdom of God , this one ought to be a spur unto us , to make us seek it . Nay , we ought to be at no rest , till we be persuaded out of God's word , that we be in that kingdom : we should give our souls no rest , day no● night , till we be resolved of this , that we are within the kingdom of grace , now whilst we are living upon earth . And therefore I add this , because we are thus miserable ( as you see ) till we be in it . 

Quest.  And that you may the better know when you be in it , remember but thus much : when you be regenerate , than you enter . But you will say , How shall we know when we are regenerate ? 

Answer . When you begin to be touched in conscience with your sins , and to be displeased with yourselves for the sins of your nature , and the sins of your lives , and withal begin to hunger after Christ's righteousness , and to frame your lives according to God's commandments ; than you are regenerate , and then you enter into the kingdom of God , you obtain it , and have right unto it . Therefore if you would have an entrance into it , labour to be touched & grieved for your sins in heart and conscience , labour to feel your need of Christ , and of his blood : and have a care to put your necks under his yoke : And when these things are in you , ( whatsoever you have been before , though the vilest sinners that ever were , ) you enter into the kingdom of God.  

Again , if this be so , that temporal things are but dependences ; we are taught , that when any calamity or loss befalls us , whether it be of goods , friends , or good name , we oght then to stay ourselves , and not to suffer ourselves to be overwhelmed with immoderate sorrow and grief : for when the greatest losses come that can be of worldly things , what is it but of things that depend on the kingdom of God ? The kingdom itself is not lost . what though thou lose the favour and countenance of men ? and thy reputation and estimation among them , or some part of thy goods ? this causeth not the loss of the kingdom , the right and title of that may stand good notwithstanding all these . Therefore we must moderate our grief with this consideration ▪ And thus Christ comforted his disciples in their afflictions : Fear not little flock , for it is your Father's pleasure to give you a kingdom . 

The third point of doctrine to be gathered hence , is this : That God is a bountiful God : and his bountifulness is here described : for if you seek the kingdom of God , you shall have it & much more : See here the exceeding great bountifulness of God , that gives men more than they seek , ask , or think of : when men seek this kingdom , they shall have it , & much more , even all things necessary for this life . A notable token of God's great bounty . The same goodness is excellently set forth elsewhere . Paul praiseth God , and attributes this unto him ( as the cause of his thanksgiving ) because he can do more , than we either ask or think . 

Ob. He can do : what is that to the purpose ? 

Ans. Therefore he speaks of such a power as is brought forth into action , and he will do . 

This is the goodness of God ; He gives them that which they seek , and more than they seek . He can do it , and he will do it . It is a point worth the consideration , that God gives his servants more than they seek for , or think of when they pray . See the performance of it to David : thou preventest him with liberal blessings : signifying that God gave him more than he prayed for , & that which he never thought of . 

This was also verified in Solomon : He asked only wisdom , and God gave him that , and riches , and honour likewise . As also in jacob & joseph . Thus we see the truth of this promise performed , both by testimony and examples suitable to it . 

And there is none of us all , but ( if we look into ourselves ) we shall find that God hath given us more than ever we desired , or ever thought we should have had . This point is not to be let pass without remembrance . 

The use hereof is manifold : for we are taught all manner of good duties by it . 

First , to have a continual care , that we do nothing that may offend God : for he is a liberal and a bountiful God : when we pray , he gives us more than we ask . 

Secondly , this should move us to put our trust in God for all necessaries , trust him with our lives and souls , and with all that we have . If he be so bountiful as we see he is , we ought not to distrust him for any thing belonging either to the soul or to the body . 

Thirdly , this should move us in all distress to seek to him for help and succour , because he is ready to help . 

Fourthly , it should move us to love this God , in consideration of this bountifulness . 

Fiftly , to be willing to pray to him , and to be ready to make our moan to him . 

Sixtly , to be thankful to him continually , who is so bountiful to us , daily preventing us with bountiful blessings . 

In a word to conclude , this aught to be a spur to prick us forward to every good duty , and to turn our hearts from every way that is evil , and to please God in all things . And so much of that point of the bountifulness of God , in that he gives them the kingdom of heaven , which seek it , and withal a great deal more than they desire . And so much of the use . 

31 Care not for the morrow : for the morrow shall care for itself : the day hath enough with his own grief . 

Here Christ doth repeat the Commandment which he gave in the 25. verse , it was repeated twice before , and now it is here repeated the third time . His often repeating of this Commandment , is to teach us to be careful to learn it , to remember it , and to do it . 

Now for the words themselves . 

Care not , etc. ] That is , take no care for the time to come . This may seem a strange commandment , maintaining idleness and licentiousness , therefore we must consider what is the true sense and meaning thereof : for the words are not so to be conceived , as at the first reading they seem to be . But there are two sorts of care ; yea of care for time to come . 

First , a lawful and a godly care : Secondly , a distrustful care . 

That there is a godly care , even for the time to come , it is plain ; for Christ himself had a bag , and judas kept it ; therefore his meaning is not to forbid all care of time to come . 

And when Agabus foretold the famine , the Church provided against it : wherefore there is no question , but there is a lawful care for the time to come , which is not here forbidden . 

That you may know what care that is , mark this : Those things that be necessary , as meat , drink , and cloth , and cannot be provided hereafter , may be provided aforehand without sin , and without breach of this commandment . For example : A man of Trade that is decayed in his strength & eyesight , may have some thing provided to maintain himself when his strength and sight is gone : He may provide aforehand things necessary for himself when he is old and cannot work to get his living . It remains therefore , that there is a lawful care for to morrow , and that is when to morrow is not able to help itself . But when to morrow is able to help itself , than it is not lawful to care for to morrow . So them this point is clear . 

Quest. What care is it then that Christ condemns ? 

Ans. A distrustful care : for such a care the Greek word signifieth , which doth distract the mind , etc. as before : That you may the better perceive it , see some examples of it . 

When men provide so much wealth as will keep and maintain both them and theirs for many ages , if they can heap up goods not to be numbered , they will do it , and there be many such gather-goods . Men forecast to provide so much as would maintain them , if they should live as long as Methushelah . This is the care forbidden , when men provide so much for themselves , as would suffice for many families . The king himself , who hath most need of abundance , must not multiply too much his horses and money ; much less ought any subject . If any man had need of superaboundance and superfluity , the King much more , yet he is forbidden it . Why then , if it be a thing to be barred the Prince , if he must be stinted and limited , what man dares be so bold as to exceed his bounds , & break out beyond his borders . This is one example of the distrustful care . 

An other example is , when men provide against all mischances and casualties , so that they will avoid all losses and damages whatsoever . And howsoever the judgement of God fall on others , they will be free from all ; And though all the world should die before them for want , yet they will live and have abundance of meat , drink , and cloth . 

They will so provide for all events and dangers whatsoever . 

A third example of this is , when men do now provide things necessary , which may sufficiently be provided in time to come : And this is the care that is here condemned by name , when they care this day , for to day and to morrow too ; when this day may care for itself , and the morrow for itself . Thus you see the right meaning of this commandment , how Christ forbids all extraordinary , curious , and superfluous care . And so much for the commandment . 

For the morrow shall care for itself , ] Now Christ layeth down a seventh reason to persuade them and us to a moderate care for meat and drink , both for the time present , and the time to come . 

The effect of the reason is this : Every day that man lives , hath sufficient grief of it own , and therefore we ought not to care for the time to come , if it may be cared for hereafter : for so we should bring more care upon us then needs . That is the substance of it . 

Object . Now to the words : Christ answereth an objection , which is this : How shall we do then for the morrow , & for the time to come ? 

Answer . Things that be necessary hereafter in time to come , must be cared for hereafter , if it be possible . 

That is Christ's answer , every day must care for itself : the time present for itself , and the time to come for itself . In which words Christ delivers a notable rule for the framing of our lives , to be remembered and thought upon , and it is this : Every man must know his own calling , and what be the duties of it , and how they must live in their callings . They must do the necessary duties and the present duties of their callings , that is the most necessary and principal , and those things that the duty , the time , the day , and the present occasion requires . 

Quest. But what must we do then for the time to come ? 

Ans. That must be left unto God by faith , things present appertain to us. When these things shall be , ( saith Samuel to Saul ) that is , thou being now a King , shalt be confirmed in it , Do that which comes to thine hand : that is , show thyself a King. thou mayest not now plot for time to come , but as occasion shall be offered , take them , and lay hold of them , & be not troubled with fear of things to come . The present works of thy calling , look what they be , and practise them . And so must we do the present duties of our calling . As for fear and hope ( which are uncertain ) of things to come , refer them to God. We must not feed ourselves with uncertain hopes , nor vex ourselves with uncertain fears : but we must do things present . This is a most necessary rule for the ordering and framing of our lives . 

The day hath enough with his own grief ] That is , every day hath affliction , trouble & grief inogh comes with it , because of our sins : Live we never so long in this world , every day will have grief , and grief enough : And therefore we need not , nay , we may not add more grief . 

Here Christ sets forth the misery of man's life , and that very notably . jacob said , His days were few and miserable . job saith , Man's life is short and full of trouble . And Christ goes beyond them both , and saith : Every day hath grief enough . Whereby he declares and sets forth notably , the miserable state of this life , which is full of grief , affliction , and sorrow . 

Here we learn that we must walk in our callings so , as we entangle not ourselves in worldly cares : for every day hath grief enough of itself , though we add none to it ; and the more we care , the more miserable do we make our life . 

Secondly , this being so , we are taught here further , to labour to estrange ourselves from this life , and to be out of love with it , and to seek for a better . The Prophet Elias , upon the very miseries of this life which befell him in particulars , saith : Lord take away my soul , I am not better than my fathers . And Paul saith : I desire to be dissolved , & to be with Christ : And , O wretched man that I am , who shall deliver me from this body of earth ? He speaks not simply , but in regard of the better estate , and to be with Christ , out of this vale of tears . Therefore we ought not to addict ourselves too much to the world : but to have a love and longing after the life to come . The very consideration of this life , & the state thereof , and of every day in it , should move us to this . 

We ought every day to commend our bodies & souls , and all that we have , to the protection and tuition of God : for wh the day begins , we shall have evil enough , let us do what we can to help ourselves : Therefore we ought for the comforting & quieting of our conscience● , to commend ourselves to God , as Christ when he was a dying , we know not how soon we may die , therefore every day ought to perform this duty : for that which Christ did at his death , David did in his life time : for those words that Christ spoke , were David's words : and he spoke them not at his death , but in his life , upon occasion of a vexation . 

If we learn any good thing , we learn it not without pain and grief , travel and trouble : If we do any good thing , we are not free from trouble : If we repent , we are molested with our corruptions : If we be the servants of God , we have daily crosses and temptations . And so much for this seventh reason , and of this point : In which Christ forbids the practice of covetousness , and strikes at the very root of all , namely , distrustful care for meat , drink , and apparel . 

FINIS . 





Act. 11. 29.  Can●  Phil. 1. 9  Heb. 5.  1.  Cor. 2. 2 , Heb. 11. 1.  & 13.  Col 3.  Prou. 6.  1.  Tim. 6.  Psal. 127. 1.  Psal. 34. 10.  Eccles. 7. 15  job. 39  Psal. 104.  Psal. 145.  1.  Cor. 3.  1.  Kin. 3 13.  Gen. 41. loseph . Act. 23.  Oligopistoi . 2.  Cor. 1.  Rom. 4.  Heb. 11.  Levit. 3  Psal. 39 9  esay . 30. 15.  Note this . 1.  Come . 2.  Enter . 3.  Waite . joh 33.  Psal. 21.  1 King. 3.  Act. 11.  Pro. 10. 5.  1.  King. 19 4.  Phil. 1.  Rom. 7.  