A LEARNED AND GODLY SERMON , preached at Worcester , at an Assize : By THE REVEREND and learned , MILES SMITH , Doctor of Divinity . 

AT OXFORD , Printed by joseph Barnes , and are to be sold in Fleetstreet at the sign of the Turks head by john Barnes . 1602.  

TO THE RIGHT Reverend father in Christ , Gervase L. Bishop of Worcester , my very good Lord , grace and peace be mult●…plied . 

Many good Captains ( Right Reverend and my very good Lord ) think it , not their duty , to fight themselves , but only to give command to others : and Physicians without blame prescribe to others that which they apply not to themselves : but of the preacher of the word of God it is justly required , no less in life & practice , them in speech or writing , to express the soundness of doctrine , or , to speak it in Homer's words , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

as by his doctrine he must preach to our cares , so by his example he must preach to our eyes : that so by both he might lay hole of our hearts , as by the light of the one he must direct us that we stray not , so by the footsteps of the other he must lead us that we stumble not , & by the harmony of both affect us that we slack not . Thus if he do , not only teaching , as Christ taught , but also living as he teacheth others to live , he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven : he shall be ●…eckoned among the her●…ss of the Christ●…an common wealth . By hide doctrine he shall win assent and obedience : by his example , imitation and love : and by both admiration and reverence . That the author of this learned and godly sermon is one of these , there is no need to prove : nor how his life and practice , as if it had been the other twin of the same mother , or the other hand of the same body , hath always been answerable to the doctrine of humility , which in this sermon is handled at large , although I envy not that there are very many arguments to make this point plain : yet I could wish there were not so many by one : and that , seeing his humble and modest mind may & doth otherwise so easily appear , he would spare to show it , by his unwillingnes to publish his learned labours : by which at this time others are forced to publish some part of them for him without making him acquainted therewith . As for the rest seeing it must be so , we are content 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪ even until God shall put it into his mind , to stay for that for which he is in debt to us ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , every man that hath received of God is a debtor to Christ in GOD and to the church in Christ ) but for this little stream of the great river of his godly learning we hope at length we shall not only obtain pardon , for publishing it without giving him notice ( for so heretofore it hath happened to many learned men , and as Possid●…s reporteth , even to Augustine in many of his works ) but also deserve thanks of the whole Church of God , when the auctor by this experience in the lesser , guessing how his greater pains will be accepted , shall begin to dare to bring forth the ampler & more laborious fruits of his learned and religious study . 

As surely meet it is that he which is so well armed and provided should not fear to venture : and that the less the certainty and the shorter the continuance of the life of man is , the sooner the common wealth & Church should enjoy the life & virtue of him that is excellent . If we will use none but Pompey ( saith Catulus in a deliberation of heaping employments upon none but Pompey ) what if we lose Pompey , whom them shall we use ? it is not good ( said the Lacedaemonian captain that overthrew the Empire of the Athenians ) that Grece should have but one ●…ie : and as the proverb tells us it is good to have more anchors them ove for our ship to rest upon . For though it be good if there be any ( though but one ) to say with than Amazon in Virg●…l . 

Audeo , et Aenead●… promitto occurrere turmae , 
Solus : et intest as ac●…eses contra obvius ●…re . 
yet it is better , if there be another to reply out of the same place in the Poet.  

Mecum partire laborem 

Better I mean , not only because if one die the other may succeed & fi●…sh that which he leaves vuperfect : as Homer notes it as a comfort to Protefilou●… his soldiers , after the death of their captain , 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : 

But also that , if the one fall , the other , as it is in the 4. of Ecclesiastes might help him up : that as Euryalus . & Nisus , they might be mutual aid and comfort each to other : 

His amor unus era●… , par●…rque in bella ruebant : 

That as the two brethren in the same Poe●… , Panda●…us and B●…as so they might stand forth the one on the one side of the gate , the other on the other , jointly stopping the entrance & irruption of the common enemy . 

Daxtrâ et laeuâ pro turribus astent : 
Arma●…s ferro , et cr●…stis capi●… alta corusci . 
for , to say the truth neither can the quicksighted eye of the sun ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) be thoroughly circumspect in all things : nay he is not able to see round about any thing : whence it is said , Etiam capillus u●…us ●…abet umbram suam . 

neither was Hector's speech of Achilles' emulation or envy , rather than truth , when he told his soldiers , 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 
He must be greater than any Achilles ( for it is proper to God alone ) which would be able to be alone . Even Adam in Paradise had need , and every creature hath need of a helper . I confess ( the thanks be unto God ) there are many helpers in our church , joining hand with him upon whom out eyes are chiefly fixte : even more than those 9  Peers , of whom , when Achilles ceased from war in his disconte , A●…ax makes boast to Hector : that without the hardy Achilles there was choice enough of one to encounter him 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

Yea , if our Latona had but two to maintain her quarrel ●…yet Latona's two would easily be sufficient against Niobes never so many : 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

But if the best among us continue thus diffident of their own ability ( how confident of the cause soëver they be ) it i●… to be feared , lest he which as yet hath , or may have many helpers , be at length either left alone , or without a fit helper . Such a one as this author ( to speak without the dispr●…ise of any ) sure would be . As he that is not partial even in this his godly Sermon may discern him : as he can know a I yond by his claw , and Hercules by his singer . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

as he that is not in turba may by feeling be found out by him that is blind . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 
I speak even of the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 which in this sermon appeareth : whether we consider the directnes of his method , & distinct ordering and handling of so many chief points of di●…ine meditation and singular use , or his zeal in affection , or his discreet moderation ●…n applying , or delightful copiousnes in 〈◊〉 . I speak the more sparingly of him because I speak as it were to his face : & because I speak to you ( Right Reverend ) which have known him so long ▪ and ever since you knew him , have loved him so deatly . But I would his modesty would not forget herself in one thing , nor make him in judging of himself to attribute ( almost against modesty ) more to his own judgement , in which he is too severe to himself , then to your ●…pss . far more indifferent estimation . whose intirenes of affection towards him , seeing it first arose from judgement , cannot be any better argument against the soundness of the judgement , than the sweetness of the fruit is against the soundness of the root . For why should he suffer his learned papyrs to be like the hidden riches of a covetous man , good for none until the owner's death ? as if it were not with the works of learned men , that are published after the author's death , as with children which are born after their father's death ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) or as if since falsehood now hath gotten so strong a head , the shamefast modesty of the learned were not to be content to s●…cken her bridle , and to suffer zeal to use the spur . It is not shamefastness nor her daughter silence , of which they now have need . Both of which , as they are excuses for me diocrity , so they are preiudices against excellency : as they are always the wisdom of fools , so in such times as these are , they are the folly of the wise . Neither is it much more excusable , in such times of ne●…de , for the learned to hide themselves with Achilles , then for the unlearned to th●…st themselves forward with Thersites . As much as the one kind overshoo●…eses by boldness , so much the other falls short by fearfulness , both of them are much amiss . And therefore Xenophon in his third book of Memorables , makes Socrater to ●…ke no less care to dissuade Charmides , the uncle of Plato the Philosopher , from refraining himself , then to dissuade Glauco , the brother to the same Plato , from thrusting himself forwards , to meddle in the business of the public state . The former of these was a man of very much worth , but of too little boldness : the later was a man of very much boldness , but of too little wor●…h . The fault of the later was more odious but the fault of the former was more hurtful , more reason to blame the later : but more need to blame the former . The later by to much contemning others , and magnifying himself , made himself contemptible : but the former by too much regarding others and contemning himself made himself unprofitable . The later by his boldness gained the dispraise which he might have avoided ▪ but the former by his shamefastness avoided the commendation which he might have ga●…ed ▪ as much as the one nee deed the bridle , so much the other needed the spur : the one for his own sake , that he might leave drawing on harm upon himself : the other for the common wealth's sake : that he might leave of with holding the public good . For so is every virtue and especially the godly learning of the chieffest among us : the honestum is proper , but the profit is common : it is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 it is Thesaurꝰ ecclesiae : I mean not for any In dulgences after they are dead , but for present use while they live . By how much the rather I hope , that every one which loves the truth ( seeing himself also hath a part in every common good ) will both by his grateful acceptance encourage , and by his prayer to God aid & further the reverend auctor of this godly sermon : that neither sickness , nor any other bar may hinder him from performing , for the advancing of the truth , far greater things , then as yet appear ▪ for myself , as I could willingly , think of myself that I am 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : So I will always pay him , & always owe him all the duties of love ▪ for which unto him ever since my childhood : and to you ( right reverend ) for these many years , I am very deeply engaged . Of your Lp●… . he could say , in his preface to a most profitable work of yours ▪ that he would be your remembrancer 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . The arguments which there he uses , with the whole comparison , in which he prefers writing before public preachig by word of mouth may be returned upon himself : with that which Pomponius in Plutarch , dehorting his son Numa from private obscurity , tells him ▪ that it is God which calls him , & suffers not his gifts to sleep in him : that the meanager of public business is as it were the hand of God : that he must not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , play the fugitive , or deny God such service as in off●…ng occasions and g●…uing abilities he requires : nor abandon the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the field & matter of good actions ▪ But my purpose is not to tell him what he should do , as indeed it beseems me not , but only to signify our desire con●●●ing w●…th your Lps. of whose desire , & 〈◊〉 desire I am not altogether ignorant : and by whose careful remembering him I hope at the length he will show himself 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . that so we might be beholding to your Lp●… . not only for your own excellent labours ; but in some sort also for his : as we are not a little to S. Hilary , and to Ctesiphon , to the one for stirring up S. Austin in the western countries , and to the other for stirring up S. Hieronym in the Eastern countries ; against the spreading infection of Pelagius . this I hope hereafter to see . Mean while I have been bold to present this parcel of his learned pains to your Lordship : to whom I know it shall be right welcome , even for the author's sake , as to all that know him . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

Thus commending your Lordship to the gracious goodness of the almighty , that you may long continue a principal instrument of his glory , and of the good of his church : I humbly take my leave . 

from Corpus Christy College in Oxford Nou. 12. 1602.  Your Lordships in all love and duty most ready to be commanded ROBERT BURHIL . 

The chief points of matter severally & 〈◊〉 order handled and illustrated in the sermon following . 

1.  The words of the text ▪ though spoken upon special occasion to the jews , have their use at all times , and among all nations . 
2 Boasting is a very common fault . 
3.  The baseness of man , and liberality of God is a chief reason against all pride and boasting . 
4.  Pride hinders our knowledge & practice in Christian religion 
5.  Pride is a confluence of many sins . 
6.  As pride , so boasting as her daughter , is to be avoided . 
7 Man's wisdom is not his own nor of himself , and therefore not to be gloried in . 
8.  In matters of learning it is very unperfect ( God only being truly wise ) and therefore also not to be boasted of . 
9  In matters of state it is very uncertain . 
10.  Policy falsely so called , is not to be gloried in , but to be hated : as the cause of the corrupt execution of the business of the common wealth & of neutrality in religion . 
11.  Strength and might by making us prosumptuous oppressors use to set God against us ▪ 
12.  riches draw on enemies to spoil us.  
13.  There is no certainty in riches . 
14.  riches commonly make not men better , but worse ▪ 
15.  True joy and happiness is to know God a●…ight . 
A LEARNED SERMON preached at Worcester . 

JER●…MIAH CHAP. 9  

23.  

Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom , nor the strong man glory in his strength , neither the rich man glory in his riches . 

24.  

But let him that glorieth , glory in this , that he understands , and knoweth me , etc.  

THE Prophet ZACHARIH in his first Chap : hath thus . Your fathers . Where are they ? and do the Prophets live for ever ? But did not my words , and my statutes , which I commanded by my servants the Prophets , take hold of your fathers ? Meaning that they did take hold of their fathers , & would take hold of them also : except they repented . So 1  Cor. 10. the Apostle saith , These things came to them for ensamples , but are written to admonish us , upon whom the ends of the world are come : Signifying that the judgments of God recorded in the word , and the whole word itself , was not ordained for the instruction only of them , in whose days it was written , but to be for the use of the Church in all succeeding ages . In a city of Egypt called Diospolis , in a temple there called Pylon , there was pictured a little boy , to signify generation , and an old man to signify corruption : also an hawk , a symbol of God ( for the quickness of his sight ) and a fish , a symbol of hatred ( fish were an abomination to the priests of Egypt , as witnesseth lo. 2o. ) & last a crocodile to signify impudency . The whole devise being laid together importing thus much , and preaching thus much : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : that is , OH ye that are young & con●…ing on , OH ye that are old and going out of the world ( OH all together . ) to you all be it known , that God doth hate impudency . This hath Clemens Alexandrinus in the 5. of his stromats . The like may be said of the present text , which I have in hand , that , albeit it be a part of a sermon , that the Prophet jeremie made unto the children of Israel a little before their captivity into Babylon ( wherein he assureth them , that piety only , & no carnal sleights , or abilities , should be able to do them good in that fearful day ) and so might seem to be proper to that nation , & to that occasion : yet for all that , if we will not mistake it , we are to take it for an everlasting sermon ( there is mention in the Revelation of an everlasting gospel ) & even for a general proclamation against all haughtiness & vain confidence of men , whether they be jews or Gentiles , young or old : even against all those , that do not set God before their eyes : making him their stay ▪ but do boast themselves of the sharpness of their wit , or of the strength of their arm , or of the greatness of their wealth , which the Lord doth not account of . And that this general use is to be made of this parcel of Scripture ▪ the holy Ghost himself , the best interpreter of his own meaning . doth plainly declare . 1.  Cor. 1. 31.  & 2 Cor. 10. 17. to the which places for brevity sake I do refer you . And here that observation of Tertullian in his book de spectaculis hath fit place : Specialiter quaedam pronuntiata generaliter sapiunt . cum Deus Israelitas admonet disciplinae , vel obiurgat , utique adomnes habet . Certain things uttered ( in the scriptures ) for one special purpose , or upon one specialloccasion , have yet a general drift or importment . when God admonisheth the Israelites of their duty , or findeth fault with them for neglect thereof , it concerneth all . So then as the Apostle said to Timothy that he suffered trouble for the Gospel's sake unto ●…ondss , but the word of God was not bond : And as it is said of Abel Heb. 11.  That he being dead yet speaketh : so it may be said in some sort of the prophet jeremy , that though he were bond as touching bodily presence to his countrymen the jews , and though his bones are rotten long since : yet for all that his words remain lively in operation even to this day : and by the same he speaketh , and preacheth to us now here assembled . 

And what doth he speak unto us in the words of my text ? In sum , and in gross thus much : to purge out the old leaven of arrogancy ; and insolenci●… , that we may be a sweet lump of modesty and thankfulness unto the Lord In particular these two points . First that we would wean ourselves from all carnal boasting , whether of our wit and cunning , or of our power and authority , or of our wealth and other abilities : this in the former verse . Secondly that we would entertain , & embrace a spiritual kind of rejoicing for God's great mercies , and favour toward us , & ●…amely for this , that he hath vouchsafed to reveal himself and his truth unto us : this in the later verse . 

Touching the former : many are deceived ( beloved ) concerning this matter of boasting . for neither is it proper to a few fools only , as some have imagined , ( for these fools are found every where ) nether is it a fault of vanity only or indiscretion , but even of iniquity , and sinnefulnes . If any doubt of the general spreading of the infection , & whether it be Epidemical , let him think but of two sayings : the one of Solomon , the other of Seneca . In the 20. of the Proverbs Solomon saith , Many men will boast , every one of his own goodness ; but who can find a faithful man ? where he showeth the fault to be general , or as good as general . So Seneca epist. 47. speaketh indefinitely , Regum nobis induimus animos : every one of us heareth the mind of an Emperor : then we will not be far behind for boasting : this for sentences . As for examples : let me produce unto you but two out of hundred , namely of Cato the elder , and of Tully . What a notable man was Cat●… the elder ? He had that commendation given unto him by consent , which none in his time was thought to deserve , to be optimus orator , optimus senator , & optimus imperator ( as Pliny reporteth ) to wit , a most singular orator , a most singular senator , or statesman , and a most singular general : and yet this so incomparable a man was so much given to boast himself , that his veriest friends were ashamed of him . As for Tully he was so excellently qualisied , that none but a Tully , that is , one admirably eloquent , is sufficient to speak of his worthiness . And yet this is not left unremembered by them , that were willing to conceal a small blemish in him , that his speech which flowed from him as sweet as honey , he made to taste as bitter as wormewoode many times , by interlacing of his own praises . Thus as dead ●…iess corrupt the sweet ointment , as Saomon saith : & as desperate steruelings , that have nothing else to feed on , will fall to their own flesh , as Plutarch saith & eat the brawns of their own arms : so for want of other boasters , many will fall to boast themselves , & though they offend God , and be offensive to men , yet they will do it . 

That such do offend God ( not only are displeasing to men ) may appear hereby . First for that God doth expressly forbid it , as in my text , and in divers other places of the scripture . Secondly for that he hath sharply punished this sin , not only in his enemies , as in olde-babel , for boasting , and saying : I am , and none else , I shall be a Lady for ever : & in new Babel , for her proud names of blasphemy , whereof this was one , as Hieron saith , Roma aterna , Rome shall flourish for ever : but also in his dearest children , as in David , for numbering the people of a vain glorious mind : and in Ezechias , for showing his treasures to to the embassadors of the king of Babel , of the like bragging pride . Thirdly for that the saints of God have greatly abhorred this vice , & refrained it , as much as might be : as S. Paul to the Galath . God forbid , that I should glory , but in the cross of our Lord jesus Christ : God for bid . And to the Corinthians . If I must needs glory , I will glory of mine infirmities : that is , I will be far from carnail boasting . Lastlie for that God hath wrought this instinct , or law of nature in the very heathen to con demne it . As namely Tully , whom I told you of even now , howsoever he fell in practice , yet when he spoke from his book , he cold say : Deform est de s●… ipso praedicare , falsa praesertim . It is an evil favoured thing to , make vaunt of ones own doings ▪ specially if he lie never so little . And the Greek Orator saith : to speak of myself , ( that which may sound to mine own praise ) I take it to be 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , so odious nay so burdenous , & so irk some , that every necessity shall not enforce me to do it . These points might be enlarged by amplifications , and set forth with variety ●… colours , & strengthened with many reasons and proofs , you may easily gather . But as they that have a large journey to make , and but a short time allowed them , must make but short baits by the way , and cannot stand to take every acquaintance that they meet by the hand : and as they that are to paint or to print a pitched field within the compass of a sheet or two of papyr , can make but few soldiers whole , or complete , but are fain to set down for the most their heads only or their helmettes : So having many things to handle , & within the compass of a short hour , I must be contented to touch only the heads of the greatest part of them , and as for long discourses , I must let them alone . 

We have seen dear Christians by many signs and tokens that the vainglorious man is no way gracious with God : but chose very odious to him : but why he should be so odious to him , and so far out of his books , we have not seen . You shall understand therefore , that God hates pride and all that pertaieneth to it , not of any emulation , for who can come near unto God , within any degree of comparison , that he should be afraid of him ? ( emulation is a kind of fear of the worth or rising of another , lest he should top us ) but of pure justice , and for the due demerit of the sin . For shall the ax●… , or saw boast itself against him that useth the same ? Esaie Chap. 10 ▪ shall the pitcher exalt itself against the potter , or the thistle say I am not a thistle ? Who made us of one blood to devil upon the face of the earth ? Who took us up , when we lay polluted in our blood , even when we lay polluted in our blood , who took us up , and said unto us , live ? who delivered us from the power of darkness , and translated us into the kingdom of his dear son , in whom we ha●… redemption in his blood , even the forgiveness of our sins ? who paid our ransom for us , when we were not worth a groat , cast his garment over us to cover us , when we lay stark naked ? and which is as great a mercy or benefit , as any of the former , who passeth by our iniquities , & wincketh at our faults , whereby we trespass against him daily , and hourly ? I say who hath forgiven us , & given us so many things , and so many more , who but the Lord ? Now this being our condition , and none other , and we being thus obnoxious to God , and defective in ourselves , is it for any of us to talk of his sufficiency , being over head and ears in debt ? or to please himself in his beauty being blacker than a black moor ? Why them art thou proud earth and ashes ? why dost thou boast as though thou hadst not received that which thou hast ? nay why dost thou not cover thy face for shame , because of the manifold pollutions wherewith thou art distained ? Yet foolish man will be wise ; naked man will be gay , filthy man will be pure , though man new born is like a wild ass' colt , as job saith . Now when the Lord seeth this , namely , that for all the cost & charges that he is at upon us , yet we remain vile and beggarly , & for all our vileness and beggerlines , yet that we will not be acknowen of it , but chose stout it with him , & beard him , & take upon ourselves stiff necks , & proud looks : is it any marvel , if the Lord hate pride which worketh this strangeness , and breach betwixt him , & his creatures ? 

For but for pride which like the same albugo , or white spot in the eye , dimmeth our understanding , nay doubteth it many times ( the similitude is not mine , but Gregori●… in his Pastorall●… and but for self love the mother of pride , which maketh us poreblinde at the least ( Isidorus Pelusiota saith of the affection that we bear to another that it is p●…re blind , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , how much more than is it true of self affection ) we should know God , and the height of his favour , & the breadth of his love , & the worth of his pardon , & so be provoked to greater thankfulness towards him . Also we should know ourselves & the sum of our debt , and the depth of our misery , & so be stooped , & humbled , & urged to make supplication to our God. ●…o these two duties of humility , and thankfulness , the whole law & the Prophets , & Evangelistes , and Apostles , and whatsoever is written in the book of God , and whatsoever thence is to be collected may in some sort be referred : And therefore , for somuch as pride is such a special hin derance to the performance of these special duties , no marvel if the LORD have the same in special detestation . 

Add hereunto , that , as Tertullian calleth the commandment that God gave Adam in Paradise , matricem omnium praeceptorum Dei : the very matrixe , or womb of all the commandments of God , and as Theodorit calleth Moses 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a very ocean of all divi●…ty : & as some have called Rome epitomen universi , an epitome or abridge meant of the whole world : so it may be said of pride , that it is the sum of all naughtiness , & a very sea of it , & there is no sin almost but pride doth participate with it . It is a kind of idolatry , it maketh a man to bow to himself , & to burn incense to his own yarn , as the Prophet Habakuk speaketh . It is a kind of sacrilege , it robbeth God of his honour , even of this honour of saving us freely , & working all our works in us , as Esaie avoucheth . It is a kind of dronkenes , it maketh a man to err from a sound judgement , and to speak , and to do things absurdely : The proud man is as he that transgresseth by wine : saith the Prophet . Fourthly it is a kind of murder , it slayeth the soul , while it maketh it to dote upon itself , even as the ape killeth her young one by clipping it to hard . Fiftly it is a very adultery , it coupleth us to another from the Lord , even to self conceit . If we say ( saith S. Augustine ) that we are any thing , & so not give the glory unto God : adulteri sumus , nos amari volumus , non spon sum , we are plain adulterers , we would have ourselves to be loved , & not the bridegroom . Sixtly a false witness , & a lying glass it is , making us believe that we are that , that we are not : fairewhen we are foul . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Love ( & self love much more ) maketh those things , that are not fair to seem fair : it so blndeth the eye . Lastly it is most covetous , & most envious , hunting after ter praise , as after a prey , and not deining that others should come near them within many Leagues . Stand a part , come not near me , for I am holier than thou , said those proud Hypocrites in Esaie . Thus as Aristotle saith out of Theognis , that in justice all virtues are couched together ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) summarily : so it may be said of pride , that in it all vices are lapte up together as it were in a bundle . And therefore God hating every sin particularely , & by itself , and by itself , he must needs abhor pride , which is a confluence , and a collection of them al. Now as he hates pride , which is the daughter of self love , as I told you : so he hates all the daughters of pride , whereof boasting , & glotying seemeth to be one of the youngest & worst . Sorry crow sorry egg , said they that judged the controversy between Corax , & Tisias . Like mother , like daughter saith Ezechiel : & so hateful mother hateful daughter may we say . When the Roman soldiers had slain Maximinus the tyrant they made search for his son and slew him also : saying Epessimo genere ne catulum quidem relinquendum ▪ of a vile litter not one whelp was to be saved alive . When Noah awoke from his wine and knew what his younger son Ham had done unto him he cursed even Hams son for Hams offence : saying , Cursed be Canaan , a servant of servants shall he be etc.  Stasinus his verdict is remembered by Clemens Alexandrinus , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . He that killeth the wicked parent , & spares his ungracious brats is a very fool . This justice appeareth to be in God toward pride & her daughters ▪ he hates both the one , & the other : yea he hates all them , that be in love with either . I shall not need to prove that vain glory is prides own daughter , for that were to prove a crab to come of a crab tree , or a black berry of a brier , or dross of the corruption of metal , or scum of the uncleanes of the meat . What is choler else , say they , them the froth of blood , spuma sanguinis ? & so what is glorying else , but a very froth of pride ? they froth out their own shame , while they boil up with their own praises : & if vaunting be in the branch , vanity is in the root , that is certain . All boasting therefore is to be avoided , and abhorred as bad , fruit of a bad tree : & if all boasting , then boasting of wisdom , or strength , or riches , as it followeth in my text . Let not the wise glory in his wisdom etc.  

Of boasting in general we have spoken enough already , now let us see more particularely , what be the things that he forbiddeth us to boast of ▪ The prophet setteth down . 3. the first wisdom : the second strength , the third riches . Of these I am to speak in order . Quod gone ri attributum est etiam in species redundat , saith Tertullian . That which is true in the general , will be found true in the special , or particular with advantage . For as much therefore as I have proved already that boasting in general is unlawful , I shall not need to prove seriously or amply , that it is unlawful to boast of these particulars , wisdom , strength , or riches : only a fleight skimming over the points may serve the turn . 

Of wisdom first this I have to say : that of all the gifts , wherewith the Lord doth beautify the soul of man , none seemeth to be comparable to it : sure I am none aught to be preferred before it . For it is the very stern of our vessel , the very sun of our firmament , the very eye of our head , the very hart of our bo die . Where wisdom sittteth at the stern there matters are ordered in a probable course to a laudable end . But where wisdom is wanting , there the sun goeth down at noon day ( to use the Prophet's words ) there the light , that is in us is turned into darkness , as Christ speaketh , & then how great is the darkness ? So thought Lactantius . Vt sol oculorum , sic sapienti●… lumen est cordis humani . As the sun is the light of our eyes , so the light of our hart is wisdom : So thought the Poet. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Fields , towns , ships are all managed & governed by wisdom . Wisdom therefore is a most precious thing : that is certain : & the merchandise thereof is better than silver , & the gain thereof is better than gold , as Solomon saith : but not to be boasted of for all that . 

And why ? First because it is not our own , or of ourselves : as Cyprian saith : De nullo gloriandum , quia nostrum nihil est . We are to boast of nothing because nothing is our own , or of ourselves . And Augustine upon john saith : Christ said not , without me ye can do little , but with out me ye can do nothing . Where then is glorying ? is it not excluded ? For if it were lawful to boast of that , which is not our own , than the crow might have been justified for braving it with her borrowed or stolen feathers ( furtivis coloribus ) & the ass for jetting with the Lion's skin about him , & the ape for skipping up & down in his master's jacket . But now these were ridiculous in so doing , therefore we cannot reasonably boast of that which is not our own : except we will be like to these unreasonable beasts . Let this be the first reason against glorying in wisdom . 

The second this : Our wisdom is many ways unperfect , therefore , if we be wise , we will not brag of it . For will any brag of his lame leg , or his one cie ? Indeed now I remember Agesilaus bragged of his clubfoot , & had never done bragging of it . Also Sertorius brag ged of his one eye , and had never done bragging of it but by their leave I think this their bragging was but from the teeth outward , and rather to prevent , and forestall others from gibing , then of any delight they took there in themselves ( bragging lightly breaketh not forth , but some inward joy , or tickling helpeth it forward ) and therefore it was like to the same Sardonius risus . And notwithstanding that exception , the proposition remaineth firm , that we boast not naturally or usually of our infirmities , or imperfections . But now our wisdom is unperfect , & very unperfect , why them should any boast of it ? That it is unperfect S. Paul showeth . 1.  Cor 13 We know in part , and we prophesy in part . Again , Now we see in a glass darkly . Yea and that which an Egyptian priest said to a Graecian by the report of Plato , ye Grecians are always children : the same will be found true not only of the Grecians , but of the Egyptians themselves , & of the English and all ; for understanding we are but children . I grant that in all ages , and in all nations some have gone away with the name of wisdom , as that Roman that was called Corculum ( Nosica was so called ) that Graecian that was called 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ( not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) Democritus Abderita was so called : that jew that was surnamed Hechachan , Aben Ezra was so surnamed : the Britain that was called the sage , Gildas was so called , Gildas sapiens , etc.  Yet for all that to talk of wisdom indeed , The depth saith it is not in me , the sea also saith it is not with me , as job saith . Who ever satisfied others or himself , in delivering the cause of the overflowing of Nilus in the summer time ? who ever could give any sound reason , why the loadstone should draw the iron to it as it doth , or direct or turn to the pole star so as it doth ? who ever went about to give a probable reason why or how the little fish called 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 should be able to stay or to stop , so great a vessel as it is reported to stay , and that being under sail too ? And to omi●… these secrets of nature , who ever attained to that perfection in any art , but he left much for them that should come after both to invent better , and to device a new ? And as for points of divinity , ( wherein I confess we have the greatest help through the benefit of the word of God , which is a light unto our feet , and a lantern to our steps ) touching the same also it is a most certain truth , that the most acute & judicious divines have both acknowledged their ignorance ( in some matters not so necessary to be understood ) and deplored their oversight . What a good speech is that of Irenaeus ? Some things in the scripture by God's providence are hard to be comprehended in this life ( ut semper quidem Deus doceat , homo auten se●…per discat quae sunt à Deo ) that God might have always somewhat to teach us , and that man might have to learn always those things that are of God. What a modest speech is that of Augustin ? Quò me contemn as , quem magnum put as esse doct●…rem , etc.  That thou mayest ( no longer have me in admiration , but ) contemn me whom thou takest to be so great a Doctor : I cannot tell what these same thrones , & dominions & principalitie●… , & powers do mean , nor wherein they differ . I will not trouble you with more quotations to this purpose . So then as Moses caused it to be superscribed or graved upon the plate for the holy crown , Holiness to the Lord , meaning to the Lord only : and as S. Paul to Timothy asscribeth immortality to the Lord , to the Lord only ( who only hath immortality ) & as a king of this land contended , that the name of king was due only to the king crucified jesus Christ : so surely the name of wisdom is due , and to be asscribed to God only , as being only wise . Why ? it is so ascribed by S. Paul in express words in the forenamed epistle , unto the king immortal , invisible unto God only wise , etc.  Yea what say you if heathen men themselves , as arrogant as they were , have acknowledged no less . Laërtius writeth that certain young men of jonia standing upon the sea shore and beholding fishermen making of a draught ▪ agreed with them a great for their draught , that what they should hale up to land in their net should be theirs . Now it was so by God's providence , that together with certain fish , they encloased a certain piece of plate ( which no man knew when it was sunk there ) and dragged though same to land in their net . The same being claimed & seized upon by the young men , by virtue of their bargain , they cast between them how to dispose of it . But when they could not agree about the sharing of it , they sent to the Oracle for resolution from thence . They were returned answer from the Oracle to send it to the wisest . They send it therefore to Thales their cuntryman : a man of great note in those days for wisdom . But when it was brought to him , he disabled himself , and disclaimed the name of wise : and sent it to an other as being more wise than he was . The second also he would none of it , but sent it to a third , & the third to a fourth , etc and so they posted it of from one to an other , until seven had it . The seventh & last Solon , he made no more a do but sent it to the temple at Delphi for a present to God , as acknowledging him only to be wise . A marvelous confession for heathen men to make touching the alone wisdom of God. And thus God , that ordaineth his praise out of the mouths of babes and sucklings as it is in the Psalm , & made the dumb beast speaking with man's voice to rebuke the madness of the prophet , as it is in the Apostle , made these men , which were but babes in Christ , nay even as beasts before him , being without God in this world , to set forth his honour and praise , and even to rebuke the mad arrogancy of many Christians in our days , Man's wisdom therefore touching matters of learning is unperfect , you hear by the confession of the wisest , and therefore not to be boasted of . 

So is it uncertain concerning matters of policy , & therefore this a third reason why it ought not to be gloried in . Prudens futuri tempo●… exitum caligino sa nocte premit Deus , saith one . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 sayeth an other . Thus it is , future things they are to be , they are not yet : therefore we cannot see them : they may fall out another way as well , as that way which we imagine : they be futura contingentia , therefore we may be deceived in them . The chirurgeon that deals with an outward wound seeth what he doth , and can tell whether he can heal it or no , and in what time : but he that is to make an incision within the Body , be it for the stone , or the like disease , he doth but grope in the dark as it were , & may as well take hoult of that which he should not , as of that , which he would . So the arti●…an , that worketh in his shop , & hath his tools about him , can promise to make up his day's work to his best advantage : but the merchant venturer , that is to cut the seas , & had need of one wind to bring him out of the haven , an other to bring him about to the lands end , another peradventure to bring him to the place of traffic , where he would be , he can promise nothing neither touching his return , neither touching his making of his commodity , but as the wind , & the weather , & the men of war by the way , & as the honesty , & skill of them , whom he tradeth with , shall give him leave . Just so fareth it in these matters of prudence , and policy , they are coniectural , they are not daemon strative , therefore there is no science of them : they have need of the concurrence of many causes that are casual , of many man's minds that are mutable , therefore we cannot build upon them . Yea they are built many times upon the errors and negligence of our enemies , and they peradventure be awake as well as ourselves . Antigonus' that wise Prince ( he is reckoned among them , that having but one eye , were exceeding politic , and crafty ) thought , & made certain account of it , to come upon his enemy Eumenes at unawa●…eses , and to take him napping , but he found ●…umenes as vigilant as himself , and so was fain to retire with a slay in his ear as wise as he came . This for matters of war So for matters of peace . Solomon the wisest of all thought that , if he might join in affinity with his neighbour princes , and take many of their daughters to be his wives and women , he should not only strengthen the kingdom in his own hand : but also establish it in his house long , and long : also he thought peradventure , that by occasion of his marriages , and affinities being great , many of the uplandish people would be trained , & won to the knowledging , and worshipping of the true God of Israel : but how was he deceived ? His wives , and women turned his heart from the Lord : he could do little or no good upon them , or theirs ; and as for the secret underminers of Salomon's state , & succession , where found they entertainment , but among Salomon's allies ? Let me instance this point in one or two examples more . Constantine the great , that worthy christian , and great politician , thought , that , if he might build a city in the confines of Europe and Asia , that might be aemula Romae , a match to Rome , & place one of his sons there to keep his court , he should not only eternize his name , but also fortify the Empire no less than if he had invir●…ned it with a wall of brass . Also Phocas , and Pipinus thought , the one if he might dignify the Bishop of Rome with an extravagant title to be called universal bishop : the other , if he might lad the church of Rome with principalities , even with principality upon principality , they should deserve immortally well , not only of that sea , but also of the whole house of God. But the way of man is not in himself as jeremie saith : neither is it in man to foresee , what will fall out luckily , or cross . The building of new Rome was the decay of old Rome , so it proved , and the dividing of the Empire was the destruction of the Empire , & no less , as wise men know . Also the lifting up of the man of Rome , was the hoisting up of the man of sin , and the locking of him in the chair , even in the chair of pestilence . Thus there is no policy so provident , no providence so circumspect , but the same is subject to errors , and crosses : and therefore no cause why it should be trusted to : and therefore no cause why it should be glorified in . Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom , etc , 

If any wisdom might be boasted of , surely one of those kinds of wisdom that ●… erst reckoned up unto you , to wit , wisdom or skill in the arts , wisdom or knowledge in divinity , wisdom or policy touching matters of state but these , you have heard , are not to be relied upon , because they are uncertain , because they are unperfecte etc. therefore much less are we to rely upon any such as is worse , or inferior to these ▪ But yet the world is the world , it hath done so & doth so , yea and blesseth itself for so doing ; therefore this wound had need to be searched & ransacked a little deeper . Homer I remember crieth out against Eris or Discord 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . OH I would it were perished and thrown out of the company of the gods & men . So Cyprian against covetousness , o dete stabilis caecit as mentium ▪ etc o this same detestable blindness of man's minds . Hieronym against luxury , or lechery , o ignis inf ernalis luxuria , o Lechery a very hellish fire . Augustine against error or mistaking , o errare , o delirare : o what a vile thing it is to be blinded with error etc. thus every one cried out against the sins wherewith their times were most pestered and po●…soned . Surely if I were appointed to touch the sore of the daughter of our people ( we have many sores ▪ from the crown of our head to the sole of our foot ▪ we are little else but sores ▪ & botches & biles ) but yet if I were to touch that which doth most of all apostemate , and rankle , than I ought to cry out o policy , policy . Policy I mean falsely so called , but indeed cunning , & cudgeling . This letteth that the prince , & the ●…ealme many times cannot be so served , as they should be : nor justice administered in many places , as it ought to be ▪ nor the Gospel of the son of God so propagated , as were to be wished many cold wish that in musters & presses , the likeliest men to do service , & not the weakest of friends , should be appointed : also that they were helped to their right , that suffer wrong : also that the incorrigible were cut of by the sword of justice : also that these same deceitful workers crafti lie crept in , in pretence to advance the Romish faith , but indeed to supplant English loialty , and faithfulness , that I sai●…e their goings out , and their come in , & their haunts were better marked : & so the danger , that is threatened by them , prevented ▪ but yet , to put our hand to the work , every one to do some service in his place : as for example , constable's to precept the ablest & fittest people for the wars : shirif ▪ to make returns of indifferente ●…uriess for the trial of rights : jurors to have God , & a good conscience before their eyes , & not to turn aside to by respects . etc. This we will not be induced to do : what letteh us ? Policy ▪ For we say if we shall be precise in our office this year , or in this action at this time , others will be as precise against us or ours another time , & then what shall we gain by it ? & if we should not lean somewhat to such a person , & to such a cause , we should offend such a great one , & he will sit on our skirts . Thus policy overthroweth polity , that is the common weal : & thus the fear of man casteth out the fear of God , as the wise man complaineth . Another vanity , nay wickedness , I have noted under the sum , that is this : there be that have the door of faith opened to them , & have opportunity to hear words whereby they and their household might be saved : & the same also do consent in the inward man to the doctrine taught , & published by authority among us , that the same is the truth , & the contrary falsehood : & yet to give their names to the gospel sound , or to protest against popery & supper stition zealously they will not be drawn . what withholdeth them ? policy , for they think continuing doubtful , nay though they should be enemies , if but secret ones , they shall lose nothing , the state holding as it doth . These be the times of mercy ( though certain ungrateful men cry out against them as though they were bloody , for no other cause , but for that they are restrained from shedding innocent blood , as they were wont in the days of their tyranny ) & if there should be a change , them their very doubfulnes & staggering would be remembered , & they advanced thereby . Thus as Demades said to his cuntrymen of Athens , when they paused to decree divine honours to king Demetrius , Take heed my master's least while you be so scrupulous for heaven , & heavenly matters , you lose the earth in the mean time , etc.  So some seem to make no reckoning at all of their heavenly inheritance , so that they may uphold or better their state on earth . Call you this wisdom , policy , providence or the like ? Than Achitophel was a wise man to prefer the expectance of honour at the traitor Absalon's hands , before the present enjoying of favour from king David , his anointed sovereign . Than Esau was politic to esteem more of a mess of pottage , then of the blessing , which afterwards he could not recover , though he sought it with tears . Yea briefly then that Emperor was provident ( were it Nero , or whosoever else ) that fished for menise & gudgeons with nets of silk & hooks of gold . What is the chaff to the wheat ? saith the Lord what is the shadow to the body , the body to the soul , frailty to eternity ? What shall it advantage a man to win ▪ etc. or can any man save his soul that hath God his enemy ? or can any man have God to be his friend , that doth stout with him ? Be not decei ved : as God is called Amen or true , in the revelation , & calleth himself truth in the 14 of john : so he loveth truth , & sincerity in the inward parts Ps. 51. & with out truth he loveth nothing that he doth love A doubling man , or a man with a double hart ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) saith S. jams is unstable in all his ways , & can such a one look for any thing at God's hands ? Let them look to it whosoever among us play fast & loose , & blow hot and cold with the Lord , making bridges in the air , as the comical Poet saith , & making flesh their arm , but in their heart depar●… from the Lord , which the Prophet doth so much cry out against . Surely such wisdom is not from above , but is earthly sensual , and devilish . And as truly , as the reproach delivered by the Prophet esay 44. in respect of their corrupt judgement is verified in them : He feedeth of ashes : a seduced hart hath deceived him , that he cannot deliver his soul ? & say , may not I err ? so the judgement denounced by the same prophet in an other place in respect of their worldly policy shall take hoult of them . Behold saith he you all kindle a fire , and are all compassed about with sparks : walk in the light of your fire , & in the sparks that ye have kindled . This shallye have of mine hand , ye shall lie down in sorrow . As if he said , your turning of devises , shall it not be as the potter's clay ? shall it not break , & crumble between your fingers ? Take counsel as long as you will , it shall not stand , make a decree , it shall not prospero saith the Lord almighty . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 saith the heathen man He that soweth the wind shall reap the whirl wind ▪ let him be sure of it . And let so much be spoken against glorying in wisdom , either rightly so called , or falsely so termed . Let us consider now of the second thing that we are forbidden to boast of , to wit strength . Nor the strong man in his strength . 

There have been many strong men in all ages : strong of arm , as that Polydamas , that caught a wild bull by one of his hinder legs , & held him by force of his arm for all that the bull could do : and that Pulio ( mentioned by Dio ) that threw a stone at a town wall , beseidged by Germanicus , with such might , that the batlement which he hit , and he which was on it came tumbling down , which made them ▪ that held the town through wonderment at his strength to yield it up . Strong of hand , as that Marius ( one of the 30.  Tyrant's ) that would turn a side a wain with one of his singers : and that Polonian of late in the days of Stephan Buther , that would knap an horseshee a sunder , were it never so hard between his hands . Strong of arm and head & body , and hart & all , as that Aristomenes mentioned by Pliny , who slew 300.  Lacedæmonians in fight in one day : and that Aurelian then or shortly after Emperor : of whom they made that song : mille mille mille vivat : qui mille mille occidit . Let him live thousand ( of years or months ) who stewae thousands of enemies . These were famous men in their generations , for strength & no doubt they were mervailously admired at by them , that lived in their times : Yet for all that nether wereothers to have gloried in them , nor they in themselves . Not others to glory in them : because Paul saith Let no man rejoice or glory in men ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) And again Let him that glorieth glory in the Lord 1 Cor. 10.  Not themselves to glory in themselves , because strength is not to be compared to wisdone , & therefore wisdom being debarred from boasting ( as you heard already ) strength ought much more . That strength cometh short of wis doom Solomon showeth both by plain words and by an example . By plain words as when he saith Eccles. 9 16.  Than said I , better is wisdom them strength . By an example : as in the same chapter , ver . 14.  A little city , and few men in it , and a great king came against it , and compassed it about , and builded forts against it . And there was found therein a poor & wise man , and he delivered the city by his wisdom . Thus Solomon . Nature also hath taught as much , both in plain words : and by examples . In plain words , as Musaeus : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Wisdom or sleight is always better than strength . By an example as Sertorius for example . He caused a couple of horses to be brought before him , the one fat and fleshy , the other a lean carrion jade : also a couple of soldiers the one strong , & lusty the other a silly sickly fellow : to the lean horse he put the strong man , & he going roughly to work , and thinking to do the deed with dead strength , haled , and pulled , and tired himself , and was a laughing stock to the beholders : but the weak fellow using some cunning , for all his weakness did the feat , & went his way with the applause . Wisdom therefore is better than strength : and therefore this is one strong reason why strength should not be boasted of since wisdom is denied . An other reason may be this : strength or force , be it equal to the strength of a Lion or Elephant , yet it is but the strength of flesh , never the less : and all flesh is frail , and subject to foil . When one cannot overcome , many may . Whom sword cannot pierce , shot will : whom shot doth not hit , sickness may arrest , time surely , and death widow be sure to make an end of . Now should a man be proud of grass , of vapour , of smoke , of a shadow , of a tale that is told , etc. whereto the whole life of man , and his glory , and consequently his strength & vigour , are compared ? An horse is but a race , they say , and so the strongest man upon earth is but the push of a pike , or the clap of a pistol . Were not Abimelech and Pyrrhus , two most valiant princes , either of them killed by the hand of a woman ? was not Totilas that noble conqueror , that had vanquished Rome , which had vanquished the whole world , was not he I say overcome , and slain by Narses an eununch , a semivir ? what should I stand any longer upon this ? God hath choose , as the foolish things of the world to confounded the wise , so the weak things of the world many times to confounded the strong . And this may be a third rea son against glorying in strength , because God himself doth many times set himself against the mighty . 

Xenophon saw so much & faith thus . God as it would seem taketh a pleasure 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . That is , to exalt the base , and to pull down the mighty . And why so ? Truly not of envy to their greatness ( as it is written of Tiberius or Caligula ) that he caused a goodly tall man called Colossus for his stature , & strength , of mere en vy to fight , after he had done his law , till he was tired , & slain : And as it is likewise recorded of Soliman in our father's memory , that having a great German brought prisoner to him , of very envy to the Germane nation , he caused his dwarf a very Pygmy to take this Germane in hand ( being a giant to look to ) & to hack him & hew him being bond to his hand , & to have many courses at him ( as if a child were set to thwite a tree a sunder ) & at length with much a do to get him down , & so to potch him in & kill him . O no , God is of no such nature : as he saith himself in esay Anger is not in me . So it may be said most truly of him , envy is not in him . no he envieth no good quality in man , which is his own gift , nether hates he any that he hath made , & redeemed : but loveth all , & would have us to love one another . nether are the great , & mighty ones confounded , & brought down by reason of their folly , or for want of judgement , whereby they give advantage oftentimes to their enemies : albeit I am not ignorant , that Synesius , that ancient , and learned Bishop saith , that strength and prudence seldom while concur : but he understands , I think , enormous strength in an huge vast body : otherwise his speech is not justifiable . for many strong have been exceeding crafty with all , as Aristor●…neses of old , of whom I spoke erewhile , & George Castriot of late ( in comparison ) of whom it is written , that they had the strength of a Lion , and wiliness of a fox . But here is the quarrel , and this maketh God an enemy very oft to the strong & mighty , because by their strength & power they think to bear out , & maintain whatsoever bad person , & whatsoever bad cause : and to break down , and to crush , and tread under foot the most righteous of the land , that stand in their way . This doth nettle God , & provoke him to displeasure . Id in summa fortuna aequius , quod validius . Let me have might , & I have right enough . Sua retinere privatae domus ( saith Tiridates in the same place of Tacitus ) de alienis certare regialaus . You would have me be contented with mine own : why ? it is for base spirited men , for peasantes , for boors , to seek but their own , gentlemen and mighty men they will law , and fight for that which is an other man's . O de men's , it a servus homoest ? saith one in ●…uvenal . You would have me use my servant well : ah fool , is my man a man ? is my tenant my neighbour ? is my neigh bor my brother ? Doth Naboth refuse to sell his vineyard to Achab , to king Achab ? I will help thee to it for nothing , saith jezabel . Doth the senate deny my Master the consulship ? Hic ensis dabit . This sword shall help him to it said Caesar's soldier . These be the same 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , ( as the Poet calleth them ) which will have the law in their own hands : They lean upon their swords , & their right hand must right them , whether it be right , or no. Nec leges metuunt , sed cedit vi●…ibus aquum . Maestaque victrici iu●…a su●… ense iacent . Thus they covet fields , and take them by violence , and houses & take them away , so they oppress a man ▪ & his house , even man , and his heritage Mich 2.  And thus as the wild ass is the Lions pray in the wilderness Sirach . 13. & as Basil saith upon Hexaemeron 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : most fishes do eat one another , and the lesser is the food of the greater . So it is too true , that in too many places the weaker , & the simpler sort of men are a pray unto the great & mighty ones , & these eat up God's people , as a man would eat bread , as it is in the Psalm . But what saith Basil in the same place ? Take heed saith he thou oppressor , thou cruel hearted man , lest the same end betid thee , that doth befall those great devouring fishes : namely to be caught thyself by the hook , or in the net . Indeed as for the comfort of the needy , & the deep sighing of the poor : the ●…ord saith that he will up himself & set at liberty him , whom the wicked hath snared : So for the confusion of the unmerciful cormorant , he threateneth thus by job : He hath devoured substance , & he shall vomit it : for God shall draw it out of his belly . And by the Prophet esay . Wo unto thee that spoilest , & wast not spoilt , etc.  When thou ceasest to spoil , thou shalt be spoilt . There is no prince that can be saved by the multitude of an host , nether any mighty man delivered by much strength . Be you never so strong o ye mighty , yet he that dwelleth in the heavens is stronger than you , be you never so well lined or backed , or guarded , yet he , that sitteth between the Cherubin is better appointed . Therefore trust not in your own strength , much less in wrong , & robbery , make not yourselves horns by your own power . There is no power , no force , no puissance that can deliver from wrath in the day of wrath , the children of wrath , that is to say them , that hale down God's vengeance upon them by their unmercifulnesse . This might be easily vouched by sundry examples , but that the time being so far spent , it is time to come to the third special thing , that we are forbidden , to glory in , to wit riches . Nor the rich man glory in his riches . 

As I gave this for one reason , why strength should not be gloried in , because it is not to be compared to wisdom , which I had proved before might not be allowed to boast : so I may assign this for one cause why riches should not be boasted of , because they are not comparable to strength , which even now I excluded from glorying . For if the more excellent cannot be allowed his liberty , the inferior cannot require it by any reason : & the prophet seemeth to use the method of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 & to exclude the better at the first , that that which is worse , might with less a do be removed , or rather with none at all . If you doubt whether riches be worse , or less to be esteemed then strength , you may be persuaded hereby , for that riches do toll-in enemies : but strength doth repel them from entering , and also expel them , if happily they be entered : also riches make the thief more ven●…nrous , but very seldom do they make the true man more hardy . That riches do to , & draw in enemies , it is evident by all stories . For what brought the first conqueror into this Hand of Britain , but the pearls of Britain as Suetonius reporteth ? what brought the Galls into Italy at the first , but the wines of Italy , as Plutarch witnesseth ? So what brought the Carthaginians into Spain , the Grecians & Romans , one after another into Asia the lesser , but the riches of Asia , the gold and silver of Spain ? So what brought the Turks over into Thracia , and after into Hungary , but the fertility of Thracia , the golden , and silver mines of Hungary ? On the contrary side what maketh the Tartars ever to invade , & never to be invaded , but because they have no wealth , that others should cover after , & their neighbours have wealth , which their teeth do 〈◊〉 watering for . This for public invasions , and robberies , as for private spoilinges , and pillage the learned know what Q. ●…urelius gat in the days of Syllae by his grange , that lay commodious to some great one , for love of the same he was attainted ▪ and billed among them , that were to be put to death , whereupon he cried out when he saw his name in the papyr , Fundus Albanus me perdidit : out alas it is my land that I have at Alba , & not any offence ; that I have done , that is the cause of my death . So Pliny writeth of one N●…nius a senator , that he was likewise proscribed , and condemned to die by Antony the Triumuir , for no other crime , but because he had a precious stone of a very great value , which Antony , or some of his followers had a great mind to . So Isocrates speaking of the times , when the Athenians were oppressed by Tyrant's ( the officers that the Lacedæmonians had set over them ) as I remember in his oration against Euthunus saith , that in those day's 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : It was more dangerous to have any wealth , them to commit any offence . I have told you already what Naboth got by his vineyard , and could tell you what one Taurus mentioned by Tacitus got by his garden , even an untime lie & a bloody death . Pernicious therefore you see riches are many times to the owners , & therefore small cause why they should be boasted of : let this be one reason . 

Another this : they be not lasting nor permanent , but soon fleet away , & are gone . They may be campared to Maieflowers , which yield a pleasant savour for a few weeks , & then before we are aware their beauty is gone . Nay like to Io nah his gourd , which yielded him content , & delight as it were this morning , & by the next day it was worme-bitt●… and withered . Nay like the same small creatures called 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , which in one and the same day are engendered , grow operfection , decay and die . Indeed Furipides saith 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . riches be not lasting , but epheme●…all , they last but for a day . And Solomon before him , riches take themselves to their wings as an ●…gle , and ●…lie into the air . Who ever could have thought that job from such wealth could have fallen upon the sudden into such misery ? who ever would have thought that the king Dionysius must be fain to play the schoolmaster , & to teach petties before he die , to get his living ? Who ever would have thought that king Perses son , and heir must be glad to learn an occupation , and to play the black smith to relieve his necessity ? Who ever would have thought that the Emperor Charles the gross could want necessaries before he died ? That the Emperor Henry the fourth ( that victorious Emperor , that had fought 52. pitched ●…tailess ) could fall into that ex●…emity as to be a petitioner for a 〈◊〉 in the church of Spira to maintain him in his old age ? Briefly that king Geliner ( before him ) that potent king of the Vandals could be so low brought , as to be forced to entreat his friend to send him an harp , a sponge , and a loaf of bread ( as Procopius writeth ) an harp to solace himself somewhat in his misery , a sponge to help to dry up his tears , and a loaf of bread to satisfy his hungry soul ? What certainty then is there in worldly wealth , when kings , and potentates be so easily stripped of it , and left as naked as my nail ? Yet for all that earthly minded men , as we are , we will still be miring of ourselves in the muck & pelf of this world , though we be no better them battles in so doing , as Basil saith : & we will trust in uncertain riches , & not in the living God , though S. Paul charges us not to do so : and if riches increase , we will set our hearts upon them though the Psalmist forbiddeth us to do so : and lastly we will be brag of that which we have and make our boast thereof , though the Prophet in my text doth expressly disallow it , and though myself have proved , that we have no more hold of our wealth , then if we had an eel by the tail . 

Well , as these be strong reasons why the rich should not glory in his riches , because they tempt thiefs , and enemies : and because they are of no certainty : so there is a third reason , as weighty as any of those , and that is , because they do not make us any whit the better . For can any man boast with any probability of that , which he cannot sa●…e , that he is the better for ? Now thus it is , Talibus bonis non siunt homines boni , sed a liunde boni facti benè utendo saciunt , ut ist a sint bona , as Augustine saith . You call them goods , but I tell you saith he by such goods men be not made good , but being made good otherwise , by using them well they usake them to be good , so Augustine . And as for bettering of men , it is too true , that Asdrubal Haedus saith in Livy : R●…rò simul hominibus bona fortuna , bonaque mens datur : Goods and goodness do seldom times meet together . For who is there , except it be one among a thousand cui praesens faelicitas siarrisit non irrisit , ( as Bernard speaketh ) but if the world come upon him , he will be besotted by the world . Therefore Thucydides recordeth as a strange thing in the men of Chius , that they were sober for all their prosperity : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . And Evagrius ascribeth this as an especial praise to Mauritius the Emperor , that in his prosperity he retained his ancient piety . In our natural bodies it is thus : the more fat the lesser blood in the veins , and consequently the fewer spirits : and so in our fields abundance of wet breedeth abundance of tares , and consequently great scarcity of corn . And is it not so with our souls ? The more of GOD'S blessing , and wealth , the more weeds of vanity , and carnalitie : and the more rich to the wo●…lde the less righteous to GOD commonly . What meant Apuleius to say that ubi uber , i●…i tuber ? but to signify that pride & arrogancy are companions to plenty . And what made Solomon to pray against fullness ? but to show , that as they must have good brains , that will carry much drink , so they must have extraordinary souls , that will not be overcome of the world . Did not David in his prosperity say that he should never be removed ? did he not say or speak unadvisedly ? nay did he not do lewdly and wickedly , defiling himself with his neighbour's wife : and embrewing his hands in his servitors blood , thus adding mur there to adultery ? Did he attempt any such thing in the days of want , & adversity ? no no , in his necessity he sought the Lord , & got himself unto his God right early : & offered to him the sacrifice of righteousness . And yet we grudge and repine , when we do not swim in wealth , when wealth through the corruption of our nature doth dull us , and taint us , and make us unapt to every good work . Again we eat poverty , as we would do a serpent , nay as the gates of hell , when yet poverty through the blessing of God doth kindle devotion , and kill sin in us , even as wormwood , or the like bitter things kill moths , or worms . This the time will not permit me to stand any longer upon : & therefore I come at once to the second verse , and will end the same in a word or two . 

Let him that glorieth glory in this , that he understands , & knoweth me . Man's wisdom , strength , & riches are vain , and not to be boasted of , thus much jeremie hath told us already , and I have proved to you by many reasons : but now if you would know ; what is the thing , wherein we may take true comfort , & whereof we may safely glory , the same is no other thing but piety , and godliness , the true knowledge of God , the true service of God : this hath the promise of this life & of the lif to come . this we ought to labour for , day , & night that we may attain it , and having attained it , we may rejoice with joy unspeakable , & glorious . This our Saviour Christ doth warrant us to do by his own example , Luk. 10.  Who there is said to have rejoiced in the spirit on our behalf , because we had our minds illuminate to understand those things , that belong to the kingdom of God , & our salvation . Even as elsewhere he defineth the happiness of man to consist herein , namely to know God the only true God , and whom he hath sent jesus Christ. Agreeable whereunto Augustine saith . In foelix homo , qui scit illa omnia , te autem nescit : beaten us auten quite scit , etiansi illa nesciat , etc.  Unhappy is the man , that knoweth all those things ( all secular learning ) if he know not thee , but happy is he that knoweth thee , although he be ignorant of the rest . But he that knoweth thee , and the rest to , is never a whit the more blessed for the other things sake , but for thee only , if knowing thee he glorify thee as God : so Augustine . The knowledge of God therefore , that is the one thing , that is necessary , that maketh a man a Christian , that lifts us up unto God , that coupleth us unto him , that justifieth , that saveth , that worketh all in all . Now by knowledge I understand , & the prophet in my text understandeth , not a bare apprehension or sense of the mind , that there is a divine power greater , and mightier than all , for so much the most barbarous hea then were not with out . they could say Deus videt omnia . Deo commendo , etc. as Tertullian showeth , yea as Saint james saith the very Devil's beleene , & tremble ( they have a kind of belief , therefore they have knowledge : ) but also a consent ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , as Clemens Alexandrinus calleth it ) and persuasion of the hart touching both the providence of God , that he worketh all in all , and all for the best to them , that love him : also and especially touching his mercy , that he will grant pardon to the penitent , even to them , that crave it for his Son's sake , & lastlie touching his bounty , that he will everlastinglie reward as many , as are his , even as many , as believe in his name . This is that saving knowledge , which the world knoweth not , neither is it revealed by flesh , and blood , but by the spirit of the father , which is in heaven . This is that knowledge whereof the Prophet Esaie speaketh : By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many , for he shall bear their iniquities . This is that knowledge , that precious treasure which so soon as a wise man findeth , for joy thereof he departeth , & selleth all , that he hath , and buyeth the field . Briefly this is that knowledge , in comparison whereof S. Paul counted all things lost , even dung , that he might know Christ , and the virtue of his resurrection , and the virtue of his afflictions , and be made conformable to his death . To conclude this is that knowledge , which whosoever seeketh is wise , whosoever getteth is rich , whosoever keepeth is strong , nay virtuous , nay happy , nay twice happy : happy he is in this world by faith , and happy in the world to come he shall be by fruition . This knowledge the Lord vouchsafe to engraffe in them , that want it , & increase it in them , that have it , & make it fruitful in all : to the purging of our con sciences in this life , & the saving of our souls in the day of our Lord jesus : to whom with the Father , and the blessed Spirit be all honour , and glory . Amen . 

FINIS . 





〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Mat. ●… . 19  Rom. 1. 14.  1 , Cor. 3. 22. 23.  ●…n Gene●…  

Zach. 1. 5. 6.  1.  Cor. 10. 11  Cle. Alex. ●… . 5. stromat  Herod . li. 2.  rev. 14. 6.  1.  Cor. 1. 31.  2.  Cor. 10. 17  Tertullian de spectaculis . 3. ●…un . 2.  Heb. 11.  Pro●… . 20. 6.  S●…n ●…p 47.  Plinius . Eccle. 10.  Plutarch de ratione vel modo , quo quis se ▪ ipsum laudet 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 1. ci●…a invidian . Esaie 47.  Hieromim . Algosiae . quaest . 11. 2.  Sam. 24.  Esa. 37.  Galat ▪ 6.  2.  Cor. 11.  Offici . 1o. Demosth. de co●…ona . Esaie 10 ▪  Act. 17.  Ezech. 16.  Coloss. 1.  ●…ccless . 10.  1.  Cor. 4.  job. 11.  Greg. d●… cur . past . part●… . 1.  Isidorus Pelusiota in epist.  Tertullian coutra ●…udaeos . Theodo . 2. the rape●…t . Habak . 1. 1●…  esay . 46. 9  & 26.  1●… . Habak . ●… . ●…  Aug. in johan . tract . 13.  Theocrit in Bucoliast . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Esa. 65. 5.  Aristotel . Ethi●…  Gell ▪  Ezech ▪  Aurelius' victor . Gen. ●… . Clem A●… Strom. 6  Lact. l. 2. c. 8  Phocylid  Pro. 3.  Cypriam . Plutarch . in Ages . et Sert.  1.  Cor 13.  Plato in Timaeo . job. 28. 14.  Psal 119.  Irenzus . Aug. contra Origenist . & Priscilian . Exod. 39 30.  1.  Tim. 6. 1●…  Canu●…us . 1.  Tim. 1. 17  Laertius in Thal●…c . Psal. 8.  2.  Pet 2.  Horatius . Pindaius . 1.  King. 11.  jer. 10 23.  Home●… . Cyprian . Hieronym . Augustine . Plutarch . Heb. 11.  jerem. 23.  Matth. 19  Revel . 3.  Psal. 51.  jacob . 1.  jer. 17. 5.  jacob . 3.  Esai . ●…4 . 20.  Esa. 50. 11.  Evil courses will not prospero . ●…om Odies . C●…l . Rodig . l. ●… cap. 57  Dio in Augusto . Treble . ●… Pollio . Pliny . Vopiscus  1.  Cor. 3.  Eccles. 9 14. 16.  Mus●… . judg. 9  1 ▪ Cor ▪ 1.  Xenoph. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 1. 6.  Esaie . Synesius epist 103.  Tacit. l. 15.  juven. sa●… ▪ 6  1.  Kings . He●…iod . Ovid. 5. 〈◊〉 ▪  ●…asil . Hom. 7 in Hexaem . Psalm 14.  Psalm . 12.  job. 20. 5.  esay 33.  Suetonive . Plutarch in Camill.  Plin. l. 37. cap. 6.  Tacit. l. 12.  jonah . 4.  prov. 23.  〈◊〉 . Procopius . 1.  Tim. 6.  Psal. 62. 11.  Augustin . ad prob●…m . Livius  Bernard 2. the considerate . Thucyd. l. ●…  Evagrius . Apuleius . Pro. 30.  Psal. 30.  1.  Tim. 4.  Luk. 10. 21.  joh. 17.  Aug. ●… . confess cap. 3.  Tertull de test ▪ animae ▪ jacob . 2.  5.  〈◊〉 . esay 53.  Mat. 13.  Phil. 3.  