Circumspect WALKING : Describing the several Rules , as so many several Steps in the way of Wisdom . 

Gathered into this short manuel , by THO. TAYLOR , Preacher of God's word at Aldermanburic Church in London . 

GAL. 6. 16.  

As many as walk according to this rule , peace shall be upon them , and mercy , and upon the Israel of God.  



LONDON , Printed for james Boler , dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Marigold . 1631.  

TO THE RIGHT Honourable and learned Knight , Sir ROBERT NANTON , one of the principal Secretaries unto his Excellent Majesty , and of his Majesty's Honourable Privy Counsel ; All the blessings of this life , and a better . 

SIR , 

That which Solomon teacheth in that one Aphorism often repeated ; wanted not apparent weight and moments of reason : saying , that in the prosperity of the righteous , the City rejoiceth : for God being in covenant with them , for their sakes doth good to such , as are joined in the same society with them : for one joseph all Potiphers' house was blessed ; and for one Paul , all that are in the ship with him are saved : yea , good and virtuous men by their presence , as Lot in Sodom ; by their prayers , as Moses in the breach ; and by their prudent Counsel , as that poor wise man , withstand the judgments of God , and save the City : for had there been found one good man , all jerusalem had been spared for his sake . Again , virtuous men advanced , will confer all their honour and grace to the public good : they live not to themselves and theirs , but take in the Church and Commonwealth , as fellow-commoners of all their goodness . Mordecai's authority wrought public deliverance to the whole Church , and Joseph's advancement sustained the whole land , by opening the garners in time of famine . The honour of one good man shall be the grace of all good men ; his power the strength of many ; his greatness the raising of many : as when one Mordecai is raised , light , and joy , and gladness , and honour , came to all the jews . Further , good men honoured by God , will honour God again , and withstand his dishonour : they will ( to their power ) provide that God's worship be erected , that his Sabbaths be sanctified , that true religion be maintained , that falsehood and errors be suppressed , that public peace be not disturbed , that common justice be not perverted , lest God's favour be discontinued , and his judgements let in . Whence they are to be esteemed the strongest towers , the thickest walls , the most impregnable forts , the surest muniments , and the stoutest horsemen and Chariots of their Country : yea , the Wise man in one word saith much more , that the Righteous is a sure foundation , upholding the whole world . 

But why write I this , or to your Honour ? surely as one who ever reverenced your worthy parts . I could not but crave leave to express myself one of the City , rejoicing and praising God in your honour's prosperity and advancement : and the rather , because myself was an eyewitness how God led you through some of your younger years , which were so studiously and commendably passed , as this your latter time fitly answereth that expectation which was then conceived of you . 

You were then dear to our common mother that famous University of Cambridge ; which for your eloquence and grace of speech and persuasion , appointed you her Orator : for your wisdom and gravity in government , choose you her Proctor : for your soundness in all kind of fruitful and commendable literature , tendered you all her honours and degrees : and for your sober , studious , and virtuous conversation worthily held now her great Ornament . And now as riper for greater employments , the same God ( whose privilege it is to dispense promotions , for he pulleth down one and setteth up another ) hath moved his Majesty not only to set your seat among the honouroble , but to admit you ( as it were ) into his breast , and betrust you with the secrets of this great state and Kingdom : an office not more ancient than honourable , befitting only men of rarest wisdom , fidelity , and fitness to stand before so great , so wise a King. This was a most honourable office among the most ancient Kings of Israel : for King David had his two principal Secretaries , Seraiah and jehonatham , whom the text commendeth for a man of counsel and understanding : and King Solomon his son had other two , Elihoreph and Ahiah , who were in chief place near the King. We read also of Shebna , principal Secretary to King Hezekiah , of whom junius saith ; he was fecundus à rege . Now your place being a service of such honour under his Majesty , cannot be without an answerable weight and charge . Your Honour easily conceiveth that the Lord charges you with a chief care of honouring him , who hath honoured you : that you stand charged to his Majesty with great trust and fidelity : that the Church expecteth that by your authority , you should promote her causes , and stand in the maintenance of pure religion : that the Commonwealth claimeth her part in you , for the preservation of peace within her walls , and prosperity within her palaces : that the University looketh you should advance her just causes , promote learning , and encourage her students , by helping them into the rooms of the ignorant and unlearned Ministers : in a word , that the whole City hopeth to be exalted by the prosperity of the righteous . 

And now if your Honour's thankful heart shall call upon you , and say , Quid retribuam domino ? you will easily fall into frequent thoughts and desires , of discharging all this expectation . This shall be happily done , if you shall choose about you the wisest Counsellors , for the happy and prudent carriage of your great affairs , imitating herein that peerless pattern of wisdom , Solomon himself , who notwithstanding his extraordinary measure of wisdom , chose unto himself , selectissimum sena●um , a bench of most wise and grave Counsellors , whose counsel Rehoboam after despised . The best counsellor is that great Counsellor , who is daily to be consulted by fervent prayer . The next is the word of God , which as it giveth no less certain direction in difficult cases , than the Oracle did unto Israel , or then did the pillar of the cloud , and of fire by day and night for their motion or station , while they passed through the wilderness : so the daily consulling with God's statutes , by reading and meditation ( as with so many learned counselors ) made holy David wiser than the aged , than the learned , than the Princes , than his adversaries . And if joshuah would prospero and have good success in his high enterprises , he must keep him to the Book of the Law , and not depart from it . The fear of God is wisdom , and the next wisdom to that , is to converse and consult with such as do fear God , whose lips speak just and good things : whereby a man shall become both wiser and better . This is the high way to attain and retain grace and reputation with God and good men ; for this is an inheritance not gotten with greatness , but with goodness : the former cannot force or compel affections , the latter sweetly draws and allures them : the former may procure flattery and applause , the latter only yieldeth true honour and sound comfort . 

Might I add but one grain to your godly care , by this olittle direction , with which If ●●fer my most inward affections , I have my expeation . I know well your Honour's sufficiency , even in this kind , above many of my profession , to furnish yourself with divine directions , if your leisure or weighty affairs would permit you to set them down : yet I assure myself , your Honour will not refuse the help of such , as are at more leisure to gather them , and humbly offer them unto your hand . I was also more presumptuous to offer these lines unto your view , because I conceived that the rules of Christian prudence and circumspection , could not be more sitly directed , nor be better welcome , than to so prudent and circumspect a parsonage . In which assurance I rest , commending your Honours further happiness and prosperity to him , who is an exceeding great reward , abundantly able to fill your heart with grace , to crown your days with blessing , and finish them with comfort , life and immortality . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

Your Honours , to be commanded , THO. TAYLOR . 

EPHES. 5. 15.  

Take heed therefore that ye walk circumspectly , not as fools , but as wise . 

CHAP. I  

The ground of the ensuing Treatise . 

THE APOSTLE in the former words , had under a comparison of light and darkness , excited the Ephesians to holy conversation , and to hate such obscene and filthy courses , as were found with the workers of darkness . Now he speaks in plain terms , that which before he enfolded in comparisons : Seeing ye are light , and in the light , wherein all things are manifest , see ye walk circumspectly , etc.  In which words are , 

First , a duty propounded , Circumspect walking , which in the first word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , is straight charged upon every Christian . 

Secondly , the expounding of that duty , not as fools , but as wise . 

And the words run , as if the holy Apostle had in other terms said thus ; You that are believers , sons of the light , aught as by your light , to check and control , yea , and discover other men's sins and ●orruptionss : so also to be ●ss unblameable , yea , and lightsome in yourselves , ●s possibly may be : and ●herfore take heed of your twne walking , and see it be circumspect . Briefly thus ; 

Every Christian man must walk warily , and circumspectly : or , The course of Christianity must be a circumspect walking . For so the word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 signifies , an accurate , and a strict walking ; or an exquisite course . So it is used , Luk. 1. 3  It seemed good to me , when I had accurately searched all things : and , Mat. 2. 8.  Herod charged the wise men thus , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 search exquisitively and most diligently of the babe : and , Act. 22. v. 3.  Paul professeth he was brought up , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , according to the exact manner of the Law.  

CHAP. II  

What circumspect walking is , and wherein it consisteth . 

Out of which so substantial a ground , it shall be worth our labour to inquire what this circumspect walking is : for we may not conceive it as any carnal craft and policy , by which a man is wary to save his goods , and outward estate : as many crafty heads and worldlings ●ast about , and continualy contrive with all wariness to save themselves , ●nd their profits : and he ●ust rise early that can get he better of them in any bargain . Neither is this circumspection any such po●cie and wariness in matters of religion , as relin●uisheth any good duty to which it hath calling ; or a●y practice of holiness , or outward profits and commodity ; or to preserve outward peace and pleasures ; as many crafty and deceitful protestants , that ●re so circumspect , as they will profess a religion which shall cost them nothing . Neither is this circumspection in any thing ● contrary , or cross to tha● done-like simplicity , and Christian innocence ● which is the ornament o● holy profession . But is ● careful and exact proceeding in the ways of God , according to the rules of God : even a● a workman most exactly fitteth his work by the l●uell and rule , and departed not from it . 

Now to this circumspection , are four things required : 

1.  A knowledge of th● right way , which is as th● light , guiding him to set every foot safely . For let ●man be never so circumspect and wary , if he be 〈◊〉 the night without a light● and without a guide , he can never walk securely and safe . The word is the lantern : and , the Commandment is the light . And , when wisdom enters into the heart , and knowledge delighteth the soul , then shall counsel preserve thee , and understanding shall keep thee , and deliver thee from the evil way , Prou. 2. 11 , 12.  

2.  A diligent watch and care to keep from all extremities , to turn neither to the right hand , nor to the left . For it is hard to keep a mean , we being very propense to extremes . Satan cares not so he can conquer us , whether it be by curiosity , or by carelessness : whether he can keep us out of the Church , or cast us out by our own conceits : whether he can keep us so cold , as no good thing greatly affects us , or whether he can make us boil over with unbridled zeal , that because we cannot have all the good we would , we will refuse a great deal of good we might have . A circumspect Christian will distinguish good from evil , and not refuse good for evil ; for that is an extremity . 

3.  An holy jealousy and suspicion , lest the heart be deceived through the deceitfulness of sin . The most simple-hearted Christian is a most wary man , that is , of his own hearts slipperinesse , suspecting himself in all things , fearing in all things lest he may not offend God. He knoweth sin lies in ambush , and suspects the insinuations of it . As he that is very circumspect for the world , is most suspicious of others , lest they overreach and beguile him : so one that is most circumspect for heaven , doth more suspect himself than any other . 

4.  A provident walking , by which a man is able to foresee future danger and evils , to prevent them , and provide for such things as may best bestead him in the way . Thus Solomon speaks of the circumspect and prudent Christian , that he foresees the plague and hides himself : and learns of the emmet to provide in summer for winter . This property of circumspection we see in the wise Virgins , that prepared oil in time . All these are inseparable properties of a provident and circumspect walking . 

Which is enjoined us in sundry other places of Scripture : as , prov. 4. 26.  Ponder the path of thy feet , and let all thy ways be ordered aright . Matth. 10. 16.  Be wise as serpents . This serpentine wisdom is nothing else but Christian circumspection . Heb. 12. 13.  Make right steps unto your feet , as good runners , who not only speed themselves in the way , but are wary to keep the right way , which they know is the shortest , and so carefully observe every step and every advantage . 

CHAP. III  

Of the next words of the Apostle , further explaining circumspect walking . Not as unwise , but as wise . ] 

The Apostle here expoundeth what he meaneth by circumspect walking ; namely , a wise ordering of a man's self according to the rules of Christian prudence . For wisdom is twofold ; either worldly and carnal , or else heavenly and spiritual . 

This distinction is the holy Ghosts own , in jam. 3. 15. 17. where both of them are at large described . Our text speaketh of spiritual and heavenly wisdom : which is such a gift of God , as both directeth and effecteth , or causeth a man to do that which is acceptable and pleasing unto God. Wherein it is much distinguished from human wisdom , which is merely contemplative knowledge ; but this is an active knowledge , giving rules and guidance in practice and action : Eccl. 10. 10.  The excellency to direct a thing is wisdom . As a Coachman in a coach , so spiritual wisdom in the heart , order the whole motion of a Christian in all his ways . 

The connexion implies , that Those be the wisest men , that walk most exactly . Prou. 14. 8.  The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way . Deut. 4. 6.  Keep them , and do them : for this is your wisdom , and your understanding in the sight of the people : — Only this is a wise people , and understanding . Pro. 23. 19  OH thou my son , hear and be wise , and guide thy heart in the way . 

CHAP. FOUR  

Proving strict walking to be the wisest walking . 

1.  HE that is but a little acquainted with the Scriptures , shall easily observe that he who walks most strictly according to God's word , is led by God's wisdom , which makes him discern between good and evil , and so walketh at a certain , by a most right and constant rule and direction : so as you shall find him square and stable of good judgement , and sound resolution in the things he is about . He is the wisest man that follows the wisest guide : But what man is he that feareth the Lord ? that is , walketh exactly : Himulco will the Lord teach the way that he shall choose , Psal. 25. 12.  Whereas it is a just punishment of carelessness , to wander as vagrants and unsettled persons in the way of religion , and grounds of Christianity ; and to be tossed and tumbled every way with the waves of inconstancy , and doubtfulness in every thing , for want of sound information and judgement in the ways of God : & needs must such be as wavering in their practice , as in their judgement . 

2.  He is the wisest man , that being to journey takes the safest , shortest , cleanest , and most lightsome way : But so doth he that walks most strictly , and circumspectly ; he only walks safely , because he walks sincerely ; whereas in declining Gods ways but a little , there can be nothing but fears without , and terrors within , and danger on every side , which nothing but uprightness can fence out . So who can deny but God himself hath described the rightest , and so the shortest way to heaven , which is the way over which he holds his own light ? And howsoever many aspersions and foul things be cast upon it , yet this is the only clean way of holiness and innocence , that leads to the Holy of Holies , into which no unclean person or thing can enter . 

3.  He is the wisest man , whose words and actions being scanned most narrowly will abide the trial : But thus must needs his words and actions be found , that is most exact , and stands most strictly the word . So David saith , then shall ●not be confounded when I have respect to all thy Commandments , Psal. 119. 6. and job 31. 35. the Almighty will witness for me , though mine enemies write a book against me . Let the enemies of grace , slander , reproach , and traduce for a time the ways of Gods righteous servants , he will make their righteousness break out as the light , and time shall show they were not so overshot as the world deemed . For , standing straight to the word , they may truly say with jeremy , Lord , if I be deceived , thou and thy Word hath deceived me . 

4.  He is the wisest man that best acquits himself in all estates : But he that walks precisely according to the directions of the Word , shall most handsomely demean himself in all estates . If God give prosperity to a wicked man , it drowns him : Ease slayeth the foolish : But this man useth it warily , without pride or insolency ; he is taught to use the world weanedly , as not using it . If he be in adversity , which sinks the sinner , this man bears it without impatience or murmuring , yea , he makes himself a great gainer by it . God's word fits him for every estate : he can want , and abound ; he is for peace or war , for sickness or health , for life or death : no evil tidings can make him afraid . As a wise man he hath rule and power over his affections , and is free from unruly passions . 

5.  He is the wisest man that taketh the best course for his own preferment : But so doth he that walketh most exactly : Godliness is the greatest gain . This man is ever in the way of preferment , he stands still in the presence of God , lives continually in his eye ; by constant honouring of him , he is coming into place of great honour , and great honour is coming upon him . He hath wealth and riches , and is still storing up as one covetous for heaven , is ever increasing in grace and glory . 

6.  He is the wisest man that can give others the best and wisest counsel : But who is so well able to give advice , as he that is best acquainted with the ways of God ? If experienced counsel be the best , who so fit as he , who hath tasted how good God is : Who so able as he , whom God hath stored with wisdom , such as hath wound him out of many troubles , such as brought into his hands so rich a stock , and revenue of grace , and made him a pattern and example of piety and virtue to many other ? 

Which if it be so , than we might take occasion to reprove such as charge God's people with simplicity and foolishness , and condemn them of much madness , in that they go in a way unknown , uncouth , and contrary to the world . They cannot walk in the dirty path of sinful pleasures , nor by the crooked rule of carnal policy , nor make the fashion of the world the measure of their conformity : but are content to walk in the strait way unto eternal life ; which the foolish world count's foolishness , and a simple silliness : but with greater folly : For God and his word approve them as the wisest men in the world , and so denominateth them , wise Virgins , wise servants , wise merchants , etc.  And our text calls them fools that walk not circumspectly . 

CHAP. v.  

Describing some means to attain this wisdom . 

Now before we pass this point , it shall not be amiss to direct the Reader by the way to some means to attain this wisdom , to walk exactly : as , 

1.  A diligent and frequent use & acquaintance in the word of God , as men become wise Politicians by often using the book of statutes . This law of God , hath God's wisdom contained in it , and makes us truly wise for the matter and measure , as God would have us. Hence the holy Ghost every where calls foolish men , to give ear to understanding , and to hear the words of wisdom , Prou. 8. 5 , 6. and v. 33.  Hear instruction , and be wise . Neither must we hear till we get a smattering knowledge of some general grounds of religion , in which most rest themselves ; but to understand the whole will of God , which is our rule : and not only to understand it , but to apply it to our several occasions , that it may not only be light in itself , but a lantern to our feet , and that in all our steps . This is the high privilege of the Scripture above all writings , that these alone are able to make men wise to salvation , 2 Tim. 3. 15.  Most men read human histories , men's sayings and writings , politic essays , and observations of prudent men : and this furnisheth them with some model of human and earthly wisdom : But only the wisdom of God's word , can make us truly wise to salvation ; without which all the wisest Gentiles , professing wisdom , and abounding mortalities , proved stark fools , Rom. 1. 22.  Cast God's book of wisdom aside , thou shalt prove a fool in the end . 

2.  Meditation of that a man hears and reads : for , to be wise , we must not only receive the ingrahted word , jam. 1. 21. but keep it , Luk. 11. 28.  Blessed are they that hear the word of God , and keep it . Now an especial way to keep the word , is meditation , which digests it into the several parts . Marry heard the sayings of Christ , and pondered them in her heart . And David used this means to become wise : yea , by constant meditation in the testimonies of God , he professeth how he became wiser than the prudent , than his teachers , than his ancients , than his enemies , Psal. 119. 97 , 98 , 99 , 100  And the reason why many hear a long time , and are never the wiser , is because they never care to fasten it by meditation , and make it their own : but wise men will lay up knowledge , Prou. 10. 14.  

3.  A loving and thankful embracing of admonition and rebuke . Prou. 9 8 , 9  Rebuke a wise man , and he will love thee : Give admonion to the wise , and he will be the wiser : Teach a righteous man , and he will increase in learning : but rebuke a scorner , and he will hate thee : and , fools scorn admonition . And therefore we are commanded not to speak in the ears of a fool : for he despiseth the wisdom of our words , Pro. 23. 9  The way for a man to grow wise , is , daily to discover his own folly , and make use of their words , who would help him in this business . Thus David grew sensibly wiser by the reproof of Nathan , when he made him confess he had done very foolishly . This is Christian teachablenesse , when a man is apt to receive a reproof . 

4.  Frequent the company of godly and wise men : for he that walks with the wise , shall be wise , Prou. 13. 20. and 9 6.  Forsake the foolish , and walk in the way of wisdom . In the company of the wise a man may be sure to do good , or take good : the lips of the righteous feed many : he will speak out of a good store-house ; he will deal faithfully with his brother , to help his soul out of sin ; his name from infamy , his person from scandal . Besides , he shall be resolved in doubts , encouraged in well-doing , and directed by such both by good instruction and good example . 

5.  Be fervent in prayer : It is a spiritual wisdom , and a gift of the Spirit ; therefore if any man lack wisdom , let him ask it of God , jam , 1. 5.  It is wisdom from above , jam. 3. 17.  This wisdom is not the birth and issue of great wits , and quick conceits , ●ut is seated in the heart ●hat is humble , and in sanctified souls , that are familiar with God , and frequent in prayer . For as Moses when he was long in the mount with God , his face shined when he came down : so those that continue in the mount of divine meditations and petitions , shall shine in wisdom & knowledge . How or whence got Solomon all that measure of wisdom ( in which he was an eminent type of jesus Christ , in whom were hid treasures of wisdom ) but because he asked it of God as his chief choice ? And David in the 119.  Psalm , makes no end of begging wisdom , understanding , good judgement from God ; because he knew there was the fountain . 

These are the means that are set apart by God , for the attaining of wisdom . If we fail in them , let us blame ourselves , if folly eat us up . 

CHAP. VI  

Leading into the particular rules of Christian wisdom , with the general distribution of them . 

Because this wisdom is not a contemplative , but an active knowledge , we must acquaint ourselves with the precepts of it , to guide us to this exact walking , that the whole man may be led by the rules of Christian prudence in all things . This is that which the Apostle prayeth for the Colossians , cap. 1. v. 9 that they might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will , and all wisdom in all things , to walk worthy of the Lord , and please him in all things . And because knowledge is of generals , and wisdom of particulars , therefore for our better direction , let us here consider some particular rules of spiritual wisdom grounded in God's word ; which he must be careful of , that would walk not as unwise , but as wise ; according to this Apostolical counsel . 

Rules of wisdom , concern 1 God , and the things of God.  
Man himself ; in his Inner man ; 1 Mind . 
2 Thoughts . 
3 William  
4 Conscience . 
5 Affections . 

Outward man , in his 1 Calling . 
2 Estate , of Prosperity . 
Adversity . 

3 Speeches . 
4 Actions , in General , for Trial . 
Undertaking . 

Special , of 1 Mercy . justice.  
Necessity . 

2 Indifferency , in General . 
Special , for Meat● . 
Sports . 
Apparel . 






Others in 1 General , toward all . 
2 Special ; 〈◊〉 1 Good men . 
2 Euillmen ▪ in , 1 General . 
2 Special 1 Scorners . 
2 Haters of ourselves . 







CHAP. VII . 

Rvles' of wisdom concerning God , and the things of God , are four . 

1.  That God is to be loved above all , and that for himself , being the chief good . This is the scope of the whole first table , the first and the great commandment , Mark. 12. 33.  To love God witb all the heart , all the understanding , all the soul , and all the strength , is more than all burned offerings and sacrifices , as the Scribe confessed ; whereupon the text infers he answered ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , cordaté , ) discreetly , wisely , and that in Christ's judgement . This is wisdom , to give God the first place , first thoughts , first service , chief praise and precedency : for , of him , and through him , and from him are all things . 

2.  Another chief point of spiritual wisdom in the things of God , is , to purchase Christ and remission of sins above all things in the world . The sound Christian is that wise merchant , that sells all to buy the pearl , that is , Christ and his righteousness : that wise builder , that lays Christ a sure foundation in his heart : He is of the number of those wise Virgins , that will be sure ( what ever they lack ) to furnish themselves of oil in their lamps to meet their bridegroom . Wisdom will procure the best commodities , and chief gain , which is Christ both in life and death . Paul was a wise merchant , who esteemed all things dross and dung in comparison of Christ. So were the Disciples , saying , Master we have lest all and followed thee . So were the Martyrs , whom the world accounted simple fools , in following Christ with the loss of life and all . Happy is that soul , and filled with found and saving wisdom , that comes to Christ with this resolution , Master , thou hast the words of eternal life , and whither shall I go ? 

3.  Let us prefer in our election and choice things of higher nature , before things of inferior : for wisdom keeps a method , by which it ever subordinateth lower things to higher . This rule our Saviour prescribeth , Mat. 6. 33.  First seek the Kingdom of God , and his righteousness , and then the things of this life ▪ first provide for hea●en , and then for earth . By which rule of wisdom , 1. all profits and pleasures must give place to piety : for all is but piddling gain to godliness . 2.  By this rule of wisdom , the special calling and trade of life must give place to the general calling , which is the trade of Christianity . 3.  By this rule a Christian must choose to be rich in God and good works , rather than in the world : which because the rich man in the Gospel neglected , he is called fool for his labour . 4.  By this rule we must with David , more affect one glimpse of God's favour and countenance , than all corn , wine , and oil , that is , the most necessary and delightful profits in the world . 5.  By this rule we must make more account of pardon of sins locked up in our breasts , than of the whole treasury of a Kingdom in our chests . 6.  By this rule we must esteem a grain of grace above a million of gold : and 7. a poor godly man above a wicked Prince : Eccles. 4. 13.  Better is a wise child than an old foolish King ; which will not be admonished . 

4.  Fear ●od , and keep his Commandments : for this is the whole man , Eccles. 12. 13.  This is to apply our hearts to wisdom , to set our hearts to keep God's Commandments , and do them : this is our wisdom , Deut. 4. 5.  Who is a wise man among you , endued with knowledge ? let him by good conversation show his works in meekness of wisdom , jam. 5. 13.  A wise man will attend the mouth of the King , and will fear the danger of the law : so a wise Christian will walk in the law of the Lord , Psa. 119. 1. and will be sure to keep him to this rule and warrant contained in the word of God , Gal. 6. 16.  And as a wise man is careful to keep his assurances and evidences for the certainty of his lands and earthly livelihoods , and is loath to forfeit any of them by failing in any of the conditions : So it is the wisdom of a godly man to keep the Word safely in his heart , which assureth him of his estate in heaven , and which he is loath to forfeit by failing in the conditions and clauses of it 

CHAP. VIII . 

Containing rules of wisdom concerning the innner man ; and first of the mind , thoughts , and william  

Being to entreat of the rules of wisdom concerning man & the things of man , good order requireth that we begin with such as concern 1. ones self , and 2. others . They which concern a man's self , respect either the inner man , or the outward . The inner man in five particulars : 1. in his mind , 2. thoughts , 3. will , 4. conscience , and 5. affections . 

For the mind , these rules of wisdom are necessary to be remembered . 

1.  To furnish it with necessary , profitable , and humble knowledge : The man's eyes are in his head , Ecl. 2. 13.  This is a wisdom to sobriety , Rom. 12. 13. where also the Apostle condemneth curiosity and conceitednesse , which wastes out time , and brings infinite idle questions , wherein men presume above that which is meet . The Prophet David professed he meddled not with things too high for him . And the Apostle Paul desired after his conversion to know nothing but jesus Christ , and him crucified . As for humbleness in knowledge , Solomon saith , The way of a fool is right in his own eyes , Pro. 12. 15. and , A wise man in his own conceit is more hopeless than a fool , Pro. 26. 12. 16.  Our rule therefore must be to grow up in wisdom , and as we grow in knowledge , so to grow in humility : for the more sound knowledge a man attains , the more shall he see in himself to humble him . 

2.  To deck and adorn the mind with humility , holiness , modesty , shamefastness , etc.  1 Pet. 3. 4 , 5. and , Col. 3. 12.  As the elect of God , put on tender mercy , kindness , humbleness , and meekness ▪ but above all things put on love , v. 14.  

The second sort of rules concerns a man's thoughts . The general is in Pro. 4. 23.  Keep thy heart with all diligence : for it is slippery and deceitful ; more than necessary to watch and suspect it , and to set time apart to check and reclaim it . But for the better keeping of thy thoughts in order , think on these particulars : 1.  Give God thy first thoughts , that he may hold the chief part in thy heart : and this will sweetly relish the heart , and by estranging it from worldly impediments , fit it , and keep it in preparednesse for all good occasions ▪ Psa. 108. 1 , 2 , 3.  David prepares his heart , and will awake early to praise the Lord : the way to walk safely and comfortably all the day , is first to reform that which is within . 

2.  Examine thy thoughts whence they come , and whither they go , and what they do in thee : By which means thou shalt banish a number of idle and wandeing thoughts , which like roving vagrants , being worth nothing , come ever to steal something , either time or grace : and so shalt thou make and keep room for better . And do this betime , because the first motions of sinful thoughts defile a man This rule is in 2 Cor. 10. 5. to draw weapons against every strong imagination , that is exalted against the knowledge of Christ.  

3.  If thy thoughts concern the world , pull them back , keep them from the world , save as much as needs must for the moderate maintaining of thyself and thine , lest heavenly thoughts be drowned and hindered , 1 Tim. 6. 9  The reason is , because our hearts being earthly , do presently conceive a sweetness in earthly things , and are presently distracted from the love of the Creator , to the love of the creature . Now spiritual wisdom requireth , that we diminish the love of the creature , that we may in crease our love of the Creator . But , if they will run upon the world , then turn the course of them a little , to consider the vanity and misery of this evil world , the painted vizor of the pleasures of it , the uncertainty of life , the deceitfulness of riches , how they be not ours , what evils and encumbrances we have received from the world , what fools they have made us in treasuring on earth , whose home and expectation is in heaven . 

4.  If thy thoughts concern thyself , or others thy brethren , labour to think better of others than thyself : for thou seest no such thing in them as in thyself : Phil. 2. 3.  Let every one esteem better of another than of himself . Yea , the more thou seemest to excel others in gifts , the more humble labour to be . An hard rule , and difficult to be practised : and therefore it is often commended to us , as Rom. 12. 16.  Make yourselves equal to them of the lower sort ▪ and elsewhere . For this purpose , conceive not only what thou hast received , but what thou wantest , and what good things thou art without : and then with Paul , say thou hast not yet attained to perfection . 

5.  If thy thoughts concern any sin , be sure it be to hate and reno●nce , to bewail and mourn for it , in thyself or others . For there is a slynesse and subtlety in sin , which while we think of , it easily gaineth some tickling and consent , which at least hindereth that through-hatred that we ought to maintain against it . 

The third rule for the inner man concerneth the will , namely , that our care must be , there be but one will between God and us : for so hath the Lord taught us to pray , Thy will be done . 1.  Wherein soever God hath revealed his will to us , in that we must rest . 2.  Whatsoever his will determineth of us , that we we must accounted holy and just , whether with us or against us. 3  Whatsoever his will prescribeth to us , whether obedience to the law , or faith of the Gospel , we must hold ourselves fast bound in conscience unto it , let it seem never so cross to us , or contrary to his law , as Abraham did in offering his son . 4.  Whatsoever his will disposeth to us , prosperity or adversity , sickness or health , life or death , or whatsoever else ; all is from a most wise hand , disposing every thing for the good and salvation of his elect , and so should be entertained . Thus Eli said , It is the Lord , let him do what is good in his eyes : and Hezekiah , The word of the Lord is good , even when it threatened the overthrow of his house and Kingdom . So David , Psa. 39 9  I held my tongue , and said nothing , because thou Lord didst it : and job , The Lord giveth , and the Lord taketh , blessed be the name of the Lord  

CHAP. IX . 

Rules for the conscience . 

The fourth sort of rules for the inner man , concerns the conscience . 1.  Beware of doing any thing with a blind conscience . A blind man swallows many a gnat , and a blind conscience swalloweth any sin . This is a wicked conscience , to which no sin so great shall come , but a man shall think he doth God good service in it , as Christ speaks of them that would s●ay his Disciples . Why do heathens persecute Christians , and Papists pursue protestants even to death , but out of blind zeal and conscience , that they root out a false religion ? And whatsoever a man doth by an erroneous and seduced conscience , is sin : the rule of conscience to heathens being the law of nature , and to the Church the law written , even the whole word of God as a pillar of cloud and fire to direct it in all the way to heaven . Therefore let the word of God dwell plenteously in you , in all wisdom , Col. 3. 16.  

2.  Do nothing with a doubtful conscience : for whatsoever is done with a scrupulous conscience , is sin , and is not only an offence of God , but of the conscience too , which is as a little God within us : for it is not of faith , nor obedience to the known will of God. Rom. 14. ult. He that doubteth , is condemned : because his action is not of faith . Therefore vers . 5. he saith , Let every man be fully persuaded in his mind . 

3.  Labour to get a good conscience above all things . Act. 23. 1.  I have endeavoured in all good conscience till this day . A pure conscience by nature hath no man , but made pure by the blood of Christ sprinkled upon it by faith , in that he hath obtained full remission of sin , and by his blood also merited the Spirit of Sanctification , by which the conscience of the believer is daily cleansed . 

4.  Labour to get a pure conscience in all things . A man by observing many things , may get himself good credit , but a good conscience must be in all the things of God. The Pharisies might not go into Pilates judgement hall , lest they should be polluted ; and yet at the same time , they could dispense with their conscience , to crucify the Son of God , a sin defiling heaven and earth , whiles the Sun was ashamed , and the earth trembled at it . The Papists may not eat flesh in Lent , their consciences will not suffer them ; but to kill Kings , and blow up Parliament-houses , their consciences give them good leave . Many protestants will not steal , kill , commit the act of adultery : but their conscience can dispense with covetousness , unbridled anger wantonness , filthy speeches , etc.  But if God's word be the same , so must the conscience : and he that serves God as Paul did in pure conscience , 2 Tim ▪ 1. 3. will do so at all times , in all places and things , and will avoid sin in his closet as much as in mos● public meetings , yea , small sins as well as great . 

5.  It is as great wisdom to keep things well , as to purchase them : therefore we must ( if we would wall● wisely ) be as careful to keep good conscience a● to obtain them : and thereunto observe two things ▪ 1.  Daily take away matte● of accusation , which is sin , by repentance . 2.  Rather displease all men than thine own conscience , thy friends , thy family , thy rulers , nay , thy own self before thy conscience . So did Daniel and his fellows . So did Cyprian ( as Augustine relates it ) when the Emperor in the way to his execution said , Now I give thee space to consider whether thou wilt obey me in casting a grain into the fire , or be thus miserably slain : Nay ( saith he ) In re tam sanctâ deliberatio non habet locum : there needs no deliberation in this case . The like we read in the history of France : In the year 1572. presently after that tragical and perfidious slaughter and massacre of so many thousands of God's Saints by treacherous Papists , Charles the ninth King of France , called the Prince of Conde , and proposed to him this choice ; Either to go to Mass , or to die presently , or to suffer perpetual imprisonment . His noble answer was , that by God's help he would never choose the first , and for either of the two latter , he left to the King's pleasure and Gods providence . Thus a good conscience makes a good choice for itself , choosing any thing rather than to offend God.  

CHAP. X.  

Rules of wisdom concerning the affections . 

The fifth sort of rules for the inner man concerneth the affections , and hath these particulars : 

1.  Delight thyself in the Lord , and make him thy chief joy . Psal. 37. 4.  For the object of our joy must not be carnal , but the Lord himself , apprehending him as Gen. 17. 1. el shaddi , almighty to save , all-sufficient to supply , and a large portion , our Sun , our shield , grace , and glory , Psal. 84.  Solomon having tried his heart with all other delights , came at last to a recantation : and so do all God's children , and say , Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us , Psal. 4.  

2.  Labour to affect all other things in God , and for God , nothing like him , much less above him , or against him : Psal. 34. 8.  Taste and see how good God is ; that is , in all things labour to find the sweetness of God in all his creatures , and all his actions . A wise man will not insist in the gift , but look to the giver , whose love he prizeth more than the token of it . If any affection make us unfit to pray , or any way thrust us from God , it is carnal . 

3.  Let us labour to get our affections more to heaven than earth : Col. 3. 2.  Set your affections on things which are above , and not on things which are on earth : where we see plainly , that these two cannot both have the affections set on them , no more than two Masters served at once : as also that it is not enough to affect heavenly things , but also with chief affection and care , in the first place . Hence is that ordinary rule , that spiritual things must be affected and asked simply , being simply good , but temporal with limitation , as being but conditionally good . 

4.  Fear the evil of sin more than the evil of punishment , because the evil of sin is more evil . Sin is simply evil , and so is nothing else , no not the punishment of it . A wise man should rather choose hell than God's offence : for there is nothing but sin which God hates , and we ought to hate nothing so much : sin directly resisteth God's glory , but punishment makes for it in the manifestation of his justice . 

5.  Be affectionate one in the case and condition of another . In case of spiritual misery , sin , weakness , human frailty : Be tender hearted one to another , even as God for Christ's sake forgave you , Eph. 4. 32. so Col. 3. 12.  Now beloved , as the elect of God put on tender mercy , kindness , etc. one to another . And in the temporal miseries of our brethren , put on bowels of compassion , be not without natural affection , forget not Joseph's affliction ; but lend , give , cloth , feed , protect from violence , and turn not thine eyes from thine own flesh . The phrase ( bowels of mercy ) shows that all our mercy must be from within , even from the tender compassions of the estate of our brother : and the same in Isa. 58. 10. that we power out our souls to the needy : that is , our souls must first be merciful , and then our mercies will be plentiful , which is noted in the word pouring . 

CHAP. XI . 

Rules of wisdom for the outward man , and first concerning his calling . 

Now we come to such rules of wisdom , as whereby the outward man is to be ordered , that we may walk ( both toward ourselves , and others ) not as unwise , ▪ but as wise , and that by the wisdom which is from above . And these rules concern , 1. his calling , 2. his estate , 3. his words , 4. his actions . 

Directions to walk wisely in his course and calling are these : 

1.  Seeing the calling is a part of Christian obedience , and duty to God , a Christian may neither live out of a calling , nor in any calling not warranted by God's word . For if God set us in our callings , he promises both to be with us in them , and to give us good success , and to help us against the tediousness of them , jos. 1. 8.  Therefore sanctify thy calling , and every part thereof , by the word and prayer . 

2.  In the whole exercise of our calling ▪ we must show all good faithfulness . 1.  To God , by depending on him , who hath made our calling a chief means of our maintenance , and not sacrificing to our own nets . For it is the Lord that gives power to get substance . 2.  To ourselves , by walking diligently , and abiding in our calling , that we may eat our own bread , and provide for ourselves and ours , and give to him that needeth , Eph. 4. 28.  For by idle and inordinate living , through the neglect of the vocation by God's just judgement men fall into the depth of sin , drunkenness , gaming , whoredom , thieving , and nothing comes amiss to an idle person . Besides , discredit , bad report , and poverty , come as an armed man upon such a one . 3.  To others , whether we be Masters or servants , as knowing that in our calling we are to practise most Christian duties , as love to our brethren , patience , truth , fidelity , uprightness , as being ever under God's eye . 

3.  Another point of wisdom in our callings , is , not to meddle with other men's business , but follow our own close . 1 The. 4. 11.  Study to be quiet and to do your own business . And every where the Apostle reproves busybodies , who going beyond their own bounds , thrust their sickle into every man's harvest , and being out of their own places and business , intermeddle with that which no way concerns them . And these are disturbers of peace and civil tranquillity , kindling and blowing up contentions for lack of other work . The same rule is for women also , that they be not gadders , but housekeepers . 

4.  In all earthly business , study to carry an heavenly mind . A Christian while he converseth in earth , must have his conversation in heaven , and know , that in all the ways of this present life , he ought never to step out of the way to eternal life . Neither shall a man be a loser by this course , seeing we have an express promise , that if we seek God's kingdom first and principally , these outward things should ( so far as they are needful for us ) without such carking care be cast upon us.  

5.  As all duties of the calling must be profitable in themselves , and for the public good , so the most profitable must be most intended , and specially performed . A Minister must read the Word , but must apply himself more to Preaching , as being more necessary . A Magistrate must execute justice upon transgressors of men's laws , but especially against open transgressors of Gods Law. Masters of Families must provide for the bodies and health of their Family , but especially for the good and salvation of their souls . 

CHAP. XII . 

Rules of wisdom concerning a man's estate , and first for adversity . 

The rules of wisdom concerning a Christian man's estate , are these : first , general ; secondly , special . 

The general rule for all estates , is this : Be prepared for any estate , contented in every estate , and assure thyself the present estate ( whatsoever it is ) is best for thee , though not ever in thy sense , yet in God's gracious and wise ordering of it . This lesson the Apostle Paul had well learned , Phil. 4. 11 , 12.  I can want , and abound ; I can be full , and hungry : I have learned in all estates to be contented . 

The special rules are either for prosperity , or for adversity . Concerning adversity & afflictions , these are the rules of Christian wisdom : 

1.  Consider thou art not placed here in the world by God to enjoy the pleasures of the world , but to enjoy God , which thou mayst do as well in affliction as in prosperity , and to cleave to him in his service , looking for nothing but afflictions , as a pilgrim going to thy Country , the way whereunto , lieth through afflictions . This ground not laid ; men count troubles a strange thing , 1 Pet. 4. 11. and start at the mention of them , as the Apostles , joh. 11. 8. when they heard Christ speaking of going into jury , where the jews had lately sought to stone him . And note it to be a corruption of the heart , to be more grieved for thine own troubles than the troubles of the Church , for private than public evils . 

2.  La● up strength and comforts aforehand : as 1.  Humility , to overmaster and tame the pride and rebellion of our hearts , and to bring in contentedness to sweeten our troubles ; and our labour will be well spent : for if we can relish the hardest part of our life , our whole life else will assuredly be more sweet and joyful . 2.  Grow up in the knowledge of God , which will make thee rise up in much comfort , and will bring in comfort against that confused heaviness , distrust , and dangerous affections & passions , which else in trouble might beaten us down , and off him . 3.  Get assurance of faith , which will sweetly warm the heart in the sense of God's love in jesus Christ : The fruit of which will be , First , to enable us to trust ourselves with God in any estate , and be assured the Lord is with us in fire and water , in the midst of the valley of the shadow of death . Secondly , to depend on him for strength : for howsoever Satan would make us bel●eve our affliction is greater than it is , or we are for it ; yet we shall assure our hearts that the Lord hath measured it out for our strength , and not above . Thirdly , to wait upon him for a good issue and seasonable deliverance , who hath promised to turn it to the best . This shall keep us from fainting , distrust , and despair . 

3.  In all evils of punishment take occasion to set upon the evil of sin , and revenge upon that : complain of it to God & men , murmur and grudge at nothing else . If affliction be sharper than ordinary , it is sure some sin or lust adds a sting unto it . But this rule mortifies sin and unruly passions , and will weaken the heart , and make a man say with the Church , I will bear the wrath of the Lord , because I have sinned . 

4.  Make them no heavier than God maketh them , by impatience , frowardness , and looseness of heart . God sometimes lays on a little finger , and the froward heart lays on the whole hand and loins , to make the burden heavier with faithless heaviness and distrust , which is but an addition of new and worse troubles than the former . How inconsiderately do many men load themselves with troubles too too light in themselves , and on the shoulders of wise men , who can make a virtue of necessity , and st●p over a number of rubs , which others stoop to remove and infinitely toil themselves ? How do many in smaller troubles , as discourtesy of neighbours , unrulinesse of children , unfaithfulness of servants , smaller losses and crosses in family-matters , give place to unquietness , impatience , and passion , till their folly have ( by seeking to ease their burden ) increased it from a dram to a talon ? And now how unmeet are they for the service of God ? how unprofitable in any Christian society ? how sour and heavy in countenance , disguised in speech , and impotent in their behaviour ? All which testify the frowardness of the heart , wherein had there been a dram of Christian wisdom and moderation , the passion had not swollen to the cause , much less so far exceeded it . 

5.  Make not haste from under any affliction . He that bèleeves , makes not haste . But labour for a right use of it rather than the removal : attain once a right use , and doubt not of a good issue . Gold is not presently pulled out of the fire so soon as it is cast in , but must stay a while till it be purged . A Musician strains up a string , and let's it not down , lest the harmony and music be spoilt : So the Lord deals with his children , but never forgets mercy nor measure ; nay , it is mercy so to measure them , as they may be purged by them . 

6.  Observe and mark thy troubles , and thy disposition in them : first , to grow up in wisdom and experience by them : thus thy sufferings will become wholesome instructions . Observe where thou wast most pinched , and wherein thou tookest the greatest comfort : secondly , to grow up in an infallible hope of God's goodness , and a good issue for time to come . For this , observe Gods seasonable hearing of thy prayers , and the proofs of Gods help in most needful times ; which shall be a strong means to keep thee from fainting , fears and despairs from time to come . So did David in the case of the Lion & Bear , and through all the 23.  Psalm . Thus the Apostle from observations of times past , gathers assurance for the time present , and to come , 2 Cor. 1. 10.  — who delivered us from so great death and doth deliver us , and in whom we trust , that he will yet hereafter deliver us. Thirdly , to be able to comfort others with such comforts as ourselves were upheld with in our troubles , 2 Cor. 1. 4. which comforteth us in all our tribulation , that we may be able to comfort them which are in affliction , by the comfort where . with ourselves are comforted of God. Thus to the godly ariseth light out of darkness , sweet comes out of sour , and out of the eater meat . 

CHAP. XIII . 

Rules of wisdom for prosperity . 

IN prosperity take these directions . 

1.  If riches increase , set not thine heart upon them , Psal. 62. 10.  For why shouldst thou , considering the danger how easy it is to wax wanton ? how hard for a rich man to be saved ? how few by outward things are drawn to the love of heavenly ? how many are ensnared and choked with them ? how flitting and uncertain they be ? how certainly we must leave them , or they us , and come to accounted for them . 

2.  In the carriage of thy prosperity be suspicious of thyself , thankful to God , and return the glory of it to him of whom thou receivest it . David , while he had liberty , easily strayed , Psa. 119. 67.  Thankfulness is God's tribute , which being denied him , he reenters on his own , Deut. 28. 47.  Because thou servedst not the Lord with joyfulness , and a good heart , in the abundance of all things , thou shalt serve thine enemies in hunger , in thirst , and in need of all things . So do many Prodigals . 

3.  Fear the cross before it come , and provide for it . The thing that I feared is come upon me , job 3. 25. and , he waited for his changes . It was an addition to the great plague of Babylon , Isa. 46. 11. that evil should come on her , and she not know the morning thereof : Destruction shall come upon thee suddenly ere thou be aware . Therefore cast the costs of religion and well-doing beforehand . 

4.  Never accounted thyself prosperous if it be not well with God's Church : Good Vriah would not rest as long as the Ark of the Lord was abroad , and his Lord joab in the field : as a good child being in health mourns and droops for the mother's sickness . David thought it not fit to dwell in seiled houses , and the Ark of God lie in tents : for the neglect whereof , the jews are reproved , Hag. 1. 4.  Nehemiah , even before the King , was of a sad countenance , and sorrowful at heart , when he received evil tidings of jerusalem , chap. 2. vers . 2.  Hester and Mordecai joyed not in the greatest advancements , so long as the sentence against the jews was unreversed . And Moses might have lived well , and at pleasure , in Pharaohs Court : but he choose rather to suffer affliction with God's people , than to enjoy such pleasures . 

5.  In thy prosperity consider the affliction and adversity of others . The contrary hereof was the sin of the Princes of Israel living in prosperity : Amos 6. 6.  They lie on beds of ivory , and stretch themselves on beds , drink wine in boles , and anoint themselves with oil , but none remembered the affliction of joseph . The like of Dives his inhumanity towards Lazarus . Yea , sometime it shall be wisdom to go into the house of mourning , which will strike a deeper impression ; and to visit others in adversity , and mark their speeches , who embraced these outward pleasures with greatest and sharpest appetite , and thou shalt find the affliction far more bitter , and their sorrow in the loss so much the sharper , as the love was eager in enjoying their peace : and perhaps they will tell thee , they were never such gainers by all their prosperity , as they were losers by it , or gainers by that present affliction . 

CHAP. XIIII . 

Rules to carry our speeches wisely , as those that aim at the Apostolical rule of Christian circumspection . 

1.  Concerning the ground of them : Labour to get a good heart , for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak . The heart of the wise guideth his mouth wisely , Prou. 16. 23.  And , if the heart indite a good matter , the tongue will be the pen of a ready writer , Psal. 45. 1.  Such as the heart is , such will be the speech : and therefore he that hath no care of his heart , cannot be a good and careful speaker . The Apostle requires gracious speech , Col. 4. 6. but that must come from a gracious heart : as Psal. 37. 30 , 31. the mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom , and his tongue will talk of judgement . For the Law of his God is in his heart , and his steps shall not slide . and Pro. 31. 26.  She openeth her mouth with wisdom , and the Law of grace is in her tongue . On the contrary , a graceless heart cannot speak well : Prou. 10. 20 , 21.  The heart of the wicked is little worth : the lips of the righteous do feed many ; but fools shall die for want of wisdom . The true reason , why many mend not their bad speeches , is , because first they mend not their heart . 

2.  Concerning the matter of speech : 1.  Because all must be wholesome so much as we may , therefore choose the best matters to talk of , matters of religion , faith , hope , and the way to salvation : for wisdom always chooseth the best . 2.  If it be chosen or offered , it concerns either God , or our neighbours , or ourselves . I If it concern God , or any part of his name , attributes , word or works , we must speak most reverently , as those who are not worthy to take his name into our mouths . The precept is , Levit. 19 12.  thou shalt not defile the name of the Lord , but fear his glorious name , Deut. 28. 58.  And they defile his name , who in common talk , lightly and carelessly use his name , of God , or Lord , or any other of his titles in ordinary speech : and they , who are ordinary or idle swearers and cursers : and jesters in Scripture-phrases , who are far from trembling at his word , Isa. 66. 3. and those that mock at sin and Gods judgements , and abuse or are unthankful for any of his mercies . II If the matter of thy speech concern thy brother's person , the rule is , to speak of the good thou knowest by him , behind his back : but of evil , not without calling , nor without grief ; and before him , or to him . Tit. 3. 2.  Warn them that they speak evil of no man , but be soft , and showing all meekness to all men . Contrary whereunto is scoffing , deriding , cursing , railing , bitter and slanderous speeches , tending to the offence of any man : yea , if men's speeches may justly offend us , we must be soft and calm , showing all meekness , not rendering rebuke for rebuke , but passing by his sin , espy in his person the image of God worthy to be reverenced and loved . If thou spea●e of his sayings o● actions , if they be evil , speak as little of them as may be , if they be doubtful , construe them in the best part : for love is not suspicious , but hopeth all things . Praise God for his good actions : and as for sins in him , deal plainly and truly with him : Leu. 19 17.  thou shalt not hate thy brother , but shalt plainly rebuke him , and not suffer his sin upon him . We must not lie , dissemble , flatter , or soothe up any in their sins , which is a most ordinary sin against this rule of wisdom . III If the matter of thy speech concern thyself , speak modestly without vanity or boasting : Prou. 27. 2.  Let another man praise thee , and not thine own lips . Nay , we should rather extenuate and lessen the good in us , if we must needs speak of it , as Paul , I am the least of the Apostles ▪ and in an others person , I know a man , etc.  2 Cor. 12. 2.  

3.  Concerning the manner of our speech . First , because every man's speech by nature is corrupt , therefore strive to make it gracious , and powdered with salt , Col. 4. 6. that is , well seasoned and savoury , not savouring of the flesh and corruption , but we must drive out or dry up the corruption of them , with the salt of grace . Against many , who powder their speech with oaths , and curses , and filthy rottenness , or fondidle speeches , savouring of the filthy sink and puddle within . Secondly , it must be just and sincere , the truth of our heart , Psal. 15. 2. without dissimulation or lies , seeing God made the tongue to express the heart . A fearful thing it is , that most men's speeches are turned into mere compliment . Thirdly , it must be more earnest , joyful , and comfortable when thou speakest of heavenly things , than of earthly : not jesting , or foolish talking , but rather giving of thanks , Eph. 5. 4.  

4.  Concerning the end of our speech : It must tend to edification ▪ Eph. 4. 29. to feed many , Prou. 10. 21. and minister grace to the hearers . It must bend itself still for God , the defence of good men and actions , and the disgrace of sin . Better no speech , than to no good end . And yet many in their light , and idle speeches say , why , I hope I do no harm . Yea , but what good doth it ? Shame will not let thee say , thou intendest edification . Therefore look well unto it . 

5 ▪ Concerning the measure of our speech : First , we must not speak too little , and omit gracious speeches when occasion is offered , as many dry and barren hearts and mouths , have not a word for God and goodness , that have words enough , and more then enough in any other argument ; like idols in good things , that have mouths , and speak not ; or as if they were possessed with dumb spirits , and not suffered to speak any good . Tell such a one of a good farm , or bargain , or natural things , and they savour and relish them well enough : whereas a good motion strikes them dumb , and makes them as fishes out of their element . Neither , secondly , must our words be too many : for in many words are many sins . The fool multiplieth words , Eccles. 10 , 14. and Prou. 29. 11.  A fool poureth out all his mind . But he that hath knowledge , spares his words , Pro. 17. 27. and he that refrains his lips , is wise , cham . 10. 19  It is folly to lay on more words then the mat●er requireth , and argueth impotency of mind , and carries a show or demonstration of passion , and excess of affection , or pride in speaking . 

6.  Concerning the season of our speech . All our words must be seasonable , as well as seasoned , that is , fitted to circumstances , times , places , and persons . Wisdom will seek a season for good words : for there is a season wherein the prudent will keep silence . ▪ And how good is a good word in due season ? Pro. 15. 23.  It is like apples of gold , and pictures of silver . Husband men observe seasons in sowing , and so must he that looks for an harvest of his speeches . Abigail would not speak to her husband Nabal in his drunkenness , but when he had slept out his wine . Every man is not capable of every good speech , nor no man at all times alike . There is an unaduised opennes , against which our Saviour by his example arms us , joh. 2. ult. He would not commit himself to some , who are said to believe in him , because he knew what was in man Silence is best where no good can be done , as Christ was silent before the high Priest : and Rabsecai must not be answered . To meet a man in the heat of his passion with good words , is to meet a Bear robbed of her whelps : but let the passion be calm , and then tell him how disguised and uncovered he was , he will perhaps believe it . 

CHAP. xv.  

Motives to look to our tongue . 

1.  Because a good man cannot be an evil speaker : if the speech be naught , the religion is vain , jam. 1. 29.  Lying and accusing is the devil's work . 2.  Watching of good speech keeps out evil , which engendereth to evil . Take up David's resolution , Psal. 39 1.  I thought I will take heed to my ways , that I sin not with my tongue : I will keep my mouth bridled , while the wicked is in my sight . And this is necessary , because the tongue is an unruly member , as fire , and by this means shall become our glory , & our brother's shield . 3.  God hath a time to call to reckoning the words that are thought but wind , Psal. 50. 20 , 21. even every idle word , Matth. 12. 36.  

CHAP. XVI . 

Rules of wisdom concerning our actions , that in all of them we may show forth Christian prudence and circumspection : and first in general . 

First , every Christian is to examine the work he is to do , whether he be about a good work , whereof he may expect comfort , Gal. 6 ▪ 3 Let every man prove his own work , and so he shall have comfort in himself . And good reason : for his work must be tried afterwards , and therefore it is wisdom to try it beforehand . And the same rule of examining it , is now , and shall be hereafter . This trial stands in four things : 1.  Whether it be good in itself , and in the matter of it : if it be lawful , if it be commanded , The rule for the goodness of any action is the word of God : What I command thee , that do only . Or else it will be asked , Who required those things at your hands ? And for the matter of our actions , we have a special rule , Phil. 4. 8.  Whatsoever things are true , honest , just , pure ; whatsoever things pertain to love , and are of good report ; if there be any virtue or praise , think on these things . And Rom. 12. 17. and 1 Cor. 8. 21.  Provide things that are honest , not only before the Lord , but also before men . 2.  Examine whether it be good in the doer , undertaken by virtue of a special calling , and answerable to that duty which himself oweth to God or man God upholdeth the societies of men by order ; which is , when every man keeps his own standing , and every one moves ( as the several stars ) but every one in his own sphere , not troubling the motion of another . So public men should attend the public office ; and private men reform in private , but let the public alone . For Christ reproved Peter's curiosity , in ask what john should do , joh. 21. 21.  And the sons of Sceva wanted calling for an action that was good in itself , and therefore were torn and wounded of the Devil . 3.  Examine whether it be good in the circumstances , seasonable and convenient , or whether the season serve not for some better action than that . For wisdom will intend of necessaries the most necessary , and of profits the most profitable . 4.  Examine whether the action now to be done be good in the ends of it , which especially are two , 1.  God's glory , 1 Cor. 10. 3.  Let all be done to the glory of God. 2.  The good and edification of our brethrens , 1 Cor. 14. 26.  Let all be done to edifying : yea , seeking their profit in some cases above our own . then , 

Secondly , if by examination we find the actions good in themselves , in us , in circumstances , and ends , we must be careful we spoil not good actions by ill handling , but endeavour to do good actions well , and to good matter add a good manner of doing . Now the right manner of doing a good action well , stands in three things : To undertake them holily : To do them sincerely : And to finish them humbly . The first is , when we begin them with prayer : for as in all matters , small and great , we are to take counsel at God's mouth ; so we are to beg leave and blessing at least secretly to ourselves , without which nothing is sanctified unto us. The second is , when we do things sincerely , as in God's sight , with a good heart , and keeping good conscience ; that a man if he be questioned in any thing , may be able to say with Abimilech , Gen. 20. 5.  With an upright heart did I this thing : and whatsoever may befall him for well-doing , he may appeal to God with Hezekiah , and say , Lord remember that I have walked uprightly before thee . The third is , when in affecting all our best actions we labour to see our defects and wants , and mourn that we neither do that we should do , nor in the manner we should . Whereof there will be three notable fruits : 1.  This will breed and nourish humility . 2.  It will drive us out to Christ to get a covering . 3.  It will make us ascribe all the glory of our actions to God , of whom we have not only all the power , but even the will and purpose : Phil. 2. 13.  For it is God that worketh in you both the will and the deed according to his good pleasure . 

CHAP. XVII . 

Rules to carry works of mercy wisely . 

IF our actions concern others , than they be works either of mercy , or of justice : 

For works of mercy much wisdom is required , and that is showed in these particulars : 1.  See thy charity come from a good ground , namely , from a heart qualified with two graces : 1.  Faith : for whatsoever is not of faith , is sin , Rom. 14. 23.  thou must first give thyself to the Lord , and then to his Saints , 2 Cor. 8. 5.  Thy mercy must issue from the sense of God's mercy in Christ to thine own soul , apprehended by faith in jesus Christ. Bring forth fruit in this vine . 2.  It must proceed from love . Works of mercy must come from the fountain of a merciful heart , Rom. 12. 8.  He that distributeth , let him do it of simplicity , that is , out of mere compassion , not out of any by and sinister respects . For if I feed the poor with all my goods , and want love , it profiteth me nothing , 1 Cor. 13.  The reason is , because the Lord looks more at the affection than the action . Whence many , not giving out of a tender heart , sympathising and fellow-feeling their brethren's misery , loose both their gift and reward . What comfort or help is in that work of mercy , which is wrung out by importunity , or by strength of law , or for shame lest a man should be noted , or by terror of conscience , when a man would heal the gripes of a galling and accusing conscience , by giving away at his death a little ill-gotten goods to the poor , which were none of his to give but to the right owners : or when out of desire of praise , or out of superfluity , when a man knows not else what to do with his wealth , but some must have it ? if out of any of these respects , all is lost . 

2.  Concerning the right subject of works of mercy : Do good unto all , but especially to the household of faith , Gal. 6. 10.  To all , viz. the poor that are not able to recompense us ; not looking for recompense of man , but casting our bread upon the waters , where there is no likelihood of ever reaping it again . And to all , even our enemies who stand in need of us , and such as usually do and will recompense our good with evil , Rom. 12. 14.  Mat. 5. 44.  And good reason : for first , all have our flesh , Isa. 58. 7. from which we must not hide our face . 2.  A●l have Gods image on them , which we must not refuse . 3.  Hereby we shall be likest to God , who doth good to al● , and to us being enemies : and attain the most difficult practice of the law . 4.  We shall hereby master the corruption of our own heart , which lusteth after revenge , and perhaps overmaster the malice of our adversaries , at least make them inexcusable . 

But especially to the household of faith : because here is God's image renewed , here is one of the blood and kindred of Christ : and if the good Samaritan was commended for mercy showed to a stranger , how much more will the Lord jesus accept that which is done to one of those little ones that believe in him , as done to himself ? 

3.  Concerning the matter of mercy : The greatest mercy we can show to any , is toward their souls , which stands in instructing the ignorant , in counselling the weak , in forgiving offenders , in admonishing or correcting him that erreth , comforting distressed consciences , and confirming them that are in good ways . This therefore must be observed , in all corporal mercy to join spiritual , labouring in all the other the good of this : and especially to pray for such mercies from God for them , as neither we nor other men can minister unto them . And though that be to be done , yet the other also must not be left undone , but we must be merciful to the outward man of our brother , in giving , lending freely , clothing , feeding , visiting , protecting from violence , etc.  For this is mercy actual and acceptable , fitted to that rule , 1 joh. 3. 18. that we show mercy not in word and tongue , but in deed , and in truth . This age aboundeth with mouth-mercy , which is good cheap , but a little handful were better than a great many such mouth-f●ls . 

4.  Concerning the measure of our mercy : We must be merciful in the highest degree that we can get our hearts unto , and be as like our heavenly Father in mercifulnesse as may be . This rule is , 1 Cor. 16. 2. that every man lay up and distribute as God hath prospered him , that is , according to his ability : for he that sows sparingly , shall reap sparingly . Doubtless men would not be so niggardly and sparing , if they knew , that what is mercifully bestowed is safest kept : the bosoms , bellies , and mouths of the poor , is the best treasury to lay our goods in : and if we expected to reap after the measure of mercy at the last day , we would more liberally sow , Host 10. 12.  Yea , a poor man may be bountiful in a little , which was the commendation of the poor widow for her two mites , Luk. 20.  

5.  Concerning the manner of showing mercy : First , it must be done seasonably and speedily when need is : Prou. 3 ▪ 28.  Say not unto thy neighbour , Go , and come to morrow , if now thou have it with thee : for thou mayst be cut off from the opportunity , or that from thee ; besides that thou omittest a present duty which is enjoined , Gal. 6. 10.  While we have time , let us do good . And life is very uncertain . Secondly , it must be done cheerfully : God loves a cheerful giver : not groningly , or grudgingly , as if every penny were too much , as many pinch ▪ pennies , who have pounds enough for any lust or pleasure , do part with pence to the poor Saints as from their joints or eyes . Thirdly , it must be done wisely : true mercy is dispensed by judgement . It spares not where God will punish , as as Saul's cruel mercy : A glass for Magistrates , whose remissness can swallow any thing , and punish nothing , neither drunkenness , nor profanation of the Sabbath , nor swearing , nor inordinate walking . It is no mercy ( out of extreme necessity ) to relieve strong rogues , wand'ring beggars , and able idle persons , but rather to punish and redress them : nor to keep hospitality for drunkards , gamesters , and riotous persons , but a good man is merciful , and measures his affairs by judgement , Psal. 112. 5.  Fourthly , mercy must be showed constantly , according to the precept , Be not weary of well doing : let not the springs of our compassion be ever dried up : as we would never have God weary of doing us good . Fifthly , we must not rest or rejoice in any work of mercy as meritorious , but in the acceptance and covering of it , saying when we have done all we can , We are unprofitable servants . 

CHAP. XVIII . 

Rules for works and actions of justice : in 1. the ground : 2. moderation . 

IN all our civil conversation with men , see that our external righteousness flow from inward piety . God in the moral Law hath coupled the two tables as the upholders one of another , thou shalt love the Lord thy God , and thy neighbour as thyself . We must love man in God , and for God. Christ aimed at both in the work of our redemption , that we should serve him in righteousness as well as in holiness all our days , Luk. 1. 75.  Civil righteousness , abstracted from piety , is Pharisaical and unfruitful . Give to Caesar Caesar's , and to God Gods.  

Concerning moderation of justice : Never stand so upon strict justice , but that sometimes for peace we must depart from our right , according to the precept , Phil. 4. ver . 5.  Let your equal mind be known unto all men : and the practice of our Saviour Christ , Matth. 17. 27. who needed not , nor could have been compelled to pay toll ; but to cut off occasion of offence and contention , he departs from his right , and pays it : he might have said , It is my right and I will stand upon it , and will not lose my freedom ; and men think they say well , if they demand but their right : But our Lord , for our example , departed from his right , and accounted the preservation of peace better than his own right . This rule is grounded upon the common law of nature , which seeks the common good , and is as careful of the neighbours good as his own . Contrary whereunto is that devilish and carnal speech , Every man for himself , and God for us all : and yet it is come into common practice , against all rules of nature and Scripture . 

CHAP. XIX . 

Rules of wisdom for justice , 1.  Commutative , 2.  Distributive , 3.  Promissive , 4.  Retributive . 

Concerning justice commutative , in contracts and bargains , some rules concern the seller , and some the buyer . 

The seller must not abuse or wrong the buyer , neither in the kind , nor quantity , nor quality of his commodity , concealing the defect , with that profane protestation , Caveat emptor : nay , the caveat is for the seller , who would not be deceived in his bargains with oaths , lies , tricks ; and so is bound to do to others : 1 Thess. 4. 6.  Let no man oppress defraud his brother in any matter : Here the holy Apostle condemns fraud by two reasons ; 1.  From the near conjunction we have one with another , he is our brother , in flesh , and in faith : 2.  From the certainty of God's wrath , For the Lord is the avenger of all such things● Leu. 19 11.  Ye shall not steal , nor deal falsely , nor lie one to another . And in Ezek. 22. 12 , 13. a fearful destruction is threatened against jerusalem , for bribes , usury , fraud , and oppression . Where by the way , Usurers may do well to consider amongst whom the Lord there ranks them . 

The buyer also must not enrerta●ne the seller with words of dissimulation , vilifying the thing , to buy it beneath the worth , Prou. 20. 14. nor detain the price beyond the agreed time , as many do whose care is to get into debt , and take up more commodity in one year , than they mean to pay in twenty ; and when all is done , pay pounds scarce with crowns : A little more safe thievery than that by the highway , never a whit more honest or just . 

In justice distributive , never forget that golden rule , to do as we would be done unto : Mat● . 7. 12.  Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you , that do ye unto them : for this is the Law and the Prophets : the royal law , jam. 2. 8. that is , the King's law , and the chief of all laws which concern our neighbours . Object . But here the Usurer hath a text for himself , saying , I would willingly pay ten in the hundred if I had need , and therefore I may take so . Ans. 1.  This must be ordered by grace , and the word of God , not by men's blind and depraved judgement . 2.  This general rule must guide us where we want a special word , which we have in the case of Usury . 3.  It is false that thou sayest ; thou wouldst not pay use if thou couldst borrow freely ; therefore if in thy need thou wouldst borrow freely , lend freely . Others having overreached their neighbours , say , They may and must make the most of their own , and they forced not their wares on them : But tell me , wouldst thou be overreached or deceived ? or wouldst thou have another to make advantage of thy necessity or simplicity ? I know thou wouldst not : Go thou , and do the like . 

Concerning promissive justice , in promises and covenants , the rule is this , That all lawful promises must be kept , suppose they were made never so rashly , to persons never so bad , though to the very great hindrance of the party making them . I explain it thus : First , I say , a lawful promise , not such as Herod made to Herodias , to give her john Baptist's head in a platter : for of such it is well said , Reseinde fidem , In turpi voto muta decretum , Break thy word , and change thy determination so did David in Nabals' case . But if it be lawful , thou must not be perfidious or slippery , as many like Eels can slip out of most fair and cautelous contracts for their own advantage . Object . What if I have done it rashly ? Answ. Repent of thy rashness , but perform thy promise . Object . What to a lewd fellow , or an heretic ? Ans. Papists say , no. A position that hath covered and coloured more horrible treachery and perfidiousness , than ever was found among the heathens . But joshua when he was circumvented , and drawn in by lies and deceit , to make a rash covenant with the Gibeonites , strangers to the Covenant of grace , did faithfully keep it : and when Saul many hundred years after did break that contract , he was plagued with sore famine , which could never be assuaged but by the death of his sons , 2 Sam. 21. 6. 14.  So in the Turkish history : The story of Ladislaus , suddenly breaking the truce made for ten years , with Amurathes the great Turk , by the counsel of Pope Eugenius , showeth in the event , the wickedness of that position and practice , by the effusion of much Christian blood , and the confusion of as many as had hand in that treacherous counsel . Object . But I shall be greatly hindered . Ans. Acknowledge thy cross , make a good use of it , but perform thy promises : Who shall dwell on God's holy Mountain ? He that sweareth to his own hindrance , and changes not , Psalm . 15. 4.  Take heed of forfeiting heaven for a little earth . 

Concerning justice retributive , in borrowing and lending , Rom. 13. 8.  owe nothing to any man save love . Doth not nature teach us to give every man his due ? and doth not grace teach us to deal justly , a main point of which justice is to pay debts ? But our rule aimeth at two things : First , to keep out of debt as much as may be● owe nothing . and that is by avoiding the means of debt : as , 1. to live above ones degree and ability , to neglect frugality and moderation : 2. drinking , gluttony , wine tobacco : 3. building , purchasing , wardrobe : 4. suretyship , and rash undertaking of others payments : 5. gaming , dicing , whoring : 6. usury . All which directly make against this rule of justice . 

Secondly , to get out of debt being in , and make due and timely satisfaction , and not as many , who force their Creditors to recover by law , what was in love sent them . What is the general voice of men in their trades , but complaints of men's unfaithfulness , whiles many make no conscience of paying debts , others can pay some to keep their credit , or all to be trusted again , but few pay any of conscience , because of the Commandment ? Object . But I am not able to pay my debts . Answ. then Go and humble thyself to thy Creditor , Pro. 6. 3. purpose and promise to pay all when thou art able . Object . So I shall utterly impoverish myself . Answ. 1.  Is not a little with righteousness , and peace with God and thy conscience , better than a great deal with iniquity ? 2.  Consider how God blessed a little to that poor widow , that sold all to pay her debts , 2 King. 4. 7. her oil was increased till she had enough for her Creditor , and herself . 

CHAP. xx.  

Rules of wisdom for our own necessary actions , in respect of their 1. order , 2. subject . 

The fourth sort of rules for actions , respecteth such as concern ourselves , and these are either necessary or indifferent actions . 

We were sent into this world to do some necessary business , which we must intend , and not waste our time in impertinent things . The Master that sent his servants into the vineyard , sent them in to work . Do we think that God sent man into the world to play and sport , for his recreation sake or idleness , yea , or to eat and drink , and only to get what to maintain himself by ? no , but for some thing beyond all these : else his end were not beyond the bruit beasts . Or can we think that God hath given men gifts of reason , understanding , judgement , and means of nature and grace , for the culture of all these , only to enjoy outward things , to feed their pleasure and appetite , which they might fully enjoy without all these gifts ? no , but the Master gave his servant's talents to traffic withal , to make their Lord and themselves gainers . We must therefore acknowledge some thing to be absolutely necessary , unto which all other things are necessary but respectively , and carry ourselves unto every thing accordingly . If we would know what that is , which is absolutely necessary , our Saviour tells us , One thing is necessary , namely , to know how a man may come into God's savour and be saved ; and all earthly things are respectively necessary , so far as they conduce to this . To know the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection , is absolutely necessary ; all things are to be counted but dross and dung unto this , Phil. 3. 10.  

But in all necessary actions , the rule of wisdom requires that the most necessary action be done first and most : Eccles. 9 10.  Whatsoever thy hand shall find to do , do it with all thy might . Nothing in the world is so necessary , as to repent us of sin past , and the reason for it is the present time , to day . Nothing so necessary as amendment of life for time to come : therefore do it now : Delays in all things are dangerous ; in this , often deadly . And this most necessary business must be done most . Well said Augustine , He must needs fail in necessaries , who overflows in superfluities . How then can men answer the wasting of their lives and time in pleasures , recreation , eating , drinking , buying , selling , and sieldome find in their hands the business which tends unto eternal life ? A good rule therefore it is , often to examine ourselves thus ? What am I doing ? and whether in all inferior things do I aim at the chief ? In eating I must not forget the bread of life . In recreation and pleasure , I must chiefly affect the pleasures of God's house . In buying and selling , I must specially help forward my purchase of eternal life . In my earthly calling I must express the calling of Christianity . This is the way to do the one necessary thing most of all . 

3.  Most necessary actions in evil men are evil : the best actions of the unregenerate are sins : and therefore it is most necessary to be a good man The truth hereof appears , because a man may do what God commands , and omit and forbear a work prohibited , and yet sin in both : for example , Aristides practised justice most strictly ; yet herein he sinned , because it was no work of faith . Alexander conquering Darius violated not the chastity of Darius his wife and daughters , but forbore this prohibited and sinful action ; yet therein he sinned , because he forbore not of good conscience . But we must know , that this sin lieth not in the substance or matter of the work , which is materially good , but in the vice of the doer , and manner or end of doing : neither are these sins in themselves but only by accident . 

CHAP. XXI . 

Rules for necessary actions , in respect of the means , and the order of the two Tables . 

no action is so necessary , as it must be thrust on by evil means . We must not do the least evil for the greatest good , which was Lot's sin , to procure good by evil ; neither yield to a less evil to prevent a greater , in evils of sin . In civil things , it is a most necessary thing to preserve life ; but not with a lie , usury , Sabbath-breaking , or going to witches : Life is not so necessary as without separation to cleave to that which is good . In spiritual things , to preach the word is so necessary , as Paul cries woe unto himself if if he do not , because the flock of God depends upon him : But if I may not preach , unless I wound my conscience , by compounding with heretics , and blending truth with error ; I must never preach but leave the care of the Church to God , who without my lie , will provide for the good of it . Thus Elijah fled and left his ministry , because he could not exercise it , unless he would have received Baal's ceremonies , and flattered with the Baalites : and if he had not thus forsaken his place , he had forsaken the Church . Great Athanasius chused rather to leave his Church , then to yield any thing to the Arrians . Saint Paul knew , that after he went from Ephesus , grievous Wolves would come in not sparing the flock : and yet because he could not stay to preach , unless he would have restored some Pharisaical observations ; and unless for peace sake he would have yielded to the rites and image of Diana , he left the place , because he must not do the greatest good by any evil means . Never let any think to thrive , by means which God hath accursed , and upon which himself cannot pray for a blessing . 

All necessary actions must be done according to the order of the Tables , ever esteeming the duties of the first Table , more necessary than they of the second . This is Christ's own rule , Mat. 22. 38.  This is the first and great commandment , and the second is like to this , both in respect of the necessary binding , and of the end : for even these are a worship of God , if they be performed in faith , and for his commandment sake . wherefore ▪ else did the Lord deliver two Tables , whereas he might have put all into one , but that he would prefer and claim the first place to duties that immediately concern his worship ? From whence Divines gather that rule of Antinomy and truth , That when the two Tables are opposed , and both call for necessary duties , which both cannot be done at the same time , the second Table must give place to the first : as Act. 5. 25.  It is meet to obey God rather then man Magistrates must be obeyed ; but the first Table derogates from the second , when both cannot be observed . So in the New Testament , Parents and friends are to be loved ; but if they be not hated for Christ , when both cannot be loved together , one cannot be Christ's disciple . 

But here be three caveats : 1.  That a special Commandment is more necessary , and dispenseth with all the ten : and it is a principle , that all Commandments of both tables run with one exception , If God command not otherwise . thou shalt not kill , nor steal , unless God command Abraham to kill his son , and the Israelites to rob the Egyptians . thou shalt make no graven image , unless God command Moses to make a brazen serpent . Thus observations of immediate commandments give all Sovereignty to God , who is to be simply obeyed and acknowledged above his Law. 2.  Moral duties must take place of all ceremonies : The rule of Divines is , that charity dispenseth with ceremony , according to that , I will have mercy and not sacrifice , because mercy is moral , and sacrifice ceremonial . So Abimelech gave David the Shewbread which was not lawful but in the case of necessary mercy . And it was superstition in the jews , that they would rather suffer their City to be taken , than fight upon the Sabbath day in their own defence . God allows an ox to be pulled out of a ditch , and led to water , and allows a necessary provision for the body , unto which even Sabbath-duties must give place . 3.  Necessity ( we say ) hath no law , but that is to be understood in man's laws , when some sudden case falleth out , so as the inferior cannot have recourse to the lawmaker , that then he may interpret the law himself , and break the letter of it , to follow the reason and intent of it : as in case of the murder of a thief . But in the law of God , one only case doth dispense with it , and that is when necessity so altereth a fact , as it taketh away from it all reason of sinning : As for example ; It is not lawful to marry one's sister , but in the beginning of the world extreme necessity altered this fact , and gave dispensation . So it is not lawful to take away that which is another's , but extreme necessity makes it lawful , because it is not another's any longer , seeing the law of nature itself maketh some things common in such extreme necessity . On the Sabbath we must hold ourselves strictly to God's worship , but if an house be on fire , we may leave it without sin . Note the equity of that law , Deut. 23. 24 , 25.  

CHAP. XXII . 

Rules of wisdom for necessary actions in respect of the scope and binding of them . 

ALL necessary actions , as they must begin with God's will , so they must end with his glory . The end and scope of all our actions must be God : 1.  Because he made all things for himself . 2.  He is the alpha and omega , the beginning from whom all is , and the end for whom , and unto whom all must be referred . 3.  If in all indifferent things Gods glory must be our aim , much more in necessary : but so it is in indifferent things , as eating , drinking , etc.  1 Cor. 10. 31. and Rom. 14. 6.  He that eateth , eateth to the Lord , or ought-so to do . 4.  The very heathens had a glimmering hereof , professing that they were not born for themselves , but partly their friends , partly their Country , and partly God. But the Scripture speaks more plainly , that we owe all ourselves to God : something indeed we owe to our neighbour , but that is in and for God.  

In the necessary duties of religion , or our calling , we must hold ourselves bound to do them whatsoever follow . Two things commonly hinder us herein , which we must arm ourselves against : The first is fear of men's judgements , faces , offence , and censures ; but we must tread this under foot , if we have a commandment and calling to do any thing , as Paul did , 1 Cor. 4. 3.  I pass little to be judged of any man : neither feared he any persecution or trouble , so he might finish his course with joy . jeremy must make his brow of brass , to speak the word of the Lord , chap. 1. vers . 17.  A Christian must prepare to pass through good report , and bad report , and to count neither liberty nor life dear unto him . Daniel would open his window , and pray as he was wont , even when his life was sought after . Secondly , events of actions do often and much trouble us : for remedy whereof observe two rules : 1.  That of the Wiseman , Eccles. 11. 4.  He that observes the wind , shall not sow : it is a foolish husbandman , who for sight of a cloud either his seed time or harvest : So for sowing works of mercy , he that sticks in doubts , and saith , I may be poor , or old , long diseased , full of children , or persecuted for the Gospel , and must provide for one , neglects his seed time by looking at winds and clouds . So many a carnal Gospeller saith , If I should go so often to Church as some , and be so forward in religion , I should lose much profit , and incur much rebukes and reproaches . Therefore , 2. we must learn to leave events and successes to God : for it is not in man to direct his steps , God disposeth as he pleaseth . The Saints of God are often frustrate of their godly purposes , as David in purposing and preparing to build an house for the Lord : but 1. they loose nothing if they do their duty : 2.  God's Overruling hand will dispose all to the best : therefore there let them rest . 

CHAP. XXIII . 

Rules for actions indifferent : 1. in general . 

A Great part of man's life is spent in the doing of natural and indifferent actions , which in themselves are neither good nor evil , but as they are used : and being so common and ordinary , many sins creep into them , because we take ourselves free and loose to do as we list in them : which conceit grows out of ignorance of God's wisdom , who by his word hath tied us as straight in the use of them as in things most necessarily enjoined . For there is no action in which we must depart from God. Object . They are therefore indifferent , because they are neither commanded nor forbidden , and therefore as they be free , so be we also in them . Answ. Although there be no word commanding or forbidding , yet there is a word directing and ordering in them , as we shall see in some general rules concerning them all , and in special rules applied to some particulars . 

The general rules concerning them all , as meat , drink , apparel , recreation , houses , marriage , and the like , are these : 

1.  The most indifferent action that is , must be used by warrant and leave from God : warrant is from the word , leave is by prayer ; and thus must every creature of God be sanctified by the word and prayer , 1.  Tim. 4. 5.  Our meat , our apparel , our houses , our recreations must all be undertaken and used , First , by the warrant of the word : for else it cannot be done in faith , Rom. 14. 23. and whatsoever is not of faith , is sin . The word must direct me in this particular meat , apparel , recreation , that it is lawful in itself and to me , or else I sin in it . Secondly , by prayer : for we must lift up our hearts at least in the use of them all : 1.  In invocation for an holy use , suspecting all our ways , and our inclinations to corrupt ourselves in everything . 2.  In thanksgiving for our liberty in all the creatures , that were justly forfeited , and God's blessing in them . This neglected , 1.  We may have the creature , but want the blessing ; have bread , but not the staff of bread ; have money , but not a bag to hold it ; clothes , but no warmth ; marriage , but not the comfort of it : and so in the rest . 2.  We do not distinguish ourselves from the bruit beasts , who live by things before them , and never look above them to the giver . 3.  We have no title recovered in any of them , but they all remain unclean , as was signified in all the unclean beasts , as all other had been , but that they were permitted by special leave , without which we are but usurpers . 4.  God is not acknowledged the author of our life & liberties , and so is deprived of his honour & homage , which no Lord among men will endure , in such as hold the least copy under them . 

2.  The most indifferent action that is , must be don● for God , that is , to the glory and honour of God ; whatsoever we eat or drink , etc.  1 Cor. 10. 31.  For while we take our part in the comforts of the creatures , God will not lose his part of them , that is , his glory by them . Doth my eating and drinking make me heavy and unfit for the service of God , to perform it with cheerfulness ? Here I have sinned in a lawful thing : for God looks to be served with cheerfulness and a good heart , in the abundance of all things , Deut. 28. vers . 47.  Doth my apparel tend to pride up and advance myself ? This is a sinful use of a lawful thing , wherein I should glorify God. Do my recreations and sports not only justle out my duties of Christianity , of reading , and meditating , and private prayer ; but engross my time , so that I neglect my special calling ? Herein I use my liberty unlawfully , and turn it into a wicked licentiousness : Recreation was never ordained by God to be an occupation , but only an help unto it . 

3.  The most indifferent action that is , must be used in love , as well as in faith , to edification , as well as in sanctification . This general rule is in 1 Cor. 14. 26.  Let all things be done to edifying . Rom. 14. 21.  It is evil to eat with offence : and it is good , neither to eat flesh , nor to drink wine , nor to do any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth , or is offended , or made weak : and Paul would never eat , rather than offend a weak brother . In case of offence , in different things lose their indifferency , and become sins , and must not be done , be they never so small , never so profitable , never so powerfully enjoined by authority , because an higher authority of God , bids us not offend our brother ; the conscience of our brother must be more tender unto us , than our own peace and preferment . Daniel and his fellows refusing the King's meat , might seem very unwise , and too strict , for so small a thing to lose the King's favour , and their own advancement : but it was not frowardness in them , nor disobedience to the King , but conscience and obedience to God's commandment in a case offensive to themselves and others : so they would not do the least evil for the greatest good . So , is this garment lawful to me , and offensive to other of God's children ? then have I no liberty in it . Is this eating , or drinking , or tobacco-taking lawful to me , and may it offend in circumstances ? I must avoid occasion of offence . Is this sport and recreation lawful in itself and to others , but is it offensive in me a puulike man , a professor , a Preacher ? Wisdom teacheth to refrain it . So the Apostle saith , All things ( that is , indifferent , of which he there speaks ) are lawful , but all things are not expedient . 

Now as we must be far from offending any , so our endeavour must be to build up our brethren and ourselves in the use of every indifferent action . Quest. How may that be ? Answ. When in the civil use of them we add some spiritual meditation , as Christ when he spoke of bread , stirred the people to meditate on and labour for the food that abideth to eternal life : so in eating and drinking we should sometime think of feeding on Christ , the true bread and water of life ; in putting on our clothes , of putting on Christ as a garment : in putting them off , of putting off the old man and the lusts thereof : in marriage , of the contract between Christ and the faithful soul : in our journeys abroad , and returns home , meditate with the Apostle Paul of our being from home , and at home with the Lord , etc.  Thus shall we cherish and refresh our souls with our bodies . 

4.  The most indifferent things must be used in sobriety and moderation ; and this is , 1.  When we use them as helps , not hindrances to our calling , general or special , but our hearts are kept by them in a fitness unto both . This is our Saviour's rule , Luk. 21. 34.  Take heed that your hearts be not oppressed with surfeiting or drunkenness , or the cares of this life , that that day come unawares . 2.  When we exceed not in them our ability and degree , but square ourselves to the most sober of our age and condition : the neglect of which rule makes the feast of churlish Nabal , like the feast of a King , and brings soft apparel out of King's houses into very cottages , to the great confusion of all degrees , so as every man is out of order ; the servant more gallant than his Master or Mistress , Scholars arrayed in unseemly sort like Soldiers , the Gentleman like a Nobleman , and the Carter like a Courtier , and every Degree many degrees beyond itself . 3.  When we hold them indifferent not in our judgement only , but also in affection , keeping the command of these , and be sure they command not us : 1 Cor. 6 12.  All things are lawful for me , but I will not be brought under the power of any thing : and , 2 Cor. 7. 30.  We must rejoice in the creature as not rejoicing ; use it as not using ; buy , sell , and have a wife as not having . This is to affect indifferent things indifferently . Contrary whereunto is that excessive desire and use of any creature , which makes our servants our masters , and puts us out of possession of them , that we may be possessed by them , as when riches have our hearts , and we have not power to command them to any good use ; the heathen disclaimed this slavery , My riches are mine ( said Seneca ) not I my riches : would God Christians would say so much , to whom grace offers better things . So when a man or woman have enslaved themselves to any creature , and made it a tyrant and commander , as insatiable drunkards , who can no more be without strong drink or wine , than the fish without water , or themselves without air : The Mule ( they say ) must have the bag hang by his mouth , and these must have the bottle or pot at their elbow continually . Others that so addict themselves to that bewitching weed Tobacco , above all reason , set more thoughts upon it than they bestow upon God , bestow more time on it by ten parts in one day than upon God's service , yea , than upon any profitable calling ; bestow more charge upon it then upon all pious and charitable uses , through the year ; yea serve it as their God night and day , and all to turn their bodies into chimneys , their blood into foot , their best and radical humour into smoke . This is an intemperate and sinful use of a creature , in itself good , if physically used : for we condemn not drink , when we condemn drunkenness , but the drunken use of it . Neither can these dry drunkards more justify their sin then the moist , nay far less , seeing the one is ordained for common use , so is not the other . But without comparing them together , it is a great sin to be a slave either to a pot or to a pipe . 

5.  In all indifferent actions , we must endeavour so wisely to pass them , as we do not for them lose any thing , better than they ; such as are , 1.  Time : men must not cast away much time in them . We should eat out as little time with our meat as we may , much less play away our time . Women must be conscionable to spend as little time as may be in arraying and trimming themselves ; for time is better than apparel . Neither for wealth must we exchange our time , but that we reserve special times for better ends : for all the wealth on earth will not buy an hour of time . 2.  Our good name is better than any indifferent thing , and aught to be more precious than the sweetest ointment : we must not eat and drink to be counted gluttons and drunkards ; nor play in excess , to be counted dicers and gamesters , which are infamous names , and such persons were banished out of the heathens Commonwealth : nor so apparel ourselves as to be accounted proud , garish , and wanton ; nor build to be accounted vain and prodigal : but prefer our good names before the use of these . 3.  Our goods and portion of wealth which God hath given us , are better than the excessive use of any of these , and we must not waste our goods more than is fit for our estate . Men have no warrant to venture great sums of money upon a few casts at dice , or bowls , or other sports . We are not Lords of our goods but stewards , and must be drawn to an account for them . Religion will teach a man good husbandry , and though it allow not only a necessary and convenient expense , but also for honest delight & pleasure , in meat , drink , apparel , recreation , building , etc. yet it allows no prodigality , except in the case of godly and charitable uses , to the poor members of Christ. O how rich should some mean men be in good works , if they had given that to the poor which they have lost in play ? and who can say but one is far better , far more comfortable than the other ? 4.  Our virtues and graces are far better than any indifferent thing , and therefore we must not lose these for the other . Against which rule they sin who in meats and drinks loose moderation , sobriety , and tem●●rance ; and they who in apparel lose their humility and lowliness ; and they who in recreation lose their patience , meekness , love and peace ; and they who in marriage lose their chastity and holiness , etc.  

By all which rules we see , how godliness takes not away the use of God's creatures , ( for it only gives liberty in them : ) but order the use thereof , that they may be used in the just measure of their goodness , and give place to better ; and restrains us no further than so , as the calling be not exceeded , nor the rules of moderation violated . 

CHAP. XXIV . 

Special rules for meat and drink . 

NOW for the special rules of things indifferent , because I must not suffer this discourse to grow so large as it would ; omitting all other things indifferent , there be three things , as most common , so more specially to be treated of ; 1.  Meat and drink : 2.  Recreation : 3.  Apparel : for all which the word of God is plentiful in the rules of Christian wisdom , and direction . 

1.  Rules for eating and drinking . 

First , for the lawfulness of it : 1.  It is necessary , to nourish and strengthen us in our duties , and repair strength decayed . 2.  It may also serve for delight : for God hath given us leave liberally to use the creatures , not only bread to strengthen the heart , but oil to make his face glad . 3.  God hath afforded us leave to feast together , and invite one another , for the maintaining and cherishing of Christian love , and mutual fellowship , as we see in jobs children , which was not unlawful : & the Primitive Churches had their agapas and love-feasts , of which the Scripture makes mention , Acts 2. 46.  

Secondly , for the propriety ; we must eat and drink our own , the sweat of our own brows , not other men's . Many cut large pieces in other men's loaves , I mean that which they know is not theirs , but other men's , if all debts were paid . This is an high kind of injustice , 2 Thes. 3. 12. not to eat our own bread . 

Thirdly , for the measure : we must eat and drink according to the call of nature , or honest and moderate delight , to make us and keep us in a fitness to godly duties of hearing , reading , praying , etc.  All that eating and drinking whereby men make themselves heavy , sleepy , unwieldy , and unfit for good duties , is sinful ; for this is not a refection or refreshing , but a destruction or oppression of nature . 

Fourthly , for our affection ; we must eat and drink with moderation of affection , not to sit at it as though we had nothing else to do , as many who bring themselves under the power of the creature , such as cannot be without the pot at their mouth , or without the pipe at their nose ; men of whom the Apostle speaks , that corrupt themselves with the creatures , losing sobriety , modesty , chastity , health , and reason itself . Here is an utter perverting of God's ordinance ; who hath given us his creatures to refresh and help ourselves by them , but men instead thereof , hurt and destroy themselves by them . 

Fifthly , for the time ; we must not so eat and drink , as we eat up also too much time : for so we hinder ourselves in our callings , which we ought specially to further , redeeming the time , Ephes. 5. 16.  Numbers set down to eat and drink , and in feasting and feeding their bodies , never feel the passage of three or four hours ; whereas to sit out a Sermon of one hour long is very tedious ; so little care have most men of feeding their souls . 

Sixthly , in eating , desire to taste the goodness and sweetness of God himself in his creatures ; else have we no better use of them than the bruit creatures . Say to thyself , OH Lord , how sweet and good art thou in thyself , who canst put such sweetness in thy creature ? 

Seventhly , we should use good and savoury speech , as salt to our meat , to acknowledge God's bounty and goodness , to praise him and to edify others . Our empty and barren hearts cannot tell how to wear out the time of feasting , but either in trifles , or inviting of others to eat and drink , who need rather bridles , than spurs . Quest. What , no other speech but of Scripture ? how then should we be merry ? Answ. It is true , that commonly all other speech but earnall , is unsavoury : but a Christian must consider , 1.  That he eats and drinks before the Lord , and his speeches must become the presence of God , who heareth and expecteth that all the speech of Christians be better than silence . 2.  All the speeches of Christians ought to savour of sobriety and wisdom , and the grace of the heart : for , whom call we to our tables but God's children by profession , who must be like themselves every where ? 3.  God hath given us leave to be merry , but with this only restraint , Be merry in the Lord ; not against him ; nor setting him out of sight , as those who never think themselves merry , but in rude and ungodly behaviours and speeches unbeseeming Christians . Plato and Zenophon thought it fit and profitable , that men's speeches at meals should be written : And if Christians should so do , what kind of books would they be ? 

Eighthly , in our eating and drinking we must be careful to season our hearts with these and the like meditations : 1.  How prone we are to know immoderate joy , and provoke God in our feasts : job was suspicious of his sons , sent to them to sanctify themselves , and afterwards himself sacrificed for them . 2.  That we shall not want incitements or provocations of such as are invited with us , or otherwise to forget ourselves , which incitements we must watch against , and arm ourselves aforehand . I remember the story of Antigonus , who being invited to a place where a notable harlot was to be present , asked counsel of Menedemus what he should do : he bade him only remember that he was a King's son . Good men may be invited where none of the best may meet them ; the best counsel is , to keep in mind that they be Kings sons , God's children ; and a base thing it were to be alured from their profession , by the ungodly . 3.  To consider in our eating and drinking our own end , and mingle our feasting with a meditation of death ; as joseph had his tomb in his garden , to season his delight with ▪ meditation of his end . Alas , this feeding and feasting is but a little repair of a ruinous house which must go down . The Egyptians had a skeleton or carcase brought into their feasts to the same purpose : So do thou , set thine own carcase before the eye of thy mind , and it will moderate thee in the pampering of it . 4.  Consider how many poor ones want some of thy superfluity . It is a great sin of great men , to drink wine in boles , and eat the fat , and to forget the affliction of joseph , Amos 6. 6.  Therefore , Neh. 8. 10.  Eat the fat , and drink the sweet , and send part to them for whom nothing is prepared . Say with thyself , Who am I to be so full , when many are hungry ? That I should abound when so many want ? How am I indebted unto God to be thankful ; and shall I requite his love with such unkindness , as to grow wanton , idle , and forgetful of him , when he is most mindful of me ? Must I eat and drink to rise up to play ? no , I must bestir me in such duties , wherein I may express much love for much love . 

CHAP. XXV . 

Rules for the right ordering of ourselves in our sports . 

These concern , 1. the matter and kind of our sports and plays : 2. the manner of using them aright : 3. the right ends . 

First , the matter of our sports must be in things which our consciences tell us are lawful or indifferent . Therefore , 1.  Holy things , as phrases of Scripture , must not be played with : thou shalt fear the holy name of God : not delight thyself in swearing . 2.  Sinful things are not to be matter of our sport : as , 1.  To make a man drunk , or swear , or to laugh at such persons : for this is a matter of sorrow to see God's image so defaced : and David's eyes gushed out with rivers of tears , to see such spectacles , 2.  Unlawful sports are plays and interludes , which are the representations of vices not to be named among Christians ; besides men's wearing of woman's apparel , the incentives of lust and fuellers of fleshly flames . Heathen Lawgivers' have banished such out of their Countries . 3.  Mixed dancing of men and women together , never read of in Scripture with approbation , and here in our text noted to be the fruit of idolatry , riot , drinking , and all other dissolute , behaviour . Would God , the root , and tree , and all branches laden with such fruit , were quite stubbed up . The heathens themselves condemned it : It was an ordinary speech among the Romans , None but either a drunkard or a mad man danceth . It were too long to infer the sentences of the heathen . The general consent of Fathers , and the determinations of Counsels make against this wicked and lascivious practice . Basil in a Sermon of his concerning drunkenness , saith , God made our knees not to caper like Goats , but to bow to the worship of God , and our Lord jesus Christ. And Viret on the 7.  Commandment , Chorea in circulo , centrum diabolus , circumferentia eius Angeli . Therefore let the Sons of light detest such an unfruitful work of darkness : for what is there here but lust of the flesh , and lust of the eyes ? what is here else , but carrying fire in the bosom , and walking upon coals ; and how can a man avoid burning ? This practice agrees neither with the gravity of the man , nor the shamefastness of the woman : nay , the very sight of it in a woman , is known more to overwhelm a man than strong drink , as we may see in Herod , Mar. 6. 22.  

4.  Unlawful games are such as the laws of the land make unlawful , which bind the conscience in things indifferent : now among unlawful games , the laws reckon dicing , and so doth the law of God , because it hath no good report in it , no praise , no virtue , Phil. 4. 8. and then it cannot be indifferent . And the like may be said of all those plays , the ground of which is lot , seeing a lot is an oracle and declaration of God's will , a part of his Name , more solemn than any oath , and must not be vainly used , or for recreation . Object . It is no lot , we use it for no such end . Ans. That is no matter ; the jews cast lots for our Saviour's garments , the nature of lots remained , though the good end was neglected . Object . God's providence overrules all other games . Answ. In other lawful games that depend upon wit , strength , or skill , our own infirmity , or want of skill , may be blamed in all imperfection : but here , because the ground is a lot , wherein we have no cunning , ( unless by cogging and cheating , which very roisters condemn ) nothing can be accused but God's immediate direction : let men consider whom they dishonour , when they say , What luck , what chance is this ? 

Lyranus in his praeceptorium , by nine reasons proveth the unlawfulnesse of playing with dice. The heathens themselves condemned it even in their Princes ; as Suet●nius in the life of Augustus' reports , that it was his greatest blemish , that he was at leisure to play at dice. Chilo being sent from the Lacedæmonians to Corinth , upon an Embassage , and finding the Senators of that City at cards and dice , would perform no part of his message , saying , he would not so much dishonour the Lacedæmonians , as that they should either make or meddle with such persons . Were such games infamous among lieathens ? how unworthy then are they among Christians . 

Secondly , as sports and plays must be indifferent in their nature , so also in their use ; and that is when we confine ourselves to the lawful manner of using them . 

1.  The persons must have two qualities : 1. they must be pure : for to the pure all things are pure , and to none else : secondly , they must be weary , and need refreshing : for God alloweth not the most lawful sports , till the body and mind stand in need ; till than we must be busy in better things . 

2.  All sports must be sanctified by the word and prayer , 1 Tim. 4. prayer before , and thanksgiving after : because we are in more danger to forget ourselves herein , than in any thing else ; in that we unbend ourselves from our ordinary business , and think we may take more liberty than usual . A strange lesson to gamesters . 

3.  All sports must be joined with the fear of God : Rejoice with trembling , which suffers not a man to pour out himself to pleasure . 

4.  All must be joined with moderation agreeing to the time , person , and place . A man must not be a lover of pleasure , set upon sport , as some , who are given over to sport , never weary , all the week long is too little . The Apostle commands , to rejoice , as not rejoicing : that is , to be so moderate and retired , as not to overvalue sports , nor to set our affections on them , as those who have other things to do . So observe due circumstances : Some at cards and dice turn night into day , and sit up all night and day , longer than they could for ten times more money be bound to any good business . Some wickedly encroach on time allotted to God's service , some part of the Sabbath day , and other times : some keep from Church , and some run from Church with their games in their mouths : others bestow upon them too much time which should be employed in the calling , either general or particular , and so much endamage themselves thereby . The mower's rifle is good to be set to his sith , when it is blunt ; but if he doth nothing but whet still , he spoils his sith , and hinders his work . Therefore let us moderate ourselves in our sports , according to the most sober of our age , degree , condition , and sort of life , and use them with such as are both godly and wise , who may rather watch over us that we offend not , rather than draw and provoke us so to do . 

5.  We must not exchange any virtue or good thing with our delight and sport : ( as before we noted ) because every thing that is good , even the least , is better than any indifferent thing : and therefore , 1.  We must not by sports hinder our callings , but fit ourselves to them : 2.  We may not clog ourselves with them , because they ought to speed our way in our spiritual course and race . Take heed they become not the devil's birdlime , in which while we wallow , we are disabled to mount aloft in heavenly meditations . 3.  We may not lose our patience , our meekness , our love , as they that scorn , quarrel , storm , and rage like heathens , against luck , chance , or fortune ; yea , swear and curse , if never so little crossed , as they that never heard of religion . 4.  We may not lose our goods , or waste our substances , or play away more than without any doubt or scruple of conscience we may bestow upon honest delight , the necessary maintenance of other things , and necessary contribution to the Ministry , and the poor first liberally provided for . 5.  We may not lose our good name , which is a precious thing , as to be counted gamesters , dicers , common bowlers , or idle persons , or a companion of them , or by obscene , scurrilous ; or uncomely words or actions , carry the brand of a rude and disordered mate . 6.  We may not lose our mastery over our sports , to let them have us at command : for , he that thus loves pastime shall be a poor man , Prou. 21. 17.  

Now we come to the right ends , which in our sports we must set before us , if we would not sin . 

1.  The end of sports must not be to pass the time , which we ought to redeem , and not let pass without gaining something by it better than itself . Nor to maintain idleness , as men that cannot else tell what to do with themselves ; for this is as ill as idleness : for idleness is not only not working , but a doing of trifles , and that which we dare not bring into our account to God. A pitiful thing , that Christians having so much to do , and so much means , and so many calls to their business , should find nothing so fit as cards and dice.  

2.  The end of our sports must not be to purchase our neighbour's money , or to help ourselves by his hindrance . And I would know , by what right of God's word I can hold my neighbour's money , which comes into my hand without labour , love , gift , or just contract . If it be not mine by justice distributive or commutative , it cannot be mine by God : But no law of God or man , hath ranked wagers in either : nay , the civil law compels none to pay that which is lost ; or if he have paid , he may recover it within fifty hours . 

But the right ends of sports are these : 1.  God's glory : nothing can be lawful wherein some glory is not won to God , in whatsoever we do , 1 Cor. 10. 31.  And therefore such sports as do not enable us to cheerfulness in the duties of religion and Christianity , fail in this end . 2.  All our earthly joys must help forward our spiritual joy in God , and the eternal joys of his Kingdom : if they come in comparison with them , or will step up to hinder us therein , they are to be contemned . Our chief joy must ever be placed in the Lord , and our chief affections must be reserved for that fullness of joy which is at God's right hand . First seek the kingdom of God , even in these , and above these : how doth he so , who spends more time in these than in that ; yea , more by a thousand degrees , if we would measure the time of his sports , by the time of godly desires , & religious duties ? 3.  The preservation of our own health , & not to impair the health of our souls or bodies , as many by their watching to play destroy their health , and call numbers of diseases upon themselves , and oftentimes untimely death . In this use alone can all recreations become good and comfortable unto us , although our corrupt nature is loath to be so confined . 

Object . If only these recreations , in this manner , and these ends be lawful , you leave us none . Answ. Only these , in this manner and ends are lawful ; and yet we disallow nothing which God's word alloweth , which ought to govern all his people . God's word alloweth for the exercise of the body , the use of the bow , 2 Sam. 1. 18. of music , Neh. 7. 67. of hunting , hawking , birding , and such sports , without swearing , disorder , and needless tormenting of the silly creatures . And for the exercise of wit , he alloweth honest riddles , judg. 14. and such games as the ground of which is wit or skill , as chess , draughts , etc.  Besides , an heart that is sanctified , would enure itself to heavenly joys , and prefer them above carnal , and little affect these which loose persons so much dote upon . 

And to those who will be ready to object the use and custom of the world , and the practice of so many forerunning ages , I answer and conclude with the Apostles words , Rom. 12. 2.  Fashion not yourselves according to this world , but prove what is the will of God. Or if you will not walk by God's rules , your sin shall destroy your own souls : look you to your duties , I have endeavoured to do mine in discovering the same unto you . 

CHAP. XXVI . 

Rules of wisdom concerning our apparel . 

Having thus finished the rules of wisdom , concerning meat , and drink , and recreations , we come to such rules as concern apparel : and they are four : 

1.  The matter of our apparel must not be stately and costly ; which must be measured partly by the ability ourselves have , partly the condition of life we are in , and partly by the example of such as are sober , grave , and wise in our rank . Yea , even in the matter of our apparel , our sobriety and modesty must appear ; yea , our humility ; when God made Adam garments , he made them of skins , homely and base , that he might read therein his mortality , and that by his sin he was become like the beasts whose skins covered him . 

2.  For the manner of our apparel , it must not be strange , garish affecting new fashions , which argues levity and new fanglednesse , but such as becometh holiness , Tit. 2. 3. and according to the sober custom of our Country and rank . Zeph. 1. 8.  I will visit King's Children , and those that wear strange apparel ; that is , such as in the form or fashion is wanton , curious , odd , savouring of pride , lightness , and singularity . A fearful threat , under which our whole land lieth , which is a receptacle of all the fashion of all Countries , besides our own daily inventions of new fashions of monstrous apparel , that were men and woman's bodies as monstrous as their apparel , they would be cast out of the company and accounted of men : and how soever their bodies be , surely their minds be monstrous , and filled with vanity : and how just were it with God , seeing such persons will not fashion their clothes to their bodies , to fashion them to their clothes ? The Apostle wishes us not to fashion ourselves according to the world ; which precept is so far out of date and use , that almost the fashions of all the world , and the vanity of all Countries , may seem to be arrived and landed in this land of ours , that a man may read in capital letters upon men's garments the lightness and lewdness that is within . 

3.  For the measure of it : beware of excess in apparel , which is a great sin , and carrieth with it , 1.  Expense of wealth , which might be better reserved to the use of the Church or Commonwealth , or covering the poor and naked Saints . All excess is commonly maintained with covetousness , injustice , or unmercifulnesse . 2.  A note of a vain mind that glory's in his wardrobe , as if a thief should boast of his bolts , or glory in his brand , or mark of felony : for apparel is the cover of our shame . 3.  Waste of time , and idleness , in the too accurate and curious culture of the body , which should be spent either in adorning the soul , or following our ordinary calling . 4.  Oftentimes debts & unjust detaining of men's deuce from them . We have known great rents soon turned into great ruffs , and lands into laces . We have heard of some brave dames , in such variety of fashions and colours , as if they had stood in a Pedlar's shop about them : and of some brave Gallants , that have carried some whole Manors upon their backs . But M. Latimer , in his time a man of much observation , noted one commodity in his leather coat , which he wore at the Court ; when the Gallants mocked him , he told them his was paid for , and so were not many of their Velvets and Satins . 

4.  Consider the ends and use of apparel , and that is , 1. spiritual , 2. civil . Spiritual , many ways : 1.  When by putting clothes on , we see our misery , and in the nakedness of our bodies the nakedness of our souls . 2.  When we labour to put on Christ jesus as a garment , to cover us form the storms & tempests which our sins have raised against us. I counsel thee to buy of me the white garments of innocency , Re. 3. 3  When by girding our apparel to us , we labour to gird up our loins , and look for our Lord jesus . 4.  When by putting off our old garments , we daily put off some relic of the old man 5.  When in adorning the body , we study to adorn the mind with humility , holiness , modesty , meekness , etc.  Not make any superstitious use , or put religion in garments . 

Civil , and that is threefold : 1. for health , 2. for honesty , 3. for ornament . 

1.  For health and necessity , to defend us from the injury of weather , and to keep us warm : to this end God clothed Adam ; and it is a curse to put on clothes , and not be warm , Hag 1. 6.  

2.  For honesty , in two branches : 1.  Decency . 2.  Distinction . 

First , decency : for nakedness in the state of innocency was a glorious ornament , but presently after the fall , shame and deformity came in ; and therefore presently Adam sewed leaves together , and God made coats to hide and cover that nakedness . Now decency requires seemly and cleanly apparel , not fordid , base , and slovenly : and condemneth that affected nakedness of men & women , especially , who wear their clothes , so as they discover the nakedness of many parts of their body ; whereas sin hath cast shame on every part , and calls for a cover over all but for necessity . 

Secondly , distinction of persons , sexes , ages , and callings . The man may not wear the woman's apparel , nor the woman the man's , Deut. 22. 5.  Against which law of nature and common honesty , how manly do women attire themselves , and how effeminately do men imitate women , as though both were willing to change sexes ? How undecent is it to see an old man in a youthful habit , to see a Minister in his ruffian's hair , pickadillies , and fashion like some soldier ? to see a peasant clothed like a Prince ? as all sorts of men almost are confused in apparel . joseph when he was set over all the land of Egypt , was distinguished from inferior Princes by his fine linen , and golden chain . In times past soft garments were in King's houses , but now that is no distinction of Courtiers . 

CHAP. XXVII . 

Concerning ornament in apparel : wherein three questions are resolved . 

THE third and last civil use of Garments is ornament : where consider two or three questions . 

Quest. 1.  Whether be ornaments lawful to be used , seeing the Apostle commands women , that their apparel be not outward , with broydered hair , and gold , nor pearls ; nor costly apparel , which he opposeth to comely apparel ? 1 Peter 3. 3. CITIZEN  Tim. 2. 9  Answ. They are : for the Apostle simply condemneth not the things themselves , which are the good creatures of God ; nor all use of them in ornament , which Rebecca and joseph being advanced , and all the Israelitish women , ware in earrings and bracelets , which was not their sin . But he condemns in them , 1.  The over-common and unseasonable use : for ornaments are not sit for all persons and times , but must be used sparingly , not commonly , having respect to times and solemnity . They be for great , not for common men , neither for those every day : the rich man in the Gospel is condemned , for going in fine purple every day . 2.  He condemns the affected and excessive use of them ; for they more affected the adorning of the body , than of the mind , to which the Apostle in both places calleth them : whereas a Christian must chiefly provide for the adorning of the mind inwardly . 3.  He condemns their offensive use of them , who did not use them as the sober and grave matrons of their years and age ; but being newly converted from the heathens , still retained the heathenish ornaments , and would not , being Christians , be put down by the heathens , but retained the former manner of adorning themselves . 4.  He condemns their end in wearing these things , which was to set forth their bodies , and pride up themselves with their ornaments ; whereas all ornaments must be used to God's glory , while we adorn his Temple , and not to draw men's eyes upon us.  

Quest. 2.  May not a man wear long hair for ornament . 

Answ. The ornament of a man's head is short hair : long hair is an effeminate ornament . 1 Cor. 11. 14.  Doth not nature itself teach , that if a man have long hair , it is a shame for him ? but if a woman have long hair , it is a praise to her . Object . We may use other things for ornament , and why not our hair ? Answ. In ornament we must look we be without offence , and that is when we frame ourselves to the example of the grave and sober , who amongst us count the fashion of flaring locks , effeminate and ruffianlike . Again , in ornament , as in every thing else , we must express godliness , modesty , and sobriety : whereas this fashion of men is received as a badge of a light mind , and an intemperate person . Object . The Nazarits did nourish their hair . Answ. That was by the special law of their profession which profession , and law , and all , is now ceased . If thou wilt be a Nazarite , thou must drink no wine , nor strong beer ; a hard law to many of our locksters . That of Absolom doth not necessarily conclude against it , that his hair became his halter : yet it is not to be passed lightly : Compare his pride with his fall , and we may observe that God doth ordinarily punish us in that wherein we sin . 

Quest. 3.  May not a woman paint her face , and mend her complexion ? Answ. no , every one ought to be content with their own feature and complexion : and to devose artificial forms and favours to set upon their bodies or faces , is a most abominable practice . For , 1.  They are not content with their form which God hath given in them , either because they are proud and would not be inferior to others in beauty ; or because they are unchaste , and would by art allure lovers , when nature hath failed them . 2.  The form of it is a lie ; it is no beauty , but a picture of it , no sincerity , no truth in it . They dissemble themselves to be other than God made them . What truth may we expect within , when a man may read in their faces , lying and dissimulation ? How is this to abstain from the appearance of evil ? 3.  What a dishonour is it to God , that a wretched worm should go about to correct and mend his workmanship ? How would a mean workman take it , that a bungler should offer to correct or alter his work ? 4.  What an indignity is it to take the face of that which they say is a member of Christ , and make it the face of an harlot ? We read but of one in the Scripture that painted her face , and that was jezabel , an arrant strumpet , and called the mother of fornications . How much more unseemly was it in that Vicar of Christ Pope Paul the second , as Platina writes ? 5.  Our Saviour plainly tells us , Mat. 5. that we cannot make one hair white or black , that is , we have not power of our hair to make it , no not to colour it : and yet these will make as many white and black as they list . 6.  If thou be ashamed of that face which God hath made thee , he will one day be ashamed of that face thou hast made thyself . And dare a Christian carry a face in his life time , which neither God made at first , nor he dares appear withal in the resurrection ? Object . But I must please my husband , and hold his heart to me . Answ. Will it not please him to behold the face that God made ? or canst thou please him in bringing a strange beauty to cozen him withal , that he knows is not thine own ? or if he take thee for beautiful when thou art deformed , wouldst thou be thus deceived in a husband , for a fair man to marry a painted husband . 

Object . But I may cover a deformity in my body . Answ. Yes , but not by setting a new form upon thy face , nor by dissembling . 

Object . Doth not the Apostle say , 1 Cor. 12.  We put covers upon the members that are least honest ? Answ. 1.  The Apostle speaks of not contemning the poorest Christian , under that similitude . 2.  We cover uncomely parts , but with what ? with clothes to hide them , not with painting , stibium , white lead , purpurisse , or check varnish . 3.  If thy external form be not so beautiful , beautify it with grace , humility , the fear of God , and other Christian virtues . The Church's beauty is within , which God and his Angels , and good men respect in the person that is most deformed and contemptible . 

CHAP. XXVIII . 

Rules for our carriage towards all men ▪ in general . 

The second sort of rules concerning man and the things of men , respecteth our carriage towards other men ; and that , 1.  In general ▪ towards all : 2.  In special , towards good , or bad . 

The general rules are these : 

1.  Wisely to distinguish between men , and not promiscuously respect all alike . 1.  This is a point of wisdom , 1 Cor. 6. 6. and 2. commanded us , jud. 22. have compassion on some , putting difference , others save with fear . Again , 3.  Many precepts can never be observed without it : as , first in things respecting God , Cast not holy things to dogs , Matth. 7. 6. that is , such as are known to be wilful repellers of the truth , lest they profane them , and tear you : secondly , in things of men , Do good to all , but especially to the household of faith : thirdly , concerning ourselves , He that hates will sergeant , though he speak favourably , believe him not , etc.  Prou. 26. 24 , 25.  Therefore labour to discern one from another . 4.  There is great difference between an Israelite and an Egyptian , between a jew and a Samaritan ; and we must observe the difference ; wherein the Lord goes before us , who though he be patient and good unto all , yet he is specially good unto Israel , even the upright of heart . Object . This is to anticipate God's judgement and censure . Answ. no , because our judgement reaches not to a man's final estate , but to the present only ; for we may not judge beyond our eyes , nor yet against them : It is alike folly and wickedness to iusti●ie the ungodly , as to condemn the innocent . Against this rule ●aile those general men , whom all fashions and companies please well enough , no matter whether protestants or Papists , religious or profane , drunkards or sober , swearers or fearers of an oath ; as the jews , they put no difference between Christ ▪ and the thieves , who were crucified with him , but only that Christ was the worst . Others put difference between the godly and others , such as between jews and Samaritans , they will not meddle with a man truly fearing God for a dish of water . But a fearful sign it is when grace is not acknowledged . 

2.  Although we must make account to live amongst all , yet our care must be to sort with the best : that is , we must embrace friendship with all so far as is possible , Rom. 12. 18. and so as we war not with God ; but familiarity only with good men , who are but a few . Lightness of familiarity is indiscretion . Here the rule holdeth well , to try before we trust : yea , a wise Christian must not commit himself to every one that seemeth good by the example of Christ , joh. 2. 24.  For , 1.  Much hypocrisy lieth at the root of men's hearts : 2.  Satan hath taught many to transform themselves , and make religion and good words a cloak for their own ends : 3.  Never did the devil more hurt to Christianity than by false brethren , who were sent in to spy their liberty . For even thy brethren , and the house of thy father , even they have dealt unfaithfully with thee , — believe them not though they speak fair to thee , jer. 12. 6.  He that eateth bread with me ( saith David ) and he that dips his finger in the platter with me , even he lift up his heel against me : and Christ saith , A man's enemies are they of his own household . 4.  Solomon saith , An unfaithful man is as a broken tooth , and a sliding foot , Prou. 25. 19 5.  Christ would not commit himself to some that are said to believe in his name , because he knew what was in man Many friends are like deep ponds , clear on the top , and all muddy at the bottom . And therefore a Christian must be well advised before he inwardly converse with another . Now if a man must be careful even in entertaining good company , how careless are men of themselves , when they thrust themselves into evil company , which is more contagious than any sickness , more infectious than any pestilence ? no age so catching of any disease , as every age is of deadly diseases of the mind in such poisoned air . Let no Christian that will be ruled by God's wisdom , presume to converse in any such company , further than the limit of his particular calling , or other just occasion and dealing is offered . 

3.  In our converse with all men , we must keep a determination either to do good unto others , or receive good from others , helping one another to life as occasion shall be offered , Heb. 10. 24.  Let us consider one another , to provoke to love and good works : jude 20.  Edify one another in your holy faith . Motives so to do : 1.  How profitable should we be , if our lips were ever feeding others , Pro. 10. 20. and if our diligence were to draw understanding from others , Prou. 2. 5.  How should we abound in wisdom , and make our whole life fruitful ? This would keep us in good trading and return of goodliness . 2.  This is the right end and improvement of our gifts , for the good of the whole body , Rom. 12. 6. 3.  Here is an excellent work of love , which is called the bond of perfection , which ties persons and virtues together , and perfects them by frequent actions . 4.  In what company soever a man comes , his care must be that his life and conversation be a visible confutation of all ungodliness . Daniels piety confuted idolatry , and Lot was a real reproof of Sodom . A Christians light must always shine , even in the darkness of the world , and against it . Should the life of a Christian be like the life of unbelievers , covetous , contentious , conceited , unjust , & c ? or should not the life of a wise Christian , vary from the multitude and common people , in judgement and practise ? Did not Christ and his followers so ? This rule is opposite to that worldly wisdom , to swim with the stream , and to do as the most do , to avoid the note of singularity . But here , as in all the course of godliness , 1.  We must become fools , that we may be wise : 2.  We must not avoid men's evil speaking , by running with them into the same excess of riot : 3.  We must not take the example of many & great ones , but of Christ , the greatest and wisest of all : and Phil. 3. 17.  Be ye followers of me , and look on them that walk so . These example's suit to our rule . 

5.  Christianity enjoins love unto all , even the worst : whose vices we must hate , their persons we must love ; by which virtue all men have place in our prayers , in our mercy and compassion as occasion requires . This grace covers a multitude of sins in all , it beareth with infirmity , it forgives offences in all : Col. 3. 13. forbearing and forgiving one another . And therefore the Apostle wishes us , above all things to put on love . And to consider that motive , Col. 4. 7.  Every one is one of us , even the worst in the natural and civil bond ; one of us , if not in faith , yet in flesh ; one of our neighbours , or congregation , or at least by the common bond of a Christian.  

6.  Religion requires courtesy as well as piety , good manners together with good conscience ; and therefore we must be courteous to all , 1 Pet. 2. 17.  & 3 , 8.  Honour all men . And Rom. 12. 10.  In giving honour go one before another . Which honour is a good opinion conceived inwardly , and expressed outwardly by reverend words and deeds . Christianity will make us have a low opinion of ourselves , and better of others then of our selves . Ob. Some are so bad , or so base , as no honour or respect belongs unto them . Answ. None is so bad but hath some honour on him , he is God's creature , he is a man , a Christian , and he may be a good man , a member of Christ , and certain reverence belongs to all this . Ob. But how can superiors , in higher place , honour their inferiors ? Answ. Many ways : 1.  In action , by testifying their good opinion of them in words , gestures , or deeds , not the least contempt : and so job behaved himself , self , 31. 13. 2.  In affection , especially , when superiors whom God hath by their place made receivers of honour , could out of an humble affection be well pleased either to want it , or return it upon their inferiors if they might do it without offence , or might it stand with good order which God hath set in the Church and Commonwealth . 

CHAP. XXIX . 

Rules of walking wisely towards good men . 

THE first of these rules is in respect of our affection , to love the godly with brotherly love . It is true indeed , all men must be loved , but here is required a more special love , as between brethren , of which Saint Peter saith , 2. 1. 7.  join with godliness brotherly kindness , because they are of the same father and family of God. The reason of this rule is this : the nearer any man comes to God , or expresseth him , the more right he hath into our affections for God's image sake : and here is a straighter bond then that of nature . The Apostle makes this a mark of God's child , to love the brethren , 1 joh. 3. 10. and David professeth , that all his delight was in the Saints , the excellent on earth : and Rome 2. 10.  Be affectioned one to another with brotherly love . And because this cannot be , except men see more in God's people then ordinary , therefore labour to see , 1.  Their high birth and true nobility , joh. 1. 13  Not of blood , nor of the will of flesh , but of God. 3.  Their kindred and alliance : they are Sons of God , brethren of Christ , who was not ashamed to call them brebrethrens , Heb. 2. 11. 3.  Their high office and place , whom Christ the faithful witness , the first born from the dead , and the Prince of the Kings of the earth , hath loved and washed from their sins by his blood , to make them Kings and Priests unto God , Reu. 1. 5. 4.  Their beauty and glory , being covered with long white robes of righteousness and holiness ; such as Kings anciently were distinguished by , wherein they appear most lovely and graceful to God , Angels , and good men : nothing is wanting to their perfection of beauty , seeing they are complete in Christ the head of all power , Col. 2. 10. 5.  Their present wealth , and future expectation : Their goods are God the chief good , Christ given them of God for righteousness , the holy Ghost sent into their hearts for sanctification and consolation ; eternal election , effectual calling , justification . And their future expectation is the City of God , the heavenly jerusalem , which God hath prepared for them , Heb. 11. 16.  

Now were it a wise course for a man to disaffect the chief favourite of his King ? and are not Gods children Gods chief favourites ? Were it a safe thing to hate the people of God , to disaffect them , to lower upon them , seeing the Lord observes what looks are cast down upon his children , as in Cain ? How was Balaam slain by the Lord for desiring evil to Israel , though himself could do them none but by his wicked counsel ? These are the last times in which men are lovers of themselves , and of men only for their own advantage , 2 Tim. 3. 2. they love them for their wealth , ease , and pomp , not for God and his graces . 

2.  We must not only affect their persons , but also embrace a fruitful fellowship and society with them in the Gospel . This is the Apostles rule , 1 Pet. 2. 17.  Love's brotherly fellowship : and how glad was he for the fellowship of the Philippians in the Gospel , Phil. 1. 5.  

Now the means of fruitful conversing with the godly , are these : 

First , to consider one another , what need the best have to be provoked and whetted on , especially in these evil and cold days , yea , such times as nip and blast piety , and the fear of God , Heb. 3. 13.  Exhort one another daily , lest ye be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin . Think what a fearful thing it is to fall from the grace of God , yea or the degrees of it ; and would we suffer a brother to run into this danger ? 

Secondly , choose fit matter to confer of in company , either by calling to mind things heard , or by stirring up to profitable hearing , diligent proceeding , in offensive walking , watchful speaking , and the like : or if need be , of admonition , exhortation , or reproof , show thy love therein ; full clouds will distil rain , light will shine abroad , and charitable knowledge is communicative . 

Thirdly , be sure to perform these private Christian duties in good , and holy , and unrebukeable manner : as , 1. orderly , those beginning which are fittest in gifts and place , as Elihu spoke in his turn : 2. humbly , none seeking to speak beyond his skill and reach : 3 wisely , watching the fittest time , and best occasion : 4. meekly and lovingly , without reasonings and murmuring , Phil. 2. 15. none crossing others , but through love one forbearing another , advising in the spirit of meekness , and with offering to submit themselves in other cases to receive words of exhortation and admonition : 5.  conscionably , so as in all such meetings and conference , every one be an helper to the truth , 3 john 8. to find it out , not to obscure or weaken it . By these means we shall have cause to rejoice in our Christian fellowship , as jonathan and David , 1 Sam. 23. 14.  

Fourthly , observe the graces that are in others , for a pattern to ourselves , 1 Thes. 1. 7. for our own provocation and imitation : Yea , spy and encourage the graces of God in the weakest and meanest Christian , so framing ourselves to that mark of a good man , who honour's all that fear the Lord , Ps. 15. 4.  Neither let the strongest scorn to ree●ive help from the weakest : Moses was content to be advised by jethro , and David by Abigail : and note Paul's humility , Rom. 1. 12. he hoped to come and be comforted by their faith , as well as to help theirs . 

Fiftly , in the use of good company , beware of giving any occasion of scandal , or offence to any , Matth. 18. 7 , 8. leave no ill smell behind thee : avoid the note of pride , conceit , forwardness in speaking , frowardness , or stiffness in thine own sense , 1 john 2. 10.  He that loveth his brother , there is no occasion of stumbling or scandal in him . 

Motives to provoke us wisely to carry ourselves in good company . 

1.  Consider how in our company we are especially to watch , seeing in no part of our life we are sooner corrupted then in that , seeing in no part of our life we do so much discover ourselves , and seeing in no part thereof , we do either more good or more harm seeing we do nothing without witness , & should do nothing which we would not have exemplary . 

2.  As Satan lays snares every where , so also in our company one with another , not so much to bring the godly to such excess of riot , as he effecteth in wicked societies , where is swearing , gaming , drinking , railing , etc. but to make them unfruitful , and keep them from the good they might do : and sofarre prevaileth , as sometimes impertinent speech , sometime debate & detracting speeches arise , and the most tolerable speech is worldliness , which stealeth away the heart and the time ; so as some who intended more good to themselves and others , carry away hearts smiting them , for not better employing that opportunity . 

3.  There is apparent loss , when we watch not to do or receive good , in company with good men . For godly men by reason of their callings , and distance of places , seldom meet ; and when they do , they loose the gain of that time in their special calling ; and if they get it not up in the furtherance of the general calling of a Christian , it is utterly lost . And what but this makes the mindfulness one of another sweet in their absence , when there was reaped so good fruit one of another in their presence ? 

4.  By this wise and fruitful carriage of company and meetings of good men , Christians shall stop the mouths of such as are ever complaining of , and accusing Christian meetings to be scarce to any other purpose , but to detract , defame , slander , censure , to strengthen one another in faction , and the like . Or if such mouths will not be shut , yet the conscience of Christians may rejoice in the contrary innocency , and not be dejected by such false testimony . 

3.  Rule . In our speeches , let us be proctor's and solicitors for the Saints , speak wisely and willingly of the good we know in our brethren , and maintain the cause , person , and name of good men to our power . The sincerity of love between David and jonathan was manifest ; in that jonathan defended David's innocency to Saul his father , not only to the loss of his Kingdom , but the danger of his own life . Ebedmelech the blacke-moore spoke a good word for jeremy , and was saved from destruction , when his master Zedekiah was slain . Nicodemus even in the beginning of grace spoke for Christ , when the whole Council was against him . And how dangerous is it to devose and invent words against Cod's children , as David's enemies ; to belie , or reproach them , to raise or receive slanders against them ? If such as stand not for grace , shall fall , then much more they that stand against it . How needful is this Apology for them , against the reproaches and scorns of this age ? How earnestly would children speak for their parents , brethren , or kindred ? Even so should it be here . It is nothing to speak for a man when others speak for him . 

4.  Rule . Concerning our actions towards good men , we should every way bestir ourselves to procure their good and welfare : we must to our hearts and affections join our hands and help to do them good , yea , be ready to lay our hands under the feet of the Saints . Gal. 6. 10.  Do good to all , but especially to the household of faith . 

Now in special , 1.  We must prevent from them all the evil we can , hinder them from sins , and from falling , hinder by all means reproach from their profession , and danger from their persons . 2.  If thou findest a good man s●iptinto an infirmity , labour to cover it , make the best of it as may be , vaunt not thyself over him , but consider thyself , and by all good means cure it if it lie in thy power . 3.  If thou find a good man stand in need of inward comfort , and cast down , help to raise him again : Christ was sent to speak a word of comfort to the weary , and every Christian hath received of his anointing . When David was in deep distress , his faithful friend jonathan comforted him in the Lord his God , 1 Sam. 23. 16. 4.  If thou knowest a good man helps , and without outward comforts , thou must now show bowels of mercy and compassion , gladly receiving the poor Saints , communicating willingly and freely to their necessity , 1 Pet. 3. 8.  Love one another as brethren , be pitiful . 1 joh. 3. 17.  He that hath this world's good , and seeth his brother's need , and shuts up his compassion from him , how dwelleth the love of God in him . 

To stir us up hereunto , consider these motives : 1.  Say with thyself , What ? am not I a member of the same body with him ? Is not he of the same family and household of Saints ? This is the Apostles argument , especially do good to the household of faith . 2.  What shall I gain , if by word or deed I shall make sad the hearts of good and godly men ? Cannot Cain cast down his looks , but God looks on it ? Cannot Ishmael laugh at Isaac , but the Lord arraigns and condemns him of high persecution ? Surely then cannot I carry the like indignities scotfree . 3.  Do I read Merioz accursed , because she came not out to help the people of God , though she had no hand against them ? judg. 5. 23.  Surely I must nor only not have a hand against good men , but I must set my hand to help them , else is not my heart so right as it should . Pilat's wife wished her hsuband to have nothing to do against that just man : but happy had Pilate been ( who was not violent against Christ ) to have been earnest and resolute for his deliverance ; the defect whereof was his overthrow . And so it shall be heavy enough in the day of judgement , that wicked men's hands have not helped the godly , seeing the sentence shall not run because they had hurt them , but because they helped them not . 

CHAP. XXX . 

Rules how to walk wisely towards evil men : 1. in general . 

The general rule is in Col. 4. 5.  Walk wisely towards them that are without , that is , the Gentiles who were not converted , without the border of the Church : for even in the Church some are of God's domestickes , some without as strangers that want faith as yet . And godly men must walk so much the more warily , not only because they have God's eye , and godly men's eyes on them , but even eyes of men yet unconuerted , who must not be cast back , or confirmed in their error , or hardened against the truth , but by all wise walking ( if it be possible ) wone to the love and liking of it . 

Now towards all unbelievers , and unconuerted men in general , these parculars are worthy observation : 1.  That every Christian avoid all known evils & offences , by which evil men might be occasioned to abide out of the Church . The law is , thou shalt put no stumbling block before the blind : for this is a fea●●full judgement of God on men unconuerted , they would willingly be blinded , and hardened in their natural estate . Now our rule is , being ourselves pulled out of danger , to help others out also ; nay , our light must reprove their darkness , their covetousness by liberality , their pride by humility , their impatience by patience , etc.  

2.  All unconuerted men hate the light , and are prone to blaspheme the Gospel , and to reproach the holy profession of it . Wise Christians therefore must cut off occasions from them , and take heed of defiling their own nest : 1 Tim. 5 14.  Give no occasion to the adversary to speak evil : and David prayeth , that none might be ashamed because of him . Ezec. 36. 20. the Lord complains , that the Israelites among the heathen polluted his name , and made them say , These are the people of the Lord , and are gone out of his land . A lewd child ( saith Solomon ) dishonoureth the whole house . Nay on the contrary , the meanest Christian in his place , by his wise and Christian walking , must adorn the profession of Christ ; so the Apostle to Titus 2. 10.  Servant's must be no pickers , but show all good faithfulness , to adorn the Gospel of the Lord jesus . An holy course of life will make the Gentiles say , as they in esay 61. 9  They are the seed of the blessed of the Lord  

3.  All unconuerted men esteem of doctrine by the life , and the profession by the practice of professors ; for they have no taste of the doctrine in itself : and therefore in the carriage of our profession , we must apply ourselves if it be possible to win them . So the Apostle ( 1.  Pet. 2. 12.  ) wishes the jews , to have their conversation honest among the Gentiles , that they might glorify God in the day of their visitation . And women are commanded , so to watch their whole behaviour , as their husbands might be won by their godly conversation . Private men must convert others by their private conversation . 

Motives so to do , are these : 

1.  Christians are on a mount , set on a scaffold , nothing they do escapeth sight and censure , all is marked , they stand or fall not alone , but to many . 2.  They have a light with them , which draws all eyes upon them , and discovers all . 3.  The eyes of the wicked are not on others , but on them , to disgrace them , and through them to smite Christ himself . 4.  The will of God is , By welldoing to silence the ignorance of foolish men , 1 Pet. 2. 15. 5.  What a glory is it , to slaughter envy itself , to stop an open mouth , and cloth an adversary with his own shame ; that he that would accuse us , must accuse the Sun of darkness when it shines . 6.  Hereby we shall be conformable to Christ , whom when Satan came to sift , he found nothing in him : wicked men shall say as Saul said to David . thou art more righteous than I , etc.  

CHAP. XXXI . 

Rules how to walk wisely towards evil men , in special : and first for scorners . 

Now we come to special rules concerning special sorts of evil men , of whom some are exceeding evil in themselves , some are evil also to good men . Of the former rank are scornful persons : of the latter hurtful . 

For scorners , observe these rules . 

1.  If we know men to be so far naught , as they scorn goodness , good men , and good things , we must avoid their company so much as we may . For what comfort can a godly man take in such company , where all good and godly communication must either be banished or derided ? There is no hope of doing good , there is danger of taking harm . 

2.  If we be by occasion beset , or cast into the company of profane , brutish and scornful persons , then observe these rules . First , grieve thou wast not better directed , Psal. 120. 5.  Woe is me , that I remain in Meshec , and dwell in the tents of Kedar . Secondly , be sure though thou seest no place or opportunity of good , that thou hast no fellowship with them in any of the unfruitful works of darkness . If they will be no cleaner by thy company , be not thou defiled by theirs . If they will not consent to thee in good , consent not thou to them in any sin . Thirdly , please them not by yielding to any sin , but give apparent tokens of dislike . Object . Why , may we not by yielding a little to them , draw them to us ? Answ. no , but the way to win them , is a pure conversation with fear , 1 Pet. 3. 12. much less may we flatter them in any evil . Micaiah would not flatter with the King , the four hundred false Prophets did . Fourthly , acknowledge thyself a child of wisdom , which is justified of all her children : suffer not God's glory to be trodden down by thy silence ; wisely break off fooleries , by savoury riddles or questions , as Samson : and in a wise and peaceable manner , change the matter : holding it a settled ground of religion , not to relinquish piety , to keep peace with wicked men : Heb. 12. 14.  follow peace , and holiness . no corruption of man must drive us from our station . Fifthly , so soon as we may , departed from them : Prou , 14. 7.  Departed from the foolish man , when thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge . And beware of falling into the like company again . joseph wisely declined the company of his Mistress , when she daily spoke unto him , Gen 39 10. and David would not return with Saul , when he perceived his wilfulness against him , 1 Sam. 26. 25.  

CHAP. XXXII . 

Rules to carry ourselves wisely towards evil men , evilly affected to us.  

IF men be not only evil in themselves , but also to us , than it is either in evil purposes , or in evil practices against us.  

If they purpose evil , than our Saviour's rule is , Beware of men , Mat. 10. 17. for they will deliver you up to the Counsels . By men , our Saviour means those whom in the former words he calleth wolves , that desire to make a prey and spoil of the sheep of Christ , and in his caveat adviseth , 1.  Wisely to prevent the plots and trains of ungodly men , discreetly to prevent our own trouble so near as we can . How wisely did jaacob prevent the fury of his brother Esau ? And as they watch to traduce us , so must we watch to cut off occasions of entrapping ; Luk. 6. 7. the Scribes and Pharisies watched whether Christ would heal on the Sabbath day or no , to find accusation against him ; our Saviour for all this omitted not to do good , but in doing it by his question unto them cut off so far as he could , the matter of their malice by clearing the lawfulness of it . So must we : And yet prepare stoutly to bear whatsoever the Lord measureth out by them . 

2.  Our Saviour would have us wisely decline their fury , not without cause provoking them : It is no wisdom to provoke an evil man : It is no good discretion to stir up a Lion , to take a Bear by the tooth , or a dog by the ears . For they desire nothing more , than matter to stir up their corruption by : So H●zekiah commanded his servants not to answer Rabseca one word . 3.  join with serpentine wisdom , innocence of doves , Mat. 10. 16.  Nothing more vexeth & vanquisheth an adversary than innocency : no better breastplate than righteousness . But if a man had the innocency of Christ himself , the adversary will watch advantages , and play upon a man's simplicity : therefore join serpentine wisdom , as Paul did , Act. 23. 6. he testified his innocence , and that with all good conscience he served God till that day ▪ but what tell you Ananias of doves innocency ? he commands to strike him on the mouth : the more innocent , the less endured ; he fared the worse for that : and therefore he joins in season serpentine wisdom ; for , perceiving his greatest enemies to be Pharisies and Sadduces , he professeth himself a Pharisie , and the son of a Pharisie , and that he was brought in danger for the hope of the resurrection which the Sadduces denied ; and so casting a bone between them , and setting them by the ears , he escaped between them . 

4.  Out of their malice we should draw our own good , so warily to carry ourselves towards them , as that we may find that of the heathen true , An enemy often hurteth less , and profiteth more than many friends . We must both in their absence , and presence especially , take heed we do not disadvantage ourselves . It was some disadvantage to Paul , when in the Council ( although he was provoked , and unjustly smitten ) he called the high Priest whited wall : he was glad to excuse it by his ignorance . We may not be to bold , or too forward to speak in a good matter . 

5.  If evil men have done us harm , and wrongfully molested and persecuted us , our rule is , 1.  In respect of them , to pity , pardon , and pray for them . If we do them good , we shall either overcome their evil with goodness , or heap coals on their heads . 2.  In respect of ourselves , possess our souls with patience , and show meekness and moderation , and say as David in Shimei his railing , It may be the Lord will do me good for his cursing of me this day . 3.  In respect of our duty , still to show an undaunted constancy , and resolution for the truth and all good ways : 1 Pet. 3. 14 , 15.  If ye suffer for righteousness , blessed are ye ; but fear not , neither be troubled , but sanctify the Lord in your hearts , and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh a reason of your hope . 

Thus far of the rules of Christian wisdom : of which I may say with Moses , Deut. 4. 5. 6.  These are the rules and ordinances : keep them , and do them : for this is your wisdom . 

CHAP. XXXIII . 

Containing motives for circumspect walking . 

But because this accurate and circumspect walking is grown out of request , and men generally are too well contented to walk at adventure , and ( as men that shoot at rovers , ) secure themselves in a loose and neglected course , and go on carelessly , as if there were no danger in wand'ring from God , and declining from the good way , we will use some Motives to provoke every Christian that tenders either God's glory or his own salvation , to undertake this Christian course . 

1.  In regard of God : 1.  Whose commandment is , that all our ways be ordered aright , Prou. 4. 26. and that the Saints walk worthy of the Lord , and please him in all things , Col. 1. 10. 2.  Whose word must be our rule , to which we must continually frame our whole course and every part thereof : for 1. the moral law is a perpetual rule , binding at all times without any intermission : 2. the precepts of it are to make the Word our continual Counsellor , to bind it to us , not to let it depart , but to meditate in it night and day . And what is it less than blasphemy , to charge the Saints with folly , singularity , and a Saintish purity , in that wherein they were most acceptable to God ? as , David set the Lord before him continually : and when he professeth his great love to the law ▪ saith , that all the day long his meditation is in it ? Psal. 119. 79.  Read we not , that the twelve tribes served God instantly , night and day ? Act. 26. 7. and the Apostles were assured , they had a good conscience in all things , Heb. 13. 18.  Was this care ( so incessant ) commendable in them , and is the same godly care now grown a vice , an hateful practice , or heresy ? 3.  Who being a God of pure eyes , will strictly stand for justice . And do we fear we can be too strict , who are to give account of every idle word , and roving thought , much more of every unwarrantable action ? Are we not to pass a strict and straight judgement , wherein every secret shall be made open , and in which it shall be rewarded according to our works ? and shall the Devil delude us , or the wicked world make us believe we need not be so straight laced , as to say with David , I will look to my ways ? 4.  Who if he ponder all a man's paths , how ought he himself to ponder them ? for all the ways of a man are before the Lord , and he pondereth all his ways , Pro. 5. 21.  

2.  In respect of ourselves : no watch or circumspection can be sufficient to us , whose natures are carried to evil as naturally as to our ordinary food . The whole frame of the heart of man is evil continually , as ready to receive any impression of temptation , as the dry tinder a spark of sire ; and not only to receive such sparks , but to conceive them , and hatch evil , and hammer it out on the anuils of our hard hearts , like cunning workmen . Whence it cannot be avoided , but that without our daily watch , sin must multiply and grow upon us , even over our heads , to a numberless number . 

3.  In respect of the wicked amongst whom we live , who are ready to take all advantages , and watch for ourfals , both to harden themselves , and reproach through us God's holy religion . For if they can scorn and contemn the servants of God for well-doing , and religious actions , how would these men of Gath and Askelon , these uncircumcised Philistimes , triumph and glory in the falls of any of God's Worthies ? Hence was the ground of our Saviors' exhortation to his Disciples , Behold , I send you as sheep among wolves , and therefore be wise as serpents , Mat. 10. 16.  Nay , we must not only by our circumspect ways stop their mouths , but convince themselves , and win them to the same holy profession with us : 1 Pet. 3. 1 , 2.  

4.  In respect of our brethren ; who some of them are not yet converted , some are already called ; both whom we offend and scandalise by our unwatchfull walking , and so the name of God is blasphemed because of us that profess it , as the Apostle speaks of hypocritical jews , Rom. 2. 24.  Hence are those many exhortations , Col. 4. 5.  Walk wisely towards them that are without , lest you give them any just occasion of exception or stumbling : & 1 Cor. 10. 32.  Give no offence , neither to the jews nor Grecians , nor to the Church of God. And how circumspect had he need to be , that must walk inoffensively between the jew and Gentile , seeing what was given to the one , seemed detracted from the other ? Yet so much is required to walk , even between the godly and profane , whose ways are diametrally contrary . 

5.  The way to heaven is full of snares , crosses , and dangers , by reason of our enemies , and therefore requires all our diligence either to avoid them , or else wisely to step over them . We can be very wary in the dangerous ways of this world , to take direction or company , and armour , and the daylight to further us : And why not in this way to heaven ? Besides , it is a narrow way , and on high : all which makes it more perilous to decline from . How circumspect had he need be , that walks upon a narrow high rock , a thousand faddom from ground , especially where a little slip or error tumbles him down , to dash him all to pieces ? 

6.  Is there any time afforded us , wherein we may set loose our hearts to any unlawful liberty , or cast ourselves upon Satan's snares , as Peter did , in going into the high Priests hall , Matth. 26. 71.  Or can we do so , and not be caught by the deceitfulnes of sin ? Stand we against such enemies as will not take advantages , who do nothing but seek them , especially when fear is set aside , which is the soul's watchman ? And if men will take liberty , and be at their own hand , have they not full leave to fall often , lie long , rise hardly , and being up again walk weakly , and not recover their cheerfulness many a day , if ever ? and must they fear nothing so much , as lest they keep their watches , and preserve themselves from falls ? Lastly , a man may pull down more in one day , than he can build in many : and experience shows , that a man is more weakened by one day's surfeit and negligence , than in an hundred , wherein he preserves the care of his health : even so it is in the soul , the health whereof is kept in strictness of diet , and observation of God's rules . 

7.  Who knoweth not that Christianity is a trade which will not forward if it be not close followed : an husbandry , which the Professor shall never thrive by , if he be not of a diligent hand ; wherein something must be done daily , or else the heart shall soon lie like the sluggards field described by Solomon ? It needeth therefore be hedged and fenced with the fear of God , and kept with all diligence . Pro. 23. 17.  

8.  This alone is the way to attain true comfort , which no man can find , by allowing himself in any course which God alloweth not . This alone is to walk safely : Pro. 10. 9  He that walks uprightly , walks safely : and what other means hath the Wiseman appointed to preserve from falling , than to take hold of instruction , and not leave her ? This alone is the way to get peace peculiar to the Israel of God , to walk by rule , Gal. 6. 16. neither can a course not attended , stand with this Apostolical injunction of Christian circumspection . 

CHAP. XXXIIII . 

Answering objections against circumspect walking . 

And whereas our age aboundeth with men of profane minds and mouths , who would turn all this our glory into shame , and censure this speech of the holy Ghost , which prescribeth a strict , precise , and accurate walking : ( why ? say they : what need men be so strict ? and , shall no man come to heaven , but such as are so strict and curious ? ) and the whole world , almost , thinks it a most idle and needless course : we will therefore answer some objections that are made against it . 

Object . 1.  A great many have lived honestly and well , that were never so foolish and strict . I hope to serve God , and do no man harm , and what need more ? 

Answ. 1.  We must walk by rule , not by example , except it be of the best , not of the most . 

2.  The Pharisies led a civil life , were outwardly very just to the tything of Mint and Anise , and very devout in their worship : and yet if our righteousness exceed not theirs , we can never enter into the kingdom of heaven , Mat. 5. 20.  

3.  The righteousness of God goes beyond all civil and outward righteousness ; it is inward , in spirit and truth ; it cuts off not only outward acts of murder , uncleanness , theft etc. but inward motions of hatred , wantonness , covetousness : it strikes at roots and branches , and hate's the least and secretest evil , which civil righteousness makes no bones of . 

Object . 2.  But this circumspect and strict walking is taken up but by a few , and those of the meanest : some men of great wisdom , place , and learning favour it not , but scorn and oppose it . 

Answ. 1.  Christianity was ever hated by the most of the world , because of the cross : the Church is black , because the sun looks on her , but comely to God and his Angels ; and this makes few enter that way . 2.  The Apostle directly meets with this objection , 1 Cor. 1. 27.  Not many mighty , not many noble , not many wise : but God hath chosen a few poor people , and they shall call upon his Name : And why not many of those ? Because they cannot so easily deny themselves and this evil world , which they must do that will be saved . 3.  Let us not wholly cast our eyes upon the examples of the world now declining ; and , as at last , so at worst ; but upon such as formerly have been set as eye-markes in the Scripture , and we shall find some , both great , and noble , and learned , going before us in strict and circumspect walking . The holy Patriarches ; Noah , Abraham , Isaac , jacob ; godly and zealous Kings , David , Solomon , josiah ; the holy Apostles , who endeavoured always to have a clear conscience before God and all men , Acts 24. 16. yea , the most wise , noble , and learned that ever was , the Son of God , whose conversation was such as none could accuse him of sin . These are the cloud of witnesses , which we must follow in running the race set before us , Heb. 12. 1.  

Object . 3.  But what an impossible commandment is this , and who can bear it ? Can we be Saints in this world , thus to order ourselves in every thing ? We are sinners , and must be sinners , and cannot be thus strict as you require . We hope we generally mean well , and God ( we hope ) will supply the rest . 

Answ. 1.  The scope of this plea is , to give overall , because they cannot attain all : which is but a false fire , by which the devil discourageth many from the narrow way , and the narrow looking to their own way . For true it is , that we call with the Scripture for a keeping of all God's commandments , always , and to live with God , and walk with him : but with evangelical interpretation , which accepteth the will , desire , and endeavour to walk with God in every thing ; which cannot but in some measure be found in a true believer , and cannot but in Christ be accepted , where it is true and hearty . Thus the Scriptures interpret themselves : 1 Chr. 28. 7.  If Solomon shall endeavour to keep my commandments , etc.  Host 6. 3.  We shall endeavour to know the Lord What can God accept less , or a good heart tender less than hearty wishes , where strength is wanting to please God in all things ? 2 ▪ Let us by the straitness of the Commandment consider whence we are fallen , and see our impotency , and confess our failing , but not therefore allow ourselves in any evil , or venture on any sin which we might by this circumspection avoid , or remit our endeavour in the respect of all God's Commandments . 3.  For such as think it sufficient to mean well in general ; consider this , that as no Master is pleased , if his Steward bring him in a general bill of great sums spent , wherein he may hide much deceit ; but sets down no days accounts , or week's bills of parcels : no more in the matter of heavenly treasure , is it enough to hide himself in general good meanings , but in every particular to avoid deceit and suspicion of it . And as it is with a traveller in an unknown way , who will not go at random , nor count it a sufficient direction to be set Eastward or Westward , but he will ask every man of every Town , and take good heed of every mark , to pass him from one place to another : so in this our passage to heaven , we must keep our special directions , and walk with God in every thing , if we will happily pass unto heaven . 

Object . 4.  But what need such daily and continual troubling of ourselves ? What was the Sabbath made for , but for God's service ? and we keep our Church as well as any : but for the weeke-dayes , we have callings to follow , and cannot intend such things : and it were better if some of these nice fellows were more diligent in their calling , as we be . 

Answ. 1.  Seeing the rule by which we must walk , is to serve God in holiness and righteousness all our days , we have no liberty to part the week between God and us. Neither must we put on holiness as an holiday garment , to put it off at night : neither may we be less holy on other days than on the Sabbath : howsoever we must exercise our holiness in the public worship of God on that day , and in the private worship , and in the personal callings on the other days . 2.  He is a good Christian , that keeps a perpetual Sabbath , and is not only one on the Sabbath day . The trial of soundness is at home , in the midst of a man's house ; and not at Church , where the Pharisie is often above the Publican . 3.  thou hast a calling on the weeke-day , in which thou must sweated and abide who ever thou art ; but thou must not so play the good husband , as to become a worldling . Use the world as not using it , as not affecting it : and acknowledge thy special and personal calling to be subordinate to the general : for in the whole exercise of thy special calling , thou must show forth thy knowledge , and religious keeping of a good conscience : once divorce these two , and never look for success on thy labours . 

Object . 5.  But this is fitter for Ministers and cloistered persons , who have given themselves to continual devotion , than for ordinary and common men , who are not acquainted with such novelties . 

Answ. 1.  If all Christians be alike subject to sin , all have need to be continually alike fenced against it . If all have the same enemies , all had need stand upon their ground . If one man's heart be as wicked as another's , every man had need set a watch round about himself . And if any have more need than other , it is unlearned and simple persons , who want such means of helping themselves , as learned Preachers have . 2.  As for the novelty of this circumspect course , we must needs say it is so to such as are of Festus his suit , who thinks Paul learned even to madness , to call him to such strictness : or Gallio his Disciples , Act. 18. who being of no religion , cannot be at leisure to give it hearing . But we have seen it to be no novelty to the Spirit of God , every where charging it upon us : nor to the godly guided by his Spirit , who can neither be idle nor unfruitful in the work of the Lord  

Object . 6.  I like such as can be so strict , and I could wish so to be ; but then I must part from the pleasure and joy of my life : for this continual watch and circumspection is full of melancholy , and uncomfortable : it hinders neighbours from sports and merriments , breaks of good company , and makes the husband and wise often look heavily one upon another : and besides , I should lose some profits and customers , and wrong my estate by neglecting it . 

Ans. 1.  This is a clean contrary judgement to God's Spirit : Pro. 3. 17.  Her ways are the ways of pleasures . God's wisdom , ordering the ways of man , brings true joy and pleasure . For , is there no joy in God , in his word , which was wont to be as sweet , as the honeycomb , nor in the Spirit of God , which is called the Comforter ? Is it such a thing of heaviness to live with God ? Alas ! what is such an heart made of ! 2.  What delights do we call men from , but such as are carnal , foolish , perishing , and unlawful ; stolen waters so sweet and savoury to corrupt flesh , the forbidden fruit which a Christian should neither touch nor taste , and happy he were if he never saw it ? 3.  There is no sorrow in godly life ; but all the sorrow of God's servants , is , that they cannot be more godly . Lay this for a ground , that God is thy chief delight , and no man may be so moderately joyful as thou . 4.  For pleasant companionship , thou losest no good company , but exchangest for better : thou hast now fellowship with God , union with jesus Christ , the inseparable presence of God's blessed Spirit , the attendance of the Angels , the Communion of the Saints , the benefit of their prayers , conference , comfort , and example . This is a pleasant thing for brethren in the faith to live together in unity . And what true joy is there in the company of gamesters , drinkers , swearers , riotous or idle persons , who are never merry unless they be mad , and never glad but when they have driven away the remembrance of God ? 5.  As for the loss of any part of thy estate , trust God on his word : Pro. 3. 16.  In her right hand is length of days , and in her left hand , riches and glory . Never did true piety weaken any man's estate : but godliness hath been the true and constant gain : this makes a small portion sweet and precious , and entails a blessing upon it , when it passeth into the hands of our posterity after us.  

CHAP. XXXV . 

Marks of a man walking circumspectly . 

And seeing most men beguile themselves with the goodness of their present course , and esteem a civil life & external honesty , not only unblameable enough , but justifiable and sufficiently commendable ; Be it known to them that if they examine not the goodness of their course by this doctrine , they are far from God's approbation , whatsoever they may conceive of themselves . In which examination I will help them with a few notes and signs of a circumspect Person , by whose ways as by a right line they may both see the crookedness , and at length begin to straiten the obliquity of their own . 

1.  A circumspect man watcheth all occasions for his own good and advantage , and if they be offered , slips them not : So a circumspect Christian looks round about him , and thinks it not sufficient to take occasions of grace and well-doing , being offered , but will seek them . How might every moment of our lives make us more stored with grace then other , if we would seek occasions of good to ourselves ? What a rich stock of grace might we have attained ? How rich in good works ? How should we have furthered our reckoning ? 

2.  A circumspect man looks round about him , and so ordereth his many businesses , as one hinder not the other , but all may go forward , and so saveth one commodity as another be not lost or lie in hazard : So a circumspect Christian casteth his occasions ; as , seeing every Christian duty is enjoined him , he hath respect to all God's Commandments . Duties of piety shall not justle out civil duties , nor civil duties eat out duties of piety ; but as one hand helps another , so one table shall further the other , one calling forward another : yea , he looks to the thriving of all his graces . He will walk very humbly before God , but so as he maintain his joy in God. His moderation shall not damp his zeal , his zeal shall not outrun his knowledge . His providence shall not lessen his faith , nor his faith destroy his providence . His love with men's persons brings him not into love with their sins , and his hatred of their sins , impeacheth not his love of their persons . His righteousness to men hindereth not his mercy , neither doth cruel mercy withstand or thrust down needful justice . Thus he is busy in maintaining all his graces , all of them being of great use , and all of them flowing from the same Spirit . 

3.  A circumspect man will be sure not to disadvantage himself by his words , but will speak to his own profit : So a circumspect Christians words make for his own best advantage . He will speak for God's glory , for good men , and good causes . He will be sure to profit himself and others with gracious & religious speeches , and be silent where fruitful speech will not be heard . Exercise to good speeches brings a dexterity and readiness of well-speaking , to which every Christian is exhorted , Col. 4. 6.  Let your speeches be gracious always ▪ and powdered with salt , that ye may know how to answer every man  

4.  As a wary and circumspect man proves a good husband for the world , so circumspect Christians are the best husbands for their souls : such a one hath wisdom and will to increase his estate of grace by every thing , and thinks himself then truly rich , when he thrives in the best commodities . He conceives himself rich , not when he hath things about him to leave to his heirs , but when he hath his wealth personally in himself , and for himself , such wealth as he carries to heaven with him . A circumspect Christian will not win the whole world with the loss of his own soul , which is nothing but to make his heirs happy in his own eternal misery . A circumspect Christian is not so careful to heap up gold , as good works in abundance , and by works of mercy and love , he makes himself bags that wax not old , a treasure in heaven that can never fail , where the thief cometh not , nor the moth corrupteth , Luk. 12. 33.  A circumspect Christian is not so careful for the soiling , tilling , and sowing of his ground , the mounding of his pasture , the weeding of his field , the pruning of his trees , the feeding of his cattle ; as in fencing the heart against temptation , in sowing the seed of God's word , in weeding of sin by the roots out of his soul ; in feeding and fostering of grace . Here is a good husband for himself : he hath that within himself that is better than all without him , and requires more tendance than they all . 

How improvident then are we in our general callings , whiles we take not opportunities of good in public or private , but slip many lessons , Sermons , and comforts on the Sabbath , and on weeke-dayes ? and whiles we will not offer a sacrifice of alms , when God sets up an Altar before us ? How do our special callings eat out our care of the general , and are all in civilities , whiles for the thrift of grace , we are altogether idle and unprofitable ? How many vain and vile speeches , unfruitful , unsavoury , and hurtful , do our corrupt hearts send out , according to their own fullness , by swearing , slandering , lying , cursing , and the like ? How bad husbands are men for their souls , whiles they have not a horse , a pig , a sheep , yea , scarce a dog about their house , but is more tended , and better provided for than their souls ? whiles they will scarce let any dunghill lie about their house , so nasty as their souls ? nor any patch of ground so neglected as their own hearts , that they grow like nettles and brambles , to be cut up and cast into the fire ? 

FINIS . 





Pro. 11. 10. and 29. 2.  Eccl. 9 15.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Esse● 8. 6  Sine pi●s ce●tu●lex murus rebus seruandis par●● est  Pro. 10. 25.  justus fundamentum mundi . 2 Sam. 8. 17  2 Chro. 27. 32.  1 King. 4. 3  2 Kin. 18. 1●  Pro. 11. 11.  Tota vita Christiani ●anctum desiderium est . Aug. in joh. tract 4.  Esa. 9  Psa. 119. 98 99 , 100  josh. 1. 8.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Pro. 10. 32.  

Strict and accurate walking , not wartanted only , but necessarily enforced in the Scriptures ▪  

Christian circumspection what it is not . What it is  And in what . To circumspect walking four things required . 

True wisdom , what it is . They are wisest men that walk most strictly . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Arist.  Psal. 37. 5.  Prou. 1. 32.  1 Cor. 7. 31  Phil. 4. 12.  1 Tim. 6. 6.  1 Pet. 2. 3.  Such as charge strict walking of silliness and folly , do● it with greater folly . Luk. 1● . 34  

Means of spiritual wisdom . 1.  Acquaintance with the Scriptures . Ps. 119. 115  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 2.  Meditation . 3.  Embracing of admonition . 2 Sam. 12.  4.  Company of the wise . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Theorg . 

Rules of wisdom concerning things of God.  1.  Love God as the chiefest good . Rom. 11. 36.  2.  Purchase Christ above all gain . Phil. 1. 21.  〈…〉  3.  Choose best things first . Luk. 12. 20  Psal. 4.  4 ▪ Fear Go● and keep his Commandments . 

Rules for the mind . 1.  To enlighten it . Psa 131. 1.  1 Cor. 2. 2.  2.  To dec● it . Rules for the thoughts . 1.  Give God the first thoughts  2.  Examine them whence they come and whither they go . 3.  Pull them from the world . If they concern thyself or others , see they be humble . Phil. 3. 12.  5.  If they concern sin . be sure it be to hate it  Rules for the william  Concurrence of our will with Gods william  1. revealing . 2. determining . 3. prescribing . 4 disposing . 1 Sam. 3. 18.  Esa. 39 8.  Ch. 1. v. 21  

Rules for the conscience . 1.  Beware of a blind conscience  joh. 16. 2.  2.  Do nothing with a doubting conscience . Conscientia nos animae . Tertul.  3.  Get a good conscience above all things . 4.  Aim at a pure conscience . joh. 18. 28.  5.  Keep diligently the goodness and purity of conscience by 2. things . 

Rules concerning the affections . 1.  Give God the chief affections . 2.  Affect all other things in God , and for God.  3.  Fix them more upon heavenly things , than earthly . Mat. 6. 24  ver . 33.  4.  Fear evil of sin , more than of suffering . 5.  Commiserate the afflicted estate of our brethren . Amos 6. 6.  

Rules fo● the special calling . 1.  Live in a lawful calling . 1 Tim. 4 5.  1.  Show al● good fait●nesse in 〈◊〉  1 To God.  Hab. 116.  Deut. 8. 18.  2.  To ●ur selves . Prou 6. 11.  3.  To others . 3.  Be not busy in other men's callings . Tit. 2. 5.  4 In earthly business carry an heavenly●minde ▪  Phil. 3. 30.  5.  Intent most the most necessary duties of them . 

One general rule for all estates , is to think the present estate best for thee . Rule for affliction . 1.  God may be as well enjoyed in adversity as prosperity . 2 Lay up strength and comfort aforehand . Psal. 23 ▪ 4.  1 Cor. 10. 13.  Rom. 8. 28.  3.  In evils of punishment to set upon evil of sin . Mic. 7. 9  4.  Make them no heavier than God hath made them . ●cuius fit patientia . Quicquid corgere est nefas . Horat.  5 Make not too much haste from under them . Isa. 18. 16.  Esa. 27. 9  6.  Observe both the trials and the fruits . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪  1 Sam. 17. 37.  

Rules for prosperity . 1.  Consider the danger of it . 2.  Be suspicious of thyself . Has aeterna sa●●●s consequitur d●pes . Has aeterna sit●s . — Sen.  3.  In thy calm provide f●r a storm . Luk. 14. 28.  4 Think not thyself prosperous , if the Church of God be not . 2 Sam. 7. 2.  Heb. 11. 25.  5.  In thy prosperity cast eye on others afflictions . Eccles. 7. 2.  

Rules for speeches . 1.  Let word● issue from a good fountain . Mat. 5.  28 . Let the matter be choice . 1.  If it concern God , what . 2.  If our neighbour ▪  1 Cor. 13. 7 ▪  3.  If ourselves . 1 Cor. 15. 9 ▪  3.  The manner . 1.  Savoury . 2.  Sincere . 3.  Most earnest in things heavenly . 4.  The end of our speech , edification . 5.  The measure . 1.  Not too little . Psal. 115. 5.  2.  Not too much . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 6.  The season . Amos 5. 13  

Motives to govern the tongue  jam. 1. 6. 8.  

Rules for our actions in general . 1.  Examine what thou art doing . This trial stands ' in 4. things . 1.  Whether good in the matter  Deu. 12. 32  Esa 1. 12.  2.  If good in the manner . Act. 19 15 , 16.  3.  If good in circumstances . 4.  If good in the ends  2.  Finding the action good , spoil it not ●y 〈◊〉 handling . The right manner of doing a good action in three things . Esa. 38 3.  

Rules for works of mercy . 1.  Mercy must proceed from faith and l●ue . joh. 15. 1.  2.  The subject of mercy . 1.  In general , all . Eccls 11. 1.  For four reasons . 2.  In special the faithful . Mat. 25. 45.  3.  The matter o● mercy . 1.  To the soul . 2.  To the body . 4.  The measure of it , to our a●ility . Gal. 6. 7 , Manus pau●●ris , Christi gazophy ▪ lacium . 5.  The manner of showing mercy . 1.  Seasonably . 2.  Cheerfully . 2 Cor. 9 7.  3.  Wisely . 4.  Constantly . Gal. 6. 9  5.  Humbly . 

Rules for works of justice . 1.  Concerning the ground . 2.  Concerning moderation of justice . 

1.  justice commutative . 2.  justice's distributive . Luk. 10. 37  2.  justice's promissive  juramentum non sit vinculum iniquitatis . 1 Sam. 25.  Con. Constan . five non seruanda cum heretic . 4.  justice's retributiu●  

Rules for necessary actions . 1 ▪ Ground . thou wast sent into this world for necessary business . Luk. 10. 42.  2.  For the order ; The most necessary things must be done first . Deficit in necessarijs , qui redundat in superfluis . August . 3.  For the subject : The most necessary actions of evil men are evil . 

4.  For the means . The best action may not be trust on by evilmeans Rom. 3 ▪ 8.  1 Cor. 9 16 ▪  Act. 20. 29.  5.  For the order of the two tables . Duties of the first table must be done first . Three caveats . Mat. 12. 7.  Ma● . 12. 11.  Exo. 12. 16  

1.  Scope . God must be the end of all our actions . 2.  Binding . Necessary duties must be ●one , what ever follow . Dan. 6. 10.  

General rules concerning all indifferents . 1.  The most indifferent 〈◊〉 be by Go●ss 1. warrant ▪ ● . l●ave . Former by the word . Latter by prayer . Reas.  2.  The most in 〈◊〉 must be done for God.  3.  The most indifferent must be used in love  1.  Not offending others . Dan. 1. 8.  2.  But building them up . 4 ▪ The most indifferent must be used in sobriety . Divitiae meae sunt , non ego divitiarum . Senec.  5.  For no indifferents forgo better things them they : as , 1.  Time.  2.  Good name . 3.  Estate . 4.  Virtues . 

Rules for eating and drink . 1.  Necessity . 2.  Propriety . 3. Measure  4.  Affection . 5.  Time.  6.  Sweetness . 7.  Communication . 8.  Meditation of 4. things . 

Rules for sports . ●  1.  Matter of them : not , 1. holy things . 2.  Nor unholy . Nemo nisi a●t ebrius a●t insanu● tripudiat . 2.  The manner . 3.  The right ends of sports . 1.  Negative . 2.  Affirmative . 

Rules for apparel . 1.  For the matter . Primavestis data est propter usum , non propter luxum ▪  2.  The fashion . England the world's ape . 3 For measure . Excess in apparel a great sin . Reason . 4.  The kinds of apparel . 1.  Spiritual . 2.  Civil : threefold . 1.  Health ▪  2.  Honesty : in  Decency . Distinction . 

3.  Ornament . Deut. 32.  Against looks and long hair in men . Against painting of faces and complexions . 2 King. 9 30.  

General rules to carry ourselves towards all men . 1.  Respect not all alike . 2.  Must live by all , but sort with the best . In all companies do good or take good . Reas. 1  By conversation actually confute all wickedness . Love every man's person , no man's sin , join with good conscience , good manners . 

1.  Rule brotherly affection . Heb. 13. 1.  Psal. 16. 2.  Many things in God's children might draw our eyes unto them . 2.  Rule . Faithful communion . Means of fruitful ronuerse . Motives thus to carry ourselves in good company . 3. Apology  4.  Rule . Helpfulnesse . Means of it . Motives to the former duty . 

Rules of wise walking towards evil men . 1.  Avoid all just causes of scandal . 2.  Stop mouths of evil men . 3.  Seek to win them . Motives . 1 Sam. 26. 25.  

Rules how to carry ourselves towards scorners . 1.  Avoid them . 2.  If cast into their company , observe 5. rules . 

Rules how to carry ourselves to our enemies . 1.  Wisely prevent their plots  2.  Decline their fury . 3.  join with serpentine wisdom , innocency of Doves . 4.  Out of their evil draw som● good . Having received wrong from them do three things . 

Motives to the former rules . Psal. 39 1.  

Cant. 1. 5.  Zeph. 3. 12.  Luk. 1. 75.  Psal. 101. 2.  1 Cor. 7. 3●  Psal. 19  joh. 16.  Psal. 123. 1  

Marks of a circumspect walker . Gal. 4. 6.  