THE Householder : OR , Perfect MAN  

Preached in three Sermons lately by ED : TOPSELL , preacher at Saint Buttolph's without Aldersgate . 

Prou. 27 , 23 , etc.  

Be diligent to know the estate of thy Flock , and take heed to thy herds , etc.  



The Contents follow in the next leaf . 

Printed for Henry Rockyt , and are to be sold at his shop in the Poultry , under the Dial . 1610.  

❧ Contents of the first Sermon . 

1 Differences of men , because few be good , 2.  A perfect man , described by the text , 3.  Wisdom , needful for all ; especially for the teacher of other , 4.  The way to attain it . 5 Neglecters of the means , reproved , 6. multitude of fools , and a remedy for them , 7.  All wants sensible , except the want of true Wisdom , 8. odiousness of spiritual folly , by Doctrine , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18.  And by comparative examples , 19 , 20.  Exhortation to wisdom , and dehortation from folly . 

Contents of the second Sermon . 

1 THE subject of private wisdom , 2.  Diligence described , 3.  The necessity thereof , 4.  The diligent shall bear rule , 5.  And is rewarded , 6.  The praise of diligence , 7.  Dispraise of negligence and sloth , 8.  Commodities of diligence , amplified in mother rewards , 9  As Nobility and acquisition of honour , 10. comfort to the diligent , and good precedents to other , 11 Discommodities of negligence . 12 Education to labour , & desert of hire necessary for all men . 

Contents of the third Sermon . 

1 THE general charge of Householders , & praise of knowledge . 2.  Every man should know his own estate and affairs , 3.  And not only believe other , 4.  Comparison of Faith & Knowledge . 5.  Dignity of knowledge ; especially Divine . 6.  Ignorance , cause of many evils , 7.  Who , and what must be known in Economics , 8.  God and reason commandeth it . 9  Honour of Household , provision and cares , 10.  Yet with predominancy of spiritual things . 11.  The Householders Storehouse necessary . 12.  This store must be given forth : commanded by God. 13.  By Nature . 14.  By Men. 15.  Exemplified in Beasts and Creatures . 16. 17. yet so , that we leave rather than lack . 18.  It must be spent on our Country . 19 20. 21. 22.  And on Wives , Children , Servants , and Strangers . 

To the Right Honourable , and right worthy young Plants of Nobility , highly born , Divinely educated , and happily married , the Lord RICHARD SACKVILL , Earl of Dorset , Baron of Buckhurst , and the Lady ANNE , his beloved wife , sole Daughter and heir to the renowned Lord , GEORGE , late Earl of CUMBERLAND , and the truly Religious Lady , MARGARET , Countess Dowager of CUMBERLAND . 

Great LORD and LADY , 

IT were vain to excuse this enterprise , your goodness will not refuse it , it were folly to commend it , your wisdoms might justly explode it . I will not say , I contrived and compiled it for your sakes , so should I seem to beg your thanks , and deprive myself of a universal benefit ; for we that labour in the Church , must not be personal . Yet I will say , that I would not divulge it to the world , but under the honour of your names : And if it could add either Goodness or greatness to your Honours , ( as I hope Almighty God in time will both ) I would every line had been a leaf , and every page a volume , till both your souls and selves could say with Solomon , who could eat or haste to these things more than we ? 

You are now become other than you were , and the graces of your Noble Natures and education , begin to appear to the view of all that will behold you : for your great places have mounted you on the highest seats , whereby you cannot be secret though you would ; for you may not descend that Theatre of Honour , till you die , Principibus regnare est vivere , & non regnare est mori , Princes & Rulers , their life is to be eminent , and when they cease to be eminent , they die , and cease to live . Wherhfore you see ( without my Narration ) the good and evil in great personages will disclose itself , so as all the enemies shall not stain their Virtues , which will break forth like the Sun in his height and heat ; nor all the flatterers , with their several false colours , and false praises , so enamel and guilt over their vices , but they will discover themselves , and if they would not , yet an evil conscience is not cured with false praises , nor a good one wounded by unjust reproaches . 

Your Hon : are greatly blessed by Almighty God , & I am assured you will , as you ought , ever acknowledge his goodness and greatness , the Author of yours : For you have not forsaken your Father's houses , with Abraham , jacob , and other , but you are both heirs of your Father's houses , and in their houses , to your mutual glory , your conjunction hath increased their honour for you acquired . And that which happeneth to few , is fallen upon you , even in your first and younger years , to be rich , and good , God grant it to continue , and ( without blemish , to the Noble Stems from which you are descended ) I will not cease to pray , that you may be glad Parents of many children like yourselves , and you , and your Posterity , be greater and better than they , if it be Gods good will and pleasure . 

The first thing wherein your Hon : must now show yourselves to the world , is your Household government . Household Government , I say , the Parent & first beginner of commonwealth , the Seminary of Kingdoms , & Counsels ; the discerner of natural wisdom , the Architect of honour , and Disciplinarie school of a wise , virtuous , and happy life : from which Almighty God setcheth his Bishops . The romans , and best commonwealthmen , fetched their Consuls & Tribunes , and many times Kings have been chosen out of this rank . The wise Solomon is an Author of this government , as you may read in the succeeding discourse . Antoninus was made an Emperor , out of this sight , proof , and hope , who is commended for taking away all wages from the idle , and leaving nothing to his Daughter , but his private Patrimony . Hermion , the fifth King of Germany , who lived after the flood , four hundred and eleven years , much about Abraham's time , is likewise remembered for his oeconomy . When he went abroad to fight , he gave diligent order for his Husbandry at home . I could speak of Eberhard a Duke of Wittenberg , for this cause honoured like a God. Of Galeacius , of Columella , and of Cato the wise , who wrote hereof , and is commended for this saying , Non deterior domus rector quam civitatis . A Housholder is not inferior to the Governor of a City , and he that is not wise in Domestical matters , shall never be trusted in the Commonwealth . 

For these causes , when I came unto Hartfield , after seaventeen year's absence , ( the first Pulpit that ever I ascended , and the first place of my Ministerial function ) I choose to speak hereof , how , and with what success your Hon : have heard , and I am not now bound to make relation thereof , or trouble myself , against rash , idle , false , and at the best , ignorant censures ; yet as evil Laws gave occasion to good manners , sins to Sermons , so hath contradiction to many good Books , and therefore I resolved first for your Honour's satisfaction , and in you for a more universal commodity to all my Countrymen , to give my Sermons a public birth , through my further travel , praying your Hon : to be the witnesses of their Christendom , that they contain nothing but Christian doctrine , and let them be called , the Housholder . 

Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe suis , 

I trust that either their Ancestor ( I mean Salomon's Text ) who was a Preacher , from which I have lineally derived them . Or at the least , some Angel of God , may give me ( with blessed Zachary ) a sufficient warrant , to take Tables and write , Their name is the Housholder , & so I hope they shall grow in favour with God , and all good men . 

To conclude therefore , right Noble and happy Earl and Countess , you have already begun as much as I have observed , your Family , and Domestical affairs are handled , not as though their Governors were but twenty , yea rather , sixty year old . You have done as well for the time ( I think by inspiration ) as all the Divines could have advised you , Purging out the old leaven from the family to you descended . Yet give me leave to say one thing , for the enemy of mankind is cunning . When Humericus purged his Court from the Manichees ( a pestilent kind of Haeretickes , which made two Gods ) in crept the Arrians , which denied Christ to be God : and thereof , there was a vision : First , a holy man saw a Church full of men , and presently after they were driven forth , be saw it full of Swine . I compare not your Hon : to Humericus ( a wretched & Haeretical Vandal ) nor the justly expelled Domesticals to such men , but only the profane beasts which will be any thing , or of any religion , for your Hon : favour , and entertainment . These I compare to beasts & swine , living in eating & drinking , and pleasure , whom I pray God to weed out , if any such be , or to keep out of your Family , them that by any preferment of friend or so may be commended unto you . I could say more , but I will not trouble your patience with these plain discourses . I hope that jesus who hath form your Hon : before you were , and now reform you since you were , will make you not Cypresses only , but Olives & Vines , for his own glory , for the Church , for your Nation , for your families , & for your own soul's estate , which I entreat you to prefer before all earthly honour and glory , and so I rest . 

At your Honour's command , EDW. TOPSELL . 

To the right Noble and Honourable Householders , feeders of the Poor : ANTHONY BROWNE , Viscount Montacute , at COWDREY . Samson Lennard , Esquire , at Hurstmounseaux . Thomas PELHAM , Esquire , at Halland . Richard Blunt , Esquire , at Dedsham . AND TO all other wise , temperate , provident , and liberal Housekeepers within the County of Sussex : EDWARD TOPSELL Parson of Hartfield and Preacher , wishes them continuance of their HOSPITALITY , and reward of their CHARITY in the World to come . 

My LORD , 

See and read how impartial we are : our Pens are like your house , open to all that are to be praised , as that is open to all that are to be relieved . If they want , you examine not their Religion , for GOD hath made you a feeder , and not a corrector ; the faults of a vicious man in want , extenuate not the Charity of the liberal . Your praises ( without respect of Religion ) are commendable before us all , for your charity aboundeth above many : and I think ( if fame be no Liar ) above most of your rank . I never saw your Lordship , and know you not , but by the Fame of your liberality , which I was glad to hear , for your own sake , for the poor , but sorry , you have no mother fellows or followers . Trust me , my Lord , I would to God , you were ours , for why should the Christian-worke of such a hand , be lost and unrewarded , for the want of true love , or the love of the truth ? O , that your Honour had miss your instructors , and that your youth had not been corrupted as fast as it increased : that good Nature , and studious Devotion , sober mind , and Noble birth , had been to your country a greater Ornament , and to your Family and Soul , afar more assured means of the Heaven you desire , than the way you walk in . But I trust , nay , we all pray , with S. Austin's mother , Ne harr lachrimarun filius pereat . You are great & nobly born , descended of a Grandfather , in all things like yourself , just , temperate , wise , liberal , merciful , provident , a lover of his country , but not of his Country's Religion . You are his true heir , he did Auizare his religion , you do the like in your religion and charity . Well , God hath made you happy , in that you are able to give : and I hope , that as one of your eyes is opened , & seeth the object of your mercy , and the true use of your large Patrimony , so in time , he will open the other , to see the infallible object of a Christian faith , for the possession of your far greater Patrimony in heaven . To this I am sure , your second self , your noble , virtuous , and truly sanctified wife , saith Amen , Amen . She is a true confessor , she hath kept her own as well as Queen Clotildis , the wife of Almaricus , she is most like her , of all Ladies alive , though your Lordship be a far more kind husband , than that Heretic King , and therefore I hope if you might with the Law , yet your noble nature ( for your own particular ) would not restrain her free liberty to visit the sacred meetings of the good Christians . In confidence's whereof , I will honour you both , and ever pray that your Lordship may never leave off your charity , nor that Noble Lady change her Religion , the assured and undoubted way to life eternal . Farewell . 

Master LENNARD , 

You are a Housholder by birth , for your aged and most provident Father , was the best that ever I knew , except yourself . You have truly performed his last charge to you , which was to do the like . You have done it in two Counties , Kent hath miss you , Sevenoke ( the place of my birth and education ) hath wept for your absence : Sussex hath found you , and God provided for you therein , the noble Patrimony of the Dacres of the South . So that now , I cannot decide , whether your worthy father your noble wife ( being a Baroness by birth , and most loving to you ) or your own disposition , have made you happiest . He blessed you as Isaac did jacob , she enriched you , and ennobled you , as Acsah did Othniell . But yourself is best to yourself , obeying Father , honouring wife , feeding many , good to all . Let your latter end be late , and all your posterity possess the same blessings , till the world's end . 

And for yourself , I will pray for your reward , that if it be Gods will and pleasure , you may have such reward at one time or other , as had Miltiades . When the inhabitants of Hellesponte Chersonesus , were warned by the Oracle , that they should choose him for the Prince and restorer of their Country , who did first of all invite them to his house after their departure out of the Temple , who passing by this Miltiades , and he by their apparel knew them to be strangers , he called to them , and offered them entertainment in his house , which they accepted , and the next day they showed him the Oracle , and entreated him to go with them , & possess their Country's principality , which thing he did , and happily enjoyed many years , the reward of his hospitality . Even so , the Divine Oracles , I know , have provided for you , & your posterity ( in Testimony that almighty God loveth Hospitality ) more honour on earth , and an incorruptible kingdom in Heaven . 

Master PELHAM , 

Who may in all your Country say better than you ? My shepherd is the Lord , his rod & his staff comfort me . My head he hath anointed with Oil , and my Cup doth overflow . My table is decked in the presence of my foes , I dwell by green Pastures , and still waters . You are seated in the eagle nest , it is a regal Bird : you ( if I be not deceived ) are descended of that race . Royal things do therefore become you . ( Good Sir ) let me not slatter you , the fame and name of your Antecessours , have long sounded in those parts . Honour of Arms commended your Father and Uncle : Love of his Country , your Brother ; Hospitality in peace hath been your honour , & I trust you have not , nor will not give over to feed . Your Patrimony hath been by your thrift augmented , and there is no cause why your mind should not ever taste of her prime and most honoured graces ; mercy , liberality , and hospitality . These things brought me first unto you . And I confess , as I had heard so I found , neither want nor waist , neither an evil eye , nor a sparing hand : and in that time of your greatest expense on your poor Countrymen , you increased most in fame and wealth . I cannot forget that note of a neighbour of yours , ( the worthiest , learnedest , justest , & most ingeniously affable Gentleman , that ever I knew in all my courses , to whose noble memory , jowe a better Sacrifice than now I give ) that your house & hand were open , when your mouth was shut , and other men had their mouths open , when their houses and hands were shut . You have ennobled your family , by honourable alliance in marriage . I need not commend him , he honoureth your family , and none that knoweth him , but honoureth him , being a lover of the means of Honour , Learning , and Arms ; without which , no man is Noble or worthy of Honour . It is the basest and unworthiest mark of a Gentleman , to care for nothing , nor to dignify his house , but by purchases , gallant . Suits , Rapiers , and Spurs , gaming and playing scores and hundred , and never to do any part of Honour , whereof he boasleth . A man may say unto them , as Herodes Atticus did to Bradeas , his Wife's Brother , when he had praised his race and descent , and yet being unwoorthy himself , Tu equidem in astragalis nobilitatem gestas . They have no Honour , but in old bones . I will pray that your Son may Patrizare , and that ( if Heaven resist not ) you may live to see him most happy , for you will make him Rich. And I will end , as Stratonicus said of his Host , who received him kindly , and welcomed him most heartily , although he knew him not , and after him , two or three in the same courteous manner . Discedamus ò puer , nam invenimus pro columba , palumbum , & pro hospite pandocheum . Let us be gone and depart , for instead of a Dove , we have found a Ring-dove , and where we thought to find a special favour , to be received alone , we find a Housekeeper that entertaineth all . 

Master BLOUNT , 

You are my latest acquaintance , & therefore with you I must conclude , not as the least , but as the upper most in my hart , and if I would praise you for housekeeping , you might give me leave to say as much of you as of the residue , and in your proportion equal to the best . For with the Centurion , you have ever loved our Nation , I mean the Preaohers : & unto your commendation do all the Prophets , and Children of the Prophets , give Testimony . You and your nobly born & minded wife , never refused him , that came unto you in the name of a Prophet . wherefore faint not , but expect a Prophet's reward ; a prophet's reward , what is that ? Nothing in earth but an empty Cup , Heathy and Barren Land ? God forbid : so the world rewardeth us , and would admit us but one foot before the Beggar ( viz. ) we must stand in the Porch , & the beggar without the door , but a Prophet's reward is to be partaker of all the good & labours of the Prophets . For the lovers of goodness are respected ( before God ) with the Preachers . But especially , the reward of the old Prophets , was the assured performance of all that they had foretold of jesus Christ , and thereof they are not now ashamed ; no more , nor no less is the assurance of those things , which you believe & hope , for they that trust in the Lord , shall not be ashamed . These lines ( I mean the succeeding Book ) were written in Dedsham house , & how unthankful should they be , if they did not leave a long lasting Monnument upon that Housholder , under whose roof they had their first being in letters . Believe me Sir , I was never better pleased , nor had more cause of content then in your house . Where besides Levies large feast , we had Christ at the table every day , I mean the holy scriptures , we wanted nothing fit for Christians , or fitting us for heaven , only the prime part of your family , your own worthy self was absent , & the hope of your name , your son : O , that you had more of such hope , so you had more inheritances for them : and for the residue of your happy issue , you are blessed in them all , & they for a father & a mother , are as happy as ever were any of their blood , & yet by father & mother nobly descended . Now must I your latest Orator , and as it were , a child of yesterday , bless you all in the name of all my brethren the Prophets , your ancient & well respected guests , to whom with the Sumanite you have given lodging and light , with the Sarepthian widow , Oil & Meal , with Lazarus , Mary and Martha , meat drink , entertainment & obedience , & with Onesiphorus sought them out , being not ashamed of their chains . So as Candala Q. of Panonia , & niece to Lewis the 12. of France , said to the Venetians , for her royal entertainment , that she never knew herself to be Queen , till she came to their teritory : so may the Preachers say , they know not themselves to be Christ's Ministers , till they come to your house . The Lord show mercy to this house , and the peace of Christ ( which the Apostles preached ) and the son of peace rest in it to the world's end . So be it . 

Finally unto all other Noble , worthy , & Worshipful Householders , I present this Treatise , for you ( like the Sheep of Christ ) are every way profitable . Who keepeth the Fatherless ? the Housekeeper . Who relieveth the Widow ? the Housholder . Who traineth up children & servants in the fear of God , and service of the Commonwealth , and common good ? the Housholder . Who nourisheth Arts , Learning , and them that serve at the Altar ? but the Housholder that payeth Tithes . Who maintaineth the world , and defendeth the Country ? the Housholder ; who having a posterity , loveth it thrice so well as the barren , & mariage-hating Inmate . Who is a monster among men ? hated , of God , disdained of the angels , shame of his Parents , & burden to his country , but he that lives , by whom no other lives ; that is , no Housholder , and yet rich enough : no liker a Christian , than an Ape is like a man , whose flesh is not good for meat , as a sheep , nor his back for burden , as the horse and Ass , nor skins for warmth and Ornament , as the Coneys , Squirrels , and Martin's , nor good to keep a house as a Bandog . Simia quam similis , turpissima bestia nobis . 

You renowned Householders , that love this kind of life , purge out of your families , the Drones which eat and consume that whereupon the Bees should live ; o drunkenness , the horror of Religion , the consumer of youth and strength , the devourer of all goodness , the bane of the Housholder , can no judgement of God or man , dry thee up , but like Deucalion's flood , thou must overrun and overslow all , except two only : the Temperate , and the Religious ? Stand up ye worthies of the time , find a remedy for this evil , or else your honour is in the dust , in the Kennel . For as when your best land is overslowed , it yieldeth nothing : so if you suffer your families to be drenched in this vice , rottenness & barrenness will devour you all . It maketh your families like Fens , & the ditches of Marish Land , wherein nothing but Snakes and Serpents , and ugly Frogs do engender . It is the pit of hell , as out of hell no man can come again ; so out of drunkenness are none recovered . Your Dogs and Beasts are better than your drunken Children and servants . For saith S. Chrisostom , Ebriosus est voluntarius daemon , ruinae excusatione carens , et comune generis nostri opprobrium . A drunkard is a wilful Devil , the shame of mankind , and one that cannot be excused in his destruction . Never shall drunkard come to heaven , for as when the Ship is sunk after a Tempest , the wares and lading are quickly washed out , but the bark is filled with sand and water , so as all the strength of man cannot weigh it up again , nor the best Navigator , and sails make it sail again : no more when a man is once sunk in drunkenness ( and sink he shall , for the Devil will not leave him , till with the Swine in the Gospel , he drown them : ) all the persuasions of God & man cannot set him upright again in the Sea of this world . For like to Bonosus the drunken Emp. Nati sunt ut bibant , non ut vivant , they are born to drink and not to live . It hath been lawful to put away a man's wife for drunkenness among some Nations : but it is needful that drunkards be excluded men's company , & with Nabuchadnezzar live among beasts ( who are never drunk ) till they have learned this abstinence from them . And believe me , if you nourish drunkards , your families shall never want woe . From which , the Lord deliver you , and from Drunkards the Lord deliver us. And so I end for your Liberality , and Hospitality , with the Prayer of Nehemiah , Lord remember these Housekeepers in goodness , according to all that they have done to this people . September , 1609.  

Your Honours , worships , and all that will believe my report , EDWARD TOPSELL . 

¶ The Housholder . 

Prou. 27. 23 etc.  

Be diligent to know the estate of thy flock , and take heed to thy herds . 

24 For riches remain not always , And is the Crown from generation to generation ? 

25 The Hay discovereth it self , & the grass appeareth , and the herbs of the Mountain are to be gathered . 

26 The Lambs are for they clothing , and the male Goats a price of the field . 

27 And let the milk of thy Goats be sufficient for the food of thy family , and for the sustenance of thy Maidens . 



Whatsoever is Life ( according to man's weak understanding ) must either be vegetative or growing , as in Plantes ; Sensitive , ye● without motion , as in the Oyster and such like ; Sense and motion , as in all Beasts , fishes , & Fowls ; and lastly , Reason , as in Angels and Men. Now , almighty God hath given unto Man all these : Growth , with the Plantes ; Sense and motion with the Beasts ; Gravity of substance with all corporeal things ; Spirituality & reason with the Angels : that whereas his divine Majesty is the Life and the Fountain from whence issueth all other life , it may most aptly agree with us , not only that we live , but that we more than live , and that in him we live , & move , and have our being . And verily , seeing we participate in the variety and dissimilitude of so many creatures , it is no marvel , although the faces , and inclinations of so many men , be also so various , diverse , and estranged one from another : for our minds are as many as our persons , and our senses more than our heads , and yet in all these , man taking this , of the Fish and Beast , that , of the Tree and Mettle , may be compared unto the Beast and Money that perrisheth , o utinam periret tantum pecunia ( saith S. Bernard of Simon Magus ) sed pecunia tecum : Would God the Money or Beasts might perish alone , but that cannot be ; for we having destroyed them , and they having infected us , we perish together with them ( like the Philistines and their banqueting house , or Sodom and their fruitful plain . ) But I know not whence it cometh , that there live scarce so many kinds of Worms , Beasts , and Fowls , as there be kinds of men , that die to God , and perish everlastingly , for more perish , then live for ever . Many are the persons & faces of men , but not so different one from the other , as are the minds and inclinations of men ; which intruth only make Men ; insomuch , considering the defects herein , it is a rare , difficult , and almost impossible thing , to find a man : For in King David's time , Psal . 14. there was not one , no not one , and yet for strength thirty and one Worthies , besides Prophets and Priests . But in Salomon's time , there was some increase , or rather one increase , or to speak more properly , an increase of one , Among a thousand men I have found one ; one God in Heaven , one Sun in the Firmament , one Phoenix among Birds , one perfect man among all . 

2 There be four things whereby a man is declared a perfect man : First , Wisdom , whereby he teacheth himself and others . Secondly , Government , whereby he ruleth himself and others . Thirdly , Frugality and Labour , whereby he provideth for himself & others . Fourthly , Liberality , and Mercy , whereby he feedeth himself and others : All these make a perfect man , and without them , our perfection is imperfection and lameness : And all these were in Solomon , a Type of the mirror of perfection , jesus Christ . First , he was wiser than all his predecessors , and taught himself and others , as appears by his writings : Secondly , he was of excellent government , for he was the King of peace , or a peaceable King. Thirdly , his frugality , in laying up grain , feeding and breeding of dattle , and building of houses , for himself and other , was great , yea he made gold and Silver like stones in jerusalem Fourthly , and lastly , he was liberal and merciful , for he was the first that observed , as riches increase so are they increased that eat them for his servants were many thousands , and at one Sacrifice . 2.  Chro 8 , 9 he offered a thousand dattle Out of this practice of Solomon , h● delivereth all these in my Text unto other , first expressed in his own person . First , his Wisdom , whil● he adviseth , Be diligent to know th● state of thy flock , etc.  Secondly , h●● Government , while he saith , Th● riches endure not always , nor th● Crown from generation to generation ; intimating he had tasted 〈◊〉 Crown and riches . Thirdly , h●● Frugality and Labour , The hay discovereth itself , and the grass appeareth , and the herbs of the mountains are to be gathered : Namely , for the use and fodder of men and Beasts : and because money & garments are also the beauty and spirit of a family , especially if they be well gotten ; he teacheth how to obtain them , while he saith , The Lambs are for thy clothing , and the Goats a price of the field , ( Viz. ) to get by sale and exchange of them , Money , for other commodities . Lastly , his liberality and mercy , in housekeeping , and let the milk of thy Goats be sufficient for the food of thy family , and the sustenance of thy Maids . 

The first thing is Wisdom , observed in Solomon by Collection , because out of the fullness of his Wisdom , he giveth Counsel for other : a note , which I here note , not out of one word only of my Text , but out of all of them together , and I trust not out of order , or curiosity of nicety , but naturally , as the scope of my Text giveth me occasion , considering my Preface ▪ and therefore I will speak of it at this time in my visitation of this place , after many years' absence , that although you need it not in regard of your continued instruction , yet I will endeavour ( that I may be remembered when I am gone ) to help forward your Faith and Wisdom both together , wherein the bounds that I will walk , shall be Truth ; my matter , Plainness ; and my Method , Brevity . 

3 Solomon is therefore wise , because he teacheth and giveth Counsel of all things , from the Court and Crown , to the Cart ; from the Master to the Servant , from the Cofer full of Gold , to the Barn full of Hay ; from the Family full of Men and Maidservants , to the Field and Commons , stored with dattle and Flocks : him and his Wisdom , let us not only admire , but imitate : for they do not only win the Game , which strike the white mark , but also they that shoot near the pin : and we also shall win by endeavour ( although we miss and fail to hit aright ) if we strive to draw ne'er in assurance of Faith. Be wise therefore that you may be men ( Christ saith ) As Serpents , I say as Solomon , to teach yourselves and other , for Serpents are wise in danger , unto which our Saviour alludeth , That we should be wise in & against persecution , but the storms of tyranny are past , & the bands of danger to our profession are broken , The snare is broken , and we are delivered . Be therefore wise as Solomon , in the Port , in the Harbour , in your peace , in your prosperity . Every man taketh himself to be wise , and therefore every man ( as a Physician ) giveth Counsel to other when he is well , and is not able to heal or advise himself in evil . The highest piece and part of Wisdom is , to Counsel ourselves , not others . Solomon never failed in teaching others , for that is easy , but in teaching himself , and distinguishing Vice and Virtue asunder , when it came to practise , there he failed . Solomon hath many disciples in his defection , not in his perfection , for they are provided for all but themselves . 

He therefore that will be wise , and give Counsel to other , whether to King and Superior , or to Servant and Inferior , let him first inform himself , for the wise man is a worthy and excellent Master , also a dexterious , and industrious Scholar : How can he teach other that teacheth not himself ? And there is no greater fool in the world , than he which is not provided for his last day , for his farewell to the world , and last estate . His soul is his chiefest care , his greatest price , his honourable charge , and his endless hope ; he which is wise for his soul , cannot be a fool in other things , although he know them not , for they belong not unto him as the essential Office of his life , but accidentally , and at pleasure , to know or not to know them . For this cause , or for the souls sake , the wiseman inricheth his mind , by all that ever he heareth , seeth , or that cometh under sense or fancy , by observing things present , by recording and calling to mind things past and absent , by foreseeing the ends and events of things to come ; whereby diligence maketh him like a Prophet for another life , for another world . Wisdom maketh him give precepts of life , by comparing things passed , with things present , & judgement so preventeth future dangers , that he is never at a loss , even for the things he misseth , but he is still the wiser by defaults and defects , and like a wise and artificial Arithmetician , by a false number findeth a true , and by a wrong way discovereth the right . His eyes are like man and wife , or like David's host , some went to fight against the enemy , and some stayed to keep the stuff and carriage : no more do they wander , both from home together , one still keepeth house , as one Pigeon still sitteth on the Egs. So the food wherewithal it is sped abroad , is not decrely bought by the death and danger of the young ones at home . If he buy wit , he maketh much of it ; to keep it , to value it , to occupy it , that he may have the Treasure of knowledge , his Counsels the infallible Oracles of certainty , though no meddler , yet seeing into every man's business , and yet best experienced in his own . For he knoweth , He that is wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament , and he that turneth many unto righteousness , as the Stars for evermore . here is wisdom ; namely , to shine , and here is the fruit of Wisdom , to convert others , and I may say of such a man , as it is in the Psalm , Who is wise that he may observe these things , for he shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord OH happy man , which is such an observer ! more happy , then by observing times of sowing , and season of reaping ; yea , then Rules of policy , Precepts of Art , course of the skies , Lord or Lady , Master or Mistress : yet most happy , because he shall see , hear , and know , the loving kindness of the Lord here is the end of Wisdom , to enjoy his loving kindness , to know his will , to have his Wages , to work in his Vineyard , to receive his penny , to keep his Sheep , to enjoy his Rachel , to hear his word , to possess his promises , to live in his fear , & to die in his favour . 

4.  Now , for the attaining of this Wisdom , to counsel and teach ourselves and others , we must ( as the Husbandman ) carry our seed abroad , out of the Barn into the field , and as he for his increase , doth ( as it were ) crave help of the Earth , of the Ox , of the Plough , of the Sun , of the Rain ; yea , of the Marl and compass , things strange to the seed : so must we seek this wisdom abroad out of ourselves , in holy & divine books , as in a field ; craving help of the laborious & diligent Pastor , of the assiduous and daily reading , and Prayer ; of the powerful illumination of the Holyghost , and of the hopeful event , success , and perpetuity of our diligence . For our way to heaven is by compass , as the Israelites came into Canaan out of Egypt , and the Lord doth exercise us by windings and turnings , and going out of the nighest way , to humble us ; for he could bring us a nearer way to heaven , to teach us to value & prise our calling at a higher estimate and rate : for if the heathen could observe , that earthly knowledge was sold for sweat , much more worth is Heavenly wisdom , even water and blood , which our Saviour endured for our sakes , before we could be converted . Turn therefore your eyes to all things , to gather this wisdom , not only to Heaven , but to Earth , to Men , to Beasts , to hell , to seas , to all . For a Heavenly knowledge of earthly things , will help to Heaven , and an earthly knowledge of heavenly things , will send to hell . He that will first see the Sun when it ariseth , must not ( like common fools ) set his face to the East , expecting her body , but contrary , let him sasten or roll his eyes Westward , upon the tops of hills and Trees , where he shall see her shining , before herself ; and that is as much light , comfort , and assurance , as if he saw herself ; even so , if we turn our eyes from the inscrutable , and unsearchable Majesty of the eternal Trinity , & look upon the radiant beams thereof , shining upon the creatures , we shall sooner see , both the beginning and ending of our wisdom , then by dazzling our weak sight and judgement , against the impenetrable body of his infinite goodness , which yet in due time we shall behold , if in the mean season we remain contented and studious , in his word , works , and creatures . Saint Basil to stir up the Christians of his time , unto an earnest and laborious searching after this Divine Wisdom , by familiar comparisons showeth , that even in nature it shines , and in the works or writings of men , we must also look for the same . For ( saith he ) even as Dyers in their tincture of Purple , first set a Gloss by some flowers , or other Artificial invention upon their wool , and then after it hath been well dipped , and as it were stained and altered by that first colour , ( which yet is not the same wherewithal , and whereinto it is to be changed ) than they cast into it the Purple or Scarlet , which doth work the more easily and effectually upon the substance to be changed and died ; even so , they which will seek and find this perfect purple and Scarlet of divine wisdom , must first seek it in the tincture of Nature , of human Inventions , & Principles of reason , that thereby the Divine Oracles , may more easily bring them to a perfect conformity with jesus Christ , their Heavenly Wisdom . And whereas it might be objected , that it is supersluous to seek for these things , which we must forsake , because they cannot continue , when the better is come , even as john Baptist giveth place to Christ , and the shadows of the Law , to the substance of the Gospel : The said Father answereth it by another comparison , that although the fruit be the end of the Tree , without which it were good for nothing but burning , yet Est aliqua gloria frondium , there is some glory and comely use of the very leaves , which show the life of the Tree , before the fruit buddeth , and also covereth the fruit in the tenderness thereof , against the violence of storm & tempest : even so , human Learning , although it ( fail like the leaves that fall ) hath glory and comeliness in it , and giveth much help , Honour and Grace to this Divine wisdom . 

5 Where first of all , I cannot but tax and reprove them , who having wit , youth , time , health , & other helps , for their better and more easy accomplishment of this excellent quality ( if I may so term it ) of Wisdom , yet sit down and spend out their miserable days in vain pleasures , which cost them more dear , and most of all in the end . I read of a certain Abbot , who busying himself in building , and other worldly occupations , was reproved by his fool in this manner : o stulte quid facis , quid te in huiusmodi negotijs , etc.  OH fool ( said he ) what dost thou ? Why art thou so troubled with these laborious affairs ? Sat still fool , sit still , with thy good cheer in thy Parlour , and thy Whore in thy Bedchamber , and Sie seruias Deo quiet , and so serve God in quietness . This fool , hath the most part of voluptuous persons to follow his Counsel ; for besides their bellies and their lusts , they have no study , care , or travail ( and that which is worst of all ) they live in an outward service of God , without remorse of conscience for their vanity , and think they serve God very sufficiently & quietly ; whereas God calleth to them every day , in that renewed reproof of the wicked man in the Parable , who Bid his soul take his ease , thou fool this night God will fetch away thy soul from thee . You fools , which though nevor so Nobly born and bred , nor never so richly provided for , with Lands , livelihood , and revenues , what mean you to spend that most precious time , and waste the means of youth , in Hauks , Hounds , Edifices , Buildings , Horses , Banquettinge , and such like ; yea , even in labours , and toiling at Cart and Plough , Shop or Sea , without respect of heaven , or heavenly wisdom , because you want nothing : I tell you , this year , this month , this week , this day , or peradventure this night they will fetch away your soul from you , o then one drop or dram of heavenly Grace and Wisdom , is worth a whole world of honour , wealth , ease , and pleasure , wherein you have wallowed , and destroyed yourselves . 

6 But seeing this world is full of Fools , which do not only come short of Solomon , but plainly reprove him , and such as urge his example , I mean our Theological fools ; Fools in Divinity , who like the jews to whom Caiaphas prophesied , understand nothing , and like the rabble in the Acts , know not wherefore they are come together , no not in their very Sacred and holiest assemblies ; I tell you the host of these Fools are so great , that one wise man cannot direct them , and you had need to pray , that as the generation of Fools , ( are in Divine matters many ) so the seed of the righteous ( to conduct ) might also be many . There want labourers in this harvest , OH Lord send them forth , to turn the disobedient to the wisdom of the just . They have a story in Denmark , that one Craca a Queen of that Country , having three sons , whom in her natural affection she much loved , and desired to promote : and especially one amongst the rest , named Ericus . She being given to Magic , made by the confection of three Serpents , a strange mess of Broth , whereof none of her sons would taste , save only this Ericus , who eating thereof , his Mother procured him the Kingdom , and he was afterwards called Ericus disertus ; that is , Ericus the Wise . We cannot , I cannot make any such confection for you , there are many sick for this broth , but what need we go to the Devil for a Medicine to procure Wisdom ? There is Balm in Gilead , there is a Physician in Israel , there is a Prophet in judah , there are means sufficient in the Lords holy word , or else Solomon would never have said . Let him that is simple & destitute of understanding , come and eat of my meat , and drink of my Wine that I have drawn . Every man is become so wise in the Lords matters that he can teach others , but when death and danger cometh upon him , even than his resolution ( like Ice and Snow ) melteth away , and he is then to seek of his soul's estate . Alas , must fools become teachers of the wise ? Or guide's of as very Ingrams as themselves ? Or shall the horse teach the rider ? The Ox the Husbandman to Plough ? Or the Sow the good wife to spin ? no verily , this is exorbitant ; even so is it for Masters and Parents , and aged persons , who will be guiding their Servants , Children or youngers , & yet have never learned Salomon's conclusion and end of all things , Fear God , and keep his Commandment , for that shall bring a man peace at the last . 

7 Thus have I discourced of Wisdom , and the benefits thereof , whereunto I will add but this one complaint , that all wants and defects be sensible , and their presence doleful to them that feel them , only the want of heavenly wisdom is not perceived , is not lamented . If a man's Land , or possession , or leaf be in any danger , presently he repaireth to a Lawyer , to declare his case , either of offence or defence , to secure his own : & worthily , for wherefore was Law made ? Or how shall justice be honoured , except the estates of men in the differences and controversies of the world , may be thereby established ? If the body be any ways heavy or distempered , we instantly post for a Physician , to the end , that Maladies prevented in time , may more easily be avoided , and health preserved ; and we do well herein , for God hath not made us for sickness , but for health , and he which placed us in a Paradise , did signify thereby , that we could not brook a Desert , & what Paradise have we now left , except our health ? Or what Desert is so intolerable as sickness ? Wherein many are forsaken of their friends , and forget their dearest self . Nay , if our Horse or Ox be but a little ill , and forsake their meat , we send for a Leech , to the end that it may be holpen : but if our soul , sick of sin and folly , forsake the wholesome food thereof , tarry at home , forbear the church and Sermons , despise grace and Heavenly wisdom , we are so wise in our own conceits , that feeling no smart or pain , we care not to be cured , but like mad men , break our bands , and set light by our best Physicians , o therefore , I pray God open our eyes , that our souls be not in worse case than our Oxen and Asses ! they fall and are sick , and find some to help them up , and ease them ; we fall and are sick , and find none to help us up , but like wanton Children , we lie still , and cry against them that would relieve us. This is folly , this is an evil to be abandoned , and whosoever is but a mean Christian , as he blesseth the hand that feedeth him with bread , so let him bless the hand that feedeth him with knowledge . 

8 But for the more detestation of spiritual folly , give me leave to argue against it , and disprove it to your consciences , that this rustic sottishness and solidity , or foolish simplicity in Divine affairs which concern the soul , may be abandoned ; for surely such an one is Salomon's fool : and if our Saviour Christ say that he is danger of Hell fire , which saith , thou fool , how much more is he worthy and likely to go to hell , that is a fool , than he that calleth a fool . For certainly , if the wrong to be so termed , when one is not , be so inexpiable , as that it holdeth the slanderer in danger of eternal torment , what is not he worthy of , that maketh himself so ? It is but the action on of the case to be so named , but to be so , is real ; and therefore suffereth & yieldeth greater damage . Harken therefore unto me , and I will set before you a row of fools recorded in assured stories , whom every man in the Letter derideth , and loveth in the figure ; that is , misliketh and scorneth this folly in other , but loveth in himself . 

9 Who is more odious in scripture than Esau , who to satisfy his present hunger ( after his hunting pleasure ) sold his own Birthright for a mess of pottage ; this shall be our first fool , whom all know , and none pity ; for if an action demonstrate a fool , surely he deserveth one of the first places . This man God hated , even for this action , and who dare love him ? there was never yet any that showed him any pity , no not his Father , nor Rebecca his Mother , and him therefore do all other hate . But tell me , why is he alone thus hated for selling an earthly Patrimony for so small a price ? When as there be many more among us , which sell Heaven for less . So do all the profane , impatient of poverty , willing to give themselves to the Devil for riches , and not only out of any want , as Esau had , but out of pride , that being Servingmen & Yeomen , they might be Gentlemen ; of Gentlemen they might be Knights ; of Knights they might be Lords ; of Lords they might be Kings ; out of ambitious thoughts , they are transported beyond those ways which the Angels watch , whereby they take the Devil at his word , and for less than the world ( which the Son of God refused ) they fall down and worship him ; no want , or hunger , or pain causing them , but only licentious liberty , and wanton cares , forcing them forward to fulfil their temptations , which being acted , they receive not one half so much good by this sin , as Esau did by his pottage . 

10 We will leave Esau and the folly of the profane , who contrary to the wisdom of Solomon , Devour holy things , and so we will come to a second fool , and that was a covetous fool , Nabal When David and his men had done him favours in the wild and wide fields , at last , he sent unto him for a recompense , and yet it was not a demand of any desert , but an entreaty for some necessary victuals for himself and his troop ; which thing the fool did not only deny , but to his peril , and the peril of all his family , reproached David and his followers , for Runagates . And if his wife had not been wiser than himself , it had not failed , but that their blood had all been that day shed upon the ground . here was his folly , that would stand for a little , to endanger all ; to save one horseload of Raisins , & Bread , and Wine , would bring himself in hazard to lose the whole store in his Barn , in his house , in his seller , besides the life of himself , and his Family . This fool we also hate & deride , who was so penny-wise , and so pound-foolish . But are not many of Nabals' haters , Nabals followers ? Many of his Scorners , his Disciples ? Yes verily , for the very same men , to save their wealth together , deny not only to David ; that is , to men in want , that which should be the fruit and work of mercy , but unto the Church , the Lords Ministers , their poor and just deserved portions , pensions , & Tithes ; whereby their private coffers ( being not sanctified unto holyuses ) are for a while stuffed with the poor Churchmen's livinge , ( like Bladders with wind ) and then cometh the Lord with one little prick , and letteth all the whole store fly away from their posterity . 

A Reverend Bishop in our nation , hath left recorded in writing , this History ; that a certain Gentleman , offered to the Parson for his Tith-wooll , a fleece or two , whereas in truth his due was to pay more : the Parson ( being a Layman ) brought the Tyth-wooll to the Church , and showed it to the Neighbours , desiring them to witness , by the view of that Fleece , whether he had justly Tythed his Wool or no : which all that saw , witnessed that he had very falsely dealt therein ; then the Parson refused to take it : whereat the Gentleman grew furious , seeing himself so justly shamed before all the Neighbours , and in his rage , swore or vowed , that he would never give him one lock more , although it cost him never so dear . Thus he rested , and the Parson also forbore his farther vexation ; but almighty God did not forget this false & furious Gentleman , for he sent a consumption into his wealth , and brought him in short time to such poverty , that he was content to take Dole or Alms amongst the poor people , which were relieved at the Funeral of the said Parson . Remember this I beseech you , and never forget this folly , neither grow rich by unmercifulnesse or falsehood : for what you think to save in the Acre , you shall lose in the Field , or what you gain in the yard , shall be again taken from you in the whole piece ; remembering always the Country Proverb , Covetousness bringeth nothing home . And so we take our leave of Nabal . 

11 In the next place cometh the proud fool Rehoboam , ( saving the honour due unto Kings ) so we will be bold to style him , although he were King Salomon's son . His folly was , that when people came unto him , and desired a release of his Father's impositions ( which thing the Elders of Israel persuaded him unto ) by one proud and scornful answer , following the Counsel of his young Minions & Playfellows , he lost ten Tribes ; that is , ten parts of David's Kingdom at once , and left himself only but two . here is a fool indeed , for it is impossible for a proud man to be wise , and Princes cannot hold their Subjects so fast tied in allegiance unto them with blood and terror , as they may do with compassion & blandishing words ; Courtesy being a great jewel in a Prince's crown ; Compassion the handle , justice the edge , and Mercy the point of a King's sword . But died Rehoboam childless ? & hath he no suruivors in his State ? I will not meddle with kings , nor Lords , or great persons , but let us come to ourselves , and such as are our equals . Austen the Monk , ( whom the Papists call the Englishmens' Apostle ) lost all the British Monks by his pride : so we , like Austen , lose our Friends , our Servants , our Neighbour's hearts , by our Lordlike and proud behaviour ; we care not whom we devour , upon whom we tread , so we may rise ; some by slanders , some by fury , some by folly and truth not to be revealed , fill the world with contentions , rending the Wife from the Husband , the Husband from the wife ; the Father from the Son , the Son from the Father ; the Lord and Master from the Servant , and the Servant from the Lord and Master , the Landlord from the Tenant , and the Tenant from the Landlord : that there is not so much love and good will left in the Country , as was betwixt Balaam & his Ass , when he did beaten him . I will speak plainly ; Some like Rehoboam speak proudly ; others ( like the rebellious Israelites ) take it as peevishly , they will have as little charity in their ears , as other have in their tongues , a word & a blow , friendship is no heavier than a feather , which every blast of wind tosseth too and from . The loss of sixpences will cause a suit , the gain of a shilling will make a Traitor , and they are more ready to follow a Crown of Gold , than an Angel of Heaven All their varnishing is outward ; they are like Giant's pictures , terrifying the beholders , and if they have not power to be cruel enough in their own persons , of their own estate , than they fly to the mightier , and incense them , abusing good Natures by false tales , and force them , instead of milk , to draw blood from their Inferiors , & so they make themselves fools , for they live without credit , and die without pity ; saving , It is pity they die no sooner . 

12 Yet behold more fools then these : And now , we bring in the man in the Gospel , who in presumption of long life , destroyed his Barns , and builded greater , and bad his soul take his ease , eat drink , and take pastime , for it had much goods laid up for many years : Ah fool ( said God ) this night they will fetch away thy soul from thee . And worthily and rightly is he a Fool , whom God calleth a fool , for his judgement cannot be deceived , his insight into man's heart is so perfect , that it cannot err : for he hath anatomised and dissected more ; then all the Physicians that ever have been . But who doth so now adays ? Who blesseth himself in his riches ? seeketh them , but to spend them ; spendeth them , but on himself ; keepeth , but for his pleasure ; and maketh account to live many years ? I will tell you who : he that will not give , because he cannot tell what he shall want before he die : For , although Almighty God have dealt never so liberally with him , giving many houses , and much money , that was born to none ; the sixth part whereof , could have satisfied him , before he had it ; now he will not trust his bounty any more , but out of his own provident wretchedness , be unmerciful to other , for fear of want , while they wallow in all surfeit and abundance . Again , they are such fools , who never cease travailing and labouring , all for their living , as if they had at the least a lease of a thousand years for their life , dealing with their souls , as Hackney men with their horses , giving them no rest till they be dead ; And then , such souls cannot rest , because if their bodies give them so little rest while they be in them , ( who yet have great occasion to honour them ) the devils , into whose power the souls of such men do pass , will show them much less favour , having no other joy , but to afflict & torment the souls that themselves have beguiled : For if the old Bird be unkind to her young one , it must look for less favour in the Tallant of the Hawks . Therefore , never gather or keep , in hope of long life ( but only to obey God's commandment , who biddeth thee labour ) for as the shadow runneth from him that followeth it , so doth long life from him that hopeth after it . Life ( saith joh ) is given to him that desireth to die . And so we leave these fools , praying God for them , that they may learn to unmber their days , and apply their hearts to Wisdom . 

13 We read of another generation of Spiritual fools in the Gospel ( called Pharisees ) and them our Saviour called Fools ; Blind , and leaders of the blind , because they were in nothing so wise , as to beguile themselves , and by observation of their own Traditions , they made the Law of God of no effect , avoiding ( by corrupt and Haereticall Glosses ) the plainest Text of God's holy word , such as our Saviour in those two Chapters allegeth : how wise also , are many rus set and Rustic persous , to avoid every one of God's Laws , having knowledge in nothing but to defend their sins . Tell them of swearing , they say , the Law respecteth judgement ; Of the Sabaoth , they say , play is not forbidden , but labour ; Of coveting house & land , they say , to desire to buy , is not to covet ; and so they condemn God , and justify Ahab . Sometime they allege , that the Gospel is for the Church of Rome ; sometime , the Brownists at Amsterdam : sometime , they snatch at God's mercy , when their own sins are taxed , & refuse his justice ; sometime again , God's justice , when they would have their enemies plagued , and disclaim mercy . Thus , they dare not deny the Scriptures , yet they will not confess them , but in their own sense . They make no reckoning of Prayer , except in the Church , and there they are superstitious , and a Holy day is more than a Saboth : If they be inclined to superstitious fasting , they have Text for that : If to profane eating and drinking , they have another for that . The pride of woman's Garments , in esay and S. Peter , was i'll in those times , but now ( they say ) it is good , ( so the holy Ghost was blind , and saw not what should suit with our times . ) The deceitfulness of Merchants , and oppression of rich men , spoken against by esay , Ezechiel , and Michah , was for the Tyrians and the jews , but all our honest Merchants are exempted , if once we have delivered our wares , and received our money and security ; and to conclude , twenty deceits in Wares , in writings , in words , are a far less sin , then to miss payment of a little money at the day , although it come on the Morrow . But I will leave these Fools , Which strain at Gnats , and swallow Camels , praying God , that his word may be our Wisdom , and our minds be subject to his direction . 

14 Now we will leave the scriptures , and descend to the human Chroniclers of Fools ; and first , we will show you the stories of such follies , as have been more general , and then them that were more special , and by God's assistance , apply both to our purpose : and let my plainness be excused , because I desire to be remembered , and to profit . 

We read of a certain people , ( called Atlantes ) who dwelling near the burning line , are every day scorched by the Sun's heat , unto whom it is a Customary Religion , that so long as they feel and see the Sun , even all the day long they do nothing else , but with hand and mouth , curse and blaspheme it for so afflicting them with heat , being angry ( injustly ) with that glorious light , that comforreth all living creatures , because in their own particular , it giveth them offence . These are worthy to be accursed themselves , who for to do them a pleasure , either would have the Sun to remove from her place , or to leave shining . Can there be in worldly affairs a greater folly ? Have they no wit , to remove their habitations and seek some other Cires and places of abode ? But to continue in a fruitless & bootless blasphemy from age to age , against the high Majesty of God , and his most glorious creature of this visible world ? well , they are Blackamoor's , and their bodies are not so black without , as this folly maketh their soul's black within . So are these in story , but how are they resembled in figure ? Mary against those Wretches I must apply it , who for their own particular , would remove the gospel , the health of us all ; the Magistrate , the peace of us all ; & Learniing , the light of us all : because for the gospel , they say other Nations disgrace them , and persecure them ; by the Magistrate , they are sometime punished , and forced to right against their will : by Learning , they are overtopped in Virtue and honour ; Therefore they are weary of the Gospel , as the Girsites were of Christ ; they rail on the Magistrate , because they may not be protected in their wrong ; and they would pull down Learning , Colleges , Byshopprickes , Cathedralles , and all Ecclesiastical dignities , that they may reign alone , and be the only Lords of Virtue and Vice , leaving no better men in the state , than Merchants , Falconers , Hunters , Riders , and poor Carters and Servingmen , to do their base Offices . 

These are verier Fools than the Atlantes , for beside their vain opinions , neither Church , nor Magistrate , nor Learning , doth them any harm , but much good : and whereas , the Moors curse that which burneth them , & scorcheth them to blackness , these wretches find fault with those that warm them , and wash them to whiteness . Whensoever therefore , you hear any open their mouths against any of these , then remember this story , and know , that no pretext of reason can excuse them , either from madness or solly : For we may not buy our Grace with other nations , ( if we be disgraced ) with the loss of the Gospel ; neither will we suffer our Rulers to be despised for the pleasure and partiality of Malefactious offenders ; nor so much as draw the Curtain upon Learning , for the tender eyes of any ignorant vain men whatsoever ; And so Lord , If these men curse , yet bless thou our church , our King , our State , our Learning , our People , for evermore . 

15 Give me leave yet to lead you along in the spirit , as God did Ezechiell , and as he said to him , Behold more abominations ; so I to you , Behold more fools . We read of a strange kind of foolish people , called , Psylli , in Africa , who were of a very low stature of body , but of a much lower and meaner wit and conceit . For they , having a City much annoyed by the Southwinde , upon a season , espying their opportunity , in a calm and peaceable weather , armed themselves to go out into the sandy Sea , or wilderness of sand , to seek this their enemy , the Southwinde , and to bid it battle , hoping utterly to vanquish it , so as it might never more blow upon them : while they ranged too and from , to seek this their adversary , suddenly the Winds arose , and so tossed the sand upon them , that in a short space they were all swallowed up therewith . These are worthily punished for their folly ( will every man say ) for what can a sharp sword do against the cold wind ? no more , then to cast stones ; and what simplicity were it to think , that the Wind were a living creature , and had either blood or spirit to lose ? Or if it had , that mortal men could meet or match it ? Well , out of these sands which drowned these Psylli people , are arose a generation , almost as foolish as they ; Namely , those which think by carnal means to overcome Spiritual dangers . For , if the soul have no affinity with Gold , the one being a Corporeal , the other a Spiritual substance , what is there in Magical enchantment , as a Fish's Liver , to drive away a Devil ? And Gold to satisfy for men's sins ? the grief of Conscience , cannot be cured by Music , nor carnal Precepts overthrow our Spiritual foe . Your spiritual dangers are greatest , therefore trust in the Lord , who is a spirit , and therefore fittest to dispel & conquer them ; but as for King , or Man , or Horse , or Spear , or Spell , or Medicine , they cannot help the soul against the Lord's wrath . It is best to yield our bodies to Spiritual blasts , and let the mind be compassed about with him , whom Wind and Seas obey . Honesty external , is a necessary Armour against the malice of man , yet our Spiritual foe will not fear it , unless it be accompanied with Prayer and Spiritual Weapons also . 

16 Thus have I showed you the more general Fools , now I will proceed against the more particular and special . And in the first place I will rank the Hypocrite , which taketh but the veil or garment of Religion ; letting go the pith and Marrow thereof . I may well compare him to that Asinus Cumanus , Ass of Cuma . An Ass finding a Lion's skin , to the end to make himself more terrible to the foolish Citizens , put himself thereinto , and then jetted fearfully up and down in the same , to the terror of as many of that City as saw him , every one thinking him ( indeed to be a Lion : and when he had held them a good time in that dreadful opinion , at last , a stranger came that way , who hearing the general bruit of this strange Beast , was desirous to see him , and at the very first , beholding his ears , knew him to be an Ass in a Lion's skin , and went boldly to him , & before all the multitude plucked off the Lion's skin , and so discovered the Ass' practice . This ( I know ) doth very well suit with an Hypocrite , first because no wise man will be a counterfeit , but only some shalow-witted person , therefore fitly resembled to an ass , apt to bear both God's wrath & Man's : Gods , because he disliketh him that is not so good as he seemeth : Man's , because men of this world hate him , that seems to be good , although he be not . Now , the Lion's skin signifieth Christ , for he is the Lion of the Tribe of juda , in whose garments we are blessed of God , as jacob was of Isaac , in the garments of his elder Brother . How glad are some men , if for a season they can counterfeit godliness , ( for that is both our Saviors' coat and skin ) and then they beguile simple people that suspect no fraud , for they will pray , read , hear , give , praise Virtue , dispraise Vice , and what not ? So as they may get an estimation of piety , to cover their more odious and secret practices . But GOD shall send a man , a stranger , of more skill and Wisdom , to pluck the skin over these Hypocrites ears , that all the world may know and deride this folly , & that they themselves may likewise understand , that dissembled Religion and Piety shall have her shame in this world , and in the world to come . 

17 Worldly men are also very much troubled with Ignorance , & want of experience in divine matters , ( I mean matters of Conscience ) whereof one Callicon ( a notable fool ) may give them a taste , and in his action apt to be derided , they may take a view of their own faces . This silly fellow being sleepy , and wanting a Pillow or Bolster to bear up his head , laid unneath it a Vessel of glass , which being very hard , and not tolerable to his tender head-piece , he remembered that he had heard that Feathers make Pillows soft ; wheruppon he went and filled it full of Feathers , and so lay down upon it again , but with no more ease than before . And surely ( no marvel ) for except the outside were apt to yield upon any pressure , in vain was it stuffed with any soft matter . You laugh that hear this , & who can forbear to deride such a folly upon so little harm . But turn to yourselves ( I beseech you ) and tell me , Who hath the judgement to procure quiet sleep to his soul when it is weary ? First , out of Nature , we know that it wanteth rest , and out of that knowledge we labour to provide it : but what do we rest our soul's head upon ? Namely , a hard brittle shining heap of some worldly pelf , upon which our soul can take no more rest , than the fool's head upon the glass , ( for as the Lion delighteth not in straw , nor the Horse in flesh , no more doth the soul in wealth of Gold and Silver . ) then we hear of another rest more soft than glass , which is learned or gathered from the Fowls of Heaven , I mean the Saints , which bring unto us the holy word of God , that we provide , and misplace it in the the former brittle hard Vessel of worldly heaps , and so think to sleep more easily upon our former Pillow , by reason of the new inward stuffing , but all in vain , for if the bottle be all hard and fast stopped , we may suck the skin off from our lips , before we draw the Wine through . Put not new Wine into old Vessels , then saith our Saviour , it will be lost , and put the soft Feathers of Divine promises into the hard pots of carnal minds , and there shall be no more rest than before . But change the mind , according to that saying ; Be ye renewed in your mind , and then the softness , sweetness , goodness , and quietness , of heavenly promises , more weighty than Feathers shall yield eternal rest to our souls . 

18 I will omit to speak of vain fear , which taketh away the wit of man , the fears of the wicked , which are causeless and easeless : declared in the folly of Phanax the Grecian , who ever feared the fall of the Moon , and did often in a foolish Prophetically pity , lament the destruction of the Ethiopians , upon whom he thought of necessity the Moon must fall ; but let men fear their falling into sin , and with sin into hell , more than the fall of the Moon upon the earth , or a dear year , cold Winter , or wet Summer . Again , I might speak against that careless sottishness , and wilful ignorance of those things , which they daily hear and see ; like to one Amphistides , which would never learn to tell above five , or to know whether his father or mother bore him in her womb : such surely are those , who will not busy themselves with Divine numbers , and know not certainly God to be their Father , or the Church to be their Mother . 

I will also omit , to discourse against the folly of profaneness in the soul's fits , wherein carnal persons having been stung in their consciences , by some guilt of sin presented to their memory , by some Text of Scripture , or other person guilty and privy to their offence : they cast offal care of divine sayings and judgement ; yea , peradventure make away the person guilty to their crimes , that he may never stand up in judgement against them . These men are resembled unto us in that fool , who being in his bed grievously bitten with fleas , did put out the Candle , to the end they might not see him , but his foolship was deceived , as afterwards he found , when he wanted light to take them out of his bed . Even so , they which think to procure rest to their secret byting , by kill the Witnesses of their crimes , or extinguishing in them the little care they had of godliness , shall be deceived ; for not only they shall have more plague , but also want help and light to recover a remedy when they would have it . 

19 I will conclude all , with another story , against the preposterous folly of worldly men , who first labour for earthly , and then for heavenly things . I do read of a Noble man's fool , whose labour was to bring in wood to the Kitchen : when he came to the pile , he would always draw out underneath , upon which the whole pile lieth , and let the uppermost alone , ( which had been more ready ) saying , that he would do the hardest labour first , and then the easiest afterwards . And by no means could he be dissuaded from this course , but would spend more time in pulling out a stick , than he should have done in carrying in an armful . So are the Children of this world , they take the most and first pains for inferior things which lie undermost , and let the superior and heavenly things , ( more easy to willing minds , which yet press and keep down the worldly things ) to be last and least regarded . I refer myself to your consciences , whether I speak not true ; if true , whether you or he are more foolish . Two parts there are in this Spiritual folly ; the first , that men by giving their first labours to the world , which is undermost , like the foundation of a Woodpile , lose much time , & the world , or worldly blessings , come more hardly unto them . For I must ever rest in my sweet Saviour's saying , Seek first the Kingdom of God , and the righteousness thereof , and all other things shall be cast upon you . And heavy things come more easily downward then upward ; therefore the Prophet telleth us , God remembreth the Heavens the Heavens the Clouds the Clouds the Earth , and the Earth the people . So all blessings must first be sought for in heaven , and then ( as Agar ) we shall have an Angel to direct us to the Fountain of water on the earth . 

Secondly , another part of this folly is , that we cannot be persuaded with this fool , but that Heavenly things are more easily accomplished of all sorts , then earthly : and therefore he which is seven years' apprentice to a Trade , and all little enough ; yet an hour in a Church at a Sermon , is loss of time in Heavenly matters , they may do it much sooner . So one of you , which lives fifty , sixty , or seventy years , and all that time laboureth in , and for the World , thinketh it enough for heaven , to have a Minister , and a few Prayers an hour or two before his death . These are our cares , and our Articles , upon these we pass our time , and venture our souls . But ( o Fools ) How long will you delight in foolishness , and hate Wisdom ! Be wise as Serpents , be innocent as Doves . If you be only wise for this world , God will destroy you . None came to the birth of Christ on earth , but the wise men in the East . There were more men in the East , but none of them looked up to heaven but these . It is better , you see , to study on the Stars , than the earth , thereby we are at least admonished , to lift up our heads , and look for Christ in heaven , as those wise men did hear on earth . We shall find him , we shall see him , for unto them that Look for him , he will appear the second time to salvation . 

You are all the children of wisdom , you must justify her , harken to her complaint , Can your hearts forbear rending and yearning to hear her cry so earnestly , o Fools , how long will ye love foolishness , and scorners delight in scorning ! Be you turned at my Correction , I will pour out my mind unto you , and make you to understand my words . Fear not the loss of any thing , the lack of that you have she hath provided , all , both house , harbour , meat , Wine , only she wanteth you , you she calleth . Wisdom hath builded her house , she hath hewn out her seven Pillars . She hath killed her fatlinges , drawn her Wine , and made ready her Table . She hath sent forth her Maids ( Viz : ) the Preachers , crying in the high places ( out of the Pulpits ) and saying ; He that is simple and destitute of understanding , let him come , let him come and eat of my meat which I have prepared , and drink of my wine which I have drawn . For sake your way o ye foolish , and you shall live , and walk in the way of understanding . 

20 So cryeth Wisdom , and let all her children and friends follow her ; yea , not only them to whom David saith ; Be you wise , o kings , he you learned you that be judges of the earth . But every Master , every Gentleman , every Citizen , every husbandman , every Tradesman , every Labourer , every Man and Maid-servant , every Old and young man Receive instruction & not Silver , & knowledge rather then Gold. Wisdom is more worth than precious Stones , and all pleasures are not to be compared to her . Strive to gain the time you have lost , Strive ( I say ) that you may be rescribed in the number of the wise Virgins , and taken out of the number of the foolish . We read of one Mycernius , that one told him , ( take what course he could ) he should live but six years . The Prince ( for so he was ) amazed heereat , plucked up his spirits and said , he would live twelve years , for he knew how to make twelve of six , and this was his course : he bade all sleep farewel , and provided such abundance of lights , that whithersoere he went , or wheresoever he was , it was always as light as day , & so he thought he lived twelve years , because he waked in light , when others sleep in darkness , which is a kind of death , one half of our life being always cut off or spent in sleep . O that we had so much wit and power to double our days we have to live , and that the lights of wisdom might never be quenched in our presence , but shine about us , and in us whether soever we go , so shall our day excel josuahs' day , and we walk in the day wherein no man stumbleth . Beloved , While you have the light , walk in the light , and the God of lights and peace fill you full , & bring every one of you out of darkness , and the shadow of death , into the light of Grace and Glory , guiding your feet into the way of peace , Amen . 

The second Sermon . 

Thus did I discourse of Wisdom and the wise man in my first Sermon , which was a necessary circumstance in my Text , giving precepts to all . Now it followeth , that we handle his words , and look into the Marrow of his proverbial Doctrine , wherein he first instructeth , Be diligent , and take heed . Secondly , he directeth , to thy flock , to thy herds , that is ; to all thy state , calling , dealing ; private , common , every where . Or by the Flock you may understand our goods enclosed within house or hedge , by the Herd , those things that are more common and wild abroad , for the wealth of those times consisted in Flocks and Herds . This his instruction he enlargeth by reason . Secondly by parts . Thirdly , by use . First , the reason , why we must look to our goods and charge is one , and that a mighty and weighty one . For riches endure not always , nor the Crown of Kings to all their generations . Secondly , the parts of the charge , are the several possessions . First , the Hay , that must be mowed . Secondly , the Grass , that must be eaten by dattle , and not trodden under foot . Thirdly , the herbs of the Mountain , they must be gathered ; that is , Grain and Corn of the Mountains for Meat , Medicine , and Ornament . Fourthly , the Lambs , they must be shorn or clipped , that out of their fleeces we may fetch garments and clothing . Fiftly , the Goats , that they may be sold , and bring in money for other uses external , for the saying is wise and true in Columella . Oportet patrem familias esse vendacem non emacem , The householder must sell , and not buy , if he will be rich . Lastly , the uses of his instruction , and all these parts of wealth , Verse 27. which is for the keeping of a good house , when he saith , And let the Milk of thy Goats be sufficient for the food of thy family and the sustenance of thy maids That is , feed thy servants , but not delicately , for so he will prove thy equal , if not thy Master , yet sufficiently , and that out of thine own store , buy nothing for him , neither for thy Maidens , but that they may better look to thy Goats and dattle , let them live upon their Milk , that so they may learn by thy example to be alike thrifty in time to come : but if once they find thee lose , & give them board-wages , they will be negligent in their charges , and bring ruin to thy estate . 

2.  [ Be diligent . ] That is , as if Solomon had said , in all the ways of thy life , be laborious and painful ; whatsoever passeth through thy hands , do it not by halves , and slightly , but let it still bear the stamp of thy diligence , And if there be any thing to be done , which is not fit for thy place , or passing thy skill , yet let thy eyes behold the doing thereof ; It is a virtue ( and no shame ) to be present at all thy affairs . Diligence is the Mother , and negligence the Stepmother of human life . By diligence they are hatched and increased , by negligence they are destroyed and diminished . If we look up to Divine and Heavenly things , diligence is exemplified , For the Angels stand always before God ; if to the Precepts of the Law and word of God : thou shalt keep diligently the Precepts , Commandments , and Testimonies of the Lord thy God. If a case come into judgement ( because the judge hath but one power to do a thing once only , whether good or ill ) and because every sentence of a judge , is the sentence of God , therefore it must also be done with diligent inquisition . When a leprous man was brought before the Priests , the Lord commanded diligent inquiry first to be made , and then every man was bound to rest in the opinion of the Priest . When the poor woman in the Gospel had lost her Groat , She lighteth her Candle sweepeth her house , and searcheth diligently every Corner . Without diligence we can do nothing . The difficulty and hardness of every work is made easy & foftned by diligence : Prudence without justice is naught worth , justice without Prudence is worth as little ▪ Knowledge , without Diligence , is of small use , Diligence with Knowledge is worth very much . The life of man is like an Iron , which use maketh bright , and rest maketh rusty : like a Water , which standing , is quickly corrupted , but running , remaineth sweet and clear , like the Pulse , which beating , showeth life , but ceasing , bringeth death . Therefore out of Salomon's precept I will amplify this point three ways . First , I will show the necessity of Diligence . Secondly , the commendation of it . Thirdly , the Commodity thereof . 

3 Touching the necessity of diligence , it was the ordinance of God to subject us all to labour , to diligent labour ; yea , even to sweated , immediately after our first parents fall , and I verily think , had they never fallen , yet without diligence they could not have lived , the necessity of all earthly and human affairs requiring the same . For by dulness , sluggishness , and idleness , our business , our life's labour is intermitted , omitted , and destroyed ; neither the work of God or man , without use , exercitation and diligence can long stand . All is a Talon , & every talon must be used ( not digged into the ground ) which cannot be without diligence . Through want of exercise , the Arms of Hercules , of the strongest , are dulled in the body , and the purest and sharpest wits are blunted in the mind . We see that the Land missing his Tillage , yieldeth smaller and worse increase , & that which is often turned , compassed , and Ploughed , is the surer ground to the Husbandman's content . The Merchant , which by continued diligence , often cutteth the Seas , is much richer than he that sitteth at home , and doth little or nothing , after one venture or two . The Iron , of round is not made flat with one stroke of the Smith , but by often doubling , & redoubling the same . The Colt cannot be tamed & fitted for the saddle , by once backing and bitting , but by being every day in the hand of the rider . When Lot went out of Sodom , he must do it with diligence , for he must be in Zoar , before the Sun rising , and he nor they in his company must be so idle or careless , as once to look backward , and so by diligence he and his Daughters escaped the fire and Brimstone . By diligence also , we escape Hel. jacob by his diligent service obtained Rahell , the Star in his eyes , the jewel of his heart . By diligent and valiant adventure , did David bring the 200. foreskins of the Philistines , and won the King's Daughter . By diligence , and not without diligence were the five Talents made ten ; and he which had so diligently made and multiplied them , was also made the Ruler of ten Cities . I can never say enough of the necessity hereof , but this I will say , without diligence the sins and filth of our lives are increased , & by diligence are they evacuated ; for the sea by ebbing & flowing , by flux , & reflux , by restless labouring and working , is not corrupted , by all the rivers , carcases , and carrions in the world , but still it worketh them out ; so as it is without infection . Wars nor peace , omit or intermit diligence , for in war it conserveth from enemy , it helpeth to victory ; in peace it conserveth from corruption of manners , and bringeth in plenty of honour and all things . 

4 We read that the Milesians having been in long civil wars among themselves , so as their forts & houses were ruined , their catle diminished by daily rapines , their grain consumed & burned , and the Land wasted , & all for the principality thereof . To help & redress this misery , the contending claimers pitying the state of their Country , grew to a parley , & laid down their swords of Hostility , and condescended to refer their cause to the Pareyans their next Neighbours , and so under their common Seal , sent by Ambassage their cau●e , quarrel , request , and submission , to their censure and arbitrement . The Pareyans accepted the determination of this business , & having received a more ample reference from the heads of the several factions , to bestow the kingdom or principality upon whomsoever them pleased within the Territory , they came to Miletum , and heard all parties , Pro & con , what could be said for every man's Title . At last , walking abroad , they saw the desolations of the whole Island , and no man minding so much as the Tillage , to procure common food , except one Husbandman , which then had sowed his land , notwithstanding the fury of the sedition . This man they called , and before all the claimers , they proclaimed him K. as the worthiest member of his Country , providing for himself , and the common benefit of other , when all in a desperate idleness gave themselves to sowing & spilling of blood , he in a diligent hand of providence , attended the sowing of Corn and grain , for the filling of his Country with store again . And so all upon a little debate , yielded to him , and praised the Pareians election . Even so is it with the diligent , their hand must bear rule , as justinus of a diligent heard-boy became a diligent Soldier ; of a diligent Soldier , a great Commander ; of a Commander , the Emperor of the world , and one of the best . 

5 Harken therefore unto me my beloved , young men and brethren , be diligent , for they that are not in the labours of men , are in the labours of Devils . When I look up to heaven , I see , and find , that without diligent Prayer , fasting , reading , meditating , & godly continued conversation to the end , we shall never come thither ; O , therefore be diligent , it is for a Crown , it will quite the pains , it will pay the labour richly . If I look upon the earth , the Husbandman hath four seasons , which observing , he is rewarded with plenty , and with neglecting , he is clothed with Beggary . Be diligent , for God doth speed the Plough . If I look on learning , and learned men , I find that diligence maketh their night's short , their days long , their diet thin , their bread course , 'cording to that of the Poet : Mùlta tulit fecitque puer sudavit & alsit 
Abstinuit vino & venere qui pythia cantat . 




Many and many are the miseries of the Student ; sometimes he sweateth ; sometimes , he freezeth ; and the songs of his Divine Oracles make him forbear both drunkenness and wantonness . Be diligent therefore , for so , mean men have attained Kingdoms ; Husbandmen , riches ; Scholars , Dignities ; and Merchants , Honours ; and without this diligence , God will not bestow his blessing . And thus much for the necessity of diligence . 

6 The second thing I noted of Diligence , is the praise and Commendation thereof , for this alone was never dispraised . The Turks dispraise Learning ; some Temperance , some Fortitude , some justice , some Religion , but all commend Diligence . Solomon is as much commended for his diligence , as for his wisdom , and when he ceased to be diligent , he also ceased to be wise ; and when he renewed his diligence , and forsook his pleasures , than he recovered his wisdom . Saint Paul inferior to no man , in praise , in desert , hath his Divine parts commended by his diligence ; first , in that he never ceased warning all men night and day , and served the Lord in watching and Prayer : that he travailed two thousand Miles , and in all that journey preached the Gospel : for these his many accidents in his labour , is ( as he deserved ) commended of all : yea , S. Peter termeth him his beloved Brother Paul . Saint Chrysostom in Ecclesiastical story , is memorable for many excellent parts in him , and especially for that in his banishment he preached diligently , and converted many to Christ jesus . He that tilleth the ground shall have abundance ( saith Solomon . ) We read of Furius Cresinus ( a Roman ) who having every year better Corn than his Neighbours , they called him into judgement for the same , alleging that by enchantment and witchcraft he sped so well , and that by such secret evil means , he drew away the fat of other men's Land into his own . The poor man appeared at the day , and brought with him all his Tools of husbandry ; waightye Ploughshares , heavy Mattocks & Spades , full fed Oxen , all his irons much bigger and stronger than other men's , and lastly his Daughter , a strong and mighty young woman , who was his helper in all his Husbandry , & setting all these before his accusers and judges , cried out in these words : Haec sunt Quirites veneficia mea . ( o Romans ) this Daughter , these Oxen , these Tools are the Instruments of my Witchcraft , and besides these , I use none , and these I apply with all diligence : whereat his judges being moved , absolved him with commendation . Thus we see , diligence procureth abundance in time of want , and favour in time of judgement : who can sufficiently express or admire her praises , which maketh men so praiseworthy , both in Court and Country . When all jewry were asleep at our Saviour's birth , who had the warning and notice thereof from heaven , even the very same night , but the Shepherd's that kept their flock by night ; commended for nothing but for their diligence , to them did the Angels of Heaven bring tidings of the Birth of Christ our Saviour the son of David . Lo , another Commendation of diligence , and a greater cannot be to hear the Angels speak , the heavenly Soldiers sing , and to see before all earthly men ( next to joseph and Mary ) the most blessed Babe that ever was . Diligence is observed by the heavenly powers , and rewarded with the happy vision of jesus Christ . 

7 Again , the continual brand of infamy and disgrace , that is set upon the negligent and sluggish , is no mean praise of diligence and industry , and therefore wheresoever we read of a sluggard or idle person , even in his greatness he is taxed for this . Esau , who having been a hunting , came home hungry , to satisfy his present hunger , sold his Birthright , in his negligence saith S. Austen , Malebat emere quam quaerere cibum , he had rather set his Birthright packing , then tarry , or go seek meat at an easier rate , wherefore he is branded with the Title of very few : Esau Ihate . Claudius , after he was Emperor , grew so careless and sluggish , that he minded nothing , neither what he said , nor to whom , nor among whom he spoke . Ptolemy another careless King of Egypt , would play at Chess sitting in judgement upon men's lives , whereby many times wrong judgement proceeded out of the King's negligence , and the blood of an Innocent was shed , which all the kings of the world , could not make to live again , or give a satisfaction . Theodosius the younger was wont to subscribe to all Letters or grants that were brought unto him : to draw him from this carelessness , his Sister Palcheria devised an edict to be made , whereby he banished his wife whom he loved most dear . And then she getting the writing again after the Emperor had signed it , brought it unto him , blamed him , he denied it , she produced it , and the shame thereof made him more diligent ever afterwards . Thus by negligence are all other Virtues stained , because diligence giveth grace to all . Learn ( I beseech you ) to be diligent , and not to break off your diligence in any point ; and in all your actions , join labour and Prayer together : Labour , without Prayer is a presumption against God ; Prayer , without Labour is a temptation of God. Let judas Macchabeus witness this for me ; before all his battles , he ever prayed , except two , one against Eupator , and then he was overcome , and lost the field ; the other , against Alcimus and Bacchides , and then he lost his life . Although his praises were many , for valour & fight , yet his diligence had not been so fortunate , if he had not joined his Prayers to his sword . Be faithful and diligent in small things , so shall God make you rulers over many , & he which is negligent in the smallest , shall not be trusted with greater . I cannot forget , I will not conceal the worthy saying of Bernard . Seruans doctrinam rarò accusabit fortunam , diligentiam cum infortunia rarò sociabis , pigritiam rarò separabis . That is , He which keepeth good Doctrine , shall seldom accuse fortune . You shall not seldom join diligence & misfortune together , you shall as seldom separate misfortune and sluggishness : and ●o I end this second part of the praises of diligence . 

8 The third part I propounded to myself , are the commodities of diligence , which are many , and therefore neither this place , nor this time will not permit me to set down either all , or those few , so largely , which I will here describe . First , Almighty God , allureth and draweth on men in all kind of life , by , and for the hope of reward and profit . Noah's Ark , Moses message to Pharaoh , David's fight against Goliath , our Saviour Christ's passion , & our profession , have all their several rewards and promises annexed to them , so hath diligence : for it cannot be , that the same virtue which blesseth mankind with so many benefits , but that also it should receive many commodities for them . First ( Solomon saith ) The diligent hand shall bear rule ; Verily , there is none of us all , but still retain both an Image of honour , and an aspiring to Government , for God made not us for servile & base slavery , but to bear rule over the creatures of the world . By diligence we have already showed how many Emperors and Kings have been advanced from mean estate , and now I will add a few more . The Kings of Hungary were derived from Lechus the second , who was a Husbandman , and by a divine demonstration , taken from the Plough to be the Virgin-queenes' Husband ; in remembrance whereof , he caused his wooden soles or shoes to be reserved in his Castle for all posterity to remember , how , and in what sort he came first into the Court. All the world knoweth that the Byshoppricke of Metz is one of the greatest of Christendom , the Bishop being a Sovereign , and a Prince Elector , the seat which Princes and great Lords have sought after for their sons . We read of one of their worthiest Bishops called Villegesus , who was but a Basket-makers son , yet would he have the Badges of his Father's occupation to remain in his Palace , aswell to make other studious , whereby they might come to honour , as also to put him in mind of his mean descent . 

9 The Grecians said , Ponos eucleias Pater , Labour was the Father of Honour , for the blessing of God doth so follow it , that many more are made honourable by diligence , then by Birth , witness all the romans , who raised their Commonwealth , and stood not upon terms of blood ( although it be honourable ) some of them were fetched from the Blow , some from other mean places ; then Virtues gave Titles , now Titles sell Virtues . Cicero , Fabius , Quintius , and other , Witness these things . When Demosthenes was asked how he came to that excellent facility of speaking , so as he led his Auditory to what part he pleased , being the glory of the greeks , and an honour to himself , he gave this answer ; that by spending more Oil than Wine , he came to that habit of perfect speaking ; Meaning , that he was in his study , writing and reading by his Lamp , when other were at the Tavern , or in their banquettes eating and drinking ; soft beds , and much learning are hardly gotten together , good cheer and painful diligence are seldom matched together , therefore as Lazarus his sorrows went before his joys , & Dives his joys before his sorrows , so Humility and Labour go before honour , and Honour abused and taken before the time , is seconded with shame , misery , and ( peradventure ) hell . 

10 Again , another commodity we receive by labour and diligence , is the comfort of a good heart , when we must sit down in age , and can work no longer : for the night of age cometh , when we cannot work , and therefore if a good Conscience be any thing unto us , and we know any thing of ourselves , then may we with Authority reprove the idleness of other , and repeat ( without boasting ) with glory and praise our own practice : whereby posterity and the younger will admire us , and praise us , and Noble Spirits , ( whereof there be some in every age ) will by our example be provoked to do the like . But if we remain in idleness and sluggishness , what ariseth in our minds , but filthy Lusts , impure thoughts , abominable actions , such as we read were in the Sodomites . Be not deceived , a little cranny letteth the wind into the house , and a little leak overturneth and drowneth a great Ship ; even so , a little idleness suffereth Satan's Wind and Water , to enter into the soul to the eternal perdition thereof . 

11 By all this we may see the commodities of diligence , both as it is in it own Nature , and as it is also in the contrary . And indeed , we may urge this second a little further , to the shame of Drones , sluggards , and idle persons ; God doth worthily punish them , so as they are not like to other men , their hands and faces spotted or stained like the green sickness , and their bellies either blown up like Eglons with fat , or ( deserved hunger following them ) lank and flat down like the bladder that is pricked . Nothing runneth in their mind but the Torment of labour , from that they post as fast as Moses from his rod , when it was turned into a Serpent , crying out against those that provoke them , as the Devils against our Saviour , Why art thou come to torment us before our time . Yea , labour grieveth them so much , as they watch late , because they will not put off their clothes , and lie long in bed , because they are loath to take the pains to put them on again . The sluggard ( saith Solomon ) when he turneth himself , maketh a noise like a Cartwheel : Why ? Because he is not liquored with the Oil of labour and diligence , he is ever murmuring and complaining : In Summer , he complains of long days , and trifleth them away at the Market , or at the Alehouse , or at other men's shops , or sleepeth after every Meal , or doth nothing but ask for news . He is at defiance with his own house and Lands , so long as there is a meeting or assembly abroad , either at Bowling , Shooting , Drinking , or other vain occasions ; being happy in nothing so much ( to his own conscience ) as that such company and occasion driveth his business out of his head . After meat , if pleasure call him not away , he goeth to sleep , and if the Sabbath come , that he must be forced to his Monthly day , yet shall Prayers be first half done , and the residue he passeth over with desires that they were ended , and like a merry Soldier whom I knew taken by the enemy , and led from Tree to Tree to be executed , was wont to say , that when he had escaped one Tree , he thought long till he had also escaped another . 

12 Well , as riches and honour are the end of labour & diligence , so is poverty the end of idleness , and such a poverty as is less ashamed to steal , then to beg , for his inward guilt of ungodly liberty taketh away from him the boldness to ask for God's sake , and biddeth him be his own Carver , to want nothing till he come to the Goal among his fellows . But woe be to them that bring not up their Children to some honest and diligent labour , they spoil them in their youth , doing them more harm for want of seven years' Apprenticeship , than they do them good by an hundred pound a year land For ease slayeth the foolish , and the prosperity of fools destroyeth them . Wo worth them also , that get , and gain , and take , and receive from other men's labours , not giving them good words for their benefits , nor ever opening their mouth for their large allowances , either in the Church , or at the Bar , yea , both in the Church , and at the Bar : sometimes Demosthenes' coynancy ( not squinancy ) stopping their mouths , as if their throats were sore : sore indeed of a Pestilence never to be cured . Sometimes , possessed of a dumb and deaf devil , whom they will not suffer to be cast out , lest their Consciences should rend them at his departure . These are they which give unto Physicians a groat , unto their Counsellors smoke , unto their Flatterers a pound , unto their Minions & Harlots a talon , unto Divines and Preachers , a halfpenny of custom . 

To conclude , let us all beware of negligence , and not only cry out against it , as the soldiers did of War in the time of Vitellius , when one had in the wars slain his own Father , yet did every man continue the wars : and so while we dislike idleness , we nourish & maintain it ; but let the Son of God be your example , not in his Miracles , but in his labours , that when death or he calleth for you , it may find you working , or praying , or Meditating , or hearing , or Counselling , or persuading , or resisting evil , or but saying this will I do , if the Lord jesus give me life and leave , that the fruits of your labours , like the coat of Tabytha , may remain when you are dead and gone . 

The third Sermon . 

You have heard in the first Sermon , I taught you to be wise ; in the second , to be diligent ; now in the third , I must exhort you to the Christian care of your own estates and goods ; both in their parts , and in their Uses , as they are comprised in my Text. First , for your dattle ( for good men are merciful to their Beasts ) provide for them Hay and Grass . Secondly , for yourselves , Corn , signified by the herbs of the Mountain , ( for in Israel they sow upon mountains ) and Money out of the price of the Goats . Thirdly , for your servants , meat , and Milk . And lastly , for you and them together , clothing , out of the fleeces of your flock . And of all these Solomon biddeth us , Know their states , and take heed to them . Whether they live with us more familiarly in the house , or enclosure , or whether they are more foreign and wild , signified under the name of herds . In this knowledge there are many sweet flowers , may profitable trees or Plantes , and many fair growing seeds . For to speak a little of knowledge in general ; without knowledge , we never have ourselves , nor Almighty God. All are bound to know ( except Children ) who cannot by their infancy of years ; and natural fools , who cannot by privation of natural faculties . The knowledge of God , is both the cause of loving and enjoying him : for , How can we love him whom we know not ? And how can we have him whom we love not ? The knowledge of God is the beginning of Wisdom , the knowledge of ourselves is the fullness of Charity . If we be ignorant of ourselves , that ignorance begetteth Pride , if we be ignorant of God , that ignorance draweth to Desperation : for if we know not God , we cannot hope in him ; if we know not ourselves , we cannot be humble , and then we cannot be blessed . By the knowledge of ourselves ( saith Saint Bernard ) we Sow in tears , because we feel and see to our sorrow , the defects of our Nature . By the knowledge of God , we reap in joy ; because , we feel and see , and hear , the plenty and copiousness of his Redemption : therefore let us go forth and carry our seed weeping , that we may return with our sheaves joying ; and both , for our knowledge , and for our Humility , neither with the Pharisies , let us boast ourselves above others , nor with the base multitude , be contented to be like others . For , in giving Honour ( saith Saint Paul ) go one before another ; that is , the rule of our Humility , to wish with Martinus Turonensis , that all our Virtues could be concealed . And again , Covet the best gifts , there is the rule of knowledge ; the best gifts are the greatest knowledge , and the greatest knowledge , ( if it be sanctified ) maketh the best men . Difference of knowledge , maketh difference of men ; and as David's grace and knowledge preferred him in the sight of God and Samuel before his brethren ( though he were lower in stature , and they taller and more personable men : ) even so , God delighteth not in men's legs , or strength , but in their heart and souls ; The Angels are pictured , not great , but full of wings , and we that are in the last part and end of the world , & therefore less in our marriage bed , than our Fathers in their Cradle , let us fly about the world , about our calling , up to Heaven , with the wings of heavenly knowledge . 

2 Solomon therefore commands , to be diligent to know our Herds , & take heed to our flocks , for they signify but one thing . Whereby he meaneth , that we should inform ourselves , of all our possessions , and not only refer their care to our Balyffes and Stewards , who many times take more pains to get our Liveries & Badges , then to do us service and deserts . It is well observed , that Almighty God hath given every man a mind and a state equal , one fit , or at least fitted for another , and no man is so poor , but his estate , is big enough to occupy his mind , and set that on work ; for a little , with righteousness , will keep an honest man in action . But if righteousness be absent , what is then the condition of such a person ? Namely , to busy himself in other men's affairs , to talk of their livings , of their stock , of their pedigrees , of their sons and daughters , and servants , and of the prizes of Corn and Merchandise , as if he had ten Characks at sea , when he hath neither Money to buy , nor ware to sell away . This man is never a stranger , but at home ; knoweth every man , but himself ; sums up all men's reckoninges , but his own ; is eeven with all accounts , till he leave himself , even nothing . From the root of this vanity , ariseth the idle humour of seeking after news , in Italy , Spain , France , Turkey , Morocco , or the Low-countrieses , and wanting good matter , he coyneth some of his own ; then he posteth to one Lord or Lady , or other great person , ( but of mean intelligence ) and there he venteth the wind in his brain . Such is the nature of man's mind ( my beloved ) as is the Nature of good ground , if you Till & Sow it , will it not bring forth good fruits ? But if you Till it not , and let it alone unoccupied , will it not bring forth weeds or Grass ? Even so , our minds sowed with knowledge of good discipline , yieldeth a happy harvest of honest faculties ; but let alone , and not filled with some better matter , becometh stuffed with the wind of vain humours , lying Tales , credulous lies , and unprofitable discourse . From hence also it cometh , that men have leisure to sow debate , by immagining faults , where none are , and discovering imperfections and follies of other men , which lying hid in secret , were better buriand forgotten , then remembered . For what cometh of it , but shame to our Countrymen , contentions in the Law , troubling of the seats of judgement , hatred and division among honest families , exhausting of Treasure , and setting the soul either wide open ( by malice ) to the devil , or closed up , by shaking off grace and shame . This is the fruit of them that are ignorant of their own estates , and yet be turbulent discerners of other men ; & the best is , the world payeth them well again . For , if they have as many Masters , as they have hearers , every one payeth him with hatred , revile , and reproaches ; so as he laboureth without fruit , Sowing the wind , and reaping the Whirlwind , discovereth , without thanks ; speaketh , without credit ; eateth , without welcome ; lives , without reputation or love ; dieth , without tears or pity ; saving , it is pity such wretches tread upon God's dear earth . 

2 But you ( beloved ) which either hear this , or hear of this , bind and buckle yourselves to knowledge , if it were possible , of every thing , Art , Trade , and Occupation ; but especially , of your estates , without which , a Christian is unlike to God , and shameth his profession , which crediteth other men , where only he should believe himself . You have but two things in your estate to look into , your souls , and your Temporalties : do in the one as you do in the other . I read of one Pomponianus a Mantuan , that he was in secret accused for denying the soul , and at last ( as all secret faults shall be renealed ) it came into the light , and he was called into judgement for it . His judges demanded of him , whether he did believe he had a soul or no ; he answered Negatively , he did not : whereat his enemies and accusers rejoiced , his grave judges reproved him sharply , and gave sentence upon him . The Prisoner marvelled , and told them they were too hasty , for ( said he ) do you believe you have souls ? Yea , said they all , and accurse them that do not . But said he , do you no more than believe it : said they , that is sufficient : then saith he , Non credosed scio . I do not only believe it as a thing absent ; but , I know I have a soul , and faith , gives place to knowledge . So my beloved , do not only believe you have Leases , and Lands , and Friends , and dattle , and goods , and Souls , but know it : it is better to know , then to believe it . Heavenly things I must believe , till I may know , but earthly things I must know , or else I cannot believe . I will love my Servant for his obedience , but I will not believe or trust him for all my state . Know yourselves to be rich , and do not only believe it : know yourselves to be Christians , and do not only believe it : know yourselves to be in the way to heaven , for if you do but believe it , you are deceived : Know yourselves to have Hope , Faith , and Charity ; report and opinion are many times false . Faith is the beginning of life eternal , knowledge is the perfection and compliment . Faith goeth before , ( as Grammar before other Arts ) or as the scholar believeth his Master , but knowledge cometh after , and either confuteth or confirmeth the Master's precepts . 

4 There be causes , there be effects , there be contraries to Faith , all which known and discerned , do no only confirm Faith , but transport , and transform it into knowledge : and true faith will never cease , till it come to knowledge , as true love is not at quiet , till it have the seal of Marriage , because it traineth to experience , and experience rests in knowing . The trial of many things begetteth Wisdom , and Wisdom the better part of experience , maketh trial of evil things ( yet without sin ) and keepeth that which is good . It was the fault of Hieron his wife , that having never kissed man ( except her Husband ) thought that every man's breath did smell as ill as her husbands : whereby her husband blamed her , and she was not thought careful enough of him . Until , and unless we know what difference is betwixt a jews faith , a Turks faith , an Anabaptiss faith , and a true Christian faith : none at all , in respect of the form , but the matter , the efficient , and the end of believing , which is not discerned without knowledge . I call the form of believing , not the essence of a true Faith , which is a word impropriated to Divinity , but the being of faith , in the minds Moral and Natural Virtues . wherefore out of a good doctrine ariseth a good faith ; not on the contrary , and out of good Doctrine and Faith , a sound knowledge , defending , maintaining , and persuading both . 

This is that knowledge , that Solomon saith , is better than Gold and Silver , and is not therefore to be misliked , because it is not always honoured and had in reputation . I have seen ( saith the Preacher ) an evil under the Sun , The race is not always to the swift , the victory to the strong , nor bread to men of knowledge . What then ? God himself is not always so respected as he ought , shall not we therefore regard him as much , as if all the world did agnize him ? Bread ( than which nothing is more needful to mankind ) yet is not always respected of wanton and full-fed Children ; shall the hungry therefore cast it away ? God forbid , no more let honourable Science and Knowledge lose her reputation , because some indiscreet Fools , have set her in the last , lest , and lowest place . 

5 God himself is a God of knowledge , & next to God , men are the Professors and Students of knowledge , for even the Angels by the church , are informed in the secrets of our Redemption . A man without knowledge , hath no God but himself , no heaven but this world , and in this ( through ignorance , of the world to come ) they crave a large improvement of their evil days , feeling no other love , or hatred , or fear , or care , or sorrow , or wounds , or conscience ; For , as men first sin , and do not care , by a long & inveterate custom , they sin , and do not know . From hence men fall into a Reprobate mind , having no good thing in them , like Beasts they are guided by appetite , like him that had a thousand Cooks , and a thousand Falconers . Reason , which should rule , is made of the Lady the Handmaid , and so the issue of their minds is like Ishmael , a bastard , and a Bondage-generation ; from which seldom cometh any good . Religion , the Daughter of God & the Church , and the first born in Paradise ; yea , in Heaven , is clapped up into some stinking Dungeon , through which , passeth the sink of all our beastly pleasures , and that which should have the highest , and the most honourable room in our house of clay ( too base for such a Guest ) is thrust behind the Stables of great Horses , the Mews of Hawks , the Porter's lodge , yea the Scullery of the most servile Offices , and where she most loveth to be ( like the Haebrew servant ) she is bored through the ear , and hath many wrongs and brands of disgrace ; still a Servant , that should be a Commander . Their rule to believe is their sense , except they see ( with Thomas ) they will never believe , and yet all the senses being filled , they are not overcome , so easy is it to show the reasons of Divinity , and so hard to persuade . In error , many ( like our late Apostates ) are first persuaded , and then instructed , but in Religion and Faith , after so much as sense itself cryeth ho , yet instruction can work no persuasion , as though some Ephialtes overlay their breasts . 

6 From hence also it cometh , that Adam's sin is laid upon God , because he suffered and permitted it , therefore he decreed and acted it : and whatsoever other evil is committed in the world , he must be made the Author thereof : so strangely rangeth ignorance and want of Knowledge , being not able to discern betwixt permission and action , betwixt the action , and the evil , that like a Bird in a net , the more it striveth , the faster it is hampered , and the higher goeth the sin . then Fortune or good luck is made their Goddess , attributing whatsoever they have , either to chance , or to themselves ; with the wicked in the Prophet , they Sacrifice to their net , or else to their Arms , to their Horses , to their experience , to their wit : but if success fail , and the issue answer not the expectation , than they curse themselves , or open their mouth against Heaven , or accuse Fortune , or peradventure lay load upon the Devil , and well they may , for they ride him to Hell , as a Thief in a Cart to the gallows . The Prophet saith , He which is afflicted , shall run hither and thither , and when he is angry , he shall curse his Gods , and the Kings . They give over praying in such cases , Propter hoc malum ( saith Tully ) or arem deos , at hij renuntiarunt or ationibus meis . For this evil I would pray to the Gods , but they have renounced all my Prayers . That admired Tacitus hath this blasphemy . Numquam maiores caedes Pop. Rom. etc. The people of Rome never endured more slaughter , whereby it was proved , that the Gods are not so watchful for our health and safeguard , as they be for our punishment and revenge . That wise Livy also speaking of a doleful ye are ; saith , that for Plagues , Famines , and sedition , never the like befell them , and if ( said he ) foreign enemies had not been wanting , Vix open deorum omnium sustentata foret Resp . scarce all the Gods could have supported our estate or common wealth . It is hard , yea almost impossible , for men without the knowledge of God , to stand in affliction if it be not sudden , but linger . Wicked men are worst in long sorrows , and best in sudden : good men be worst in sudden , ( as Manaoh , Daniel , and Saint john ) and best in long miseries , and continued calamities . Titus' another Demy-god among the Heathen , when he saw that he must die in his youth , ( after he had been Emperor but two years ) he cried out against the heavens for their small regard of his life . Wicked & ignorant men ( if they have any spirits ) are like Tigers , who hearing a Drum , by't and tear off their own flesh ; so these in great terrors and evils , are at their wit's end . When their Conscience biteth them , than they seek out false remedies , more hurtful than assured perils ; Namely , the company of good fellows , and Musical merriments , as though sin were sent to afflict them , to help the Tavern , Alchouse or Minstrel : but so also they bewray their folly and want of skill , for their last recourse is unto GOD , when they have tried all other means , and then they neither speed well , nor do well , because they do it late , too late , beginning at the wrong end , all is out of course , and lost ; yea , with their own wives they commit fornication , and poison themselves with their own meat . There is not one Virtue or grace of God , which they cannot Nicke-name , nor a fault so foul , which they will not blanche over with some defence ; and if at any time it drop into them to hear a Sermon , it is for the phrase , or some sinister respect , goodness being a stranger , and scornfulness an ordinary companion with them . They have learned nothing of God , but to swear by him , and that rashly , falsely , and presumptuously ; for to reprove them ( never so gently ) for the same , is to take a Kid from a Bear , and a Lamb from a Lion , and a Wolf by the ears . They have no care for their souls , no more then for Beggars by the Highway , whom they neither desire to hear , to remember , to relieve . They love none but themselves , and care not upon whom they tread , nor whom they disgrace , to be a foundation to their rising . I would they loved themselves in the Nature of true love , for such love is like the Mother's love to her Child , a love to preserve , but their love is like the hungry man's love to his meat , a love to consume . To conclude , from hence it cometh , that they never think of death with patience and fear it more than hell , because they are not so thoroughly persuaded of hell , as they be of death , and in one word , I may describe them by the Psalm , The ways of GOD they have not known , and there is no fear of God before their eyes . 

7 Thus , and this have I spoken of knowledge , as it is a virtue Moral , and Theological ; now it is varied in my Text , by these words , And take heed to thy Herds , which afterwards are also divided into Hay , Corn , Cattell , and servants , that every one of these may be preserved in Use , Office , Life . So our Flocks and Herds are our Families , our cattle , our charges Pastoral , and Magisteriall , kingdoms to Kings , Monarchies to Emperors , Counties to Sheriffs , offices to Officers , every Servant & maid have their Flocks , their Herds . He that worketh by the day , or that is hired for a year , or is apprentice till a jubilee , whether he follow the Flocks and Ewes with young , as David did , or the Plough and Oxen as Elisha did , or the wars as joab and Abner did , or attend on their Master as the Centurion's servant did , or on their Lady & Mistress , as the Maids of Esther did , or Fish in the Sea , as the sons of Zebedee , or walk on Messages on the Land , as the Servant of Abraham ; and to conclude , whether they be set over all as Bailiffs and Stewards , or over the Hay , or over the Corn , or over the dattle , or over the Men and Maidservants , they have their Flocks , & Herds , and charges , which they must know , and take heed unto , for service is no inheritance , and badges of Lords and great men , are neither to maintain us , or defend us in ill . These are the things that make a man , that make him perfect , in as perfect manner as may be , if they be found in the way of righteousness , such servants shall divide the inheritance among brethren , and men of this quality , shall stand before Princes . 

8 There is nothing more commendable in a man , than oftentimes to visit , view & review their possessions , take special consideration of their meanest utensiles , so shall they see how they are kept & preserved , which of them must be altered , which nourished , which continued , which removed , which standeth in the stable , and which is fallen into the ditch . Our cattle are not free from our care on the Sabbaoth day . Which of you ( saith our Saviour ) shall have an Ox , or an Ass , fall into the ditch on the Sabaoth day , and shall not help him out . And which of you doth not lose his Ox or his Ass to water on the Sabbaoth day . By which we see our blessed Saviour give allowance to this labour , arising both out of necessity and mercy , which two only cases , give dispensation to civil and base services on the Sabbaoth day , which works else were unlawful and insufferable in true Divinity . Yea , in the Law we are bound , not only to regard our own dattle , but our Neighbours , yea , our enemies , and to bring home his Ox or Ass that goeth astray , to restore the pledge , to restore that we find to the true owner , ( if we can come to the knowledge of him . ) Such care hath almighty God of every man's particular , as that they which follow not this order , corrupt his ordinance , alter his providence , change the Divine property of those things they loose negligently , or retain unjustly , and shall pay most dear for usurpation of that , which God in trial ( not in right ) hath given into their hands . Again , if we often look not to our estates ( I mean such as are householders ) how can we know what to give according to our proportion , or what store to keep , after our allowance ? we may give that we cannot spare , and must go buy else where , which is folly , we may keep that we cannot spend , & that is misery and wretchedness ; our Granaries shall be empty or fusty , without our knowledge , our wardrobes void of store of Household , our Armouries without weapons , our Sellers without drink or wine , which i'll beseemeth a Housholder , a Man , much less a Christian , to whom God hath given state and living , and a family , for He ( saith S. Paul ) that provideth not things honest before hand for his own Family , is worse than an Infidel . 

9 The charge of this life , is food , raiment , and friends ; care first to provide these , then to use them . Weee read that joseph was ordained and honoured of Almighty GOD , with the second dignity in the kingdom of Egypt , ( after he was drawn out of prison ) for the provision of Corn and Victual ; yea , for this his Father & brethren gave reverence unto him . Lo , an excellent dignity of housekeeping , and providence for to feed them whom the Lord hath sent into the World , among whom are his Church , that must not want when the Lion's lack and suffer hunger . Every Family hath its children , in whose name , blood , and estate , it consisteth ; their enlargement and continuance standeth upon the wise administration of Household affairs , as well to keep that which is already gained , as to gain that which is desired . Saint Paul would not have a Bishop or Deacon to be chosen , but by this Touchstone of experience , how they had ordered and guided their Households ; for no man can ever serve or rule well the Church of God , that hath not well behaved himself in the Domestical and oeconomical life . The wise Cato would have the Housholder , Providere familiae instituta , cibos & medicinam , to provide first for the manners , secondly , for the maintenance ; and lastly , for the Medicine of their Families in the time of sickness . What is meat and large allowance of fare and diet to our servants , without good and Divine manners ? What are Divine & good manners , without maintenance ? What are both of them without health ? And what is it to live in such a family , where neither God is feared , nor the labours of good servants regarded in time of sickness ? Surely , let no man trust that Master that forgetteth seven , or but one years' service , for one month's sickness . A vile Nature or Prodigality , or worse , is the cause hereof . Be studious therefore of your families good , and with Salomon's Mother , Seek Wool and Flax , and labour cheerfully with the hands . Be like a Merchant's ship , to bring food from far . Rise early while it is Night , give your portion to the Household , and the ordinary to the Maids . Put the hand to the Wheel , and your Arms to the poor and needy . Consider Fields , and Carpets , & fine Linen , and Garments , and buy them , so shall honour be your clothing , and ●ou shall rejoice in your latter days . But yet remember in all your labours , that Almighty God be not forgotten , for it is in vain saith David , to rise early , & eat the bread of carefulness , going late to bed , except the Lord give rest to his beloved . You may with Elisha Blow in the field , and follow the Oxen , but if Eliahs' Mantle be cast upon you , you must forsake the Plough , and follow the Prophets . Our sermons are like his Mantle , and they call you to heaven , as that did Elisha , to be a Prophet . Matthew may sit in his Publicans Office , but if our Saviour call him away , He must arise and follow him . All Trades of life are but Handmaids to Religion , therefore vain are they which forsake the Mistresses , ( which is Godliness ) her Table and Parlour , which is the Temple , for the Maiden's webs , and Worke-houses of less value and estimation . 

10 How shall they be able to look almighty God in the face , which either feeling wealth coming upon them , or else in an over-carefull desire , to be rich , and accounted laborious , forsake the Churches and Altars of the Lord , seldom visiting the holy Communion , as a day-feast ; seldom coming to the Church , as a Market , wherein there is nothing gotten ; and as seldom mumble up their private Prayers , without Devotion , Understanding , or Diligence ; O , I say , what account shall they give unto the Lord , for this drowsy & Lethargical negligence in their soul's cases . Albina their care is for the shoe , none for the foot ; all for the Hat and Feather , none for the head ; all for the Badge on the sleeve , none for the Wages in the purse ; all for the body , that body and soul are both lost . It is a comely thing to see a ship rigged , and with spread sails floating on the Waters , observing also , how one is at the Stern , another at the top , and every man in his place , ( the winds moving withal ) so it will continue in order and sail surely ; but if either Pilot or Steersman be wanting , or other Mariner , the Winds will soon rend the sails , and the Ship split against the rocks : even so , it is a goodly thing , and a royal , to see a Man sailing to heaven , having under , him the earthly Waters , ( though inconstant ) above him the winds of heaven : if he want not in him , Reason , understanding , Religion , and Grace , which are the Mariners that row and waft our souls to the eternal kingdom . It is good therefore to lay hold on this , and not to forget that , For what shall it advantage a man , to win the whole world , and lose his own soul . 

11.  Now , I return again to the careful Housholder , who must look to every part of his possession , as it is in my text , Hay , grain , Catle and Servants ; yea , although he wear the Crown . It was an excellent saying of Alphonsus , a King of Spain : Principis inane nomen nisi habet in aerario , the name of a king or Prince is an idle thing , if he have not a Treasury to maintain it . The Crown is maintained by diligence , by the Blow , and the Commonwealth flourisheth under the same . I will not , nor may I meddle with Princes ; but I say , that the name of a Housholder is an idle thing without a storehouse more or less , according to the proportion of the family more or less . The kingdom of heaven is likened to such a store-house , out of which the Lord's Family is replenished with things new & old . The Lord hath his Apple Trees , and Orchards , and Sellers , as he telleth his Church ; to teach us , that store is no sore , but sorrow cometh by the default thereof . When God himself made the world , he made man last of all , having first provided all other things for him : as the world roofed with the Heavens , and floored with the green Grassy earth , stored with all fruits , incessantly and successively growing one after other . The Stars being his lights , the Creatures of all sorts being Servants and Tributaries to him , the Angels of heaven his assured friends , waiting on his safety , & every bird singing melody to his prosperity ; so did the great householder provide for man even before he was made ; so hath he continued his store working hitherto , And seed time , & harvest , cold and heat , Winter & summer , day and night , hath not ceased , but shall remain as long as the earth shall endure . So must wise Householders provide aforehand , things honest ; even before marriage , Meat and houses , & clothing , & before children , as the mother doth the swaddling clotheses . That out of the herds he may with Abraham fetch a Lamb or a Kid , or an Ox : out of the Pastry with Sara , fetch the Meal for the bread of strangers . It is not good to want store and provision at hand , the Venison is best in the Park , and the dattle in our own , and not in others men's herds . When Isaac would have Venison , because it ran wild , Esau was long in taking it , & so jacob came in the mean time with the tame Kid ( a thing in store , and at hand ) and got away the blessing . Even so , when necessaries are then to be sought , when they should be used , it preventeth both the thanks , and the benefit , and store bringeth both : for Jacob's Venison ( though not true ) had both the blessing , and the thanks . Store at hand , is like friends at hand , whereof Solomon saith , A friend at hand , is better than a Brother a great way off . The ancient Egyptians were want to hang or paint at their doors a Praetors Wing , in token of their Gentry . The Romans , the Spears , Shields , Swords , and warlike weapons , which their Antecessors had gotten by their prowess : & these things ( though at the doors ) yet no man durst remove or make away . Thus did they for their Honour , let us do as much for our houses and Families , and let not there be among us any that keepeth not his parents Lands , goods , Arms , dattle , and Virtue , that as we are known by their names , so we may be by their Lands , Honours , Prowess , Frugality , & all other works of Faith , Hope , and Charity . 

12.  Thus have I briefly spoken of the Household care to get and keep . Now of the last part of the Housholder , or housekeeping , which is his mercy in spending , & liberality in giving forth . That which was first called his charge , Flock and Herds , he now calleth his Family and Maidens , which must be fed and clothed . Whereby , is first to be noted , that all the care we have spoken of , is to give , to bestow , to spend , to distribute , and feed others . He which is the Servant of riches , doth keep , and get them like a Servant , but he which is the Lord and Master of them , doth give and dispose them like a Master ; nothing proveth a man so much the owner of his wealth , as the use and bestowing of it ; nothing showeth him so much a base servant of wealth and riches , as the hoarding up , and keeping it close from the sight of the world . Now , the servant doth keep them , as Servants do their Master's goods ; and he which is a Servant of riches , is not a Servant of jesus Christ . Beware of this wretched getting of goods to keep them , & not to spend them : God , Nature , Men , Beasts , and all good creatures , confute and deny this . GOD , for he which is infinite in wealth , giveth all in this world ; He eateth not of our Flocks or folds , or of Beasts that run wild on the hills , he therefore commands the earth to feed man , For he openeth his hand , & filleth all living things with his blessing , he saith , It is a more blessed thing to give , then to receive . He charges the rich in this world to be ready to distribute . He threateneth that the rust of the Gold and Silver laid up , shall consume and torment the souls of them that hoard . He telleth that no man's life standeth in the things it possesseth : He showeth thee o man what is good ; Namely , to do justice , and love Mercie . And to conclude , Him he styled a Fool , which having plenty of Corn , more than his Barns could hold , would rather build greater Barns ( to keep it ) then give away the superfluous surplusage to the poor and needy , o Fool , this night they will fetch away thy soul from thee , than whose shall all these goods , and Bags , and Obligations be ? Surely , If you say your children's ; what comfort is it to a Father in hell to remember the intolerable Torments he there endureth , for getting and keeping that wealth unjustly , without showing pity to other , which now his Sons and Daughters revel in with all earthly pleasures . I tell you such earthly pleasures , have a bitter end ; but such Torments have no end : For although they ask but a drop of water , yet they are not heard , because they have not heard them that begged , or would have borrowed of them in need . 

13 Nature also is an enemy to this wretchedness , to this Covetousness , she loveth to multiply , and to increase , if she have Milk in her breasts , she knoweth that ( like riches it will rot ) therefore with it she feedeth other . The trees that are laden with fruit , bear them but till they are ripe , and then if they be not taken off , they let them fall . How glad are the fields when they are covered Laetis segetibus , with smiling Grain , and yet they hasten to the harvest ( as the Pigeon to her breeding ) that being rid of one crop , may be Ploughed for another . The sheep wearied with his fleece , inviteth by a panting necessity , the Shepherd and Shearer to take it off . The seed would be sown , the Gardens would be gathered , the Sea would be Fished , the Heavens keep not their influence , but send it down among us. Why then should men get goods to keep them , and yet riches endure not always , nor the Crown from generation to generation . Are they not the sons of Nature ? Why degenerate they ? What Tigers Milk have they sucked ? What Cockatrice hath hatched them , who corrupteth all that she toucheth ? Let Nature teach them ( if they will not learn of such a Mother ) who as Boetius saith , That cuique quod convenit , & ne inter eunt , laborat , giveth to every thing , convenient , & laboureth that nothing perish : but these let their money perish , their woods rot , the moths eat their garments , which might be given away , and the Dogs and Swine , that good meat which would maintain the children . The walls have their Gold laid upon dumb pictures , and Heathen men's shape are well clothed by them , and set forth in counterfeits , but nothing cometh from them , for the general good , but ( as it were ) by force of Arms . 

14 Men also , I mean the general and Universal inclination of mankind , is against the keeping of goods in private without some use . They keep ( saith one ) for fear of want , and yet they want the use of that they keep . Behold a just judgement of God , ut semper indigeat , qui semper timet indigentiam , They always want , which are always in fear of want . The two Persian Princes had two Titles given them by their people , to signify their good and ill . Cyrus they called Patrem , a Father , because he gave them riches , and laid up , but for their necessaries ; and Darius , they called Negotiator , a Merchant , whose study is to gain , or not to lay out . Valerius . Auaritia indagatrix lucrorum aiudissima vorago , ne que habendo fructu foelix , sed cupiditate quaerendi , miserrima . Covetousness , the searcher out of gain , is a most greedy gulf or swallower , in keeping it is not happy , but in seeking , it is most miserable . 

Tully saith , Illi morbo qui permanet in venis , & inhaeret in visceribus , nec inveteratus evelli potest , nomen est avaritia , That disease is called Avarice , which runneth in the secret veins , and cleaveth to the inward bowels , which if it be inveterate , can never be pulled forth . Pythagoras . Covetous men which have riches , and do not use them , are like unto Orphans and Wards in their Nonage , which also have houses and Lands , but cannot dispose them . Seneca saith , Inopiae pauca desunt , avaritiae omnia . Poverty wanteth some things , but Covetousness wanteth all things , and therefore the rich man that hath goods & doth not use them , doth never any thing well , except in dying . So he . Unto all these , I may add the note of Innocentius . For Covetousness , Balaams' Ass hurt his Master's foot , and reproved his rider . For Covetousness , the people of Israel stoned Achan in the valley of Anchor , after he was found guilty of the Golden garment . By Covetous Ahab , was Nabaoth put to death for the Vineyard . Gehazi got the leprosy through Covetousness , when he abused Naaman in the Prophet's name . judas for Covetousness , sold his Master and hanged himself . Ananias and Saphira belied their Charity , and keeping back their portion ( for they had sold their Land and kept their sin ) were strooken dead by the Lord Believe it , the merciful man never died ill death , the Covetous and parsimonious never happy death . Therefore away with this monster , which all men cry out against , and they which love it most , are ashamed to confess it . Men are wont to desire wealth , pleasures , and Honours : of Wealth cometh evil things ; of Pleasure , filthy things ; of Honour vain things . For riches breed Covetousness and Avarice ; Pleasures bring forth Gluttony and wantonness ; Honour , nourisheth Pride , and Vainglory , and I tell you if you receive not the witness of men , the witness of God is greater . 

15 Beasts & all creatures hate this parsimony , it is the royalty of the Lion to eat but once of his prey , the residue he leaveth to other , and cometh not again to it . The Elephants are for that cause dispraised , because they hide their teeth fallen off , that no man , or other creature should find them . The Lizzarde , that knowing her urine to congeal into a precious stone , covereth it in the sand , that it might not be discerned . Of what brood are these wicked men , whom no example of God , or Nature , or Men , or Beast can move ? They are surely some Satyrs , or strange Ethiopian brood , or peradventure sent by some of the earthly spirits , of whom the Conjurers say , They keep the Treasures in the earth , that no man may use them . Such spirits are these , that is ; Devilles , but in other shapes , that only keep goods from them , that would use them better : let the world sink or swim , they get none from them , and if God were money they would lock him up , that none else might enjoy him . But they that have this world's good , and see their Brother perish , how dwelleth the love of God in them ? that is , there dwelleth no love of God in them , and so out of God his love I leave them . 

16 But let me not be understood , that I speak against all keeping and storing up of money , and other things , as though it were unlawful to possess any more provision of meat , then for a meal ; of Money , then for a day ; of Garments than one , for one body , and so of the residue . God forbid , for so in time of necessity man should be unprovided of help when he should use it . God hath ever in store . There is no question of Corn and dattle , but of jewels , and money , and such like . Solomon in my text , biddeth to look to the he Goats , that they may be a price of the field . Money must be provided against sickness , suit , enemies of our country , and for all other necessities . jacob had money , which he sent by his sons into Egypt for Corn , the first and second time . Abraham had Money , wherewith all he bought the field of Emor . The Church had her store , Acts 2. and 5. and therefore let no man think it against conscience , to be always provided against wants : wherein the rule of Socrates was good ( if it could be followed ) that a man's Treasure should neither be bigger nor lesser than his necessity . But because that cannot be known , it is good our store be more plentiful , so our charity be never the less . When Iphicrates pitched his Tents in a little open field , and then began to trench and wall them , his General asked why he did so , and what he feared ? To whom he answered , such a question became not a commander , Ah undans cautela non nocet , we can never be enough secured against future perils . King Alexander seeing one of his Soldiers going to sharpen his Dart when all other were going to fight , cashiered him , and cast him out of the Army ; saying , Inutilis acie , qui pararet arma tunc cum iis utendum . He was unwoorthy of his army , who went then to provide Arms , when he was to use them . Even like the foolish Virgins , which neither took Oil sufficient , & when they had spent their store , gave themselves to sleep , till it was too late to provide . 

17 Let us therefore keep our honest store : for thereby did Abigail mollify the angry and displeased heart of David , when he came against her husband Nabal : and if the present she brought him , had not been present and at hand , it had not failed , but they all had perrished before so much could have been provided . Our Coffers must not be like the sealed bags , which Alexius left at Ancona , when he had compounded the wars with the King of Almains . For the Emperor Comnenus his Master , who being to leave Hostages of money with the Citizens , he by his Master's direction , secretly conveyed away the Money , and left with them the empty , yet sealed trunks and Boxes , bidding them keep them safe , until they were by the Emperor required . But this deceit being discovered , fared ill with the Emperor ; even so , poverty will not be long hid , and then shame or sorrow will follow , until ruin , or else some strange and woeful laborious recovery of our estate . And so I will conclude , that seeing the Lord maketh both rich and poor , let us with care and Conscience , conserve a Storehouse of well-gotten wealth , as we do relieve the well-deserving poor , for both shall meet before the Lord together . 

Now followeth a conclusion of all , which standeth in the amplified distribution of the charge , who they be that must be looked unto , who entertained and maintained , who to be provided for , and so an end . Our Flocks and Herds , Family and Maidens , are many in the figure , for I will allegorise them , as well as handle them literally . 

18 And in the first place , the subject of our Wisdom , Government , Wealth , and Mercy , seemeth to be our Country , the common parent of us all , which though it bear us as the horse doth the Rider , and as the oxen draweth the Wainman in his Cart , yet must it be directed and defended by us. In it we have all our shares and inheritances ; of it , we receive our lives and breath , and therefore for it we ought to apply our care and power . If we forget jerusalem ( say the jews in Babylon ) then let my right hand forget her cunning . jerusalem was their country , Babylon their place of exile & banishment . Therefore sweet is the name of our Country , and better is the smoke thereof , than the fire of another , and the dust thereof , than the stones of a strange nation . Nehemiah also , when he heard that his Country's repair was hindered , how did he leave his place before the King , and laid aside his Courtly garments , put on sackcloth , and lived in Prayer and Fasting . Saint Austen in his old age , writing of his Country , which then began to be spoilt by the Arrian and Circumcellian soldiers , and Vandals ; saith , Serio iam , ac frigescentibus membris , feruet animus desiderio patriae , now in my old age and coldness of all my limbs ; yet my heart burneth for the desire of my Country . But we are all pressed , and ready to fight for our Country , and to grace it with the effusion of our blood ; true it is , & no true English hart can do otherwise . But what availeth it to fight for our Country against strangers , while we betray it to the Lord ? What if we be ready to go against Turk and Pope , with the Arms of flesh and blood ? while we have disarmed ourselves of Prayer , Faith , Hope , Honesty , Temperance , Humility , and will not so much as put on the head-piece of Salvation ? But in steed thereof , Blasphemy and Swearing , Drunkenness and Voluptuousness , Stealing and Deceiving , till the Land mourn , and be no more able to bear us. My heart bleedeth to forethink and see the ruin and desolation of so many fair Houses , goodly Towns , green Meadows , and Corne-fields , for the sin and wickedness of them that possess them . God hath mother ways to destroy us then by one , then by the stranger's sword , against which only we are provided ( by the care and providence of our Governors . ) He can bring a fire from Heaven , as he did on Sodom , or he can sweep away head and tail by the Pestilence , like unto the Army of Senacharih , whereof ( it consisting of almost two hundred thousand men ) they died all in one night , except ten men . And Constantinople , Anno 760. was so dispeopled by a Pestilence , that the Emperor Copronymus , was fain to fetch men from other Countries to inhabit the houses , lest they should fall down . Before the Danes coming into England , there were above forty thousand Churches , and in seven battles there were perrished ( wellnigh ) five hundred thousand persons , & above twenty thousand Parishes & Churches decayed . I omit to speak of Famines and other means of our destruction , and I beseech you all , to love their Country , and let not their posterity be dispossessed by their crying sins , for the Prophet saith , A fruitfnl Land is made barren for the sins of them that dwell therein . 

19 Your Wives and Husbands are also your flock , these must be taken heed unto , for the married are like the Palms , they are Males and Females , so they must be planted one beside another ; yea , the Boughs of the male must be sometimes wreathed and put upon the Female , or else it will not prospero , but mourn and pine away . So it is betwixt Man and wife , there must be more than sight of each other , for they are bone of each others bones , & Flesh of each others flesh . Flesh cut asunder , loses the vital powers and so dyeth , but united , grows together again , and so lives . no Man , but he which is wise knoweth , what heed to take or respect to bear to his Wife ; For Christ doth thereby decipher his love to his Church . So ought a Man to love his Wife as Christ loved his Church , who gave himself for it . Every one that is married hath given away himself . Sweet are the bands of Wedlock , yet they are bands and must restrain us : Bonum est coniugium tamen à iugo tractum : Marriage is good , yet is named from the yoke , according to that , Be not unequally yoked with Infidels . They which are yoked have no power but to draw , those which are married , have no liberty but to love and look to one another . When Darius had lost his Kingdoms , and Credit , and Honour , and Liberty , he wept not for all that : but when he heard tell that his Wife was dead , than he wept bitterly . So near and dear are the minds of them that be virtuously married , that they cannot part without a thousand sorrows . They are to each other a true Glass , as is the face , so is it in the Glass ; as is the Man's and Husbands , so should be the honest Wives ; as is the loving Wives , so should be the tender Husbands . To conclude , As the vine on the house top , so is the Wife ; The vine as it is of excellent use , so it is wonderful weak , and except the Gardener support it , it will lie on the Earth and bear nothing . The wife must also be tendered & supported , or else she cannot yield the Wine of comfort to make thee have a glad heart . In every Man's charge there are faults to be espied , no Man casteth away his flock for one sickness ? no , if he have a thousand Sheep , and nine hundred fall foul , yet letteth the sick go , & keepeth the residue . Wives have their faults and frailty , and men are not clear : Vnicuique dedit vitium natura creato . We are all unblameable one way or other , therefore spare one another , forbear one another , and let nothing break of love : but that which dissolveth Matrimony , that is whoredom , and the God of all love shall marry you both to jesus Christ . 

20 I proceed : Our Parents are the flock and charge of us that are Children , and Children are the charge of Parents . For we are born weaker & more feeble than all Creatures , and had we not some body to receive us when we come into the world , woe were it with us , we might make a short and woeful stay or Tragedy , To be born , to weep , to die . Neither our Parents or their Antecessours , have any thing which they transfuse not into their Children , their honour , fame , goods , or stains , for their children they have them , and in despite of reluctance , they will descend upon them . But let them nourish and cherish their Children , and not their sins , and let them wisely take away the rotten from the sound ; I mean their children's vices from their persons , or else vice will overcome Parents and Children . Some make their Children Ludentes Simias , other Fodientes sues , That is , Either they bring them up to nothing but to play , as many of the rich , or else they train them to nothing but to delve and dig the earth , as many of the poor . Alas poor Children , better unborn , because the richer have their pleasures deforming them , and the poorer their labours depressing them , one of them having no sense of Heaven , the other , no understanding but of Earth , and both of them without God to be their Father , and the Church to be their Mother . 

21 Our Parents are our charge that are their Children , we ought therefore to take heed unto them : & for their sakes to fly no labour . At Rebeccaes command , jacob ( that was never from his mother's wing ) fled to Padan-aran , and what miseries did he there endure for twenty whole years , the Lord God hath related . If we have any glory and praise , let us give it to our Parents . When Antigonus had won a victory , yet he would attribute it to his Father . Amphionius and Anapius , two brethren , when they had saved themselves from the City Catanea , which was all on fire , and remembered that their old Father was yet within , they took hands , and forced through the flames , and with difficulty ( yet with safety ) brought away their poor old Father . O , Happy Father of such Sons ! O , Happy Sons , to be such Men ! though you be dead , yet will all good Childerens remember you while the world lasteth . Be good to your Parents , you young Men & Maidens , for as you serve them , shall you be served again ; if courteously , your Children will do the like ; if disobediently , yours will also pay the score double and treble upon you . 

22 The Servants are also the charge and flock of the Master , and the Master of the Servants , each must be careful , the Servant of diligence , toward his Master , and the Master , To take heed to the herds of his Servants . Servants are wild , because they have been wantonly bred , therefore they love no discipline . But let your love to do them good appear unto them , and then they will be more honest , and more tractable . Great things have been done by Servants . By a Servant , Abraham provided a Wife for his Son Isaac . By a Servant , and that a little Maide-seruant , Naaman was brought from his Country to judea , to the Prophet , and there cured of his Leprosy , both of body and mind . By a Servant was Darius brought to be a King , and the kindness of a Master to his Servant , did save his life , when all the Tyrian Servants did cut their master's throats . Therefore do good to your servants , give them instruction , and all good service will follow . Deal not with them as Vintners do with their Vessels , which draw them till they be empty , and then turn them out of doors . So many work out their Servants strength , & then turn them out to beg . Servants , are so set on drunkenness and liberty , that no wages can win them from that notorious Vice , what will be the end hereof . If Lords , and Gentlemen , and Masters , alter not the Copy of this licentious grant , I see not how our poor envied Nation can stand long , without more Enemies than ever the old Saxons had , or the late Netherlanders . In sum of all , break of Prodigality , and neither you that be Masters , put more on your shoes and Garters , than many good Men on their whole bodies , and let not your delicate mouths , buy your appetites pleasure to dear : neither suffer the poor to drink more in one hour , than they get in a day . You all sit with Rulers , follow the wise man's counsel , Put thy knife to thy throat , if thou be a Man given to thy appetite . 

Lastly , although Solomon names none in this Text , But the family & the Maidens : yet he excludeth not the stranger , for in the family on the Sabbaoth day he is commanded to rest , and he which receives him , is not to let him depart on that day , as it is Exo. 20 , 5.  And although it be not in the estate of every man to entertain , yet is it a duty to guide and direct such as are distressed to Houses of hospitality . And indeed in ancient time , men were only received to house , & brought with them their own victuals , as you may see in the story of Jacob's Children in Egypt , and the Levite and his wife in the City of jemini . Surely to be Hospitable is a part of Charity , & one of the greatest ; wherefore the Scripture saith ; Let brotherly love continue , and be not forgetful to lodge strangers , for thereby some have entertained Angels in the likeness of men , alluding to Abraham & Lot , to whom the Angels came before the destruction of Sodom . What is more horrible & uncomfortable to men , then to be without harbour and House ; and therefore did Agar take it so grievously as she mourned in desperation , until the Angel showed her a Fountain where again she filled her bottle . They which inhabit the deserts follow the footsteps of wild Asses unto the Water-springes , which without them they should never find ; and therefore love and make much of them . How much more should we love to bring one another to the places of our refreshing , and not shut up our doors against the Stranger , as Paradise was against Adam : so as it should be as equal or ready for Strangers to die there , as to dine there . The Priests and Scribes which put our Saviour to death , could Buy with the Money of judas a place or field to bury Strangers , but let us not provide their Graves , rather their Tables , whether they be sick or sound . 

When David had lost his Wives , and all his goods , by making much of a Stranger , he came to find and recover all again . Even so , we cannot lose by courtesy and humanity to strangers , For we are all Strangers in this world . And if the first Christians had not received the Preachers of their faith ( that were strangers unto them ) into their houses , their peace which was the peace of Christ had not light or rested upon them . Rahab for lodging strangers had her life saved , and as many as she would receive into her Family . We read of the ancient inhabitants of Bretinum in Romandiola , that they did contend for the entertainment of strangers , and for that cause they erected a Pillar in their Market place , into which every one of the Citizens drove and fastened a distinct ring , and that every stranger that came to that Town fastened his Horse to one of those rings , into whose House he was to be received ; which thing was so observed , that incontinently with all alacrity he was entertained and lodged , and the Citizens took it for a great favour . The barbarous Vandals had so much humanity in them towards strangers , that they confiscated all his goods , and gave liberty to set his House on fire , that had expelled or incivilly handled a stranger . I could be infinite , but I must conclude . job saith ; The Stranger did not lodge in the street , I opened my doors , unto him that went by the way . Abimelech hath his commendation for lodging Abraham a stranger . So hath jethro for Moses . Obadia that hid so many Prophets , and nourished them , even four hundred . Saint Hierom saith of him , that for his mercy he received the gist of Prophecy , and was buried in Sebaste , that is Samaria , in the Grave wherein Elisha was after buried , and S. john Baptist . The widow of Sarepta , a heathen woman , the Sunamite , Martha , and Lazarus , Zacheus , Simon the tanner . Gatus , Onesiphorus , and other had never been spoken of but for their Hospitality , and receiving of strangers . Theresore let not the good Householder forsake strangers , for the Lord loveth them , and goeth with them : and if they be received in the name of Christ , whether they be good or ill , he will pay their reckoning . Learn therefore ( saith Saint Austen ) learn ( o Christian ) without difference and respect of persons , to offer entertainment , lest he whom thou shuttest out of doors be thy Lord and Saviour . For he saith ; I have been a stranger and ye have not lodged me . I tell you , that he that laboureth for Christ , and he that refresheth him that laboureth , shall be both rewarded before jesus Christ . To whom be all present and eternal glory . 

FINIS . 

Page 41. line 1. read he walloweth , P. 46. read Apharantes , P. 65 read Mycerninus , P. 86. li. 5. read Pulcheria , P. 87. li. 20. read infortunio , P. 88 l. 1. deal not . P. 90. li. 12.  Villegisus , so in the margin , 118. li. 15. read King , 132. li. 12. read dry . 145. line 2. read avidissima . 





Eccle. 2 , 25  Conscientiam malan laudantis preconium non sandt , nec bonam vulne rat convitium Aug. contra petil . Your Lordship shall find them anciently divided into Regra , satrapicia civilis & privata , of which the second , which is the Lordly House , fitteth your Honour . jul. Capitolinus . Auenti . lib. 1. annal . Bocor . Plutarch . Luke 1 , 63  Victor . de persecv . vand . lib , 2.  Swearers & drunkards are no more tolerable in a family them Arrians in a Church . 

Being a stran her in Midhurst , in August this year , 1609 I heard by one whom I believe , that at Cowdrey were fed daily & relieved , well near 200. of all sorts . Lady Montacute daughter of the late fia . of Dorset , & . Aunt to the now Earl . Procop. de bell . Goth. lib 2.  Vxorem euntem adsacra christianorum , stercoribus pro●ectis defoedari curavit , & verberibus cam immanitur , tractau●●t . Herod . lib. 6 They were Thracians , called Dolonci . They shall be Barons of Dacres in the right of their Mother . Psalm 23.  Gilbertus de Aquila , was the Lord of Laughton . Sir Nicholas Pelham . Sir William Pelham . Sir john Pelham . M. William Morley of Gliude . M. Henry Carey , son and heir to the Lord Hunsdon . Coelius . Erasmus . M. T. P.  Mistress Blount was daughter to the Lord La-ware . M. W. B.  Luke 10 , 5.  Aug. ser . de ehrlet . cavend  Hom. 1.  Cap. 5 , v. ult ▪  

 joh. 11. 25   Act. 17. 28  Psal . 49 , 20.  Acts 8 , 20.  judg. 17 , 30   Psal . 14. 3.  2.  Sam. 23.  Ecc. 7. 30  1 Reg. 10 , 27.  Heb. 20. 22 ▪  Mat. 10 , 16  Dan. 12. 3.  Psa . 107. 43  De gentib . scriptor . Prou. 9 , 4.  Eccl. 12 , 13  Gen. 25 , 32 , 33.  Doctor Babington L. Bishop of Worcester upon Exodus . Beda . Luk. 12 , 20  Mat. 15 , 23  Herod . lib. 4 Stobaeus ser . 42. vocat eas Apharants . Sab. lib. 4. cap. 9  Gel. lib. 6. cap. 11.  Herod . lib. 4  Herod . lib. 1 Erasmus . Eustathius super odyss . Plutarch . Suidas . Gilbert . li. 1 Narrac . Idem lib. eod . Mat. 6 , 33.  〈…〉  esay . 30. 1  Heb. 9 , 28  Prou. 1 , 22.  Prou. 9 , 12.  Psal . 2 , 10.  Prou. 8 , 10.  

Mat. 18 , 10  Deut 6 , 7.  Deut 17 , 4.  〈◊〉 ▪ 58 ▪  2.  Pet. 3 , 15.  Luke 2. 8.   Centur x. In his Chapel , where none came but the Emperor , & himself , he caused to be written , Villegese prioris fortunae esto memor , & qui nunc ses considera . 

Centur. 11.  1 cor . 14 31  Eccl. 9 , 11.  esay 8 , 21.  judg. 15.  Dan. 10 , 8 Revel . 1 , 17  Luke 14.  Exod. 23 , 4  1.  Tim. 5 , 8  Gen. 41.  1.  Tim. 3. 4.  Pro. 31 , 13  Psal 127. 2.  Luke 12.  Cant. 2 , 5.  Gen. 8 , 22  Alex. ab Alex.  Psal . 50 , 13  Psa . 145 , 15  Act. 20 35.  2 Tim. 6 , 17  james 5 , 3.  Luke 12 , 15  Micah 6 , 8.  Luke 12 , 20  Ideo rogans dives non exauditur in tormentis quia rogantem pauparem non exaudivit in terris . Aug.  De consul . lib. 2.  Pet. Ravisi . Lonicerus . Valer. lib. 3  Tuscul . In. Prou.  De conned . huma . Plutarch . Plutarch . Nicetas . Prou. 22 , 2  Psal . 137.  Neh. 1 , 4.  Aug. ad Nectar . Isaiah 37.  jero. lib , 4. come . Ranulphus Polychr . Ephe. 5 , 25  Ambr.  Psal . 128 , 3  Mowing Apes . Digging Pigs . Gen. 27 , 43  Gen. 24.  2.  Reg. 5 , 3  justine . Pro , 23 , 2.  Gen. 42. 43  jud. 19 , 16 , and 20.  Heb. 13 , 12  Gen. 18 , 19  Gen. 21 , 19  Luke 10.  Lewd . descr . Italiae . Cran. lib. 4.  job. 31 , 32.  Genesis 2 , 6  Exod. 2.  In Abdiam  