

King's have their Periods by Dame Nature's date . 
The poor man dies , so doth the Potentate ; 
And though to the World's eye Kings seem completer , 
Their standing high makes but their fall the greater 
Pavosian sculp . Great Britain's SALOMON . A Sermon Preached at THE MAGNIFICENT Funeral , of the most high and mighty King , JAMES , the late King of Great Britain , France , and Ireland , defender of the Faith , etc.  

At the Collegiate Church of Saint PETER at Westminster , the seventh of May 1625.  

By the Right Honourable , and Right Reverend Father in God , JOHN , Lord Bishop of Lincoln , Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England , etc.  

LONDON , Printed by John Bill , Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty . 1625.  

1 Kings 11.  41.  
42.  
43.  
and part of the Verse . 

And the rest of the words of Solomon , and all that he did , and his wisdom , are they not written in the Book of the Acts of Solomon ? 

And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel , was forty years . 

And Solomon slept with his Fathers , and was buried in the City of David his Father . 

Great Britain's SALOMON . 

Most high , and mighty , 

Most honourable , worshipful , and well beloved in our Lord , and Saviour JESUS Christ ; It is not I , but this woeful Accident , that chooseth this Text. You know best , that no Book will serve this turn , but the Book of the Kings ; no King , but one of the best Kings ; none of the best Kings , but one that reigned over all Israel , which must be either Saul ( as yet good ) or David , or Solomon ; no King of all Israel , but one of the wisest Kings , which cannot be Saul , but either David , or Solomon ; none of the wisest Kings neither , unless he be a King of Peace , which cannot be David , a Man of War , but only Solomon ; no King of Peace neither ( the more is our grief ) alive , and in his Throne , and therefore it must of necessity be the Funerals , and Obitts of King Solomon , which we have in these words : And the rest of the words of Solomon , etc.  

I Must no otherwise paint Solomon this day , then as Apelles was wont to do King Antigonus , which was imagine lusca , halfe-faced , and of one side only , to conceal the want of an eye , which he had on the other . For if I should set him out in the full proportion , and leave not so much as a wart , or a mole undescribed , he would prove , but a foil , and a shadow , and not ( as I desire he should ) a lively image , and representation to deck , and adorn these present Funerals . His Vices can be no blemish to that King , that resembled him only in his choicest Virtues . The Rule in Scripture doth differ much from that in the Painter's shop . For here Copies do many times exceed the Originals . Solomon was a Type of Christ himself , and by consequence a Pattern for any Christian . I do therefore in these three Verses observe three parts , the Happy Life , the Happy Reign , and the Happy End of this great King Solomon . For the first part , his Life was happy in four respects . First , for his sayings , The rest of the Words . Secondly , for his doings ; And all that he did . Thirdly , for his Wisdom ; And his Wisdom . And fourthly , for the Eternity , and preservation of all these , In a Book of Annals of the Acts of Solomon ; And the rest of the words of Solomon , etc.  For the second part , his Reign was Happy for three Circumstances . First for a great Capital City , wherein he resided , which was Jerusalem ; He reigned in Jerusalem . Secondly , for a great Circuit of Ground in which he commanded , which was , all Israel ; over all Israel . Thirdly , and lastly , for a great Space of time , wherein he flourished , which was forty years ; And the time which Solomon reigned in jerusalem over all Israel , was forty years . For the third part , his End was Happy in a threefold Circumstance . First , in regard of his death , which was not a sudden , and violent dying , but an affected , and premeditated kind of Sleeping ; And Solomon slept . Secondly , in regard of his Soul at the time of his death , the which ( how ever wanton , and unruly wits have made their disputes ) went to no other place , than the receptacle of his Fathers ; And Solomon slept with his Fathers . Thirdly , and lastly , in regard of his Body after his death , which was no way despised , or neglected , but solemnly interred in the Sepulchers of the Kings , in the Tower of Zion , and the City of David his Father ; And Solomon slept with his Fathers , and was buried in the City of David his Father . 

Nor doth this Text hang together like a rope of sands , but the parts thereof are chained , and linked very fast , in a mutual cohaerence one with another . For first , Nullus magnam potentiam sine Eloquentia est consecutus , saith Tacitus , no glorious King , but was a Kind of Speaker , and therefore here are Words ; Reliquum verborum , as Saint Hierome reads it , the rest of the Words . Secondly , because they are not Words , but Actions , that aeternize a King , here are Actions likewise ; Quae fecit , All that he did . Thirdly , because Actions from without are of small continuance , without a Well from within for a new supply , here is a Pond to feed them from time to time ; Sapientia eius , His understanding , and wisdom ; And his wisdom . Fourthly , because this Wisdom would be soon forgotten ( as M. Aurelius was wont to complain ) without a History , here is a History provided of the Acts of Solomon ; The Book of the Acts of Solomon . Fiftly , because a History written in an obscure place , of a little Country , and but a short time , is of no esteem , and reputation , here are all things fitted for Fame , and eternity , A great City , to wit , Jerusalem ; He reigned in Jerusalem . A great Empire , the twelve Tribes of Israel ; over all Israel . A great , and a long reign , for the space of forty years ; The time that he reigned over all Israel was forty years . Sixthly , because such a long , and glorious life would be crowned ( as Augustus was wont to say ) with a fair , and an easy death , here is a dying compared to a sleeping ; Dormivitque Solomon , And Solomon slept . Seventhly , because the Soul , which cannot sleep , must be provided for , as well , as the Body , it is disposed of to his hearts desire , In the Society of David , and the rest of his Fathers ; Cum Patribus suis , With his Fathers . Lastly , though this be enough for a Private Man , yet somewhat more would be wished in a King. That Body , which so repraesented God himself , when it was alive , must not be neglected now it is dead . And therefore he is buried in the Sepulchre of the Kings , and the City of David ; in Civitate David Patris sui , In the City of David his Father . And the rest of the words of Solomon , etc.  

But you will say , All these parts refer to King Solomon , and that King JAMES is forgotten in the division . Most High , and Mighty , Right Honourable , and Right Dear Beloved ; Our late Sovereign shall be remembered in due time , and much to the honour of King Solomon . King Solomon in his Funerals had a glorious Tomb in deed , as josephus describes it , but he had no Statue at all carried before him . That was peradventure scarce to lerable amongst the jews . A Tomb he provided for himself , and so prophetically , as that ( if we may believe Pineda , and others ) there were just as many Cells therein , as there were to be Kings of juda , that is twenty one . A Statue God Almighty hath this day provided for him . Many of these twenty one Cells being never filled , because the unworthy Kings were buried elsewhere , Solomon shall lend King james a Tomb , and King james shall lend unto him a Statue . The Tomb you may observe in the Exposition , and the Statue in the Application of this piece of Scripture . King JAMES shall first die in Salomon's Text , and Solomon shall then arise in King JAMES his VERTVES ▪ For as Herodotus reports of the Egyptians , that by wrapping their dead in glass , they present them alive to all posterity : so by that time I have plated over the parts of this Text with the particulars of the Application , you that hear me this day , shall have that happiness of the Queen of the South , which is not only to have read in a Book , but withal to have seen with your eyes , and to have heard with your ears all the rarities , and perfections of the wise King Solomon . You shall then perfectly remember these sayings , these doings , this Wisdom , this History , this great City , this united Empire , this long Life , this happy Death , this Rest with his Fathers , and these solemn Funerals , which are the Minutes of this Text. And the rest of the words of Solomon , etc.  

I Begin with that part , whereof I find in myself the greatest want , to wit , Eloquence , pointed at in the Entrance of my Text. Reliquum verborum , the rest of his words . For that Man had need of Salomon's Words , that will speak of this first , or second Solomon . Eloquence in some reasonable proportion is so necessary in a King , that a Philosopher calls it 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , one of the chiefest of the Royal Virtues . Surely the want of this made Moses in a manner refuse all government , though offered unto him by God himself . And Homer , that is , Solon ( for he is supposed the Author of the Poem ) is by Plutarch made to say , that a ready Sword will not do the work , if it be not attended with this readiness of Speech . Surely Pyrrhus , though a mighty vaunter of all his Actions , would often confess more Cities conquered by Cyneas his tongue , then there were by his own Spear . And although an Aaron may sometimes supply a Moses , and Eloquence be borrowed from the tongue of a Minister , yet surely no great Monarchy was ever raised , but where the King himself was a competent Speaker . In the Roman Empire it is observed by Tacitus , that the Princes of the first line , julius , Augustus , Tiberius , Claudius , yea and Caius himself ( as blunt as he was ) never borrowed a tongue to speak to the people . Nero is noted to be the first Caesar , Qui alienae facundiae eguit , that ever usurped another man's Language And therefore no marvel , if in Solomon a great Monarch , and the second of his line , the History gave a touch of his Oratory , and Eloquence , Et reliquum verborum Salomonis , And the rest of the words of Solomon . Now when I look upon this world of Matter I am to run thorough in a minute of time , the best Eloquence , that I can use in setting forth the Eloquence of Solomon , is to say nothing , and to turn you over to his admirable writings ; the Proverbs , the Book of Wisdom , and Ecclesiasticus , which were dictated ; together with Ecclesiastes , the Canticles , and many of the Psalms , which were penned to a Syllable by King Solomon . And so I proceed from his Words unto his Actions , the second part of his Life ; Omnia quae fecit , All that he did . And the rest of the words of Solomon , and all that he did . 

HE DID . 

King's are anointed ( as Cassa●eus observes ) upon the Arms , as well as upon the Head ; and the Arms are the Instruments of Action , and Doing . That phrase of Scripture , so applied to Kings , that they must go in and out before the people , requires somewhat more than Elocution . In the Genealogy of our Saviour , expressed by S. Matthew , though many more be written down , yet none is called a King but David ; Davidem Regem , David the King. Matth. 1. 6. verse ; because ( as Interpreters expound the place ) David was , as a King should be , a Man of War , and a Man of Action . Nero could tune his Instruments well , and yet , as Apollonius said to VESPASIAN , he was a mean Prince , because he knew not how to tune a People . And on the other side , Themistocles could never play on the Harp , but yet is famous in all Histories , because he could make a City greater . Plutarque in his 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , speaks of two Men , that were hired at Athens for some public work , whereof the one was full of Tongue , but slow at Hand , but the other blunt in Speech , yet an excellent Workman ; Being called upon by the Magistrates to express themselves , and to declare at large how they would proceed ; when the first had made a long harangue , & described it from point to point , the other seconded him with this short speech , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , ye Men of Athens , what this man hath said in Words , that will I make good in true performance . And as he was adjudged the better Artisan ; so is the Man of Action the better King : unless they come jointly , as they do in this Text , VERBA ET FACTA , Words and deeds , And the rest of the Words of Solomon , and all that he Did. Now if you desire to know all that he did , I must turn you over to this Book of the Kings , which notwithstanding is but a Florus to that Livy , or rather a PHOTION to that DEMOSTHENES , that first described them . Some of them I shall touch upon , when I come to the second Solomon , and do now hasten to the third part of his Life , which is his Wisdom ; And the rest of the words of Solomon , and all that he did , and his Wisdom . 

HIS WISDOM . For indeed brave Actions are but the Fruit , Wisdom is the Tree that bears them . Actions are but Rivers , Wisdom is the Head that feeds them . And where this is wanting , they are like Land-floods , violent for the time , but gone in an instant . Here therefore you have the fruit together with the Tree , that brought them ; here you see the Rivers , together with the Spring that sent them ; here you read of Salomon's Deeds joined with that Wisdom that first contrived them . And the rest of the words of Solomon , and all that He did , and his Wisdom . HIS WISDOM . How necessary in a King , Salomon's choice hath taught all Kings . For being presented by God himself with a Pandora of royal graces , although brave Actions called in that place the life of his Enemies was in the Box , yet took he out nothing but Wisdom to govern his people , 1 Kings 3. 9 verse . He took out nothing , but Wisdom said I ? Nay , rather in taking out Wisdom ( as God tells him in the next verse ) he left nothing behind . Omnia assunt bona , quem penes est virtus . How can he want these golden Apples of Princely Actions , that hath this garden of the Hesperides , wherein they grow ? For although Kings ( as I said before ) be anointed on the Arms , the Instruments of Actions , yet are they crowned only on the Head , the s●at of Wisdom . For as in the natural ; so in the civil Body , the spy and discovery of all the members is placed aloft in the watchtower of the Head. Here are the Eyes , that see for all . Here are the Ears , that listen for all . Here are the Nostrils , that smell out for all . Here are the Brains , that sweat for all . And here is the Wisdom , that provides for all . And therefore what can a tongue , or an Arm do a Man good , if they be not guided by somewhat in the Head ? Sayings , and doings are of little worth , if Wisdom follow not , as it doth in this place ; And the rest of the words of Solomon , and all that he did , and his Wisdom . WISDOM . whither this Wisdom of Salomon's was universal , and embraced all Sciences , as Pineda ; or a Prudence reaching to the Practic only ( because of those words , To govern my people ) as Pererius thought ; the Latin translation Sapientia being for the first , the Greek 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 for the second , the Hebrew 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 for both the opinions ; Also whither Solomon did surmount as Tostatus , or fall short of Adam in the pitch of his Wisdom , as Gregory de Valentia thinks , are such doughty Frays , as I have no leisure to part at this time , being now in the fourth place to speak of that Book , which ( if extant ) would peradventure end part of the quarrel ; the Book of the Acts of Solomon . And the rest of the Words of Solomon , and all that he did , and his Wisdom , are they not written in the Book of the Acts of Solomon ? 

The Book of the Acts of Solomon . Alexander upon the Conquest of Persia in a deep contemplation of his late Victories , being told of one , that brought him some news , replied hastily thereupon , What news can any Man bring unto Me , unless it be that Homer is alive again ? As who should say ; All these Actions of mine will vanish into air , if there be not a Scholar to write , and record them . And surely little had now remained of the sayings , the doings , and the Wisdom of Solomon , if they had not been of Record in this Book . The Book of the Acts of Solomon . For although God suffered this Book to be burned by Nebuzaradan , and ordered not Esdras to renew the same , because it was but a journal of Salomon's Actions , of a Civil rather , than a Religious use , and fitter for a Closet , then for a Temple , yet was so much thereof placed in the Canon , as might be useful for God's Church , being culled out of this journal either by Hieremie , or esay , or Esdras , or Ezechias , or ( as I think ) the Servants of that King , who without quaestion collected his PROVERBS , Proverbs 25. 1. verse . And therefore as this Text is but an Epitome of the 11. first Chapters of the first Book of the Kings : so are these Chapters but an Epitome of this 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , or journal of SALOMON . The Book of the Acts of Solomon . And surely Dignum laude virum Musa vetat mori , as there was never any King , that deserved ; so was there never a King in Scripture , that hath obtained more Writers of his Acts , than this King Solomon . For whereas Saul had never a one , David in his long reign had no more than two , besides what Solomon in his Ecclesiastes hath written of himself ( as many of the Caesars , julius , Augustus , Tiberius , and Adrian are noted to have done ) three great Prophets , famous in their times , Nathan , Ahias , and Addo had their several pens in these Acts of Solomon ; the Book of the Acts of Solomon . And indeed Books , especially such as these , written by Prophets , and Honest men , are most necessary both for the applauding of the good , and the terrifying of ill-deserving Princes . Non potest humile , aut abiectum quid cogitare , qui scit de se semper loquendum , saith Mamertinus in his Panegerique . He had need be careful of all his Actions , that is to be the subject of future Histories . For although I allow not a Private man to feed upon Glory , and have preached against it ( with all my heart ) not many weeks sithence : yet was I ever of Panormitans opinion in the life of Alphonsus , that it is Cibus Regum , a very fit dish for the repast of a King , and due unto him from the after Ages . Multi famam , pauci verentur conscientiam . Some few peradventure refer it to God , but most Kings desire , as Augustus did , to be applauded by Men. then for the bad Kings a History is the true Aretine of the world , Flagellum Principum , the Lash , and scourge of all wicked Princes . They have no Schoolmaster ( on this side Hell ) unless it be this one , to keep them in awe . And in very truth , if he comes but one day after their Reign , as Tacitus did to the Caesars , he lays about him , like an Orbilio , or as that Usher in Theon , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , fetching blood at every stroke , for very small , and petty offences . And yet as humorous as they are , what History did ever commend Nero , or discommend the Emperor Traian ? I except Cardan the Fantastic , who writing a Book de morte Gulielmi , of the death of Will his footboy , thought good to join it with another piece , which he was pleased to style the Encomium of Nero. To conclude this point , it is called 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 in the Greek , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , which signifies to fix , and settle . All these sayings , and doings , and wisdom of Kings , would scatter away , like quick Mercury , if they were not fixed in such a Book as this ; The Book of the Acts of Solomon . And so much of the first part of my Text , which I called Salomon's Life , comprehending the words , the deeds , the wisdom , and the journals of Solomon . And the rest of the words of Solomon , and all that he did , etc.  

Now to come to the second part of this Text , which is Salomon's reign , and to begin with the first Circumstance thereof , his Capital City , it is true what Euripides said of old , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , it is requisite for a Man , that would be glorious to have his abode in a famous City . This Book of the Acts of Solomon had scarce been worth the taking up , if his Words , his Actions , and his Wisdom had not been presented on this great Theatre , the City of Jerusalem ; And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem . A City is an Abstract of a whole State. For as Cain being guilty of the Murder of his Brother , built the first City we read of in the world , Gen. 4. vers . 17. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , as josephus speaks , to make himself strong with his people about him : So most of the Monarches to this very day , guilty of oppressing , or being oppressed by their neighbour Princes , Orbem in urbem contrahunt , do contract their people to this short Epitome , which we call a City , as the twelve Tribes are said to be fetched to Jerusalem , Psa . 122.  And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem . Now Jerusalem was not only a City by itself ( as it is in that Psalm ) but a Type , and Figure of all other Cities . ' For as Jerusalem was an union of two Cities , jebus , and Salem , and an union of two Tribes , juda , and Benjamin , and an union of all Israel , as it followeth in my Text : So are other capital Cities in their proportion . So that as a City seated upon a Hill cannot be hidden ; no more can a King seated in such a City . All his Words , his Actions , and his Wisdom are still upon record ▪ God Almighty therefore being thus resolved to make Solomon glorious , as a type of our Saviour far more glorious , placed all his sayings , his doings , and his Wisdom , long pulcherrima urbium Or●entis , as Pliny calls it , On the goodliest Theatre of all the East , the Eye of the world , and the Queen of the Nations , the City of Jerusalem . And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem . And so much for the first Circumstance of Salomon's Reign , which is his capital City Jerusalem . He reigned in JERUSALEM . 

The second Circumstance of his Reign is his Empire , or Dominion , which is very large , and with a Reference , and a Difference withal from the beginning of his Fathers , and from the middle of his son's Reign , said here to be over all Israel . He reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel . Over All. For as Tully saith , that the Romans held no true Cities , but these three , Carthage , Corinth , and Capua , which they called 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the three Cities that troubled their Common wealth , because these three only had Territories , and Dominions belonging unto them : so Jerusalem , confined to her Walls , might peradventure put forth a Mayor , but was no seat for a glorious King , without the annexation of this great Empire of all Israel . He reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel . In multitudine populi dignitas Regis , In the multitude of the people is the King's glory , Proverbs 14. 28. verse . And behold a people not to be numbered for Multitude , 1 Kings 3. 8. verse . As the sand of the sea , 1 Kings 4. 20.  As the dust of the earth , 2 Chron. 1. 9  Even the Kingdoms from the river unto the lands of the Philistines , and unto the border of Egypt , 1 Kings 4. 21.  For these were the bounds of all Israel . He reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel . I will not sin with David in numbering this people , which Vilalpanda in his second Tome upon Ezechiel ▪ labour's to do , and makes up a Totall of 6624. million . Neither will I compare Solomon either with Arphaxad , a King of many Nations , judith . 1. 1. vers . or with Assuerus a King of twenty seven Provinces , Esther 1. 1 verse . or with Nabuchadnasor a King of all the earth , judith . 2. 3. verse , or with Alexander , that would have been King of more ; I must leave Tostatus , and Pineda , two Spaniards , in a hot skirmish about this question : It sufficeth me , that God gave Solomon as many people , as he took to himself in those days , to wit all Israel . He reigned in jerusalem over all Israel ; And so much of the second Circumstance of his Reign , the largeness of his Empire and Dominion . 

I Come now to the third Circumstance , the Continuance of the same , which was a fair , and a large scope of time , aequalled only by one , or two , but exceeded by none of the Kings of juda , to wit , forty years . His reign in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years . Forty years . For , Solomon was not brought upon the Stage , as Cato stole into the Theatre , ut exiret , to take a turn , and go out again , Ostentatus , raptusque simul Solstitialis velut herba , solet , As the Poet speaks of Mineruius : But that his sayings , his doings , and his great Wisdom , irent in saecula , might make an impression upon the Ages to come ; God gave him a long , and a stirring part in this Scene of Glory , which was a reign of forty years . He reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel for forty years . Forty years . For although we commend not a Musician for playing long , but for playing well upon the Lute ; yet occultae musicae nullum encomium , without competent trial he is not at all commended . This life , saith Nazianzen , is a Fair , or a Mart , wherein good men may be furnished with virtues . Although he that buyeth most in this Fair , is a better Chapman , than he that stayeth most , yet common reason must allow a time for a man to make his market . Shall Hypocrates with his Arsenio longa , vita brevis , complain for a time to study Herbs ? and Theophrastus' fall out with Nature for a further respite to study Trees ? and Aristotle vex himself for a longer life to study Motions ? And may not Kings expect more favour in this kind , to study out those Egyptian Hieroglyphiques of the Hearts of Men ? and to perfect that Art of Vesticius Spurinna , Solan senectute prudentiam , a wisdom taught only by multitude of years ? Surely God is very careful herein . That life , saith Saint Gregory , which is commended in Scripture , doth commonly end with a plenitude of Days . When God lends these extraordinary talents to any man in place , Post multum temporis , it is a long time after that he reckoneth with them , Matth. 25. 19 verse . And therefore Solomon trusted with all this stock of sayings , and doings , and Wisdom , and a City , and an Empire over all Israel , had a reign of forty years to employ the same . And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years . And so much of the Second general part of my Text , the most happy reign of King Solomon . 

I Was now concluding with that 2 Chron. 1. 12. that there was no King before or after to be compared for happiness with our King Solomon . His sayings , his doings , his Wisdom , his Fame in Histories , his City , his Empire , and his long Reign , far surmounting all Kings in Scripture ; when lo a Philosopher ( who must also be heard when he speaks the truth ) pulls me by the sleeve with an Ante obitum Nemo supremáque funera , that before I presume to commend a King , I consider well his death , and his Funeral . Verily I have done so both now , and heretofore , and that with more than ordinary diligence . I have read all that Peraldus , Cognatus , Vilalpanda , Pineda , Delrio , Suarez , and some others have said of this Theme . I know that Saint Basil saith in one place , he died not so well , and Prospero plainly , that he died ill . no doubt but he sinned against his God , for he was not Christ , but his Type only . Yet I know on the other side , the whole Army of the Fathers , Schoolmen , and Commenters upon the Scripture , do bring him with Faith , and Repentance to his Grave , moved principally with the end of my Text , that his Soul departed ( as the Souls of the Saints are said to do ) by a sweet sleeping , that then it rested in the society of his Fathers , and that his Body was buried with the better Kings in the City of David his devout Father . And Solomon slept with his Fathers , and was buried in the City , etc.  

The first happiness of Salomon's end is this , that his Death is resembled to slumbering and sleeping . And Solomon slept . It is observed by one , Quod Hebraei , Homines in stat●●perditionis mortuos , Sanctos autem do●●ientes vocent , that the Hebrews say of Wicked Men , that they die ; but of the Saints , that they fall a sleep . I cannot tell , whether the Rule be general ; but Chrysastome saith directly , that without Christ , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , death is still death , and Hell in the bargain , and they are only said to sleep , that die in him . Surely it is the godly dying , that most resembles slumbering , and sleeping . For first as we praepare ourselves unto the one before it comes , by setting aside the traffic of the World : so are the godly disposed to the other . Look upon Solomon at his death's bed ( for then saith Hierome this Book was penned ) Two things have I prayed of thee , deny me not before I die , Take away from me Vanity , and Lies , Proverbs 30. 7.  Verse . Secondly , as we willingly yield to Nature in the one ▪ so do the Saints to the God of Nature , when he calls upon them , in the other . Listen to Solomon in his Ecclesiastes written not long before his death ; The Righteous , and his works are in the hand of God , Eccles . 9 1. vers . Lastly , as Men lay by their clothes with an expectation to use them again in the one : so do the Saints their bodies , with an expectation of judgement in the other . So ends the Sermon of this Royal Preacher . God shall bring every work unto judgement , Eccles . 12. and the last vers . And therefore this praeparing , and composing of ourselves overnight , with a full Resolution to awake in the morning , is no bitter dying , but a gentle sleeping . Dormivitque Solomon . And Solomon slept . And so much of this first happiness . 

The second Happiness is in regard of his Soul , which is said here to remain with his Fathers , Dormi●●…tque Solomon cum Patribus suis , And Solomon slept with his Fathers . His Fathers . Nonotiosè scriptum est hoc , sed perpensè , & examinatè , saith Saint Ambrose in his first Book of Cain , and Abel . This is no phrase light on by chance , but to be well weighed , and considered . It cannot be expounded of his dead Body ; for none of the kindred were entombed with Solomon , but David only . Vnde claret , non ad Sepulturam corporis , sed ad consortium vitae relatum , as he saith of Isaac ; and therefore , we must conclude , that Salomon's sleeping in this place , was not to rot with his Fathers in the grave , but to live with them in the Kingdom of Heaven . And so Solomon slept with his Fathers . Idem est apponi ad populum suum , ac apponi ad Patres , saith Burgensis . To sleep with his People , Gen. 25. 8. is the same thing as to sleep with his Fathers . And to sleep with his People is expounded by S. Augustin , to rest in the society of the Angels with Abraham , Isaac , jacob , & David , who praeceded Solomon in this Faith , and Repentance , as spiritual Fathers . And Solomon slept with his Fathers . And so much likewise of his second Happiness . 

The last Happiness at his End , or rather after his End , was this , to be solemnly interred as a great Prince in the City of David his Father . And was buried in the City of David his Father . After his End I say . For I will not strain this note , as some have done . Bachiarius , a Writer as ancient as Saint Augustin , makes it an Argument of his very Salvation , that he was buried inter Reges iustos , in the Sepulchers of the better Kings , in the City of David . It is true indeed , that those wicked Princes , Amon , joram , and joas were not : and it is as true , that Rhehoboam , Amasias , and Abiam , as wicked as they , were all buried in the same place . Leaving therefore his Soul in bliske with his Fathers , these Funerals shall serve for a double use ; first , for an honour to this Body already dead ; and secondly , for a Comfort to all Bodies as yet alive . For the first , the Bodies of Saints must be respected , as Phidias his Images were wont to be ; not for the Stuff , but for the Maker's sake . Non contemnenda sunt spiritus sancti organa , saith Saint Augustin . This Body of his , so glorified by God while he was alive , must be glorified in some proportion , although he be dead . amongst other magnificencies of his own , he built this Sepulchre of David his Father , and therefore was rightly interred in the Sepulchre of his Father . In the City of David his Father . And as Funerals do honour the Bodies that be dead ; so do they comfort the Bodies that are alive . Sepultura Spiritualiter prodest viventibus , in quantum per hanc astruitur resurrectionis sides , saith Aquinas writing upon the fourth of the Sentences . The Burial of the Dead is a lesson to the Living , to put them in mind of the Resurrection . Indeed if I were of Heraclitus his Faith , I should be just of his opinion , as Origen quotes it in his fifth Book against Celsus , that dead Bodies are to be neglected , as dissolved for ever to dust , and ashes . But we Christians must be more careful , where we lay these clothes , being to wear them again in the Resurrection . I beseech you remember in Herodian , and Xiphiline , what costly beds the Emperors lay in , when in their 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , they were to be burnt , and changed to Gods. With what cost doth the Phoenix consume herself , because she knows she shall be revived ? Had not Solomon been to rise with David ; he had never provided in this sort to be buried with David , In Civitate David Patris eius , In the City of David his Father . And so I have done with the parts of my Text , the Obits , and the Funerals performed of old ; I come now to what I promised to add to the same , which is a lively Statue of King Solomon . 

AS Spartianus therefore reports of Traian , that after his Death , he triumphed openly in the City of Rome , In Imagine , in a Lively Statue , or Representation invented by Adrian for that purpose : So shall this Solomon of Israel do at this time in the Statue , and Representation of our British Solomon . Truly me thinks ( Si nunquam fallit imago ) the resemblance is very lively . 

Sic oculos , sic illemanus , sic oraferebat . 

All the Circumstances do suit very well . And therefore , as a late Commenter upon Philostratus tells us , that in Greece the Statuaries began with the making of their mould , and then proceeded to the polishing of their parts : So will I compare these two Kings , first as it were in one general lump , or mould , that you may see by the odnesse of their proportion , how they differ from all Kings beside : and then with a particular examination of the parts of my Text , that you may observe by the several Members , how well they resemble the one the other . 

For the bulk , or the mould , I dare praesume to say , you never read in your lives , of two Kings more fully paralleled amongst themselves , and better distinguished from all other Kings besides themselves . King Solomon is said to be Vnigenitus coram Matre sua , the only son of his Mother , Proverbs 4. 3. so was King james. Solomon was of complexion white , and ruddy , Canticles 5. 10. verse . so was King james. Solomon was an infant King , Puer paruulus a little child , 1 Chron. 22. 5. verse . so was King james a King at the Age of thirteen months . Solomon began his reign in the life of his Praedecessor , 1 Kings 1. 32.  So , by the force , and compulsion of that state , did our late Sovereign King james. Solomon was twice crowned , and anointed a King , 1 Chron. 29. 22.  So was King james. Salomon's minority was rough through the quarrels of the former Sovereign ; So was that of King james. Solomon was learned above all the Princes of the East , 1 Kings 4. 30.  So was King james above all Princes in the universal world . Solomon was a Writer in Prose , and Verse , 1 Kings 4. 32.  So in a very pure and exquisite manner was our sweet Sovereign King james. Solomon was the greatest Patron we ever read of to Church , and Churchmen ; and yet no greater ( let the house of Aaron now confess ) than King james. Solomon was honoured with Ambassadors from all the Kings of the Earth , 1 Kings 4. last verse ; and so you know , was King james. Solomon was a main Improver of his home commodities , as you may see in his Trading with Hiram , 1 Kings 5. 9 verse ; and , God knows , it was the daily study of King james. Solomon was a great maintainer of shipping , and Navigation , 1 Kings 10. 14.  A most proper Attribute to King james. Solomon beautified very much his Capital City with Buildings , and Water-works , 1 Kings 9 15.  So did King james. Every man lived in peace under his vine , and his Figtree in the days of Solomon , 1 Kings 4. 25.  And so they did in the blessed days of King james. And yet towards his End , K. Solomon had secret Enemies , Razan , Hadad , and jeroboam , and prepared for a War upon his going to his Grave , as you may see in the verse before my Text. So had , and so did King james. Lastly , before any Hostile Act we read of in the History , King Solomon died in peace , when he had lived about 60.  Years , as Lyra and Tostatus are of opinion . And so you know did King james. You see therefore a Mould fitted for another Solomon in the Bulk , and General : I come now , according to the Method in my Text , to polish , and refine the Members of this Statue in their division , and particular . 

TO begin with his Reliquum verborum , his words , and Eloquence ; you know it well enough , it was rare , and excellent in the highest Degree . Solomon speaking of his own Faculty in this kind , divides it into two several Heads , a ready Invention , and an easy discharge , and expression of the same . God hath granted me to speak , as I would , and to conceive , as is meet , for the things spoken of , Wisdom 7. 15. vers . and this was eminent in our late Sovereign . His Invention was as quick as his first thoughts , and his Words as ready as his Invention . God had given him to conceive . The Greek word in that place is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , that is , to make an Enthymem , or a short syllogism ; and that was his manner . He would first wind up the whole Substance of his Discourse into one solid , and massy conception ; and then spread it , and dilate it to what compass he pleased , profluenti , & quae Principem deceret eloquentia ( as he said of Augustus ) in a flowing and a princely kind of Elocution . Those Speeches of his in the Parliament , Star-chamber , Council Table , and other public Audiencies of the State ( of which , as of Tully's Orations , Ea semper optima quae maxima , the longest still was held the best ) do prove him to be the most powerful Speaker , that ever swayed the Sceptre of this Kingdom . In his Style you may observe the Ecclesiastes , in his Figures the Canticles , in his Sentences the Proverbs , and in his whole Discourse , Reliquum verborum Salomonis , all the rest that was admirable in the Eloquence of Solomon . For , beside his Prose , Iter ad carmen noverat , he made a Verse also when he pleased , and that ( as became Buchanans' best Scholar ) Sanissimi coloris , of a most dainty , and elaborate composition . An everlasting honour to the Muses . For as Alexander , somewhat shy at the first , was content afterwards to be Burgess of Corinth , because Hercules had formerly accepted of the place : Even so the greatest Potentate of all the Earth , may now without blushing stoop to a Verse , being the usual Recreation of King David , together with this first , and second Solomon . For the King our Master never used it , but as David did , for the praise of God , and his own comfort . He was in hand ( when God called him to sing Psalms with the Angels ) with the Translation of our Church Psalms , which he intended to have finished , and dedicated withal to the only Saint of his Devotion , the Church of Great Britain , and that of Ireland . This work was stayed in the one and thirty Psalm . Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven , and whose sin is covered , The very best meditation of all ( as Saint Austin thinks ) in the Church Militant , to prepare a Soul for the Church Triumphant . Thus therefore in Prose , and Verse , in his Proverbs , and in his Canticles , he was nothing short of the Eloquence of Solomon , pointed at in this first circumstance . Reliquum verborum Salomonis , The rest of the words of Solomon . 

From his sayings I am come to his doings . Quae fecerit , All that he did 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , ( as Theocritus speaks ) a vast wood , and world of matter , fitter for the Annals , and History of the Time , then for a fragment of a Funeral Sermon . Every Action of his sacred Majesty was a Virtue , and a Miracle to exempt him from any parallel , amongst the modern Kings , and Princes . Not a particular of his life , but was a mystery of the Divine Providence , to keep , and praeserue those admirable parts , for the settling , and uniting of some great Empire . Why was the Queen his Mother barren in France then grown a greater , and yet fruitful in Scotland , a lesser Kingdom than this of ours ? Why was the Father killed in his Bed , and yet the Son at the same time spared in his Cradle ? Why was he put ( like another Hercules ) to strangle Serpents in his swaddling clouts , and to fight , before he could lift up his Arm , with the Husband of his Mother , for a just revenge of the Death of his Father ? Why were those worthy Guardians of his Sacred Person so swept away , Murray , Lenox , and Morton killed , and Mar tormented , and vexed to death , and yet this Infant , without his Protectors , from time to time miraculously protected ? How was his Youth freed from the Faction of France , and his Riper years from that of Spain ? the which two , like Sampsons' Foxes , tied by the tails , agreed in nothing but their End , which was to poison his Religion , and Succession . Why did Gowries' Man , prepared to Kill him , tremble in his praesence , and begin to adore him ? Lastly , ( for no preservation can be named after this ) when the Match , and the Powder , not far from this place , was so fitted , and praepared , why was this King so divinely praeserued ? Surely for no other End then this , that as Perez was wont to call himself Monstrum Fortunae , the Monster of Fortune : So this Prince might appear in the world , Monstrum Providentiae , a Monster , as it were , of the Divine Providence ; ( taking the word , as Scaliger applies it to Virgil , Monstrum sine Labe , a Monster for want of Imperfections , ) and be esteemed for his Quae fecerit , what he should do , in time to come , a Miracle of Kings , and a King of Miracles . I leave the multitude of his Actions to fill up Chronicles , and will instance only in those four Virtues ; which it seems do now adorn his Hearse , and speak the same unto your Eyes , which I would do unto your Ears ; that is , the Actions of his Religion , his justice , his War , and his Peace , four principal Members in this Statue of Solomon . First for the Actions of Religion , it is true what St. Gregory saith , that God doth therefore give Princes their Kingdoms to fit , and praepare men for his Kingdom . Hence our Churches come to be builded , and our Churchmen to be thus maintained . Now as Solomon of all the Kings of Israel : So our Late Sovereign of all Christian Kings , that ever I read of , was the most constant Patron , of Churches , and Churchmen . This Patronage extended to three several Branches , to the Doctrine , to the Discipline , and to the Maintenance of God's Church . And of his Affection to these three he gave a full demonstration , by that he had spent three Months in this Kingdom . To the Doctrine , by the Translation of the Bible , against the Papists . To the Discipline , by the Conference at Hampton Court , against the Novellists . And to the Maintenance , by remitting all Sede-vacantes , and disabling Churchmen to make Leases to the Crown , against the Courtiers , and Statists of those worse times . Ye House of Levi praise ye the Lord , quoniam misericordia eius in Saeculum , For this Mercy of his endureth for ever . But this beginning amongst us was but a Map of his whole Life , as many times a little Ring , receiveth the image of a great Colossus ; Because , from the very cradle wherein he was crowned , all his life was a continued Patronage of the Doctrine , the Discipline , and the Maintenance of the Church . For the first , I will speak it boldly , Et dicam universa audiente Graecia , in the praesence here of God , and Men , that I believe in my soul , and conscience , there never lived a more constant , resolute , and settled Protestant in point of Doctrine , than our late Sovereign . The first Letter that ever he wrote to Queen Elizabeth of famous memory , upon his taking of the Government to his own managing , was for Assistance against those Men , Qui verae Religioni adversabantur , that were Opposers of this true Religion ; And this was in the year 1578.  In the same blessed mind he still remained , when he made that profession to Secretary Walsingham ; Se Religionem receptam constantissimè defensurum , that he would most constantly defend his received Religion , in the year 1583.  In the same Resolution he continued , when he put it to Queen Elizabeth to choose him a Lady , who recommended unto him at the first Madam Margarite , Aunt to our now Queen ( whom God long bless , and praeserue ) and afterwards our late Queen Anne , a most blessed Lady in many respects , and yet in none more than this , that she was the Mother of our present Sovereign . In the same Faith he persevered , when he made his Rhodes ( as they call it ) to the North of Scotland against the Papists , in the year 1594. or there about's . He grew in this Faith from strength to strength , when he wrote his Basilicon Doron , which made the Romanists despair of him , and set on Parsons to forge Titles , Clemens Octanus to publish Bulls , and the whole Conclave to oppose his Succession , as we may now read at large in the Letters of Cardinal D'ossat . And upon his happy Arrival to this Crown , a Protestant he was deemed by Watson the Prologue , and , that without any hope of Change , by Faux the Epilogue of the Powder Treason . To conclude , he defended this Doctrine of ours with his pen , his Laws , and his Sword , the whole Progress of his Life ; and sealed it with the blessed Sacrament at the time of his Death . Sic illi visum est vivere , sicque mori . I am bound in conscience out of Zeal to the Truth , and my duty to my dead Master , to add a word more , ere I close this Point . This blessed King , in all the time I served him , did never out of deep , and just reason of State , and the bitter necessities of Christendom in these latter times , give way to any the least Connivance in the world , towards the person of a Papist ( for to his Doctrine he never did , he never would do , nor was there any Consideration under heaven could have forced him thereunto ) but he strictly guided himself in the same , by some notable President of Queen Elizabeth , ( the Lodestar of all his greatest Actions ) and that in the very point ; and bathed his favours with showers of Tears ( I speak it in the praesence of Almighty God ) lest these Intendments of his for the apparent good of the State , might scandalise for all that , ( in an oblique line ) his weak , but well meaning Subjects in their Religion , and Doctrine . And so much for the first point . 

For the second , as he patronised the Doctrine , so did he also the Discipline of this Church , I mean the Hierarchy of the Bishops , and the use of Chapters , and Cathedral Churches , as a Government received from Christ , and his Apostles , and the only Discipline that ever agreed with the Fundamental Laws of any Christian Monarchy . For as that Musician in Philostratus sent his young Scholar to a sort of Bunglers , where he might learn , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , how he should not pipe : so God Almighty was pleased , that this great King should be bred for a while in that new Discipline , that he might learn in times to come how he should not Discipline the Church of Christ . In that Discipline he learned this Doctrine , that one King may be lawfully surprised by three Earls , 1583.  That Ministers are not subject to either King , or Council , 1584.  That they may deny the King to pray for his Mother . 1586.  That they may call Synods without the King , and make Laws too ; Ne quid Respublica detrimenti capiat , That there be nothing done to the prejudice of the State. 1593.  For these Aberrations therefore in the Discipline of that Church ( though he honoured those Preachers to his dying day for the truth of their Doctrine in all other points ) he first brought in the jurisdiction ; Secondly , the Name ; Thirdly , the Cathedrals ; and lastly , the Consistories , and Revenues of my Lords their Bishops : such a Patron he was of this most reverend , most ancient , and most Apostolical Discipline . Lastly , he was as great a Patron of the Maintenance of the Church , as ever I read of in any History . For beside his refusal of Sede-vacantes , and that Law he enacted at his first entrance for the preservation of the Revenue of our Churches in England , he might well say with David for his other Kingdoms ; Zelus Domus tuae devoravit me , that the Endowing of Bishopricques , the Erecting of Colleges , the buying out of Impropriations , the Assigning of Glebes , the Repairing of the old , and the Founding of new Churches hath consumed , and taken up all , or the far greater part of his Revenues in Scotland , and Ireland . I have no time to dwell upon particulars , but in the general , think you of whom you please , of Constantine of Rome , of Charlemagne of France , of Alphonso of Spain , or to come home to our own Island , a Soil more fertile in prodigious Founders , of Lucius , of Offa , of Alfred , of Saint Edward , of any King before , or since the Conquest , and I will say of my dear Master ( as he said of Traian ) Tu melior peioriaevo , though the times be far worse , yet was he far the greater Founder . And therefore to conclude this point , imagine Discipline to be the Walls , Maintenance the roof , and cover , true Doctrine the sweet perfume , and Incense of the Temple , and you have Salomon's first Act before your eyes , the Building of God's House , and his Quid fecerit , what he did by Actions of Religion . 

For the Actions of justice in this King , they were so ordinary , that being repeated they would prove as tedious for the present , as in the Ages to come they will be admired . For , as Synesius saith of that glorious Planet , that it is nothing for the Sun to shine 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , it being of his Essence to glister , and shine : so were it frigidissima laudatio , very poor Oratory , to commend our King for being just , there having been made over all Europe , for the space of forty years , no more quaestion of his being Just , then of his being King. If we look at home in his own Dominions , never were the Benches so gravely furnished , never the Courts so willingly frequented , never poor , and rich so equally righted , never the Balance so evenly poized , as in the Reign of our late Sovereign . I could tell you that , that will never be believed in future times , of a Lord that died for a vile Varlet , of a Peer condemned for a sorry Gentleman , nay of a dear Son unrelieved for a time against a Stranger , for fear of swerving the breadth of a hair from the line of justice . If we look abroad into foreign Countries , Quae tam seposita est , quae gens tam barbara ? Those very Princes , that have done him none , have been forced to confess his Uprightness , and justice . I leave you therefore to resolve with yourselves , of the which of these Salomon's , that Text is most true ; The Wisdom of God was in Him , ad faciendum iudicium , to do justice . 1 Kings 3. last verse . And so much of the Actions of his JUSTICE . 

The third sort of Actions , which are those of War , are also observable in the peaceable Reign of our late Solomon . For although it be a fashion amongst men , ut nolint eundem pluribus rebus excellere ( as the Orator speaks ) that they cannot endure that one Man should be thought eminent in many qualities , as the same Prince in the managing of Peace , and War : yet surely nothing , but the malice of some people , that would place their wheels in Princes , as Daedalus did in his Statues ; to pull them to combustions at their own pleasure , can deny this Laurel to our late Sovereign . For besides that occasioned in Scotland , to make his roads into the North , a●ter the defeat of the Earl of Arguile , he showed himself in person , not only 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , resolute enough , but , if we may believe the Story ( as Plutarque said of Tiberius Gracchus ) 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , somewhat to forwardin those unapproachable places , scattering his Enemies as much with his example , as he did with his forces ; 

— dum magnos tolerare labores Ipsa Ducis virtus cogit — 

I say , beside these Adventures of his person , he was unto his people , to the hour of his death , another Cherubin with a flaming sword , to keep out Enemies from this Paradise of ours ; wherein , above all neighbouring Nations , grew in abundance those Apples of peace , which now I am to gather in the last place . 

And surely Actions of Peace ( what ever debauched people say to the contrary ) set out a Prince in more orient colours then those of War , and great combustions . In turbas , & discordias pessimo cui que plurima vis : Pax , & quies bonis Artibus indigent , saith Tacitus , any Phaethon will serve to fire the world , but none beside the God of Wisdom can keep it in order . And this is most evident in the Book of God. When Israel is to be chastized with War , and Desolation , any furious jehu will serve the turn ; But for the managing of a long , and a continued Peace , no less is required then the Wisdom of Solomon . Now of these Actions of King james his Peace , though many others have made whole Books , yet will I make but a short Index . You may find in those volumes , the Schools of the Prophets newly adorned , all kind of learning highly improved , manufactures at home daily invented , Trading abroad exceedingly multiplied , the Borders of Scotland peaceably governed , the North of Ireland religiously planted , the Navy Royal magnificently furnished , Virginia , Newfoundland , and New-england peopled , the East India well traded , Persia , China , and the Mogor visited , lastly , all the ports of Europe , Africa , Asia ▪ and America to our red Crosses freed , and opened . And they are all the Actions , and trueborn Children of King JAMES his Peace . And so much , or rather ( for want of time ) so little of the Quae fecerit , and what he did ; The rest of the words of Solomon , and all that he did . 

The third member of this Statue , is his Wisdom , fitly resembled to that of Salomon's . For if the pattern seem to excel in the Intellectuals , I am sure the Statue exceeds in the Morals . If we take this Wisdom for an Universality , clasping in her Arms all Arts , and Sciences ; she cannot be denied in that large sense , to have built her a house in that sacred bosom . For , as Budaeus being ask'● by Francis the first , if all the Books in the world were to be burnt , what one he would save , to preserve Learning , made answer , that he would save the Works of Plutarque , because they had impressions of all the Sciences : so say I , and appeal herein to any Scholar in the world , that if all Books were to be burned , and Plutarque also to bear them company : yet could a man find some footing , and impressions of all Arts , and Sciences , of all kinds of Divinity , Morality , and Humanity whatsoever , within the Works of our late Sovereign . But if we take Wisdom for that deep reach required in a King , for the governing of his people , which Synesius calls 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the Prince of all the Princely Virtues ; I will without blushing say of Him , as Pliny did of another , and appeal herein to my Noble Lords of his Privy Counsel , Nihil est omnium quod discere velis , quod ille docere non potuit , there was nothing in that kind that a man would learn , but was fully taught by our Great Master . But ( alas ) I dare not launch into this vast deep , whereof the best Head ( wherever it is ) in all Europe cannot sound the bottom : Nisi sapiens non potest perspicere sapientem : My wisdom , I confess , is far too short to give you any character of his infinite Wisdom . Some streams hereof , you may hereafter find in the Histories of this Age , the fourth Member of this Statue , the Book of the Acts of Solomon . And the rest of the words of Solomon , and all that he did , and his Wisdom , are they not written in the Book of the Acts of Solomon ? 

For although King james had no such Officers as Solomon had , à Commentarijs , appointed of purpose to write his Actions ; yet Dulce estoculis videre Solemn , the Sun cannot shine in such a brightness , but Eyes must behold it , nor set in so lasting a night , but the world will miss it . Private Histories ( as Adrian said of Apers accusations ) are but Ink , and Paper , and may be holp in part with the golden pin-dust ; whereas Suffragia mundi nullus emit , None can be honoured of all Europe , but he that held the Balance of all Europe ; and , for the space of twenty years at the least , preserved the peace of all Europe . Christendom therefore will be the Book , Swords , I fear , will prove the Pens , and the Remembrance of the times past , the Acts , and Monuments of our blessed Solomon . And if multitude of Writers could multiply his Fame , the Israelite with his fifteen Penmen ( for so Pineda makes his Boast ) must give place herein to our British Solomon . What Writer hath cause to speak of a King , but praesently he falls upon this King of Writers ? So that as Constantine the Great did nickname Traian , Herbam Parietariam , a Wall-flower , because his name was engraven on every wall : so shall emulous Posterity term King james Herbam chartaceam , a Paper-flower , when they read his glory in all Writers . And as one saith of Plinius , and Tacitus , that they were Literarum nomina , non Hominum : So will it be a quaestion amongst Critics in the Ages to come , whether this name of james doth more properly note an eminent King , or an eminent Scholar . And in that case , if ungrateful posterity should forget the King , ( as believe me it will not ; for like one of Demetrius his Statues , this King will show better and better with time ) yet if it should , Learning will never forget the Scholar . In the world before the Flood , though we read not of one King , the Inventors of the Arts are still remembered . His History therefore , like Herodotus his History , shall be written , and set out by all the Muses ; they all shall join in the writing of his Book , the Book of the Acts of our British Solomon . 

IN the fifth place , survey we his Capital City ; which enlarged , and repaired in each corner thereof , 1 King. 9 15. and refreshed within with a running water ( which josephus attributes to the Son of David ) doth no more resemble that other , than this Jerusalem , where our Solomon reigned . He reigned in Jerusalem . Here for the space of two and twenty years the Sacrifices were daily offered , here God's word was learnedly expounded , here the Laws were justly administered , here all the Tribes were usually assembled , here the three Kingdoms were convened , here Edinburgh and Divelen were united , like jebus , and Salem , in one Jerusalem . Whilst Solomon reigned in this Jerusalem . And so much of this fifth Circumstance . 

IN the sixth place , survey we the bounds of his Empire , and King james will prove a King Solomon in this , as being the first King ( for aught we know ) that reigned here over all this Island , Over all Israel . He reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel . There is a brute of one Brutus long before , but it is no more than a mere brute . King james is the first King of the Island , that we read of in good Histories . And surely Non sine numine Diuûm , this came not to pass otherwise , then by God's direction , from time to time . When the two Daughters were so matched , why should Scotland be preferred ? when a new race had gotten the Crown , why should the name within the space of 115 years be thus extinguished ? When many praetenses were made to this Land , why should they all in this one King be concentred and united ? that of the britain 's by Cadwallo , that of the Scots by Fargus , that of the Picts by the Daughter of Hungus , that of the Saxons by the Sister of Edgar , that of the Danes by the Daughter of King Christian , and that of the Normans by the Daughter of Henry the seventh , from all the which he was a Lineal Descendant . Surely to let us know , that this was the Solomon , whom God from the beginning had anointed King over all Israel , and accordingly he reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel . And so much of the sixth Circumstance . 

The seventh Circumstance is the time of his Reign , the which , though it falls short in a divided , yet in a compounded sense exceeds the pattern . For though he reigned not so long over all Israel , yet in all he reigned 58. years . A long , and a blessed reign , wherein he was married to one Queen , and ( as he said of Tigranes ) to a thousand Virtues . A Reign like that 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , or golden chain in Homer , whereof 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the several links were several blessings , with the one end fastened to his Cradle , and the other dropping into his Grave . And surely God Almighty , to let us know that it is by him that Kings do reign , makes them sometimes to govern States ( and that very well ) before they be able to govern themselves . Varanes his child was crowned King , while he was yet in his Mother's womb . Frederick the second , when he was but three years old . joas , when he was but seven . Solomon , ( as some Rabbins think ) when he was but ten . Charles the ninth , when he was but eleven . St. Lewis , when he was but twelve . And our late Sovereign aged little more than so mamy months . Thus God stocks those Kings with Days , whom he means to stock with Goodness . Thus our Dear Master , who reigned better , reigned also longer than King Solomon , whose Reign in Jerusalem ou●r all Israel , was no more than forty years : And so much of the seventh Circumstance . 

AND hitherto , Most High and Mighty , most Honourable , Worshipful , and well-beloved , you may imagine I have offered unto your thoughts , not only a Statue of King Solomon , but withal , as the Grecians did in their Hercules , and Xenophon in his Cyrus , an Idea , or Representation of all the perfections required in a King. But , out alas ! those Statues of theirs are ( as the Soul that frames them ) lasting , and immortal , but this of ours made of Flesh and Blood , Maiore nostrûm damno , quam suo ( as he said of Titus ) to our loss , but his great Advantage , is proved Mortal . ay , but did you not know before ( will some men say ) that the King was mortal ? I did indeed , And I know withal , the state of Christendom doth require , that such a King , as this , of these sayings , and doings , and Wisdom , and Experience of 58. years , should have been immortal , 

Verum oneranda mihi non sunt , memoranda recepi , Fata — 

Our only comfort is this , that as he lived like a King , so he died like a Saint . He did rather ( as Saint Hierome said of Nepotian ) migrare , quam mori ; or ( as Saint Bernard writes of Hubertus ) abire , quam obire , he did not die , but fall asleep , Dormivitque Solomon , And Solomon slept . Never have you read of any King , that left this world more resolved , more prepared , as though he had unbraced himself for his Bed , rather than for his Grave . And it was his fashion so to do , when he was summoned by any sickness . God dealt with this Blessed Prince , as he did with Ezechia , for certain years before his Death , he was called upon by his sickness at Royston to set his House in Order . Lord , what a Speech he then made to his Son our present Sovereign ? OH Verba Bracteata . Not a syllable in all the same , but deserves to be written in letters of Gold. How powerfully did he charge him with the care of Religion and justice , the two Pillars ( as he termed them ) of his future throne ? How did he recommend unto his love , the Nobility , the Clergy , and the Commonalty in the general ? How did he thrust , as it were into his inward bosom , his Bishops , his judges , his near Servants ; and that Disciple of his whom he so loved in particular ? And concluded with that heavenly Advice , to his Son , concerning that great Act of his future marriage , To marry like himself , and marry where he would . But if he did marry the Daughter of that King , he should marry her Person , but he should not marry her Religion . But now at this sickness more shaken with the fits of a raging Fever , the nearer Death drew unto him , the more he prepared himself for it . All his Latter days he spent in prayer , sending his thoughts before into Heaven , to be the Harbingers of his happy Soul . Some four days before his end , he desired to receive the Blessed Sacrament , Viaticum Aeternitatis , as it is termed in the Ancient Counsels , a blessed Bait , that the devout soul useth for the most part to take in this life , when it is ready to travail for the other life . Being demanded , if he was prepared in point of Faith , and Charity for so great a Devotion ; He said he was , and gave humble thanks to God for the same . Being desired to declare his Faith , and what he thought of those Books he had written in that kind , He repeated the Articles of the Creed one by one , and said he believed them all , as they were received and expounded by that part of the Catholic Church which was established here in England . And said with a kind of sprightfulnesse , and vivacity , that what ever he had written of this Faith in his life , he was now ready to seal with his Death . Being questioned in point of Charity ; He answered presently , that he forgave all Men that offended him , and desired to be forgiven by all Christians , whom he in any wise had offended . Being told , that Men in Holy Orders in the Church of England do challenge a power , as inhaerent in their Function , not in their Person , to pronounce and declare Remission of sins , to such as being penitent do call for the same ; And that they have a form of Absolution for that very purpose , set down in the Book of Common Prayers ; He answered suddenly ; I have ever believed , there was that power in you , that be in Orders in the Church of England . And that , amongst others , was unto me an evident demonstration , that the Church of England is without all quaestion the Church of Christ . And therefore I a miserable sinner do humbly desire Almighty God to Absolve of my sins , and you , that are his servant in that high place , to afford me this heavenly comfort . And after the Absolution read , and pronounced , he received the Sacrament with that Zeal , and Devotion , as if he had not been a frail Man , but a Cherubin clothed with flesh , and blood . And some hour after , he said unto his Son , the Duke , and others that stood about him , that they could not imagine what ease , and comfort he found in himself , since his receiving of the blessed Sacrament . OH , saith he , that all my Lords would do but thus , when they are visited with the like sickness . Themselves would be more comforted in their Souls , and the world less troubled with quaestioning their Religion . From this time , to the hour of his death , the sickness prevailed more and more upon his Body , and his Sense , and Memory not much impaired , Prayers were multiplied accordingly from hour to hour , for the comfort of his Soul . And as Nazianzen saith of Saint Basil , that he did desire to die 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , with some sentence of piety in his mouth : so there were selected in English , and Latin , some short sentences of Devotion to raise , and lift up his Soul into Heaven , before it came thither . With this he was so ravished , and Comforted , that as all his Servants ( never sufficiently commended for Diligence , and Devotion ) can bear witness , when he groaned now under the pangs of Death , yet was he ever still , and as quiet , as a Lamb , when these Ejaculations were infused into Him. To one of them , to wit , Mecum eris in Paradiso , he replied presently , Vox Christi , that it was the voice , and promise of Christ . And another , Veni Domine jesu , veni citò , he twice , or thrice repeated . And a while after , his hastening on forward towards his End , hastened us also to that Prayer usually said at the hour of Death ; the which was no sooner ended with that sentence , In manus tuas Domine Commendo spiritum meum , but his Lords , and Servants kneeling on the one side , his Archbishop , bishop , and other of his Chaplains on the other side of his Bed , without any pangs , or Convulsion at all , Dormivit Solomon , Solomon slept . And so much of this eight , a most bitter Circumstance . 

And yet this Bitterness is like the bitterness of Myrrh , very unpleasing unto us , but very praeseruative unto him . Mors ianua vitae . He had no way , but by this Mortality , to cloth himself with Immortality . Were it not for this Sleeping , how had he obtained this eternal Dreaming ? which his Soul severed from the dregss of the Body , doth now enjoy in the praesence of God , environed no more with Lords , and Knights , but with troops of Angels , and the Souls of the Blessed , called in this Text , his Forerunners , or Fathers ; And Solomon slept with his Fathers . And therefore as Papinius Statius reports of the old Arcadians , that mourning all night for the setting of the Sun , they were comforted notwithstanding at the break of day , when they saw him in his Sphere again . And as the people enraged at the death of Romulus , were quieted by and by with Proculus his news , that he saw him in glory riding up to Heaven : Much more must we Christians remain full of hope at the death of a Saint , that is gone to his Fathers ; Dormivitque Solomon cum Patribus suis , And Solomon slept with his Fathers . And no more of this ninth Circumstance . 

And I must say less of the Last of all , prevented therein by the Magnificence of his Majesty : Because , for any thing we read in the Scriptures , the Funerals of the first , came nothing near the Stately Funerals of our second Solomon . Shall I say therefore of my present Master , that he is a great , and a hopeful King ? All that is true ; but I leave it to another , that hath time to enlarge it . I will only say , as St. Ambrose said of Theodosius , Summam votorum complexus est , pius est ; He hath showed himself , as we desired he should , a pious Son of a most pious Father . He lays , with all possible solemnity , the Body of his Father in the Sepulchre of the Kings , erected by Henry the seventh his great Grandfather , Tanquam in Civitate David Patris eius ; Just as this other Solomon was , In the City of David his Father . And yet , with due reverence to his Majesty , I must be bold to say , that all this is nothing to that Honour , which God hath done to the Funerals of his Father . So dear in the sight of the Lord is th● Death of his Saints . For God hath provided another Statue yet to adorn the Exequys of our Late Sovereign . I do not mean this Artificial Representation within the Hearse ; for this shows no more than his outward Body ; or rather the Body of his Body , his clothes and Ornaments . But I mean that Statue which ( beyond all former precedents of Piety ) walked on foot this day after the Hearse , one of Myrons' Statues , Qui paenè Hominun animas effinxerit , which came so near to the Souls of Men , A breathing Statue of all his Virtues . This God hath done for Him , or rather for Vs. For as he hath made a lively Representation of the Virtues of Solomon , in the Person of King james : So hath he done a like Representation of the Virtues of King james , in the Person of King Charles our Gracious Sovereign . 

I will therefore conclude these Exequys of Solomon , with a saying spoken by that imitator of Solomon , Mortuus est Pater , & quasi non est mortuus , Similem enim reliquit sibi post se . Though his Father be dead , yet is he , as though he were not dead , for he hath left One behind him most like himself . Whom God long prospero , and praeserue . 

The Grace of our Lord etc.  

FINIS . 

LONDON , Printed by JOHN BILL , Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty . M. DC . XXV . 





 1 Sam. 13 1.  Filius unius anni erat Saul . S●mplex & inno●●ns ●anquam pu●r unius anni . Called paraph . Hieron . P. Danian . l. 2. ad Albe●icum . Cardin .  1 Sam. 13. 13.  Stult●●gis●● , ●●c custod ●●imandata Dom●ni D●i tu● .  2 Sam 32. 35.   Plutarch in Eu●en● .  Vid. Io. Monthol . i● Prompt . juris . verbo Solomon .  A●nal . 1● .  For as Alexander tells his ●ather Philip. Such Exquisiteness in this kind , as he his Father expressed , is not required in every King. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Dion . Chrys . orat . 2.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪ Pyndar . Olimp. odd . ● 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Nazianz. Orat. 30.   jul. Capitol . in Antonino Philosopho . & Anton. de Guevara . in●orol ●orol . p●n● .  S●●ton . in eius 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪ S●b● & suis 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 pre 〈…〉 . cap. ●9 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Anton. Monach 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Datur hoc i 〈…〉 strium u●●orum posicrit●ti , ut ex●qu●●●●●●●●iscua Sepultura s●●●● e●●ur , etc.  Tacit. Annal. 16.   Antiq. l. 7. c. 1● .  〈…〉 . Salom. 〈…〉 3.  ●● Serli 〈…〉 Are 〈…〉 . 〈…〉   4 Reg. 21. 28  ▪ 2 Chron. 21. 20. 2  Chron. 24. 25.   Lib. ● .  Matth. 12. 42.   Musonius apud S●ob . s●rm . 4●   Exod. 4. 10.   Octa●●●nus F 〈…〉 lib. de 〈…〉  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪   Plutarch . in PEA 〈…〉 .  ●●● Alexander thought it unnecessary in a King to be exact in this kind of learning . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Dion . Choice . Orat. 2.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 And Ta●●●us requires in a Prince , 〈◊〉 ill●um illum ex Sa 〈…〉 . De 〈◊〉 Agricol . And Leo the Emperor made use of M 〈…〉 his Eloquence , 〈…〉 〈◊〉 in 〈…〉 Sid 〈…〉 . Apol 〈…〉 in Panegyr .  Annal. 15.   Prous . ●●   In 〈…〉 Solomon 〈…〉 Aquinas 2 q. 113. a●● . 3. ad . 2.   Prior pars p●●b 〈…〉 P●●ed . d 〈…〉 . Sa 〈…〉 1.   〈…〉   Numb . 27. 17.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Philostrat . de vita Apoll. lib. 5. c. 10. 〈…〉   Plut. in Themisto●●e .  〈…〉   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Syne● . de regno  Nullis Circums●●iptam terminis sapientiam adeptus est . de reb Sal. l. 3 c. 9   Libr●● in Genes . q. 4. ut & Abulens . 3 Reg. 3. q. 10.   I● 3 Reg 3. q. 11.   Tom. 1. disp . 7. q. 2. pun●●● . 1.   C 〈…〉 lib. 5.   Studia praestant . ut etiam ●●●er . 〈…〉 . Quin●●l . 〈…〉 Orat . l. 12. c. 4.   Sanctius . proem . in 1 R●●  〈◊〉 Paralip . 〈…〉 〈…〉 rum , 〈…〉 〈…〉 m , 〈…〉 rep 〈…〉 〈…〉 Sanctius 〈…〉 1.   San 〈…〉   〈…〉   〈…〉   2 C 〈…〉   〈…〉 〈◊〉 Annal 3   Plinius 〈…〉 lib. 3. ●p 20. 〈…〉 ma● , etc.   Fama liberrima principum judex . Senec. Detestantur malos principes etiam qui malos faciunt . Plin. Panegyr .  Octavian . Ferrar . lib. the sermon . Exoter .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Plutarch . in vita Demost . Beat victuro ante alia convenit patriam esse glorios●m . Amm●anus Marcell . lib. 14. & tamen 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Arist . apud La●rtium . lib. 5.   〈…〉 . 3.   Masius in jos . ●●● . 15. n. 63.   ●●a● Montan. ● jos . 18. 20.  Ruper●us lib. 2. in Deut. c. 18.  v 〈…〉 . ●om . 3.  〈…〉 . ch . p. 1. lib. 〈…〉 .  〈…〉 14.   〈…〉   ● Reg. 2.  ●● .  ● Reg. 12. 16.   Orat. d● l●g● Ag●●● . contra ●ul●um .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Aristot . ●●●● . 7.  ● . 8.   Part. 2.  ●●● . ● . d●sp 3. c. 5●   Imperij amplitudine , longo interuallo su●erabatur ab aliis imperatoribus tum prioribus , tum 〈…〉 oribus . Tosta● . in 2 Chron. 1. cue ▪ ●1 . Dionies . Ca●thus . ●n ●●●● . c. 3.   ●go ●●re si ●●● seo , ut 〈…〉 , i●● gl●ria , a●qu● a●●● gl●riae oh 〈…〉 , populique mul 〈…〉 , Salomonem sur erasse al●o●●m n●s ●i●e pr●●r●ss ●i●e 〈…〉 s orbis dominatores . Pineda d●r●b . ●alomonis . lib. 6. c. 2.   In Sententijs la●●ici● quater . ●●●●ersibus come 〈…〉 .  〈…〉 .  〈…〉 etc. 〈…〉 ●ce●●us●ul . quaest . l. 3.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . La●●●●us●ib ●ib . ● .  In●e A 〈…〉 . 〈…〉 ●xigen●● , 〈…〉 , etc ▪ S●n●● d● B 〈…〉 e vi●● ▪ c. 1.   Plin S 〈…〉 d. l●b . 3.  〈…〉 1.  ●● Caluis●um . & A●n●rum 〈…〉 udo d 〈…〉 s●●●en●iam . job 32. 7.  Crescit inse●ibus . Hieron . ep . 2. ad N●po●●an .  Non ●a●●le 〈…〉 plenus dierum ponitur , nisi is , evius per ●andem scripturam vita lauda●●r . Grego● . M●●nus in job. ult. Nemini dedit D●●s spacium peccandi . Ecclesiasticus 15. 22.   Qui pau 〈…〉 multatalenta lucri secit ben● vivendo . Chrys . in locum . Quaeris quid sit ampl 〈…〉 spacium ? usque ad Sapientiam vivere . Sene.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Aristot . Ethic . l. 1. c. 11.   Basil . ● P 〈…〉 . n●m vitae ●● . p. ● non glorio ●um .  Parte . 2 the predict . c. 27.   〈…〉   〈…〉   ●n 1. cap. 〈…〉 & lib. 2. con●ra jovinianum .  〈…〉 quod 〈…〉 P●lanus , 〈…〉 〈…〉 39   Sup. Genes . 26. 8.   Tom. 〈…〉   1 Reg. ●● . ●● .  2 Chron. 21.  ●● .  2 Chron. 24 ▪ ●● .  3 Reg. 14.  ●● .  2 Chron. 2● ▪ ●● .  3 Re● . ●● ▪ ● .  〈…〉 'em , 〈…〉 ad 〈…〉 est 〈◊〉 August . de ●●●●tate Dei. lib. ● . c. ●3 .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ●●●●phus Antiq. 〈…〉 .  Thom. in 4.  Sent. ●●si 4● . q. 2 〈…〉 3  〈…〉 August . 〈…〉 lib. ● . c. 5.   〈…〉 upon 〈…〉   Imaginem Traian●●urru ●urru triumphal●●●xit , ut optim●● imperator ne post mortem quidem triumphi a 〈…〉 dignitat●m . Sparta . in Adrian .  Blaise de Viegenere sur le premier liure des tableaux de plat-pemture de Philost .  For his ●ate Majesty never approved of the precedent , as is touched in some place , by Cambden , and Thuanus .  Tacitus Annal. lib. 13.   Plin. Secund. lib. 1. ep . 20.   Plutarch . i● Alexand   〈…〉 St. Ambrose of David .  Aug 〈…〉 .  Idyll 〈…〉   Vna ●●●●arum in omni●●● Lampido Lacedae●●nia r●p●ritur , quae regis filia , regis uxor , regis mater fuit . Plin. Histor . nat . l. 7 c. 41.   A●roci , & horrendo scelere , quod boni omnes ●●●● detestati . Cambd. Eliz. pag. 11● .  Postquam conspexit angueis ille alter pue● , 〈…〉 cunis exilit , facit recta●● angucis impetum , etc.  Plautus in Amphitruone . Act. 5.  〈◊〉 .  Cambden . Eliz. pag. 121.   Cambden . Eliz. pag. 172.   Idem . ibid. pag. 203.   Mortonius Anglis addictissimus ab Arranio l●s● Maiestatis accusatus , in carcerem 〈◊〉 Cambd. Eliz. pag. 314.  Ex delator●m invidia . pag. 315. obtrun●atus . pag. 317.   Prae moerore , postquam tredecim meses praefu●sset , ●atis concessi● . Cambd. Eliz. pag. 204.   Cambd. Eliz. pag. 316.   Summa consilij erat , ut rege intercepto , externas cop●●● ad religionem Romanam restaurandam , & Angliam●uadendam ●uadendam admitterent . Cambd. Eliz. part . ● pag. 500  M. S.   Gow●●es conspiracy . fol 6.   Cambd. Eliz. part . 2. pag. ●●6 . M. S.   In Poetice .  Vt terrestre regnum coelesti regno famuletur . Greg. ep . 62. ad Mau●itium .  Ing●●● caesar , & p●r gloria tua , ●ive 〈…〉 ud post 〈…〉 , si●e 〈…〉 nt . P●m. ●● Paneg.   Now read in our Churches .  Printed by command 14.  january 1603. and now reprinted by King james his new command , 〈…〉 diatly before his death . ●●●● .  The Act. of 〈…〉 1 ●ac .  Ipsa initia plantare debent Principis nominis samam . Theodoricus .  Per Dunfer●●ilinium . Cambd. Eliz. pag. ●●● .  Edinburg● . Cambd. Ehz pag. 341.   〈…〉 〈…〉 ham de 〈…〉 c. ●a 〈…〉 Eliz. 〈…〉 2. pag. 513.  〈…〉 .  〈…〉 Ma●g●●i 〈…〉 〈…〉 regis 〈…〉 regi 〈…〉 Ca●●●d Eliz. part . 2.  ●● . 3 M S.   〈…〉 idem . 〈…〉  Cam●●d . Eliz. 〈…〉 2. pag. 561.  M. S.   Sed his alij , libr●● long prae 〈…〉 Basilicon Do●on . etc. Incre 〈…〉 , quo● h●m●num animos & 〈…〉 sibi conci 〈…〉 , etc.  Id. in Eliz. part . 2. pag. 65● . M. S.   Id●●b●d . pag. 562.  M. S.   Speeds ▪ Chro. p. 9TH .  L●●re s●pti●sme 131.  A● Roy & 〈◊〉 8. 162.  A 〈◊〉 de Ville●oy . & Liure 7. 132.  A Mons . de Villeroy .  Speeds Chro. p. 912.   For they themselves will needs ( as the Romans said of the jews ) make themselves as remote from us , as the Indians ▪ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Philostrat . in vita Apollon . l. 5. c. 10   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . lib. 2. and his word was , no Bishop , not King. Confer . at Hampt . Court. pag. 36.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Philostrat . in vita Apoll. l. 5. c. 11.   However he lived amongst Puritans , and was kept as a Ward under them , yet since he was ten years old , he ever despised their opinions . Confer . at H●mp● . Court. pag. 20.   Cambd. Eliz. pag. 342.   Cambd. Eliz ▪ pag. 361.   Cambd. Eliz. pag. 444.   Cambd. Eliz. part . 2. pag. 550.  N●c exp●ctata Regis authorit●te , Barones' , & Burgenses Con●ocarunt ( Ministri ) ad consultandum ne quid detrimenti relligio , aut respub . caperet . M. s ▪  Cambd. Eliz. pag. 362.   Psal . 68 10.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Synesius de regno .  Cicero in Bruto .  Aristot . Politi● . l. 1. c. 1.   Rex ipse difficile 〈…〉 i●meris molestus confl●ct●tus , per asp●rrimo●●ont●s in illa parte cont●●dit , etc.  Camb. Eliz. pa●●● 2. ●ag . 5●1 . M. S.   Lucan .  V●●nam meis tempori●us e●en at , ●t militum stipendi● in Doctor●s Artium absuma stir . Leo Graecanicus .  Histor . l. 4. initio libri . Ad laud●m regnant●● tra●itur , si a● omnibus p●● ametur . Cassiodorus . ●pist . l. 1. ep . 23.  A deep point of policy . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Artist . polit . l. 8. c. 14.   In vita Budaei . Id●m narratur de Theodoro Gaza . Sphynx . Philos . cap. 25.   As 〈…〉 is called 〈…〉 . S●●d●ss in P●●lolog . & ●piph . lib d●m●nsu●● .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪ Synes . de regne .  Plin. S●●undus l. 1. epist . 10.   Sanctius in . 1.  Reg. proleg . 1.   Ecclesiastes 11. 7.   Spartianus in Adriano .  Sidonius . Me●●s omnibus quam singulis creditur . singuli enim decipere , & decip● possunt : nemo omnes , neminem omnes ●e●ellerunt . Plin. Secund. in Panegyr .  De reb . Salom. lib. 1. cap. 1.   Ap●d Euseb .  Nos●i m● ? & quidem ex s●●d● ▪ ●ss . Ad ho●●l●um . Tacitus ●s , ●n Plinius ? Exprim●●● non poss●m quam sit iu●●ndum mihi , quod nomina nostra qu●si litera●um propria , non ●omin●● , lit●ris reddunt●r . Plinius Secund. lib. 9 ep . 23.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Plutarch . re●p . gere●d . precept . So●um ●●●●m 〈…〉 dat , a●g●tqu● t●mp●r●s spat●●● . Plin. in Pan●g .  Genes . 5.   Whereof the several books are assigned to several Mus●ss . Qu●m ●e●●ren● mu●● , vivet . Tibul. li. 1. ●l●g . 4.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Pynd . Olymp. Hymn . 7.   See the Proclamations for buildings . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Philostratus de vitis Sophist . l● . 1.   Which a man might call , as the Egyptians do N●lus , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Philost . de ●i● . Apol. l. 5. c. 10.   De bello judaic. l. 6. c. 6.  a Cambd. in sua Brit. pag. 5 ▪   The name of the T●ddo●ss .  〈…〉 by the 〈…〉 Ea●●e of N 〈…〉 tun , in 〈…〉 speech for the 〈…〉 , made in 〈…〉 ment . 3. l●c . 26 ▪ Ma●j . M. S.  ●●a● . ●   Pr●● . ● ▪ ●● .  〈…〉   ●●●● of 〈…〉 Poly 〈…〉  4 〈…〉   Ra●●● Da●●d Kim●●●a●●d ●y●am Sal 〈…〉 docetism in●tio 〈…〉 〈…〉 am . Although all the Gr●●ke and ●at ne Fathers , make him to be 12. years old .  ●nuent●r of France ▪ in Ca● . 9 ●   I ●d●●i●● su● fectus est I ●do●icu● 〈…〉 duodenum ●a●u● Gaguinus . Comp●ndij sui libr. 7.   Regn●m ●●ssit 〈…〉 vix ●redecin ▪ m●●s●s ●ato . Cambd. Eliz. pag ▪ 119.   Su●ton . in Ti●o . Non mem●ni me●e●●sse m●la morte ●ortuum , qui lib●nter opera pieta●●● exe●cuit . Hi●●on . didst . 13.   Auson . Burd●● pr●●● . cap. 19   Faelix somnus 〈…〉 requ●●s volu●tate , 〈…〉 vol●ptat● , vol●pt●● cum ●tern●ta●● Petius Damianus de Stephano . Dulcis sim●l & beatus 〈…〉 . Gregor . Nyss●n . de c●● .  4 Reg. 20. 6.   〈…〉 Mr. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 and showed and approved ●y the 〈◊〉 in his life-time M. S.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Solon apud Plutarch .  So his Majesty had done before , sying , that it was Apost●●●●all , , and a very good ordinance , in that it was given 〈…〉 name of 〈…〉 th●● de 〈…〉 it , and upon the clearing of his con 〈…〉 e Con●er ▪ at 〈◊〉 . Court. pag. 〈…〉 it is re 〈…〉 in the 〈…〉 zions of 〈◊〉 , Bohem , ● Saxon.   In ei●● vita .  Est magnisicum , quod te ab omni cognatione vitiorum reprimis , ac revocas ; sed magnificentius , quod tuos . Quanto enim magis ard●um est , alios praestâre quam se ; tanto laudabil●us , quod cum ipse sis optimus , omnes circa te similes tui effecisti . Plin. sec . de Traiano in Paneg. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Plutarch . de Catone Maiore .  Cui peregrinatio dul●is est , non a●a● patria● . August . in Psal . 93.  Cur ●an● vitam adeo amamus , ubi quanto ●iutius quis ●u●rit , tanto ma●or● oneratur Sarcina p●ccator●m ? Ambros . ●e bono mortis . cap. 2.  Name ●ur ●o●t●m adeo detr●ct●mus ? Ne videa●us nimirum descripta in Apocalypsi joannis . Cypr. lib. the mortal . Sect. 17.   Si tamen ●as ●st aut ●lere , aut omnino mortem voca●e , quâ tanti viri mortalitasmagi●●inita , quam vita ●st . De Verginio . Rufo . Plin. sec . l. 2. ep . 1.   Dormiun●●ort●● , non solum p●opter f●cilita●em r●suscitandi , sed ●tiam ●●●pter iucund● insomnia , quae animae à cor●o●●bus s●paratae ha●ent , dum Deum ●●c●e ad ●aciem , etc. Salmer . tom . 6. tract . 44.   Thebay . 4.   Plin. secund . de viris illustribus . c. 2.   So the Egyptians mourned for jacob 70. days ; joseph but 7. days . Gen. 50. 3.  & 10.  So of the blessed Virgin at the death of Christ : Stantem lego , flentem non lego . Ambros . in Luc.   Orat. Funebr . de Morte Theodos . Imperat.   Psal . 115. 15.   Te ad sydera tollit humus . Plin. secund . in Panegyr .  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Cyrus Prodrom . in sua 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 : in Gregor . Theol.   Eccluns' . 30. 4.  