THE Souls immortal crown consisting of seven glorious graces . 

1.  Virtue . 2.  Wisdom . 3.  Love. 4.  Constancy . 5.  Patience . 6.  Humility . 7.  Infinitenes . 

DIVIDED INTO SEVEN day's Works . 

AND Dedicated to the Kings most excellent Majesty . 

AT LONDON Printed by H. Lownes , and are to be sold by I C. and F. B. 1605.  

TO THE HIGH and mighty Prince , JAMES by the grace of God , King of great Britain , France and Ireland , defendor of the faith , etc.  

TO whom shall I dedicate the praise of Virtue , but to him whom Virtue praiseth , which in your Majesty being made good , to the eyes of those understanding spirits , that can judge of the heavenly notes of heroical natures ( I hope ) having Truth for my warrant , to escape the scandal of fawning Eloquence : vouchsafe therefore my gracious Sovereign , in this plain Poem , to peruse the labour of my heart's love , which with the service of true loyalty , I humbly lay at the feet of your Royal Majesty , beseeching the virtue of all grace , & grace of all virtue , so to bless you with his infinite blessings , that as virtue under heaven putteth her praise under your Patronage , so the Patron of all virtue will so Royalize your praise in the Heavens , that to your gracious Crown on earth , you may receive a Crown of Eternal glory . 

Your Majesty's most humble and loyal in all service , ber N. Gent.  

To the Reader . 

You that have a heart to lift your eyes above your head , and have not buried your soul in the sink of sin , take a little time to read over this little Tract , where if virtue may invite you , wisdom may woe you , love may draw you , constancy may content you , patience may persuade you , or humility may entreat you , you shall not pass without your payment , and make a profit of your expense : the villain cannot taste it , the fool understand it , the hateful not love it , nor the inconstant commend it , the impatient endure it , nor the proud regard it : but I hope the best will allow it , and to them I only leave it , who can best judge of it , will judiciously peruse it , and accordingly esteem it ; there is no state taxed in it , no person abused by it , none that read it , but may have good of it , and for the good of all men I have done it . The youthful may learn , and the aged consider what is most necessary for the soul's comfort , the rich may find treasure above their wealth , and the poor , relief in their misery : in sum , to avoid tediousness , I hope you shall see Virtue truly honoured , Wisdom truly praised , Love truly described , Constancy truly commended , Patience truly proved , and God in all , truly glorified : to the tuition of whose grace , in hearty prayer for your happiness , that you may seek it only in his goodness : I leave you for this time , and for ever till I better know you . 

Your friend as I find cause , ber . N. Gent.  

The Argument . 

Virtue is Wisdom's light , Wisdom her love , 
And Constancy her only life's delight : 
Which Patience in Humility doth prove , 
Humility the eye of Virtue's sight : 
I hat sees the Grace's branches of the Tree , 
Which figure's God , in whom their Glories be . 
A POEM UPON the praise of virtue . The first day's work . 

O my dear Muse , that never couldst endure 
The wicked courses of a wretched mind : 
Nor , ever learnest by cunning to procure 
The hateful comforts of a hellish kind : 
But , ever hast the love of virtue near thee , 
Speak in her praise , that all the world may hear thee . 
Go , tell the greatest Monarch ( where thou goest ) 
She is a Queen to fit his Majesty : 
And , tell the wisest Counsellor thou knowest , 
By her , his wit hath greatest dignity : 
And , tell the fairest , in her fairest grace , 
Fowl is her fair , except she blush her face . 
Tell the Divine , she gives a glorious light , 
Unto the truth of the eternal word : 
Tell Valour , she makes but a bloody fight ; 
Except she guide the hand , that holds the sword : 
Tell all the Arts , their studies are but idle , 
Except she hold the senses in a bridle . 
Tell Honour that her title 's but a tittle , 
Except she build the steps of her estate ▪ 
Tell riches , all her Greatness is but little , 
Except she hold her reckonings at a rate : 
Tell Love , alas , his treasure 's but a toy , 
Except she be the substance of the joy.  
Go , tell the world more than the world can tell , 
All is as naught , where she 's not all in all : 
Tell Excellence , she never doth excel , 
But , when her Grace doth to her Glory fall : 
Tell Truth herself , that in her trump of Fame , 
Her highest Note is only in her name . 
O , were she seen within the sacred sense 
Of her high favour always with the highest ; 
Where Angels Grace , and Grace's excellence , 
Keep her dear Love unto themselves the nighest ; 
then would the world all humbly fall before her , 
And , next to God , in hearts and souls adore her . 
O , could a King but note her Queenlike Nature , 
What Majesty is in an humble mind ; 
How , on the earth she makes a heavenly Creature , 
In being loving , patient , true , and kind : 
And , in her sweetness , sweetly so perceive her , 
no King on earth would for his Kingdom leave her . 
And , could a Queen behold her Glorious Grace , 
How her true Love doth truly lovely make her : 
And what a Sun she sets upon her face , 
That makes the Godly for a Goddess take her : 
She would so truly and so dear love her , 
That , no conceit should from her Court remove her . 
And did the gravest wisest Counsellor , 
But sound the depth of her divine conceit , 
Where perfect Truth is Reason's Paramour : 
When Wisdoms care doth cut off all deceit : 
While sacred judgement in true justice sits , 
Her will should be the Rule of all their Wits . 
And , could the neatest Courtier once behold 
How comely she is with a little cost : 
How far she is from every pleating fold , 
Where , fond expenses are in folly lost : 
They all would leave their Antic Love's desire , 
And , take their patterns from her plain attire . 
And , did the fairest Nymph , or Noblest Maid 
Behold her Beauty in her glorious Brightness , 
Pure in itself , unspotted , not berayed : 
Nor , idly carried with a look of Lightness ; 
They would so far her excellence prefer , 
As , all would leave themselves to follow her . 
And , did the most experienced Officer , 
But note her carriage , in her service care : 
Where Conscience is the true examiner 
Of all the thoughts , where Honours courses are : 
While gracious spirits dwell in earthly Natures : 
The Court would be a place of heavenly Creatures . 
Did the Divine see her Divinity ; 
And , what a spouse unto the soul she is , 
Who , with the world hath no affinity : 
But , in the heavens hath her eternal bliss . 
He would his life , unto her love refer ; 
And , leave the world , for only Love of her . 
And , did the Lawyer look into her laws : 
Where Truth and Love do try the case of life ; 
And wicked Craft can never make a clause , 
To feed Ambition with the fruit of strife : 
But , every plea , in pities conscience prove : 
All Law should only live , but in her love . 
And , did the Soldier , in the points of War , 
See how she sets the honour of the fight : 
How from offences , she doth keep a far , 
Yet , in the quarrel , doth maintain the right : 
And , saves the lyves , hat do to Mercy yield ; 
She should be high Commander of the field . 
She is not locked up in the Miser's Chest , 
Nor , leapt up in the lines of lewd conceit : 
Her life is more in liberty fair blessed , 
then , on the wills of wicked wit to wait : 
no , no , it is too much against her nature : 
To have to do with any wicked creature . 
When she alone doth in her Closet sit , 
Heavens open her the windows of their light : 
And Wisdom's spirit doth inspire her wit , 
While holy Grace , doth guide her spirit right : 
Saints tears , her Ink ; her pens of Angels wings , 
While , to the Glory of her God she sings . 
Her Paper is a pure , unspotted hart , 
Where thoughts are words , written in the lines of love : 
Where Patience points at sorrows inward smart , 
While ruthful passions do Repentance prove : 
And , Truth records , that Grace's eyes may read , 
How souls are healed while sinful hearts do bleed . 
There , all the Angels , in their turns attend ; 
To do their service , in their purest sense ; 
While , Wit and Reason , do their Nature's bend ; 
Unto the life of Love's obedience : 
And gathering so all gracious thoughts together ; 
She wears the Garland , that can never wither . 
There , doth she put the Poets to their pensions , 
Whose Wits are worn with too much worldly study , 
And cannot reach the height of heaven's Inventions : 
But , plod in pools where plashes are too muddy , 
And takes a Muse for Gracious Pleasures play , 
To set her Music in a heavenly Key . 
There , doth she sing , how sweet a thing it is , 
To see the heavens all blessed thoughts embrace : 
How Beauty sees the highest of her Bliss , 
But in the feature of an Angel's face : 
While , Time and Truth do in their trial prove , 
There is no life but in the eternal Love.  
The fading pleasures of Affections play , 
The partial working of imperfect will : 
The feeble state of fickle fancies stay , 
The careless compass of unkindly skill : 
The cursed humour of Inconstancy , 
These hateful humours she doth all defy . 
no , where she loves , it tends but with her life , 
And when she speaks , her judgements shows her wit : 
And , when she writes , her Concord's know no strife , 
What choice conceit shall chief in honour sit : 
But speak , and write , and look , and like , and love , 
All have their blessings in the heavens above . 
She gives the King a high Supremacy , 
And , to his Queen a Gracious Majesty : 
And , to his Court she gives a Decency , 
And to his State she gives an Unity : 
And , to the Rich a superfluity , 
And , to the poor a bounteous charity . 
She gives the Scholar , Understanding sense , 
And , to the Soldier , Resolution : 
And , to the judge an upright Conscience , 
And the Repentant , Absolution : 
The Tradesman , care , to keep his family , 
The Labourer , patience , and Humility . 
She leads a King into his Cabinet , 
And , shows him there the burden of his Crown , 
Before his eyes she doth his Kingdom set , 
And to his God his duty doth set down : 
She shows him there the fall of idle pride , 
And , how his person doth in safety bide . 
She shows him there the honour of her love , 
The ground of Grace in the eternal good : 
She shows the blessing of the souls behoove , 
Upon the breeding of a Royal brood : 
And , that Religion is the Rule of Grace , 
That keeps the kingdom in a happy case . 
She shows him there , the benefit of peace , 
The hurt of War , the hate of Tyranny : 
The joy of Love , the happiness increase : 
Where Wisdoms cares are Honour's company : 
And , sound advice in sacred verity , 
Maintains a Monarch in his Majesty . 
She shows him there , how flattery folly feeds , 
While Reason sees the ruin of self-will ; 
She shows the difference , 'twixt the herbs & weeds , 
Wicked illusion , and discretion's skill ; 
She shows him all , that she thinks fit to show him , 
To strength his State , that nothing overthrow him . 
She shows him there the sweet contentive life 
Is not still carried in varieties ; 
Nor faithful Care doth fear the fatal knife , 
That , is not subject to Impieties : 
But he alone , is all , and only Blessed , 
Who , all in Mercy , hath his spirits Rest.  
She makes him see , that he could never see , 
But , through her sight , the brightness of all Seeing ; 
She makes him be , that he could never be , 
But , in the blessing of her blessed Being : 
Thus , all in sum , she makes him see , and be : 
That without her , he could nor be , nor see . 
She gains him all his Greatness in her Grace , 
His Country's love , the honour of his Court : 
She keeps him safely in his kingly place , 
And , to the world she doth his fame report ; 
And , when from earth Death must his Crown dissever , 
She makes him reign a King in heaven for ever . 
She takes a Queen unto herself aside , 
And , shows her all the Glory of her Grace : 
How , she alone doth make the blessed Bride , 
And , how she keeps her in her highest place : 
She makes the King in glorious Robes attire her , 
And , all the Court , love , honour , and admire her . 
then doth she bring her humbly on her knees , 
And , sets before her the fair book of Bliss , 
Bids her there find that she can never lose , 
The care of life , where every comfort is : 
When lifting up her heart with humble eye , 
She sees a Beauty brighter than the sky . 
There she beholds in Mercies Majesty , 
Her Saviour sitting in a Glorious Throne : 
Where , in the Essence of Eternity , 
He rules all powers in himself , alone : 
When , seeing her thus humbly fall before him , 
He blesseth her that doth so much adore him . 
then , doth she see the Angel's exercise , 
Who , with the Saints and Virgins fit and sing : 
While humble spirits make their Sacrifice , 
Unto the Glory of their Gracious King : 
While , all the Host of all the heaven rejoices , 
To hear the Music of the heavenly voices . 
then , doth she set the Consort of the Quire , 
Where every Note doth keep his Time and Tune : 
The ditty only speaking of Desire , 
Where , love doth only unto Mercy climb : 
Where every Close doth in such comfort meet , 
That all the Heavens are ravished with the sweet . 
She takes the Virgin to her Morning task , 
And sets her down a form of faithful prayer : 
But , covers not her Beauty with a Mask , 
When she hath made her truly heavenly fair : 
But , brings her forth with such a Blessed Grace , 
As , makes him happy that may see her face . 
She shows her in a Glass of Beauty's Truth , 
How , Art doth Nature too much injury ; 
That feebled Ay in forced tricks of Youth , 
In true Conceit is Reason's Mockery ; 
The idle thoughts that spoil the inward eyes , 
Where Love should live , but in dishonour dies , 
She shows her there the Maiden-blush complexion , 
Betwixt the cherry red , and snowy White : 
And , reads her then the precepts of perfection , 
Within the circle of Diana's fight ▪ 
She shows her all the Titles of desert , 
And , that true honour lives but in the hart . 
She never taught the Eye to leer nor lower , 
Tongue , idle talk ; nor mind , ungracious thought ▪ 
She never set a countenance sharp and sour , 
Nor , fetch 't a sigh upon a thing of naught : 
But , shows her Judgement of so just a Measure , 
As , proves her Wisdom worth a world of Treasure . 
She shows her then , how Fancy like a Flea , 
Can skip about a skittish humoured hart : 
And , how that sorrow like the Ocean Sea , 
Can drown the spirit in a deadly smart : 
While , Melancholy doth oppress the Mind , 
Where better humours have no place to find . 
then , doth she take the Counsailour alone , 
And , shows him all the secrets of his hart , 
Bids him behold the Mournful Widow's moan , 
The Orphans tears , the grieved Suitors smart : 
Love , fear , and serve , first God , and then his King , 
And , do no work that may his Conscience wring . 
She tells him then , the heavenly Consistory 
Doth only sit upon the spirits good : 
Where , in the fight of sacred Wisdom's eye , 
Cannot a clawse amiss be understood : 
While , Truth itself , that pleads the poor man's case , 
From Mercies justice hath impartial Grace . 
then ▪ doth she take aside the Courtier , 
And , shows him all the fruits of idleness ; 
That , fancy is but folly's Treasurer , 
While Wit is thrall unto unthriftines : 
While Pride presuming on deceiving Hope , 
Grief doth the Gate , but to Repentance open . 
She tells him there she never taught the eye 
To feed the spirit with an idle Gaze : 
She never taught the tongue to walk awry , 
Nor , brought the mind into a wilful Maze : 
She never taught the fashion , nor the cost , 
Where , Wisdom sees time , and expense but lost . 
She never teacheth to play fast and loose , 
Nor , juggle with a false conceived joy : 
Nor , let the Fox be taken by a Goose , 
Nor , ever sold a treasure for a toy : 
She never taught him to misspend his time , 
Nor higher state than his desert to climb . 
She never taught him how to crouch , nor creep , 
Nor scorn , nor scoff , nor hang the head aside : 
Nor sigh , nor sob , nor wipe the eye , and weep , 
Nor hateful thoughts in loving looks to hide ▪ 
no , no , she is or a more heavenly Nature , 
then , with such by-wit to abuse a Creature . 
then , doth she call for every Officer , 
And bids him strictly look into his Oath , 
That , Conscience may be true deliverer 
Of an unspotted , simple faith , and troth : 
That service love by duties care discharged , 
In Honour's eye make due Reward enlarged . 
then , doth she take account of his accounts , 
How , all the sums do with the parcels 'gree : 
And , how much cunning Conscience surmounts , 
And , what in fine , the final sum will be : 
And , tells him that a counting day will come , 
When he shall make account for all and some . 
Thus , when she hath the Courtiers all read over , 
She calls the Lawyer to a conscience case , 
And , tells him , Truth is Learning's only Lover , 
Who , never puts the poor Man out of place : 
But , holds the hand of justice weight so even , 
As if the Balance had the Beam in Heaven . 
She never takes a Bribe to make a Motion , 
Nor , soothes a Client in a false Conceit ; 
She never seeks an undeserved promotion , 
Nor sells her Beauty unto the poor by weight ; 
no , she is true , and just , and wise , and kind , 
And , as she thinks , will ever speak her mind . 
then doth she take the Soldier in his Tent , 
And shows him there the hideous fight of blood : 
That , Mercy ever with true valour went , 
To spoil the wicked , but to spare the good : 
That , Conquest never is in true perfection , 
But , when a Man can Master his Affection . 
She teacheth not a wicked Stratagem , 
Nor , how for Coin to buy and sell a Town : 
Nor to usurp a princely Diadem , 
Nor raise the vile , nor put the virtuous down : 
no , when she once begins to levy Arms , 
The good have Grace , the only wicked harms . 
She never prayed upon the poor Man's purse , 
Nor tyranized upon the Prisoner : 
She never reaped the Mournful Widow's Curse , 
Nor of an Infant was a Murderer : 
She never was by Sea nor Land a Thief , 
But had Compassion on the poor Man's grief . 
Thus having showed the Soldier what she knows , 
Becomes the carriage of a Noble Mind : 
She calls the Merchant , and to him she shows , 
That , Conscience care is of a heavenly kind : 
While no corruption can the soul infect , 
That to the spirit hath a due respect . 
She shows him there , there is no ware , nor weight , 
But the all-seeing-eye in secret sees , 
And , that no cunning can excuse deceit , 
Which gaining dross ; doth better silver lose : 
She tells him plain it is all got gain , 
For fading pleasure gets eternal pain . 
She tells him , that the adventure on the Sea , 
Is not all blessed to enrich the covetous : 
Nor to maintain the Epicure his Ease . 
The proud , the bad , nor the vicious : 
But , to provide for need , and to relieve 
The needy hart , whom gripping want doth grieve . 
In some she shows him that the spirits wealth , 
Is free from all unconscionable ill ▪ 
And , howsoever , Wit doth work by stealth , 
There is no Wisdom but the Gracious will : 
Where careful Love , where Comfort never wastes , 
Lays up the Treasure that for ever lasteth . 
then , doth she call on every Trade and Art , 
And , still cries out , have care of Conscience , 
Bids every eye , look well into the hart , 
And , not be carried with a wicked sense : 
For , in the day of the eternal Doom , 
Plainness in heaven will have a princely Room . 
What , though sometime her habit be but poor , 
Her lodging hard , her diet spare and thin : 
She stand disgraced at the rich man's door , 
And fast without , while other feast within : 
Yet , is she better with her Cross contented , 
then , sport with sins , to have her soul tormented . 
And , though sometime she sit and hold her peace , 
While , idle heads do use their tongues at large : 
And , grieve to see true Learning's worth decrease , 
When that a Dunce doth take a Doctor's charge ; 
Yet , may the world in all her courses know , 
't is not her will , God knows it shall be so . 
And , though sometime she be in fetters tied , 
While wicked spirits walk at liberty , 
And , be enforced her fairest thoughts to hide , 
While hateful thoughts are had in Dignity : 
Yet hath she patience to endure her crosses , 
While heavenly gain doth countervail her losses . 
O , could the world discern her worthiness , 
In all true honour , in all honour's truth : 
How she doth only give a happiness 
Unto the gravest Age , and greenest Youth : 
Even from the King , unto the poorest Creature , 
She would be honoured in a heavenly Nature . 
But , let the world esteem her as it will , 
She shall be worth more than the world is worth : 
And , when the world shall blush to see her ill , 
then shall she bring her heavenly Beauty forth : 
And make them all confess unto their faces , 
Her Glory puts them all unto disgraces . 
She never speaks but Truth , nor doth but well , 
Her thoughts all pure , and grounded on perfection : 
She doth among the holy Muses dwell , 
And guide's the Graces , all by her direction : 
She is the Body's Grace , the spirits Queen , 
In whom all Graces have their Glory seen . 
O , that I could describe her in her height , 
As God and her good Grace might give me leave : 
How all the Saints , and all the Angels wait , 
But on her will , and from the same receive 
The highest substance of their heavenly Bliss , 
In whom alone all heavenly Blessing is . 
then should the world be all ashamed to see , 
How basely they her glorious Grace regarded : 
And grieve in souls to think that ever she 
Should for her service be so ill rewarded : 
That few or none , wise , fond , nor rich , nor poor , 
But ready are to thrust her out of door . 
then should the Courts of Prince's flock unto her , 
And Lords and Ladies sue to her for Grace : 
And happy souls that best can service do her , 
And seek their life but in her lovely face : 
And then her Grace , such should a Glory bear , 
That there should be no world but where she were . 
But since her worth is to the world unknown , 
And only Heaven doth her dear Love embrace : 
Her worth is more than can in words be shown , 
While Grace itself can only show her Grace : 
Let me but leave her in all Admiration , 
To Virgins , Saints , and Angels Adoration . 
And let me say but what in soul I find , 
She is the Essence of all Excellence : 
The Eye , the Heart , the Body , and the Mind , 
Where holy Rules have all their Residence : 
Of all good Motions the first only Mover , 
The proof of love , and of Love's proof the Lover . 
The strength of Truth , th' assurance of all Trust , 
The Concordance of all contentive cares : 
The judgement of the Wisdom of the Just , 
The sacred shop of the Celestial war : 
The lemme for which no price can be too great , 
th' eternal Manna for the spirits Meat . 
The Eye of light , where Love hath all his life , 
The tongue of Truth , where Wisdom hath her words : 
The heart of peace , where patience knows no strife , 
The hand of Bounty that all Grace affords : 
The face of Beauty where all Brightness shines , 
The soul of wonder that all worth defineth . 
The soil wherein all sweetness ever groweth , 
The Fountain whence all Wisdom ever springeth ; 
The wind that never but all blessing blows , 
The Air that all comfort ever bringeth : 
The fire that ever life with love inflameth , 
The figure that all true perfection frameth ▪ 
The study of the soul's Intelligence , 
The Art of Wisdom's high Invention : 
The Rule of Reason's best Experience , 
The work of Mercies Glorious Mention : 
The ground of Honour , and discretion's Grace , 
Place's perfection , and perfections place . 
All this , and more than I can speak or write , 
In Virtue lives , and to her love belongs : 
And , though the world do bar her of her right , 
Yet heaven will one day right her of her wrong ▪ 
And make the world to know her gracious Nature , 
And , how she only makes the Glorious Creature . 
And , since that day will one day come unwares , 
When she will call a Court of all her Teanures , 
And , see the fruit of all her servant's wares , 
And , take an order for all Misdemeanures : 
Let all the world be fearful to offend her , 
And think them happy that can best attend her . 
Let every Creature seek and sue to serve her , 
And every King , and Lord , and Lady love her : 
And every heart endeavour to deserve her , 
And every Mind for some good Motion move her : 
And every tongue in true perfection praise her , 
And every soul to endless Glory raise her . 
And let me ask a pardon of heaven's Grace , 
For my poor spirits mounting up so high : 
Who , for my sins doth bid me hide my face , 
And not to heaven to dare to lift mine eye : 
And say no more , but end as I begun , 
She is a Queen of Queens , and I have done . 
And since that Virtue never can be seen , 
But by the Eye of Wisdom's sacred sense : 
Where she beholds her as the Blessed Queen , 
That wears the Crown of Reason's excellence : 
Let me beseech the Heavens my soul to Raise , 
To speak of Wisdom in her worthy praise . 
And , though I know , and cannot but confess 
My thoughts unable to aspire so high , 
And every way , but all unworthiness 
In me , to write of such a Mystery : 
Yet let my heart a little tell my Mind , 
What wonder worth , in Wisdom's works I find . 
Gloria in excelsis Deo.  

Upon the praise of Wisdom . The second day's work . 

From the vain humours of unseasoned Wit , 
Whose heedless will breeds nothing else but woe : 
Among the seats where sacred spirits sit , 
The holy pleasures of the heavens to know : 
My humble Muse learn what perfection says , 
In Glorious Wisdoms never ending praise . 
She is the spirit of the highest power , 
The Essence of all pureness Excellence : 
The compass of the everlasting hour , 
The Virtue of all pureness Quintessence : 
The knowledge that all knowledge only giveth , 
And only life , in which , life only lives . 
She sits in counsel with the Trinity , 
And is th' Almighty's secret Secretary : 
She keeps the Graces in an Unity , 
And doth the charge of all their service carry : 
Before Creation she did make Election , 
And for the Action she did give direction . 
She calls the Angels each one by their names , 
And sets the Saints and Martyrs in their places : 
Their Hymns and Songs unto their Lord she frames , 
And to their Music gives especial Graces : 
The Seraphins she makes to clap their wings , 
While all the Heavens their Haleluiah sings . 
Amid the sky she set the Sun and Moon , 
And made division 'twixt the day and night : 
She made the morning and the after noon , 
And set each planet in his place aright : 
She pricked the Stars upon the Firmament , 
And gave a life to every Element . 
She made the times the seasons of the year , 
The change of Natures , and the notes of choice : 
She made perfection every way appear , 
And in her labours made her Love rejoice : 
So by desert the highest did her call 
High Officer , and work Mistress of all . 
She made the Earth in compass like a Ball , 
Betwixt the water and the sky depending : 
Yet hangs so fast , that it can never fall , 
Until all earthly things must have an ending : 
And having framed it as she thought it meet , 
Made it a footstool for her Master's feet . 
She made the Seas , the Brooks , the Fountain spring's : 
The Trees , the Fruits , the Herbs , and every Flower : 
The Fish , the Beast , and every Bird that sings : 
The Year , the Month , the Week , the day , the hour : 
The outward shape , and every inward sense , 
And every Star a sundry influence . 
She framed Man the last of every Creature , 
But yet the best , and to her love the nearest : 
She gave his heart a kind of heavenly nature , 
And held his life unto her love the dearest : 
She made him all things by their names to call , 
And under God , Lord Governor of all . 
She taught him only how to know the good , 
But never taught him how to know the evil : 
She fed his spirit with a wholesome food , 
Till Pride did bring him poison from the Devil : 
She made him then his folly to confess , 
And then his faith in Mercy find redress . 
She gave his soul a Mind above his Hart , 
His Hart , a feeling of his spirits Nature : 
His Nature , Reason ▪ and his Reason , Art ; 
His Art , a knowledge of each earthly Creature : 
His Knowledge , Honour ; and his Honour , Grace , 
His Grace a favour , in a Glorious place . 
She read him all the Rules of Learning's Love , 
The Natural , the Moral , and Divine : 
She showed the Blessing of the souls behoove , 
That doth not wholly to the earth decline : 
She shows the way unto eternal Bliss , 
And , for the world , how base a thing it is . 
Yet , when she made the world for her best Grace , 
She sets a Course , and Rule for every thing : 
For Nature , Reason , Action , Time , and Place , 
How best proportion might perfection bring ; 
And , how in all might all things so agree , 
That in their Concord's , might no discord be . 
In scale , and feather , hair , and skin , and hue , 
In substance , sense , in colour , shape , and feature : 
How they were first begot , and how they grew , 
And how each one should differ in their Nature : 
Yet , differing so , they might together live , 
That none might other hurt , or hindrance give . 
But unto Man , she only gave a mind , 
To look into the life of every Nature : 
And give them names , and use them in their kind , 
And take commandment of each kind of Creature : 
And by her will to walk among them so , 
That every one should him their service owe.  
She made each hair , each Artir , and each vain , 
The flesh the bones , the finnowes , and the skin : 
The heart , the lytes , the liver , and the brain , 
The outward Beauty , and the strength within : 
And to his soul did give that heavenly Nature , 
That made in all the admirable Creature . 
She gave him wings to mount above the wind , 
And inward Eyes to see above the Sun : 
And by her Rules did make his Reason find , 
How Sun , and Moon , & Stars their courses run : 
How Seamen by the pole their courses guide , 
And by the Moon the turn of every Tide . 
She makes him find the Heaven's operations , 
Upon the Bodies of the earth below : 
She makes him by his spirits contemplations 
Upon the earth , things above Earth to know : 
And to his knowledge doth that Virtue give , 
As learns him only to his God to live . 
She makes a difference in the Minds of Men , 
She crowns the Princes , and entitleth Honour ; 
She writes their Stories with a perfect Pen , 
And doth advance them that do tend upon her : 
She makes them Blessed that do in patience prove her , 
And live for ever that do truly love her . 
She doth instruct the King in all his care , 
Where Mercies justice bears a blessed sword : 
She shows the Peers when they in counsel are , 
What favour heavens the faithful hearts afford : 
She shows the people the due loyalty , 
That Subjects owe unto their Sovereignty . 
She makes the Courtier not misspend his time , 
She bids the Soldier spare the Innocent ; 
And the Divine beware the Conscience crime , 
And makes the Lawyer a good Student : 
She makes the Merchant honest with his wealth , 
And , labour keep the labouring Man in health . 
She teacheth every Science , and each Art , 
And shows the Truth of every Argument : 
And makes distinctions upon every part , 
And is of all the only Ornament : 
She shows the Student in Divinity , 
Heaven with the world hath no Affinity . 
She feeds no fancy with an idle fashion , 
Yet fashions all things in a comely frame : 
She never knew Repentance woeful passion , 
Nor ever feared the blot of wicked blame : 
But even and true what ever she intended , 
Wrought all so well , that none could be amended . 
She never whirls about an idle Wit , 
Nor taketh pleasure in a wanton Eye : 
Nor in the seat of pride did ever sit , 
Nor from the poor did turn her hand awry : 
Nor maintained wealth with wretched Misery , 
Nor sought for honour by Indignity . 
no , no , that Man that would his Mistress make her , 
That Woman that doth choose her for her Lover : 
That Man , or Woman that doth only take her 
For their best Love , and in their hearts do love her : 
In ravished sweetness of her Beauty's Blisses , 
Will dwell upon her lips in lovely Kisses . 
She never yet did harm to any living , 
Nor is there any good but that she doth : 
To every soul she is her Comfort giving ; 
And with her sweetness so Affection wooeth , 
That they who could in Love's perfection prove her , 
Would hate themselves , and if they did not love her . 
She lays the lines of life in Virtue's love , 
Imploies the Mind in holy Meditations : 
The hart , in study of the souls behoove , 
The spirit , in Love's Contemplations 
The tongue , in speaking truth on every part , 
The soul , in prayer , for a faithful hart . 
She never was acquainted with Corruption , 
Not came within the Air of all Infection : 
Her purpose never had an Interruption , 
Nor ever was she crossed in her direction : 
But sound and sure she caries so her skill , 
That in all good , there can be found no ill . 
She is the fairest of all Beauty's Fame , 
She is the sweetest of all Reason's sense : 
She is the Noblest of all Honour's name , 
She is the strongest of all Love's defence : 
She is the richest of all earthly Treasure , 
And purest substance of the Spirits pleasure . 
O , what can there be more ? that she should be ? 
Or , how should she be more than that she is ? 
That all may see , and more than all may see , 
The blessed Being of all Being Bliss ; 
All Infinite , in all perfections ways , 
And Infinite , in all perfections praise . 
And , being then in goodness all so Good , 
As , being best , a better cannot be : 
Which , in herself is only understood , 
And in herself , herself can only see : 
What life of Grace ? but would in love admire her , 
Or Gracious love could live , and not desire her ? 
But since that love is the true life indeed , 
Of which she is , by which she only lives : 
From which she hath her only happy spied , 
To which she oweth all the good she giveth ; 
Let me the purest of my passion prove , 
To see her Glory in the Grace of love . 
THE PRAISE OF Love. The third day's work . 

OH Love that livest in that only light , 
Which gives all seeing to all gracious Eyes : 
But keepest thy sense from that ungodly sight , 
That in the darkness of Illusion dies : 
Lighten my soul that it may clearly see , 
How thou in Wisdom , Wisdom lives in thee . 
The Angels can in their Atonements tell , 
How kindly thou dost make them live together : 
And where the Saints and holy Martyrs dwell , 
The holy Muses bring their Music thither , 
And while the Host of all the Heavens rejoice , 
thou tun'st the heartstrings of the highest voice . 
Love is the Essence of Eternity , 
That works the course of Wisdom's carriage : 
Where the high counsel of the Deity , 
'twixt Heaven and Earth do make a Marriage : 
While in the life of Holiness alone , 
The Lord of Heaven , and his true Church are one . 
It lays the plot , and draws the lines of pleasure , 
Within the ground of Grace's Paradise : 
It works the Truth , that is the spirits Treasure , 
And builds the height of Honour's Dignities : 
It bends the Eyes of Grace's Royalty , 
And knits the hearts of Virtue's Loyalty . 
It is no Object for an earthly Eye , 
Nor any Muse for any worldly mind : 
Although the world in true effects may try ; 
It is a spirit of a powerful kind ; 
And such a power , as all powers do submit ; 
To the Invincible power of it . 
It maketh Will do only what it list , 
While Wisdom guide's the Axill Tree of wit : 
And never fears the hurt of had I wist , 
That sees a Cross , and is content with it : 
While patience finds the only fair perfection , 
Of Fancies faith , in favours true Affection . 
It is a substance that admits no figure , 
For in itself it breeds but of exceed : 
While in the Notes of pleasures truest Nature , 
The fruits of Faith are Fancies only feeding : 
While in conceit those high Contentments meet , 
That happy souls are ravished with the sweet . 
To comprehend , it passeth Comprehension , 
And to define , 't is undefinable : 
And to describe , it doth exceed Invention , 
And to conceive , 't is unconceivable : 
Yet by the Virtue that our sense it gives , 
Our Reason finds that in our souls it lives . 
It is a fire that kindleth in the Eye , 
It is an Air that cooleth Furies heat : 
It is a water that is never dry , 
A Paradise , where grows the spirits meat ; 
Thus it partakes of every Element , 
Yet lives above the highest Firmament . 
It is a thought begotten by a sight , 
And 't is a sight that lives in the thought ; 
It is a life that breedeth in delight , 
And a delight that life hath only wrought ; 
It is a word that by true spirits spoken , 
Doth knit a knot that never can be broken . 
O , how it doth a blessed Nature nourish , 
And how it doth an humble spirit cherish : 
And how it makes a faithful heart to flourish , 
And suffers not a Gracious soul to perish : 
Witness those hearts whose perfect spirits prove , 
How love in Wisdom , Wisdom lives in love . 
Fortune can never have a force to foil it , 
Nor fear to fright , nor envy to annoy it ; 
Nor passion to hurt , impatience to spoil it , 
Nor Death to kill , nor Devil to destroy it : 
But where all pleasures spring , and perish never , 
here , or in Heaven it hath a life for ever . 
From the fair Brightness of a Beauteous Eye , 
It caries honour to an humble hart : 
And from the heart of Truths Humility , 
It gains the comfort of a kind desert : 
And in true kindness , that content alone , 
That of two Bodies makes the Mind but one . 
It brought down Heaven to Earth , brings Earth to Heaven , 
It walks about the circle of the Sun : 
It makes the Planets keep their orders e'en , 
And Nature kindly all her courses run : 
It sits upon the holy seat of Grace , 
And with the highest , hath the highest place . 
It keeps all Order , Measure , Rule , and Right , 
In Nature , Reason , Wisdom , Wit , and Sense ▪ 
In word , and deed , and thought , by day and night , 
In time and place , in Case , and Mood , and Tense : 
Where all proportions are in such perfection , 
As shows the depth of the divine direction . 
It makes the husband kind unto his wife , 
The spouse obedient to her faithful fere : 
And in that kindness that contentive life , 
That only doth but in that life appear : 
The Children gracious , and the Parents kind , 
And each in other what they wish to find . 
brethren and sisters live in Unity , 
And Neighbours live in friendly Neighbourhood : 
And friends continue in true Amity , 
And strangers unto strangers to do good : 
Princes in Peace , and Subjects live in Grace , 
And so the earth to prove a heavenly place . 
O , how it fights against infamous thought , 
And kills the Nature of an ill conjecture : 
How true it hath the life of Virtue taught , 
And builds the height of Honour's Architecture : 
How little it regards all earthly toys , 
And surely leads the soul to endless joys . 
How sweetly on the Nurse's lips it lies , 
While she is bussing of her little Baby : 
And how it twinkles in the Infant's eyes , 
In learning of his Christ's Cross , and his A. B : 
How cherry-red it dies a snowy white , 
Where Maiden-blushes make a blessed sight . 
Love makes the Triumphs of the truest joys , 
And sounds the Trumpet of the sweetest sound : 
Love speaks in hearts , and makes no idle noise , 
But is in some of every Grace the ground : 
It is a Riddle above Reason's sense , 
And of exceed all the excellence . 
It makes the thought , the word and deed all one , 
It binds the eye , the hand , and heart together : 
It is in truth the only Tree alone , 
Which keeps his green where not a leaf can wither : 
It is the Bird that only sings in May , 
And makes the holy spirits holy day . 
It takes away the tediousness from time , 
The pain from patience , in desire delays : 
The fear from care , the hearts content to climb , 
The sloth from labour in his hardest ways : 
The frailty from the Nature of Affection , 
And folly from the passion of perfection . 
It is a Virtue of that sacred sense , 
In working wonders in the spirits power : 
As in the height of Reason's Excellence , 
Upon the top of Truth's eternal Tower : 
Doth stand with such a Grace of heavenly Glory , 
As may be called the state of Wisdom's story , 
And since it is so infinite in worth , 
As doth exceed his pen of Reason's praise : 
Who from the soul of Wisdom issue's forth , 
As from the Sun his brightest shining Rays : 
Let me here cease , and all in Admiration , 
Leave it to Wisdoms only declaration . 
And since it doth in nothing more appear , 
then in the Nature of true Constancy : 
Which is a Virtue to the soul to dear , 
As keeps the soul from Errors Ecstasy ; 
Let me a little speak of that sweet Nature , 
Of Constancy that makes the Blessed Creature . 
THE PRAISE OF Constancy . The fourth day's work . 

OH Constancy , thou only kingly thought , 
That keeps the spirit in her purest kind : 
And hast against all idle frailty fought , 
And like a Mountain set lest fast the Mind : 
Let me conceive some part of thy content , 
Where pleasures spirit is most sweetly spent . 
And though I cannot reach that Royal height , 
Wherein thy sacred Majesty doth sit : 
Yet as a Servant let me humbly wait , 
To see thine honour , and to speak of it : 
And so to speak , that all the world may see 
Wisdom's Loves , Honour only lives in thee . 
The constant Eye hath never wand'ring fight , 
The constant Ear hath no unkindly hearing : 
The constant Tongue doth ever speak aright , 
The constant Heart hath ever happy cheering : 
The constant Mind the fairest thoughts unfold thee , 
The constant Soul on earth & heaven behold thee . 
It never hath a thought of jealousy , 
Nor stands upon Opinions Parador : 
Nor runs a fury into frenzy , 
Nor fears the Wolf , nor joineth with the Fox : 
But like the Phoenix in a sunny fire , 
Finds life's delight in ashes of desire . 
It loves no change , and breeds the joy of choice , 
It fears no fortune , nor it serves no folly : 
It keeps the Rule where Reason doth rejoice , 
And is the substance of contentment wholly : 
It is a stay that strengtheneth the Mind , 
And knit the senses in a sacred Kind . 
It is the true foundation of all strength , 
Which while it holds , the frame can never fall : 
It is the line that draws the longest length , 
And ever is , that sees the end of all : 
It keeps the Rules of the Heaven's revolution , 
And doth confirm all Reason's resolution . 
It is the lock upon the heart of love , 
A Chest that keeps the treasure of the Mind : 
Within the soul a Rock that cannot move 
A Band ▪ that doth the thoughts together bind . 
A light where Wisdom Virtue's honour seeth , 
And life where only Grace with love agreeth . 
It keeps the Sun in his continual brightness , 
The air in coolness , and the earth in dryness : 
Water in moisture , and the wind in lightness , 
The fire in hotnes , and the flame in highness : 
The good in goodness , and the kind in kindness , 
The mind from madness , and the eye from blindness . 
It was the mover first of marriage , 
And made the first continuance of content : 
It set the course of Wisdom's carriage , 
And never further than affection went : 
It is the state of all perfections stay , 
And Times all ever lasting holy day . 
It is the Crown of Patience kingly care , 
The seat where Mercy sits in Majesty : 
The Law wherein all blessed precepts are , 
The fame of Love , and league of Amity ; 
The learning of the wisest wits instruction , 
And sense of the most sweetest thoughts construction . 
Above the Heavens it lives with the highest , 
And in the Heavens it dwelleth with the purest : 
And to the Nature of the best the nighest , 
And in the sense of all conceits the surest : 
And in the Action of all Art the strongest , 
And in the length of Time , and Truth the longest . 
It keeps the centre of the earth from moving , 
The swelling Sea from passing of his Bounds : 
The Rules of true perfection from Reproving , 
The health of Wisdom from all follies Wounds ; 
The circle of the world in such a frame , 
That Admiration may commend the same . 
O , how it writes the worthiness of those , 
That strove for honour to the stroke of death : 
And how without comparison it shows , 
The mouth of Wisdom blessed in her breath : 
And how it makes the fame of them to flourish , 
That with their Bounty virtuous spirits nourish . 
It made the Mirror of all Martyrdom , 
And in the faithful makes a Glorious fight : 
And in the day of the Eternal doom , 
It will be Gracious in all Glorious sight : 
Where hopes continuance in all kindness care , 
Brings humble faith to endless happy fare . 
And since it is so infinite a Grace , 
As may deserve as infinite a praise : 
And is the fullness of the fairest place , 
In all the walk of Wit , and Reasons ways : 
Where patience proves the best experience , 
Let me a little sing of Patience . 
THE PRAISE OF Patience . The fifth day's work . 

Sweet Patience thou sovereign of perfection , 
Of Gracious thoughts the only Governess : 
Who by the Rules of thy divine direction , 
Dost bring the heart to highest Happiness : 
My humble soul with thy sweet love inflame , 
That I may sing in honour of thy name . 
The purest thought that ever heart possessed , 
The clearest Object of the carefullest Eye : 
The present Medicine for the Mind distressed , 
The only ease in every Misery : 
In all the proof of Wit's Experience , 
In heart , and mind , and soul , is patience . 
It puts off fear of Fortune's forwardness , 
And only rests on Resolution : 
It wrestles with the world's untowardnes . 
And holds the state of Reason's Constitution : 
It conquers Will , and so doth carry Wit , 
That both are happy only but in it . 
It breeds no wroth , nor moveth Envy's ill , 
It breaks no concord , nor dissension stirs : 
It learns the spirit an especial skill , 
Where Reasons care Repentance not incurs : 
And if Repentance , folly do enforce , 
It is a mean unto a sweet remorse . 
It beareth want as if it were no woe , 
And suffers wrong as if it had no sense : 
It swallows sorrow as it were not so , 
And taketh Death for life's Ingredience : 
It neither feeds of fortune , fear nor fate , 
But always is all one in every state . 
In time it keeps the compass of the hour , 
In action , order , measure , point , and place : 
In thought , the temper of the spirits power , 
In Wit and Reason all the Rules of Grace : 
In Grace the ground of that perfections story , 
That goeth near the height of Virtue's Glory . 
It makes the entrance into every Action , 
Continues the proceedings , makes the end : 
It kills the Nature of unquiet Faction , 
And of a foe sometime doth make a friend : 
It doth conceal the heart's calamity , 
And makes a Virtue of Necessity . 
By Patience we do our souls possess , 
And tread the path to our soul's Paradise : 
While the impatient in their soul's distress , 
Headlong fall into their soul's Miseries ; 
It is a salve that heals the soul's grief , 
Sorrows ranked poison , and the soul's relief . 
Patience doth try the Truth of every thing , 
Distils the spirits of the purest Natures : 
Teacheth the Muse her Music notes to sing , 
And finds the difference of all kinds of Creatures : 
Gives body's health , and makes the spirits diet , 
And brings the soul unto Eternal quiet . 
It keeps the Husband chaste until he marry , 
The Wife obedient to her Band of love : 
It makes the Mother for her Child to tarry , 
And Servants wait for their Rewards behoove : 
It makes the Seaman tarry for a wind , 
And poor men wait till richer men have dined . 
It makes the wounded Man endure his dressing , 
The sick Man see the losing of his blood : 
The poor Man bear the pain of his oppressing , 
The good Man against evil to do good : 
The wise Man study for the state of Bliss , 
The holy Man find where all blessing is . 
It keeps the King from thought of Cruelty , 
The Noble Peer from Pride's Ambition : 
The Counsailour from all Impiety , 
The Courtier from all ill condition : 
The Churchman from the error of self-will , 
The Layman from the exercise of ill . 
By patience David had a Princely fame , 
And , job his patience hath a worthy praise : 
But Christ his patience hath the Glorious name , 
That ever lives to never ending days : 
Since then in God and Man it is so glorious , 
Let it be held a Virtue all victorious . 
In God it doth a work of Mercy show , 
In Mercy Comfort , and in Comfort Grace : 
In Grace that love from which that life doth flow , 
That shows where Patience hath a happy place : 
O blessed Patience that in Man doth prove , 
God's Mercies comfort in his Gracious love . 
It brings the heart to Love's Humility , 
Humility to Truths simplicity : 
And simple Truth to Cares Tranquillity , 
And quiet Care to faith's felicity : 
And happy faith unto that fairest Bliss , 
In which the fairest of all Blessing is . 
And since that in Humility I find 
True Patience hath her purest Residence : 
And brings the heart , the spirit , and the mind 
Unto the height of Reason's Excellence : 
Let me a little show what Virtue says , 
In setting down Humilities due praise . 
THE PRAISE OF Humility . The sixth day's work . 

O the sweet sense of love's Humility , 
Which fears displeasure in a dearest friend : 
The only note of true Nobility , 
Whose worthy Grace is graced without end : 
While faithful love in humble Truth approved , 
Doth ever live of God and Man beloved . 
Her Grace is Gracious in the sight of God , 
Makes men as Saints , and women Angels seem , 
Makes sin forgotten , Mercy use no Rod , 
And constant Faith to grow in great esteem : 
And is in some a Blessing of the Highest , 
And to the Nature of himself the Nighest . 
It maketh Beauty like the Sun to shine , 
As if on earth there were a heavenly light : 
It maketh Wit in Wisdom so divine , 
As if the Eye had Celestial sight : 
It is a Guide unto that Haven of Rest , 
Where Blessed souls do live for ever blessed . 
In Christ it is a Grace of worthy Glory . 
In Man from God , a gift of special Grace : 
While in the state of Virtue's honours story , 
Wisdom doth find it in perfections place : 
And placed so high in the Almighty's love , 
As nothing more can Mercies comfort prove . 
It makes the eye look down into the heart , 
The heart obedient unto wit and sense : 
And every limb to play a Servant's part , 
Unto the will of Wit's pre-eminence : 
It brings the Mind unto the Body so , 
That one the other cannot overgo . 
It is the death of pride , and patience love , 
Passions Physician , Reason's Counsailour : 
Religions Darling , labour's Turtle Dove , 
Learning's Instructor , Grace's Register : 
Times best Attendants , & Truths best Explainer , 
Virtue's best Lover , and Love's truest Gainer . 
It is the Prince's Grace , the Subject's duty , 
The Scholar's lesson , and the Soldiers line : 
The Courtier's credit , and the Lady's Beauty , 
The Lawyer's virtue , and the love divine : 
That makes all senses Gracious in his sight , 
Where all true Graces have their Glorious light . 
It makes the heart fit for all good Impression , 
It doth prepare the spirit for perfection : 
It brings the soul unto her sin's confession , 
It helps to clear the body from infection : 
It is the mean to bring the mind to rest , 
Where heart , soul , body , mind , and all are blessed . 
It made the Mother of the Son of God , 
Gracious in him who made her full of Grace : 
And on her Son it blessedly abode , 
In bearing all the filthy worlds deface : 
And in his Servants for their Master's love , 
Did Faith's affections in their passions prove . 
It saved Abrahami Son from Sacrifice , 
When Isaaks death was quit by the Ram ; 
It saved Noah and his Progenies , 
Where on the earth destruction's Deluge came ; 
It saved Lot from hurt of Sodoms' fire , 
And Israel from cruel Pharaohs ire . 
It wrought in David Gracious penitence , 
In Niniveh a sweet submission : 
In job a famous Blessed patience , 
In Paul assurance of his sin's Remission : 
In john the habit of a holy love , 
In Christ the Grace that did all Glory prove . 
It ever holds the hand of faithfulness , 
And ever keeps the Mind of Goldlines : 
And ever brings the heart to quietness , 
And ever leads the soul to happiness : 
And is a Virtue of that Blessedness , 
That merit's praise in highest worthiness . 
O how it gains the Child the Parent's love , 
The wife her husband , and the servant's Masters : 
Where humble faith in happy hopes behoove , 
Finds patience care , discomforts healing plasters : 
And truest course of cares Tranquillity , 
Only to rest but in Humility . 
And since that in the life of humble love , 
I see the way unto the well of Bliss : 
Where Patience doth in all perfection prove , 
Where the high Blessing of all Blessings is : 
Let my soul pray that I may humbly sing , 
The heavenly praises of my holy King.  
Of the infinite praise to the infinite glory of the infinite goodness of the infinite God. The seventh day's work . 

OH Glorious God , and God of only Glory , 
Essence and substance of all excellence : 
The ground the grace , the state , & all the story , 
Of Virtues , Wisdoms , Grace's Residence : 
Inspire my soul with those pure thoughts perfection , 
That show some sparkle of thy love's affection . 
And let me not presume a look too high , 
Lest thou abridge the Blessing of thy love : 
Nor yet so low , let me embrace mine eyes . 
As thy fair praises may unfitly prove : 
But so thy goodness every where to know , 
That every where I may thy Glory show . 
And though my soul polluted all with sin , 
Unworthy be of the least thought of Grace : 
Yet let thy Grace a Glorious work begin , 
Thy holy spirit in my heart to place : 
That to the date of never ending days , 
My soul may sing thine everlasting praise . 
Before there was a light , there was a light , 
Which saw the world , the world could never see : 
From which , the world receives her brightest sight , 
And brightness more than in the world may be : 
O heavenly light above all earthly seeing , 
Where only Virtue hath her only being . 
From the fair Brightness of this Beauteous light , 
Hath Wisdom's eye an only power to see : 
The line of life that leads her spirit right , 
Unto the place where all perfections be : 
Which in the work of wonder do approve , 
The Gracious labour of a Glorious love . 
There Virtue doth in all her brightness live , 
Spreading abroad the branches of her Bliss : 
As doth the Son his beams of brightness give , 
While in himself the only brightness is : 
O blessed light where such a life remaineth , 
As gives all light , and yet all light containeth . 
There doth she sit , and sweetly look about her , 
Beholding in the eye of Virtue's light : 
Pureness within , perfection all without her , 
While in a brightness far above her sight : 
There lives a power her spirits love inspiring ▪ 
To frame a work for wit and sense admiring . 
There from a Chaos or Confusion's Map , 
She takes the matter of her curious frame : 
While in the limits of fair Virtue's lap , 
She draws the course and compass of the same : 
Where having laid the groundwork of her Grace , 
She made the world up in a little space . 
Six only days was for her work ordained , 
The seventh to rest , the labour of her love : 
Her time she kept , and in her care retained , 
Such form and measure as did truly prove : 
Her Master taught her every rule so right , 
That all was good and pleasing in his sight . 
Her first day's work was in the Heavens on high , 
When she divided darkness from the light : 
Wherein all pleasing the all seeing Eye , 
The light she called day , the darkness night ▪ 
When having heaven and earth of nothing framed , 
The Morn and Evening she the first day named . 
The second day upon the waters , she 
Did fall to work , and made a Firmament : 
By which , the waters should divided be , 
That were in this confused continent : 
Where every one within their bounds should stay , 
So , Even and Morn she made her second day . 
then from the earth the waters she divided , 
And gathered all together , called them Seas : 
And by her skill so carefully provided , 
That in her work she did her Master please : 
then made the earth , and called it dry land , 
Thus did the labour of her third day's hand . 
In which she made the earth to fructify , 
In leaf , and fruit , Tree , bud and herb , and seed : 
In which she did her Master glorify , 
Who , seeing all , said all was good in deed ▪ 
So in her work thus worthily commended , 
In morn and evening was her third day ended . 
then in the heavens the shining lights she framed , 
That should divide betwixt the day and night : 
The greater lights , the Sun and Moon she named , 
Which should give Rules to times and seasons right ▪ 
The lesser stars to whom she gave a light , 
To twinkle like the Candles of the Night . 
And in this work she kept her course so well , 
And still the state of Grace so understood : 
As he in whom all Graces only dwell , 
In sight of goodness saw that all was good : 
So where no praise her worth diminished , 
The Even and Morn her fourth day finished . 
then to the waters she her work applies , 
And made each moving and each creeping thing : 
And in the Heaven each feathered fowl that fly's , 
And every Creature that doth carry wing : 
When all seemed good in her great Master's eye , 
Who bade them all increase and multiply . 
Thus having wrought with infinite conceit , 
The sundry form and shape of every Creature : 
With such invention as exceeds the height , 
Of Wit and Reasons praises highest Nature ▪ 
While high perfection each proportion framed , 
The Even and Morning was her fifth day named . 
Thus when that her week's work was almost done ▪ 
She hath her choicest work to take in hand : 
For which before the Model be begun , 
She must upon her Master's counsel stand : 
How she may shape his love , his lively picture , 
To have his patience pleased in his Creature . 
When having favour in his high perfection , 
With humble care a lump of clay she takes : 
Of which , by Rules of his Divine direction , 
Unto his Image perfect man she makes : 
Who so in love did to his liking fall , 
That under Heaven he made him Lord of all . 
Thus having made up all her workmanship , 
Within the limits of her fairest love : 
Where constant Truth could never take a trip , 
While careful Patience did perfection prove : 
When all was good , in goodness all installed , 
The Even and Morning she the sixth day called . 
And seeking now her sacred thoughts to rest , 
Upon the Grace of the Eternal good : 
She finds the Sabaoth by her Master blessed , 
Who gives her spirits that especial food : 
That after all the labour of her days , 
Doth make her sing his everlasting praise . 
Which , as I find , in her fair Music sounding , 
Although it be a Note above my reach : 
Yet on the Grace of Virtue only grounding , 
As her sweet spirits doth my spirit teach : 
My humble soul shall strain my heart to sing , 
The Gracious praises of my Glorious King.  
OH holy Essence of all holiness , 
Grace of all Glory , Glory of all Grace : 
Perfections Virtue , Virtue's perfectness , 
Place of all Beauty , Beauty of all place : 
Truths only Trial , Time's Eternity , 
Incomprehensible in thy Deity . 
Wisdom's deviser , Father of her love , 
Constancies proof , and life of patience : 
Humilities Essence , Faith's true Turtle Dove , 
Mercies Almighty Glorious Residence : 
Sweet jesus Christ , mine humble soul inflame , 
To sing the Glory of thy holy Name . 
Before what was , but that which ever is , 
The Godhead all Incomprehensible : 
Sweet jesus Christ , the Essence of all Bliss , 
But in his Manhood only sensible : 
My Saviour's was , and in himself alone , 
Containing all things , but contained in none . 
The Nature of all Virtues in his Nature , 
Had all their Essence of their only Being : 
When in Creation of each kind of Creature , 
Wisdom in him had only all her seeing : 
Whose love in him that constant patience found , 
That of her Grace and Glory was the ground . 
His spotless Virtue all his life did prove , 
In doing good to all , and ill to none : 
His Wisdom did the Doctors wonder move , 
His love the Touchstone of all Truth alone : 
His Constancy even to his dying hour , 
Did show his patience , had a heavenly power . 
And for the Note of his Humility , 
His cross bare witness in his life and death : 
Who bore all baseness Incivility , 
Yet never breathed the smallest angry breath : 
OH glorious King that came from Heaven on high , 
Upon this earth for Beggars so to die . 
His virtue in his will , his word doth show 
His Wisdom in Election and Creation ; 
His love , his Lovers by his death do know , 
His Constancy , his patience confirmation : 
His patience his humility did prove , 
And all in some his Glory from above . 
Whose Virtue such , as his that could not sin ? 
Whose Wisdom such , as worketh Virtues will ? 
Whose love is such , as Wisdom lives in ? 
Whose Constancy doth show such kindness still ? 
Whose patience such , as did his passion show , 
Or who so high , and ever brought so low . 
What Virtue doth , his Wisdom doth express , 
What Wisdom doth , his love doth manifest : 
What love doth , doth his constancy confess , 
What Constancy doth , in his patience blessed : 
What Patience doth , Humility doth tell , 
In him alone they all and only dwell . 
then let the virtuous for all virtue love him , 
And let the wise in Wisdom's love admire him ▪ 
And let the constant in all kindness prove him , 
And let the patient patiently desire him : 
And let the humble humbly fall before him , 
And all together all in all adore him . 
O that the world could see his virtue's Beauty , 
Or wit of man his Wisdom's Majesty : 
Or Love could look into his Constancy , 
Or patience into his humility : 
then vice , nor folly , frailty , rage , nor pride , 
Should in the minds of men so much abide . 
His Virtue made the first perfections Nature , 
His Wisdom made the form of all perfection : 
His love did give the life to every Creature , 
His Constancy the care of Love's direction : 
His patience Medicine for all Miseries , 
His humbleness the way to Paradise . 
Wouldst thou be perfect ? in his virtue know it , 
Wouldst thou be virtuous ? in his wisdom learn it : 
Wouldst thou be wise ? in his love only show it , 
Wouldst thou be loving ? in his life discern it : 
Wouldst thou he constant ? in his care conceive it , 
Wouldst thou be patient ? in his death perceive it . 
Wouldst thou be humble in his lowliness ? 
Learn to submit thyself to higher powers : 
Wouldst thou be blessed in his Blessedness ? 
Learn to bestow the labour of thine hours : 
Wouldst thou be holy , and live happy ever ? 
Live in his love , and thou shalt live for ever . 
The infinite good thoughts his virtue giveth , 
The infinite good works his will perfecteth : 
The infinite good life in his love lives , 
The infinite love his constancy effecteth : 
Th'infinite constancy his patience proveth , 
Do humbly show what infinitenes loveth . 
Since Virtues ( then ) good thoughts are infinite , 
And infinite is Virtue in good thought ; 
And infinite is Wisdom in good wit , 
And infinite is love by Wisdom wrought ; 
And infinite is constancy in love , 
Which infinitely patience doth prove . 
In infinite Humility of hart , 
Unto the height of all Infinitie : 
In infinite perfection of each part , 
That makes the infinite Divinity : 
The Father , Son and holy Ghost all three , 
In one , one God , all infinite Glory be . 
And since no heart is able to attain , 
Unto his holy and eternal praise : 
To whom alone doth duly appertain , 
The date of Glories never ending days : 
When Angels in their Haleluiah dwell , 
Let me but sing A men , and I am well . 
Gloria in excelsis Deo.  

TO ALL Learned and virtuous Scholars , and gracious Studients , honour and happiness . 

Gentlemen , I fear , this my mistermed piece of Poetry , in your true judgements , will be subject to the reproof of error ; what is amiss , I humbly leave to your correction , and what is otherwise , to your favourable acceptation : and so , loath to be tedious in ceremonies , I rest affectionately to all good learning . 

A friend avowed . ber . N. Gent.  

