PAQUIL'S FOOLES-CAP SENT TO SUCH ( TO keep their weak brains warm ) as are not able to conceive aright of his Madcap . With Pasquil's PASSION for the world's waywardnesse . Begun by himself , and finished by his Friend MORPHORIUS . 

¶ Imprinted at LONDON , for Thomas johnes , dwelling near Holborn Conduit . 1600.  

TO MY VERY GOOD friend , Master Edward Conquest , as much happiness from Heaven , as his worthy heart can wish . 

SIR , to forget your undeserued kindness , were a note out of my nature : & yet how kindly to requite it , is many notes above my ability . But as a lame man , that strives to go , shows he would run , if he had legs : so , in the humour of my good will , imagine a Desire of a greater matter . But leaving these compliments , and to come to my purpose ; as I have found you a kind Spectator of my Labours , so let me entreat you , at my hands to accept this treatise , with a foolish title . Where , if Wit have played the Wag , let him not have his name for nothing : and where you find a head fit for this Cap , either bestow it upon him in charity , or send him where he may have them for his money . I know you are acquainted with many that well deserve it : whom , lest they should be mistaken for better men , I pray you give them the Cap for their Cognisaunce . And so , hoping that your discretion will bear with my imperfection , to find no better work , to give notice of my good will ; I rest , with much thankfulness , in more Affection than Protestation . 

Yours assured , to command , N. B.  

❧ To the Reader . 

YOU that Read , to term you Gentle and he not , you would think I did mock you : & therefore give me leave to think of you , as I find you . But to the matter : Madcap hath passed one fit , and new is fallen into another : what it is , you may partly guess by the Title . For , in a Fool , is hid a great deal of vain matter : which you shall here find run over , in a few Verses ; not the best that ever you red , nor perhaps the worst that you may meet with . But to be short , what Pasquil begun , Morphorius hath ended : how well I say not : but the better , if you like it : to whose kindness , in hope of patience , I commit it ; and so abruptly I leave it . 

Your friend : 

❧ TO HIS HONEST friend Pasquil , in all haste . 

Friend Pasquil , hearing of late of the pains that thou hast taken in reprehending of the wicked ( among the spirits of best condition , not a little commended ) I have thought good ( finding the corruption of this Age ) to put a Fool , to thy Knave . Among which weak witted brains , I have not let slip such Beetle headed Asses , as taking upon them the work of thy Wit ( in seeking to rob thee of thy Worthiness ) have showed the height of their Foolishness . Who , among other such wise people , finding their names but in their Natures , will ( I hope ) like good children , rather mend their faults , then be angry with their masters : if not , let them sink in their own sorrow : give the Madman his Madcappe , and the Fool his Fooles-cappe : thou and I be friends , and the world fare as it list . And so farewell . 

thine , as his own , MORPHORIO . 

Morphorius to the Reader , in the behalf of his friend Pasquil . 

HE , that of late was in a Madding fit , 
Doth from a franzy to a folly fall : 
And which is better , mad , or foolish wit ? 
I think as good , almost have none at all . 
Well , Sugar sweet , or bitter as the gall , 
't is Pasquil's humour , so I pray you take it : 
And as you like it , choose it , or forsake it . 
His meaning was , to please none but himself , 
Nor to displease but those that well deserve it : 
He doth not care , though Envy play the elf : 
His dish is dressed , and he will not Reserve it : 
But to the world , for such poor diet serve it , 
As are content with ordinary dishes , 
While Nicer Gulls are choked with Gugin fishes . 
When he was Mad , he Raged against the knave : 
Now idly fitted , falls upon the Fool , 
In hope that Doctor's better wisdom have , 
Than Carp at scholars that do go to school , 
And wish a workman but to know his tool : 
For Gravesend Barge can never passage have , 
Till it be furnished with a Fool or Knave . 
FINIS . 

PAQUIL'S Fooles-cap . 

What means this world , that Muses can not rest , 
But one or other will be working still ? 
't is not time now to break too broad a jest ; 
Lest , had I wist , repent a heedless will , 
While hammering sconces have unhappy skill 
Which in their Cradles , being born accursed , 
Will ever construe all things to the worst . 
But since the Wisdom of the world I find , 
Before Heaven's Wisdom , Foolishness indeed , 
While such Illusions do the spirit blind , 
As only grow upon ungracious seed : 
Which wicked Humours in the heart do breed , 
While truest Wisdom lives above the Sun : 
Let me but play the Fool , and I have done . 
But some , perhaps , in peevish spite will say , 
The field is large , wherein I am to walk : 
Where I may wander many an idle way , 
And make a deal of fiddle faddle talk : 
But say , my Muse mistake green Cheese for Chalk , 
This is the worst ( to hide her idle brains ) 
She shall have but the Fooles-cappe for her pains . 
But , let her wear it , since it is her due . 
Who hath no Wisdom , can not speak of Wit : 
Who never came where Wit and Reason grue , 
Must needs shoot wide , when that they aim at it . 
For , while the Gander by the Goose doth sit , 
't is ten to one , how ever prove the weather , 
But that the birds will all be of a feather . 
then , good Wise Man , if such a one thou be , 
That dost these lines of little matter reed , 
I pray thee be not in a chafe with me , 
Although a lad be spurred till he bleed : 
Keep thou thy Stable for a better Steed : 
Who hath been well brought up in Reason's School , 
May have the patience to go by the Foole.  
But , if it be , you can not go along , 
But that you needs will stumble at a straw ; 
If that yourself will do yourself such wrong , 
To let the Worm upon your Wits to gnaw , 
Until a Crow be come to be a Daw : 
then do but think how some this ●east will smother , 
Why should one Fool be angry with another ? 
then be not angry , let the Fool alone , 
Except thou be a bird of his own brood : 
For trust it true , it will be ten to one , 
If once thy head be covered with his Hood , 
It will so heat thy brains , and stain thy blood , 
That thou wilt fall into such Ecstasies , 
As while thou livest , thou never wilt be wise . 
Beware therefore in time of Had I wist , 
Let not Impatience show thy pievishnesse : 
Keep thy Conceit within Discretions List : 
Where thou mayest look upon that Idleness , 
That fills the world too full of Foolishness : 
Seek thou to know but where true wit doth dwell , 
And learn to laugh at Fools , and all is well . 
And if thou chance to meet an idle Mate , 
Whose tongue goes all too glibbe upon the ●eare , 
And chief delight is so much in his prate , 
As where he comes , will be chief Prater there : 
In friendly kindness tell him in his ear , 
That in the Rules of Wit and Reason's school , 
He will be counted but a prating fool . 
And if you hap to light upon a Gull , 
That is conceited of his Mother wit , 
And doth apply his beetle-headed scull 
But to an humour of an idle fit ; 
In honest kindness let him hear of it , 
That in the Rolls of Wisdoms Rules you reed , 
Less hope of him , than of a Fool indeed . 
And if you chance to see the Son of Pride 
Look fifteen thousand mile above the Moon , 
And lie abedde until his idle hide 
Must make a Morning , of an afternoon ; 
For fear his Worship should be up too soon : 
Lest that the Air should hap to do him harm , 
Lend him the Fooles-cappe for to keep him warm . 
And if you chance to spy a Subtle Stave , 
That hath a world of Simple wits beguiled , 
And , like a cunning , cogging cozening knave , 
On others harms , his helps doth only build , 
Tell him that Satan is a subtle child : 
That while the wicked gold for dross do sell , 
Makes Fools seem wise , until they come in hell . 
He that doth murder twenty thousand men , 
And sack their cities , and their towns deface : 
And , with the dash but of a wicked Pen , 
Bring a poor world into a piteous case , 
To gain himself a kind of Monarch's grace : 
Tell him what Angels read in Virtue's school , 
That bloody Pride doth breed a hellish Foole.  
He that doth covet more than is his own , 
And scrapes and scratcheth for a little dross : 
And , all with ease is like a Bladder blown , 
And never cares for any neighbour's cross , 
For his own gain , to give a thousand loss : 
Tell him , when Wisdom beats the world about , 
The Fool will quickly lay the Miser out , 
The swaggering Huffecappe that will stare and swear , 
That he will cut through the whole piece of cloth ; 
And face to face , will meet the old blind Bear , 
And break the Can , that 's filled up with froth , 
And cares not how he throw away anoath : 
Let him be sure when Virtue's Honours fall , 
In Wisdoms Court he hath no place at all , 
The sneaking Coward that doth closely creep , 
And feareth every shadow where he goes : 
And of himself both watch and ward doth keep , 
For fear his Friends should grow to be his Foes : 
Doth so much title of true Manhood lose , 
That he may read what Truth in honour tries , 
A Coward never can be truly wise . 
The Idle Spendthrift that will sell his land , 
To feed the humours of an addle head : 
And sows his seed upon the barren sand , 
Till late Repentance live to beg his bread , 
Let him believe what many a one hath read : 
How ever Fancy make excuse for it , 
Such Had I wist had never happy wit.  
He that doth think that Wit is but in Wealth , 
And plots to purchase kingdoms with a Purse , 
And never thinketh of the Spirits health : 
But doth his heart with wicked humours nurse , 
And for a blessing , falls upon a curse : 
Let him confess , if in heaven's blessings blot , 
He find himself a wicked Fool , or not . 
He that looks Babies in his Mistress eyes , 
And beats his brains to tell an Idle tale : 
And thinks himself , that he is wondrous wise , 
That breaks a ●east , though it be ne'er so stale : 
And for a Nut , cracks nothing but a Shalt : 
How ere he think of his own wit amiss , 
Wisdom will tell him , what a Fool he is . 
She that is neither Noble , fair , nor wise , 
Nor scarce so rich as a new shorned Ewe ; 
And yet , conceited in her own foul eyes , 
When she is dabbled three foot in the dew , 
That she may seem a pretty handsome shrew : 
Let her not think , but such a Shut the do●re 
Is half a Fool ; and if she be no more . 
He that hath neither Truth nor Honesty , 
Good hand , good leg , good body , nor good face , 
Nor any such exceeding quality 
As may advance him unto Honour's place : 
Yet , thinks himself a man of special grace ; 
When madmen tread the Woodcocks Morris dance , 
Give him the Fooles-cappe for his Cognisaunce . 
She that is fifteen mile about the waste , 
And all with fat unable is to go , 
Yet makes her face up in a piece of paste , 
As though she were an Image of Rye Dowe ; 
Tell her but truth that Wit and Reason know , 
That this is all , that Fame doth her afford , 
A filthy Owl is but a foolish Bird . 
He that doth hit upon a printed book , 
And finds a name near fitting to his own , 
And of his own poor wit hath undertook 
The ground of all hath from his humour grown , 
When every Bird is by her feather known , 
Pasquil doth tell him that poor Aesop's Pie 
Will show him how his Wit hath gone awry . 
He that doth many , all for Wanton love , 
And hath no Reason for his fond affection : 
But all too late doth with Repentance prove 
The woeful fruits of wretched wills direction , 
While Want and Sorrow are the Souls correction : 
Tell him , such babies may the dug go suck ; 
While loving Fools have never better luck . 
She , in a glass , that sees her Sorrel hair , 
And strait will put it to the Painters die , 
And then doth think that she is wondrous fair ; 
When flattery feeds her humour with a Lie , 
O , let her not in such an error die ; 
But bid her kindly crack this friendly Nut , 
So foul a Dowd ' is but a foolish Slut.  
He that delights to tell an idle tale , 
Upon the prattle of a cogging Mate , 
And carelessly his credit se● to sale : 
Which being noted for his foolish prate , 
He shall be sure to find , although too late ; 
That Wisdom reads these Rounds in Reasons schools , 
Newes-carriers are next Neighbours unto Fools . 
She that doth file her tongue for Eloquence , 
To entertain a world with Idle talk : 
And thinks she hath the very Quintessence 
Of quick conceit , wherein her wits do walk , 
Yet doth not know a Buzzard from a Hawk ; 
Let her believe , such giddy headed Tittes 
Are not commended for the truest Wits . 
He that doth love to talk of Robin Hood , 
Yet never drew one Arrow in his Bow : 
And yet doth think his skill is wondrous good , 
That scarce the compass of a mark doth know : 
When such a Goosecap doth a shooting go , 
Tell him , that in the aim of Wisdoms eye , 
Wide handed Wits will ever shoot awry . 
He that doth put his state upon his friends , 
In hope of grace , when all his good is lost , 
Shall find his Wit not worth two puddings ends , 
When want of pence to reckon with the Host , 
Doth make the Beggar chalk upon the post : 
Whose base condition doth too plainly show , 
He was not wise , that played the Woodcock so . 
She that doth think , she hath a rare conceit , 
That gives the Cuckoo to her kindest friend ; 
And laughs to think upon that close deceit , 
That doth but breed Repentance in the end : 
Tell her , if she the sooner not amend , 
Wisdom sets down , that knows what Wit doth mean● 
A wicked Drab is but a foolish quean . 
He that that is proud of his conceited wit , 
When he can cog , and cozen , prate , and lie : 
And place himself with better men to sit , 
then may beseem so base a Rascaldry , 
As is too far from thought of Chyvalry ; 
When every Ass his due reward shall have , 
The Fooles-cappe is too good for such a Knave . 
He that in heart doth say there is no God , 
And neither thinks of Heaven , nor yet of Hell : 
Nor hath a feeling of that heavenly Rod , 
That makes the Soul , in Sorrow's tears , to tell 
How Mercy doth within the Spirit dwell : 
Within the book of Wisdoms blessed School , 
The Lord of Heaven hath set him down a Foole.  
He that will lend more than he well may spare , 
And he that spends all that he hath and more ; 
And only trusteth unto Fortune's share , 
And cares not how he run upon the score , 
Until the Beggar meet him at his door : 
Wisdom will tell him truly in the end , 
He is a Fool that is not his own friend . 
She that can look as mildly as a Lamb , 
Yet is a Tiger inwardly in heart ; 
And cares not how , nor where she leave the Ram , 
When she hath gotten once the rutting part : 
It is a Rule , in Wit and Reason's Art , 
That she , that hath no better natured Wit , 
The Wise will term a dogged foolish Tit.  
He that is brought up idly in his Youth , 
And scorns to labour in his elder years , 
And never thinks upon the day of Ruthe , 
When want ( entangled in the Beggar's breers ) 
The heavy sound of helpless Sorrow hears : 
Let him believe , that Truth doth plainly wright ; 
The Fooles-cappe fits the Idle beggar right . 
He that can plot a world of villainy , 
And never cares what Virtues love deserveth : 
And sorts himself with wicked company , 
That from the way of perfect Wisdom swerveth , 
While Mercies hand the gracious heart preserveth : 
That sinful wretch will find in Satan's school , 
A damned villain is a cursed Foole.  
He that doth fill his Coffers full of Gold , 
Yet will not wear good clothes on his back : 
But doth a kind of Clownish humour hold , 
To have his Garment cut out , like a sack , 
And thinks Red Herring have a dainty smack : 
Tell him in kindness ( that he may not quarrel ) 
The Fooles-cappe will be fit for his Apparel . 
She that is given to Ease and Sluttishness , 
And trifles out the time in Trompery : 
And yet will think it is no pievishnesse , 
To feed herself with Idle Foppery ; 
May hap to find in Sorrow's Misery , 
That when the Grasshopper doth leave to sing , 
An idle Hielding is a foolish thing . 
He that doth study twenty things at once , 
And hath intent for to perform them all : 
And yet his beetle addleheaded sconce , 
In full conclusion can do none at all : 
If that the Fooles-cappe to his fortune fall , 
Let him not think but it will finely fit 
The Idle head , that hath no better Wit.  
She that is given to Pride and Bravery , 
And Ruffin-like , will swear , and swash it out ; 
And studies nothing else but Knavery , 
To bring a wicked kind of world about ; 
And cares not whom she follows with a flout : 
Such foolish Kittes of such a skittish kind , 
In Bridewell book are every where to find . 
He that is here to day , yonder to morrow , 
And cares not how he rangeth here and there : 
Not careth what he can or beg , or borowe , 
To spend or spoil , he cares not how nor where : 
O , tell that Idle Fellow in his ear , 
If that he do not take the greater care , 
The Fool will catch him , ere he be aware . 
She that doth love to gossip , and to tattle , 
And leaves her house to keep itself alone ; 
And cares not how she spend the time in prattle , 
Till she have barred her Husband to the bone : 
Let her not think but such an Idle joan 
Must have this note set down upon ●er name ; 
A Tattling housewife is a foolish Dame.  
He that can comb his head and curl his beard , 
And set his Ruffs , and wear his Cloak in print , 
And by his side can finely wear his swearde , 
And learn to fleer , and leer , and look a squint , 
And keep his steps , within a measures stint : 
Let him be sure to pass with this good flout ; 
He lacks the Fooles-cappe yet to set him out . 
He that is well in service entertained , 
And justly hath the due of his desert ; 
And by his labour , finds that he hath gained 
The careful comfort of an honest heart ; 
Yet fond will with such a Master part : 
Tell him , what Truth doth by Experience know ▪ 
He is a Fool , leaves such a Master , so . 
He that will let his Wit to run on Wheels , 
And in proud terms will with his betters stand , 
Until his Tongue be tempered by his heels , 
Until his Brains have better manners scanned : 
And if the Fool do take him by the hand , 
Bid him have Patience , to endure the sound ; 
That lack of Wit will lay a Fool a ground . 
He that in Libels takes delight to write , 
And cares not whom he wickedly defame ; 
But pievishly will show a baggage Spite , 
To touch the Honour of an Honest name : 
What shall I say , that he is much to blame ? 
Yea , and so much , as for his idle veins , 
He well deserves the Fooles-cappe for his pains . 
He that hath all his study in the Clouds , 
And all misliketh every thing he reeds : 
And what the Sun within her Circle shrouds , 
All in the height his haughty Humour feeds : 
If he do chance to light on Herbs for Weeds , 
He is but foolish ; rise he ne'er so soon , 
That runs in haste to overtake the Moon . 
He that will Read , before he learn to Spell ; 
And write a Book , before he know a Blot ; 
And keep a Shop , before he learn to sell ; 
And fall to galloppe ere he learn to troth : 
whither such one think himself wise or not , 
Let him be sure that better wits do reed , 
Such Madhead fellows are but Fools indeed . 
He that with pleasure follows Cards and dice , 
Drinking and wenching , and such Idle sports : 
Until too late Repentance know the price 
Of Patience passage to Saint Sorrow's ports ; 
Whereto the Beggar most of all resortes : 
O let him know when he doth comfort lack . 
The Beggar Fool will have him by the back . 
She that doth find her Husband true and kind , 
And for her wants to work both ●ight and day : 
Yet like the Weathercock , with every wind , 
Will turn her Humour every idle way , 
And cares not how he fall into decay , 
So she be fed according to her fit ; 
She is a Baggage , and a foolish 〈◊〉 . 
He that is married to an honest wife , 
That , as her life , in love doth hold him dear : 
With whom his heart may have a quiet life , 
And , in content , live many a merry year 
Yet leaves a Do to take a Rascal Dear : 
The fruits of Will do prove his Wit accursed , 
That so will leave the best , to take the worst . 
He that doth envy every man's good hap , 
And knows not how to get himself in grace : 
And lays his Love but all in Fortune's lap , 
Whose custom is her followers to deface : 
When he is fallen into a piteous case , 
O let him know , before he hang himself , 
An envious fool is even such an Elf . 
She that doth keep an Inn for every Guest , 
And makes no care what wind blow up her skirt , 
And ready is to break a Chaucer's jest , 
To make a Smock even measure with a Shirt : 
If such a one be called a Foolish flirt , 
' was not for nothing that she had her name , 
When all the world is witness to her shame , 
He that doth take the law , but as a jest , 
And will be hanged but for good fellowship , 
And thinks it nothing to be halter blessed , 
When from the Gallows it is but a skip ▪ 
O , let him not in anger hang the lip , 
If by desert this due reward he take ; 
He was a Fool , that hanged for fashion sake , 
He that will weary out his friends with borrowing , 
And be beholding to an Enemy , 
And kill himself with too much Sorrowing , 
To think , the touch of Treason's villainy 
Should make such work in wicked company : 
Wisdom will tell him , what Experience tries , 
That kind of Wit will never make him Wise.  
He that importunes an approved friend , 
And he that fears to speak where he may speed ; 
And in beginning , looks not to the end ; 
But loves to glory in a Wicked deed , 
And will his heart with wicked humours feed : 
These Wits do show ( that are so fitly matched ) 
A Nest of Fools , that Wisdom never hatched . 
He that doth set his hand to every Bill , 
And neither cares for Right nor Equity , 
And only bendeth his unhappy skill , 
But to the overthrow of Honesty : 
Fools , that are so near in affinity , 
When Wisdom makes a trial of true Wit , 
Not one of these that hath to do with it , 
He that doth build high Castles in the Air , 
Until they headlong tumble on his neck : 
And he that will not an old Ship repair , 
Till it be too far tainted with a leak : 
If that the Woodcock give his Wits the peak : 
Let him not chafe if that it be his chance , 
To wear the Fooles-cappe , in a Moris-daunce . 
He that can play on Twenty hands at once , 
And turns his humour unto every time : 
And hath his Spirit tempered for the nonce , 
To set his flowers only in the prime : 
If when he thinks most warily to climb , 
By due desert a breakeneck-fall he have , 
His craft doth prove him but a Foolish knave 
He that will talk of every thing he knows , 
And credit give to every thing he hears : 
And builds his knowledge only on suppose , 
Yet understands not what too plain appears : 
How young or old soever be his years , 
Who of his poor Wit giveth witness so ; 
Think him an arrant Fool , and let him go , 
He that doth wonder at a Weathercock , 
And plays with every feather in the wind , 
And is in love with every Nannicocke ; 
Yet scarcely knows an Orange by the Rind : 
When every Fool is found out in his Kind , 
How is it possible but he should pass , 
For a poor silly simple witted Ass ? 
He that doth think it is no Wickedness , 
To lead a young man into Wantonness . 
But takes delight in all Ungodliness ; 
Until the Heart in Sorrows he avinesse , 
Do show the fruits of Wills unhappiness ; 
Let that vile villain read in Virtue's Schools , 
Such wicked wretches are Ungracious Fools . 
He that will change a jennet for a jade , 
And put his Land into a little House : 
And , in the way where Little Wit doth wade , 
Watch a great Mountain for a little Mouse , 
And sits to feed a Monkey with a Louse : 
Where Will is so in folly overgone , 
Wisdom says plainly , his is small or none . 
He that will put his state upon adventure , 
And may be safe and if it please himself : 
And he that binds his service by Indenture , 
To baggage courses for a little pelf : 
If that his Ship do run upon a Shelf , 
Let him not think , but that poor Wit of his , 
From Wisdoms Course , was carried quite amiss . 
He that will creep unto an old joyne-stoole , 
And serve a Thatcher for a Bunch of straw , 
And he that goes to work without his tool , 
And loves to wrangle with a man of Law , 
And thinks no Bird so pretty as the Daw : 
How ere such one be of his Wit conceived , 
Wisdom will tell him he is much deceived . 
He that will tread a Measure as he walks , 
And connterfaite Maid Marian's countenance : 
And loves to fall into those whisper talks , 
That bring poor Wit into a piteous trance : 
If that the Fool do light on him by chance , 
He must assume what Fates to him assign : 
I can not help him , 't is no fault of mine . 
He that will Drink until his brains be merry , 
And Eat until his stomach be too full , 
And Lie a bed until his bones be weary , 
And Prate so long until he prove a Gull : 
If that such brains be lined with Gander's wool , 
When such Wise creatures put their Wits together , 
To choose the wisest , who knows which is whether ? 
He that all day sits blowing at a coal , 
And never leaves till he put out the fire : 
And he that holds his finger in a hole , 
To please the humour of a fond desire : 
And he that loves to trample in the mire : 
When these wise men together make a play , 
The Fool will run with all their Wits away . 
He that will in an humour leave a friend , 
And in a fury fall upon a foe : 
While ill beginnings make as bad an end , 
When poor Repentance doth too late beshrew 
The heedless Will , that Wit doth overthrow : 
That Fool must needs be turned unto the List , 
Among the number of the Had I wist . 
He that will tell his secrets to a stranger , 
And play the Coward with an enemy : 
He that will put himself in needless danger , 
To follow a mad headed company : 
Let him take heed a sudden villainy 
Make him not find in true Repentance School , 
A backward Wit lacks little of A Foole.  
He that will wear his wealth upon his back , 
Yet in his purse doth scarce his dinner carry : 
And he that says to give his neck the crack , 
Because he will not for his fortune tarry : 
If such a Fool become a Buzzards quarry , 
When Careless Will doth show his Wit so small , 
't is not my fault , I cannot do withal . 
He that doth study out his brains in trifles , 
And miss the humour of a better mark : 
And cousins his conceit with Foolish nifles , 
In taking of a Bunting for a Lark , 
And every Pibble for a Diamond spark : 
He that doth so his Will to folly fit , 
Doth plainly show he hath no perfect Wit.  
He that can eat no other Meat but Milk , 
And for his Horse , must have an Ambling Nag : 
And cannot wear a Shirt , but soft as Silk : 
Nor keep his Coin , but in a Golden Bag , 
And must be known his Mother's kindest Wag : 
Such smoothed Godsons show in Wisdoms school , 
A Milk-soppe Baby is more half a Foole.  
He that will be afraid of every dream , 
And thinketh every puddle is a pool : 
And runs ten miles to eat a mess of Cream , 
And can not sit but on a Cushion stool : 
If such a Noddy be not thought a fool , 
He hath great favour in the Rule of Wit , 
That sees his Weakness , and concealeth it . 
He that doth fill his head so full of humours , 
He knows not where he may in quiet sit : 
And he that loves to raise uncivil rumours , 
Until that justice do in judgement sit , 
Upon the works of such a wicked wit : 
Such wicked Wits , for honest people's health , 
Might well be banished from a Common wealth . 
He that all night doth watch a Coney borough , 
To catch a Ferret , that hath broke his Muzzle : 
And he that squats a Hare within a furrowe , 
And sees how she within her Mucedorus doth Nuzzle ; 
And yet so long about the Bush doth puzzle , 
That she is gone ere he can well beset her , 
Which , of these two good Fools , may be the better ? 
He that doth put all to the latter day , 
To reckon even with all the world at once : 
And in the mean time is at such a stay , 
He knows not how to use his addle Sconce : 
If such an Ass be noddied for the nonce , 
I say but this , to help his Idle fit ; 
Let him but thank himself for lack of Wit , 
He that wilfully falls into offence , 
And satisfaction never cares to make : 
But carelessly stands in his own defence , 
While that the Fool his Wits doth overtake : 
When late Repentance makes his heart to ache , 
He scapeth well , if ( for such idle veins ) 
Worse than the Fooles-cappe answer not his pains . 
He that loves to be noted for strange fashions , 
And for his locks , and for his kind of gate : 
And in his Muses , and his Passions , 
Will not be thought an ordinary mate : 
If that his Wits come to themselves , too late , 
I know not well how to be his Adviser ; 
But even be sorry , that he was not wiser . 
He that will hoard up all for a dear year ; 
Yet in the mean time want necessities 
He that will be unto himself so near , 
As bring himself into extremities , 
By his own wilful caused calamities , 
This is the end that will fall out of it ; 
Such Niggard Fools have never better Wit.  
He that doth put his wealth upon a Cock , 
A Card , a Die , or such an Idle toy : 
And hath his humour so much on the Smock , 
As if it were his Spirits only joy : 
When Soorrowes sighs do show the heart's annoy , 
Let him go back unto Repentance school , 
And see how long his Wit hath played the Foole.  
He that will busy be with Every matter , 
Yet scarce hath power to bring one well to pass : 
And never leaves to cozen , lie , and flatter , 
Until he prove himself a Craftre Ass : 
Let him but look in the Foles looking Glass , 
And there his Woodcock Wit shall plainly have 
The true proportion of a Paltry Knave . 
He that persuades himself , He is a King , 
Yet all the world doth for a Beggar know him : 
And he that takes the Winter for the Spring , 
Because the Sun a little light doth show him 
If want of Wit do wholly overthrow him , 
And that the Cock's comb to his cap do fall , 
't is not my fault , I can not do withal . 
He that puts fifteen else into a Ruff , 
And seventeen yards into a swaggering slappe : 
And twenty thousand Crowns into a Muff , 
And half his land into a hunting Cap : 
If that the fool do catch him in his trap , 
There like a Woodcock let him walk about : 
When he is in , I cannot help him out . 
He that in all his thoughts is so unholy , 
He makes no care of any good conceight : 
But gives himself so much to Idle folly , 
That unto Hell he runs the high way strait : 
If he be poisoned with the Devil's bait , 
I can not choose but tell him like a friend , 
Such wicked Fools will have a woeful end . 
He that will Brace his face at Lothebury , 
Because he will not blush at Knavery : 
And he that will refuse no Drudgery , 
To gather Dross by any Slavery ; 
And yet will stand upon his Bravery : 
He is no fool , whoever be an Ass , 
Makes such a Cover for a looking glass . 
He that reputes him of no wickedness , 
Nor takes delight in any godliness : 
But in the way of all unthriftinesse , 
Doth waste the time of Nature's wretchedness ; 
Where helpless Sorrows , in unhappiness , 
Do breed the Spirits endless heaviness : 
That Fool is in the height of foolishness . 
He that regards not how he use his speech , 
Nor careth how the world do go about , 
Nor maketh reckoning who behold his breech , 
Nor how he play the Logger headed lowte : 
Where Wisemen live , if he be beaten out , 
Let him be patient , if it come to pass 
A beastly Fool be handled like an Ass . 
He that doth make his Tongue a two hand sword , 
And only seeks his Honour all by stealth : 
And cares not how he falsify his word , 
Nor by how much disgrace to gather wealth : 
How ever so his Carcase be in health , 
Wisdom describes him , in true Honour's school , 
A Gull , a Knave , a Coward , and a Foole.  
He that doth gain more , than he well may spend , 
And prattles more than Truth doth understand : 
And in his actions , always doth intend 
Upon the stay of wicked works to stand : 
If that the Devil take him by the hand , 
Let him believe what highest Truth doth tell ; 
He is a Fool , that leaveth Heaven for Hell.  
He that doth take a Shadow for a Substance ; 
And yet doth think he hath a perfect sight : 
And he that takes an Humour for an Instance ; 
And yet believes his brains be in the right : 
He that in darkness so doth look for light 
( How ever Will do take his Wits to school ) 
Wisdom in deed will find him but a Foole.  
He that hath once a piece of work begun , 
And knows not how nor when to make an end : 
And he whose will his Wits doth overrun , 
To make a Foe in wronging of a Friend : 
He that doth so amiss his Spirit spend , 
( However so his own conceit do deem him ) 
Wisdom in deed will but a Fool esteem him . 
He that is Esau for Unthriftiness , 
And follows Cain in his ungodliness : 
And loves Achit●phell for wickedness , 
And is a judas , in unfaithfulness , 
Whatever show he make of holiness : 
That man I find in too much foolishness , 
Hath red the Scripture in unhappiness . 
He that of Machavile doth take instruction 
To manage all the matters of his thought ; 
And treads the way but to his own destruction , 
Till late Repentance be too dear bought , 
Shall find it true , that hath been often taught : 
As good be Idle as to go to school , 
To come away with nothing but the Fool , 
For fear whereof , lest some of mine own sect 
( That have but played the Fools , with lack of Wit ) 
Do kindly tell me of my Cares neglect , 
In finding humours for the time more fit : 
While wicked Spirits do their venom spit : 
I will conclude ( to prove world's Wit an Ass ) 
Man's Wit is vain , shall be , and ever was . 
Sapientia mundi , stultitia coram Deo.  
Pasquil's passion for the world's waiwardnesse . 

Wicked , ungracious , and ungodly Age , 
Where hateful thoughts are gotten to their height , 
How should my spirit in true passions rage ? 
Describe the courses of thy vile conceight , 
That feed the world but with the devil's bait : 
While woeful hearts , with inward sorrows wounded , 
Find Wit and Reason in their sense confounded . 
no , no , the depth of thy unknown distress 
( Wherein the heart is overwhelmed with woes ) 
Exceeds the power of passion to express ; 
While so much grief within the Spirit grows , 
As all the power of Patience overthrows : 
While virtuous minds , within their souls aggrieved , 
Must helpless die , and cannot be relieved . 
The clearest eye must seem to have no seeing , 
And Eloquence must be to silence bound , 
And Honour's essence seem to have no being , 
Where wicked winds run Virtue's ship a ground , 
While healthful spirits fall into a swoon ; 
That only Pride , that wears the golden horn , 
May live at ease , and laugh the world to scorn . 
If every right were rightly apprehended , 
And best deservings best might be regarded , 
And Careful works were to their worth commended , 
And Gracious spirits graciously rewarded , 
And wicked craft from Conscience care discarded ; 
then might the Angels sing in Heaven , to see 
What blessed courses on the earth would be . 
But o , the world is at an other pass , 
Fools have such Masks , men can not see their faces : 
There is such flattery in a looking Glass , 
That winking eyes can not see their disgraces , 
That are apparent in too open places : 
But what avails unto a wicked mind ? 
no eye so cloudy , as the wilful blind . 
To see the sleight of subtle sneaking spirits 
( That dare not see the Glass of their disgraces ) 
Thrive in the World , while better natured merits 
Can not aspire unto those blessed places , 
Where faithless hearts should never show there faces : 
Would it not grieve an honest heart to know it ? 
Although the tongue be sworn it may not show it . 
To see a horse of service in the field , 
Hurt by a jade , that can but kick and fling : 
To see Ulysses wear Achilles' shield , 
While hissing Serpents have a Hellish sting : 
To see the Knave of Clubs take up the King , 
Although he be a wicked help at Maw , 
' was but a clown that yet devised the law . 
To see a sight of Curs worry a Hound , 
A flight of Buzzards fall upon a Hawk , 
A Coward villain give a Knight a wound , 
To hear a Rascal to a King to talk , 
Or see a Peasant cross a Prince's walk , 
Would it not fret the heart that doth behold it , 
And yet in figures may not dare unfold it ? 
But what a kind of wretched world is this ! 
They that are honest , let them be so still . 
Such as are settled in their course amiss , 
Have much a do for to reform their william 
It is the wind that drives about the Mill , 
That grinds the Corn that sometimes fills the Sack , 
That laid awry may break the Loaders back . 
What shall I say ? that knows not what to say . 
This world's vile Grammar hath a wicked speech : 
Where Wealth and Will do carry such a sway , 
That many a time the Goodwife wears the breech , 
And the stowte Oak must yield unto the Beech. 
Such vile conjunctions such constructions make , 
That some are pois'ned with a Sugar Cake . 
Terence his Plays are too much in request . 
The Knave , the Fool , the Swagg'rer , and the Whore , 
Thraso and Gnato , Lais and the rest 
Of all the crew ( that I dare say no more ; 
But beware the dogs that keep the Devil's door ) 
So play their parts upon the worldly Stage , 
That thiefs are hanged before they come to age . 
O , 't is a word to hear a Gander keake , 
And all the Geese to give a hist to beer : 
To hear an Owl to teach a Parrot speak , 
While Cuckoos notes make better Music dear ; 
Where ne'er a better singing bird is near , 
Would it not grieve a good Musician's ear , 
To be enforced to stand attentive there ? 
To see a Wise man handled like a Fool , 
An Ass exalted like a proper man : 
To see a Puddle honoured like a Pool , 
An old blind Goose swim wagers with a Swan , 
Or Silver Cups disgraced by a Can : 
Who would not grieve that so the world should go ? 
But who can help it , if it will be so ? 
no , no , alas it is in vain for me , 
To help the eyes , that joy not in the light : 
He that is sworn that he will never see , 
Let him play Buzzard , with his blinded sight . 
An Owl will never have an eagle flight ; 
He , that is once conceited of his Wit , 
Must die of folly : there 's no help for it . 
And yet good Fools , that can not do withal , 
May well be born with , for their simple Wits : 
But Knavish Wits , that wicked Fools we call , 
( Where hellish Satan with his Angels sits , 
To work the feats of many a thousand fits ) 
Those foolish knaves , or knavish fools I mean , 
I would to God , the world were rid of clean . 
And yet it is in vain such world to wish : 
There is no pack of Cards without a Knave : 
Who loves to feed upon a Salad dish , 
Among his Herbs some wicked weed may have . 
Some men must win , some loose , and some must save . 
Fool's will be Fools , do wise men what they can , 
And many a Knave deceive an honest man  
A Curtall jade will show his hackney tricks , 
And Snarling Curs will bite a man behind : 
The Black Thorn Shrub is best known by his Pricks : 
A Kestrell can not choose but show her kind . 
Wise men sometime must wait , till Fools have dined : 
And yet , those Fools , in common Wits conceit ; 
Are Wise , when Wisdom on their wealth doth wait . 
And yet the wealth Fool is but a Fool , 
The Knave with all his wealth is but a Knave : 
For truest Wisdom reads in Virtue's school , 
That there is no man happy till his grave . 
The Hermit lives more quiet in his Cave , 
then many a King that long usurps a Crown ; 
That in the end comes head long tumbling down . 
Yet who so base , as would not be a King ? 
And who so fond as thinks not he is Wise ? 
Doth not the Cuckoo think that she can sing , 
As clearly as the Bird of Paradise ? 
The foulest Dowd ' is fair in her own eyes . 
Conceit is strong , and hath such kind of vain , 
As works strange wonders in a Woodcock's brain . 
But , what should Fancy dwell upon a Fable ? 
In some far Country's , Women ride a-stride : 
The Fool that in the kind can use his babble , 
Shall have Fat meat and somewhat else beside . 
For Wit doth wonders under folly hide : 
Yet in true Wisdom , all are Fools approved , 
They that love Fools , and Fools that are beloved . 
But since 't is best that all agree in one , 
The proverb says , 't is merry when friends meet . 
It is a kind of death to live alone . 
A loving humour is a pleasing sweet , 
Let Wise men study on the Winding sheet , 
And weaker Wits this poor contentment have , 
't is better be a Fool then be a Knave . 
And so , good friend , if so thou be , farewell : 
I must not stand upon the Fool too long ; 
Lest that my spirits so with folly swell , 
As do perhaps my better humours wrong ▪ 
And therefore thus in brief I end my song ; 
The wisest man hath written , that ever was , 
Vanitas vanitatum , & omnia vanitas . 
Vanity all , all is but vanity , 
Nothing on earth but that will have an end : 
Where he that trusts to bare Humanity , 
Shall hardly live to find in Heaven a friend . 
Take heed therefore the Highest to offend : 
Either learn Wit , where truest Wisdom lies , 
Or take my word , thou never wilt be Wise.  
And therefore let the wise not be displeased , 
If they be counted Fond as well as other : 
For , 't is a plague , that hath the world diseased , 
Sinch sin became unhappy Nature's Mother : 
And let me say but this , my gentle brother ; 
Since all is vain , that lives under the Sun , 
Good wise man be are with Fools , and I have done . 
FINIS . 

