A COMMENT UPON COHELETH OR ECCLESIASTES : Framed for the instruction of PRINCE HENRI Our hope . 

BY HUG BROUGHTON . Anno 1605 

A COMMENT UPON COHELETH OR ECCLESIASTES : Framed for the instruction of PRINCE HENRI Our Hope . 

By HUGH BROUGHTON . 

Anno 1605.  

TO THE MOST NOBLE , HENRY PRINCE OF great Brittany . 

IN a former little book , ( most noble Prince ) speaking Hebrew and Latin , I showed the persons of David's Family : the King's race , and the Kinglier than the Kings , the house of our Lord after the flesh : a matter opened in few words : yet mistaken in England and almost every where , to the ruin of infinite million : who finding Christians unable to settle their own narration , rejected all Christianity . That small work I dispersed in many thousand copies by Sea and Land over Europe and Asia : where many have thought the gift not mean . Next , knowledge of the People that sprang from David's house : the quality of the Kingdom & perpetual Throne promised to David , 2.  Sam. 7. and 1.  Chron. 17. and Psal . 89. should be known . To manifest that Solomon David's son , and a King that hath all Royalties of this world , is chosen of God. He telleth upon his own longue study and experience , that all things under the Sun be vain : So that the Throne promised to David , must be for the world to come : which the man Gabriel that appeared to Daniel to tell our Lord's death : and to Marie for his birth , doth plainly expound what nature it hath : that it is the Kingdom of Christ by sufferings bringing joy . The whole book of Solomon herein spent , with helps to clearness , I join to the former : which , if God will , shall be accompanied with others , as the argument calleth for explication . 

Your grace's most humble Hugh Broughton . 

THE CHIEF MARK OF ALL The holy Scriptures . 

SUNDRY ways doth our heavenly father draw us unto the Kingdom of his son : But Man created of God plain will be searching out many conceits , to his own over throw : by the sleight of Satan : as the Angels that kept not their place , fell to ruin . They being created the first day : & hearing the voice of God which dwelleth in light that none can come too ; saw that the frame of the world was not for Spirits use : the Spheres in their wonderful greatness & swiftenes : the stars in their most beautiful order : the vapours , winds , & clouds in most wise poise , the plants , fowls , fishes , beasts , all these benefit not the Angels . But after the making of all these , the holy trinity consulteth for making man , in justice & plain holiness , & maketh his body of the earth : that all things may serve his use : the stars , the Elements , the plants & all live things . And God doth breath into him a soul immortal , full of life , which might have kept the body always alive : & showeth unto Angel's man's wisdom , in that he names all beasts with terms defining their nature , & maketh a woman outo of his side , & giveth them dominion over the Earth : and g tiuth his Angels charge over them , to attend upon them , & to keep them . But one part mislikeh this charge , & by that rebellion extinguish their own light , & lose their own glory , & find misery unrecoverable : & seek leave to try man , whether he can be deceived , to cast of the obedience of God , & prevaileth , & bringeth them to death of the soul , & loss of that light which would have kept the body alive for ever : & into sin that draweth eternal woe upon it . And this disobedience being wrought quickly the first day of man , brought all the world under corruption : and greved still the holy spirit , & his Angels . But then further counsel is showed : that the ETERNAL Son of God will take Humanity of Eves Seed : and to him the world is subiectea , till an uncorruptible new world be made . But Satan withdrew belefe from this point ; & rules as Prince of the darkness of this world , so as it is hard for Adam's Sons born in sin & blindness extreme , to hold this world cursed : which yet all serves man's use : and to hope for a world unvisible , for the soul leaving this life : & of a new world for the body & soul . Seeing Adam cared not for God's charge , being yet in life & Lordship , & believed not the word of him who spoke & all things had their being : So the Sons of Adam will hardly believe that the King of Glory must die to give life : and to light Adam by faith to life : and arise to raise Adam : and leave this world , to show hope of an other world . Experience teacheth us how far this is from us.  

To this none can come unless the Father draw him . Yet God's grace in government condemneth all for not laing hand upon this grace , and for not craving of grace truly so to do . Now to show that by death life should come , in Paradise a beast is killed : and with the skin , our Parents be clothed : and fire from Heaven burneth the carcase : and the next day is appointed for a rest to meditate , on this : to whom able to govern , the creature is subjected : who by resting the Sabath in the grave : which fell out after 39 60. years , fully endeth the Sabath , & rising with the light the first day , brings light unto the world : as in day , for death , his passion was fitted to Adam's day & time of fall & sentence , against him . Thus redemption was taught : & anger by a curse pronounced to come by the flood . Now Cains murder of Abel , showeth what poison Satan breathed into Eves soul to bear such a son : & further , Cains sons appear bad in making Gods of stars made to serve man : defying their Lord that made the world for them : & deifiing the creatures , to lose the creator and creatures : when the flood washed their bodies away : and their souls ascend to God's Throne to have from it & before it , eternal flames . Yet than Christ shown in Noah , how all beasts & Elements & heavens obeyed him . Again , they are told that Christ shall arise from Sem to be a King of justice & peace . And , that , when the heathen receive the promise , japheth his sons shall have the chiefest continuance of grace : And Noes families be named ; & the Prophets show their nationes & stories with God's people . That matter is expounded by the Prophets , speaking still of the first families . 

But now they make the sad blessing a skoph : and build a proud tower for worship to stars . then GOD divided all their tongues , that they should no more hear his truth : to pled foolishly against it . And two thousand years all Heathen estranged from GOD perished for ever & ever . And in short speeches to Abraham , he foretelleth , that of him one shall come that shall bless all nationess : & showeth his death , & recovery from death in Isaak offered near death , but only by God's voice , reserved , as by a resurrection : & that Jacob's sons should not worship stars above , or any thing on earth , they are stars in Joseph's dream : & precious stones in Aaron's Breast lap , or Care of judgement . And to show what justice God required , they have plain Laws of perfect Equity : with a curse to all that keep not every one : that men might know how sin aboundeth : & to the poor in spirit the redeemer is declared in mysteries that the profane should not skoff : yet plainly to such as mark how Adam & Abraham heard of him : & life of the soul is showed by dwelling with God : as the second death for the soul , by anger from the face of God. Thus closely the world to come is showed . Also the tabernacle , & appartenances showed Christ his dwelling with man : & by sacrifices & birds escaped , his death & resurrection : that for justice hence by faith men should not say : who can go up to heaven to bring Christ down , or who can go to the deep of the earth to bring Christ from the dead , but might know that jesus should be the Eternal , & that the Godhead should raise him from the dead . And the saving of our souls appeared , in the Brazen serpent , when Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness , & the stonged by serpents wear healed . Many doubt less asked him , what was meant thereby : & he told that so the sun of man should be lifted up : that they who beleved on him should not perish , but have life everlasting . Moses mind shined with knowledge of all , as did his face shine with light : & Levies Sunlike Smaragd : & his Prophecies abridge all the holy stories : & he maketh the twelve dumb stones tell much , from Aaron's breast : And the patriarchs lives , have the like revolutiones in their children : how for cleaving to the redeamer they should find glory , & again shame in refusing their father's God , & following the blindenes of the God of this world . Now in David God historically expresseth Christ his Kingdom . David cometh to his Kingdom by continual afflictiones : & so all that will follow the religion of Christ shall be persecuted . And by whom the covenant of God & his law shall be kept to vanquish Satan , David is told : even that Christ shall come of his loins to reign upon his throne for ever . Of him he shall come to be a man & a King in this world : but he shall have no Kingdom in this world , & the earth which God hath cursed : but to him is the world to come subdued : being the creator , & David showeth how yet in his suffringes & death he was made inferior to Angels : but crowned with glory & honour , since he sat on the right hand of God. And when he came into the world , all the Angels of God worshipped him . And that juda should consider how by sufferings this glory cometh , David describeth as an Evangelist the suffringes of Christ . This David doth . And telleth in Prophecies the overthrow of his nation , & their captivity , & retarne ; & Antiochus persecutiones , & the jews rejection : even all their times : how God took a time to plant them , & will pluck them up : to seek them , & will destroy them : to keep them & will cast them off : to love them , and will hate them . Now for experience that a Kingdom under the Sun was not promised in Christ , Solomon had all wisdom , wealth & pleasure , & found all to be vanity : & by his pleasures fell from God : but returned , and teacheh in Ecclesiastes in all particular sorts , that all here is but vanity & vexation of spirit : by man's deal , and by the sorrows of their hands : and closely warneth that his son shall not rule all his : foreseying how Joseph's jeroboam vold leave only juda to be an whole tribe till Shiloh his child by the Virgin the King Eternal came in the flesh . Part of Rachel's house , and a little , of Benjamin , because God built half jerusalem and the Temple in his tribe , for that , part of Benjamin cleaved to juda : as a wolf though not a lion in Mardochai and Atossa the mother of Great Artaxerxes , that built the temple , which abode till our Lord came into it . And Solomon warneth the ten tribes , how they will be robbers making one purse , and refuse the love of the truth : and how God would laugh at their destruction by Assur : and fitted Proverbes to have kept them from destruction : And the son of Thamar , of Rachab , of Ruth , of Bathsuagh in the Canticles turneth all joy to the Kingdom of Christ : that Joseph's house should not despise the root of jessai , though jesus Son of Nun conquered the Land & made the Sun to stay . A matter showing that which followeth . 

JESUS the Son of GOD , and the Son of David after the flesh , would darken the Sun , and shake all the earth . And years ne'er a thousand , GOD still so governed juda that they should look for the Kingdom of heaven , always opened by CHRIST , and still feel their state on earth to be full of sorrow . That did they sun prove true . 

For the Kings of juda were all either worshippers of Devils' with many of their people , or , in some feeling of great danger & distress : or , in open hearing of Prophets , and that , many at once , that Babel should end their state : and Salomon's house : because they followed Babel built to make Gonddes of creatures . Salomon's house utterly perished . And in Babel , the Image , and other Pictures tells them in expositiones seven times over how heathen shall withhold judahs' kingdom , even from Salathiel and Zoroba babel our Lords Fathers after the flesh until he came into the world And they saw how yet under Heathen they were defended . And when they saw not only the fall of Salomon's race , temple , city , & kingdom , but of mighty Babel in 70. year's reign : then they were in fit case to be taught of David's Throne that should stand for ever . Aethan , of Phares brother , Zarach , told it afore Psal . 89.  But the Angel Gabriel telleth it more properly , even to the very year and day : that all the world might reckon 490. years to gather how many years , months , and days they were from the end of Moses , & how ne'er to the work of redemption , by the son of God dwelling in our tabernacle . And poor jews from 120. nationes are sent to jerusalem by Cyrus' proclamation of the true God , who all could teach Heathen that the world was made , and also how longue than it had stood : where still infidels will err . And for receiving of Christ his Prophecy , the poor nation that returned to jerusalem in hope of life by it , is recorded by the holy spirit which beautified the heavens , in high honour ; how many their whole number to every man did make . This honour had the saints : & their poor state in Ezra & Nehemias' is from God set down & their defence , & affinity with the Persiam kings also is penned from God's wisdom , & , religion is exponded by Aggei , Zachary & Malachy , even to john Bap. & to the meek King , Christ himself . & to the destruction of their nation , which will not believe that all kingdoms under the Sun are vanity : but do and will still hope for a pompous belly blessing in this cursed earth . In due time our Lord cometh , to have his tabernacle in us : for which his tabernacle or temple the world was made obedient unto man And though Moses tabernacle , were most diligently thrice described : & furnished with all dignity of matter & form : yet God did sun leave it in smalle regard : & likewise Salomon's temple . Yet against S. Stephen's doctrine Act. 7. to this day Israel hopeth for a temple of stone , & city to be built on mount Zion , in Chanaan . But our Lord leaveth this world , to sit on David's throne for ever : & jews perish in their lies , and blindness , & for our Lord's brightness , four Evangelistes tell that : & one telleth how the Apostles taught that to the heathen ; & holy Epistles comment upon all Moses , to teach Israel the golden building , & how their Thalmudicall is straw : in all hope of Policy good on Earth . And when jerusalem is destroyed to force an end of Moses Ceremonies : then more fully the nature of David's throne is opened by Gracious john , in obscure Patmos . He showeth how all the goodly jewels used through Moses and the Prophets tend hither , how the knowledge of Christ practised openly & rightly by his servantes , maketh the heavenly jerusalem : the holy jews a ey-expectation . But this should have two hindrances : one by the profane Caesares , whom the Lord would pay for their parts : that all their world should be altered : the other by Christianes' falling away , as Ishmael & Ephraim did . So Mackmad of Ishmael sun withdrew all the countries of Daniels Image , to their old Arabic infidelity : and Christ leaveth them to eternal blindness , as he did the old builders of Babel . Also the city , that crucified Christ , setteth up an earthly pomp , with corruption of all holy truth , & carriage in hope of life by the waters of Scripture , out of which he that is not born again by the Spirit , can never enter into the Kingdom of heaven . Yet against this Pomp Christ ruleth his common weals in perpetual expectation of the Eternal Throne to be fully manifested . And this sum doth the holy Bible afford . Which he that beareth in mind shall sooner see the driefte of every particular Book . And now Ecclesiastes will show , how this world can have no good Kingdom : where all kind of Sorts flow with vanities and vexation of Spirit . But to consider his book with more clearness of light , his kindred , & life , & a popular speech of his royal and most witty close speech , & divinity chief points , yet resisted of his nation , these are to be laid forth somewhat familiarly , for the help of the unacquainted with such matters . 

AN ABRIDGEMENT OF Salomon's LIFE . 

DAVID had sons by many wives . The King and his brother Nathan , & two more named in 1 Chr. 3. 5. by the daughter of Ammiel : besides the first born that sun died . That his wife was called Bathsuagh 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 a Daughter of nobility : God closely disposing tongues to that which in story should be most famous . After Urias the faithful Hettean died for his people & the cities of his God , by good David's wicked sleight , and David had made that Psalm of repentance to the comfort of all that should by faith find justice , David comforted Bath suagh , and swore that Solomon should reign : & called her Bathshebagh 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 daughter of Oth. And he see further that Salomon's house would not be upright with God , but would overthrew the temple & nation Leu. 26. and Deut. 28. and that Nathans prophecy should come of Salomon's next brother : & called him Nathan : that his name should abridge the Prophecy . Bath shebagh 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 also hath her honour from God. prov. 31.  Being an holy teacher of holy truth , and joying that Christ should come of her , as of Thamar , Rachab , and Ruth the Moabite : and not also of Roboams mother the Ammonite , nor of any King afterwards . Solomon was born about the time that Adoniah deflowered Thamar : as the story showeth : and is cast by the Rabbins and Greeks to be twelve years old when David dieth . His Father and his mother and the Prophet Nathan instructed him in the ways of God : & he craved wisdom of God , and had it above all Kings : and the more he increased in wisdom , he taught the people knowledge , and fitted many Proverbes . Three books he left ; The Song of Songs showing the joy of the Church that truly followeth Christ : and the Proverbes , warning much the Tribes that they will fall away from God. In the same book he joineth the words of Agur Ben jakeh : a wise Prophet of his time , who in few words taught much , of man's corruption : and spoke of God to devil in Christ , named ●thiel , and Vcal , that is with me God , even the Mighty . And Koheleth in his third book . The K. had fower name's Solomon , and jedidiah , 1 King. 12. , Lemoel , prov. 31. and Koheleth : Eccl. 1  The notation of the last should here be opened : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Cahal the verb is , Gather , and the noun Ecclesia , a company gathered to one assembly : as the 600000. which at once denied God : Num. 13. called there 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ghedah : elsewhere often 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Cahal . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Synagogue , or Ecclesia . Of Gathering the best thing , that is , wisdom , he is called Koheleth 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Aben Ezr. Ecclesiast . 1.  That is : He is called Koheleth , by the term of wisdom which was gathered in him : finding by experience that all things under the sun are vain : & common weals full of folly & madness : that men should look to the Kingdom of Christ in heaven . The LXX . made a new term of their own Ecclesiastes : a wise Doctor . And this book commenteth upon Nathans Prophecy , cited afore : and teacheth closely , that many Kings of his posterity by foolishness would break the hedge , that Serpents should bite them : & would speak great words , as did Roboam , so foolish as one that known not the way to the city . And he himself , was entangled by his wives to build Idolea for them : But he proclaimeth their wickedness : and how jedidiah , the beloved of God was delivered from them . None should doubt but that he is in the Kingdom of heaven ; seeing all the Prophets be there Luc. 13. and he spent all his life to teach the vanities of this world . His posterity ended in jechonias : and the jews miss of all the Prophets' meaning , which say : that messias should come of jechonias : who left no child naturally : jere. 22.  But sons to his Kingdom many . 1 Chr. 3.  & Salathiel of Nathan Mat. 1.  Luc. 3.  This point should specially be noted of Christianes' . The jews use all endeavour to overthrew S. Luk for our Lord's Kindred : & mightily labour to prove that Salathiel was natural son to jechonias : and not only S. to the Kingdom : as troops of others 1 Chr. 3. but properly son , as any other to his father , in private speech . And as they look for a pompous Kingdom : so they continue against God's oath , the line of Solomon : in Sanedr . folio 18.  Perec 10. atticle 12. in these words . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 

This rule is a foundation : that no King may be accepted for Israel , but of the house of David & of the seed of Solomon only : & who so is a schismatique against this family , denyeth the name of the blessed God , & the words of his prophets . Thus expressly they teach that messias must come of jechonias : & know that S. Luke & our Gospel falleth where that is granted : whom I answer in mine hebrew treatise to Prince Henry . And I have shown of the grossness of our table elsewhere . 

A PARAPHRASE Abridging the book : WITH OBSERVATIONES OF speeches towching the holy Ttinity , & of judaism , stumbling against Koheleth even unto this day . 

ALL this book of Coheleth or Salemon , tendeth , as was shown , to open Nathans speech , 1 Chro. 17. touching the Eternal throne of David : And this syllogism ariseth hence by the jews grant : in the Chaldy upon this place . 

If all things under the sun be subject to extreme vanity : the Eternal throne promised unto David , must be of an other world . 

But all things under the sun be subject to extreme vanity : 

Therefore this is all the Man , to look unto the judgement of God for an other world , and unto the throne of the better stay . 



The proposition is omitted , as lapped in the Prophecy of Nathan closely : and not to be opened directly to the profane : who would contemn all speech of the world to come . And the humble would sun conceive it . The assumption is proved by a plentiful induction , going through all man's state . And these be the chief heads . The shortness of man's life passing as a vapour . The Sun , wound , and water , never resting in one place , picture our state , and cause our change : our eyes can never be contented nor our ears : & yet nothing is new : but forgetfulness maketh things past to seem new . And to mark men's actions , Koheleth , that gathered all wisdom by experience , being a King , and in jerusalem the glory of the world , should pass all that none coming after him should exceed him . He considered the carriage of the wise , and of the mad world : and see that the crooked would not be streightened , and the imperfect could not be made up . He tried pleasure in his great cheer , & his thousand women . That became nothing worth . He joined wisdom and royal majesty together , in all pomp , and stately works and delights . But all was vanity . Though wisdom pass folly as darkness passeth light : yet this event have both , that both sun die , and their memory . And what the wise by care never resting doth bring about , a foolish heir , as Roboam and his house , almost all the race unto their end in jechonias , by wicked madness destroy . The best thing which the wisest would wish is contentement , in using their present travel . But God's variety in governing man's times & seasons in birth , death ; planting , rooting out : seeking , rejecting , love and hatred , this checketh all hope of resting in contentement of wealth goten . And God used this variety in his judgements that men should fear him . But the thorny cares & pleasure , choke the meditation upon God's work . And thus the wisdom of the best cannot bring any sound state . Now follies be infinite . In courts of judgement , might overcometh right : and men are become beasts : and for all things under the sun , as the one dieth so dieth the other . And who considereth the spirit of a man , that it ascendeth unto God ; scant any : But men live as not beleving , or not regarding the soul's immortality . And the wisest cannot look for use of their own , for oppressors unresistable are in every place : that the heathen saw how it was best never to have been , & next , to die quickly . Envy of life , bretheth in others slothfulness . whereby the poor in all common weals be infinite . And their misery bredes a contrary , in some rich : that being without kindred , yet they have none end of their labour . Yea the rich Kings nether for themselves nor other have any happy case . A wise child in prison , as joseph , is in better case than an old foolish King , as joas. And Kings were born poor & naked : and may come to the same case : and people be still weary of the present , & men under Kings had need of continual prayer : and in prayer , much babbling & rash vowing increase vanities in the best business . And for the oppression by the mighty , many are amazed : and know not how 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the holy Trinity is above all , & hath a time for judgement : But the most , think there is no God. Now tillage would seem a contented life : better than merchandise : where money multiplieth not : but by care and hazard . Here , as wealth increaseth , the servantes that spend it increase : and the master hath no more than they , saving only the sight : and the servantes sleep is sweet : but care suffreth not the master to sleep . And often falleth the rich to be worth nothing : and only contentement here is good : but to use the goods gotten , that is a gift of God. Often the wealthy are cut off from use of their own ; long life & many children cannot in poverty make one better than the untimely birth : yea though a man live in poverty two thousand years . All must come to one place . And this befalleth all men that the soul is never satisfied . By this the wealthy wise man or fool hath no sound preeminence , nor the poor of knowledge , infericritie , in walking afore the living . The notation of Adam should teach of his nature : for the first names expressed the natures of the things named : and it is evident , that he is but earthly Adam , and is not able to strive with his stronger : and who knoweth what is good for man in the days of his life that are but a shadow , & who can tell him what shall befall him . Therefore there is no true joy in this life : but a good name before God is better than any wealth : wherein precious oinctmentes in the East , were the chiefest , and better is the day of death , than the day of birth , and the house of mourning then the house of feasting : for the mourning house is the end of all , and the living will take it to hart . The practice of wise & foolish show this . For the wise go to the house of mourning , the fools to the house of banqueting . So the check from the wise is better than the songs of fools . For as the voice of thorns is under the pot , such is the laughter of fools . And because oppression from the stronger driveth men to madness : & bribes again destroy their hearts , the good end is better than the good beginning , and patience better than anger . A man must be slow to anger : for anger rests in the bosom of fools . As this proceedeth not of wisdom to ask : why were the former days better than these . Wisdom is good with wealth , while men live . Both bring a sheltre . But wisdom is the better , it saveth him that hath it . And here wisdom showeth itself : even in hamblenes not hoping to straighten that which God hath made crooked : rejoice with the rejoicing : and weep with the weeping days . God hath so set one by the other , that none can find fault . The just perishes in too straight justice , & the toilsome holdeth one long in his toil . Be not toilsome to much nor too wise : and play not the fool : it will bring death before the ordinary course . It is good to keep betwixt both : as they that fear God will . Wisdom will strengthen more than ten rulers : though in many things all stumble . And this point of wisdom hath great use , not to regard all evel tongues : for all speak evell of others & the tongue can not be bridled . This Kohe let tried : & sought still to find reasons for all carriages . But that was far off . Now the far off and the deep who can find out . But in trying the madness of folk , Koheleth found by his thousand wives , that an evell woman was bitterer than death . This he found : examining one thing by an other to find out devises . But this he could not find out : though in men one of a thousand , Koheleth would find out the subtlest devises , yet of a subtle woman's devises in all that number , he could not . They made him build houses to strange Gods : whereupon the Kingdom first rent , afterwards , perished . And this , Koheleth found generally true : that God made Adam plain , but they found out many inventiones . And so do their children in all folly . And who is as the wise man ? who is like him that knoweth the nature of matters . Wisdom lighteth the face of a man : and the hardenes of his face wilbe changed . As unlernednes bredeth boldness : and judgement , lothnes to be meddling . And it avoideth the calamities that come from governoures' oppression . Herein visdome would keep the King's laws , in the Lord : and not resist authority : for he earieth not the sword in vain . But he that doth well shall have praise of the King. But here men breed themselves much sorrow , not knowing what will befall them . And this vanity is common , that men consider not , rulers nor subjects , how suddenly death unexorable , ( against which there is no striving ) ceaseth upon men . By want of wisdom herein men wilbe ruling men , to their own harm . In that case Koheleth see the wicked buried : when they went away , and passed from the holy place of judgement , & were forgotten in the city where they had so done . And this vanity might teach , that no throneacceptable unto God , can be found in this world . But by not knowing God's dealing herein , men fill this world with vanity . Because judgement is not shown quickly upon evel works , men's hearts be fully carried to do mischief . But the wise Koheleth would tell , though the wicked do wickedly an hundreth fouled , and live long : yet it shall be well with the Godly : & not with the wicked whose days are but a shadow . An other secret government of God , teacheth the vanity of this life , that the just are plagued , and the wicked prospero . This teacheth that there is an other world of recompense : as in the Parable of Lazarus and Dives . In this diversity quiet enjoing of the present wealth is all that a man can have of his travel . And for man's business restless and slepelesse , not the wisest can see the reason of God's works . By outward prosperity , the just and unjust are not discovered often times . Hence Epicures exhort one an other with long orationes to present pleasures : while not the swift have the gool : nor the valiant the victory , nor the wise , the bread , nor the cunning , favour , but a time and occurrant befalleth all . And men know no more their time , then fish or foul that be caught in a net , and snare . Without special wisdom , this will not be shunned . Wisdom is soon contemned . This example may be pregnant . A little city besieged of a great King , by a poor man's wisdom hath been saved . But that poor man is soon forgotten , yet wisdom is better than strength : though the wisdom of the poor is contemned , & his words are not heard . The words of the wise in quietness are heard , more than the cries of Lords over fools . Wisdom is better than armour of war : and one that misseth of it , as a Lord over fools , will lose much good . As one dead fly putrifieth much precious oinctement , so a little folly marreth a man precious for wisdom & glory . Wisdom is rare : and to have the hart on the right hand . But to have the hart on the left hand , that is common to the fool : whose hart faileth in the plain way , and he telleth all that he is a fool . And in such a world , what study of the Law can breed a blessed throne on earth . The Spirit of rulers often riseth against a dutiful subject : as did Salomon's against jeroboam : he left his place and fled to Egypt : and became the ruin of Salomon's throne . Here a soft cure might have delayed much sin . An other evel is great and common : appearing notably in the unlawful kingdom of Ephraim . The fools of the ten tribes were set on high , and false Prophets ; and the truly rich sat down low . Servantes sat on horseback & Princes walked upon the ground . This people might know that great is the vanity of governements here . Roboam in juda likewise paid the price of that , extolling foolish young men , and contemning old sages . And King joas most notably : yielding from his rich counsellors , to the foolish Idoleservers . And his grandfather joram greatly wanted wisdom that lost all Edom's subjection , and advanced fools to kill his own bowels , and to die by torment of bowels . And as Saul by folly hoping to defeat David , digged a pit which himself fell into : So King Ochozias joining with Israel , broke an hedge , that the Serpent jehu strange him . And of all Kings wanting wisdom , and of all in high place , and of ill bent , away from God , these Proverbes wilbe verified , he that removeth stones wilbe greved by them , and he that cleaveth wood , shall be endangered by it , if the iron be blunt , and a man whet not the edge , but be vehement in strength : vehemency in a blunt cause , will cause danger . Wisdom from God's words of right , will only bring good success : teaching to beware of Satan's deceits , where a sting at the first is past cure . All the Kings of Israel followed jeroboam's worshipping of calves : being so sttong at the first : without using holy advice : that afterwards there could be no use of enchanters . All the Prophets warning were nothing : all that jonas whale , and Ninevie taught : all that Osec , Amos , Esai , and Micha told , wrought little good . As deaf adders they stopped their ears : and would not hear the voice of any enchanter . Yet the words of the mouth of the wise do bear grace : as specially the speeches in David for the Kingdom of Christ : but the lips of the fool jeroboam swallowed up all his house , when he bade worship calves at Dan and Bethel , and forbade to go up to jerusalem . The beginning of the words of his mouth was foolishness , and the end of his mouth an evell madness . The other King's foolish before God , multiplied words against judah , but see not their fall . Great toil they took , family after family , and wearied themselves in their Idols : being as men that known not the way to the city . And such were all the Kings of Israel , and the wicked of Roboams Kingdom . And woe be to the kingdom , where the Princes be given to feasting : as the true noble and sober bring happiness . A King doom is like an house : where by slougth the timber work rotteth , and by dissolute hand , the house wilbe dropped through : when they make feasts for laughter , and that wine cheer the hart , and money must affordall . And herein the medlars with Kings find their own ruin ; & this vanity is common . But they that look to the kingdom of Christ , will not in thought meddle with Caesar : for listeners will fly to report all that is once uttered . But men should ambitiously seek to meddle with their own matters , and to do good for the hope to come : as Pilgromes & strangers . This will be a casting of seed upon moist ground : which will fructify : that as one sooweth he shall reap . Therefore while we have time we should do good to all : lest God alter our ability , or occasion . The clouds and trees teach that : the clouds fall to moisten the herbs , and where the trees fruct falleth , gatherers' wilbe ready . And herein we should not be casting doubts , either for others success , or lest we in time want ourselves , of our joys . The husbandman blow eth in hope : not looking to the clouds for sowing or reaping : as we know not the winds way , nor the Embryones growth , so we know not how sun God altereth times from life to death : from planting to unrooting , from building to breaches : from laughter to weeping , from seeking , to losing : from speech to silence , from love to hatred , from peace to war : from youth to old age , morning and evening we should not be weary doing good : for in due time we shall reap , if we do not faint . It is a good thing for one to cheer his own life , will man's hart say : but long and merry life wilbe nothing saving vanity : when we think upon the time after this life , how it shall never have end . This thought will make young men little joy in the morning of age : considering that God will bring them into judgement . And the wekenes of our earthly tabernacle should put us in mind hourly . For days void of all delight will sun come : when our eyes , ribs , arms , stomach , ears , and tongue , and all helps of voice & the legs fail : & grains buddeth , & we are shaken off like a grasshopper : and the chine & liver & brain pan all will be rend , and man returns to his endless home , & mourners go about in the street . This may teach us how all temporal things be vainess , & teach from Scriptures to find out Christ his Kingdom : that when the outward man is corrupted , the inward man be fully renewed . For Christ is our life : and to die in him , that is all our gain . And man's sun passage hence up to God's throne , to receive according to the works done by the body , good or evell should print this in our hearts . And we should give more abundant heed to Koheleth his words : lest they flow aside from our eyes , as they from Ephraim , prov. 3. and from the men of jerusalem : Eb. 2. whom sin platting about them entangled to destruction . Koheleth , as all the other Prophets , hath words of delight , & Scripture of right : words of truth : as Goads to direct us , & nails fastened , in the sheep folds , given from Christ the only Shepherd , of whom David spoke Psa . 72. his last words : & therein these . Blessed be the Eternal , God , the God of Israel , & blessed be his glorious name for ever : and let all the earth be filled with his glory . Amen , yea amen . 

A TREATISE OF THE Holy Trinity 

NOW , for the trinity , I will follow those texts at which the very jews be amazed , & I will make my style altogether from their words , saving that , their future , for messias to come , I will turn into the time passed . In the Babylonian Thalmud in Sanedrin folio 38. excellent places be cited for unity & plurality : touching also messias from Dan. 7. where Rabbi Sadaias speaketh matter worthy regard : also from Ex. 23. where Ramban writeth well : & I saak Ben Arama upon Ex. bringeth the whole Thalmudique consent , that messias is greater than the Angels & inferreth thereupon that he must be God : which matter Koheleth toucheth for plura lity of People , in Boreeicha Thy creators . I have joined an Hebrew style to the English : that the one may help the other . 

OF THE UNITY IN GODHEAD AND PLURALITY of persons . 

THE ETERNAL , our God , the Eternal is one : & his nature is made known by himself : for the persons , the father , the Son , & the holy Ghost , & we must follow & mark the mystery of the Scriptures for the plural number , and for the Son of God : and for the holy Spirit . In these there is a great mystery : Let US make man according to OUR image : This for the persons . And for the unity of natures this : God created man after his own image . So , Come Let US go down , and Let US confound there their Lip . And , the Lord Went down to see the city , and the tower . And , For there , Elohim WERE reucaled unto him : & , the God which heard me in the day of my distress : And , who is like thy people Israel , one nation on the earth for whom THEY went , even Elohim , to redeem them unto himself , for a People , And , Until THRONES were set up : and the Everlasting Sat : what is to be said of that , One for himself , & one for the Son of David : as it is written : behold with the clouds of heaven one like the Son of Man came : This is Messïas our righteousness . And is it not written of the messias ? Meek and riding upon an Ass ? In deed he came in humbleness , & came not upon 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 horses with pride . And whereas it was written with the clouds of heaven : They are the Angels of the host of heaven . This is the great dignity which the Creator gave messias . And to the Everlasting did they bring him : as it is written : The Eternal said unto my Lord , sit thou on my right hand ; etc.  A certain Saducie said , to Rabbi Idith in the Babil . Thal. San. folio 38.  It is written : & to Moses he said : Come up unto the Eternal : unto me : he should have said . This is Matatron ( the Angel that led the People ) of whom it is written . My name is in him . It is written : rebel not against him , he will not bear with your sins . Mark also the commentary of Ramban upon these words ; Behold , I send mine Angel before thee , to keep thee in the way , & to bring thee into the place which I have prepared : regard him , & obey his voice . Provoke him not , for he will not for bear your Sins : for my name is in him . Thus there speaketh Ramban . In the propriety of the text , this Angel which is promised here , is the Angel the redeemer in whom the great Name ( God ) is For in jah jehova is the Rock Everlasting . And the same said : I am the God of Bethel . It is the manner of the King to tarry in his house . And the Scripture calleth him Angel because the world is governed by this Person . And words of the general Rabines concerning Christ are these : in Isaak Ben Arama upon the Law folio 76.  Our Doctors say , who art thou great mountain ? This is Christ. Ana wherefore is his name called great ? because he shall be greater than the Fathers , as it is written : Behold my servant that prospero , he shall be high & exalted ; I 'll shall be higher than Abraham & exalted above Moses : & he shall be far above the Angel's 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 of ministry : of whom it is written Ezek. ● . They had height , & they had terror . And if they mark & understand this , they do know that the dignity of messias is above the Angels of ministry . In that sense should not he be God himself : as they appropriate unto him this honourable title . This hath Ben Arama . And most plainly doth the same man's words say , that God spoke this of messias : ps . 89.  I will be his father , & he shall be my son . As Aben Ezra saith of , Kiss the Son : This is messias . And of the holy Spirit . Gen. 1. 2. they say : This is the Spirit of messias the King : Zohar upon Gen : and commonly from jeremy 23 : as in Bathra . sect . 5. folio 75. B. That he is , jehovah our righteousness . And thus they do in words agree with our holy Apostles . But they turn aside like a warping bow : whereof I will now speak by the help of God.  

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 OF JUDAISME DISANNULLING COHELETH AND ALICE the Bible . 

One great Rabbin who lived 42 3 years ago , who gathered the jerusalem Thalmud and the Babylonian into an easier order , & translated what he bringeth into familiar Hebrew : ( they be rare jews that understand the jerusalemy , or the Babylonian specially ) He endeth his volumes in the common place of messias : who shall be translated & cited in his own words : to show how the whole nation misseth extremely of Christ , the end of the law : though in tongue , they agreed with the Apostles . 

Rambam , or R. Moses Ben Maymony in Misnaioth Tom. 4. tract . Kings Sect. 11. & 12 thus writeth . 

messias the King shall stand up & restore the Kingdom of the house of David to the old state of the first government : & he shall build the temple , & gather the dispersed of Israel , & the Laws shall be restored . They shall offer their offerings , and keep the seaventh years rest , according to every commandment delivered in the Law. And every one that believeth not in him , and he that looketh not for his coming , he denieth not only all the other prophets but also the Law , & Moses our Doctor . For behold the Law testifieth of him : as it is said : And the Eternal thy Elohim shall restore thy captivity and pity thee , and gather thee again , etc.  After thy dispersion shall be into the extremity of the heavens : Yet the Eternal will bring thee again . And these speech set fourth in the Law , they are abridgements of all the speeches which are spoken by all the prophets . And specially in the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Section of Balaam as is spoken , and there he speaketh of two messias : of the first messias which is David which saved Israel from the hand of their enemies : And of the latter messias , which shall stand up of his children : which shall teach Israel in the end . And in the former place he saith : I shall see him : But not now : I shall view him , but not near : This is King messias . A star from jacob : This is David : & a sceptre : That is King messias : And He shall smit the Lords of Moab , He , is David : as it is said : And he struck Moab , And measured them by cord : And he shall unwall all the sons of Seth : He is Christ the King : as it is said : And he shall rule from sea to sea . And Edom shall be an inheritance : Even to David as it was said . And Edom became servants to David . And Seyr shall be an inheritance : etc.  This is to messias the King. As it said : And Saviour's shall arise on mount Zion etc.  Also concerning the cities of refuge he saith : thou mayst add yet three cities etc.  But this hath never been done . And the Lord did not command any thing in vain . But the case standeth according to the words of the Prophets : & it needeth no disputing for all books are full of this matter . 

And Let it never come to thy mind that messias the King needeth to work by signs and wonders : For beho●h Rabbi Akiba was a great Doctor among the Doctors of the Thalmud : & he was Harnes bearer to Ben Coziba , the King , & he thought that he was the King messias . Both he deemed , and all the Doctors of his age , that he was King messias , until he was killed for Sinne. when he was killed , they knew he was not : And the Doctors asked of him , for no sign for no wonder . And the ground of the matters thus standeth : That the Law , that the statutes & rights of it , stand for ever , yea for ever & ever . And nothing may be added , nothing may be taken away . And if a King stand up from the house of David studying the Law , & busiedin the commandments 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 as David his father , according to the written Law , & the Law of traditions , and compel Israel to walk in it , & to repair the ruins of it , & to fight the wars of the Eternal , behold this is sure , that he is the messias , if his doing prospero & he build the temple in place , & gather the dispersed of Israel , behold that man is messias out of all doubt . And he will settle all the world , to serve the Lord together : As it is said : then I will turn unto nations pure Lips , that all may call upon the name of the Eternal & serve him with one accord . Perek : or Section 12. & the last of all his Thalmud . Let it not come into thy hart , that in the days of messias , any thing shall be abrogated from the custom of the world , or that any newness shall be in the frame of the world . Nothing so . The world goeth on in the same rate and that which is said in esay And the wolf shall dwell with the Lamb : & the Leopard shall lodge with the Kid , that is a parable and a dark speech . The sense of the speech is : That Israel shall dwell in safety , among the wicked of the world : which are Likened to the wolf & Leopard . As it is said : the Evening wolf shall spoil them , & the Leopard shall watch at their cities . And they shall turn unto the Law of truth : and they shall not spoil , nor destroy , but shall eat their store in quietness : as Israel . as it is said : The Lion as the Ox , shall eat straw . And so in other matters the like which are written of messias , they are resemblances . And in the days of Christ the King it shall be known to all , what things were resembled : and to what matters the hide meaning tended . The Doctors say there is no difference betwixt this world , & the days of Christ , but only the service under the Kingdoms . It may be seen by the proper sense of the prophets , that in the beginning of the days of messias shall be the war of Gog and Magog , & before the wars of Gog & Magog , a prophet shall stand up , to settle Israel , & to praepare their 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 hearts , as it said : Behold I send unto you Elias etc.  And he cometh not to Pollute the pure , or to purify the polluted , nor to disable the fully allowable , nor to allow the manifestly disallowable , but to settle peace in the world : as it is said , & he shall turn the hearts of fathers unto the Children . And there be some of the Doctors who say , that before the coming of messias , Elias shall come : But all these matters & such like doth no man know , what they shall be until they be : The matters are matters closed up with the prophets : also our Doctors have no Kabala for these matters , But with wresting of the texts . And therefore they are at schism for these matters : And these matters are in no case , for their order of being , or particularities , any foundation of Law. Let not a man busy himself in the Agadoth : ( or fables wittilypenned ) nor be long in Midrasoth commentaries of allusions which are spoken of these matters , & such : & let him not lay them for a foundation : For they teach neither faith , nor Love. So let not a man reckon the End. ( Yet the Angel Gabriel & Daniel did to the very hour Daniel . 9 ) as our Doctors say Let their soul breath out who reckon the ends . But let him expect and believe according to the general rule which we have expounded . In the days of messias the King , when his Kingdom shall be settled , & all Israel shall be gathered unto him , all they shall be genealogized according to their families , by his mouth from the holy Spirit , which shall rest upon him : as it is written , he shall sit & he shall purify and cleanse : The sons of Levy first shall he cleanse , and thus say : This man is of the Priest's family : & this man of Levies genealogy : & he shall reject them which are not of the Genealogy of Israel . Behold a certain One said : And the Ambassador said unto them etc until there stands Up a Priest with Urim & Thummim . Behold thou art taught , that by the holy Spirit the Principal shall be referred to their Genealogy , & the genealogized 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 shall be made known . But he will not genealogize Israel , that is , them who are not of Levy , but generally of what tribe they be : showing that this man and this man , is of such a tribe . But he will not tell , that such a man is of special virtue , such an one , of an Heathen mother : such an one , a Slave : But of right , will Let them sink that will have their Sun to set . 

The Doctors and prophets desired not the days of messias , neither to rule over all the world nor to subdue the Heathen , nor to be extolled of nations , nor to drink & make merry , but to have Leisure for the Law and wisdom , and have no tax master and Hinderer , that they may be worthy of life Eternal . And in that time there shall be no hunger , no war , no emulation , nor strife , for goods shall flow plentifully . And all delicates shall be found as Plentiful as dust : And the world shall study nothing cls , but only to know the Eternal . Therefore there shall be great Doctors , & skilful in hide speeches , & they shall apprehend the knowledge of their Creator , according to the force of their strength ; as it is written : For the Earth shtlbe full of the knowledge of the Eternal , as the waters that cover the Sea.  

The Ebreu that followeth is the jews continued speech of their mistaken messias ; But excedeth much the English translation in space , because I would have a fair and great Letter , After shall come a short censure upon the lews hope for their messias : & then : The Chaldy Paraphrastes own argument of Coheleth , & the holy Text.  

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 A Censure upon the jew Rambam . 

He speakeah truly that Balaam prophesieth of Christ : but he little marketh what Balaam taught : by that : messias shall unwall all the sons of Seth. Yffor destroying all their towns brickwall this were spoken , that were no benefit . nether will Solomon suffer to hope for one age to have any thing , the like whereof was not afore : either for peace or wars . Paul expoundeth the unwalling of Seth sons . 2.  Cor. 10.  Our armour is not carnal but mighty for God : to pull down strong holds : This Balaam meant By more cities of refuge , Rambam seeketh corners . thus he reasoneth : 

Yfwe had not yet all cities of refuge promised , there is a returning unto our land of Chanaan to have them . But yet we had not all promised : 

Therefore there remaineth a return to Chanaan . 



The assumption is double weak . The Law gave leave to make more , if they conquered more : as Reuben Gad & Manasses conquered more . & Permissions be in Laws no less than commandments . Besides we may not say that Reuben Gad & Manasses made no cities more of refuge : because it is not recorded . The witty Aben Ezra noteth upon Gad , Gen. 4. 9 that much is unrecorded , which jacob speaketh of him . Thus Rambams hope is the web of a spider . And concerning building of jerusalem , what can that profit more than it profited in Salomon's time : when sun all came to nothing : And now the world is 5531. years old : and their rule is : that six thousand shall end it : which wilbe at 469. & what can that time work to change the whole world . Touching Elias : He tottereth : But we know the case : and he might learn Christ & the heavenly jerusalem of our . N. Test . & the Chaldy upon Eccles . 1. v. 2. telleth that their messias is but vanity . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 KOHELETH . 

Ecclesiastes . 

1.  The words of Koheleth , the Son of David , King in Jerusalem . 

2.  Vanity of vanities saith Coheleth , vanity of vanities , all ( is ) vanity . 

3. what permanent good hath man in all his labour which he taketh under the Son ; 

4.  An age passeth , and an age cometh : though the earth abideth still . 

5.  Both the Son ariseth , & the Son goeth down : and to his place doth he breath : there he ariseth . 

6.  He walketh unto the South , & compasseth unto the North : The wound whirleth , whirleth , walketh , & into his circuits returns the wind . 

7.  All the rivers go into the sea , yet the sea is not full : unto the place whither the rivers go , they return to go 

8.  All things travel , man cannot utter it . The eye is not satisfied with seeing : nor the ear filled with hearing . 

9  That which hath been is the same which shall be : and that which hath been done , is the same which shall be done : and there is nothing new under the sun . 

10.  Is there any thing of which one may say : Behold this , it is new ? it hath been already , in the old time that hath been before us.  

11.  There is no remembrance of the former , also of the latter which shall be there shall be no remembrance of them with those that shall be after . 

12.  I Koheleth was King over Israel in Jerusalem . 

13.  And I did apply my mind to search and try the wisdom of all , which is done under heaven . This is a sore occupation whidh GOD hath given to the sons of man , to be occupied therein . 

14.  I considered all the works that are done under the sun : & behold , all is vanity , and vexation of spirit . 

15.  The crooked cannot be made straight & that which is wanting cannot be made up . 

16.  I thought in my hart , saying : behold , I have amplified & augmented wisdom above all which have been afore me in Jerusalem : Yea my hart saw much wisdom , & knowledge . 

17.  And I applied my heart to know wisdom & knowledge , madness & foolishness : I knew that this also was a vexation of spirit . 

18.  For in much wisdom is much grief : & he that increaseth knowledge , increaseth sorrow . 

Chapter . 2.  

1.  I said in mine hart , come now , I will try thee with mirth . Therefore use good - , cheer . But behold also this was vanity . 

2.  Of laughter I said , thou art mad : & of mirth , why dost thou this ? 

3.  I consulted in my hart to continue my flesh in good cheer : ( yet I applied my mind unto wisdom ) and to lay hold upon folly ; until I might see what were best for the sons of man , to do under the heavens , the number of the days of their life . 

4.  I made me great works : I built me houses : I planted me vineyards : I made me gardens & orchards : and I planted in them trees of all fruit . 

5.  I made me pools of water , to water with them the wood growing with trees . 

7.  I bought servants and maids : and I had such born in my house : also I had great possession of oxen , and sheep , above all that were before me in jerusalem . 

8.  I gathered me also silver & gold , & the peculiar jewels of Kings , & countries : I provided me singers , men & women : and the delights of the sons of men , instruments of all sorts : 

9 which as I was great I increased above all that were before me in jerusalem . Also my wisdom remained with me . 

10.  And whatsoever my eyes desired , I witheld it not from them : I withdrew not my hart from any joy . For mine hart rejoiced in all my labour : and this was my portion of all my travail . 

11.  then I looked upon the works which my hands had made , and unto the labour which I had laboured to do : & behold , all was vanity and a vexing of spirit : and there is no permanent good under the sun . 

12.  then I looked to see wisdom and madness , and folly , And what can a man do that would try after the King ; only that which hath been done already . 

13.  then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly , as light excelleth darkness . 

14.  The wise man hath his eyes in his head & the fool walketh in darkness . But I saw that the same hap should happen unto them all ▪ 

15.  then said I in my hart , as it happeneth unto the fool shall it happen unto me also . And to what end then should I more study for wisdom . then I said in my heart that this also was vanity . 

16.  For there shall be no remembrance of the wise , as none of the fool for ever . Because things passed in the days to come are all forgotten . 

17 ▪ And how dyeth the wise man as the fool ? Therefore I hated life . For I was grieved at the work which was wrought under the sun . Because all was vanity & a vexing of spirit . 

I hated also all my labour , wherein I had laboured under the sun : which I must leave to the man that shall be after me . 

19  And who knoweth whither he shall be wise or foolish : and shall rule all my labour , wherein I have laboured , & wherein I have showed myself wise under the sun ; This also was a vanity . 

20.  Therefore I went about to make my hart weary , of all the labour wherein I had laboured under the sun . 

21.  For there is a man whose labour is in wisdom & in knowledge and in good dealing : yet to a man which hath not laboured therein , shall he give his portion . This also is vanity & great grief . 

22.  For what hath man for all his labour , & for the vexation of his hart , that he laboureth under the sun . 

23.  For all his days are sorrows , and & his occupation disquietness , & even in the night his hart taketh no rest . This also is a vanity . 

24.  There is nothing so good for a man as that he eat , and drink , & cheer his soul by his labour ▪ Though this allo I saw that from the hand of God , it cometh . 

25.  For who should eat , or who should quickly do that , rather than I : for my labours ? 

26.  Now , to the man which is acceptable before him God giveth wisdom and gladness : but to the sinner he giveth occupation to gather & to store to give to him that is acceptable before God. This also is a vanity & a vexing of spirit . 

Chapter . 3.  

1.  All things have a time ▪ and all have a season under the heaven . 

2.  A time to be born , & a time to die : a time to plant , and a time to pluck up the planted . 

3.  A time to slay , and a time to heal : a time to break down , & a time to build . 

4.  A time to weep & a time to laugh : a time to make lamentation & a time to dance . 

5.  A time to cast away stones , & a time to gather stones : a time to embrace & a time to be far from embracing . 

6.  A time to seek & a time to lose : a time to keep , & a time to cast away . 

7.  A time to rent , & a time to sow : a time to be silent , & a time to speak . 

8.  A time to love , & a time to hate : a time of war , & a time of peace . 

9 what permanent good hath the doer wherein he laboureth . 

10.  I have seen the business that God hath given to the sons of men to occupy them therein . 

11.  He hath made every thing goodly in his time . but he hath set the world in their hart , that a man cannot find out the work which God doth , from the beginning to the end . 

12.  I know that there is nothing good in them , but to rejoice & do good whiles one liveth . 

13.  Also that any man eateth & drinketh , and jnjoyeth the good of all his labours , this is the gift of God.  

14.  I know that all which God doth it will be sure for ever : and God doth all that men should live in fear before him . 

15.  That which hath been is now ▪ and that which is to be , now hath been : & God will bring a gain , that which is now passing away . 

16.  Moreover , I marked under the sun the place of judgement : there was injurye . & the place of justice : there was jnjury . 

17.  I said in my hart : the just & the unejust God will judge , for there is a time for every thing & for every deed , there . 

18.  I said in my hart , after the manner of the sons of man , when God made them known , that I saw how they are beasts : they to themselves ▪ 

19  An hap befalleth the sons of man , & an hap befalleth the beast : and they have one hap : as the one dieth so dieth the other : and man excelleth not the beast . For all is vanity . 

20.  All came from the dust , & all returns unto the dust . 

21.  For who considereth the spirit of man which doth ascend upward : and the spirit of the beast which doth descend downwards , unto the earth . 

22.  then I saw that there is nothing better than that a man joy of his works . For that is his portion . For who can bring him to see what shall be after him . 

Chap. 4 

1.  But when I considered all the oppressed ones which were greved under the sun : & behold the oppressed had the tears , but they had no comforter , for the oppressors had the strong hand . , and the other had no conforter . 

2.  then I commended the dead which already are dead , above the living , which are alive yet ▪ 

3.  And above them both him that as yet hath not been : because he hath not seen the wrong doing which is under the sun . 

4.  For I marked all labour , & all industry of works : how it bringeth envy to a man from his neighbour . 

5.  The fool foldeth his hands , & eateth up his own flesh . Saying . 

6.  Better is an handful with ease , them two fistfulls with labour & fretting of spirit . 

7.  Again I marked a vanity under the sun . 

8.  There is one & none the second : and he hath neither son nor brother : and there is no end of all his labour ; and his eye cannot be satisfied with riches . And for whom should I labour and defraud my soul of good ? This also is a vanity & a grievous toil . 

9  Couples are better than one . For they have a good reward for their labour . 

19  For if they fall , the one will lift up his fellow : & woe is the one which falleth , and hath not a second to lift him up . 

11.  And if a couple sleep they shall be warm : but how can one alone be warm . 

12.  And if some one be stronger than one , two will stand against him , & a threefold thread will not sun be broken . 

13.  A poor & wise child is better than a King that is old and foolish : which cannot abide to be advised any more . 

14.  For out of the prison he cometh forth to reign : when as he that is born in his kingdom is made poor . 

15. 3.  I saw all the living which walk under the sun , attend upon the child which shall stand up the others place . 

16.  There is no end with any people , for any that is over them . Also the later will not rejoice in the same . So this also is vanity & vexation of spirit . 

17.  Look to thy feet when thou goest into the house of God. For he is nearer to hear , then to sacrifice . There the gift of fools . For they know not that they do evil . 

Chap. 5 

1.  Be not rash with thy mouth , nor let thy hart be hasty to utter any thing before God. For God is in the heavens , & thou art on the earth . Therefore let they words be few . 

2.  For as dreams come by much business , so the voice of a fool hath much babbling . 

3. when thou vowest a vow to God , differ not to pay it . For he deliteth not in fools . what thou dost vow , pay . 

4.  Let not thy mouth make thy flesh sin , neither say before the Angel , that it was an error . wherefore should God be angry for thy voice , and destroy the works of thy hands ? 

5.  For as in many dreams be vanities : so in many words . But fear thou God.  

6.  If oppression of the poor , & robbery of judgement & justice , thou behold in a country , marveyle not at the matter . For an higher than the high one doth mark : & there be high above them . 

7.  The commodity of ground is for all . The King is made servant to the field . 

8.  He that loveth money , cannot be fed with money : or he that loveth any wealth which hath not fruit . 

9 when this good is much , they be many to eat it : & what good cometh to the owners , but the view of their eyes . 

10.  The sleep of the labourer is sweet , whether he sleep little or much but the fullness of the rich suffreth him not to sleep . 

11.  There is a sore sickness which I have seen under the sun : riches kept of the owner , to his own harm . 

12.  And the riches perish by some evil business : & he beget a son and nothing cometh to his hand . 

13.  As he came out of his mother's womb naked , he returns to go as he came : & he cannot carry away any thing of his labour , which he may bear in his hand . 

14.  This also is a sore sickness . Even as he came so he goeth away : and what permanent good hath he that he laboured for the wind ? 

15.  Also all his days in darkness doth he eat & much anger and by his own sickness & paining . 

16.  Behold what I have seen : it is a goodthing to eat & to drink , & to enjoy the good , in all a man's labour which he taketh under the sun the number of the days of his life which God giveth him : for this is his portion . 

17.  Though to every man to whom God hath given riches & treasures , & giveth him power to eat thereof , & to take his part , & to enjoy his labour : this is a gift of God.  

18.  For , he will not much think upon the days of his life : whom God busieth in the cheering of his hart . 

Chapter . 6.  

There is an evil which I saw under the sun , & it is much among men : 

2.  Some man , to whom God hath given riches , & wealth , & honour , & he wanteth nothing for his soul of all that he desireth : yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof , but a strange man shall eat it up . This is vanity , & this is an evil sickness . 

3.  If a man beget an hundred children , and live many years , and though the days of his years be multiplied and his soul be not satisfied with good things , and he have not wherewith to be buried . I say that an untimely fruit is better than he . 

4.  For he cometh into vanity , and goeth into darkness : and his name shall be covered with darkness . 

5.  He also hath not seen , nor felt the sun : he was in better case than the other . 

6.  Yea though he had lived a thousand years , twice told , and see no good . Do not all men go to one place ? 

7.  All the labour of man is for his mouth : yet the soul is not filled . 

8.  then what hath the wise more than the fool ? and what less hath the poor man of knowledge ; to walk afore the living ? 

9  The eyesight is better than the walking of the soul . Also that is vanity and vexing of the spirit . 

10. whatsoever one be , his name was given of old : and it is known that he is earthly man , and is not able to contend with him that is stronger than he . 

Chapter . 7.  

1.  When there be many things that increase vanity what permanent good thing can a man have ? 

2.  For who knoweth what is good for a man in life , the number of days of the life of his vanity which he shall spend as a shadow ; for who can show unto man what shall be after him under the sun ? 

3.  A good name is better than a good ointment , and the day of death than the day that one is born . 

4.  It is better to go to the house of mourning then to go to the house of feasting , because this is the end of all men : and the living shall lay it to his hart . 

5.  Sadness is better than laughter For under heavynes of countenance the hart may be merry . 

6.  The hart of the wise in the house of mourning : But the hart of fools is in the house of mirth . 

7.  Better it is to hear the rebuke of a wise man , then that a man should hear the song of fools . 

8.  For as the noise of thorns is under the pot , so is the laughter of fools . This also is vanity . 

9  Because oppression may make the wise mad ▪ and rewards destroy the heart : 

10.  The end of a thing is better them the beginning : The patient in spirit is better than the haughty in spirit . 

11.  Be not rash of spirit to be angry . For anger lodgeth in the bosom of fools . 

12.  Say not , how cometh it to pass that the former days were better them these . For thou canst not ask that from wisdom . 

13. wisdom is good with possessions : & an excellent commodity for men while they behold the sun . 

14.  For wisdom bringeth shadow : money bringeth shadow ▪ but knowledge hath the preeminence ▪ wisdom keepeth alive them that have it . 

15.  Consider the work of God. And who can make straight that which he hath made crooked ? 

16.  In the day of good , use the good ▪ & in the sore time , consider it . God hath so set the one by the other that man cannot find no blame in him . 

17.  I have seen all things in the days of my vanity . There is a just man that perished in his justice , & there is a wicked man that continueth long in his malice . 

18.  Be not thou just much : and be not too wise : wherefore shouldst thou undo thyself . 

19  Be not too wicked : neither be a fool . wherefore shouldst thou perish before thy ordinary time . 

20.  It is good that thou lay hold on this : but yet withdraw not thy hand from that . And he that feareth God shall come out of them all . 

21. wisdom shall strengthen the wise man more than ten mighty Princes that are in the city , can give strength . 

22.  Though there is no man just in all the earth , that doth good & misseth not . 

23.  Take not heed to all the words that men speak , lest thou do hear thy servant speak evil of thee . 

24.  For often times also thy hart knoweth that thou also hast spoken evil of others . 

25.  All this have I tried by wisdom . I thought , I willbe wise : but it went far from me . 

26.  That which is far off , & deep , deep , who can find it out . 

27.  I turned me heartily , to know and to espy , and to seek wisdom & conceits & to know the mischief of folly & foolishness of madness . 

28.  And I find one thing bitterer than death : Even the woman , who is nets , and her hart snares : & her hands be bands . He that pleaseth God shall be saved from her : but the sinner shall be caught by her . 

29.  Behold , saith Koheleth , this have I found , examyning one by another , to find out conceyts . 

30.  But this which further my soul sought , I found not out . 

The conceits of a man one of a thousand I found out , but of a woman with all these qualities , I found not out . 

31.  Only behold this have I found out , that GOD made Adam plain : but they sought out many conceits . 

Chap. 8.  

1.  Who is like the wise ? & how rare is he that knoweth the nature of matters ? Wisdom in a man will lighten his face : & the hardness of his face will be altered . 

2.  I say , regard the King's mouth yet after the oath to God.  

3.  Be not rash to go out of his sight : stand not in an evil matter . For he can do whatsoever he william  

4. where the word of the King is , power is . And who may say unto him , what wilt thou do ? 

5.  He that keepeth the law shall feel no evil thing : & the wise hart will know time & judgement . 

6.  For every thing hath his time & jugment : But the mischief of man is much upon him : 

7.  Because he knoweth not what is to come . & how things will fall out , who can tell ? 

8.  Man is not ruler over the spirit , to retain the spirit : neither hath he power in the day of death : nor armour for the battle : & no striving will help them that use it . 

9 All this have I seen , setting my hart toward every work that is wrought under the sun : That there is a time when a man ruleth over men to his own harm . 

10.  And in that sort I saw the wicked come to the grave , & they passed away , and went from the holy place , & they were forgotten in the city where they had so dealt . So this was a vanity . 

11.  Because sentence upon evil dealing is not executed quickly , therefore the hart of the sons of man is fully bend in them to do evil . 

12.  Though a sinner do evil an hundreth times and long continue : yet I know that it shall be well with them that fear God , which reverence his presence . 

13.  But it shall not be well with the wicked : neither can he long continue days , which are but a shadow : he which liveth not in fear before God.  

14.  There is a vanity which is done upon the earth , that there be just men , to whom it cometh according to the work of the wicked : & there be wicked men to whom it cometh according to the work of the just : I thought that this also is vanity . 

15.  And I praised joy . For a man hath no better thing then to eat & to drink and to rejoice ▪ for this will stick to him of his labour , the days of his life that God hath given him under the sun . 

16.  When I applied mine hart to know wisdom , & to behold the business that is done on the earth , how day & night a man would not see sleep with his eyes , 

17.  then I marked all works of GOD that man cannot find out the work which is done under the sun , Though man labour never so much to seek , yet he cannot find it : yea although the wisest think to know it , he cannot find it . 

Chap. 9  

1.  FOR all this have I applied unto mine hart : even to try out all this ; that the just & the wise , & their works are in the hands of God : neither love nor hatred doth men discern , by all that is before them . 

2.  Even all they find , as if all had one hap , the just & the unjust : the good & the clean , and the unclean , the sacrificing , & he that sacrificeth not : the good & the bad have alike : the swearer as he that reverenceth an oath . 

3.  This is the most grievous of all that is done under the sun , that all have one hap . Also the hart of the sons of man is full of evil , and madness is in their hearts whiles they live , and afterwards they go to the dead . 

4.  For all that be yet accompanied unto all the Living ( say the men of an evil hart ) they have assurance . For it is better with the dog alive , then with the Lion that is dead . 

5.  For the living know that they shall die : but the dead know nothing at all : neither have they any more a reward . For their remembrance is forgotten . 

6.  Also their love , and their hatred & their envy is already gone & they have no more portion for ever , in all that is done under the sun . 

7.  Go , eat thy bread with joy , & drink thy wine with a cheerful hart . For God now accepteth thy works . 

8.  At all times let thy garments be white & let not oil be lacking upon thine head . 

9  Enjoy life with the wife which thou dost love , all thy days of vain life : which HE hath given thee , under the Sun : all thy vain days . For this is thy portion in life , & in thy Labour which thou dost take under the sun . 

10.  All that thy hand can find to do , do it ; as thou canst . For there is nether work , nor invention , nor knowledge , not wisdom in the grave whither thou goest . 

11.  Again I marked under the sun : That the suift win not the race : nor the valiant the victory : nor the wise the bread : nor nor the subtle , riches ▪ nor the cunning , favour : But a time & occurrent happeneth to them all . 

12.  For assuredly man knoweth not his time . As fishes are taken in a mischevous net , & as birds are caught in the snare ▪ So they , the sons of man are entangled , at the evil time when it falleth upon them suddenly . 

13.  I have also seen this wisdom under the sun ▪ & me thought it great . 

14.  A little city had few men in it , and a great King came against it ; & compassed it about , & built forts against it . 

15.  And there was found therein a poor & wise man : & he saved the city by his wisdom . But none remembered this poor man . 

16.  then said I Better is wisdom than strength , yet the wisdom of the poor is despised , & his words are not heard . 

17.  The words of the wise are more heard in quietness then a Lords cry over fools . 

18.  Better is wisdom than weapons of war as one uncircumspect destroyeth much good . 

Chapter . 10.  

1.  One dead fly putrifieth , & corrupteth much precious ointment ▪ so doth a little folly , him that is in estimation for wisdom , for glory . 

2.  The hart of a wise man is at his right hand ▪ but the hart of a fool is at his left hand . 

3.  And also when the fool goeth by the way his hart faileth , and he telleth unto all that he is a fool . 

4.  If the spirit of him that ruleth , riseth up against the , leave not thy place . For a soft cure pacifieth great sins . 

5.  There is an evil that I have seen under the sun : as an error that proceedeth from the face of him that ruleth . 

6.  Folly is great height ▪ and the rich sit in low place . 

7.  I have seen servants on horses , and princes walking as servants on the ground . 

8.  He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it : And he that breaketh down a hedge , a serpent shall sting him . 

9  He that removeth stones shall find sorrow thereby ▪ And he that cleaveth wood shall be heated thereby : 

10. when the Iron is dull , & the man whetteth not the Edge , but useth might . But the best help to bring a thing to good pass , is wisdom . 

11. when the serpent hath bitten before charming then the cunning charmer profiteth nothing . 

12.  The words of the mouth of a wise man give grace : but the lips of a fool devour himself . 

13.  The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness and the later end of his mouth is wicked madness . 

14.  And the fool will multiply words . But the man knoweth not what shall be . And who can tell him what is following him ? 

15.  The labour of the foolish doth weary him . For he knoweth not how to go into the city . 

16. woe to the OH land whose King is a child : & whose princes eat in the morning ▪ 

17.  Blessed art thou OH land , whose King is the son of nobles : and whose Princes eat in time , for strength , & not to drink . 

18.  By slothfulness beams come to decay : by holding down the hands the house droppeth thorough . 

19  Men making feasts to be merry , that wine make glad the living & money must afford all . 

20.  Curse not the King no not yet in thy thought , neither curse the rich in thy bed chamber : for the foul of the heaven will carry the voice , & the winged bird will declare the matter . 

Chapter ▪ 11.  

1.  Cast thy seed upon the moist ground : for after many days thou shalt find it . 

2.  Give a portion to seven , & also to eight . For thou knowest not what evil shall be upon the earth . 

3.  If the clouds be full , they will pour fourth rain upon the earth : And if the trees fruit fall toward the South , or toward the North , in the place that the trees fruit falleth , there fruit gatherers will be . 

4.  He that looketh upon the wind , will not sow : & he that looketh upon the clouds shall not reap . 

5.  As thou knowest not the way of the wind , as nor of the bones in the belly of her that is with child ▪ so thou knowest not the work of God that worketh all . 

6.  In the morning sow thy seed , & in the evening remit not thy hand . For , thou knowest not whether will come to good : this or that : or whether both shall be alike good . 

7.  Surely the light is a pleasant thing : and it is a good thing to the eyes to behold the sun . 

8.  But though a man may live many days , and in them all , be merry , yet let him remember the days of darkness , that they be the many . whatsoever cometh will be vanity . 

9  Rejoice , OH young man , in thy childhood , & let thine hart cheer thee , in the days of thy youth , & walk in the ways of thy hart , and in the sight of thine eyes . But know that for all these things God will bring thee to judgement . 

10.  Put away God's anger from thine hart & remove evil from thyflesh . For childhood and yonghead is vanity . 

Chap. 12.  

1.  Therefore remember thy Creators in the days of thy youth , Before the evil days come , & the years approach , of which thou wilt say , I have no pleasure in them . 

2.  Before the sun is dark , & the light , & the moon , & the stars , and the clouds return after the rain . 

3. when the keepers of the house shall tremble , and the strong men shall bow themselves , and the grinders shall cease because they are few , & they wax dark that look out by the windows , 

4.  And the doors shall be shut by the street , with the base sound of the grinding , & a man shall stand up at the voice of the bird : and all the daughters of Music shall be brought low : 

5.  And men will dread every high place , & fears will be in the way , & the Almond tree will flourish , & the Grasshopper will be a burden to itself : and all lust will be dissolved : & a man goeth unto his long home ; and mourners go about in the street . 

6.  Before the silver cord is loosed : and the golden ewer broken , and the pitcher burst at the well , and the wheel broken at the cestern : 

7.  And dust return to the earth as it was , & the spirit return to God that gave it . 

8.  Vanity of vanities , saith Koheleth , all is vanity . 

9  And this is a matter of excellency , As Koheleth was wise , still he taught the people knowledge : and weighed and examined and fitted many parables . 

10.  Koheleth studied to find words delightful , & scripture rightful : 

11.  The words of the wise : as goads , & as nails fastened in the sheepefoldes ▪ being given from one shepherd . 

12.  And my son give all diligent heed to them . There is no end in making many books & much reading is a wearynes of the flesh . 

13.  The sum of the matter is , all being heard : Fear God & keep his commandments . For this is all the man  

14.  For God will bring every deed unto judgement : with every hide thing , whether it be good or evil 

The sum of the matter is , all being heard : Fear God & keep his Commandments ; for this is the man The Mossorite note I Th. K. K. esay . Malachy . Lam. Eccl. by the Eb. first letter . 

Four rare sentences in the heavenly Hebrew are repeated in the end of the book , that men should evermore think upon them : 

Lam. 5.  

TURN US OH ETERNAL UNTO THEE , AND WE SHALL BE TURNED : RENEW OUR DAYS AS OF OLD . 

This showeth that all cometh from God that pitieth . So this v. of Koheleth moved S. Paul to abide all grief , to keep men from Daniels flames : 

So esay 66.  

FROM MONTH TO MONTH AND FROM SABBAT TO SABBAT SHALL ALL FLESH COME TO WORSHIP BEFORE ME SAITH THE ETERNAL . 

This showeth an utter abrogating of Moses : seeing all nations cannot come every week to jerusalem . 

The last is , Malachi v. last save one : 

BEHOLD I send UNTO YOU AN ELIAS A PROPHET , BEFORE THE GREAT AND FEARFUL DAY OF THE ETERNAL COME 

: From that speech closing the prophets , the Angel Gabriel begins the New Testament in his speech to Zachary of his Malachy john . So sweetly both Testaments Kiss one the other : that none of wit or grace should ever think Tobies foolish fable or judithes ridiculous lie to be from any sad purpose of a writer . 

To the reader . 

In this empty space , a speech worthy of place every where , may be added : which Gregor . Nazian . speaketh upon Chapt. 3. who cosidereth the spirit of man which ascendeth , Thus he saith : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 That is I saw in the low places : a dungeon of punishment , receiving the wicked : and an other place appointed for the Godly . Thus the father , who knew that Abraham & such were in heaven , yet speaketh as heathen did . This sentence giveth light , for the understanding of the Greek fathers . 

Finis . 

Faults escaped in this edition of Ecclesiastes . 

Eccles . Chap. 2. ver . 26.  Read it thus , God giveth wisdom and knowledge & gladness . 

Chap. 3. ver . 14. for ever : to it nothing can be added and from it nothing can be diminished : and God etc.  

Ver. 19 the other : and they all have one spirit : and man etc.  

Ver. 20.  All go to one place : all come etc.  

Chap. 4. ver . 3. his neighbour : Thus also is vanity and vexation of spirit . Ver. 17. the house of God , & be nearer to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools etc.  

Chap. 5. ver . 4.  It is better that thou shouldst not vow , then that thou shouldst not pay it . 

Ver. 5.  Let not thy mouth etc.  And so change the figures in all the other verses following to the end of the Chapter . 

Ver. 8. as it is here , but ver . 9 being corrected , read it thus , hath not fruit : This also is vanity . 

Ver. 11. being corrected , Read thus , whether he eat little etc.  

Chap. 8. ver . 15.  Read thus , no better thing under the sun then etc.  

Chap. 9 ver . 18. weapons of war ; but one uncircumspect etc.  

Chap. 10. ver . 6.  Folly is set in great height : etc 

Chap. 12. ver . 10. righful ; words of truth . 





Their life & manners & contempt of God ●ob set h forth : wi●h their destruction ▪  

Shortness of life . wise policy cannot help common weals so many be imperfections  Chap.  2.  Pleasures , wisdom , & royalty are but vanity . Chap.  3.  Oppression common . ▪ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 The heathen sentence was afore from God.  Sloth mother of poor folk x.  Cover senseless . Cham 5.  The preset is soon loathed .  they the high God. as God thy creatoures . chap. 18.  Husbandry full of cares . riches be uncenten . Ch. 6.  Many children : in Arabian poverty are a misery . one in justin had 600.  Adam the name kelleth man of his frailty . Sad meditation of death is the best thing . Even women a common mischief 〈◊〉 worse them death . Solomon 〈◊〉 jeremy age . felt ●●at . Cham 8.  King's offences are very hard to be cured & 2 voided : Palls death knocketh poor cottages , and Kings Pal lates with an equal foot . These towes of the last in this world , a hue that all Good is to be hoped in an other world . Epienres fill kingdom's b● blindness herein . & as fish & fowls men are snared , wisdom is in cities in the best desert sun forgotten . Folly in one & in one thing doth mach harm . Hatted from rulers makes many leave the care of their place to their harm . Hoseas , Amos , & Esai blame Israel for this . Cham 11.  In this variety we should serve the time . & omit no occasion , and Israel had experience of all these where the elected fathers had often sons rejected , and fathers lost left sons to be found o●t : ●ill whole apostasy rooted out the nation . Chap. 12  all joy falleth : & sorrow upon sorrow befalleth . 

HIGH The Tri nity . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 jam. 3. 2.  Koheleth blameth not wom● kind : as would translate him many : but their de●e slights : as experienced in his own wives who deceived him . S. Paul R. 13. handleth this place against jews which would not obey heathen : & preventing the Popesty ranny , that should a rise in Rome . From authority & government representing God's presence . not manifested by outward things : yet sure of reward to life eternal in paradise : when they commend their soul to the hands of God.  It is evident that these words are spoken in the person of the wicked : and should be pronounced as imitating their person . So have I printed them in another character . 