THE PRACTICE OF PRINCE'S . 

Published by A. Ar.  

prov. 29.4 . 

The King by judgement stablisheth the Land : but he that receives gifts overthroweth it . 



Printed in the year 1630.  

When the Children of Israel had sinned against the Lord , he delivered them over in the hands of spoilers , and sold them into the hands of their enemies round about , so that they could not stand before them , Levit. 26.  Deut. 28.  judg. 2.  Our estate is so , we have transgressed his laws with an high hand , and yet we have not hearts to lament it as we should , nor eyes to see the hand of God go out against us in all we set our hands unto , both in peace and war ; but we attribute all to secondary causes , & look not to the Lord against whom we have sinned : some of us can see that our best Nobility and valiantest Captains and Soldiers , are cut off by indirect means , and our wealth and honour consumed , to our great reproach and ignominy . Yet we do not observe it as we should , and what a fearful estate our land now stands in , this short treatise doth show amongst them that bear sway , or at least might be heard by the rulers , All seek their own , and no man that is Christ's . Some of them pretend to be conversant for him in superficie boni , but it is indeed in alto mal● . Where is there amongst us any that will stand for the cause of Christ ? so that I may say : there is but a step between us and death . Hester will interpose hirself for her country , and if she perish she perish ; the fire of God's wrath is ready to break in upon us , therefore if the fuel of sin be not taken away the wrath of Gods will never cease till we be all consumed . What true heart will not bring help to quench this fire ? alas it will be vain to bring water when the house is burned to ashes . 

Who will not at least cry when he seeth his mother murdering , I will conclude with the Apostles words : Lord save us else we all perish . 

A. Ar.  

The practice of Princes . 

WISDOM in the Proverbs which all Divines acknowledge to be the Son of God , the eternal Word , by which the father made the world , saith there , by me Kings reign , and Princes decree justice : by me Princes rule , and the nobles and all the judges of the earth . Where , though it be true that God infused into diverse heathen Princes and judges zealous of virtue and justice , some beams of this Wisdom , who may therefore be said , in some sort , to rule by it ; yet we are not to understand that every King and Governor , that ruleth & judgeth by unlawful policy or wicked counsel , doth it by this Wisdom . Jeroboam , vainly fearing that the people's going up to jerusalem would make them revolt , took counsel for the setting up of calves in Bethel and Dan , wherein he and his counsel did not rule by this Wisdom but by a devilish policy , which indeed was rather folly then true Wisdom , for it made God his enemy ▪ and was the sudden overthrow of his house ; as the like earthly policies were of the families of Saul , Ahab , Absalon , Achitophel , Haman and others . The meaning therefore of that place is , that all Kings , Princes , judges and Governors , that judge and rule well and happily , they judge by or according to that wisdom which is God's word : thereby keeping their people ( what in them is ) in the true worship and fear of God ; as did David , jehoshaphat , Hezekiah and Josiah , wherein they are truly Gods Vicegerents , seeking his kingdom , and the righteousness thereof , and whereby their own kingdoms are kept in peace , and the neighbouring kingdoms come to fear them , as they did jehoshaphat , therefore wisdom saith , By me Kings reign : not by any polices or subtlety but by me , who an God's Wisdom . Which is there found most true , where Princes square their counsels by God's word , and labour that their people may be governed in all matters of faith and salvation by his revealed will ; and where , as they ought , their own laws and government tend to the same end : for therefore the throne of a King is called , the throne of the Lord and the kingdoms of this world the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ . 

But besides those general rules in the Law and the Gospel , which show Princes what should be the end and scope of all their laws and government ; and by which ( where kings do so esteem of them ) their people are bridled and kept in awe , as by that word , which stilled the raging of the sea , and the madness of the people ; and which is the rod of his strength ; this Wisdom in holy writ , and especially in that book of the Proverbs , hath left unto all Prince's diverse special Rules whereby they ought to square all their actions and government , which may be called The Prince's principles , or The practice of Princes : which should be regarded as Christ's charge to Christian Kings , and ever observed , because they are Gods immutable Wisdom , which he hath left to be a sure guide to all Princes to the end of the world ; and whereof in a more special manner that may seem to be said , By me King's reign , etc.  Now therefore harken oh Children unto me . If all the Children of Wisdom ought so to do , Princes more especially , their calling being of the greatest weight , deeply concerning so many thousands of people , and standing most in need of that Wisdoms help , which is the Son , and the Prince of the Kings of the earth . All Princes are as much bound to observe his laws and directions , as their meanest subjects are to regard theirs , for he is the King of kings , and all his Rules and directions are perpetual laws ; so immutable and irrevocable that all designs and determinations that are contrary unto them , how fair a show soever they make of wisdom and a probable good , they are but mere wickedness , and can not establish the Prince that puts them in practice , but rather tend to his undoing : for that is one infallible principle left us by Wisdom , A man can not be established by wickedness , and therefore the Lord saith , Woe to the rebellious children , that take counsel , but not of me , and cover with a covering but not of my spirit : which walk to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh , and trust in the shadow of Egypt as Asa also sought a league with Syria , and relied on it , and not on the Lord , , and was therefore punished , wherefore Wisdom saith , It is an abomination to Kings to commit wickedness : for the throne is established by justice : by carrying themselves justly towards God and their people , therefore state policies that stand not with piety must needs overthrew it . Such are all temporize . in matters of religion , with Princes and people of a contrary faith , and seeking , or favouring middle ways of reconcilement , such as halt between God and Baal , between Christ & Antichrist , like the Arminians of our time : which ever grow from bad to worse , & make but the adversaries abroad and at home more insolent , and God to give us over to be deceived by their practices . As we may see in the fruit of that treaty with Spain ; wherein King james , who had ever favoured the Papists , and slacked the execution of laws against them , at last to attain his ends first with Spain , and then with France , permitted aid to go to the Archduches , and after to the French King against the Rochellers : more manifestly connived at popery , favoured the old Countess , diverse Lords , & others , the friends thereof ; frowned on the religious opposers of their practices , in court & parliament ; suffered not the laws , to be executed on Priests & jesuits but suffered them in a manner openly to dispute , preach and write , and in some sort forbade preaching & writing against them : all which could not but make Israel to sin , many to leave their love and zeal of the truth , others to fall to Popery , Arminianism , temporizing or neutralitie ; which things , it seems were also done and suffered , to bind them by those favours from practising against his life , as they had done against the life of Queen Elizabeth . Howsoever neither by those favours , nor yet by urging and pressing fruitless traditions and ceremonies , and silencing such as groaned under them , were their number lessened , and drawn nearer to our religion ; but rather multiplied and made to affirm , that the most learned , and wise on our side , did hereby show their good opinion of Popish religion . In so much that Fisher the jesuit grew so insolent in print , as to incite the King , by the example of the French King Henric 4. to let in the jesuits , saying , that besides thanks & presents from Peru , China , etc. he purchased 2000 pounds for his fame . But he knew the King's timorous nature ; and therefore as B. White observed , He had his end in mentioning that instance known to the world direful and tragical , & a hope by that trope to intrude by terror for how they requited that Kings love the doleful catastrophe shown , therefore he addeth , male ominatis parcite verbis . Knowing that men would be ready to infer that King james was like to find no better requital of Papists for his politik favouring of them : which is always just with him to permit , who saith , He that will save his life viz. by ungodly temporize shall lose it . The King knew that though he should call the best protestants , puritans , wrong them and their religion ; yea see it suffer never so much injury and loss from others ; yet there was no danger of them ; ( much less that a King should need to burn Paraeus his works ; though he meant to deserve evil ) for religion binds their hands . But must they therefore have the more injuries heaped on them to please the Papists ? or because Papists are bloody , if crossed in religion , must Kings therefore temporise with them , and not rather trust in God's protection , as Queen Elizabeth did ? That which men do , in an unjust policy , to prevent an evil , is in God's justice suffered to be the cause that brings it on them , as Gen. 11.4 . joh. 11.48 . And accordingly , it seemed so probable , that King James died by the practice of such papists and popelings , as every day lulled him asleep with tales , flatteries , wine , jests , songs , and catches , while the Palatinate was losing ; that the Parliament desired to have it sifted out , but this proceeding for him was dashed in such sort , as he , to his own hurt , had oft crushed the endeavours of many Parliaments by prerogative , wherein he having by checks and scorns prevailed against the counsels and privileges of Parliaments , and refused to let them rid him of such flatterers and secret enemies , as neither truly feared the Lord nor the King , but midled with jesuited Spirits , given to change , religion and government , as being of the Spanish faction , that was true in him which the Preacher saith , I saw a time that man ruleth over man to his own hurt . In so much that some said Better is a poor and wise child , than an old and foolish King , that will be no more admonished . But certainly he had great abilities of understanding and judgement , if fear of the papists power and practices , and an unlimited desire of peace with them , had not made him use many temporizing policies , pleasing to them , and grievous to his best subjects . Howsoever his policies , of that kind , found no better fruit than the increase of papists and the emboldening of them here , the shameful loss of the Palatinate , the undoing of his posterity there , the danger of losing his only Sun in Spain , the more violent persecution of the protestants 〈◊〉 Germany and France , to the loss of many friends abroad , of 〈◊〉 Subjects hearts at home , and his own fame every where . In further proof whereof , I need say the less , seeing vox populi , votiva Angliae and Tom telltruth have said so much : yet some men make a god of him , and urge his Son to follow his father's wisdom , as if we had not yet had mischief enough by the reviveing Romish and Spanish factions . But God grant it may be a warning to him , and all other protestant Princes , to abandon all such fruitless and drangerons policies , as favour diverse religions , together with the treacherous promoters of them ; & to harken in such cases to that which the Wisdom of God saith . Trust in the Lord with all thy heart and lean not to thine own understanding . Cease from thine own wisdom . Ask counsel of God at his oracles , for therefore Wisdom saith to such a one as hath not so consulted with God's word , as he ought ; Hear council and receive instruction , that thou mayest be wise in the later end : and for policies and counsels that stand not with God's word ; My Son hear no more the instruction that causeth to err from the words of knowledge . 

Wisdom saith , in the multitude of the people is the honour of a King , and for the want of people cometh the destruction of the Prince ; that is , whether he lack people , or having multitudes want their hearts , which Rhehoboam found true , when embracing evil counsel , and seeking to be a more absolute Lord over them , than his father , he thereby lost the most of them , and so his greatest strength under God , whereby he was exposed to the more danger of all foreign enemies . which proves it to be one of the most traitorous offices that can be , in counsellors to alienate the heart of a King from his subjects . 

Here therefore questionless , they can not be excused , who incensed the King against his subjects in Parliament . I know some lay great fault in the Knights and Burgesses for delaying the grant of the subsidy of tonnage and poundage , considering the King's wants . The truth is , they had been worthy of great blame , if the necessity , that compelled them to it , had not pleaded for them : which was to get some things , before that grant , reform , which did eat at the root of religion & state , & which they thought they should never be once suffered to speak of , much less to question & sift out , if the customs were once granted , for they knew that many great crimes of lust , murder , oppression , & the like , could not get hearing , much less justice , when they had been laid to the Duke and his confederates in former sessions and sit of Parliament , as well since the death of King james , as before ; & that also in matters of treachery in religion and state , as about the loss of the Palatinat , treasure , shipping , munition and honour , in the expedition to Cales , Rees , Rochel , and in other designs : wherein they of that faction , under public pretences seemed to be private Agents for Rome , France & the house of Austria , and diverse of them manifest introducers of Arminianism , which they used as a shooing-horn to draw on Popery & division , though they know that a Kingdom divided in itself can not stand . In this last sitting , diverse things of these kinds , were manifested against some Bishops and others , when now the house being ready to declare them to the King they that were sick of the Parliament , to shoulder out these proceedings and find them other work , animated the officers of the custom house , & some others , to use all extremity ( & among others against a burgess then sitting in Parliament ) who being therefore questioned in the house of commons , they that got them the king's protection on purpose to engage him in that cause as their manner is in others ) had then pretence to cry out , that the King's prerogative was infringed , & he obliged to adjourn the Parliament : which well perceiving that by such divises & shifts they should be prevented ( as they had often been ) of questioning delinquents , & that the assembly was like to be therefore dissolved , began to protest more openly and plainly against such whisperers : who in the mean while , as men guilty , and unable to stand the trial , laboured uncessantly , by all the pretences that could be invented , to prove the Commons contemners of regal authority , & the King obliged on point of honour to dissolve that assembly . Yet afterwards their greatest enemies that counted them little better than traitors , could not prove their demur insuffifient , nor that they had done any thing against the laws , whence it came to be held honourable in them all to choose rather to abide in prison , then to gain offered liberty by being bound to the good behaviour : which may be an argument to the King , that those men , incensed him against them , to save their own treachery from coming to trial ; & that this was the end of getting their friends chosen Knights and Burgesses , as also of all their intelligences in the house , guarding the King's ears , and preventing all Parliament complaints & proceeding , by a prevaricating exposition of them , & even of the very talk of another parliament . Many of them had got their honours and offices of the Duke by such services to him & therefore now , to save their own stakes , and maintain that pride , they have made all this division , and left the king to get money and hearts where and how he can ; while in the mean time , they accounted these counsels and services trusty , honourable , and meritorious ; and thus as wisdom saith , Many will boast every one of his own goodness : but who can find a faithful man ? Only by pride doth man make contention . And hence it was that they ever jeered and scorned the best endeavours of the Parliament : & therefore though they be many , and of great wit , no marvel , if yet their wisdom have failed them in many great designs , for as wisdom saith , A scorner seeketh wisdom and findeth it not . A wicked man diggeth up evil , and in his lips is like a burning fire : setting whole Kingdoms in division and combustion . A froward person soweth strife , and a tale-teller makes division among Princes : he divideth the head from the members , and the peeves and Princes one from another . He shutted his eyes to device wickedness , he will not be brought to see what is evil , nor suffer others to see it , but to prevent good men with cunning speeches , he moveth his lips and bringeth evil to pass . If any thing be never so little amiss in his adversaries , he aggravates , and repeats it , to keep them from discovering his own greater faults : so he makes a man an offendor for a word , and turns aside the just for a thing of naught , and therefore Wisdom saith , He that justifieth the wicked , & he that condemneth the just , even they both are an abomination to the Lord Now since it is apparent , that such are the Achans' that trouble our Israel , through the secret love they bear to the wedge of gold & babylonish garments , to honours , profits and Romish superstition , and that many such are got about the King ; partly by reason of King james his treaty for a match with Spanie , which made him broock none , but such as praised and furthered it , his favouring of papists , both which drew them , and other church-papists , lukewarne newters and temporisers about him , partly through the craft of Gondomar , the Duke his mother and other Agents of Rome , Spain and France who intruded , into places of counsel and trust , instruments best fitting themselves and their own ends , partly through the match with France , for seeing the French King is such a manifest friend & champion of Antichrist , a protestants peace and alliance with him can not be so safe as it was with his father , nor much better than with Spain ; partly by suffering the Duke , the Papists , Arminians and their supporters , Bishops and others ; with other delinquents to pass unquestioned , or at least unpunished ; & principally by reason that by lies & devises , they have daubed up matters , as they did the losses at the I 'll of Ree , guarded the King's ears and suffered them to give effectual hearing to none but themselves ; hence it came to pass with him , as Wisdom saith , Of a Prince that hearkens to lies , all his servants are wicked . Every one grows , and hopes to shuffle off his wickedness , as others have done : and even those , who , if they lived where religion and justice were truly maintained , would be honest men ; they yet , to keep their places , profits and honours , and to get greater , are not only fain to connive at the practices of such as the Duke was , who could help them to honour & offices , but even to excuse and justify many of them ; as Wisdom saith . Every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts , they blind the eyes of the wise : So that when the wicked come up the man is tried , what he is , as many Lords spiritual and temporal have been who are found too light , while ( though it be true ) that He that receives gifts overthroweth the Land , yet for honour or profit they temporise or connive when delinquents prevail and a Romish or Spanish faction is revived , though God , religion , Prince , people , state & all loose by it , which hath filled the Land with many secret murmurs and groans ; in so much that some , who are reckoned wise men , have not sticked to infer , that there is no likelihood that God shoult ever give a blessing to such men's counsels , as have either assisted the Duke and his faction in their projects of betraing the Palatinate , the French protestants and the religious endeavours of Parliament men and other good Subjects ; or connived at these vile practices , and so justified him and his confederates : for ( say they ) such counselors as could not see these practices , which every mechanical fellow and very ploughmen perceived ( being so many , so frequent and so apparent ) they are blind guide's unfit to be about Kings : and such ( say they ) as percived them , and did not lay themselves and their fortunes down at the King's feet , to show him the treachery and danger , but connived to get or keep preferment , they were cowardly and mercinarily base , and unfaithful to God , religion , their King country and the very State , wherein they were chosen watchmen . Where in policy popery is connived at , neutralitie and Arminianism favoured , delinquents born out , and Parliaments for their sakes dissolved , the King must needs have such Servants , and them ever false Cum privilegio : for if he harken to them that say that these are good policies , to hearkens to lies : & God saith Of a Prince that hearkens to lies , all his servants are wicked . Men , that take his word , say , that therefore as their root must needs prove rotten , so things can never go well with the Christian world , much less with the religion and state of England , till the council which hath been so Dukified , be in a manner wholly changed , they therefore count them fools , who think if God should take the King away issueless , & that the injured King and Queen of Bohemia should come to the crown , things must needs mend ; saying that could not be , unless the council were also changed , and made examples to keep others from the like treachery and temporizing , for ( say they ) if a King be constant to religion , they also can make great show of defending religion ( as the Duke and others d●d ) thereby to get trust , that they may under hand betray it . And people ( say they ) had the like hopes when King james died , seeing our King , that now is , make great preparations , and for aught we know with sincerity : but , by the practice of the Duke and his faction , retaining all his father's counsel which for the most part were Hispanolished , Frenchified , Roman●sed or Newtralised , and suffering some worse , both spiritual and temporal , to be added unto them , all those forces were soon brought to nothing , things are grown a great deal worse , and , to the greater grief of all goodness and good men , without God's special mercy remediless ; seeing that a king who only hears and sees things in such men's reports can not know the truth , and that no man dares speak for a free Parliament , that may sift it out , much less for an effectual reformation , for as Wisdom saith of such potent counselors , When the wicked rise up , men hide themselves : but when they perish the righteous increase . A man that hardeneth his neck when he is rebuked shall suddenly be destroyed , and can not be cured ( as God manifested in the Duke ) when the righteous are in authority , the people rejoice , but when the wicked beareth rule , the people sigh . Rehoboam was not strengthened by such counsellors , but weakened . A King and his people are a body politik , and the Parliament his representative body : Now as in a body , if the faculty of the brain in one side be stopped , that it can not descend through the sinews to the senses of moving in the limbs and members , than those parts have the dead palsy , and the man becomes as it were half dead , and as unable to do any service effectually , as our men were at the Palatinate , Cales , Ree , Rochel and in the Parliament house : so is it with the body politic of great Britain , through the practice of some jesuited Spirits , who , being disguised in the sheep's clothing of a protestant outside , & gotten into the place of favourits & counsellors , have cunningly infected many ; both Bishops and others ; In whom and by whom , the brain for the most part , is ill affected and the reciprocal passages between the head and the members are stopped ; so that the right faculty can not descend , through the sinews , the peers , judges and Bishops , to the senses of moving in the King's body the Parliament ; and so his Majesty's tie . giving no life and strength to that body and the best members thereof , nor they means to him , the whole body is half dead , & so unable to offend adversaries , that it can not defend itself , but must needs perish , if those ill humours in the brain of counsel be not by his majesty purged and removed , whereas if he did agree with the Parliament , and had a counsel favouring the moving endeavours of the same , he must needs grow dreadful to them , who now hope to see his kingdom ( by these continued divisions ) easily conquered ; witness the Pope's Bull to the present French King , given at Rome , Septemb. 4. 1626.  Now then seeing that it is clear , that in these things , the Kings Ma tie . himself ( who is ruled and abused by them ) is not the least sufferer ; but hath cause to say of them , as old jacob did of Simeon and Levi brethren in evil ; Into their secret let not my Soul come ; and that thus divided from his people , which under God are his strength , he must needs be in more danger of foreign enemies , & forced to treat with them on harder conditions , which is one of the secret ends , that some of these whisperers had to help the Catholic cause ( at least under a pretext of zeal to the King's prerogative , which zeal they used both as an instrument to work division , and a cloak to cover their treachery to our religion , and their secret favour to Rome and her champions ) what true Subject but will pray and endeavour that the King may see & expel these dangerous counsellors ? which is the end of these few collections , and reflecting the light of that wisdom , on their practices , which saith , Blessed is he that shall not be offended in me but wisdom is justified of her children , practices so desperately persisted in , that there seenes to be enivitie , jealousy and emulation between France and Spain , whether shall ( by their means ) hold the continued honour of cozening , & in the end of conquering us , wherein yet I should abhor to be so plain , & indeed to meddle at all , if the many great and manifest wrongs done to God , religion , my King & country , with the extreme danger the three later stand in , did not seem to cry out of silence & banking , & to call to me for plain dealing what ever it cost me , as Isa . 1.23 . Ezech. 22.27 . for 1.  What a miserable thing it is , to see wicked counsellors get such a hand over their King , that he is wholly ruled by them , and dares not do or say any thing , but what they like ? nor favour a good man and his cause further than they admit ? as it was with Zedekiah , who durst not be known of the talk he had with jeremie , but was forced to feign a business , and an answer to stop the mouths of his Princes and Councillors , so very a child they made of him ; though it be said , woe to thee oh Land whose King is a child : when with a courageous & constant frown , he might have dispersed them all , and have saved himself and the city , by being persuaded by jeremie . 2.  Wisdom saith of a true king The pleasure of a King is in a wise servant ( this wise man is one truly religious , not an Achitophel ) but his wrath shall be toward him that is lewd . Such as are our seditious whispers , the seedesmen of division . Righteous lips are the delight of Kings , and the King loveth him that speaketh right things . And again : A King that sitted in the throne of judgement , chaseth away all evil with his eyes . He looks with indignation on wicked men , as considering , that he sits in the throne of the Lord , to do that which is right , and best for God's service and kingdom . A wise King scattereth the wicked , and causeth the wheel to turn over them . And why should we not pray and hope that God may give our King this grace , seeing Wisdom saith , The King's heart is in the hand of the Lord , as the rivers of water : he turneth whithersoever it pleaseth him ? for he saith to Kings , Cast out the scorner , and strife shall go out : so contention & reproach shall cease , and on the other side , He that loveth pureness of heart , for the grace of his lips , the King shall be his friend . Wisdom also showeth that it is for a King's honour and safety to have wicked men sifted out , and cut off or expelled , saying , The glory of God is to conceal a thing : but the King's honour is to search out a thing : to let such come to trial . Take the dross from the silver , and there shall proceed a vessel for the finer . Take away the wicked from the King , and his throne shall be established in righteousness ; as if he said , otherwise it must needs totter . OH but these cunning Achitophel's have many goodly pretences , showing , that it is wisdom in Kings to keep down and suppress these Puritans , as they were ever pleased to call the gentlemen of the lower house , and all that cry out for reformation , or trouble themselves with such matters as the treaty and match with Spain , the increase of popery and Arminianism , the loss of the Palatinate , and of Shipping and honour in the Seas ; transportation of mumunition and corn , the Rochellers , or the like , and thereby ( say they ) tax the wisdom and government of their King and his council , when indeed this suggestion , & the like , is but a cloak to cover their treachery , love to superstition , and hate of our religion , yet want they not a disguise of pretended love to the book of common prayer , the hierarchy , and such traditions and ceremonies thereof , as do not offend popery ; as if that were sufficient to make them protestants and good states men whose hearts and practices are for Rome : for as wisdom saith , Hatred may be covered by deceit , but the malice thereof shall be discovered in the congregation ; that is , in an public and free assembly ; which shows the good use and necessity of Parliaments , which these men's practice could never endure , and therefore they have still got them dissolved , by hook or by crook , let what would follow , either at home to the joy and furtherance of the Papists and Arminians , & the extreme weakening of the King and kingdom ; or abroad to the undoing of our friends and religion in Germany , the Palatinate , France and Denmark : whereby our Bishops , and their abettors , have showed they had rather all these should fall , than their own faction and glory , though popery and pelagianism have every where thriven by it , what care they ? that being in many of them the main end of these their practices ; witness Cousins protected for all his cozening devotions published , and palpable superstition erected ; and their suffering the Appealers' book to pass two or three years , and the Author to be rewarded , that so scholars in the universities , to get promotion , might in like manner corrupt and be corrupted , and so corruption might spread from these fountains to all parts of the Land , watered by them and when they doubted that in Parliament , it might be questioned and they for suffering and furthering they ; to prevent that , they get the King to call it in sleigthly ( not a search to be made for it , as for other books , not left as this to be freely sold in shops by any that would ) and to forbid all disputes , preaching and writing on both sides , knowing they could thereby hinder all that should write against those errors , and let books and disputes pass , which defended the same ; as they after did Dr. jacksons second part , printed before the Parliament , but somewhat kept in till it was dissolved , whence it appears that though these were points they durst not maintain in Parliament , and therefore errors ; yet their drift was to save and further them , and to engage the king further and further in the cause , that so the Parliament might not meddle with them , or if they did , it might be pretended , the house took the matter out of his hand , taxed his government , and undervalved his prerogative , that so he , incensed thereby , might show the Arminians more favour . And the like ends have they that get Kings , in pretended policy , to connive at popery , and stay the execution of laws against Papists , suffer ordinance , victuals and other provision of war , to be daily transported to the enemies of our religion ; that so if never so little show be made of reforming these things before a Parliament , and yet Parliaments complain of them , or of their agents in court , church-papists treacherous favourits & delinquents , strait it might be pretended the matter is taken out of the King's hand , and his government and prerogative is taxed and infringed , thereby to put off reformation , incense his majesty and get them more favour . And still to save these practices from coming to trial , and therewithal to put men out of heart in their trading , make them sell their ships and therein the walls of the land , they ever find the Parliaments other work in case of customs privileges and other matters , and then inform the king that in those things his prerogative is by them grossly infringed , and he obliged to dissolve the assembly . 

The reasons , why the house of Austria and the French have of late prevailed , are chiefly two , first because they had care to suffer none to be of their council of state , Agents abroad , nor Generals and Commanders in war ; but such as they knew were sure to their religion , and would strive all they could to maintain and propagate the same . In all their treaties and wars , this was ever one main end , they aimed at , as appears by Gondomars practices in his treating with England ; and the care and zeal of their Generals of Bavaria , Tillie , Spinola and the rest ; as he saith that writes the siege of Breda ; Against them it was thought fit our forces should be bend , not for affectation or desire of Sovereignty , but for the reestablishing of religion , and regaining what they usurped . Now if they had seen like true zeal and care in the English council and Generals , for the Protestant religion , they never durst have attempted so much as they have : but they grew confident that England , than the strongest of all protestant States ( and most likely to work , Rome's Ruin if truly zealous ) could not to any purpose help the Palatinate , the French protestants , nor the King of Denmark ; much less hurt the proceedings and conquests of Rome's champions spiritual or temporal , knowing the King's disposition , and that she and they had the Duke and other secret friends in England , who one while would hold the King's hands ( easily kept from drawing his sword ) under vain pretexts of hope to set all right by treaty , while they of the Palatinate and the French protestants were losing and bleeding ; and another while when they could with no colour use that course any longer , would in counterfeit zeal get forces raised , with great show of aiding and defending religion and the friends thereof , but with secret purpose to bring them , for Rome's sake , to nothing ; as besides delays , the lame commissions procured , the popish leaders and instruments employed , and munition and victuals to the enemies transported , sufficiently manifested ; that so at last England might be glad of peace with France and Spain on hard conditions . And in the mean while , they could , with gifts , presents , flatteries , promises , and some small supplies and services , make show that they were great friends and Agents to the King for the King and Queen of Bohemia , their issue , the King of Denmark , and the Rochellers ; the easier to cousin them all , and get the fault laid on the Parliament , that strove most to remove such deceitful practisers , as by working these things , seemed to hope a rebellion would follow ; and than Romish champions might be called from France or Spain to take a side , and get all , as wisdom saith , A seditious person seeketh only rebellion , therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him . King's can not bind them from such practices by showing them favour : for papists will forfeit all other bands to strengthen those of their religion . Secondly because in Germany France and Spain , the Popish clergy , high and low , have ever had free liberty to speak and write unto Princes , and others for the defence and propagation of their own religion , and rooting out of their adversaries , and to reprove all such as failed therein , and get them punished , while in the mean time , the Duke and other their secret friends in England , so laboured , and by the help of the Bishops obtained , that protestant preachers writers should not do the like for their religion , no not though it were by God's undeniable word ; and that if any did , it should be never the better , yet till there be the like care & zeal both in the counsel of state and in the clergy , things can never go well with our religion and state , nor they be enabled to stand against the zeal and practices of a contrary religion and kingdom . Ministers are Christ's Embessadors and Agents : and therefore aught to have free liberty to speak in the word of the Lord to Kings & statesmen ( so it be in good and reverend sort ) for things pertaining to the furtherance of Christ's Kingdom , and against such practices as hinder the same . They ought rather to have had this privileidge than Gondomar , the Duke's mother , & such others as on the contrary laboured for the kingdom of Antichrist , and till they have it , princes can not say rightly that Christ hath his Ambassadors or Kingdom received in their courts . Which some undertake to prove , can not be till the hierarchy and dominion of the Lord Bishops ( never by Christ ordained but forbidden ) be overthrown , as dangerous to protestant Princes and states ; because the great places thereof , are only baits to make some divines temporisers , instruments and friends of such treacherous Arminians , church-popelings and delinquents , as can prefer them ; and others to spend their zeal in maintaining the hierarchy and the fruitless dominion , traditions and ceremonies thereof . Out of all which , he that will , may see , that the losses , dishonours and troubles that have befallen this Land , and indeed our religion and brethren also in the Palatinate , Germany , France and other parts , have chiefly sprunge from these two fountains . 1.  A corrupt council and clergy in England , that were more for the Duke and his confederates that helped them to honours , offices and preferments , them for the religion and state divided , and kept low , by his and their practices ; which the Pope , the house of Austria , and the French King , perceiving , took that for a time of persecuting , conquering and depelling all protestants . 2.  A vain policy of suppressing such preachers , writers and Parliament men , as sought to discover the mischief of treachery , and obtain effectual reformation . In the later ( if not in both ) the power and flattery of the Bishops were principal helps , their seeming holy habit , reverence , and authority , countenanced the projects of the Duke and his confederates , while for preferment , they stuck fast to him and them in court and Parliament : and their power and hierarchy served to terrify , suppress and stop the mouths of such ministers & writers , who otherwise might by their sermons and books have discovered the homebred enemies , and obtained relief for the friends of our religion , which is the service Christ gets by Lord Bishops and their hierarchy ; who hereby showed , that they will sooner let religion , Prince , State and all go down , than their own usurped dignities and hopes of further preferment , for these and other courtiers and Dukanists , that have still pretended the King's power and prerogative , have not strengthened , but rather weakened and debased the same . 1.  By those fruitless expeditions that they caused abroad ; which were so forecasted that the Sailors and Soldiers , neither coming to good service nor their pay , should refuse to serve the King any more , or to be governed by his officers , but be readier to spoil their country when they returned . 2.  By those dangerous divisions that they have procured and nourished at home . And while they got his majesty to suffer diverse ambitious divines for advancement , to broach anew , the doctrines of Pelagius , and to erect popish superstition , to the treading under foot as well of the divine law , as of the Parliament , have they by all these things gotten the King and his laws to be more reverenced , or less ? Surely less witness the general murmurs of his subjects throughout the whole Land , and diverse bold outrages of Sailors and unpaide Soldiers . Would it not grieve any true Subject to see how the King's authority was of late despised in that outrage in Fleetstreet , backed by the Templars ? wherein some observed a just judgement of God , that as the King suffered divines , who are , or should be , God's lawyers and Soldiers , to tread God's authority & law under foot , by slighting some proofs of Scripture , and sophisticating others ; so God suffered Soldiers , Templars and other Inns of court men to spurn against his laws and authority . God , that oft pays by retaliation , suffers people to deal so with Princes , as they deal with him , and their Servants to be alike faithful to them in their service , as they are to him in his . If people see their Princes cast away the word of the Lord in diverse things , they wickedly grow as careless of God's word , which enjoines subjection to Princes , and which otherwise stilleth the madness of the people , and keeps them in awe , God causeth the Prince that fears him , and sincerely furthers his word preached , to be by his people reverenced , loved , feared and enriched with presents and gifts , as Jehoshaphat was : He therefore that doth it not , but rather the contrary , he must needs find the contrary ; him he suffers to be molested with enemies , and the rebellions of his own vassals , as were Solomon , Rehoboam , Jeroboam , joram and others , wherein that is fulfilled , which the Lord saith , Those that honour me , I will honour , and those that despise me shall be lightly esteemed : Look then on the dishonours and losses of the State abroad , the troubles , divisions and outrages at home , and confess them to be the fruits of their counsels , who stand for connivance at popery , favouring of Arminians , and protection & honouring of delinquents temporal & spiritual . 

But though I should reckon up all the fruits of their counsels , some men would yet commend them for wise counsellors , as our Arminians , and ambitious temporisers and popelings do , who have all thriven by them , for as wisdom saith , They that forsake the law praise the wicked : but they that keep the law set themselves against them . Wicked men understand not judgement , but they that seek the Lord understand all things . It is fit indeed that Kings should have their counsel : for where no counsel is , the people fall : but where many counsellors are , there is health , that is , if they be honest men , and true as the old men that counselled Rehoboan faithfully ; diverse great matters of state may be better carried by such privy counsellors , then by a Parliament , which is more public & open : but if they be Achitophel's , and as the young men that gave wicked counsel , temporisers or false to the religion and State , they seem to serve ; then the more they are , and the more wit they have , by so much the worse they being such as Wisdom describeth . When the wickid are increased , transgression is increased , but the righteous shall see their fall . Such as neither , Fear the Lord nor the King , but meddle with them that are given to change religion and government ; for such while they rule their King are all Princes to his hurt : and so wisdom saith , For the transgression of the Land many are the Princes thereof . They are the sins of the Land , which reign in the light of the Gospel , as drunkenness , adultery , profaneness , oppression and the like , that provoke God to suffer them to be intruded , & to prevail against the zeal and care of so many Parliaments . Not all the base treachery of delinquents , nor the wisdom of so many hundred men , oft set in Parliament , to discover them , suffice to make the King , see their practices , and the danger of defending them , much less the necessity of expelling them , when the sins of the nation hold them up . If our sins had not supported them , to plague us , God , that maketh men to be of one mind in a house , would have made our Kings , as our Parliaments , to hear see and abhor them ; and not have suffered them to be so deaf and blind on that side , to the breeding of such long and dangerous divisions between the head and members of the Parliament : but for sin , He taketh away the speech from the faithful counsellors , and judgement from the ancient . Hence it was that God suffered the Duke to get so many to be created and made Earls , Viscount's , Barons and Bishops , & them to be brought into the parliament to uphold his faction , and carry out his party in the upper house by multitude of voices , after the Pope's example in the counsel of Trent . A strange way and merit to achieve honour , if I miscall it not , being so attained by them that justify the wicked for a reward , what true honour have such men ? It is ● great honour indeed to a man to be made a Peer of the Realm , and by virtue thereof , to sit as a judge in Parliament , to hear causes , and to establish and ordain laws ; matters so greatly concerning a nation : but that is , if it be for the right furtherance of God's kingdom , true religion and justice , and the manifest good of the common wealth ; herein they are Gods , in a laudable sense and worthy reverence : but if by them these things shall go backward , and the contrary be brought forward ; If a man shall attain and hold honours for favouring popery Arminianism , or neutralitie , or for conniving at such practices as those of the Duke , or for justifying delinquents , and getting Parliaments for their sakes dissolved , or for overthrowing their laws and privileges , is there true honour in such a one ? It is indeed as if one attained or held honours by murders , treasons , adulteries , thefts , lies and the like ; or by slobering them over , as some write of the smothered murder of Marques Hambleton and others , and as if a man should get the honour to be a judge by overthrowing the laws . And they that get or hold honours and offices by getting Parliaments thus dissolved , and providing that there may be no more , or at least not free to touch all ill practices and persons ; it is , as if one should get the honour of a judge for overthrowing the court of justice , or for providing that no causes might be heard , or at least that diverse might not come to true judgement , but either be smothered and thrown out , or carried by corrupted voices . What poor ploughman having the knowledge and fear of God , is not much happier than such great ones with their thus bought offices and honours ? And yet who sees not , that those who for such services to the Duke and his faction , have been made Earls , Viscount's and Barons are exceeding many , and three fold more than the ancient nobility ? at least than those of them that have constantly distasted such vile practices , and all communion with them ? the like might be said of Bishops , Deans and heads of colleges . And therefore I am persuaded , that who so life's but a few years shall see a greater rot of Nobility and Princelike clergy , than ever was seen in this Land , which I write not as prophesying ( for God forbid that I should be so arrogant , as to make myself a Prophet or the Son of a Prophet ) but as gathering it from the never failing word and Truth of God in such places of that of Isaiah , woe unto them that speak good of evil , and evil of good , which justify the wicked for a reward , and take away the righteousness of the righteous man from him . Therefore as the flame devoureth the stubble , and as the chaff is consumed of the flame , so their root shall be as rottenness , and their bud shall rise up like the dust , etc.  A good Christian should rather refuse & lay down offices and honours , then take or hold them on such conditions . And yet God knows very few have of late years attained or hold any great offices or honours , but on such terms , or at least by reason of some participation with them . Witness those furthest from court , and least infected , the Lieutenants , Deputie-leiftenants' , judges , justices , Majors , Aldermen and other officers , made to further or exact , and wring from the people , benevolences and loans , and to strain for them or imprison such as stood out , or make them serve as Soldiers , or lodge and maintain such unruly and unpaide Soldiers , as were billeted , in their towns and villages , for no other service then to punish them : things set a foot to hinder the calling of Parliaments , breed divisions , if not rebellions , make the Land weary of wars for defence of religion ; and so to save the treachery of the Duke and his confederates from coming to trial : who in the mean while have ever found the commons new greivances to put the old accusations and proofs out of their minds . Many great complaints have been made against such men : God grant the King , may give them an effectual hearing in a free parliament , lest otherwise men fearing to be imprisoned & crushed , as others have been , should not speak what they know ; and so treachery should still prevail , and hinder the King of the happiness following the due execution of justice : for the throne is established by justice . A King that judgeth the poor in righteousness his throne shall be established for ever . 





prov. 8.15 . 1.  King. 12 26.  2.  Chro. 17 10.  1.  Chro. 29 ●3 . ●●u . 11.15 ●●●l . 22.8  Psa . 65.7 Psa . 110.2  Reu. 1.5 . prov. 12.3 . Esa . 30.1 . and chap. 31 1.  ● . Chro. 16  Pro 16.12 .  The Papists . See the Reply to Fishers Praefac . Mat. 10 . 3●  Pro. 1.5.9 . Pro. 24.21  Eccles . 8.9 . chap. 4.13 . Pro. 3.5 . Pro. 23.4 . Pro. 19.20 . vers . 27.  Pro. 14.28  1.  King. 12  By depriving them of their privileges to reform abuses in church and Commonwealth . Mar. 3.24 . Pro. 20.6 . and jer. 5.1 Pro. 13.10  Pro. 14.6 . chap. 16.27 28.30 . Isa . 29.21 . Pro. 17.15  Pro. 29.12  Pro. 19.6 . Isa . 1.23 . Pro. 28.12 . Pro. 29.4 . Pro. 29.  Pro. 28 . 2●  Gen. 49.6 . Mat. 11.6.19 . jer , 38 . 2● . Eccles . 10.16 . Pro. 14.35 . chap. 16.13 . chap. 20.  ● , 20.26 . Pro. 21.1 . chap. 22.10 11.  Pro. 25.1.2  Pro. 26.26  ●eidge of Breda pa. 8 Pro. 17.11 . 2.  Cor. 5.20 . Mat. 20.2 1.  Pet. 5.3  Mat 22.34 2 , Tim. 2.4  2.  Chro. 17 5.  1.  King. 11.14 . chap. 26 12.15 2.  King. 9.14 . 1 Sam. 2.30 . Pro. 28.4.5  Pro 11.14 . & chap. 15.22 . Pro. 29.16 . Pro. 24.21  Pro. 28.2 . Psa . 68.6 . joh. 12.20 . Psa . 82.1 6.  Isa . 5.20.23.24 . Psa . 1.4 . ●ro . 29.14  