An alarm to London : or , the famous London's blowing up by Londoners . Sounded , not to fire their buildings , but to quench their burnings . In a letter to major general Browne . 

London , printed by Matthew Simmons , next door to the gilded lion in Aldersgate street , 1650.  

An alarm to London , not to fire their buildings , but to quench their burnings . In a letter to major general Browne . 

Sir , 

I am bound by the duty i owe to old Israel , to make inquiry after Joseph's portion ; the birthright of the commonwealth of England . religion and liberty , and good laws , and reformation , were the blessed inheritance bequeathed and promised to England and London ; and you , Sir , were one of the feoffees left in trust , to take care that Simeon and Levi ( Brothers in blood and cruelty ) Might not murder him : the knife ( Sir ) was lately at Joseph's throat , and you were then , a reubenite , to bestride him from the intended cruelty of treacherous men , at the first assault , and treaty of the brothers . Joseph ( Sir ) is newly taken out of the pit , and yourself ( With some others of the division of Reuben ) standing at the pits brink , discontented that Joseph is raised . It hath pleased the divine power to secure the young man in that deep and dark place , and hath already begun to exalt Joseph against the unkind desires of Israelites and Aeyptians : Sir , you May believe it , that the same good hand will lead on the commonwealth of England ( As much hated and shot at , as ever Joseph was ) through the deep red sea ( Of England's blood ) and through she wilderness , and through divisions , and through contradictions , and through murmurings . this ( Sir ) is the present estate of England's afflicted Joseph ; and this ( Sir ) will be done with an outstretched arm , and England shall have passage from the red sea , and Egypt , and the wilderness , and arrive safely in the land of Canaan , and rest ; and shall have powerful victories over all gods , and their enemies . Of this and other nations , and all persons , good and bad , far and near , shall gaze and stand amazed , to see and hear the rare and unheard-of executions , yet unfinished . Be pleased to read the record underneath ; being the will and testament of good and great men , great prophets , and consider of it , and do unto Joseph what right you can , without more violence , and persuade your friends so to do ; for your own sake , and for your friend's sake , and for the city's sake , and for Joseph's sake ( Joseph advanced to a commonwealth ) for the commonwealth of England's sake ; and shun all prejudice in the reading of it , for benn's sake ; whereby you fully gratify his desires , and good will to Joseph , your self , and this great city . 

Yours , for the sake of Joseph , Benjamin . 

The hand of old Jacob upon the head of young Joseph , the commonwealth of England . 

Gen. 49. 22 , 23 , &c.  

England is a fruitful bough , even a fruitful bough by a well , whose branches run over the wall . 

The archers have sorely grieved him , and shot at him and bated him : but his bow abode in strength , and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob . 

Even by the god of thy father who shall help thee , and by the almighty who shall bless thee with the blessings of heaven above , blessings of the deep , that lieth under , blessings of the breast and of the womb . 

The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors ; unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills , they shall be on the head of England , and upon the crown of the head of him that is separate from his brethren . 

The rod of Moses , and the red sea ( The red sea of English blood ) divided , for the safe return of afflicted England out of Egypt , now sojourning in a wilderness of wild beasts , and stinging serpents . 

Deut. 23. 13 , &c.  

Blessed of the Lord be his land for the precious things of heaven , for the dew , and for the deep that coucheth beneath . 

And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun , and for the precious things brought forth by the moon , and for the chief things of the ancient mountains ; and for the precious things of the lasting hills . 

And for the precious things of the earth , and the fullness thereof , and for the good will of him that dwelled in the bush : let the blessing come upon the head of England , and upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren . 

The glory of England is like the horns of unicorns , and with them he shall push the persons . 

The waters of Jordan divided ; and England upon his advance to Canaan . 

Joshua 10.  

Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon , and thou moon , in the valley of Ajalou , and there was no day like that . 

And Joshua said , bring out those five Kings unto me , and he said unto the captains of the men of war which went with him , come near and put your feet upon the neck of these Kings . 

Fear not , nor be dismayed , for thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies against whom you fight . 

For my honoured friend , major general Browne . 

Sir , 

liberty of all enjoyments is near to life , and as much as that amounts unto , i do acknowledge that to be the just sum of my obligation to you ; for i bear you witness , you were that vigilant governor of Abingdon , that did ( By exchange of me for another prisoner ) give me my freedom from a harsh imprisonment at Wallingford , when a little longer stay there , would have made me as miserable , as the malice of an enraged enemy could make me . Sir , the obligation ( Wherein i stand bound ) is double ; you were faithful then to the public , you were friendly then to me ; i have therefore endeavoured to make my suitable address unto you ; the one was private , to thank you , the other is public , to acknowledge you . 

Sir , it is emminently known unto you , what a great turn of providence there is visible amongst us , since that time ; and how strange and amazing it hath been ( And yet is ) to the inhabitants of this island , as if there had been a total and perpetual eclipse of the sun of England's glory ; you know also , how it hath pleased the wisdom of God , to suffer the judgements of good persons , to vary about this matter ; and how dangerously their opinions have diversified them into very unkind speeches and behaviours one towards another , and i hope neither of them will forget what fat advantages were given thereby to the enemy , yet how rawny and lean they grow still upon the variety and full mouthfuls of them , they could never thrive , but were so cursed upon the top of them all , that it was usual to observe , they could never come off without the loss of a head , the breaking of a neck , or the battering of the bones ; some mischief or other did still post after them , from place to place , Kent , Essex , the North , &c.  where ever they went , they could never keep off the gentleman upon the pale horse , but vengeance would over the wall , and pull them out by head and shoulders . 

Sir , it is acknowledged , you did manifest much wisdom and courage in the first part of your actings for this nation , but it is also said that in the latter part of your adventures , the more you excelled in boldness and abilities to speak , the more of danger it did portend : i did never yet know any that did suspect ( Much less impeach ) your intentions as retrograde ( For the main of them ) or declining from the first integrity of them , but there doth lie a blame upon you , that you did not so soon or seasonably submit unto the wisdom of God , that hath , it seems , against your declared will , made better provision for you and us too , than it was possible for you to make for yourselves , or for us , by all the wisdom you could put forth . 

Sir , let us extol and speak well of that wisdom , that doth restrain the dangerous results of our counsels , and of that providence that cures our improvidence ; the good God ( We May see ) is so much the more careful of us , by how much he espyeth our weakness and shallowness to be the more in dealing for ourselves with a subtle enemy , and in providing for our own safety . 

Sir , the wisdom of God , hath wonderfully ( Next to a miracle ) determined , that England's Joseph could not come home safe by a treaty , nor yet be ever restored to his father with life and honour , before his cruel and treacherous brethren were brought upon their faces , put in ward , and made to acknowledge their great trespass ; we are verily guilty concerning our brother . 

Sir , it is manifest , that the patriarchs were ( Almost all of them ) very ill affected to Joseph . Steven notes as much in his confession ▪ Acts 7. 9 and there files up their malignity upon record . And the patriarchs ( moved with envy ) sold Joseph , &c.  There was but one amongst ten , but voted against Joseph , but voted him a bondman in Egypt , and you well know that Israel's Joseph was a type of England's Joseph , sure there is an English Israel , and doubtless there is an English Joseph too , and the parallel that runs along in all the veins of the troubles , and preservation of them both goes as free from halting , as any i have read of . 

Indeed there is some disproportion between the number and the virulency , of the haters of the one and of the other , Israel's Joseph had but nine against one that hated him , but England's Joseph , can make their Vnits , ten , their ten , hundred , their hundreds , thousands , and these within us too , besides those many without us , and these patriarchs too , English patriarchs , and for the implacability of their envyings , ours observe no measure or limitation of time or condition but are beyond compare . Those in Dothan did weep and take on in Egypt ( Now that they saw their younger brother was preferred ) that they dealt so ill with him in Dothan ; ours in England weep millstones , nay when stones weep , they be dry , Joseph in anguish , they rejoice , Joseph advanced , they malign still , and do reach after him ; and though he be advanced above the sun , yet do bark , ( Though in vain ) as dogs that will wawle against the moon . 

Sir , i would begin with Israel's Joseph , and with the archers that shot at him first , you do remember the sacred history , had the patriarchs any cause to hate Joseph , yet did they not resolve his death ? and did they not cunningly contrive his ruin ? indeed Reuben is honourably recorded for his willingness to save him , and to restore him to his father , but alas ! the man is more to be commended for his affection , than his discretion . true , Reuben doth bestride the child , and very manfully delivers him at the pit , and pleads , oh do not kill him , shed no blood , lay no hand upon him , here 's a pit , throw him there . honest man ! Joseph is more beholding to thee for thy good wish , than thy great wit ▪ what ? throw him into a pit , Reuben ? is that all the liberty thou canst obtain for Joseph by a treaty ? what dost think thy brothers be children ? or be they babes ? and will they so soon be pleased ? and can they forget the dream ? or are they strangers in Dothan ? or do they not know the way to the pit where Joseph is ? Alas good man ! thou knowest is not , thy brothers are too revengeful , and too deep for thee to deal with , for life and liberty by a treaty , what cares Simeon and Levi for conditions and promises , when they resolve to be treacherous ? have they not swords by their sides ? what do they care for a treaty ; treaty them no treaties , hatred and revenge for Joseph's vision are settled upon the lies ; what if the malignant tribes return when thou art gone , and kill Joseph in the pit , when no man sees it to tell the old man ? hath not thy wisdom provided well for thy young brother , to make a grave for him ? and to save the tribes the labour of digging one ? and to save old Jacob funeral expenses for his beloved Joseph , what have thy brothers more to do now , but a knock , and a shovel of earth , and Joseph is not . Ah Reuben , Reuben , i love thy pity , but i fear the pit , there is but little good like to be of this treaty , however Joseph thanks thee for thy good meaning . 

And Judah ( Sir ) would be thought a friend to Joseph too , but it is easy to prove him an arch malignant , indeed his enmity glides along in smooth language , and runs away in a still channel , without noise , which argues the depth thereof : we have nothing but his own words , and his own declaration , that speaks him a friend , and these neither speak him any other but a comparative friend , he would not be thought less than an enemy to Joseph , but only not to be so bloody , as the rest were , or would have been . Then all his deeds be acts of hostility ▪ oh it is Joseph ! our brother , our flesh and blood , yet let us sell him , save his blood , bit sell his body , save his body in doth in , but damn his soul ( If possible ) in Egypt ; if this be all thy kindness ( Judah ) thou wilt kill thy brother with kindness . 

Judah , Sir , was a dangerous enemy to the budding commonwealth of Israel , i am more than half persuaded , that it was he which gave his brother's commission of array , to do what they did , indeed we could not find his packet of letters , but we find him in the head of the bloody crew , and the orator upon all occasions . He was that noble tribe , that had many Kings in his loins . He was a declared royalist , and it fell to him by eldership , to be their general upon this design : Reuben ( The elder ) was too honest for their purpose , and had declared his good affection to Joseph , at the first assembly of the brothers . His vote went that Joseph should go home , he should go home and be a comfort to old Israel . 

Simeon and Levi ( Next in years ) had carried the generalship from Judah , but that they had before discovered their incapacity to manage such a command , by their rash and treacherous dealing with the Sichemites , after they had yielded unto certain articles in a treaty with them , they had made themselves and the old man to stink before the inhabitants of the land , and therefore are now by the others judged unfit ; Judah is the man that must direct them in their counsels , and lead them on , a man of incomparable parts and majesty . He was one that knew how to play his game well , it is he that animates against Joseph , in the cabinet whisperings , it is he that pleads for Joseph in a more open council . 

What ever they do with Joseph , home he shall not go , that he resolves against Reuben , and for the down right killing of him , he will not yield to that neither , that he urgeth against Simeon and Levi . he ••rsiwades rather to a treaty and gives the ground and reasons of such an accommodation . He is our brother , and what profit in his blood ? rather save his life and sell the young man . he hath not the spirit of a soldier , but of a butcher that delights in blood . 

It is confessed Judah's pleading for Joseph was very pathetical and seasonable to save present execution , but withal , there was much cruelty and selfishness in the bowels of those bowels . What profit in his blood ? the blood of Joseph Might have stuck upon their shepherd's coats in Dothan , there was danger in that , what profit ? 

It seems gain and other self-ends Might have prevailed very far upon Judah's good nature to make him forget Joseph was any kift or kin to him . Those sacred records leaves a stain upon his very kindness . 

But to speak truth , what could Judah do or say less ? How could he do so little for him ? A stone could not retain its hardness to see such anguish as was upon Joseph's soul , they do confess afterwards in the ward , that they did see much of it but were hardened , and that they confess was their sin , surely none but such as had quite blown out the glimmering light of nature , and had forgotten they were men , but would have melted long before , with that abundance of tears that run down Jesephs' cheeks , but would have been moved with all those moving pleadings that Joseph had to pour forth . They confess them to be very piercing and visible to be seen , but themselves hard and impenetrable . 

Joseph's plea for his life . 

And shall i never see my dear father again ? But must i lose my life ? or ( That which is as near ) my liberty ? and will brothers be my executioners ? will Israelites be bloody ? O! brother Judah help ! why brother Levi , brother Zebulon ; it is the day of Joseph's trouble : hath Joseph no brother , will not Nepthali , will not Gad , will not Asher know or pity him ? why , i am the son of your father , i am Joseph , i came in duty and kindness to see you , and shall i be killed for my kindness ? am i not worthy to live for my love ? let me know my fault that i May be sorry , that i May repent before i die . is it because i did tell you my dream ? truly ( brothers ) it was a real vision , and no idle fancy ; is it because your sheaf was lower than mine ? it is not possible that your sheaf should be the lower for Josephes' sheaf ; is it because the sun and moon did obeisance to me ? why ? what ill can that presage to you ? can those honoured luminaries be eclipsed by Josephes' glory ? or can your native luster and brightness be lessened by any splendour of his ? and alas what profit will arise unto you out of a dead carcase , and a little coat ? will not a loud conscience for the blood of an innocent , sting more than that can heal . 

Besides , what if Joseph's dream proves a vision indeed ? and your brother become such a Prince as May require such bendings ? as May deserve such honour , from a family so illustrious and honourable as is the family of Jacob ? what if you my Lord Judah and the rest of my brothers should see cause to bow before me ? would Joseph be stiff while you bend ? and could his eyes be dry , while yours be wet ? do you think Joseph so unnatural , and undutiful both ? I beseech your excellency to consider , you May rather weaken than strengthen the family of Jacob , by the ruin of Joseph , besides the errand i come about deserves not such entertainment ; i come to inquire after your welfare . Ah let me go home again , that i May do my errand to the old man , our father , that i May tell him i did escape the wild beasts , and did see my loving brothers in safety upon the plains of Dothan . 

And now Sir , could a general say less ? or could a nobleman do so little for Joseph , as Judah did for him ? A man that had so much elegancy in his lines , and of excellency in his loins , could he use less courtesy in his behaviour ? what was it for him to say , Simeon hold , Levi be not rash , Joseph is our brother indeed , and his blood will do us but little good , a child's coat will be but little booty , no such plunder here , as you had of the Sichemites when you put them to the sword in Shalem : Sir , this is one of the best of all those cursed resolves amongst the worst of enemies . No profit in the carcase of a commonwealth . it is a principle that sways with the most moderate of the degenerate kind of Catiline , yet rather than fail in their design of mischief and violence , let Joseph , the joy and comfort of old Israel be sold to Pharaoh , nay , let him go to the devil ( So far as they can doom him ) they 'll do their best to send him thither , so they May have Joseph's portion of honour and estate ; his portion of honour in Jacobs' family ; and his portion of estate in Jacobs' flocks : they regard neither the life nor liberties of young Joseph , nor old Israel , if they May have but coin by making their coffins , 

Sir , i have now my purpose , now that i have minded you of those ancient treaties , and treacheries ; and prayings , and pleadings ; and stirrings , and strivings ; and good meanings too ( A few of them ) touching Israel's Joseph : that i have minded you of the little number of Joseph's friends . it is one of the least of numbers , if you reckon him at home , and him abroad at the treaty too , that i have given you a review of the multitude of Joseph's enemies , even amongst patriarchs , and how cunningly they did work against Joseph ; to let you see that neither cunning nor cruelty could ever prevail upon innoceney first and last too , but truth hath always had the day after hard skirmishes , that you Might observe how honest hearts May be undermined , and prevented in their intentions to preserve Joseph . 

It was Reubens' case , he had by treaty , provided a pit which ( Though dry ) was safe neither for himself nor Joseph , how excellently enemy's act according to their principles . Judah doth far exceed Reuben in abilities to treat , Joseph's bondage is Judahs' aim , and a dark dungeon is Joseph's fate . it is not so with Reuben , a plot could not succeed worse to Reuben then this did , for he tore his hair . In the interim , Sir , there is an old catching for Joseph , the tribes will kill him , but Reuben catcheth him , the tribes do sell him , but God doth send him : 

And now Sir , here we find a third party as well in Israel then , as in England now , a party Sir ( And a gallant one too ) that was no more dreamt of by the old patriarchs ( But only what Joseph saw in his vision ) then was of late thought on by the young patriarchs of England : good and bad men with us ( All of them ) miscarry alike in their counsels concerning Joseph , Reuben ( With us too ) beats off Simeon and saves Joseph , Judah he cousins Reuben , and sells Joseph , God befools them all and sends the man in a dispatch of his own to Egypt , there to provide food for Israel . and thus the wisdom of God deludes crafty Judah , and secludes King Reuben ( Though he was for the cause ) from his wiser counsels . nay it pleased providence to cage them up both in ward together in Egypt , with their particoloured counsels , as if they had been both alike enemies to his great stateliness , and as being equally destructive in their judgments , and purposes , to his own sanctity and Israel's safety . 

Sir , i thought to be more short , but the way i took to follow Joseph , i find to be rough and intricate , and the way i find , is longer too , from Dothan to Egypt , and from thence backs again to England , than i could imagine , i was forced to go somewhat about , because i discovered a variety of engagements , and holds , and garrisons . I saw , Sir , pits and petitions , and treaties and treacheries , and cries and counsels , and clamours , and accusations ; and dungeons , and dangers by the way , and so i could not wait upon Joseph through all these , and return to you so soon as you Might expect , however my presumption is your candour , and i though you would not take offence that i tarried so long , for that the occasion of this wearisome length of lines was not only in loyalty to Joseph , but in love to you , Sir , and if i fail something in method and memory , you will remember i went through a thicket , and forest of wild beasts , and will soon excuse my failings , while only love and thankfulness to yourself and Joseph doth guide the pen . 

Sir , it hath been the good will of him that dwelled in the bush to go as well before England's Joseph as Israel's , and hath led him on through a wilderness of pits , a Dothan of dangers , & a dungeon of difficulties , hath so cleared the pits of water , the dungeons of darkness , the wilderness of serpents : serpents of their stings , hath so taken out the malignity of every wild beast in the way from Dothan to Egypt and from thence to England , knocking out great teeth , breaking jaw bones , chopping off heads , so that England's Joseph as well as Israel's , is now beyond the reach of his cruel brothers , preserved in the midst of Israelites and Egyptians , malignants are either in ward , or else have learned to pronounce our English shibboleth without faltering , they begin to say my Lord Joseph and make low congees and humble addresses to the supreme authority of the nation ; to the council of state , to the keepers of the liberties of England , the Lord's commissioners , and to all these , right honourable . 

Those greater luminaries that would not do obeisance to our Joseph , are utterly darkened , the sun of this lower orb , is gone quite retrograde more degrees then that in the dial of Ahaz , 2 King , 20.  And the other of our dark world's greater luminaries the moon ( The very emblem of mutability and change , being most full of spots in her greatest fullness ) for her ill will to Joseph , is commanded sistence , and standing still in the valley of Ajalon ; in a country of valleys , and there amazingly made to behold and gaze upon the rare and unheard of execusions of the great Jehovah , done by his despised Joshua's , and the most glittering stars that will not bend shall fall down , and whatever be their luster or largeness , the fall of Lucifer shall be their fate , it is manifest to all beholders , that a divine hand hath set a crown of glory upon the head of England's Joseph , and that sun or star that shall dare reach after Joseph's crown , now in his glory . Believe it , Sir , the despised saints , will but triumph at their treason , and they will do no other but utter a song of praise to God for their plagues amongst men ; Babylon is fallen , is , fallen ; how art thou fallen , Lucifer , sun of the morning ? this , this will be the song of saints ( Honoured Sir ) so long as the sun hath a course to give , or England an age to live . 

I will not stand to run the parallel , i humbly crave that to be the fruit of your meditations . it is now vacation with you there , though it be term time with us here : indeed , Sir , they are most happy that have least to do with a deceitful world , that are most vacant from the businesses of an uncertain age , unless they have their eyes the better , and are of a more quick sight , to see their work before them . 

But now Sir , who ever malign that the commonwealth of England begins to be illustrious , surely no English heart , no Reubenites should do it ; yet there are great thoughts of heart for the divisions of Reuben ; for the discontents of Reuben , the contradictions & murmurings of this friendly tribe ; it is not Ireland's Rabsheka , but it is England's Joseph that is honoured ; he is not an English man , but an Irish man , that hates the young lad.  believe it Sir , ( Or suppose it possible ) the wild Irish , the savage Orcades will go near to turn round in half an age , will engage to submit to the commonwealth of England , if our Joseph will protect them ; and what a base dishonour will it be to our English cavalry ; ( And to some of the division of Reuben too , it will be no credit : that they will be younger brothers to pagans' and Papists , and to the Moors , and to the worshippers of Mahomet , in their duty of submitting to England's Joseph ; will it not be a blushing shame to such as are not quite brased against it , to think that the barbarous Irish should be sooner disarmed of their bloodthirstiness , than our wretched cavalry can be brought in by kindness and freedom : oh how soon will the succeeding age that is already treading upon the heels of this , befool , and ( Pittyingly ) behest the pride , and ignorance and wretchedness , and stubbornness of this present generation . 

I said indeed there were some that could already frame themselves to say , my Lord Joseph ; but it is as sure that many of these ( I would i had not cause to suspect them all ) i say most of the s• , do but pour out their old malignity into new bottles , have , and will act against young Rubenites upon old principles of hatred and revenge , because Reuben delivered Joseph at the pit . i do very well know the men that now lie in the pit upon that very account . 

But Sir , my purpose is to mind you that what ever their hopes May be , they do sumbmit in point of act unto Joseph , they dare not for their lives take up arms again , unless they be men of base and broken fortunes , and are desperate , because Joseph is a Prince , a potentate : he is the commonwealth of England . and because the Lord of hosts hath made him a father to Pharaoh , not to Pharaoh mystical , Joseph will be a ruin to his kingdom , but Pharaob natural , to black and swarthy complexioned persons ; i am persuaded our Joseph will soon enlighten and interpret their dreams , that those dark persons in the darker places of the world , May not for ever perish in the years of death and darkness , for want of interpreters , for want of such an interpreter as Joseph will be ; when magicians are silent , Joseph will such an interpreter as Joseph will be ; when magicians are silent , Joseph will speak truth and prophecy . he will be an enemy to no nation . he will be a friendly neighbour to the ( Late oppressed , now the ) high and mighty states of the low countries , and Lords of the united provinces . he will be an enemy to none , but to the lowest country of all , the principality of blackness and darkness for ever . Joseph will be a scourge to all the loousts that come out of that bottomless pit : the legates alatere of that infernal hierarchy ; these darken the Christian world ; their general vicar , the Pope . the flying fiery serpent Copp , and that wretched ly-monger the man in the moon ; these be the pests of the commonwealth of England ; these came in the smoke , rev. 9 2.  

Joseph will be a friend to enemies , much more a friend to friends , now that he hath power ; but than friends must be friends , and sign the engagement ; and enemies must give a pledge too , that they are not spies while Joseph doth nourish them ; Judah must take the engagement , as well as Reuben , and Simeon too , as well as Judah , and confess their trespass too ( Such as are faulty ) before they can be trusted in a place where there is such variety of good food , and abundance of great treasure . Israel's Joseph would nourish no spies , no more will England's Joseph , if an engagement can tie them from treachery . i do see there is one provided , that must either bow them or break them ; will either mend them , or end them . 

But now Sir , there are great thoughts of heart , for , and in the divisions of Reuben ; Deborah and Baraak , are pensive at this sad conceit , in that stately song of their triumph : it is now Reubens' case to be put in ward , by the command of that Joseph , whose life he was a means to preserve at the first onset of England's cavalry . i do wish much tenderness of heart May be showed to those that are of tender consciences , that are not yet assured of Joseph's safety ; if they be of Reubens' division , and not Simeonites . 

And will Joseph require his friends thus ? it were no pity to see Simeon and Levi tied neck and heels together , and to put Judah in a fright ; but for Reuben to be clapped up in ward , and for him to be ranked with rank malignants , seems strange . malignants rejoice at that , and Reubenites mourn for that , and all be divided , and offended at that ; yet Sir , you see , providence will have it so ; i pray submit to it . 

Sir , i would the consideration hereof , Might serve for a helmet , and a breastplate both , to keep you entire , and unwounded in those two principles of life , the head and the heart ; believe it Sir , saints themselves are shot in the mouth , and do speak boldly , and i fear bloodily . i have sent you therefore a larger piece of Joseph's party coloured coat , & have used the more expressions that it Might be unto you as so many quiltings to make you shot-free , and to keep you from the malignity of these revolting times . that though ( It seems ) you have fainted somewhat in the conflict , yet you May not utterly fall in the exit . 

And will Simeon take the engagement , and not Reuben ? will Reuben tear his hair ? what will he do it now ? now that Joseph is safe ? He Might have done it at the pit , but will he take on like a mad man at the court ? it had been a suitable deportment for wretched Simeon and Levi so to do ; for cop , the Pope , and the man in the moon so to do ; but men wonder to see Reubenites divided about the matter of Joseph's glory . oh how do wicked men hiss ? how do most taverns and alehouses , and how do all stews and brothel-houses , laugh and dance at this evil report ? i could herein exceed , but in my exceeding , i should fall abundantly short of what you , and all the world , know to be , but too true . 

I believe you would give me leave to conclude , but shall i be bold to come nearer to you ? would you know the mystery ? it is this , God is gone by you ( And others too of reuben's division ) unseen , and hath taken Joseph along with him in all the haste : there hath been much snatching amongst us , in the parliament , in the army , in the city , country . this hath made great noise everywhere . And shall not the wisdom , and power of God have one snatch amongst us . He will have something as well as we , he hath catched what he could get , and was worth the taking , and this he hath done without much noise , wisdom is deep , the more divine , the more deep ; man's wisdom is shallow , and from hence proceed the great stirs , and the clutter that is amongst us . Sir , Joseph was taken from you , and from your counsels in the night , and went in ways untrodden with a good guide . Quick sighted men could no more see him in his March to Pharaoh's court then blind men . hence all our discontents , fears , despairs . hence it is , that Joseph's good friends that was kind to him on his bed of sickness , do now draw the curtains upon him as if he were dead religion , and laws and all good order , learning , trading ( All ) utterly defunct , friends , and enemies too agree together about this . it is so , it must needs be so , Joseph is not , Jacob is bereaved , some evil beast hath eaten up the child . 

This was old Israel's fear , though his internal eyes were very good , and by the help of a prophetical prospective could see so many generations after him , yet he could not tell what was become of his son . he was so subtly , and secretly conveyed away to court that neither he , nor Reuben , not little Benjamin could tell , or believe any other but that he was dead . no hold , but the old man and Reuben would go after him , one to the pit , the other to the grave , and there will never want malignant tribes to settle the conceit of Jesephs' death fast upon Israelites and Reubenites , for say the old ones , see his coat if it be not so , a bloody , torn , party coloured coat , look on it . 

The new tribes are , as if they were spit out of the old ones mouths . oh what a bloody , particoloured coat , do they hold forth , and show to the world . The wild beasts did do it , but who were those wild beasts ? they poor harmel•sse creatures , did not tear nor besmear the coat with blood , no not they . 

see thy son's coat , it should seem Joseph was Jacobs' son , but not their brother , i pray note how wicked men will shift off their sins with their relation to Joseph . the coat was Joseph's ( thy son's coat ) the particoloured coat was Joseph's , the bloody coat was Joseph's . Joseph was Jacobs' son , but now he shall be none of their brother , they had made a match , and were sworre brothers to the wild beasts ; they could not then be Joseph's brethren too until the ward and some fears and frights , had purged them of some gross malignity . oh how impudently do the ill affected tribes of this age shift off their great trespass from themselves , what blood they pour upon Joseph's coat ? how boldly do they hold it forth and tell it ? how shamelessly do they object the parti-colouredness of it , and the sad hap thereof to Jacob and Joseph : the parliament and the commonwealth of England . Crnelty , and injustice , and errors and irreligion , and blasphemy and profaneness , and divisions , and sects , ( All that is bad ) that is theirs see thy son's coat . 

Sir , snatchings you know are the sudden catching away of things unexpectedly . men think themselves wronged when they be thus dealt with . such a snatcher is providence , only it can always justify what it doth in that kind , which we can do but seldom . We are offended that things are thus snatched away from us . 

Sir , in these sad conflicts amongst Reubenites , i find and have observed a threefold provision made by the wisdom of God . first for itself , next for Joseph , then for the friends of Joseph . 

1 for itself , the wisdom of God will provide that instruments shall have their due ( truth and justice call for it ) but men must wait the days of payment . neither men , nor angels , nor devils shall take away that which is God's , namely his honour and reputation in the world , that 's one provision . if Reuben had been the only instrument to deliver backe young Joseph to old Jacob , oh what a man Reuben had been ! How great for courage ? how wise for counsel ? that hand which is most seen , carries away all the honour . Saul hath slain his thousands , and David his ten thousands , but ( It should seem ) God stood by and did nothing . oh what gallant men had Brown , and Waller , and Essex and others been cried up to be , if they had done all the work ? what had they done at Abbington ! what at Newbury ! what at Winchester ! what at Gloucester ! what in the West ! what great feats they had done everywhere , this had been the talk , Sir , ( Whither you will or no , ) persons will argue thus . And man's way of reasoning is very destructive to the glory and ways of God . if instruments stand in the people's light so that they cannot behold his exceeding great glory , let the men be never so precious , they shall be laid aside for a time . God himself will bury Moses with his own hand , rather than the persons shall set the man up in his place . 

Moses was honoured with the conduct of God's persons through the red sea , as far as the wilderness , and there he is put out of commission , and shall go no further . Joshua shall be their captain general in their March to Canaan . you yourself and other worthy commanders were honoured to go before English Israel from Egypt , through a red sea , as far as the wilderness , and are you offended that the wisdom of God hath taken away your commission , and buried your honour for a little time ? Sir , it was come to this pass , that your honour must be buried or gods , your wise doom or his , your treaties or his counsels ? and would you have his fall and yours stand ? his go down , and yours go up . Downs with that spirit i pray you , or else it will sink you as low as any place God hath to put you in . Are you angry that he makes no further use of you , when all men know you have been so ? and so ? so for courage , and so for trust , &c.  Why , that 's the reason that providence takes you off , it is policy to take men off when they begin to be so popular . when meant are great , God is little . London is populous , and popularity is a great temptation to by ass men ; it is infinitely against the height of his spirit to overcome a world by a world , or by many in the world . God is upon a design that persons will not believe . With 2 or 3 he will turn the world upside-down . he hath done so , and he will do so . 

that 's the first provision . 

And then , next , provision must be made for Joseph too ; our of Egypt have i called my son ; the truth of God is engaged to bring Joseph out of Egypt , he shall not for ever dwell among Egyptians , Joseph shall be advanced to a commonwealth ; sineon shall not kill him ; Judah shall not sell him , God will seize upon his goods where ever he find them ; and it shall go freely from him again , for the nourishment , and preservation of Israelites ; and for interpretation to the Egyptians too . 

And now Sir , to come as near as i am able unto you , can it be , do you think , that the good providence should make no provision for the friends of Joseph ? what ? not for Reuben ? not for friendly Reuben ? not for the elder brother ? not for the best brother ? what , not for valiant Reuben , that withstood nine , for the cause of Joseph ? yes , Sir , care is taken for Reuben , by crossing Reuben ; and there is made for him too , a gracious provision of good , by a careful prevision of evil ; Sir , it is a work of providence , admire it , and stoop to it . 

Ah Reuben , ( England's true hearted Reuben ) it is well for thee , and for all of thy division , that the treaty at the pit took not ! It was well that Joseph was taken out , though to thy discontent . dear Reuben , it would have grieved thee to have found thy brother's carcase in the pit , and they self thrown there to bear him company for a Round-head ; were not thy brothers in commission of array against Joseph ? and against all the friends of Joseph ? 

Sir , treaties near a pit , ( Where men be divided , and do mistake one another , as in a place of darkness ) are dangerous , especially such treaties as are managed with such disadvantages ; of nine against one , of nine against one , did i say ? of ninety against one , i dare say , if you take in all the confederacy , and such as wish well to our ill . Treaties of cunning men against well minded men ; of united men in evil , against divided men , about that which is good ; of bloody men against peaceable men : Reuben , Reuben , i tell thee again , i do love thy pity , but i did fear the pit.  

Sir , i am more than only persuaded , that by this time , you , and we too , had known sorrow , if those counsels had took . Your wit had gratified our enemies , more than their courage could ever have done ; yet this i know too , men are observed to be mutineers against present providence always , either it is too hot , or too cold ; either too wet , or too dry for them ; but i hope you will prove a better student of providence , and that you will submit unto it , and that you will engage for it , against such as will make but little distinction ( Less than men will imagine ) between Presbyterians and independents , and against such as have already resolved how to level all our new names , into one heap of rubbish . 

To conclude , Sir , it is against such as , you May be confident , will come with such a powder of wrath against your persons , and of hunger to your estates : ( For can they ever forget how much you beat them , and how penny your marshal used them ; ) that they will give no other but the same quarter to the city of London , as that merciless powder did unto those families near the tower of London . Sir , they will easily take ( Or else take the pains to dig out ) your treasure , i speak to more than to yourself , and will kindly help you to make good ( for themselves ) so much of that known proverb ; Lincoln was , London ( yet ) is , and Montrosse shall be , &c.  



I cannot part with so many friends without one word more of remembrance , because my design is to awake sleepers . 

Oh London , London ! how many sighs have you made ? how many groans have you uttered ? how many precious tears have ye shed ? that the keeper of Israel , would keep you ? and your god with you ? and your religion with you ? and your liberties with you ? and your wives with you ? and your children with you ? and your friends with you ? and the glory of England's Joseph with you ? And now that he casts a good eye upon you , now that he hath told you of so many treasons to prevent them ; of so many designs to blast them ; of so many combinations and devises to scatter them , them that would soon have scattered you ; are you offended at this providence ? do you repine at this provision ? will the Irish , or the uncertain Scots , or the Orcades , or France , or Spain , or Barbary ; will any of these do you think , give you content , if a wise God cannot do it ? 

I pray , Sirs , think and bethink yourselves , and walk about the city , the island , tell the towers , : mark well her bulwarks : and in your rounds , peep under the foundations , search the vaults , not with dark lantherns ; guide Faux and traitors did so , they do , and have done so , that would blow you up : Londoners ! Englishmen ! take the benefit of the sun by day , and of a torch by night . Pray be not so unkind as to send up such annoying , such choakingsmoake , to offend the pure and clear eye that England and London seem to have monopolised to itself for the safety of both , and for the preservation of all that any of us do enjoy . video , rideo , do ye understand and remember the old powder treason ; it was the very mother of this ; that was the mother , and this the daughter . 

Sir , it is a child begotten of the same black father , a child begotten after his own likeness , as black and dark as himself , oh how many barrels of powder , be laid ! and how many billets , and logs , and great bars of iron too , be laid over those barrels ! those unhappy ones in Towerstreet , were but as a boy's squib in comparison of these vanlts and barrels , yet how many sweet families were blown up by that squib ? and those barrels ? and that improvidence ? i do melt into a brine of saltish tears at the very writing of it , but you will melt into tears of red blood at the feeling of it , if better provision be not made for you by your guardians , and by him that guides your guardians . 

Those barrels were laid , ( Whither in a seller or shop , or warehouse , i know not ) under some weak timber-houses in a street of London , these are laid under the very foundations of the strong tower of London , the city of London , the towns and cities of England , and the very weal of all the Commons of England . Here all enslaved-nations do contribute to give a sound blon indeed , the work will be the more easy if many hands be put to it . Believe it ( Honoured Sir ) the Pope hath barrels , and billets , and faggots , and Oneale hath barrels , and the Scots have barrels , & the Danes have barrels , and they say some Londoners have barrels too , i fear if you help them not with powder , yet you put fire enough at the touch hole : but shall these blow up England ? no i trust , nor yet London neither . Better provision is made for both . I hope providence will snatch London from those barrels or those barrels from London , and take away the knife least the child hurt himself , and prove a grief to father and mother : dear Londoners , engage against all powder plots , your solitary Ben : doth give you an alarm ; and it is an alarm of love to London . 

Not to fire their buildings , 

But , 

To quench their burnings . 

Finis . 

















