A plain and necessary confutation of divers gross and Antichristian errors , delivered to the university congregation , the last commencement , anno. 1653.  By Mr. Sydrach Simpson , Master of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge . 

Potentior est veritas quam eloquentia , potior spiritus quam ingenium , major fides quam eruditio : & ut paulus ait , stultum dei sapientius est hominibus . Luther . Epist. ad Caspar . Bornerum . Profess . Lipsens . 

Non est istud temeritas , sed fides ; neque inconsideratio , sed ratio ; neque furor , sed fiducia . Hilarius lib. contr. constantium augustum . 

London , printed by Robert White , for Giles Calvert , and are to be sold at the sign of the black-spread-eagle , near the West-end of Paul's . 1654.  

An apology to the reader , touching the following reply to Mr. Sydrach Simpson's sermon . 

If it shall seem grievous to any , that i have dealt thus freely and plainly with Mr. Sydrach Simpson , one of the first pastors of an independent congregation in England ; let them consider how Paul dealt with those brethren gal. 2. to whom ( According to his zeal , and the present occasion ) he gave no place by subjection , no not for an hour , that the truth of the gospel Might continue with the Galatians ; and though those brethren seemed to be somewhat , yet saith Paul , what ever they are , it makes no matter to me , seeing God accepteth no man's person : and so notwithstanding their reputation , he did not spare them . Yea , let them consider how Paul at Antioch withstood Peter to the face for dissembling with the Jews in the case of the gentiles , and for not walking uprightly according to the truth of the gospel : wherefore Paul did publicly and sharply reprove him before them all . For no true believer is to keep silence , when the doctrine of the gospel is corrupted by the doctrines of men , or to be modest in this matter . wherefore i was compelled to speak thus plainly to him , for his gross prevarication in the things of God ; and i am well satisfied in my conscience in the discharge of my duty , whatever shall be the censure of carnal Christians , who have no true sense of the glory of Christ's gospel , or of the profit of his persons , whom yet Christ so loved , as to lay down his life , and to be crucified for them . 

again , if it shall offend any that i deal thus roundly against human learning ; let them know , that i am not against human learning upon all accounts , but do allow human learning ( So it be sober and serious ) in its own place and sphere , as well as other human things : but i do oppose it as it is made another John Baptist , to prepare the way of Christ into the world , or to pepare the world's way to Christ : and also , as men make it necessary , for the true knowledge of the scriptures ; yea , the very unction for the ministry . 

And herein , according to the grace of Christ i both do and will contend against it for ever : seeing human learning mingled with divinity , or the gospel of Christ understood according to Aristotle , hath begun , continue , and perfected the m•ster•e of iniquity in the outward church . Wherefore i do in all boldness appear for Christ the w••dom of God , against human learning the wisdom of th•world ; knowing assuredly that he is as very Antichrist who opposes Christ as the wisdom o•god , as •e that opposes him as the power and righ•ousness of God : and men May as well bring into the church of God another righteousness than Christ , and another power than Christ , as another wisdom than Christ . wherefore , as they who bring in human righteousness , that is , civil or moral righteousness , or any works or duties of men for righteousness , into the church of Christ , they are true antichrists in so doing ; seeing herein they are contrary to , and do oppose Christ the righteousness of God : and as they who bring in human power , or the secular arm into the church of Christ , to do , or leave undone , to reward or punish , to promise or threaten , to encourage or discourage by that , they are true antichrists in so doing , seeing herein they are contrary to , and do oppose Christ the power of God ; so also they that bring in human wisdom , or the learning and philosophy of men into the church of Christ , they also are true antichrists in so doing ; for herein they are contrary to , and do oppose Christ the wisdom of God . for Christ is , and is to be the only power , the only wisdom , and the only righteousness in the church of God ; and he that brings in any other power , wisdom or righteousness , besides Christ himself , that man is in very deed Antichrist . and in this matter also , it was necessary that i should be bold for Christ against Antichrist . 

3.  again , if any shall be offended that i speak thus freely against the universities , which are of such honourable esteem everywhere in the nation , especially with the ignorant and vulgar persons , and with men of all sorts , who have not the right knowledge of Christ and his gospel ( wherein are so contained all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge , that no part of this treasury is left out thereof , to enrich heathenish philosophy withal , which by the gospel is left as a desolate thing , empty and destitute of all true wisdom and knowledge ) i say , if any think that i have too deeply censured these universities ; let them know , that i have done in this matter but as Wickliff , Hus , Luther , and several others , holy men of God , and happy instruments in the hand of Christ have done before me . As for instance ; 

Wickliff terms the universities , castra caimitica , Cains castles ; synagogas satanae , the synagogues of Satan , and affirms they were never ordained or instituted by Christ . 

John Hus , ( Or Otho Brunfelsius , if he set out the contents of the chapters ) calls them satrap antichristi , the lieutenants of Antichrist . 

Luther in his book contra ambrosium catharinum , showing out of Daniel the prophet , that Antichrist is rex facierum , the King of faces , or appearances , he affirms that the universities are one of those faces of Antichrist , and that they are very comely or sightly to look on , and yet indeed are a very chaos and open gate of hell , and that in these the most choice youth of Christian persons are prostituted , and are cast into the open throat of hell ; and that in these Aristotle is read , whereby the wits of Christian youth are possessed & busied with human & heathenish learning ; yea , are quite blinded and oppressed with it . 

He saith also , that the universities are the woe , that the fifth angel ( Mentioned revel. 9 ) brought upon the earth : and that who ever it was that did first institute and confirm universities , he was a star fallen from heaven to earth : to wit , from the gospel of Christ to human learning . 

And in his exposition on psal. 22. he calls the universities the mothers of learned men , the gates of hell , and saith , they are called ( scholae , i. e.  Ludi ) schools , that is , plays by a fatal name , seeing they make sport with the scriptures , and cast lots upon them , as upon the garments of Christ , every one dividing to himself a share of them , according to his own human and philosophical apprehension . and he saith , that the doctors of these universities are by the same providence called doctores scholastici , i. e.  ludicri , vel illusorii : school-doctors , that is , mocking or May game doctors . 

again he saith , those most glorious mothers of studies , the universities , stink before God with most loathsome abomination . 

These universities are those Antichristian soldiers , who put a reed into Christ's right hand instead of a sceptre : and this reed is philosophy , that vain deceit , or as the apostle else where terms it , the operation of error : by which philosophy ( Saith he ) the unhappy persons of Christ began to be governed , that is , to be seduced , and to be led away from the gospel of God . and this vain reed they put into his right hand , by preferring learning before godliness ; saying , ( According to their usual manner of speaking ) he is a learned and a godly man ; hereby making learning to take place of godliness . and yet this philosophy is nothing but a weak reed , which counterfeits a sceptre , rather than represents it , and so is nothing but vain deceit ; for there is nothing propounded in such doctrine but vanity and lying , though under the title of knowledge and religion . 

In a word , he calls them antichristi lupanaria , the stews of Antichrist . 

Melancthon also terms the universities , domos mendacii , houses of lies , and saith , it is manifest that they are all heretical by their school divinity , which all the schools in Europe have received from the university of Paris , and are thereby infected with heresy ; and he saith , the students in the universities , are not the persons of the gospel , nor yet of the law , but are the persons of Aristotle's morals . 

And thus it is manifest that others have spoken freely and sharply against the universities before now . And therefore wise and godly Christians will have no just cause to be offended at me , who have spoken in like manner , having the same cause . 

Object . Now if any shall object , that they all spoke against popish universities , and that our universities are otherwise now , than they were then , and so there is not the same cause to speak against them now , as there was heretofore . 

answ. to this i answer , that though the outward form of gross popery be taken away from them ( As also from the rest of the persons of this nation ) God having put it into the hearts of the civil power to reject it , after the light of the gospel had begun to shine to them , yet are the heart , bowels , bones , marrow , sinews and blood of the universities , the selfsame now as heretofore ; and though the outside of it hath passed under a very little change , yet the inner parts of it remain as before , in the full strength of antichrists kingdom , and that without any alteration at all . For the selfsame statutes of the universities and colleges still remain with them in force , which were at first given to them by their popish founders , through the help of Antichrist : and these statutes are of such authority with them , that they depart from the rule of Christ's gospel , to walk by the rules of sinful men , for worldly stipends and rewards . Farther , the same philosophy or heathenism , and the same school-divinity or Antichristianism , are yet instilled into the youth and students , as were many hundred years ago , in the darkest times of popery ; and these things are all in all in the university learning and education , insomuch that no man is of any esteem and reckoning with them , know he the gospel of Christ never so soundly and truly , if he be not ( As they speak ) a good philosopher , and school-divine . so that the university for its inside is the selfsame now , as it was in Wickliff , Hus , or Luther's time , being informed and possessed with the same heathenish and Antichristian doctrine , now as then : yea , many of the selfsame outward and Antichristian forms and follies still remain with them , more than with any other persons in the nation again , even to their hoods , caps , scarlet robes , doctoral ring , kiss , gloves , their doctoral dinner and music : neither could they ever yet to this day find in their hearts to lay aside their very prevaricator , which is some notable varlet picked out of the university , and brought forth in the presence of all the heads , students , scholars , and all the great resort of ministers and persons at their public commencement , to make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience before them all , and in open defiance of the gospel , which stands in faith and love , to abuse , and deride , and jeer , and reproach all sorts of persons , of all ages , sexes , professions , and this presently after their divinity acts , which is a wickedness the very heathen would be ashamed of , and which plainly declares what kind of divinity is taught and learned in the university , which can endure , allow , countenance , and be merry at that which so highly contradicts God's word , and grieves his spirit : yet because it makes them merry after a full dinner , and puts more joy into their hearts then the holy scriptures , they could hitherto dispense with all to this day . 

And so however religion for the outward form , hath been much reform in these nations ; yet the universities as the strongest holds that Antichrist hath had amongst us , have still remained much what the same , not only as to the inward substance of all things , to wit , their statutes , philosophy and divinity , but also in a great measure to their outward forms , as they were in their first Antichristian institution . 

Wherefore it was necessary also , that i should be plain and free for Christ's sake and his churches , against these ( As Luther calls them ) stews of Antichrist , and dens of thieves , who have been , and still are the constant and fruitful seed of antichrists kingdom in the world , out of which it Might suddenly on all occasions and opportunities grow up afresh , how greatly soever it had been before wasted and destroyed among the persons , by the clear word of God and his mighty providences and works accompanying it . 

now as it was necessary this work should be done , so through the grace of Christ was i made willing to do it , seeing no else more fit and able did appear . And well knowing , that he that provokes the universities and clergy against him , provokes principalities and powers , and the rulers of the darkness of this world against him ; as is evident in the example of Wickliff , Hus , Luther , Tindal and others : i have therefore according to Christ's counsel , sat down and Counted the cost of this undertaking , and after all do say , the Lord is on my side , i will not fear what man can do unto me . and so i commit thee Christian reader , to that grace which is from God , to keep thee in this new hour of temptation , if the Lord suffer it to come forth upon the earth . 

4.  Again , if any shall object in reading this reply , that i , myself make use of human learning , whilst i speak against it . 

I answer , what part of philosophy is here made use of ? or who of the heathens are here quoted ? I have chiefly made use of the testimony of some faithful Christians , who have lived in several ages , and yet have all witnessed by the same spirit , the same truth . and it is no more human learning to quote believers in the church since Christ , then to quote the patriarchs and prophets before Christ , or the apostles and evangelists which immediately followed him . 

5.  And last of all , if any say , i myself relate to the university , why then do i speak against it thus ? 

I answer , that i neither do , nor will relate to the university , as it is polluted with any of the abominations herein mentioned : but as by the providence of God alone , i have been brought to that relation in which i now stand , and continue in it , against the wills and workings of many ; so through his good pleasure i will remain , till he shall otherwise dispose of me ; and during my sojurning with them , i will not fail to testify against their evil , and to endeavour to win all those whom God shall persuade to receive his truth , from heathenism to the gospel , and from Antichrist to Christ . 

wherefore let none be offended that i am made willing to hazard and part with my worldly accommodations for Christ's names sake ; but let them rather praise the grace of God , which hath enabled me to witness a good confession , what ever worldly disadvantage i Might run into thereby . Wherefore welcome the kingdom , righteousness , power , wisdom , word of Christ , though they swallow up all my earthly accommodations : for such love hath the Lord put into my heart , that i would not willingly conceal any thing of his most precious truth , either to gain or to preserve to myself the whole world . and so righteous father , not my will be done , nor theirs , but thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven . 

Finis . 

isa. 62.1 . 

For zions sake i will not hold my peace , and for Jerusalem's sake i will not rest , until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness , and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burns . 



Master Sydrach Simpson the last commencement preaching to the university congregation in Cambridge , and to many others , especially ministers there gathered together at that time , from several parts of the nation , among other things , he let fall in that discourse of his , these gross and Antichristian errors . 

The rehearsal of the errors . 

1.  he brought in that scripture 2 Kings 6. v. 1 , 2. which was his text : the words whereof are these , and the sons of the prophets said unto Elisha , behold now the place where we dwell with thee , is too strait for us ; let us go we pray thee unto Jordan , and take thence every man a beam and let us make us a place where we May dwell : and he answered go ye . this scripture he used to prove the lawfulness and religiousness of the present universities , and the usefulness and necessity of human learning to the church and ministry of the new testament . and what the scripture speaks of those schools , he brought to countenance , encourage and justify these : adding , that if it were objected , that that was the old testament : he did answer , that the old and the new were not distinct testaments , but administrations : thereby holding forth , that the universities now , are answerable to the schools of the prophets that were then ; and that the universities are as agreeable to the new testament , as the schools of the prophets to the old.  

2.  That they who have endeavoured to pull down schools , have always been men who were found enemies to religion . So Julian the apostate shut up the doors of the schools , because he would have all religion to go down . 

3.  That the knowledge of heavenly things cannot come to us but by things on earth , and that all divinity is swaddled in human learning . 

4.  That Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel , and that God took him so fitted , and made him an able minister of his church . 

5.  That men's hatred to God doth as well appear in their hatred to human learning , as if they hated the scriptures . 

6.  That if the spirit teach without means , men May as well be without the ordinances as without the universities and human learning . 

7.  That men now are not to receive the spirit in that immediate way to understand the scriptures in which it was given to them who wrote the scriptures . 

8.  That men now are to get knowledge by studies and human learning , and not by inspiration . 

9  That human learning is as the outworks to the fort of the gospel , and as the outer court to the temple of the gospel : and so if you will keep the fort well , you must keep the outworks strong ; and if you will preserve the inward , you must look to the outward court . 

10.  But what is the bottom of all this ( to wit , of some men's appearing against human learning , as the unction of the ministry , and against the universities as the fountain of the ministry ) but this ? that some say , they are one with Christ ; and as Christ hath the divine nature in him , so every believer hath ; and he that hath God in him , need not go to any man to learn ; whereas John 17.  Christ speaketh of believers as at an infinite distance from him : and if believers be so united to Christ as they say , they will follow , that Christ should not be the only begotten of God ; and that Christ and we should be equal , and be not our Lord , &c.  

11.  Arts and tongues are the cups in which God drinks to us . 

12.  We shall never keep up religion , if we do not keep up learning : but when learning goes down , religion goes down too . 

13.  Seeing religious foundations are so ancient , then keep them up : your destruction will never be but from yourselves . 

these notes were take from Mr.  Simpson's mouth , and delivered to me by an honest hand , and affirmed to be true for the substance of them ; and i also heard several others who were hearers of that sermon , relating the same things . 

now because i find that this doctrine hath not only grieved the hearts of the faithful , but also strengthened the hands of the carnal and evil persons : the things which he then delivered , being usually the thoughts of their hearts , and words of their mouths ; i thought it my duty , being set in my place for the defence of the gospel , to give a public reply to such gross errors so publicly delivered , to the danger of so many ; and which one would never have thought should have proceeded from such a man ; especially after the day of the gospel hath so far dawned , and the Antichristian shadows are so far retreated and flown away . 

and so i shall begin with the first of these errors , and proceed in the order in which they are set down . 

1.  Error . 

he brought that scripture , 2 king. 6.1.2 . touching the sons of the prophets , asking leave of Elisha to go and build at Jordan , to prove the lawfulness and religiousness of the universities , in their present use and customs , &c.  

Answer . 

to this i reply , that there is a vast difference between those schools , and these universities , as in many other things , so chiefly in this ; that in those schools of the prophets , named by him , the holy men of God freely taught the youth , who came willingly to them to learn , especially in the corrupt times of Israel and Judah ; i say they taught them only the knowledge of the books of Moses , and of the other prophets then extant , and no heathenish knowledge , or disciplines of the gentiles at all . And these kind of schools began early in the church : for the fathers before the flood , and the patriarchs after , all taught their children and families the word of God ; and so each of their families was such a school . and that we May not be at uncertainties in this matter , it is manifest what doctrine they taught , by that which God himself saith of Abraham , gen. 18.19 . i know Abraham ( Saith God ) that he will command his children and household after him , that they keep the way of the Lord , and to do justice and judgement : this was the sum of Abraham's doctrine to his family . and this is farther confirmed by that of Asaph , psal. 78.2.3.4 . Where he saith , i will open my mouth in a parable , i will utter dark sayings of old , which we have heard and known , and our fathers have told us : we will not hide them from their children , showing to the generation to come the praises of the Lord , and his strength , and the wonderful works that he hath done : where we plainly see what doctrine the children received from their parents , and the parents taught their children from one generation to another ; to wit , not vain philosophy , and the disciplines of the heathens , but the praises of the Lord , and his strength and wonderful works . this also is manifest by the practice of Jehosaphat King of Judah , who sent his Princes with the Levites up and down throughout Judah , and they only took the book of the law of the Lord with them , ( And no heathenish authors ) and taught the persons , 2 chron. 17.  

And Ezra after the prophets return from Babylon , took only the book of the law of Moses , and read it to them , and the Levites also read in the book of the law of God distinctly to the persons , and gave them the sense , and caused them to understand it . nehem. 8.  

And this also James the apostle witnesseth , acts 15.21 . saying , Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him , being read in the synagogues every Sabbath day . 

So that the faithful prophets of the Lord , during all the old-testament , had the chief care in their schools to keep the word of the Lord among them in a right sense , according to the mind of the spirit . for seeing the Lord's persons are his portion , they knew they were to be carefully educated and instructed in the right knowledge of the scriptures , to prepare them for the Lord , and to make them meet for his kingdom . and the keeping of the word and doctrine of God pure , is one of the greatest matters of all in the church of God : for as the word is , such is the worship , such is the faith , such is the conscience , such is all : wherefore the holy men of God , would by no means bring in the philosophy or doctrine of the heathens into their schools , to teach that to their sons , or scholars , but only the true , faithful , and unmixed word of God . 

And if against this it be objected , that Moses was learned in all the learning of the Egyptians . 

To this i reply . but did Moses ever teach any of that learning in the church , or publish any of the doctrines of it , or did he command or encourage any of the persons of God to learn it ? Or did any other of the prophets of the Lord many ages , teach their sons or scholars , any of the Egyptian philosophy , which was the ancientest , or the Sinaradine table of Hermes Trismegistus ( The pretended scholar of Moses ) so much boasted of , or any heathenish author whatsoever , of which there were many then extant ? I say , let them prove that but one heathenish author was read by any of the prophets to their scholars , and then they will have some colour Taught Jesus , and the resurrection from the dead . 

Thus Peter first taught the men of Judea , and inhabitants of Jerusalem , that God had made Jesus whom they had crucified both Lord and Christ , having raised him from the dead , because it was not possible for him to be holden of death , who was the Lord and author of life . 

And Steven , disputing with the libertines , Cirenians , and Alexandrians , and divers philosophers of Cilicia and Asia , did hold forth to them , nothing but Christ , and that he should put an end to the temple and law , and should change all the customs of Moses . and they were not able to resist the wisdom and spirit by which he spoke . Act. 6.  

And Paul at the university of Athens , reproved their heathenism , and taught nothing among the Epicureans and Stoics , and other sects of philosophers , but the resurrection of Christ and his kingdom and judgement . act. 17.  

he also disputed daily in the school of one Tyrannus , and that for two years together , and persuaded only the things touching the kingdom of God , brought into the world by Jesus Christ . act. 19  And he so prevailed with his doctrine , that many which used curious arts , brought their books together , and burned them before all men , and the prior of them was Counted at fifty thousand pieces of silver . so that as the gospel pr•vailed , and the name of Christ was magnified ; so did persons renounce philosophy , and burn their books of curious arts : for which books our university would give as much money ( If they could procure it from good benefactors ) as they were valued at : so that as they , through the efficacy of the gospel , of heathens became Christians , and threw away all other learning , and burned their books of great value , least they should infect others : so on the contrary , in our universities of pretended Christians , men usually become true heathens ; never valuing the precious gospel of God our saviour , as they do other heathenish and philosophical books . 

Farther , the same Paul dwelled after at Rome two whole years in his own hired house , and during all that time , preached only the kingdom of God , and taught those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ , with all boldness : but taught not one word of philosophy . 

he also at Corinth , a great and famous city of Greece , full of philosophers and orators , taught nothing among them , but Christ crucified , to the Jews a stumbling block , and to the Greeks foolishness ; but to them that believe both of Jews and Greeks , Christ the power of God , and the wisdom of God , 1 cor. 1.  

and as he made no use of human learning all this while ; so in 1 cor. 2. he plainly renounces it , and rejects it ; saying . 

ver. 1.  And i brethren when i came to you , came not with excellency of speech or wisdom , declaring unto you the testimony of God . 

ver. 2.  For i determined not to know any thing among you , save Jesus Christ , and him crucified . 

ver. 3.  And i was with you in weakness , and fear , and much trembling . 

ver. 4.  And my speech and preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom , but in demonstration of the spirit and power . 

ver. 5.  That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of man , but in the power of God . 

ver. 6.  Howbeit , we speak wisdom among them that are perfect ; yet not the wisdom of this world , nor of the Princes of this world which come to naught . 

ver. 7.  But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery , even the hidden wisdom , which God ordained before the world unto our glory , &c.  

ver. 13.  Which things , also we speak , not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth , but which the holy spirit teacheth , comparing spiritual things with spiritual things . 

in a word , this whole chapter tends to the utter rejection of philosophy , ( which is the wisdom of the world , ) in the kingdom of Christ , which is the kingdom of God . 

he also in his epistle to the Collossians chap. 2. gives forth another plain testimony against philosophy , desiring ver. 2. that the hearts of the believers Might be comforted and that they Might be kni• together in love , and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God , and of the father , and of Christ , in whom are hide all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge ; and this ( saith he ) i say , least any man should beguile you with enticing words : wherefore v. 8 saith he , beware least any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit , after the tradition of men , after the rudiments or elements of the world , and not after Christ ; for in him dwells the fullness of the godhead bodily , and ye are complete in him , who is the head of all principality and power ; here is a sufficient caution again philosophy for the true church for ever . for what need we ( if we are true Christians ) to turn aside for wisdom and knowledge , and learning , and curious arts to the heathen , seeing God hath given Christ to us , in whom is treasured up all the heights , and depths , and lengths , and breadths of wisdom and knowledge , whereby the whole world was made , and every creature form and fashioned , and in which it hath its being , subsistence , and operation ; yea in this Christ dwells all the fullness of the infinite and eternal God , and he is the head of all principality and power , in earth and heaven ; and there is in him alone , infinitely enough to make us wise and learned for ever , without calling in the help and contributions of the vain philosophers , and their foolish wisdom . it is enough for Christian schools , to be taught to know Christ , by the ministration of the spirit ; and all other learning that is out of Christ , though it seem to be never so high and deep , all faithful Christians are to reject it , as mere sophistry and deceit . 

and thus you see that the apostles , aswell as Christ , taught their scholars and disciple only the gospel , and spoke not one word for philosophy , but directly against it . 

and the following fathers , and next teachers of the Christian church after the apostles , they also obeyed the command of Christ , and followed the example of the apostles in this matter . For the Bishops and presbyters , that is the overseers and elders , had tender regard to the children of Christians , and did teach them aswell as the persons , the pure doctrine of the gospel ; they held forth to them , Christ crucified , and did exhort them to faith , new obedience , the confession of Christ , and patient suffering , and did not at all •ntermingle philosophy with their divinity , but always rejected and condemned it , all along the first and purest times of the Christian church , till the mystery of iniquity began to arise , and did cunningly insinuate itself into the church , by the means of human learning . 

and here it will not be amiss to relate what Justine martyr saith of himself , as to this matter ; who was before his conversion to the Christian faith , a great philosopher : and lived about 150. years after Christ's nativity : he in his dialogue which Try•ho relates , how first he joined himself to that sect of philosophers called the Stoics , and after to the peripatetics , after to the Pythagorean sect , and after to the Platonists , but had no satisfaction in his mind by all this knowledge : but at last he beholding the torments and sufferings of Christians , and seeing them bear them with such comfort and constancy , he did thereby conceive that it was impossible for that kind of persons to be subject to any vice , or carnality ; which vices of their own nature are not able to sustain any sharp adversity , much less the bitterness of death . And hereupon he began to love and search after the Christian religion : and being afflicted in mind , he did withdraw himself into a solitary place , where there met him an old ancient father of comely visage , and gentle behaviour , who began to reason with him , and to tell him that there was no knowledge of truth among the philosophers , who neither knew God , nor were aided by his holy spirit : and did farther reason with him of the immortality of the soul , of the reward of the godly , and punishment of the wicked . Then Justine being satisfied with his reasons , yielded to him , and demanded of him how he Might attain to that true knowledge of God , whereof he had spoken ? who counselled him to read the scriptures , adjoining therewith prayer , &c.  

and as This•ustines left all other learning , and betook himself only to the•criptureses ; so in the understanding of the scriptures , he rejected all his philosophy , and philosophical apprehensions ; saying , that the interpretation of the scripture is to be accommodated to the will of the doctrine of the spirit , and not to human reasonings ▪ and that he Might be sure and safe in all things , he had constant recourse to the scriptures thus understood . So that Justine martyr being effectually co•verted , wholly le•t his philosophy , and betook himself to the scriptures , and taught them to the church , as he had been taught them of God by his spirit . 

Constantine the Emperor ( though he were the first that brought in the mystery of iniquity into the Christian church , by mingling the civil and ecclesiastical states and laws together ) there being in his time a great increase of Christians , through the ministry of the gospel , and a great confluence of them to his imperial city for the words sake , he wrote to Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia , in a special letter , wherein he desired him withal diligence and speed to procure fifty volumes of the scriptures to be written in parchment well and legibly , and in such a bigness or volume as Might be carried with greatest ease ; for she further teaching and instructing of those that came to attain the knowledge of the Christian religion : judging it most meet , that Christian persons should be instructed in the doctrine of Christ . 

and though afterwards , when the suffering times of the church began to be over , Christians became more car••l and secure ( and that in the very days of Constantine ) and so began to decline the word of faith , and to seek after philosophy ; yet had God in all the ages of his church some of his servants , who did reject it , and did cleave only to the word : among which , i shall only for the present , produce the testimonies of Berno , who lived above six hundred years ago , and Zuinglius of latte• times . 

Berno who lived about the year 1008 , and was a man furnished with all sorts of learning , saith , that he had for many years rejected a••ung the figments of the poets and the histories of the heathens , and the study of secular letters , and had converted the whole intention of his mind in the word of God , and the divine things contained therein : and accordingly , he taught no other doctrine to any . 

hularicus Zuinglius also pastor of Z•rich in helvet•ae ,  who had been educated in all kind of learning , and was after through faith and the teaching of God an eminent instrument in his church , he saith thus of himself ; when ( saith he ) i being yet a youth , was exercised in all sorts of learning , i can truly say , that i did not profit less than the rest of my equals : but when about seven years ago , i betook myself to the study of the holy scriptures , than the things that i had before sacked in , or learned from philosophers and divines , did procure me so much trouble , that being then moved by the authority of the scriptures , i judged that all those things were to be cast away and Counted as dung , and that the true mind of God was only to be received from his pure and simple word . And therefore i began humbly to entreat the Lord , that he would vouchsafe me his own light : by which means it shortly came to pass , that the reading of the holy scripture did much delight and please me ; and they being nakedly and alone propounded , did flow unto me with more ease , then if i had read them divided and distracted with variety of comments . and as he rejected philosophy wholly , and entertained the word , so did he only teach this word to faithful C•ristians , who are the only true school of Christ in the world . 

now by all this it appears , that the schools of the prophets and apostles , and of Christ himself the head of them , and of the most faithful Christians , that followed Christ , in the first and latter ages , were in no sort like the schools in the present universities , where human learning , according to the statutes of the universities , prevails for the first seven years , and they think youth cannot be made good Christians , except they be first made good heathens . 

the schools of the prophets and apostles would not meddle with the philosophy of the heathen , but led the children and youth presently to the word of God , and therein to the true knowledge of God in Christ : but these schools first lead youth from God and his word several years together , to the corrupt reason , wisdom , notions , conceptions , yea to the idolatry , blasphemy , atheism , lusts , filthiness , and villainies of the cursed heathen , that thereby ( in a strange and Antichristian method ) they May be the fit to know and understand the scriptures . 

the schools of the prophets , taught only Moses and the prophets to the Jewish youth , and the schools of the apostles taught Christ only and his gospel to the children of Christians : but the universities lead men both from Moses and from Christ , both from the law and the gospel , to the heathen , to make men hereby able Christians and divines . 

the Queen of the South came from the utmost parts of the earth , to hear the wisdom of Solomon ; and the universities leave Christ , who is infinitely greater and wiser than Solomon , and go to the utmost parts of the earth for wisdom there . so that in these universities , there hath been the greatest apostasy and withdrawing from Christ , and the greatest dishonour and disparagement offered to him , and his gospel , as ever was known . 

for is it not a matter of greatest wonder and amazement , that after that word which was with God , and was God , and is God blessed for ever , hath been manifested in the flesh , and that flesh of his hath been justified by the spirit , to have the fullness of the godhead dwelling in it bodily : and that this wonderful person hath come to his church , in the same common nature with it , filled with all the righteousness , wisdom , truth , power , life , peace and joy , and all the things of God : i say is it not strange , that he who alone comprehends the fullness of all things and in whom are hide all the infinite treasures of divine and heavenly wisdom and knowledge , that he alone should not be Counted sufficient and enough , no not by those who pretend his name , to make us wise to salvation ( which is the only true , excellent , and necessary wisdom in the world ) and to make the man of God perfect , and the whole church of God complete : but to the great dishonour of Christ , yea , to the very rejection of Christ , the children of Christians must be led from the doctrine of Christ ▪ the son of the living God , to the doctrine and disciplines of the wretched , filthy , abominable , wicked and damned heathen and to spend the prime and flower of their youth in these things ? Who but Antichrist himself could have brought in and set up such an abomination of desolation in the church of God ? 

and yet for the better credit of all things , must these be them , that their divinity cannot be called the doctrine of Christ , but of Antichrist , being wholly contrary to the word of faith . 

and therefore Mr. Simpson was the more to blame to flatter them in their evils , and to deceive the world , in appropriating to them the glorious title of the schools of the prophets , who are in all things so contrary and contradictory to them . 

now the sum and certainty of this matter , is this ; that the congregations of believers , where only the word of the gospel is truly taught according to the ministration of the spirit , whether to youth or men , they under the new testament are answerable to the schools of the prophets , under the old , who only taught Moses and the prophets : and the universities , wherein philosophy is first taught the youth , and after divinity , and then both are mingled together , to the utter perverting and corrupting the gospel of Christ ; i say , these universities in the time of the gospel , are answerable to the high-places in the time of the law , where a doctrine and worship prevailed which was not according to God's word , but man's will : and where Judaism , and heathenism were mingled together into one mongrel religion most odious and abominable to God and his persons : and so the universities in the time of the gospel , are only answerable to the high places in the time of the law : but not at all to the schools of the prophets , as Mr. Simpson pretends . 

and now for the conclusion of this matter ( which i reckon , to be of great concernment for the true church to be thoroughly instructed in : ) i shall bring forth the testimony of some godly men : of whom some show how the schools and universities of Christians came first to be corrupted , to wit , by departing from the plain word of the gospel , and bringing in philosophy : and another foretells the reformation of the schools of Christians , to wit , by rejecting philosophy again , and bringing in the word of faith : all which will serve as a confirmation of what hath been already spoken . 

Matthias parisiensis a Bohemian by nation , who lived about the year 1380. wrote a large book against Antichrist , whrein he affirms that Antichrist had seduced all universities and colleges of learned men ; so that now they teach no sincere doctrine , neither give any true light to Christians through their teaching ; to wit , they being all corrupted through philosophy , and having through that corrupted all divinity . 

and John Hus , that humble and faithful servant of Jesus Christ , and blessed martyr , saith , that Antichrist hath seduced all carnal Christians from divine wisdom , which is full of salvation and the holy spirit , to the wisdom and science of men and of the Princes of this world , which ( Wisdom and science ) he hath exceedingly enlarged and increased , and made authentical , and very gainful of riches and honours in this world : that so by this means , divine wisdom and science Might be neglected of Christians , and grow old , and be covered over , and be accounted as vile and unprofitable by them ; and that , only that which is high with men ( to wit , human learning ) Might be reckoned glorious , and excellent , and of great authority with Christian persons . 

the same Hus saith , that this human learning , wisdom and knowledge , Antichrist doth perfectly subject to himself and his service , he being more mighty and subtle through the operation of Satan , than all worldly men , whom with all their learning , disciplines , and abilities , he strongly sub•ugates to himself , and doth especially serve himself of these : wherefore saith Job chap. 41. sub ipso erunt radii solis , the heams of the sun shall be under him , that is , the holy scripture , and the chief doctors and teachers of it : and he shall prepare gold as dirt , that is , he shall have all the wisdom and learning of men at his pleasure , and in great readiness , and with much ease shall gain it to himself . And Antichrist by such men ( saith i. Hus ) doth make his body or church strong against the saints of God , and well-favoured and glorious , that it May appear very taking to the world , and May win in all men to it that are not taught of God and renewed by his spirit . and thus Antichrist serves himself of all learning and learned men ; whereas divine learning , and the teaching of God he could never in any measure subject to himself , but is always rejected , discovered , and overcome by it . 

Martin Luther saith , that whosoever it was , whether Alexander of Hales , or Thomas of Aquine , who first instituted universities ; he was a star fallen from heaven to earth , who received the key of the bottomless pit , and opened it , and brought forth into the church philosophy , long ago dead and damned by the doctrine of the apostles ; and from the smoke of the bottomless pit , that is , philosophy , came forth locusts on the earth ; that is , saith he , populus vniversitatum è philosophia natus , the persons of the universities , born and bred of philosophy , &c. thus Luther . 

Abbas , Joachim Calaber , who was long before these , and flourished about the year 1230 , in his commentary on Jeremy the prophet , speaks to this purpose , that the sixt angel , mentioned , revel. opens the bottomless pit , and brings out philosophy into the church ; and out of the smoke of this doctrine locusts proceeded , and are spread over all the church into every fruitful place ; and these locusts he saith , are scholastici & magistri , qui nunc facietenus blandiuntur ut decipiant , nunc caudetenus feriunt unsubvertant simplices & incautos ; that is , the locusts are scholars and Masters , according to the academical degrees , who sometimes flatter with their countenances to deceive , and sometimes strike with their tails , that they May subvert the simple and unadvised . And to these scholars and Masters , the ignorant and common persons resort , and they open to them the old cisterns of heathenish learning and disciplines , long ago stopped up by the doctrine of the apostles : and these cisterns they open , by teaching philosophy to the persons : but they shut up the living fountain of saving water , that is , the word of faith : but the spirit of the Lord ( saith he ) in the following prophets whom the Lord shall raise up , idola studiorum carnalium visitabit , shall visit the idols of carnal studies , maintained and kept up by secular stipends . 

further he saith , that as Antichrist brings forth his mark , which is philosopical doctrine in the church of Christ , and by this mark all his teachers and persons are known ; so there shall rise up against these , such as have the mark of Christ , or the sign of thou in their foreheads , that is , the open and manifest doctrine of Christ crucified . And as the signs of Moses destroyed the signs of the magicians so shall the word or preaching of the cross destroy all philosophical doctrine , and human and secular learning out of the church . and then the children , and youth , and , men of all ages , sorts and conditions , shall be taught no other doctrine in the church of Christ , then that which is found in the scriptures , even in the writings of the prophets and apostles , and that not according to any human and philosophical understanding , but according to the teaching and mind of the spirit . And God by all his true servants shall destroy the studies of carnal doctors , and Masters in divinity , and shall dissipate all secular and philosophical learning , by the word of truth in their mouths . And so shall the church be reform aright , when the doctrine of Christ only shall be received and esteemed of , and shall live and flourish among Christians . 

and thus as Antichrist hath laid aside the scriptures , and all true spiritual and divine learning out of his schools and universities , and hath brought into them , instead thereof , philosophy and human learning ( and so these schools are most unlike to the schools of the prophets ) so in due time , when God shall undertake to reform his church , all this sort of learning shall be cast out again as dirt and dung , and the plain word of the gospel only shall prevail and flourish among the Christian persons : which time the Lord hasten for his elects sake . 

2.  Error . 

That they who have endeavoured to pull down schools , have always been men who were found enemies to religion : so Julian the apostate shut up the doors of the schools , because he would have all religion to go down . 

Answer . 

True it is , that they who have sought the subversion of Christian schools , wherein the doctrine of the gospel is purely taught , without the mixture of philosophy and heathenism , they all have been , and are very enemies to the true religion : but they that seek to put down heathenish schools , and to erect Christian , or to reform the schools of heathen into Christian , or to remove heathenism out of Christian schools , they are not before God and good men enemies to true religion , but the great friends of it , nay , they that call heathenish schools by the name of Christian , that they May still remain with the better credit in their heathenism without any true reformation according to the gospel . i rather judge them to be enemies to the true religion , and friends only to their profit , preferment and ends . 

Julian indeed did forbid that Christians should be instructed in the disciplines of the gentiles , but saith Sozomen ( The writer of the ecclesiastical history ) he did this , because he thought , that by those disciplines men Might attain to a great faculty to persuade , which advantage he would not have the Christians to gain to the help of their religion . now certainly this was done , as Socrates ( Another writer of the ecclesiastical history ) doth acknowledge , by the singular providence of God , for seeing than Christians had begun to degenerate from the gospel , and to betake themselves to heathenish learning , Julian attribu••d all the glory and excellency of Christianity to that learning , and so thought with Mr. Simpson , that if human learning were denied to Christians , Christianity itself would soon be at end . Wherefore the Lord stirred up Julian to put down the doctrine of the heathen in the schools of Christians that it Might appear to all the world , that as the true Christian religion is not helped by human learning , so neither is it hindered by the want of it : and that there is more light knowledge , truth , wisdom , power , utterance given to Christians by the unction of the spirit alone , which all receive who believe , then through all heathenish disciplines : and also that it Might be manifest that true Christianity is founded on faith in Christ , and the gift of his spirit only , and not at all on human learning . for what human learning had Peter and John ? and yet in what wisdom and authority did they , being ignorant and unlearned men , reprove , convince , and silence the greatest and ablest men of the Jews ? And what human learning had Steven , and yet he confuted the libertines , and Cyrenians , and Alexandrians , and all the philosophers of Cilicia , and Asia , which disputed with him ; and they all were not able to resist ( Not the human learning but ) the wisdom and spirit by which he spoke . and Christ hath promised all his persons , that when for his names sake they should be brought before Kings and rulers , who usually have the greatest accomplishment of human learning , that then they should not study beforehand what to say ; for he would give them in that very hour a mouth and wisdom which none of their adversaries should be able to resist . and the power and virtue of the gospel , and the wisdom , knowledge , and utterance of God's spirit is more gloriously manifest in plain men then in learned men ; for in the one , the grace and virtues of the spirit are attributed to human learning ; but in the other , to God only , who dwells in them . Wherefore that the wisdom , and knowledge , and light , and power of the word of faith in true Christians Might not be attributed to human learning , God stirred up an enemy to Christian religion to be so serviceable to it as to hinder heathenish doctrine from being taught in the schools of Christians , that so the c•urch Might be restored to be , as in the days of its youth , when there flourished in it only the simple and plain word of faith , without any intermingling philosophy or human doctrine . and if Constantine had made such an order in his time , Julian had not had such an opportunity to have renounced Christianity , and turned heathen . for Julian being instructed in the philosophy and disciplines of the heathen by Libanius his tutor , by this means he came to love philosophy better than the gospel , and so by degrees turned from Christianity to heathenism , which May be a fair warning to all Christians , that they suffer not their children to be so educated , lest at last , with Julian , they ( At least in their hearts ) loath and reject the gospel , and become with him apostates and pagans' . 

And hence it is most evident , that heathenish philosophy is so far from being a profitable study for the children of Christians , that it is very dangerous for them to be so educated , as Socrates is forced to confess ; where he saith , for Christians to be thoroughly instructed in the disciplines of the gentiles , there is none will grant that this is profitable to the Christian religion : for it is not without danger for Christians to be taught in the learning of the heathens , seeing this teacheth that there are many gods . and therefore saith he , the doctrine of the heathen is not approved by Christ or any of his apostles or disciple . 

Wherefore said Luther , my counsel is , that a youth should shun philosophy , and school divinity , as the death of his soul . 

3.  Error . 

That the knowledge of heavenly things cannot come to us but by things on earth : and that all divinity is swaddled in human learning . 

Answer . 

I conceive that all Christians at the first reading of this , will acknowledge that this doctrine is not divine , but philosophical . 

The philosophers say , that nothing is in the understanding , but that which is first in the sense , ( Which is proportionable to that which Mr. Simpson speaks ) and yet they know not what they say , when they say so . but let us consider if this be so : that the knowledge of heavenly things cannot come to us but by things on earth ; then how shall we know the mystery of God , even the father , and the mystery of Christ , who is God manifest in the flesh ? or how shall the mystery of faith , and of our union with Christ through faith into one flesh and spirit with him be known ? Or the new birth , and new creature , which hath all things new in it , and all those new things , the things of God ? Or how shall the free justification of a sinner through the death of Christ , and his reconciliation to God be known , with all the rest of the things of the gospel , seeing nothing on earth can reveal the least part of these things ? And if the world by wisdom , that is , its philosophy , knew not God , how can it by that wisdom reveal God and his things which it never knew ? nay , the apostle doth clearly testify against this carnal and corrupt doctrine , in 1 cor. 2.7 , 8. saying , we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery , even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world unto our glory , which none of the Princes of this world knew ; and by Princes of this world , he means not only worldly powers , as Chrysostom affirms , but also philosophers and orators , who often obtained the chief government among the nations . God hath wrapped up his gospel , saith Paul , into such hidden wisdom , that they are never able to search into it , or to discover the least part of it , seeing God contrived it all , and appointed it before the world unto our glory : and all their knowledge is but from the world . Yea , he adds , eye hath not seen , nor ear heard , neither have ever entered into the heart of man the things which God hath prepared for them that love him ; in which words God hath shut out the natural man for ever , with all his study , knowledge , abilities , and attainments , from the having any right understanding of his kingdom , or the things of it : for the eye of man hath not seen them at any time , nor his ear heard them , nor hath any knowledge of them entered into his heart : so far is this doctrine from truth , that the knowledge of heavenly things cannot come to us but by things on earth . but the apostle shows how the faithful come to know these high , holy , spiritual , and eternal things , which lie infinitely beyond the knowledge and discovery of all men , to wit , by the spirit , saying , but God hath revealed them to us by the spirit ; for the spirit searcheth all things , yea the deep things of God . so that the persons of God know the things of the gospel , not by earthly things , as Mr. Simpson affirms , nor by philosophy and outward wisdom , which only reaches to earthly things , but by the spirit . 

Farther , if all divinity be swaddled in human learning : then i do affirm that all such divinity hath no great depth ; seeing the bottom of human learning is easily fathomed . 

But can any Christian heart think , that all true divinity , which comprehends in it the height , and breadth , and length , and depth of the love of God , which passeth knowledge , and all the unsearchable riches of Christ , and all the infinite and incomprehensible treasures of his wisdom , power , and righteousness , of his love , goodness , truth , faithfulness , and of all the fullness of the godhead , wherewith he is filled , can be contained and wrapped up in the narrow and scant bounds of human learning ? How much truer doctrine had it been to have taught , that all true divinity is contained in God and his word , and that we can know nothing of God aright but by his word , which holy men have spoken by the spirit , and believers do receive by faith , and out of this word . all the learning in the world doth not contain in itself , neither can it reveal to us aright , the least thing of God , or of his mind and will . 

But i conceive he Might speak thus , that all divinity is wrapped up in human learning , to deter the common persons from the study and enquiry after it , and to cause them still to expect all divinity from the clergy , who by their education have attained to that human learning which the plain persons are destitute of : for it is the old and new design of Antichrist to make the persons depend on the clergy for all divinity , though the persons have the scriptures as near them , and the grace of God usually nearer to them then they ; seeing God resists the proud , and gives grace to the humble . 

Again , if all divinity be swaddled in human learning , then must it sadly follow , that all who want human learning , must needs also want divinity ; and then , how shall poor plain persons , who live in lawful callings , and have not the leisure to attain human learning , how shall they do to be saved ? Or what help must they have to teach them divinity , who have not opportunity to gain human learning ? 

And yet farther , if all divinity be swaddled in human learning ; then Christ and his apostles had no true divinity ; for they had no human learning to swaddle it in , nor would have none ; shall we say now according to Mr.  Simpson's doctrine , that they had no divinity ? I do with all boldness affirm that this doctrine is contrary to the Christian faith . 

4.  Error . 

That Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel , and God took him so fitted , ( to wit , with human learning ) and made him an able instrument in his church . 

Answer . 

Not so , but God took Paul , not a good scholar , and so made him an able preacher ; but he took him as a blasphemer , and persecutor , and as a cruel and enraged enemy against Christ and his truth , and persons , and magnified the riches of his mercy by converting such an one : and Paul having much forgiven him , loved much , and through his great love , was the fit to preach the gospel , according to that of Christ to Peter ; Peter , dost thou love me ! feed my sheep . yea Paul himself ascribes his painful and profitable preaching , not to his learning and education under Gamaliel ( which also was , or aught to have been only in the law and prophets , as hath been proved ) but to the free grace of God bestowed on him , saying , i laboured more abundantly than they all , yet not i , but the grace of God in me : so that Paul became so excellent a preacher , not by his fitting through human learning , but through the grace of God . 

and here i shall mind Mr. Simpson of a passage which i have read in Chrysostom , which comes home to this matter in hand ; it is in the third homily on the first epistle to the Corinthians , where he saith , that God had no need at the beginning of the gospel of learned men , and sophisters to preach the gospel , and to convince the world with syllogisms ; but did only use the word of faith in the mouths of plain handicrafts men , and artificers : wherefore ( saith he ) when the Greeks shall accuse the disciple of Christ , as ignorant of letters , and unlearned , let us ourselves who are Christians , accuse them more . Neither let any one say that Paul was wise and learned ; but let us say , their men were wise and learned , but ours were rude and ignorant ; for in thus doing ( according to the truth ) we shall have the greater advantage against them . For if Paul were unlearned , and yet overcame learned Plato , his victory was the greater , and the grace of God the more glorious . * now this i say , ( saith he ) because the other day , i heard a certain Christian discoursing ridiculously with a Greek , each of them in their discourse prejudicing their own cause : for the Greek spoke that which the Christian should have said , and the Christian spoke that which the Greek should have said . For the question between them , being touching Paul and Plato , the Greek endeavoured to prove that Paul was rude and unlearned , but the Christian through his simplicity did endeavour to prove that Paul was more learned and eluquent than Plato . and so the Greek should obtain the victory , if the Christians reasons should prevail . For if Paul were more learned than Plato , then Might men object that he overcame not the world through grace , but through eloquence . wherefore that which the Christian spoke , made for the Greek , and that which the Greek spoke ; made for the Christian . wherefore ( he saith ) when the Greeks shall say the apostles were rude , and unlearned , poor , mean simple , obscure persons , let us acknowledge it as the truth ; for this is not their reproach but their glory ; that being such , they yet overcame the learned men , the wise men , the philosophers , the rhetoricians , the orators , the Princes , and all the world , as if they had not been men . For when any thing is done above the state and power of nature , this doth exceedingly manifest and magnify the grace of God . 

and so it appears that Chrysostom was of another mind in this matter touching Paul , then Mr. Simpson ; and that Paul was of another mind touching himself . 

now seeing Mr. Simpson doth here insinuate that human learning fits a man to the ministry of the gospel : and seeing this also is the opinion of all the carnal and unbelieving persons , i do desire them to consider what some godly men have spoken clearly from the word of God in this matter . 

Chrysostom ( who knew the mystery of the gospel more clearly than any of the ancient writers ) in his comment on the first epistle to the Corinthians , doth wholly exclude human learning from contributing any thing , either to the speaking or receiving the gospel . for ( saith he ) to believe in him that was crucified and buried , and to be fully persuaded that he rose again , and sits at the right hand of God , and hath all power in heaven and earth given to him , and that he is made of God , to the whole church , wisdom , righteousness , sanctification and redemption ; this doctrine stands not in need of human wisdom and reasonings , but of faith only , and that both in them that speak it , and in them that receive it . for the apostles did not proceed in this matter in outward wisdom , but in faith , and so became more wise and excellent than the worldly wise : and so much the more , as it is a greater matter to receive the things of God by faith , then to be persuaded into them by the force of argument . 

he adds also , that to the receiving the doctrine of the gospel , neither is the wise man profited thing by his wisdom , neither is the plain man hindered any thing by his ignorance ; yea , if i May speak a wonderful thing ( saith he ) ignorance is more fit and ready to receive the gospel than wisdom . and a shepherd , and a ploughman will sooner receive the gospel and submit to it , than a scholar who lives in the strength of human wisdom and reason . 

he farther saith there , that where the wisdom of God is , ( as it is in the gospel ) there is no need of man's wisdom , as where the sun is , there is no need of a candle . 

and he concludes there this matter thus . that the preaching of the gospel is a heavenly thing , and that human wisdom and learning cannot help herein , but rather hinder . And that therefore when Christ sent forth the first teachers of the gospel , he took not wise and learned philosophers , that the cross of Christ Might not be made void , and that the faith of Christians should not stand in the wisdom of man , but in the power of God : but he chose plain fishermen , tent-makers , publicans , obscure , simple , poor , contemptible , ignorant and unlearned men ; and these overcame Kings , Princes , persons , nations , Greeks , philosophers , orators , sophisters , they overcame the ancient manners , customs , and the very religion of the world , also their laws , judgements , divers sorts of punishments , and innumerable kinds of deaths ; and by all this ( saith he ) it was manifest that their preaching was not in human w•sdom , but in the grace of God . 

and thus doth Chrysostom affirm , and prove that human learning doth not fit men to the ministry of the gospel , but is rather a hindrance thereunto , and that the grace of God only fits them for this heavenly work . 

hear also what Wickliff saith to this matter , in his book entitled , the path way to perfect knowledge ; where he showeth , that it is not human learning that helps to understand the scriptures , and to profit in the study of them , but something more high and heavenly ; his own words as these . he whose heart is full of love , comprehendeth without any error , the manifold , abundance , and largest teaching of God's scripture ; for Paul saith , the fullness of the law is charity ; and in another place , the end of the law is charity of clean heart , and good conscience , and of faith unfeigned ; and Christ saith , thou shalt love thy Lord God of all thy heart , and of all thy soul , and of all thy mind , and thy neighbour as thyself : for in these two commandments , hangeth all the law and the prophets : and as the root of all evil is covetousness , so the root of all good is love . 

Charity by which we love God , and the neighbour , holdeth surely all the greatness and largeness of God's speeches . Therefore , if we have not leisure to search all the holy scriptures , and to pierce into all the privities of them ; hold thou love , whereon all things hang , and so shalt thou hold that which thou learnest there , and also that which thou learnest not . For if thou know charity , thou knowest something , whereon also that hangeth which thou knowest not . And in that that thou understandest in scripture , love is open ; and in that that thou understandest not , love is hide . Therefore he that holdeth love in virtues or good life , holdeth both that which is open , and that which is hide in God's word . 

and after speaking to the clergy , he saith , therefore worldly fools , do ye first repent of your sins , and forsake pride and covetousness , and be ye meek , and fear ye God in all things , and love your neighbour as yourself , and then shall ye profit in the study of holy writ . and this is a far other way to understand the scriptures then human learning . 

and after , he speaking of the abominations of the university of Oxford , saith thus , the fourth abomination , is , that it is now purposed to hinder Christian men from learning freely God's law , till they have spent nine or ten years at art , or philosophy , which comprehendeth many strong errors of heathen men , against the Christian belief . It seemeth well that God will not cease from vengeance , till it and other things be punished sore . For it seemeth that worldly clerks , and feignedly religious , do this under pretence , that simple men of wit and knowledge know not God's law to preach it generally against sins in the realm . But wit ye , worldly clerks , and feignedly religious , that God both can , and May if it liketh him , speed simple men out of the university , as much to know the holy scriptures , as Masters in the university . Wherefore ( he saith ) it is no great matter , though men of good will be not poisoned with heathen men's error nine or ten years together ; but let them live well , and study the holy scriptures , and preach truly and freely against open sins till death . thus he . Whereby he declares that the scriptures are not to be understood by human learning , but by faith and love : and that human learning , doth not prepare men to the knowledge of the word , but rather corrupt them with heathen men's errors . 

Tindal also , that apostle of England ( as Fox calleth him ) and blessed martyr , speaks thus to this matter ; they will say yet more shamefully ( meaning the clergy ) that no man can understand the scriptures without Philautia , that is to say , philosophy : a man must first be well seen in Aristotle , ere he can understand the scripture , say they . Now ( saith he ) Aristotle's doctrine is , that the world was without beginning , and shall be without end , and that the first man never was , and the last never shall be : and that God doth all of necessity , neither careth what we do . without this doctrine ( saith he ironically ) how could we understand the scripture , that saith , God create the world of naught , and God worketh all things of his free will , and for a secret purpose , and that we shall rise again , and God will have accounts of all that we have done in this life . 

Aristotle saith , give a man a law , and he hath power of himself to do , or fulfil the law , and becometh righteous with working righteously . but Paul and all the scripture saith , that the law doth but utter sin only , and helpeth not ; neither hath any man power to do the law , till the spirit of God be given him through faith in Christ . Is it a not madness then to say that we could not understand the scripture without Aristotle ? moreover Aristotle's felicity and blessedness standeth in avoiding all tribulations , and in riches , health , honour , worship , friends , and authority , which felicity pleaseth our spirituality well now without these and a thousand such like points , couldst thou not understand scripture , which saith , that righteousness cometh by Christ , and not of man's will : and how that virtues are the fruits and gifts of God's spirit , and that Christ blesseth us in tribulations , persecution , and adversity . how i say ; couldst thou understand the scriptures without philosophy , in as much as Paul , col. 2. warned them to beware lest any man spoil them ( that is to say , rob them of their faith in Christ ) through philosophy and deceitful vanities , and through the traditions of men , and ordinances after the world , and not after Christ ? — and after — but now ye drive them from God's word , and will let no man come thereto , until he have been two years' Master of art . First they nuzzel them in sophistry , & in bene fundatum ; and there corrupt they their judgements with apparent arguments , and with alleging to them texts of logic , of natural philosophy , of metaphysic and moral philosophy , and of all manner of books of Aristotle , and of all manner of doctors , which yet they never saw , &c.  

again , huldricus Zuinglius speaks thus to this matter . we must needs be taught of God and not of men ( to wit in the knowledge of the gospel ) for this is the saying of the eternal truth , which knows not how to lie . joh. 6.  But and if you do not firmly believe that you May be taught of God , human doctrines being utterly rejected , ye are yet destitute of true faith . neither have i myself devised this thing ; for Hilary also is of this opinion , but there is no need of his testimony , when we hear that both Christ , and all the apostles were of the same mind . And here the whole use of school divinity falls to the ground , and whatsoever is drawn out of the philosophers . for all these things do lean on human reasons , which when they have once possessed a man's mind , he than thinks that the heavenly doctrine is wholly to be directed and framed according to the rule of human learning , which he judges to be most firm and infallible . Which thing they sufficiently discover in their words , saying , ubi cessat philosophus , illic incipit theologus , where the philosopher ceases , there the divine begins ; whereby they signify thus much , that he is able to judge most rightly in divine things , who comes most furnished with human learning . As if so be the light of our will were more excellent , and more perspicuous than the divine glory ; when yet we hear Christ saying , i receive not glory of men ; but i know you , that you have not the love of God in you , joh. 5.  For they who have the love of God , cleave to no word so constantly as to the word of God ; seeing this is the light that enlightens every man that comes into the world . But no man is able to prove that philosophy is such a light . For which of the philosophers instructed the apostles ? Those simple , and in the judgement of the world , those foolish men , unskilful , and unlearned fisherman , were elected and instituted of God , and then were sent forth to preach , that they Might become the Masters and teachers of the whole world : to wit , that God according to the saying of Paul , Might make ashamed all the strength of the world , and all the wisdom of the world . thus he . 

Luther also saith , it is an error to say , that a man cannot be a divine but through Aristotle ; nay , saith he , a man cannot be a divine except he become one , without Aristotle . and again , a man becomes a divine by living , yea by dying , and by being damned ( to wit in his own sense ) not by studying , reading , or speculating . and again , in holy things we must not dispute or play the philosophers ; but in divinity we must only hear and believe , and resolve in our heart that God is true , though the things he speaks in his word seem never so absurd to reason . and again , we shall then do well , if we leaving logic or philosophy in their own sphere , do learn to speak with new tongues in the kingdom of faith , without all sphere . For the affection of faith is to be exercised in the kingdom of faith , and not a philosophical understanding . 

and thus have these godly men held forth and proved from the word , that human learning is rather a hindrance than a help to the ministry of the gospel , and doth rather unfit than fit men for it : and that the grace and teaching of God only , prepares and enables men to this divine work , and no human thing at all . 

wherefore let all true Christians be advised , that human learning is so far from fitting men for the gospel and the ministry thereof , as is suggested , that indeed there is nothing in greater enmity to Christ crucified ; nor more contrary to the word of the cross , than that ; yea nothing in all the world hath been such an introducer , favourer , supporter , and inlarger of antichrists kingdom , as human reason , learning , and philosophy ; this hath brought in all the hypocrisy , superstition , false doctrine , false worship , sects , schisms , divisions , which have at any time prevailed in the church during all the reign of Antichrist : and the gospel of Christ , and the true belief and practice of it , hath not had at any time a greater and more subtle and plausible enemy than this . yea farther , the gross ignorance and blindness of the rude world , hath not so perverted and falsified the word of the gospel , nor rendered it such contradiction and resistance , nor hath brought such annoyance , to the faithful who have received and confessed it , as human science hath done ; for this hath enabled men stoutly to oppose the truth , and subtly to defend error as the truth ; this hath made men bold and cunning to suppress God's mind from the world , and to hold forth their own mind to them , as if it were God's , under the pretence of the outward letter of the word , and a multitude of other evils have sprung from this corrupt fountain . wherefore the apostle Paul is so far from encouraging Christians to betake themselves to human learning to fit them for the gospel , that he by the spirit utterly forbids Christians heathenish philosophy , lest they should be spoilt through the vanity of it , and be led away from Christ . and thus in this matter hath Mr. Simpson manifestly departed from the doctrine of the scriptures , and of faithful men who have spoken from it . 

5.  Error . 

That men's hatred to God , doth as well appear in their hatred to human learning as if they hated the scriptures . 

Answer . 

I conceive Mr.  Simpson's heart was hot within him , out of his great zeal to human learning ( The great goddess by which the university lives ) when he thus spoke ; and it appears he is very tender of the reputation and glory of it , who thus vindicates it , at as high a rate as the very scriptures . but Sir , do you know no more difference between the most precious word of our eternal Lord God , and his son Jesus Christ , and the foolish , corrupt , and stinking doctrine of men ? is there no more difference in your divinity , between the word of righteousness , life , and salvation , which God hath spoken by Christ , and Christ by his servants , and the word and doctrines of wretched men , full of sin , death , and destruction ? And if the law itself , given by the ministration of angels , loseth its glory before the gospel , as the apostle testifies ; how much more doth heathenish philosophy , brought forth , partly from the corrupt reason of man , and partly from the inspiration of the devil , become •oathsom & abominable before it for ever . And cannot we be enemies to this say y•u , without hating the blessed word of God ? Nay , the blessed word of God where it prevails in truth , doth make men to hate this , and to Count it loss , and dung , and filth , and the most loathsome baseness in the world , in comparison of itself . wherefore , through the grace of Christ , we will so love the scriptures , which are divine learning , as to hate human and heathenish learning for their sakes , seeing it hath put a veil of darkness in the church , over this glorious sun , the word of faith . 

6.  Error . 

that if the spirit teach without means , men May as well be without the ordinances , as without the universities and human learning . 

Answer . 

We do not say , that the spirit usually teacheth without means in the church of Christ ; but we say , he teacheth by means of his own appointing ; and how will Mr. Simpson prove by any scripture that universities and human learning , are means , which the spirit of God useth to teach his church by ? where did ever the Lord speak one word , that he would use the disciplines of the gentiles , as means whereby to teach men to know the mystery of Christ ? Wherefore this is strange doctrine , that arts and sciences are the means whereb• the spirit teacheth the church : for sure i am , the Lord never taught his church , either of the old , or the new testament by these means : only Antichrist hath taught his church after this manner , and hath set up human learning as an ordinance of God , yea , as an ordinance of the new testament to learn Christ by ; that Christians Might be trained upto know Christ the wisdom of God , by human learning the wisd••• of the world , which is in direct enmity to God . 

The chief ordinances whereby God helps his church are the word of faith , and the prayer of faith ; and by the ministration of the spirit , he begins , and carries on the salvation of this spiritual persons : and these ordinances the true church cannot want , neither doth God do any thing in his church without them . But the spiritual church , for aught that i could ever yet read in the word , May well want their divine ordinance of human learning , and yet not want any ordinance of God , that he hath appointed and sanctified for the use of his true church . 

7.  Error . 

That men now , are not to receive the spirit , in that immediate way to understand the scriptures , in which it was given to them who wrote the scriptures . 

Answer . 

Surely Mr. Simpson will not deny , that the spirit is given to that whole church which is the body of Christ ; seeing Paul saith , if any man have not Christ's spirit , he is none of his , he is no member of his . Now the spirit is always given to whomsoever it is given , by the father and the son , as Christ taught his disciple , promising them that the father would send the spirit to them in his name ; and also , that he himself would send it to them from the father . and was this promise only made to them , and not to all the faithful also , who should believe in Christ through their word ? doth not Paul say , rom. 12.13 . of the whole church , that by one spirit we are all baptised into one body , and are all made to drink into one spirit ▪ he saith also to the Galatians chap. 4. because ye are sons , God hath sent the spirit of his son into your hearts , crying , abba father . and thus it is manifest that the whole church of believers , and every true member thereof , do receive the spirit of God . and do they not receive in alike immediately from God ▪ who can give the spirit of God to man , but God himself ▪ when God promised to , pour out his spirit in the last days upon all flesh , did he name any difference in the pouring of it out , saying , some shall receive it immediately , and some mediately ? No , but all that are Counted worthy to receive the spirit of God , do receive it alike immediately from him ; neither hath Christ left any lieutenant or deputy in the world , to give his spirit to men in his absence : but he himself is always present in his true church to the end of the world , both to teach them , and to give them his spirit . he is too much in the darkness of Antichrist , that denies this . 

It is manifest then , that all the true church alike receive the spirit of God and that they all receive it alike immediately from God , seeing no man nor angel can give the spirit of God , but God himself gives his own spirit to whom he pleases by his own word , which he himself ministers by his own spirit ; and by this spirit did holy men speak the scripture , and by this spirit only do holy men of God understand the scripture , as Paul saith , 1 cor. 2 12.  now we have received not the spirit of the world , but the spirit which is of God , that we Might know the things that are freely given to us of God , among which his word hath a chief place : and after saith , that by the spirit they had the mind of Christ , which others want , who yet have the same letter of the word , and are destitute of the spirit . and so as the faithful spoke the word by the spirit of faith , so through the same spirit of faith only , so given , do the faithful understand it . 

And though this thing be clear in itself , yet i judge it convenient to add here the testimonies of Luther and Calvin in this matter Luther saith , the scriptures are not to be understood but by that very spirit by which they were writ , which spirit can be nowhere found more readily and effectually , then in those holy letters of his which he hath written . 

and Calvin saith , the same spirit that spoke by the mouth of the prophets , it is necessary that that should pierce into our hearts , to persuade us that they faithfully delivered that which was committed to them of God . so that we must necessarily have the same spirit to know his mind , that they had to utter his mind . Wherefore it is evident that Mr. Simpson is not orthodox in this point neither . 

8.  Error . 

That men now are to get knowledge ( to wit of the scriptures ) by studies , and human learning , and not by inspiration . 

Answer . 

This doctrine carries the visible mark of Antichrist upon it ; for it is only the inspiration of God , that inables a man to know the things of God , and not a man's study or human learning : it is not in this case , in him that wills or runs , but in God that shows mercy . wherefore Christ hath said , no man knows the son but the father , and he to whomsoever the father will re•eal him ; wherefore Paul prays for the Ephesians , that God would give them the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Christ : without which spirit of revelation ; Christ and the father can never be known . what can human learning , and the studies of men find out of the mystery of Christ , which was hidden from ages and generations , as Paul testifies , till the spirit revealed it ? Yea , Christ hath taught , that God hides these things of the gospel from the wise and prudent , that is , the studying and learned men , and reveals them to babes ; and that this is his good pleasure so to do . And so no man can know Christ and his gospel , and what is the faith , hope , and love of the gospel , but by the most present teaching and revelation of God himself by his spirit . wherefore to deny the inspiration of God's spirit now , and to ascribe all knowledge of the word of God to men's studies , and to human learning , is the most gross and palpable doctrine of Antichrist and his prophets ; whereas , all the persons of God are taught of God himself , in all the things of God , as Christ hath said ; because no man by his own studies and pains can attain thereunto . 

and in this matter , i shall also add the testimony of Luther , and Latimer . Luther saith , no man sees one jot or tittle in the scriptures , but he that hath the spirit of God : for all men have a darkened heart , in such sort , that if they could speak , and knew how to bring forth all things of the scripture , yet have they not any true sense or right knowledge of them . For ( saith he ) the spirit is required to the understanding of the whole scripture , and of every part thereof . 

and Latimer saith , the carnal and philosophical understanding of the scriptures , is not that wisdom of God which is hide from the wise , and revealed to little ones . 

9  Error . 

that human learning is as the outworks to the fort of the gospel , and as the outer court to the temple of the gospel ; and so if you will keep the fort well , you must keep the outworks strong ; and if you will preserve the inner , you must look to the outer court . 

Answer . 

how highly hath Mr. Simpson honoured Socrates , Pythagoras , Plato and Aristotle's , &c. to make them a strong guard for the person of Christ ? and how highly hath he honoured their learning , to make it a defence for the gospel ? and how weak and feeble hath he sought to render the word of faith , that must be thus defended by the arts and disciplines of men , as not being able to stand alone , and to defend itself ? Doth this man truly believe in the son of the living God , who make him such an helpless idol ? or doth he believe the word of the gospel , which hath given eyes to the blind , and ears to the deaf , and feet to the lame , which hath raised the dead , and cast out devils , and commanded the winds and waves , and they have obeyed ? i say , doth he believe this word to be of God , which hath done the very works of God ? and yet openly affirms to the world , that it cannot maintain itself , or subsist without the help of philosophy ? is that word , which mightily and perfectly saves all the elect , and that in despite of the world and the devil , and the gates of hell , not able to save itself without human help ? must that word be secured by Aristotle , which delivers all the elect from sin , death and hell for ever ? Are grammar , r•thorick , logic , ethics , physics , metaphysics , mathematics , the weapons whereby we must defend the gospel ? is Mr. Simpson so ill a proficient in Christianity , that he hath not read , or doth not remember that of Paul , ephes. 6.12 . where he saith , we wrestle not against flesh and blood , but against principalities , against power , against the rulers of the darkness of this world , against spiritual wickedness in high places . 

Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God , that you May be able to withstand in the evil day , and having done all to stand . 

Stand therefore , having your loins gird about with truth , and having on the breast plate of righteousness . 

And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace . 

Above all , taking the shield of faith , wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked . 

And take the helmet of salvation , and the sword of the spirit , which is the word of God . 

Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit , and watching thereunto with all perseverance . 

Here now are the true Christian weapons , whereby he defends himself through the word , and defends the word against all the world . 

and the same Paul , in 2 cor. 10.3 . saith . 

For though we walk in the flesh , we do not war after the flesh . 

For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal , but mighty through God , to the pulling down of strong holds . 

Casting down imaginations , and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God , and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ . 

And having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience . 

so that the faithful do not defend the gospel by philosophy , as is heathenishly suggested ; but by the gospel they defend the gospel ; and the gospel hath in itself that wisdom , righteousness , strength , and those virtues which are infinitely able to defend itself against all the world , and against all the powers of darkness . and how contrary is this doctrine to Mr. Simpson's ? and thus much for his outworks to the gospel . 

now for his outer court to the gospel , i know no other outer court the gospel ever had then the law of Moses , which law was the preparation to the gospel , and the school Master to bring us unto Christ ; which human learning never was . But human learning is the outer court to antichrists temple , it is the schoolmaster to bring men to Antichrist . and thus would Mr. Simpson also turn the law out of its place , and set up human learning in the stead of the law , and so would make void both law and gospel for human learning sake ; surely one would think he hath some considerable advantage thereby , that he thus fences for it . 

10.  Error . 

but what is the bottom ( saith he ) of all this ( that is , of some men's appearing against human learning , as the unction of the ministry , and against the universities as the fountain of the ministry ) but this , that some say they are one with Christ , and as Christ hath the divine nature in him , so every believer also hath : and he that hath God in him , need not go to any man to learn . Whereas joh. 17.  Christ speaketh of believers as at an infinite distance from himself ; he their Lord , they his servants . He in glory they in the world . And if they be so united to Christ , than it will follow , that Christ is not the only begotten son of God ; and that Christ and we should be equal , and he not our Lord , &c.  

Answer . 

now doth not all this declare a most woeful ignorance of , and enmity to the gospel of God our saviour ? for is our union with Christ , the foundation of error ? or have true , believers no real union with Christ , but imaginary ? do not the saints partake of the divine nature ? doth not Peter expressly affirm it ; 2 pet. 1.4 . where he saith , exceeding great and precious promises are made to us that we thereby should be made partakers of the divine nature ? and what is the divine nature , but the very nature of God ? see Luther on the place . 

again , are believers , as he affirms , at an infinite distance from Christ ▪ if this were true , what sad news would it be to the church of God ? how can this doctrine agree with these scriptures ? that Christ May dwell in your hearts by faith : and Christ in you the hope of glory : and of him are ye in Christ Jesus : again saith Christ , i am the true vine , and ye are the branches : and so as the vine is in the branches , and as the branches are in the vine , so is Christ in Christians , and so are Christian in Christ . again , joh. 14.20 . At that day ye shall know saith Christ himself , that you need not doubt of the doctrine ) that i am in my father , and you in me , and i in you : and again joh. 17.21 . saith Christ , i pray not for these alone , that is , who now believe , but also for all that shall hereafter believe in me through their word , that they all May be one , as thou father art in me , and i in thee , that they May be one , as we are one ▪ i in them , and thou in me , that they May be made perfect in one , that the world May know thee ▪ hast sent me , and hast loved them 〈◊〉 thou hast loved me ▪ here now is no infinite distance between Christ and believers , but a wonderful and admirable nearness , and oneness , which the learned ignorance of philosophy understands not , nor the ignorant knowledge of any carnal Christian . 

but sure this word of God is true , and the saints receive it in faith , and will not be deluded with any philosophical , sophistical , or Antichristian glosses of false teachers . 

and thus doth the holy word of God affirm plainly enough , that Christ and his Christians are most nearly united ; and yet doth not this union make an equality , and rob Christ of his due glory : seeing Christ is the head and they his members ; Christ the first born , and they his brethren : and so as Christ hath the pre-eminence in all things above them all , as becomes the head and first born , so they have communion with him in all things , as becomes his members and brethren . 

and whereas he jests , and saith , he that hath God in him , needs not go to man to learn ; i do affirm this is true enough , and the scripture hath affirmed it in several places ; Isaiah saith to the spiritual church , all thy children shall be taught of the Lord : and Christ saith it is written , they shall be all taught of God ; he therefore that had heard and learned of my father , cometh to me . and John saith , 1 John 2.27 . The anointing which ye have received from him abideth in you , and ye need not that any man teach you ▪ but as the same anointing teacheth you all things , and is truth , and is no lie . and this doctrine is so manifest from the scriptures , that he is of Antichrist that denies it : for God inwardly teaches all his persons by his spirit his own self : and they so hear the word by the ministry of man , that it is always God that teaches them , and not man . 

11.  Error . 

Arts and tongues are the cups in which God drinks to us . 

Answer . 

In what a sad condition then are the common and plain persons , that they cannot pledge him ? but only the learned clergy keep these cups to themselves , as heretofore they kept the cup in the sacrament . 

But what strange phrase is this ? savouring of the ranters religion ; as if God was the familiar companion of the clergy , and sometimes drank to them in a cup of Hebrew , sometimes in a cup of Greek , and sometimes in a cup of Latin as if sometimes he drank to them in a cup of logic , and sometimes in a cup of ethics , sometimes in a cup of metaphysics . is not this truly , profana vocum novitas , a profane newness of speech , never before heard of to my knowledge in the church of God , and which the apostle utterly condemns . 

12.  Error . 

We shall never keep up religion , if we do not keep up learning ; but when learning goes down , religion goes down too . 

Answer . 

The church is founded on Christ , and Christ and his church ( It seems ) are both founded on human learning . it is no wonder now , that Mr. Simpson lays so great stress on it everywhere ; and that men of his religion term the university , fundamentum ecclesiae , the foundation of the church . and if human learning do indeed uphold all Christian religion , let all men and magistrates come forth and uphold it in the name of God . but surely the religion of the gospel depends wholly on Christ , as Christ on God : and there is no need of human learning to support this , except God and Christ are insufficient . we have a sure word and doctrine of the gospel , that remains firm for ever , and inviolable , and inconquerable , in and through Christ , and his spirit , and the father ; and all the world shall shatter in pieces , and human learning , go down to hell , and this shall stand fast for ever : heaven and earth shall pass away , and not one jot or tittle of my word , saith Christ . 

believers , know that not one point of your religion depends on human learning ; but all on Christ himself , who is the true and living word . wherefore these are the fears of Antichrist and his prophets , that their religion will go down with human learning , because it was set up by it ; but the true religion of the gospel of God our saviour was at first set up without it , and hath hitherto remained without it , and will abide so for ever . and to this the spirit , and the bride give witness . 

13.  Error . 

Seeing religious foundations are so ancient , then keep them up : your destruction will never be but from yourselves . 

Answer . 

religious foundations ! What religion founded the universities is well known . for by the council of four monks , the scholars of Bede , to wit , Rabanus , Albinus , Claudius , and John Scotus , the university which had been translated from Athens to Room , was translated by Charles the great from Rome to Paris , an. 791.  And for our English universities of Cambridge and Oxford ; thus it is recorded , that the study of Cambridge was instituted , anno 630.  by Sigi•bert King of the East , angles , who after changed his purple or kingly robes , for a friars cool or Hood . and the lectures here were begun by four monks , of which brother ode ( As they termed him ) read grammar , according to Priscian's doctrine : terricus an acute sophister read Aristotle's logic , according to the institutions of Porphyrius , and Averr•eses ▪ brother William , read Tully's rhetoric , and Gislebertus , read divinity to them on Sundays , and saints days . 

And for Oxford , that was founded by King Alfred , anno 895. by the persuasion of neotus the monk , and rewards were propounded for those that would profess learning there . Afterwards both these schools were made universities , in Edward the firsts time by the court of Rome , as Robert Remington affirms . 

Yea farther , by the very names of the colleges it is manifests , what religion set them up ; some being founded in the honour of one saint , some of another saint ; one being founded in the honour of Christ , another in the honour of Jesus , another in the honour of Immanuel , another in the honour of the trinity ; whereby they have rent the name of God in pieces , each one seeking to honour that name of Christ most , in the honour of which his college was founded ; yea , some colleges have been founded in the honour of Christ's body ; as the colleges of orpus christi , in both universities : and one in Oxford , for the help of all dead souls , and for their rescue out of purgatory : and so it is well known what religion founded them . and what religion will in due time destroy these foundations ( If they be not reform ) is as well known . 

For Wickliff , whom God raised up to be one of the most eminent reformers of the Christian religion , since the apostles times , speaks thus touching universities , colleges and students . seeing Christ ( Saith he ) hath not ordained these universities , or colleges , it is manifest that both they and the graduations in them are nothing but so much vain heathenism introduced , in testimony whereof , as well the collegiates as other graduates do seek the things which are their own , leaving the rules of charity : from whence do arise envies , and comparisons between persons and countries , and many other seed-plots of the father of lies . 

again , he having spoken of other sects , saith , our judgement concerning colleges is the same , as touching their general studies : for through them , persons and countries are accepted against the rules of charity , and inward envies are h•aped up with other sins , perjuries , and simonies , against their own statutes . notwithstanding it is granted , that out of such colleges many good things do arise , aswell as out of other sects , yet not so many as by the occasion of the sin of the devil , and the sin of the first man . And therefore let a faithful man be ashamed to allege the fruit of such profit . 

again saith he , if these colleges are in their conversation rejected of the Lord , who doubts but that to nourish them in this way is no alms , but the foolish presumption of a faction , and party against Christ . For all these sects , and all newnesses which are not founded on Christ the Lord , they tempt Christ with the devil , mat. 4. seeing they despise the free ordination of his sect , and do rather choose another sevile sect , less good , as if they would not ascend into the heavenly Zion , by the steps which God hath ordained , but would fly to the pinnacle of the temple by the carrying of the devil . What alms therefore is it to cherish such a child of the devil in Cains castles against Christ ? 

He also affirms that one idiot through the help of the grace of God , doth more good in the church , than many graduates in the schools and colleges : and that God's inspiration of such , doth more profit the community of the faithful , than all the universities , and all their studies and privileges . 

Thus hath Wickliff witnessed in this matter , who was also himself Master of Balliol college in Oxford : and Philip Melancthon gives this testimony of him , equidem sapientem virum judico fuisse wicklefum anglum , qui omnium primus , quod ego sciam , vidit vniversitates fuisse satanae synagogas , that is , i do indeed judge Wickliff of England to have been a wise man , who for aught i know , first of all saw universities to have been the synagogues of Satan . 

John Hus also , that excellent instrument of Jesus Christ , and blessed martyr , saith , speaking on that scripture , isa. 28.  woe to the crown of the pride of Ephraim , and the crown of pride shall be trodden underfoot , saith , the doctor-ships and masterships of many , who having the word of God wholly choked in them , do now too shamelessly make broad their phylacteries , and enlarge the borders of their garments , and love the chief chairs in the schools , and to be saluted in the markets , and to be called of men doctor ; and by this they go in the apparel and harness of the mystical body of Antichrist , because it is written that he is the King of all the children of pride . and the crown of pride , of these children of pride shall be trodden down . 

And thus as it is manifest what religion founded the universities ; so it is as manifest what religion will in the appointed time destroy these foundations , if they be not truly and thoroughly reform . for surely as they are , if the work of Christ go forward in the world ( As it necessarily must do notwithstanding the present defection ) in the appointed time ) they can no more be held up , than the house built on the sand , in the time of tempest . for the true spiritual church is built on the foundation of the prophets and apostles ; Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone , and so it is firmly founded upon a rock , and can never fall ; but the universities are built on the philosophers and heathen , Plato and Aristotle being the chief corner stones , and so they are built upon the sand , and neither can their own hands uphold them , nor the secular arm establish them , in that day wherein the Lord alone shall be exalted . but it is not men of moral and civil religion and righteousness , who will do this work , and execute this vengeance ; for the inchauntments of the universities are too strong and mighty for all human spirits : but the called , chosen , and faithful ones of Christ , when he shall summon them , and call them to his foot , they shall not stand on-complements , formalities and niceties ; nor regard friendship or enmity ; but through the power of faith , shall break through all that can be said and objected by the wisdom , policy , prudence , and religion of man , and shall execute the righteous judgements of the Lord , on these mothers of harlots , and fornications of the nations . 

And whereas he saith , their destruction will never be but of themselves : i do verily believe that . For seeing their root is rottenness , their fruit must needs be destruction . yea , the Lord will raise up his word in the midst of them to destroy them : for the more the word of the Lord shall blow upon the university , the more shall this grass wither , and the flower thereof , that is , human learning fade away , till it be at last quite dried up . And this is the burden of the university , whose day is coming , when iniquity shall have an end . 

And thus have i done with these things ; there were many other things in that s•rmon as contrary to the gospel ; which for brevity's sake i have omitted . 

Now what a sad thing is it , that such poisonful doctrine should be poured forth into an university congregation , and that by the ministry of such a man ? and if the ceremonies of the law were in use under the gospel , how ought we to rend our garments at the bearing of these things ? 

And now blessed Lord Jesus , who wast crucified , dead and buried , but art risen from the dead by the eternal spirit , and art ascended on high to fill all things , have mercy on thy poor church , which is so grievously rent and torn this day , by wolves in sheep's clothing , and is thus hurt and consumed by poisonable doctrine of men , who seek themselves , and their own things , to the harm and ruin of thy poor persons ! Oh thou son of the living God , who are the way , the truth , and the life ; how shall the kingdom of Antichrist be brought down , when the hands of such men , who seem pillars in the church , are stretched forth so strongly to hold it up ; and how shall the days of Antichrist be shortened , when his kingdom is coming forth again in the greatest deceivableness of unrighteousness that hath ever yet appeared in the world to delude the nations ? Oh Lord remember all thy promises , and make haste to destroy Babylon the great , with all its mysteries of righteousness , and unrighteousness , and let it sink as a millstone in the sea , without any hope or possibility of a resurrection . and seeing there is no hand of man stretched out for this work , but all hands are against it ; do thou destroy it oh Lord without hand , even with the spirit of thy mouth , and brightness of thy coming according to the truth of thy promises , and the unutterable sighs and groans of thy spirit occasioned thereby , in the hearts of all thy faithful and elect . even so Lord , and let thy kingdom come , and make no long tarrying . 

Amen . 

A testimony from the word against divinity-degres in the university : or , any academical degrees made us• of for the ministry of the gospel . 

The universities ( Whose soul and life do lie in human learning and school-divinity ) that they Might gain the greater profit to themselves , and glory to their children , have ( After the example of the heathen ) given their children degrees in d•vinity ( As they in art ) and the glorious titles of bachelors , Masters , and doctors in divinity , as so many crowns of gold upon their heads , to win them honour and reputation with all persons , who have been under the delusion of Antichrist . 

And in the confirming of these graduations or degrees , ( Which also is done for a sum of money ) they give the graduate's licence and power to preach , and to expound the scriptures , and that by the sole authority of the university . 

For the vice-chancellor , admitting a bachelor in divinity to his degree , useth these words in the name of the university , we admit you to declare all the apostolical epistles , in the name of the father , son , and holy ghost . and so the bachelor in divinity , hath power according to his degree , only to deal with the apostolical epistles , but must go no farther . and admitting a doctor to his degree , the vice-chancellor saith thus , we admit you to interpret and profess all the holy scriptures both of the old and new testament , in the name of the father , son , and holy ghost . 

And thus doth the university , through power received from Antichrist , give men , chiefly for money , divinity-degrees ; and through those degrees it gives authority and privilege to bachelors in divinity to expound part of the scriptures , and to doctors to expound and profess all the scriptures ; and they that gain these degrees to themselves , are ( As there is good reason ) the great men in account with the university , and also with the carnal persons of Antichrist , how destitute soever they be , of the faith and spirit of the gospel . 

wherefore i cannot choose but give in my testimony against this glorious and gainful privilege of the universities , to wit , their conferring upon their children degrees in divinity , and creating them Masters in that mystery , which none can teach but God himself ; and which none can learn , but true believers who are born of God , and are his true disciple . 

And so i do openly affirm , that degrees in divinity ( For i meddle with none else ) given by the universities to their children , are plainly and grossly Antichristian , being most manifestly contrary to the word of the gospel , and the light that shines in the new testament . 

For first , in the gospel of God our saviour , we learn , that only a new and heavenly birth makes men to be of the true church , and that the pouring forth of the spirit on these children of God , according to the measure of the gift of God , makes Christians of several degrees in this church , and not academical graduations . 

Secondly , in this gospel also we are taught , that all the true ministers of Christ are equal , and not one superior to another , as these degrees make them . 

Thirdly , in this gospel also we are taught , that the true greatness amongst Christ's true disciple , doth not stand in academical degrees , or worldly honour and dignities , but in the faithfuls near and exact following of Christ in word and conversation ; and that the sons of Zebedee , in desiring superiority and preeminence above the other disciple , contrary to the life and doctrine of Christ , did grievously offend , and were therefore sharply rebuked of Christ . 

Fourthly , yea here , we hear Christ himself forbidding this very thing to his disciple , that Antichrist and his prophets Might have no cloak for doing the contrary , where his gospel is truly taught and published . For mat. 23.  Christ doth forbid his disciple before all the multitude , to be as the Jewish rabbis or doctors , who ( Saith Christ ) do their works to be seen of men , and disguise themselves with different garments or habits from others ( That they Might be the more taken notice of , and have the more respect ) and do love the uppermost rooms at feasts , and the chief seats in the synagogues , and greetings in the markets , and to be called of men doctor , doctor ; but saith Christ to his disciple , be not ye called doctor , for one is your Master , even Christ , and ye all are brethren , and so equal . 

Whence it is evident , that this practice of universities and colleges in giving men degrees in divinity , as they call it , and titles , habits , and dignities accordingly , is contrary to the express command of Jesus Christ , and so is a mere invention of Antichrist , to put honour and reputation on his ministers . 

It is also manifest , that this practice of the universities , hath all along made many doctors in the church , which yet never were Christ's true d•scipleses . 

It is also manifest , that these degrees and titles do cause men to be proud , and to lift themselves up above their brethren , and to think themselves something when they are nothing ; such graduates , u•ually pro•ing theologi gloriae , divines of glory ; and not theologi crucis , d•vines of the cross , as Luther speaks ; that is , proud and h•ughty clerks , and not the humble ministers of Christ cru•ified . 

These degrees also do break the simplicity of the persons of God , and do prejudice the communion of saints . 

Farther , these degrees are a dangerous snare to simple persons , causing them to receive all for good doctrine that is delivered b•such men , though it be never so erroneous and unsound , inasmuch as their high titles which they have gotten in these high places , and the reputation of their learning , strikes an awe into them , that the• dare not once question what such men deliver , m•ch less contradict it . 

Wherefore , as much of the mystery of iniquity is discovered and dissolved already , so there is no doubt , but that this glorious relic thereof , to wit , divinity-degrees , will also in due time follow , as the lightnings of God shall enlighten the world . 

And seeing so much of the light of the gospel hath shined forth in thi•age , it were to be wished that the universities , heads of colleges , and clergy , would not wilfully , for worldly honour , •espectss and advantage sake , shut their eyes against it , or rather with open eyes , maliciously seek to extinguish it , but that they would be contented , to have all their honour lie in their l•keness to Christ , who was in the church as one that served ; and who was so far from receiving honour and taking titles from men , to make himself of account in the world , that being Lord of all , he made himself of no reputation ; and that they would reject all the pomp and pride of the fa•se church , which being destitute of faith and the spirit , makes itself and its ministers glorious , in outward names and titles . 

Now though this be a plain case in the gospel , and there needs no testimony of men , yet for the fuller conviction of the world , i shall add the witness of other believers , that it May appear , that i am not alone in this matter , though to have been alone with the word , would have been sure and safe enough . 

In Edward the third's time , there was an excellent d•scourse set forth , called , the ploughman's complaint , &c. which testifieth against these divinity-degrees , in these words , Antichrist ( Saith it ) maketh Masters too many , who teach the persons with their own teaching , and leave gods teaching which is needful , and hide it with quaint glosses from the mean persons . But ( Saith he ) these glosers object , that they desire not the state of mastery to be worshipped thereby , but the more to profit the persons when they preach the word . For they say the persons will more believe the preaching of a Master , that hath taken a state of school , than the preaching of another man that hath not taken the state of mastership . to which he replies , that it is no need that Masters bear witness to God's teaching or word , that it is true and good , neither ( Saith he ) can any man by his state of mastership which God hath forbidden , draw any man from his sin , rather than another man which is not a Master , nor will be none , because it is forbidden him in the Gos•el . and a little after he saith , seeing we are to bel•eve a m•nss wo•kss more than his word , the deed showeth well of these Masters , that they desire mastership , rather for their own worship , then for profit of the persons , &c.  

After , John wickl•ffe that chosen servant of Christ , did witness against these Antichristian degrees , who saith , the clergy do busily seek their own wo•ldly w•rship and glory , and by great gifts and va•ne costs , to be called Masters in divinity , and to speak before Lords , and to sit at meat with them , and not to teach truly the gospel to all manner of men , by meek l•fe , and freely , as Christ bids . 

The same Wickliff on mat. 23. cap. 4. saith , although in some studies , the name of doctor imports excellency , seeing it is a heathenish rite , heaped together of many honours and states , yet in the text of the apostle , it is taken more plainly , for any faithful man , who doth notably teach the Catholic faith : and so the name doctor , speaks desert and labour , and takes away pride and eminency of state according to this world . 

again , saith he , every sect , state and operation which Christ doth not approve in his gospel , is in reason to be rejected ; and therefore seeing Christ doth not approve , but reprove the forenamed heathenish mastership , it is manifest that it is to be discharged , and cast out of the church . 

again , saith he , note that the name of an office , doth much differ from the name of a scholastical graduation , heathenishly brought in . 

He saith also , that Christ hath specially forbidden his disciple , heathenish or scholastical mastership ; and that Christ would have the name of Master or doctor singularly reserved to himself , seeing he , by reason of his hypostatical union , hath a certain excellen•y which cannot agree to any other of mankind . and concludes , that seeing there is danger in attributing to men the title of Master or doctor in divinity , therefore in good reason those titles are to be shunned in the church of God . 

John Hus also saith , that they who take to themselves academical degrees , and titles answerable , do go in the apparel and harness of the mystical body of Antichrist , who is the King of all the children of pride , to wit , of the Masters and doctors in divinity . 

again in another place he speaks to this purpose , Christ ( Saith he ) saith , joh. 8.  neither came i of myself , but the father sent me ; so the saints have come in the name of the Lord Jesus , and in the name of Jesus they have performed their priesthood , and he is the crown of their glory : * and by this , they are distinguished from certain , who are otherwise crowned , as Masters and doctors , and bachelors , and from others of other kind of titles , according to the manifold wisdom of this world : for these excelling others by their pains , and through their own science and learning , are notably beautified with their own titles and crowns , and therefore do rather perform their office in their own name , then in Christ's . thus he . 

Luther speaks much to this purpose also ; but i shall have occasion to use him more largely . 

Zuinglius on that scripture mat. 23.  be ye not called doctor , for one is your Master , Christ , &c. saith thus : thou hearest here , that these titles of Masters and doctors , are not of God , seeing Christ forbids them . 

Conradus pelican also , a godly preacher , having the sense of this on his deathbed , desired his friends , that he Might by no means be buried , as the manner than was , in the habit of a doctor , quia sperabat se resurrecturum ad judicium non ut doctorem , sed ut humilem christianum ; because he hoped he should rise to judgement , not as a doctor , but as a humble Christian . 

Now methinks , the clear and precious word of Christ alone , should take off the universities and clergy , from giving and receiving these degrees and titles , if they do in good earnest profess themselves to be his disciple ; but how much ought they to be ashamed and confounded , when they see other believers , for the love of Christ and his word , utterly renouncing these things before their faces , that they , if they persist , May be left wholly without excuse before Christ and his church . 

And now for the conclusion of this matter , i shall hold forth to the universities , the true degrees , which Christ the son of God , did himself take in the church of God , and which all his saints are to take after his example . 

Jesus Christ the son of the living God , the first and chief teacher of the new testament , did neither commence bachelor nor doctor in divinity , but he took five other degrees , wherein the university-graduates are usually wanting . 

Christ's first degree in the church was this , that he was the son of God , as the Lord said to him , thou art my son , this day have i begotten thee ; and again , this is my beloved son , in whom i am well pleased . and this is the first degree that Christ himself took in the church , his divine sonship according to his human nature . and this degree all the faithful take with him , for they all are begotten of God , and born of the immortal seed of his word , and their being the children of God through faith , is the first degree also , that they take in the church . 

2.  Christ's second degree in the church , was his unction with the spirit , for being the son of God , the spirit of God came and sat upon him in the form of a dove , which was his new testament-baptism : and his first degree was confirmed to him by the father , when he took this second ; for whilst the spirit rested on him , a voice from heaven said , thou art my beloved son in whom i am well pleased . 

And this second degree also , all the faithful take with Christ , for they all as his fellows , are anointed together with him , the chief among them ; they as members are anointed together with him the head , with the same oil of gladness ; and being sons , God sends the spirit of his son into their hearts ; and the spirit of the son in their hearts , is a sure testimony they are sons : and their second degree also confirms their first ; to wit , the gift of the spirit , their s•nship . 

3.  Christ's third degree was this , that after he was anointed by the spirit , and declared to be the son of God , then for the proof of both , he was led by the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil , forty days and nights together ; and in all these temptations , through his sonship , and unction , he overcame the devil , and came away conqueror : and this was his third degree in the church of God , that the anointed son of God , overcame the devil , in all the greatest and most grievous temptations he could assault him with . 

And this third degree also , all the faithful take with Christ ; for when they are the anointed sons of God , Satan sets upon them , with all sorts of temptations , and they are led by the spirit of God , to wrestle with principalities and powers , and spiritual wickednesses set in high places , and the rulers of the darkness of this world : and yet they in the strength of their sonship and unction with Christ , do also with him , tread Satan under their feet , and go away conquerors through the grace of God in them ; and this also is their third degree in the true church . 

4 Christ's fourth degree in the chur•h was this , that after his sonship , unction , and victory over the devil in all temptations , he then went forth as a fit and able minister to teach the gospel of the kingdom , against all the enmity and opposition of the world , devil , and false church , as is taught us mat. 4. v. 11.  & 17.  

And this fourth degree also , all the truly faithful take with Christ . for after they through faith are the sons of God , and through their sonship are anointed , and through their unction , overcome the devil in all his temptations , than also they preach the gospel of the kingdom , being all of them , a chosen generation , and royal priesthood , to show forth the virtues of him that hath called them out of darkness , into his marvelous light , as Peter testifies : and they all speak as they do believe , and have experience : and their sonship , unction , and victory over temptation , is as sufficient a ground for them to teach , as it was for Christ to teach ; and so they without any regard of the laws of Antichrist , or orders of the clergy , go forth to teach the everlasting gospel , as Christ did before them ; and this is the fourth degree of the faithful in the church . 

5.  Christ's fifth and last degree , which he took in the church was this , that he having both preached and lived the word , whereat the world and worldly church were wholly offended , and enraged , did at the last , willingly confirm his doctrine with his death , and seal to the truth of it , with his blood ; exposing himself to the most shameful and ignominious death of the cross , to confirm his gospel to his church ; and this was the highest and most glorious degree that Christ took in his church , as Christ testifies , when speaking of his suffering , he saith , now is the hour come that the son of man should be glorified . 

And this fifth degree also , all the truly faithful do take with Christ , either in deed , if need require , or in preparation and readiness , and that whilst they live in outward peace . all the blessed martyrs have taken this highest degree in the church with Christ ; and all the rest of his seed have been , and are ready to take it also , when it is the good will of their heavenly father , seeing they can say in the same faith and spirit with Christ , even in this matter , father , if it be possible , let this cup pass from me ; yet not my will , but thine be done : for they are come to do the will of him that sent them , even to the laying down their lives . 

Now these are the only degrees , that Christ himself took in the church , and which all the saints take with him ; and the true spiritual church of believers , allows and approves no other degrees but these . 

And what now are the university-degrees in divinity to these ? they are degrees in antichrists church only , and every heathen or human creature , Turk or infidel May take them as welll as they , with a little time and pains , and money . 

wherefore ( That i May turn my speech a little to the university ) do thou university lay this to heart , how much thou hast departed from the gospel of Christ in this matter , as well as in all the rest ; and hast received the doctrine , and laws , and methods , and manners of Antichrist , wherewith thou hast deceived thyself aswell as the nations . and thou university , hast like thy own mother Babylon , mystery written on thy forehead , for thou hast taken to thyself this title , alma mater , the beautiful mother , which only belongs to Jerusalem from above : and though thou hast brought forth a company of prodigious children , heathenish foolish , vain , vile and abominable , yet hast thou called them learned , and given them degrees in divinity , contrary to the degrees in the gospel , and hast sent them forth , into every city , county , town , and village , as ministers of Christ , yea as sons of the morning , though unbelievers and destitute of the spirit : and thus hast thou deceived the nations , and given them a false ministry in stead of a true , and by this false ministry , a false word in stead of the gospel , and the world hath not at any time received a greater woe , nor more grievous plague then from thee : wherefore thus saith the word of the Lord , the day of thy vengeance is coming , and the years wherein thou shalt be made desolate ; and thy dainty and goodly things shall depart from thee , and thou shalt find them no more at all , and the voice of musicians and pipers shall no more be heard in thee , for in thee is found the blood of prophets and of saints , and of all that have been slain upon the earth : thy human learning , to wit , thy philosophy and school-divinity , & the false ministry that they have set up , and the false Christians , that have proceeded from that ministry , have devised and executed all these murders , and massacres , on the true saints of God . 

Finis . 



quis est sapiens & intelliget haec ? 

The testimony of Martin Luther upon the whole matter , to wit , touching universities , human learning , or philosophy , vniversity-degrees , &c.  

Martin Luther in his answer to Ambrose Catharinus , expounding the vision concerning Antichrist , dan. 8. speaks thus : 

The twelfth and last face of Antichrist , is that chaos , and open gate of hell , yet very comely to behold , to wit , the universities , into which , perjury , and the abuse of God's name are the entrance , and the progress is a free and most licentious conversation in all manner of wickedness . And yet under these sins and destructions , science and sapience are promised . Yea titles and degrees are given in stead of rewards . 

But what do they perform at length ? First , the more choice youth of Christian persons are here prostituted , and are cast into the open throat of hell , that i verily think this destruction was figured by the idol Moloch , to whom anciently they made their choice children to pas• through the fire . Afterwards Aristotle being read to them , and not rightly understood , the wits of Christian youth are exercised with heathenish and human learning , yea , are quite blinded and oppressed with it . And in stead of the word of God , the doctrine of Antichrist is delivered , that it May seem , the devil himself could not bring forth a more subtle and effectual invention and engine , eutterly to extinguish the gospel , then to set up universities . Wherein , under the pretence of Christian doctrine , nothing should be taught but that which is most contrary to the Christian faith . And if at any time it seems good to call forth the choicest to the government of the churches , they call them out of these stews and dens . 

And truly to me , this last face of Antichrist seems to be the most hurtful of all , because this hath the pretence of the word , when all the rest have only the colour of example ; and this is plainly schola Hidoth , the school of propositions , of which anon . For it is incomparably the greatest prejudice , under the colour of the word , to teach things contrary to the word ; seeing the face of e•ampleses is form and strengthened by the face of the word , which otherwise would soon come to nothing , if the word should reign in its genuine sense ; and also , seeing the pretence of examples doth only deceive the manners , but the pretence of the word , overthrows the word . But if by any grace of God , the universities should receive the word ( to wit , instead of philosophy and school-divinity ) how soon would the papacy , with all its faces or appearances perish , seeing this face , to wit , the universities , is the prop , bones and whole strength of that kingdom of faces ! 

This deceitful face seems to be foretold rev. 9 which scripture it is worth the while to rehearse , and a little to unfold , for John saith , the first angel sounded , and i saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth , and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit , &c.  I will here make trial a little with my own apprehension . Now certain it is , that by angels through all the Apocalypse , is meant the overseers of churches , as doth plainly appear out of the second and third chapters , where it is written to the angel of Ephesus , Smyrna , and others . Further , that other sort of angels which sounds the trumpet , of which there are seven mentioned , chap. 8. cannot agree to any but the Roman Bishop , seeing no others are said to sound with trumpet . Now to sound with trumpet , can be nothing else , as appears by the consequence of the text , and the following effects , then to make decrees , which none ever arrogated to himself , besides the Bishop of the Roman church . Neither is it said in vain , that they prepared themselves to sound , see•ng chiefly in these Popes , there hath been an impatient fury , and unquiet tyranny , to make laws , and thereby to subject others to themselves . 

But let us come to our first angel , who was the first among three , who were to bring three woes upon the earth , and this is he , who did first institute and confirm universities , whom it is not easy for me to name , histories so varying in this matter . But let him be whosoever he was , he was a star fallen from heaven to earth , whether it were Alexander of Hales , or ( Which i rather think ) St. Thomas who only ( After the universities were approved , and this angel had sounded ) was either the first , or chief author of bringing in philosophy into the Christian world , being the most Aristotelian , yea plainly Aristotle himself , to whom , as to the earth , he fell from Christ the heaven , having obtained the authority of that most wicked angel , approving such studies . 

and he received the key of the bottomless pit , and opened it , and brought forth to us philosophy , long ago dead and damned by the doctrine of the apostles : and from thence ascended the smoke of that pit , that is , the mere words and opinions of Aristotle and the philosophers , as the smoke of that great furnace : for then philosophy prevailed , and became of large extent and power , so that Aristotle was made equal with Christ , in respect of authority and faith . And hereby was the sun darkened , ( Even Christ the sun of righteousness and truth ; moral virtues being brought in in stead of faith , and infinite opinions instead of truth ) and the air also with the smoke of the pit ; that it May be understood , not to be an eclipse of the sun , but the obscurity of the air and sun , by the smoke of the pit ascending , to wit , human doctrines , obscuring Christ and his faith , as the sun and air . 

and out of the smoke of the pit , there came forth locusts on the earth . here the persons of the universities , bred and born of philosophy , are called locusts by a most fit name , because they are without a King , that is , Christ , and fly in companies , as is said , prov. 3. and also because they waste and burn up all green things , wherever they light ; and so the grammarians think they have their name locustae , locusts , a loco usto & vastato , from the place which they burn and waste . And so , this persons of the universities , consumes and burns up all the green pasture of Christ , that is , the fruit of faith . 

and power was given to them as the scorpions of the earth have power : to wit , to wound the consciences of men , because the green fruit of faith being wasted , which heals the consciences of men , it cannot be but the conscience must be hurt and prejudiced . 

and it was commanded them , that they should not hurt the grass of the earth , nor any green thing ; that is , that they should not hurt the elect.  for they do not hurt all , neither do natural locusts hu•t every green thing , but some certain place : so it is here . 

but only those men , who have not the mark or seal , of God in their foreheads ; that is , some grass they should hurt , to wit , those who have not faith , which is the mark of God , which we carry in a pure conscience and free conversation , 

and it was commanded them that they should not kill them , but only should torment them five months . this seems to be spoken of moral doctrine , which seeing it teaches us the knowledge of sin like the law of God , it doth not kill , but only afflict a man with vain studies , wherein he is always learning , and yet never coming to the knowledge of the truth : for they being killed with the letter , are quickened with the eternal spirit , only they are tormented five months , that is , the whole time of their sensual life , in which moral virtues reign . And we see by experience that all moral divines , are of a most evil and unhappy conscience , full of scruples and unquietness , and have power neither of good nor evil : and therefore it follows , 

and their torment is , as the torment of a scorpion when it strikes a man . behold here a wounded conscience : for here he expounds what he had said before , that they are not savingly killed , nor spiritually quickened . 

and in those day's men shall seek death and shall not find it , and shall desire to die , and death shall flee from them : to wit , the death of sin , which doth too much live in the conscience , and yet is not rightly known ; for if it were known , presently it being slain would perish : but this cannot Aristotle's ethics do , but it is the office of the letter and the spirit . 

and the shapes of the locusts were like to horses prepared to battle , to wit , of scholastical disputation and conflict . he describes the war by this allegory ; for they are ready to argue pro & contra ( As they speak . ) and on their heads were as it were crowns of gold : that is , the names and titles of degrees , as , magister noster eximius : sacrae theologiae humilis & indignus professor , &c. that is , our famous Master : and the humble and unworthy professor of sacred theology , and the like . and these crowned ones , John Hus called hypocritas coronatos , crowned hypocrites : and by reason of these crowns , they have authority and power among the multitudes of carnal Christians , who are willing to entertain antichrists pomp , into Christ's church . yet have they not true crowns , but as it were crowns of gold , which they are very proud of , and are much puffed up with them , though usually , they are set on the head , of ignorance and error . 

and their faces are like the faces of men , because their doctrine and life is governed , not by the spirit of faith , but by the dictate of natural reason , and by the light of nature illuminated by Aristotle . 

and they had hairs like the hairs of women . for philosophy brings forth effeminate ministers , given to ease and luxury ; and in whom is nothing of spirit , nor of manly abilities in Christ . For the haired are priests , as you May see psal. 68  isa. 3. and in other places . 

and their teeth are like the teeth of lions : consider only the Thomists in stead of all other divines ; whether they be not biting , slanderous , and devourers of all that speak a word against Aristotle's divinity . yea the Thomists , Scotists and modern men , bite one another among themselves , and sharpen against one another , not any teeth , but the teeth of lions , neither is there any sort of men which war more fiercely or with greater hatred , than those sects of divines , each of which desire to devour the other , that it May reign alone . 

and they have brestplates as it were brestplates of iron , and this is the pertinacious and confident presumption of each sect , on the truth and soundness of his opinion : and by these iron brestplates they are unconquerable : and these are the principles of each sect.  

and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots , and of many horses running to battle : the wings are the words of these that dispute and conflict , by which they do impetuously , brawlingly and clamorously rush on one another and fight : as we see in the tumults of disputants both by words and writings , where neither yields to neither , but each one is unconquerable . For he signifies this pertinacious affection of disputing , by the rushing of chariots and horsemen . 

and they had tails like unto scorpions , and there were stings in their tails , and their power was to hurt men five months . here he explains what before he had propounded , to wit , that the fruit and end of this divinity is nothing but evil consciences , during all the time of the sensual lives of men . For that divinity is an abomination to those who are spiritual , because these are without the bounds of the five months , in the spirit of liberty . 

and they had a King over them , which is the angel of the bottomless pit , whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon , and in Greek Apollyon . here we May learn that the rector general of all universities , is not Christ nor the holy spirit , nor any angel of God , but an angel of the bottomless pit , that is , one that is dead , and is among the dead and damned . Who is it then ? even that light of nature , to wit , Aristotle , who doth truly reign in the universities , as Abaddon , and Apollyon , that is , a waster and destroyer of the church . For we have said that an angel signifies a teacher or a doctor in the church . And certain it is , that Aristotle who is dead and damned , is at this day the great doctor of all the universities rather than Christ ; for he reign• alone , being exalted by the authority and study of Thomas , reviving freewill , and teaching moral virtues and natural philosophy , to wit , the three-headed Cerberus , or three-bodied Geryon . 

Behold the first no which the church hath from the Romish Antichrist by the ministry of saint Thomas : and they whose duty it was chiefly to have prohibited and extinguished these things , they chiefly have erected and established them . 

thus Luther , word for word , in the forenamed place . he also in his book de abroganda missa privata , speaking of the idol M•loch , saith thus : 

Moses and Jeremy have described the worship of this idol to be after this manner , that they did burn or offer to him their children in the fire , supposing that hereby they did perform the greatest and highest service to God , inasmuch as after the example of Abraham they do not spare their own children , though they do this , not only not being called as Abraham was , but also without faith , & in the highest wickedness ; and therefore the psalmist testifies , psal. 78.  that they offered not their children to God , but to devils . for whatsoever is not done by the call and command of God , is not done to God but devils , who suggest this , though it be done under pretence of the name of God . 

Now hereby ( saith he ) i conceive the universities to be represented , in which the best and choicest part of Christian youth is offered , as it were in burned sacrifice to God , that there they May be instructed , and be made as it were wholly divine . For the common persons believe there is no place under heaven , in which youth can be better instructed , so that even religious persons have recourse hither . For to learn any thing out of the university , is to learn nothing : but to have studied in the university , is to know all things . There all divine and human things are believed to be taught : for no man sends his son hither with any other opinion than this , that he can nowhere be better sent . They think they perform the highest service to God , that they offer their sons to be form according to the instruction of godliness , that thereby they May become profitable and useful ministers , preachers , governors , who May wholly become God's own portion , and be useful both to God and men . 

And hereto appertains the name Moloch , which signifies a King , or kingly , because this kind of study doth honour them with degrees and promotions , and renders them fit and able to govern others . For we see that all that are preferred to governments , are taken out of universities : and he that is not a graduate or member of an university , is not qualified for preferment , or to be set over any persons : but let the ass first be crowned ( To wit , with a degree ) and then let him reign . 

And parents do not see , and they that do see , do not regard , that youth are usually here destroyed , though rude and vile manners , none commonly forbidding them . Yea fornications , luxury , and other manifest sins do but mildly destroy them , but that they are endued and possessed with philosophical , heathenish , human , wicked , and impious opinions , this is the fire of Moloch , which no tears can sufficiently bewail , seeing through this they especially are devoured and perish , who are the most studious and modest youth in universities . So great is the fury of God upon this valley of Tophet and Hinnom , that they perish more grievously who learn most , and live modestly , than they who learn nothing and are corrupted with lusts . For these learn nothing which is to be unlearned again , seeing they know they do evil ; whereas the other suck in poison which happily or never they do vomit up again , holding that for good which is evil , and instructing those with the like opinions , whom they take to teach . 

And to these pits of hell it is to be imputed , that the sun of the gospel is obscured with the smoke of the pit : for out of this smoke proceed those locusts , which possess all chairs , and pulpits , and administer all governments , that Satan from the beginning of the world , could device nothing in all the world more strong and pernicious to waste faith and the gospel , than universities , neither was it meet that this evil should arise , but in the end of the world , when the world through the prevailing of sin , being loaden with the wrath of God , should draw near to hell and damnation . For the miserable persons must needs hear those things taught and delivered out of the pulpits , which those Molochites have learned in the universities . And they have learned nothing but the highest blasphemies of God . Neither is it lawful to have anywhere any other pastor than these . 

In Jeremiah that valley is called Gehinnom , from whence Christ took that word gehenna , which what it signifies , i do not well know : but it seems to me to come from Janah , which signifies to eat up ; or to pill , or waste , as tyrants or usurers , do pill and suck out the persons : so that Gehinnom is the valley of pilling or wasting the persons , for these being set over the persons as shepherds , aught to feed them with the word of life , and they in stead thereof , do insensibly waste and devour them , in their body , goods , and soul , with the pestilent doctrines of Universit•es . And such teachers do the universities , those s•nagogueses of perdition , give us . thus Luther . 

these now are Luther's own words , which i have made legible to English men . Wherein it is manifest that he condemns the universities in the very institution and constitution of them , and chiefly in their chief studies , human learning , and school-divinity , and also , as to that gross popish opinion , that they are the fountain and nurseries of the ministry : and that none are fit to teach , or so fit to teach , as those that have been educated in them . Yea though these be raw , foolish , ignorant fellows , yet being university-graduates must they be set over towns and parishes , and the miserable persons must not only hear them and their doltish doctrine brought from the uni•ersitieses , but also must be constrained by secular power and laws , to pay them well for such pains , which tends only to the ruin of their souls for ever : and no hand is yet strongly and resolutely stretched out to deliver the persons from this intolerable bondage . For the necks of the persons of the world have never endured so grievous a yoke from any tyrants , as from the doctrine and domination of the clergy . For worldly tyrants , have only afflicted men's bodies and temporal estates , which reached but to this short life : but these spiritual tyrants , the clergy or false ministry , when they have got countenance , strength , and aid , from the worldly magistrates , how have they with their academical , philosophical , heathenish divinity , infected , poisoned , and destroyed the persons to eternal death , and no durst shun them , upon pain of temporal death or punishments . But now through the great goodness of God , and his mighty providences and works from heaven , it is a more happy age : and happy shall they be , who being called forth , shall do the work of God against all discouragements and difficulties , and shall not with Ephraim being harnessed turn their backs in the day of battle . 

and now to return to our business again touching the universities , let none object that Luther speaks against popish universities only , for this is but a weak and simple defence , and altogether unable to ward off the mighty blow of God's word , from their heads and hearts . For the things condemned in the foregoing testimonies of Luther , are the self same for the substance of them , as do live , prevail , and flourish in our present universities , as hath been before declared , and i leave it to every faithful Christian to judge the truth in this matter . But men would fain preserve their titles , degrees , authority , dignity , state , stipends , and therefore for defence of these things , they must needs say something , though it be to never so little purpose : but yet by such discourse they sufficiently declare how cool and icy they are for Christ's interest , and how zealous for their own . 

but certain it is , that as the universities were set up at first as nurseries for antichrists kingdom , men being therein so educated ( according to the undertaking of Charles the great ) in philosophy and school-divinity , that it Might be said to them , vos estis sal terrae , & lux mundi , ye are the salt of the earth , and the light of the world ( which yet only agrees to the faithful who are born of God ) so have they still remained the same hitherto in substance , though not without some small change of outward form . 

for first , the philosophy taught and studied in the university is the very same that it was at first , and this philosophy is nothing but the religion of the heathen , for what the law was to the Jews , and the gospel is to the Christians , philosophy was and is to the heathen ; and in this study the poor lads wast the flower and cream of their lives , to no purpose , but to make them more heathenish , corrupt , and bold , than they were by nature . And , 

2.  for their divinity which they usually learn in the universities , out of the fathers , schoolmen , and systems ; and in which they are trained up , to dispute either for it , or against it in the schools ( it being in seriousnes• , all one to them what they hold and maintain in religion , seeing all is but opinion to them ) and which they after teach to the peole , with special regard to their own profit and advantage , this is not the true word , and ministry of the gospel . For the gospel is the word of faith , which word , is the word in our hearts , according to the tenor of the new covenant , wherein God saith , i will write my law in their hearts , and put it in their inward parts ; but now the university-divines , the truth being indeed dead in their hearts , and having no presence nor power there , they take it up out of the books and writings of men , wherein it hath been buried , and by this means bring forth a dead doctrine to the world ( which other men have spoken , but they have no experience of ) and not the word of life , which hath quickened them ; but only a dead letter , raised up like the l•ving letter , which they present to them , as the w•t•h of Endor raised up a dead Samuel in the outward habit and appearance of the living Samuel , and presented him to Saul : so these university-divines bring forth the outward garments and appearance of the truth to the persons , when they do best , but the substance , soul , and life of the truth , they cannot bring forth , because they have not the l•ving word of God in their hearts , but have only a dead word , which they gather out of the books and writings of men . And this is the university-d•vinity . 

and lastly , the preachers which the universities send forth , are usually in the greatest enmity to Christ and his gospel , of all other men whatsoever , and do bring greatest prejudice to Christ's kingdom , and advantage to antichrists . For when men without learning , and yet without the spirit of Christ , will undertake to teach the persons ( as many also now do ) their ignorance is manifest to all , and is judged of all , and they through their rudeness can never long deceive the world ; but now , when men are as destitute of the spirit as they , and yet have human learning , and the letter of the word in a philosophical sense to help them , this is that that endangers and deceives the world , the persons supposing the doctrine of the gospel according to philosophical learning , to be the ministration of the spirit , and to be sufficiently enough to instruct the church . And so antichrists kingdom is set up with credit and renown by these : whereas the ignorant teachers , who are destitute of the spirit , are able to do him no considerable service . But Christ will not have the learned men to be teachers in his church through their learning , and as little will he have ignorant men to teach in his church , because of their ignorance ; but whether men be learned or ignorant according to the world , it is no matter in Christ's church , where each man is to speak in the spirit of Christ , which makes alike , both the ignorant and the learned , wise in Christ : and so the learned man becomes ignorant in the church to be learned in Christ , and the ignorant man without worldly learning , forthwith becomes wise in Christ ; and the learned and the ignorant meet together only in the wisdom of Christ , which is the wisdom of God , and swallows up at once , all the learning and ignorance of the world alike , and will have all wise alone in itself . 

wherefore all universities being left and forsaken as to this matter , let learned and ignorant men come alike to Christ to be made wise in him , who is made unto us of God , our only wisdom . 

Finis . 

The right reformation of learning , schools and universities according to the state of the gospel , and the true light that shines therein . 

Though i do not pretend to that wisdom which Might direct the world ( farther than the word of God is with me ) yet shall i be bold , as one who desires to be faithful to Christ , and profitable to his true church , to offer my apprehensions and advice , to the called , chosen , and faithful ones of Christ , that either now are , or hereafter May be in authority in these nations , touching the instructing youth , and ordering schools . 

1.  first , therefore , as to this matter , i do judge , there neither is , nor can be , any greater evil then to bring up children in ease and idleness , and that they should have nothing to do , but to do nothing ; and to live freely and without control , according to those natural lusts and corruptions which they bring along with them , into the world , which do soon wonderfully improve through such a careless and unnurtured life . And such children and youth , usually become an early prey to the devil , who readily fills them , with all the ungodliness and unrighteousness of the heathen . 

2.  I conceive it meet , that the civil power , or chief magistrates , should take great care of the education of youth , as of one of the greatest works that concerns them , and as one of the worthiest things they can do in the world ; inasmuch as what the youth now is , the whole commonwealth will shortly be . 

3.  To this end , it is meet that schools ( If wanting ) be erected through the whole nation , and that not only in cities and great towns , but also ( As much as May be ) in all lesser villages : and that the authority of the nation take great care , that godly men especially , have the charge of greater schools ; and also that no women be permitted to teach little children in villages , but such as are the most sober and grave ; and that the magistrate afford to this work , all suitable encouragement and assistance . 

4.  That in such schools , they first teach them to read their native tongues , which they speak without teaching ; and then presently as they understand , bring them to read the holy scriptures , which though for the present they understand not , yet May they ( Through the blessing of God ) come to understand them afterwards . 

5.  That in cities and greater towns , where are the greater schools , and the greater opportunities to send children to them , they teach them also the Latin , and Greek tongues , and the Hebrew also , which is the easiest of them all , and aught to be in great account with us , for the old testaments sake . And it is most heedfully to be regarded , that in teaching youth the tongues , to wit , the Greek and Latin , such heathenish authors , be most carefully avoided , be their language never so good , whose writings are full of the fables , vanities , filthiness , lasciviousness , idolatries , and wickedness of the heathen . seeing usually , whilst youth do learn the language of the heathen , they also learn their wickedness in that language ; whereas it were far better for them to want their language , then to be possessed with their wickedness . and what should Christian youth have to do with the heathenish poets , who were for the most part the devil's prophets , and delivered forth their writings in his spirit , and who through the smoothness , quaintness , and sweetness of their language , do insensibly instill the poison of lust and wickedness into the hearts of youth ; whereby their education , which ought to correct their natural corruption , doth exceedingly increase and inflame it . 

Wherefore my counsel is , that they learn the Greek and Latin tongues , especially from Christians , and so without the lies , fables , follies , vanities , whoredoms , lust , pride , revenge , &c. of the heathens ; especially seeing neither their words nor their phrases , are meet for Christians to take into their mouths : and most necessary it is , that Christians should forget the names of their gods and muses , ( Which were but devils and damned creatures ) and all their muthology and fabulous inventions , , and let them all go to Satan , from whence they came . 

6.  It May be convenient also , that there May be some universities or colleges , for the instructing youth in the knowledge of the l•beral arts , beyond grammar and rhetoric ; as in logic ; which as it is in divinity ( As one calls it ) gladius diaboli , the devil's sword , so in human things , if it May be of good use , if reason manage that art of reason : but the mathematics especially are to be had in good esteem in universities , as arithmet•ck , geometry , geography , and the like , which as they carry no wickedness in them , so are they besides very useful to human society , and the affairs of this present life . 

There May be also in these universities or colleges , allowed the studies of physic , and of the law , according to that reformation which a wise and godly authority will cause them to pass under , both being now exceedingly corrupt and out of order , both for practice and fees . 

7.  But why these universities or colleges should be only at Cambridge and Oxford , i know no reason ; nay , if human learning be so necessary to the knowledge and teaching of the scriptures , as the universities pretend , they surely are without love to their brethren , who would have these studies thus confined to these places , and do * swear men to read and teach them nowhere else : certainly it is most manifest , that these men love their own private gain , more than the common good of the persons . But now seeing by the hand of God , a kingdom is turned into a commonwealth , and tyranny into freedom , we judge it most prejudicial to the common good of a commonwealth , that these two universities should make a monopoly of human learning to themselves , especially ( As is said ) seeing they say , no can well understand or teach the scriptures without it ; and so by reason of this their encroachment , against the rule of love , through the former grants of Popes and king• , all men should be necessitated to send their children hither from all parts of the nation , some scores or hundred mile• , for liberal education , to the great trouble and charge of parents : especially this considered , that the universities usually , have been places of great licentiousness and profaneness , whereby it often comes to pass , that parents sending them children far from them , young and hopeful , have for all their care and cost , after several years received them back again with their tongues and arts , proud , profane , wicked , ab•minable , and incorrigible wretches . 

Wherefore doubtless it would be more suitable to a commonwealth ( If we become so indeed , and not in word only ) and more advantageous to the good of all the persons , to have universities or colleges , one at least in every great town or city in the nation , as in London , York , Bristol , Exeter , Norwich , and the like ; and for the state to allow to these colleges an honest and competent maintenance , for some godly and learned men to teach the tongues and arts , under a due reformation . And this the state May the better do ( By provision out of every county , or otherwise , as shall be judged best ) seeing there will be no need of endowment of scholarships , inasmuch as the persons having colleges in their own cities , near their own houses , May maintain their children at home , whilst they learn in the schools ; which would be indeed , the greatest advantage to learning that can be thought of . 

8.  It would also be considered , whether it be according to the word of God , that youth should spend their time , only in reading of books , whilst they are well , strong , active , and fit for business . for commonly it so falls out , that youth lose as much by idleness , as they gain by study . and they being only brought up to read books , and such books as only contain wrangling , jangling , foolish , and unprofitable philosophy , when they have continue any long time in the university in these unwarranted courses by God , they are commonly in the end , fit for no worthy employment either in the world , or among the faithful . 

To remedy which great evil , colleges , being ( As hath been spoken ) dispersed through the great cities and towns of the commonwealth , it May be so ordered , that the youth according to Luther's counsel ) May spend some part of the day in learning or study , and the other part of the day , in some lawful calling , or one day in study , and another in business , as necessity or occasion shall require . 

And thus shall youth be delivered from that ease and idleness , which fills the hearts of university-students with many corruptions , and noisome lusts , whilst they fill their heads only with empty knowledge and foolish notions ; whereby neither can God be glorified , nor their neighbour profited . 

9  And if this course were taken in the d•sposing and ordering colleges , and studies , it would come to pass that twenty would learn then , where one learns now , and also by degrees , many men , ( On whom God shall please to pour forth his spirit ) May grow up to teach the persons , whilst yet they live in an honest calling and employment , as the apostles did . And this would give them great efficacy and power in teaching , whilst they lived by faith , through their honest labour , and were delivered from the mischief of idleness : but and if the faithful shall desire any one , that is more apt to teach , and hath received a greater measure of the anointing ▪ then his brethren , to spend more of his time in the word and prayer , than his calling will afford , at such times they ought to supply him : and the law of love in the hearts of the faithful , will be law enough in this matter , without calling in the aid of the magistrate . 

And by this means May the chargeable and burdensome maintenance of ministers , by degrees be taken away , and the church of Christ , and the very nations themselves , be supplied with a more faithful , Christian , and spiritual ministry then now it hath , at a far less rate . for God hath promised in the last days , to pour out his spirit on all flesh , and the sons and daughters , and servants and handmaids shall prophesy , and then shall knowledge cover the earth as waters the seas . 

Now for conclusion , i do conceive that none of the faithful and wise , ha•e any just cause to be offended for speaking for the use of human learning in this reform way , which the gospel will permit , seeing by this means these two errors of Antichrist would be dissolved among us ; the one of making un•versitieses the fountain of the ministry ; which one thing , is , and will be more and more ( As Christ's kingdom shall rise up and prevail in the world ) a millstone about their necks ; and the other , of making the clergy a distinct sect or order , or tribe , from other Christians , contrary to the simplicity of the gospel . 

2.  Let the faithful consider that this reform use of tongues and arts , justly hath its place in the world . for if all men cannot be Chr•stians ( As Paul saith all men have not faith ) yet let them be men , and improved in the use of reason , and sober learning , where by they May be seru•ceable to the commonwealth in their age , whilst the church of Christ hath its own members and officers , through the call of God , and unction of his spirit only . For * human learning hath its place and use among human things , but hath no place nor use in Christ's kingdom , as hath been sufficiently proved . 

And thus , have i freely offered my advice for mending things that are amiss , and making strait the things that are crooked in this matter . 

Finis . 





omnes scholas esse hareticas , vel theologia scholastica arguit . melanct. in apol. pro mart. Luther . 

the rehearsal of the errors . 1.  error . answer . no heathenish learning was taught in the church of God all the time of the old-testament . object . answ.  Peter . Steven . Paul . the primitive Christians and believers , taught no philosophy . Justine martyr forsook philosophy , and betook himself only to the scriptures . non ad humana• cationes , sed ad voluntatem doctrinae spiritu• interpretatio est accommodanda . justin. in exposit. fidei . Constantine the Emperor , took care for the teaching the scriptures to Christians . E•s . lib. 4. de vità consta•ti• . Berno Augiensis Abbas . Se mu•tis •am annis poetarum figmenta , &  interiorem ad 〈◊〉 per  epist ad magnified . cum juvenis adhuc , in omni Disciplinarun genere exercerer , certo affirmare possum , me••on minus quam reliquos aquales meos prosecisse , etc , Zuingl . lib. de certitud . & veritat . Verbi dei . matthias parisiensis antichristum o•nes Vaive sitates & eruditorum collegia seduxisse , ita ut jam nihil sani doceant aut christianis rectè suâ doctrinâ praeluceant . illyrit . Flat . Catal. test. veritat . John hus. seduxit antichristus à divina sapientia , plena salute & spiritu sancto , ad prudentiam & scientiam hominum & principum hujus mundi : quam copiavit nimis vehementer , & dilalavit & authenticavit & lucrosam divitiarum & honorum in hoc seculo effecit , ut ita divina sapientia & scientia esset neglecta à christianis , inveterata & obducta , & quasis vilis & inutilis ab iisdem reputata , &c.  joh. hus. lib. de vita & regn. Antichr . cap. 30.  Martin Luther . m. Luther . De cap. civit . Babylon . Joachim Calaber . 2.  error . answer . vetuit ne christiani gentilium disciplinis instrucrentur . Sozomen , histor. eccles. cap. 17.  Acts 4.13 . Acts 6.10 . christianos de integro gentilium disciplinam imbibere , nemo est qui christianae religioni prodesse concesserit . Nam non est extra periculum christianos gentilium eruditione institut , quippe quae docet multos esse deos. Socrates histor. eccles. cap. 14.  meum consilium est , ut adolescens vitet •hilosophiam ac theologiam scholasticam , ut mortem animae suae . luth. tom. 2. fol. 434. b  3.  error . answer . ver. 10.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Chrysostom . in 1. epist. ad cor.  Hom. 7.  4.  error . answer . * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , &c.  chrysost.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . chrysost. in 1. epist. ad Corinth hom. 4.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , &c. idem . Ibid.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . chrysost.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Wickliff . how the ministers May come to understand the scriptures . Tindal . Zuingl . Libr. de certitudine & veritate ver.  Dei . quod si non firmiter creditis , vos , humanis doctrinis desertis , divinitus doceri posse , vera fide etiamnum vacui estis . cadit hic theologiae scholasticae usus universus , & quicquid ex Ph•losophis haustum est . error est dicere , sine aristotele non fit theologus , imò theologus non fit nisi id fiat sine aristotele . tom. 1. fol. 10.  Vivendo , imò moriendo & damnando sit theologus , non intelligendo , legendo aut speculando . luth. to . 2. fol. 57  In saecris rebus non est disputandum aut philosophandum : in theologia tantum est audiendum & credendum , & slatuendum in corde , dem est verax , &c.  rectius fecerimus fi dialectica seu philosophia in sua sphara relictis , discamus loqui novis linguis in regno fidei , extrae omnem spharam . Affectus fidei exercondus est in articulis fidei , non intellectus Philosophicus . Luther . 5.  error . answer . 6.  error . answer . 7.  error . answer . scripturae non nisi eo spiritu intelligendae sunt quo scriptae sunt , qui spiritus nusquam praesentius & vivacius quàm in ipsis sacris suis quas scripsit literis inveniri potest . luth. tom. 2. fol. 309. a.  

idem spiritus qui per os prophetarum locutus est , in corda nostra penetret necesse est , ut persuadeat fidelit•r protulisse quòd divinitus erat mandatum . cal. institu . lib. 1. cap. 8.  §. 4.  

8.  error . answer . nullus homo unum iota in scripturis videt , nisi qui spiritum dei habet : omnes habent obscuratum cor , ita ut si etiam dicant & norint proserre omnia scripturae , nihil tamen horum sentiant aut ver• cognoscant , &c.  Spiritus enim requiritur ad totam scripturam & quamlibet ejus partem intelligendum . luth. tom. 3. fol. 169. a.  carnalis & philosophica scripturarum intelligentia non est sapientia dei qua à sapientibus absconditur , parvulis revelatur , Latimer in his answer to sr. Edward's Baintons' letter . 9  error . answer . human learning is not the outworks to the gospel . human learning is not the outer court to the gospel . 10.  error . answer . 11.  error . answer . 12.  error . answer . 13.  error . answer . studium cantabrigiense institutum noscitur , anno. 630 à Siguberto a•glorum o •entalium r•ge , qui postea purpuram in cu•ullum commutavit . arnoldus Wion duacensis , Benedictinus . lib. 5. cap. 94.  an. 895 rex alfredus hortante neot• Monacho viro doctissimo , oxonii publicam academiam instituit , proposita professoribus literarum praemiis . georg. lilius in chron. britan. regnante , edvardo primo , de studio Granibrig , facta est vniversitas , sicut est oxonium , per curiam romanam . Robert . Remington . quia enim christus non ordinavit istas vniversitates sive collegia , manifestum videtur , quod ista sicut graduationes in illis sunt vana gentilitas introducta , in cujus signum tam collegiati quam & alii graduati , quaerunt quae sua sunt , charitatis regulas deserentes : ex quo pollulant invidi• , comparationes personarum & patria , & multa alia seminaria patru mendacii . Wickliff in speculo militantis ecclesiae . cap. 26.  — quantum ad collegia in studiis suis generalibus est idem judicium . Nam per ipsa patriae & personae , contra charitatis regulas acceptantur , & intrinsecae invidiae , cum peccatis aliis & perjuriis ac simoniis contra instituta propria cumulantur . Conceditur tamen quod ex talibus collegiis sicut ex aliis Scotis eveniunt multa bona , non tamen tot , quot occasione peccati diaboli , & peccati primi hominis , ideo erubescat fidelis fructum talis commodi allegare . Wickliff lib. de cura pastorall. cap. 10.  si collegia ista sunt in conversatione à domino reprobata , quis dubitat quin sic nutrire eos non foret elcemosyna , sed factiones & partis contra christum stulta praesumptio . Nam omnes hae sectae & omnes novitates , quae non in christo domino sundatae sunt , tentant christum cum Satana , mat. 4. cum spe•nunt ordinationem liberam sectae ejus , & praeeligunt servilem sectam aliam minus bonam ; acsi nollent per gradus quos deus ordinat in Zion coelestem ascendere , sed per lationem satanae ad templi pinnacula transvolvere . Quae ergo •lcemosyna est sic fovere puerulum talem diaboli in castris cainiticis contra christum ? idem . John hus. pedibus conculcabitur corona superbiae . Nam multorum doctora•us & magistratus , qui suffocato in ipsis prorsus verbo evangelii , jam invere , cundè nimis magnificant fimbrias & dilatant phylacteria sua , & amant primas cathedras in scholis & salutari in foro , vocari ab hominibus rabbi  . cc per hoc cedunt in apparatu & armamento corporis mystici antichristi , quoniam scriptum est , est rex super-omnes filios superbiae , joh.  Hus. lib. de regno antichristi . cap. 14.  

procancellarius bacchalaureum theologiae admittens , his verbis utatur ; admittimas te ad enarrandum omnes apostolicas epistolas , i• nomine patris , filii , & spiritus sancti . Doctorem admittens ita dicet , admittimus te ad interpretandum & prositendum universam sacram scripturam tamve•etis quam novi testamenti , in nomine patris , filii & spiritus sancti . cap. 20.  de ceremoniis in gradibus conferendis university-degrees in divinity Antichristian . the gospel against divinity-degrees in the universities . the saints & martyrs against diu•nity-degreeses . ploughman's complaint . J•hn Wickliff  licet in qui bus•am sindus nom•m docto•is sit excell•ntius , cum fit vitus gentilis ex multis honoribus & statibus aggregatus , tamen in teatu apo•toli ••mitur simplicius , pro quocunque fideli , qui notabiliter docet fid•m catholicam ; & sic dici• nomen doctoris meritum & laborem , & interimit superbiam & status eminentiem quoad mundium . Wickliff tractat. in cap. 23.  Mat.  breviter , omnis secta , satus vel operatio , quam christus non approbat in suo evangelio , est rationabiliter dimittenda ; ideocum christus non approbat sed reprobat gentile m•gisterium supraedictum , patet quod est de ecclesia dimittendu• . idem . nota quod nomen officii multum distat a nomine graduat•onis scholasticae , gentiliter introductae . Wickliff , in sermon . Domini in monte . cum periculum & superfluitas sit in isto nomine videtur quod istud nomen sit rationabiliter fugiendum . John hus. Hus , libr. de regno , &c.  Antichristi . c. 14.  * ac per hoc distinguuntur a quibusdam alivade coronatis , ut magistti & doctores , & baccalaurei , nec non aliis varii generis titulorum in multiplici scientia hujus mundi , &c.  Luther . Zuinglius . audes hic bu•usmodi titulos magistrorum & doctorum non ex deo esse , quum christus hoc vetat . zuin. Conradus pelican . 

melch. Adam . in vita pelican . 

the true divinity-degrees in the church of God . Christ's first degrees in the church . His divine sonship . his second degree . His unction . his third degree . His victory over temptation . his fourth degree . His teaching the word . his fifth degree . His dying for the word . 

rev. 9 from the first to the twelfth verse expounded by Luther . vers. 1.  ver. 2.  ver. 3.  ver. 4.  ver. 5.  vers. 6.  vers. 7.  praeparatis in praelium , & armatis omni genere doctrinae , & arte loquendi , arguendi , respondendi , exhortandi• potentes sunt ad invedendum & defendendum quamcunque velint veritaelem , aut speciem veritatis , armati nihil ominous omni apparentia fa•etiae & honestalis . j. hus. et super capita corum coronae : i. e. tituli magistrales , vel dignitatum & graduum in ecclesia investitura . j. hus.  vers. 8.  vers. 9  vers. 10.  vers. 11.  Luther's second testimony . ☞ ut academiis , ab initio mundi , satanas nihil excogitaret praesentius , ad vastandum fidem & evangelium toto orbe . the university-philosophy . t•e un•versi•y-divinity . the university-preachers . 

* juramentum magistrorum in receptionibus & resumptionibus sol•nnibus . Jurent etiam , quod extra is•an vniu•rsitatem nusquam alibi in anglia , praeterquam oxoniae , in aliqua facultate incipi••l , ou• lectiones suas solcuniter resum•nt , nec consenticut quod aliquis a libi in anglia incipiens , hic pro magistro in illa feculiate habeatur . Luther . libel . de instituend . puer . * sufficit autem ut homines de his rebus , ( scil. de artibus & scientiis ) quantum in schola diclicerunt , noverint propter usus humanos . August . in act . contr. felicem . 

































































































































































