A REFUTATION of the Objections Against the ATTRIBUTES of GOD in general . 

IN A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul , September the Fifth , 1698.  

BEING The Sixth of the LECTURE for that Year , Founded by the Honourable Robert Boyle , Esq 

By JOHN HARRIS , M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY . 

LONDON , Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin , at the King's-head in St. Paul's Churchyard , 1698.  

JEREM. ix . 24.  

Let him that glorieth , glory in this , that he understandeth and knoweth me , that I am the Lord , who exercise loving kindness , judgement and righteousness in the earth : for in these things I delight , saith the Lord  

Pride and Vainglory , are Things which Human Nature is strangely subject to ; there being scarce any one so mean , but who judges that he hath something or other that he may justly be Proud of , and value himself for . But as Pride is Folly in the general , so it apparently discovers itself in this respect , That those Men are usually most Vain , who have the least Reason to be so , and that too in Things that are the least valuable in themselves . Thus , as the Prophet intimates in the Verse before the Text , Men frequently glory in Bodily Strength , in Beauty , and Agility , and in the Affluence of external Possessions : Things which are the meanest Appurtenances to our Natures , and which are neither in our Power to get nor keep . Wisdom indeed , and Judgement , Learning and Parts , Wit and Penetration , and all the Nobler Endowments of our Minds , are things of the greatest intrinsic Worth and Value , and we have much more reason to esteem ourselves for them , than for all the Goods of Fortune , or any Bodily Excellencies . But yet , Let not the wise man Glory in his Wisdom and Knowledge neither ; though as the Targum on the place hints , it were as great as that of Solomon himself ; for we have in reality no just ground to value ourselves for even this , when we consider that the best of us have it but in a very slender Proportion ; and that our highest Knowledge is very imperfect and defective . Hence it comes to pass , or at least ought to do so , that the Modesty and Humility of truly knowing Men increases with their Learning and Experience : Their being raised something above the common level , instead of lessening and shortening in their Eyes the Statures of other Men , increases their Prospect of a Boundless Field of Knowledge all around them ; the more of which they discover , the more they find yet undiscovered . But he that knows but little , vainly thinks he knows every thing , and judges all is empty and void that is without the Bounds of his scanty Horizon . 

Another great Vanity there is also in Pride , which is , That Men are frequently conceited and Proud of those things , which they have the least share of , and are fond of such Actions as do plainly discover their Defects . For usually those Men are most forward to talk of Learning , who are least acquainted with Books ; and those make the greatest Noise about , and Pretensions to Philosophy , who have the least insight into Nature . Those who talk most of Certainty and Demonstration have usually the most confused Ideas , and the most Superficial Notions of things , and are the farthest of all Men from true Science . This is apparently seen in the Pretenders to Scepticism and Infidelity , and in all the Atheistical Writers . no Men express themselves with such an insupportable Insolence as these New Lights , these Reformers of our Philosophy and our Politics ; who yet after all are Proud knowing nothing , as St. Paul speaks , Rom. 1.21 . But are vain in their imaginations ; their foolish heart is darkened , and professing themselves to be wise , they become fools . And therefore it is that the wisdom of God appears as foolishness to them , because the carnal mind savoureth not the things that are of God.  

Thou would Men but studiously apply themselves to consider of , would they carefully and impartially examine into , and would they but seriously make use of those Means that God hath graciously given Mankind , in order to attain a sufficient Knowledge of his Nature and Perfections ; They would then find so much Beauty , Wisdom , Harmony , and Excellency in this inexhaustible Fund of Knowledge , as would sufficiently Reward their Pains and Endeavours . And this we may glory in ; this Knowledge will be the most noble and honourable that our Capacities can attain unto ; and in comparison of which , there is no other Qualification and Excellence in our Natures at all valuable . For here we have an Object the greatest and most perfect that can be , the more we know of which , the more we shall exalt and perfect ourselves . Here are no empty Speculations ; no difficiles Nugae , no false Lights , nor Fantastical Appearances ; but 't is a real and substantial , an useful and practical Knowledge ; a Knowledge that doth not only delight us for the present , but which brings constant and lasting Satisfaction here , and eternal Happiness hereafter . Let him therefore that glorieth , glory in this , that he understandeth and knoweth God , that He is the Lord , who exerciseth loving kindness , judgement and righteousness in the earth , for in these things do I delight , saith the Lord In which words , there are these two Things chiefly considerable : 

I A Supposition that God is capable of being known to us by his Attributes . 

II An Account of some of those Attributes which he exerciseth in the Earth , and in which he delights . 

Under which Two Heads , I shall , in pursuance of my general Design , endeavour to Answer those Objections that Atheistical Men have brought against the Attributes and Perfections of the Divine Nature . 

I Here is a Supposition that God is capable of being known to us by his Attributes . He that glorieth , let him glory in this , that he understandeth and knoweth God , that he is the Lord , who exerciseth loving kindness , judgement and righteousness in the earth . 

't is plainly supposed here , That this Knowledge which we are directed to acquire , is a possible Knowledge . God would not command us to understand him by his Attributes of Goodness , Mercy and Justice , which he continually exerciseth in the Earth , if it were impossible for us to attain to it : He would not delight to do such Works in the World , if nothing of them could be known , nor himself by them . But the Psalmist tells us , the Lord is known by his Works : And that the Heavens declare his Glory , and the Firmament showeth his handiwork : And St. Paul is express , That the Invisible Things of Him are clearly seen , being understood by the things that are made , even his Eternal Power and Godhead . 

And indeed , These Attributes of God are what is most and best known to us , and from the certain Knowledge that we have of these , we may be effectually assured of the Existence of some first Cause , some Supreme Being in whom all these Attributes and Perfections must inhere . The Infinite Nature , indeed , of This Divine Being is Incomprehensible to our shallow and scanty Understandings , and we cannot by searching find it out , nor discover the Almighty unto Perfection . But notwithstanding we have as certain a Knowledge , and as clear Ideas of his Attributes as we have of any thing in the World. And Grotius' Gloss on this place is very just and proper : God doth not bid Men know him according to his Nature , which exceeds Human Capacity to do , but according to those Attributes or Properties of his which relate to Mankind , which the Hebrews call Middôth , i.e. those Measures or Dimensions of Him which are proportionable to our Understandings and Capacities . And such his Attributes are , for we see them visibly exerted in the Works of the Creation , and we find them necessarily included in the Notion that we have of the Supreme Being , or the First Cause of all things ; as I have already showed in another Discourse . 

But this , some are pleased to deny ; and say , That nothing at all can be known of God , but only , that he is : for his Nature is perfectly Incomprehensible ; that we do but dishonour God , by pretending to Understand and to talk about his Attributes ; about which we can say nothing but only what serves to express our Astonishment , Ignorance , and Rusticity ; and therefore the Civil Magistrate ought to determine what Attributes shall be given to the Deity . This seems to be the Sense of Vaninus , and is plainly of Mr. Hobbs ; and was before them of Sextus Empiricus . Which take in their own words : 

Non Deum melius Intelligimus quam per ea quae negamus nos Intelligere , saith Vaninus . Again , Deum nullis tam plenè indicatum intelligimus Vocibus , quam iis quae Ignorantiam nostram praetendunt . We can have , saith Mr. Hobbs , no Conception of the Deity , and consequently all his Attributes signify only our Inability and Defect of Power to conceive any thing concerning Him , except only this , that there is a God . And in another place , saith he , God's Attributes cannot signify what he is , but aught to signify our desire to honour him ; but they that venture to reason of his Nature from these Attributes of honour , losing their Understanding in the very first Attempt , fall from one Inconvenience to another without End and Number , and do only discover their Astonishment and Rusticity . Again , When Men ( saith he ) out of Principles of Natural Reason dispute about the Attributes of God , they do but dishonour him ; for in the Attributes we give to God , we are not to consider Philosophical Truth . And therefore he concludes , That those Attributes which the Sovereign Power shall ordain in the Worship of God , as signs of Honour , aught to be taken and used for such by Private Men in their Public Worship . In which he agrees as he useth to do , exactly with Sextus Empiricus ; who tells us that the Sceptic is in the right for asserting Gods according to the Laws and Custom of his Country ; and in paying them that veneration and worship which on the same account becomes due to them , will not venture to determine any thing Philosophically about them . 

Now from these Passages , I think it appears plain enough , that though these Men did in words pretend to own and acknowledge a God , yet in Fact they were Atheists , and had no true Belief of any such Being . For a Deity without the Attributes of Understanding and Wisdom , without Ends or Design ; none of which Mr. Hobbs asserts expressly , can be in God , is a Ridiculous stupid Being , an Idol that every rational Agent must needs despise , and which can never be the Object of any one's Adoration , Love , or Obedience . To assert therefore that the Attributes of God are not discoverable by Reason , nor agreeable to Philosophical Truth , but may be declared to be any thing which the Sovereign Power pleases to make them ; this is designedly to expose the Belief and Notion of a Deity , and to render it so Precarious , that it can be the Object of no Rational Man's Faith. And this last named Writer Treats the Deity after the same manner in most other Places of his Works ; He saith , we must not say of Him that he is Finite , that he hath figure Parts or Totality , that he is here or there , that he moveth or rests , or that we can conceive or know any thing of him ; for all this is to dishonour him : And yet to say that he is an Immaterial Substance , that he is an Infinite and Eternal Spirit , is , he saith , Nonsense , and what destroys and contradicts itself . However he is willing to allow the word Immaterial or Spirit to be used towards God , as a Mark of Honour and Respect . 

That is , we may attribute to God what we know to be Nonsense and Contradiction , and this is the Way to Honour him ; and to speak of him any other way , is to Dishonour Him ! Who doth not perceive that it was plainly the Design of this Writer to treat of the Deity after such a manner , as should deprive Him of all Knowledge and Care of Human Affairs , and consequently , effectually Banish out of men's Minds a just Veneration for Him , and Adoration of Him ? Such Men are the most Dangerous and Mischievous of all others ; Professed Atheists can do no great Harm ; for all persons are aware of them , and will justly abhor the writings and Conversation of Men that say boldly there is no God. But there are but few such ; they have found a way to pass undiscovered under a fairer Dress and a softer Name : They pretend to be true Deists and sincere Cultivators of Natural Religion ; and to have a most Profound Respect for the Supreme and Almighty Being : But when this Profound Respect comes to be thoroughly examined and duly understood , it will appear to be the most abominable Abuse that can be , and a most wicked and Blasphemous Idea of the Deity . For they make him either nothing but the Soul of the World , Universal Matter , or Natura Naturata , a God that is an absolutely necessary Agent , without any Rectitude in his Will ; without any Knowledge , Wisdom , Goodness , Justice , Mercy , or Providence over his Works . But let such persons take what Names they please upon themselves , a little consideration will soon discover what they are in reality ; and , I hope , give Men a just abhorrence of such Notions , though never so speciously put forth . 

But let us now proceed to examine what Ground there is from the Nature of the Thing , for Men to advance such wicked Opinions , and to show the weakness and precariousness of them . And here it must be premised and taken for granted , that there is a God. This is what the persons I am now concerned with , pretend to own , and to acknowledge . Which being supposed : It appears very plain that we may have if we will , and some persons , as I have showed , have always had , a very clear Notion or Idea of the Attributes and Perfections of such a Being ; as also that they are fixed and immutable Properties in the Divine Nature . For by professing to believe a God , they must mean , if they mean any thing , The first Cause and Author of all Things , and the Governor and Disposer of them ; A Divine Being , containing in himself all possible Perfections ; without being subject to any manner of Defect . This I have already hinted at in another place , and shall now more largely prove . 

So far is it from being true , that we cannot reason of the Nature of God from his Attributes , nor Discourse of those Attributes from our Reason ; That this seems to be the only proper Way of enquiring into the wonderful Depth of the Divine Perfections . I mean , the only Way we have without Revelation , for I am not now considering what God hath farther discovered of Himself to us by his Word . For though the Deity doth abound with Infinite Excellencies and Perfections ; yet by the Light of Nature we can discover those only , of which he hath given us some Impression on our own Natures ; and these are the Scales and Proportions by which our Reason must measure the Divine Attributes and Perfections . For in order to gain good and true Notions of these , we ought to take our Rise from those Perfections and Excellencies which we find in the Creatures , and especially in ourselves . 

There can be but two Ways of coming to the Knowledge of any thing ; by its Cause , and by its Effects . 't is impossible for us to make use of the former of these , in Reference to the Deity : For He being himself without Cause , and the First Cause and Original of all Things cannot be known to us this Way . But by the second Way , he very properly may be the Object of our Knowledge , and we ought to apply ourselves to this Method , in order to understand the Attributes of God. For whatever Excellency or Perfection we can any way discover in the Effects of God in the World , i e. in the Works of the whole Creation ; the same we cannot but suppose must be in Him , in the highest and most noble Proportion and Degree ; since they are all owing to , and derived from Him.  

And if we take a serious and considerate View of the Excellencies and Perfections that are to be found in the Creatures , or the Works of God in the World ; we shall find that they may be reducible to these Four general Heads ; Being or Substance , Life , Sensibility , and Reason . All which we find to be in ourselves , and therefore they are at hand , and ready to assist our Meditations ; and these will , if duly considered , lead us into a good Way of discovering the Attributes and Perfections of the Divine Nature . And I doubt not but a great Reason why Men have had and advanced wrong Notions of God , hath been because they have had such of themselves , and of those Perfections that are in our own Natures . Men that do not understand that the true Perfection of Human Nature consists in Moral Goodness , or in an Universal agreeableness of our Will to the Eternal Laws of Right Reason , cannot conceive aright of the Attributes and Perfections of God : For they will be for making him like themselves , guided by vehement Self-love , and inordinate Will , or whatever predominant Passions possess them . 

'T were easy to Trace this in the Epicurean Notion of a God dissolved in Ease and Sloth , and who neglects the Government of the World , to enjoy his own private Pleasures ; and in the Hobbian one of a Deity not guided by any Essential Rectitude of Will , but only by Arbitrary , Lawless , and irrisistible Power ; for both these Opinions are exactly agreeable to the Genius and humours of their Authors and Propagators . 

But to proceed with our Deduction of the Divine Attributes from the Excellencies and Perfections which we find in ourselves . 1.  If in the first place we consider Being , and the high Perfections that do belong to it ; we shall find that they must needs be in the Deity , who is the First and Supreme Being , and the Cause and Author of all others in the World , in the utmost Perfection . Now the highest Perfections belonging unto Being , we find to be these two : 1.  That it shall have an underivable and necessary Existence , always be , and never cease , die , terminate or be extinct ; and , 2.  That it be Great and Ample as to its Extent , in opposition to Littleness or Scantyness , and to being Limited , Circumscribed , Bounded or Restrained by any Other Thing . 

And if we attribute these two Perfections to God , thence will plainly Arise his Eternity , and his Immensity or Omnipresence . For what cannot possibly cease to be , but hath necessary Existence included in its Nature , is Eternal . And what cannot be any way Limited , Circumscribed or Restrained , must needs be Boundless and Immense , and present every where . And I dare say , that these Notions of God's Eternity and Immensity , do find an easy admission into , and are firmly rooted in all considerate and unprejudiced Minds ; and who are not debauched by Sceptical and Atheistical Metaphysics . For 't is impossible for any one that thinks at all , to have a Notion of a Deity that can die , or cease to be ; or that is so confined and imprisoned in any one part of Space , that he can extend himself no farther : No! it must be an Epicurean Stupefaction of Soul , indeed , that can induce a Man to fancy a Mortal or a Topical God ; one that may be slain , or die of old Age , or be shackled and confined to any one part of the Universe , exclusive of the rest . And though a Man cannot find perhaps that he hath an adequate Idea of Eternity ; yet that God must be without Beginning or End , he will readily allow , as soon as he considers the Thing ; for he will perceive that the First Cause of all Things could not be caused by any thing else , but must be Self-existent , and without Beginning : and if nothing could cause his Being , nothing can take it away neither , and consequently he must be Everlasting or Eternal . And of this Attribute the Heathens had a clear Idea and Belief , giving God the Title of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and Swearing usually by the Immortal Gods. Tully saith , Deum nisi Sempiternum Intelligere quî possumus ? How can we conceive the Deity any otherwise than to be an Eternal Being . And Aristotle in many places makes Eternity Essential to the Idea of God ; and particularly , Lib. 2. de Coelo . 

And so as to Immensity or Omnipresence , though he , indeed , cannot tell the manner how a Spirit or Immaterial Substance permeates Matter , or is present to every part of it ; yet he will conclude that the Deity must some how or other actually fill and be present with all things ; since 't is impossible he should be excluded any where , or be in any respect bounded or limited ; as 't is also that he should act or operate where he is not . Nor would , I believe , any free and unprejudiced Mind have recourse either to the Notion of God's being Universal Matter or Infinite Space , in order to solve His Immensity or Omnipresence . For the former , he would see , necessarily makes the Deity materially divisible , into Parts actually separated from each other ; and to be part of him here , and part there ; which he could not but think monstrously absurd and impossible : and the latter renders God nothing at all , but Imaginary Room , Vacuity or Space , in which Bodies are capable of Moving up and down , or to and from , without hindrance or impediment from any Medium . Which how it should , any more than the former account for the Energetical Power , Wisdom , Justice and Goodness of the Divine Nature , ( the noblest Perfections he can have any Idea of ) 't would be as impossible for him to conceive , as it is for the Assertors of it to prove . The ancient Heathens allowed this Attribute of Immensity to the Deity , by common consent . Tully tells us , That Pythagoras asserted , Deum esse animum per Naturam Rerum omnium intentum & comeantem , De Nat. Deorum . And he cites it as the Opinion of Thales Milesius ; Deorum omnia esse Plena , De Legib. lib. 2. which Virgil also affirms expressly , — Jovis omnia plena . And again , Deum namque ire per omnes Terras tractusque maris , coelumque profundum , Georg. lib. 4.  And Seneca tells us , That God is ubique & omnibus proesto . And in another place , Quocunque te flexeris , ibi Deum videbis Occurrentem tibi , nihil ab illo vacat , Opus suum ipse Implet . 

2.  If we consider Life ; Another Perfection which we find in ourselves , we must needs conclude that this is in the Deity too , who is the great Author and Fountain of Life , in the highest Degree and Proportion imaginable . Now the Perfection of Life seems to consist in Activity , or an Energetical Power to Act , or Operate ; in opposition to Impotence , Weakness , or Inability . And this Perfection , no one sure can possibly doubt to be in the Deity . For besides that 't is impossible for us to conceive that Life and Activity in ourselves can proceed from a Dead and Unactive Principle ; our Reason must needs reject the Notion of an Inanimate , and Impotent Deity , or of one that is any way defective in Power , as soon as it can be proposed to it . Can we imagine that a Being from whom all Life , Power and Energy is derived , can be without it himself ? and that he who hath , as Simplicius calls it , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , a whole entire or perfect Power , that hath all the Power of Nature at His Command , can be unable to perform whatever is possible to be done ? that is , whatever is agreeable to , and consistent with , the other Attributes of the Divine Nature ? And if so , must not then such a Being be owned to be Almighty or Omnipotent ? From whence we see another great Attribute doth plainly arise . And of this Attribute of the Deity , there was a plain and clear Notion all along among the Heathen Writers ; as appears from Homer in many places , who speaking of God , says , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . The same thing also we have in the Fragments of Linus , long before Him. And in Callimachus also , in express words . As also in Agatho , an Ancient Greek Poet cited by Aristotle in his Ethics . So in Virgil and Ovid , you have frequently the Title of Pater Omnipotens given to the Deity . And this Attribute of Infinite Power in God , Epicurus set himself with all his might to confute ; denying there was any such thing as Infinite Power at all ; that thereby ( says Lucretius , lib. 1. ) he might take away Religion too . 

And from hence also his Eternity might be naturally deduced . For we cannot conceive this Life or Activity , this Almighty Power that is in God , can ever cease , decay or determine , any more than it can have had a beginning , and consequently such a Being must necessarily Exist , be Eternal , or Endure and Live for Ever . 

3.  If we proceed a little higher , and consider Sensibility which is another great Perfection that we find in ourselves , and some other Creatures , we must needs Attribute This also , and that in the highest degree , to the Divine Nature . I take this now in the general , for that Power or Faculty whereby any Being is capable of taking Pleasure or feeling Pain . And such a Sensibility , or something Analogous to it , we cannot but think God must have in the most exquisite Perfection , since our Own , as well as that of all other Creatures , must be derived from Him. And though , indeed , we ought to think that the Infinite Perfection of his Nature secures him from all Possibility of feeling Pain , ( since nothing can contradict his Will , run counter to his Desires , or frustrate his Expectations ) yet we have no reason to suppose the Deity insensible of Pleasure ; but may justly conclude from hence , that he is always most perfectly happy . For he contains in Himself all Possible Good and Infinite Excellencies and Perfection , and of this He is most tightly sensible , and consequently must eternally be Pleased and delighted with himself in the Enjoyment of his own Infinite Fullness : And this Notion many of the Heathens had of God , that he was a most Happy Being ; styling Him frequently , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

4.  But the Highest Perfection which we can discover in ourselves , and in any created Being's whatever , is Reason . And this , no doubt , we ought also to attribute to God in the highest Degree and Perfection . Now the Perfection of Reason seems to consist in these two Things : 

1.  In Knowledge and Wisdom in the Understanding Faculty . And , 

2.  In Rectitude or Righteousness in the William  

All which we cannot but suppose the Divine Nature to be perfectly endowed with . And first as to Knowledge and Wisdom ; The former of which , implies an Understanding of things as they are in themselves , according to their true Natures and Properties : And the latter , a considering of them as to their Relations to , and Dependences upon one another ; or in other words , according as they are fit or qualified to be Ends or Means . 

And these must certainly be in God , for the same reason that we have found in Him the other Perfections abovementioned . To the Deity therefore , from this Consideration , we ought to Attribute Omniscience , and Infinite , or most perfect Wisdom ; for no doubt we ought to conclude , That the Deity both knows every thing according to its Nature , and also understands its Usefulness and Subservience to any End , Design or Purpose whatsoever . And therefore it was as stupidly or impiously said by Mr. Hobbs , That there can be no such thing as Knowledge in God , and that he can have no Ends. For I cannot imagine there can one so grossly Ignorant and Foolish be found among Mankind , who doth really believe there can be an ignorant or a foolish God ; and who would not abhor such a Position as monstrously absurd and impossible . A Man must be a long while conversant with Atheistical and Sceptical Philosophy , before he can grow so dull as not to perceive the force and Power of the Psalmists Logic and reasoning in Psal. 94. v. 8 , 9 , etc. and he must be very Studiously brutish and Learnedly foolish , before he can think that he that planted the Ear , should not be able to hear himself ; and that he that form the Eye should not see ; and that he that gave and taught all Knowledge to Men should have none himself . 

The mighty Reason that Mr. Hobbs is pleased to give , Why there can be no Understanding in God is , because that Faculty being in us nothing but a Tumult of Mind , raised by External Things that press the Organical Parts of our Bodies , there can be no such thing in God. And in other places , he sagaciously determines , that 't is impossible to hear without Ears , to see without Eyes , and to Understand without Brains , none of which God hath ; and therefore must be Ignorant and Stupid . But , methinks , 't is very hardly done of Him , to determine the Deity to be Corporeal , and yet to assign Him none of these Material Organs in order to make him an Intelligent Being . Why should not the same Matter which is able to form the Mechanic Understanding of so great a Philosopher , be capable of being modified as Intelligently in the Divine Nature ? Must the Deity have the worst and most stupid Body of All others ? Into what abominable Absurdities will such Principles as these lead a Man ! or rather into what abominable Impieties and Blasphemies will Vice and Pride hurry him ! He doth not only think wickedly that the Deity is such an one as himself , but infinitely worse ; a Corporeal Being that hath lesle and fewer Perfections than a Corporeal Man ! But I must not dwell on showing the Design of this Writer , having sufficiently done it already . I shall only now add , that I think I have already proved that Matter alone cannot think , know , nor understand ; and therefore it is not men's Brains , but their Soul that hath this Intelligent Power ; and no doubt an Infinite and Immaterial Mind , needs not any Material Organs to convey Knowledge to him , in whom all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge do Inhabit , and from whom they are all derived and do proceed . 

And there was , Anciently amongst the Heathens , a clear belief of the Infinite Knowledge and Wisdom of God. Tully tells us , that Thales used commonly to say , Deos omnia cernere , the Gods behold or know all things . And Seneca saith , Deo nihil Clausum est ; interest Animis nostris , & mediis cogitationibus intervenit . And as to the Wisdom of God , Tully deduces it after the same manner as we now have done , by attributing the Excellencies of the Creature to the Deity in the Highest Perfection . Sapiens est Homo , saith he , & propterea Deus ; Man hath Wisdom , and therefore God , from whom the Wisdom in Man is derived , must needs have it himself . But again , As we must attribute to God Infinite Knowledge and Wisdom ; so we must Rectitude of Will or Perfect Righteousness too . And since the Rectitude of the Will consists in an exact Conformity of it and all its Affections to the Impartial Rule of Right Reason ; we cannot but suppose also , that the Will of God is in a most exquisite Conformity to the Dictates of his Unerring Reason ; and that the Deity doth in every respect act exactly agreeable thereunto . And by this means we shall find that God must be Just and Righteous in all his proceedings , and that he always executeth Justice and Righteousness in the Earth , and delights in these things . Our Adversaries , indeed , do assert , That there is no such thing as any distinction between Good and Evil , Just and Unjust , that can be taken from any common Rule , or from the Objects themselves ; but only with Relation to the Person that useth them ; who calls that Good which he love's , and that Evil which he hate's . That God doth every thing by his Irresisistible Power ; and that in that is founded our Obedience to Him , and not in any Principle of Gratitude to him ( b ) for Benefits which we have received from him . That Justice is founded in Power , and that whatever is Enacted by a Sovereign Power can't be Unjust . The Groundlessness of which Impious and Dangerous Notions , I shall fully show in a subsequent Discourse ; and therefore shall only now observe , that this Way of depriving the Deity of these most excellent and lovely Attributes of Justice and Goodness , and making Him to Act only according to the Arbitrary Dictates of Irresistible Power , gives us the Notion of a Devil instead of a Deity , of an absolute Tyrant , instead of a righteous Governor of the World ; and is directly contrary to the Sober and Considerate Sentiments of all Mankind , in whose Minds a plain Distinction between Good and Evil is founded , and who can never be brought without doing great violence to themselves , to assert that the Deity is not guided in all things by the Eternal Rules of Truth and Justice , and that the Judge of all the Earth should not do right . They see the comeliness and loveliness that there is in good and just Actions among Men ; and therefore cannot suppose that an Infinite and Almighty Being can do any thing contrary to them ; they are sensible that Deviations from those Rules proceed only from the Defects and Imperfections that are in our Natures ; but that God , who is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , who possesseth and sustaineth all things , cannot make use of any indirect Means to procure himself Happiness , or to slave off Misery ; since the Perfection of his Nature gives him all the one , and secures him from all the other . And they which certainly never believe that God will do any Action , that they do not think suitable to be done by a good and just Man ; But will on just Grounds conclude , That whatever Excellence or Perfections they can any way discover to be in a Good Man , must needs be in the highest Proportion in God , and consequently that the Deity must be most Righteous , Just and Good , and most Kind , Merciful and Gracious in all his dealings with his Creatures . 

And thus we see how by considering the Excellencies and Perfections which we find in ourselves , and attributing them in the Highest Proportion to that Supreme Being the Deity , from whence they must all be derived ; we may attain to a good and clear Knowledge of the Properties and Attributes of the Divine Nature : We may find them to be such as are agreeable to the plainest Reason and to Philosophical Truth : and consequently conclude , that they can have no such weak and precarious Foundation as the Order of the Civil Power , and the Will of the Supreme Magistrate . 

And were it now my Business , 't were very easy from hence to show also the True Foundation of Religious Worship ; that it doth depend on the Right Apprehensions and Notions that we have of the Attributes of God ; and that our Obedience to Him , is founded in our Gratitude to him for the Benefits which we receive from Him , and consequently is our Reasonable Service . But the Proof of this will be more proper in another Place . 

FINIS . 





 Amphitheatr . Provide . Aetern . p. 9   Human Nature , p. 69.   Leviath . p. 374.   Leviath . p. 191.   Leviath . p. 192.   〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Adu. Math. p. 317.   Leviath . p. 190.   Sermon 4 th' . and 5 th' .  In my Second Sermon   Ep. 95.   De Benef. lib. 4.   Leviath . p. 190.   Leviath . p. 24 , 63 , 64 , Spinozae Oper. Posth . p. 37.   Leviath . p. 187.   Plato calls the Deity 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , the very Idea or Essence of Good. And herein he seems to have followed the Pythagoreans and Timaeus Locrus in particular : Who asserts of Mind , according to him the first Principle of the Universe , that it is , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , of the Nature of Good : And saith further , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , that they call it God , and the Principle of the best things . 

Aristotle also reckons Moral Goodness among the Perfections of the Divine Nature : And Plutarch saith , 't is one of the chiefest Excellencies in the Deity ; and that on this account it is that Men love and honour Him.  

Hierocles in Carm. Pythagor . asserts the Deity to be Essentially Good , and not by Accidental or External Motives . 

