The axe laid to the root of the old corrupt-tree ▪ and the spirit of deceit struck at in its nature , from whence all the error from the life , among both Papists and Protestant's hath arisen , and by which it is nourished and fed at this day . 

In a distinction between the faith which is of man , and the faith which is of God . 

And in some assertions concerning true faith , its nature , rise , &c.  it 's receiving of Christ , its abiding and growing in his living virtue . 

With a warning concerning adding and diminishing from the scripture in general , ( And the prophecies of the revelation in particular . ) Discovering what it is , and the great danger of it , with the only way of preservation from it , where is added a short touch about the use of means . 

As also a brief history concerning the state of the church since the days of the apostles . 

With an exhortation to the present age . 

By the movings of the life , in a friend to the living truth of the most high God , but an utter enemy to the spirit of error and blasphemy , where ever it is found , as well in the strictest of the Protestant's , as among the grossest of the Papists . 

Isaac Penington the younger . 

London : printed and are to be sold by Lodowick Lloyd , at his shop next the castle in Cornhill , 1659.  

The preface 

There was a glorious day , and bright appearance of truth in the times of the apostles . They had the true comforter , who led them into all truth , and kept them alive in truly , and truth alive in them . By this spirit they , as living stones , were built up a spiritual house , founded upon Zion the holy mount , into Jerusalem the holy city , which is the church of the living God , the pillar and g•ound of truth . And here they had their conversation in heaven , with God the judge of all , with Christ the mediator , and with the spirits of •ust men and the holy angels , which always behold the face of God . They lived in the spirit , they walked in the spirit , they prayed in the spirit , they sung in the spirit , they worshipped in the spirit , and in that understanding which the truth had made free , and had God dwelling with them , and Christ walking in the midst of them ; and by the presence and power of his life in them ; were truly dead unto sin , and alive unto God , they being not strivers against sin with man's legal spirit , but by the power of grace , which made them more than conquerors through him that loved them . This was part of the glory of that state , in that day of the sunshine of the gospel . 

But behold , a thick night of darkness overspread the beauty of this ? Some false brethren went out from the true church into the world , getting the sheep's clothing , making a great outward appearance , and drew the world after them , yea and some from the very churches themselves : ( How hard was the apostle Paul fain to plead with the Corinthians about his own apostleship and doctrine that he Might preserve that church from the false apostles ! ) And when they had gathered a sufficient party in the world , they made head against the true sheep & lambs of Christ , fought with them , and overcame , them . And when they had overcome them that had the living testimony of Jesus , and the true power and presence of the spirit among them , they set up their own dead form making a cry all over the nations of the earth , revelation is ceased , there is no looking now for such an infallible spirit , and such immediate teachings as the Christians had in the apostles days , who had the anointing to teach them all things : but they point men to traditions , to the church , as they call it ( Which title the whore hath engrossed since the days of the apostles ) or to searchings of the scriptures , and reading expositions upon it , and bodies of divinity , form by the understanding part in man to instruct the understading part . Thus the whole course of religion and of the knowledge of God , came to be out of that spirit and life wherein it first came forth ( And wherein it first stood ) and consisted in doctrines of men , and a form of worship and knowledge which the wisdom of man had framed , in an imitation of that which formerly stood in the life . 

And now men being gone from the life , from the spirit and his immediate teachings , into an outward form of knowledge and worship of God in the wrong nature ; now Antichrist is got up , and the dragon sits in the temple , appearing there as if he were God , giving out laws and ordinances of worship in public , and putting men upon duties and exercises of devotion in private , and he is obeyed and bowed down to in the observation of these ; but the true living God is not known ; nor his secret still voice ( Which calls out of these ) heard , because of the great noise which the dragon makes in his temple ( For so it is now , he having gained it , though it was once gods ) about his laws and ordinances of worship , which he would have all compelled to , and none suffered to testify against them that they are his , and not the Lords . 

Yet it pleased the Lord , all the night of this darkness , to raise up some ▪ witnesses against the dragon , and all his invented forms of worship , though they were still hunted , persecuted , knocked down , and their testimony cried out against as error , heresy , schism and blasphemy , and the ways , worships and ordinances of the whore the beast and the dragon still cried up as the truth . Thus the Papists , they cried out against the Protestanus as heretics and schismatics , who were witnesses against them ; and the Protestant's , they cried out against the Non-conformists , separatists and brownists , who were witnesses against them ; and every sect cries out most against them , who are led further from the apostasy , and raised up by the Lord as witnesses against them , against their setting down in their form , and not pursuing the guidance of that spirit , which would lead them quite out of the darkness , and not have them sit down by the way . 

Now the Lord God in these latter days , hath not only raised up witnesses against the whore , the dragon , the beast , the false prophets , with all their inventions which they have set up instead of the truth : but hath assayed , and begun to deliver his persons out of this Egyptian darkness ; and to bring them back to the light of the land of Canaan . and now great enemies have appeared , the sons of the night exceedingly strengthening themselves to keep out the day light , every one crying up his own form , and all joining hand in hand against the power : yea & that spirit , which first tempted from God , is exceeding busy to cause those whom the spirit the Lord hath been drawing out of the land of darkness , to make a captain to return to Egypt , or at least to sit down in some form , or some pleasant notion of things by the way & not to follow the Lord , through all his intricate leadings in the vast howling wilderness , till he bring them into the possession of the true rest . What a work there was to quench that spirit which stired in the Protestant's against popery , & to fix the in episcopacy , & in the use of the common prayer book ? When that was detected & turned from , than Presbittery endeavoured to take its place , & to bring it its directory : but the pursuit of the Lord was so hot against that , that it stunk presently , & his mighty hand would not suffer that so much as to arise much about the same time , independency and Anabaptism appeared and contended ; and there was a more simple and honest thing stirring there , then in the other : and accordingly the blessing of the Lord ( Which was not to the form , but to the life that was stirring within ) did appear more among them but they , fixing there , lost the life and simplicity to which the blessing was , and met with the death and the curse , which is the proper reward of the form : for any form out of the life , kills the life ; and its reward is death to itself . The form kills the life , which stirred underneath , and made it appear with some freshness ; and when the life , from which it had its seeming beauty and lustre dies , than it soon withers and dies also : so that the living principle being once slain , there remains nothing but the dead spirit feeding on the dead form . There was one more pure appearance , and nearer to the kingdom than all these , which was of seeking and waiting : but death overcame this also , making a form of it , and stealing in some observations from the letter of the scriptures concerning the kingdom , whereby their eyes were with held from beholdingthe inward principle and seed of life within , to look for some great appearance of power without ( Such as was among the apostles ) to set things to rights ; and so they were held captive by the same spirit in their seeking and waiting , whereby the others are held in their forms . Thus have persons generally missed the following of that good spirit , which began to lead them out Egypt , the dark land ; and losing their guide , have fixed somewhere or other by the way , resting in some form , or in some notion or expectation of things ( According as in their wisdom they have imagined from their skill in the letter ) short of the life itself . Thus have their carcases fallen in the wilderness . 

Now this i have to say to you all . All you who rest in any form whatsoever , or rest in any notion or apprehension of things short of the life itself , ye had e'en as good have stayed in Egypt , as to fix by the way , and to take up a rest in the wilderness , short of Canaan . in plain terms , ye had as good have abided in popery or in episcopacy , ye had been as acceptable to God there , as here . Not that i say your forms of indepedency , Anabaptism , or seeking , are as bad as popery , episcopacy , or Presbittery ; nay they are all somewhat nearer , and the last of them very much nearer : but your fixing there , and the dead spirit feeding there on the dead thing , is as remote from life , as if it had gone quite backe again . And this dead spirit is as hateful to God here , as it is among the Papists , yes and in one sense more , because it makes a pretence beyond them . 

And the truth is , ye have gone back again , though not in the direct , form , yet into that very spirit , wherein Poperey's strength and kingdom lies , & so are become one of the beasts names , & your strength & defence lies in the beasts horns , either in the outward powers of the earth , or in that inward knowledge of things and wisdom from the letter , which is out of the life , and so are not yet come out of the city Babylon . for mark , the spi•it that fixeth in a form short of the life , is the same that whored from the life : and the same spirit is the whore still , in what form soever she be . The spirit that rose up in the life , against the death and corruption whereof popery wholly corsisted , was a good spirit , and this spirit would pass through all forms , till it meet with the life : it is the other spirit that says to thee , thou hast gone far enough , and so tempts to stay by the way . And he who hearkens to this spirit , and stays anywhere by the way , he is caught with the old whore in a new dress , and is drinking the cup of fornication afresh . And then like the Papists , he runs to the powers of the earth , to defend his form , against the witnesses of God ( And that 's his cover under which he persecutes , and there he lies hide ) or at least to his own wisdom and reason , to strengthen himself with arguments for fixing here , and against going any further . And then he grows wise in the flesh , and cries out against them , who are still led by the same spirit to press on further , as weak , silly , giddy , unsettled , seduced persons , that can never know when they are well . Thus the wise Episcopalians reulied the simple-hearted Non-conformists , who pursued further than they : and the non conformists , when they lost their simplicity and begun to stick , reviled those that pursued beyond them ▪ and thus at this day , those who are pressing on in the spirit , are disdained by those who have took up their station in the flesh , and with their two great horns , of earthly power and earthly wisdom , are they pushing at them . 

Look about you , look about you , all sorts of devout professors , see where ye are : are you not dead in your forms ? is not the good old puritan principle ( Wherein once was true life in its measure ) dead and buried there ? Consider with yourselves , hath that grown in your forms , or hath it been slain there ? Speak the truth in your own hearts , can ye truly say , from a sercible feeling in the life , that that principle is still alive in you ? If it were so , ye could never be drawn to persecute , no nor to suffer persecution , ye that have power to hinder it : but if that seed be choked , than ye May well connive at , if not further the enemy , and plead for him , and join i•terestss with him . While Abel lived in you Cain could not rise up in his dominion , but now the righteous seed is  Slain , the murdering nature appears . Oh hasten out of this spirit , hasten out of Babylon , cast off the spirit of popery , return to the old puritan ▪ principle : do not cry it up in deceit , to oppose the present appearance of truth , which is grown up further in it ; but subject that dead formal earthly spirit to it , which is fallen beneath it : and when ye are come to a true touch f life there , ye May be able to own the same truth in its growth to a further measure . But while thou art in the dead unde•standing and from the power and life of truth in thine own particular , dost thou think to be able to measure truth aright in others . Nay , thou measurest by a false appearance of things in the fallen understanding , and in the wisdom which thou hast gathered there , since thou thyself fellest from the living principle : and this must needs commend that most , which is nearest to it , and not that which is nearest to truth . And this is the great error of this age , men with a gathered knowledge from scripture-words , without the true faith and life , go about to measure that life and knowledge which comes from the faith : and because it suits not with the apprehensions which they have taken into their minds , they condemn it . And thus being in the stumbling wi•dome and way of observation , to which truth was never revealed , but was ever an offence , they stumb'e at it : and thus men generally dish , and split themselves against the same rock now , as the Pharisees did of old . Now this understanding must perish , and this wisdom in men be brought to naught ; before that can be raised up which can judge aright . 

Hearken therefore to my exhortation , as ye love your souls , come out of popery indeed and in truth , come out of the spirit of popery ; burn the whore in her new forms , as well as in her old : cast off all these new names of the beast , under which the old spirit has made a prey of the life in your own particulars , and lies lurking to make a prey of the life in others , and to force it into its own deceitful forms of death , and slay it . Leave defending your faith and church by the beasts horns , and come to that faith and church which is received , gathered , and defended by Christ the one horn of salvation . Leave your reasonings and disputings in that wisdom which has slain the life , and come to that wisdom which comes from the life , and springs up in the life ; and ye will find more certainty and satisfaction in one touch of true life , then in all the reasonings and disputes of wise men to the world's end . The ground wherein men's religion grows ( Even of the most zealous ) is bad , even the same ground wherein the Pharisees religion stood and grew ; and it hath brought forth such kind of fruit , namely , such a kind of conformity to the letter , as theirs was , which stands in the understanding and will of man , rearing up a pleasant building there , but keeps from the life , and from building in it . But the true religion stands in receiving a principle of life , which by its growth forms a vessel for itself s and all the former part , wherein sin on the one hand , or self righteousness on the other hand stood and grew , passeth away . 

These things following strike at the King of Babylon himself , yea even at the very root of the Antichristian spirit in every man , which he that can mild y receive the stroke of , May feel the true spirit of life ( Which lies slain underneath ) spring up in him , and give life to his soul ; which , when it is delivered , will be able truly to know and rejoice in the Lord its saviour . And when the root of that spirit is cut down ( Which never brought forth sweet pleasant fruit unto life , but only sour fruit , finely p•inted and dressed for the eye and palate of death ) its body , branches , leaves and fruit will wither and die daily , and truth come to grow safely . 

A distinction between the faith which is of man , and the faith which is of God : one whereof is the faith of Zion , the other the faith of Babylon ; the one laying hold on Christ , as he is revealed the King of life in Zion , the other lays hold on an historical relation of Christ , the fame whereof hath sounded in Babylon . 

There is a faith which is of a man's self , and a faith which is the gift of God ; or a power of believing which is found in the nature of fallen man , and a power of believing which is given from above . As there are two births , the first and the second ; so they have each their faith , and each believe with their faith , and seem to lay h•ld on the same thing for life ; and the contention about the inheritance will not be ended , till God determine it . Cain will sacrifice with his faith , and he believes he shall be accepted : if he had not believed so , he would not have been so angry when he found it otherwise . And the Cainish spirit in man , the vagabond from the life of God , which hath not an habitation in God , nor the eternal life of God abiding in him , he is busy with the same faith at this day , and hath the same expectation from it , as Cain had . 

This is the root of the false religion , of the false hope , of the false peace , of the false joy , of the false rest , of the false comfort , of the false assurance , as the other is the root of the true . In this faith which is of man , and in the improvement of it stands all the knowledge , zeal , devotion , and worship of the world in general , and of the worldly part in every man in particular : but the true knowledge , the true zeal , the true devotion , the true worship stands in the faith which is given of God , to them which are born of the immortal seed , which li•es in God , and in which God lives for ever . 

Now it deeply concerns every man to consider , from which of these his knowledge , religion , and worship proceed , and in which of them they stand : for if they proceed from , and stand in the faith which is of man , they cannot please God , nor conduce to the salvation of the soul ; but though they May taste very pleasantly to man's palate now , and administer much hope , and satisfaction to him at present , yet they will fail at the time of need : for as Christ said concerning the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees , so May i say concerning this faith : except your faith , with the works of it , exceed that faith and all the works of it ( Even to the utmost improvement thereof ) which is to be found in man's nature , it will never lead you to the kingdom of God , nor be able to give you any right to the inheritance of life ; for he that will inherit , must be the right heir , must have the faith of Abraham , the faith of Isaac• which springs up from the root of life in the seed ▪ and this leads the seed into that spring of life ( Out of which it shot forth as a branch ) which is the inheritance promised to the seed . And here is Christ , alpha and Omega , in every particular soul , where life is begun and perfected , •unning its course through time , back to that which was before the beginning . 

Therefore observe and consider well , what this faith which is of a man's self can do , and how far it May go in the changing of man , and in producing a conformity of him to the letter of the scriptures . And then consider where it is shut out , what it cannot do , what change it cannot make , what it cannot conform to , that so the true distinction May be let into the mind , and not a foundation laid of so great a mistake in a matter of so great concernment . 

1.  A man May believe the history of the scriptures , yea , and all the doctrines of them ( So far as he can reach them with his understanding ) with this faith which is of man . As by this faith a man can believe an history probably related to him ; so by this faith May he believe the histories of the scriptures , which are more than probably related . As by this faith a man can receive doctrines of instruction out of philosopher's books , so by the same faith he May receive doctrines of instruction out of the scriptures . Reading a relation of the fall of man , of the recovery by Christ , that there is no other way to life , &c.  this faith can believe the relation of these things , as well as it can believe the relation of other things . 

2.  This being believed from the relation of the history of these things , this naturally sets all the powers of man on work ( Kindling the understanding will and affections ) towards the avoiding of misery , and the attaining of happiness . What would not a man do , to avoid perpetual extremity of misery on soul and body for ever , and to obtain a crown of everlasting blessedness ? This boils the affections to an height , and sets the understanding on work to the utmost , to gather all the rules of scripture , and to practise all the duties and ordinances therein mentioned ? What can the scripture propose to be believed , that he will not believe ? What can it propose to be done , that he will not do ? Must he pray ? he will pray . Must be heat ? he will hear . Must he read ? he will read . Must he meditate ? he will meditate . Must he deny himself and all his own righteousness , and duties , and hope only for salvation in the merits of Christ ? he will seem to do that to , and say , when he has done all he can , he is but an unprofitable servant . Does the scripture say he can do nothing without the spirit ? he will acknowledge that too , and he hopes he has the spirit ; God hath promised the spirit to them that ask it : and he has asked long , and asks still , and therefore he hopes he has it . Thus man by a natural faith grows up , and spreads into a great tree , and is very confident , and much pleased , not perceiving the defect in his root , and what all his growth here will come to . 

3.  This being done with much seriousness and industry , there must needs follow a great change in man : his understanding will be more and more enlightened , his will more and more conformed to that , to which he thus gives himself up , and to which he thus bends himself with all his strength ▪ his affections more and more warmed , he will find a kind of life , and growth in this according to its kind . Let a man's heart be in any kind of study or knowledge , applying himself strictly to it , he gathers understanding in his mind , and warmth in his affections : so it is also here . Yea this being more excellent in itself , must needs produce a more excellent understanding , and a more excellent warmth , and have a greater power and influence upon the will . 

4.  Now how easy is it for a man to mistake here , and call this the truth ? First , he mistakes this for the true faith , and then he mistakes in applying to this all that which belongs to the true faith : and thus entering into the spirit of error at first , he errs in the whole course of his religion , from the beginning to the end . He sees a change made by this in him , and this he accounts the true conversion and regeneration . This leads him to ask and seek and pray , and this he Counts the true praying , the true seeking , the true asking . This cleanseth ( After its kind ) his understanding , will , and affections , and this he takes for the true sanctification . The justification which is to the true believer , he also aplyes to this faith : & so he has a peace ,  satisfaction , a rest here , and an hope of happiness hereafter . Thus he receives what is already revealed , & he waits for what May be further revealed , which he can embrace and conform to , turning still upon this centre , and growing up from this root . And he that does not come hither in religion , falls short of the improvement of man's nature and of the faith that grows there , ( Which naturally leads all the powers of nature hither , and fixes them here ) which is but dead . And now this man is safe , he is a believer , he is a worshipper of God , he is a Christian , he is an observer of the commands of Christ : when the overflowing scourge comes , it shall not touch him : all the judgements , plagues , threatenings in the scripture belong not to him , but to the unbelievers , to them that know not God , to them that worship not God , to them that observe not the commands of Christ : thus by his untempered mortar , from his false faith ; he has built up a wall against the deluge of wrath , which wall will tumble down upon him when the wrath comes . The growth of this faith , and great spreading of it into all this knowledge , zeal , and devotion , hath not changed the nature of it all this while , but it is the same that it was at the beginning , even a power of nature in the first birth , and all these fruits are but the fruits of the first nature , which is still alive under all this . All this can never kill the principle out of which it grows , but feeds it more and fattens it for the slaughter . 

Thus far this faith can go : but then there is somewhat it is shut out of at the very first . There is somewhat this faith cannot receive , believe , or enter into . What is that ? It is the life , the power , the inward part of this . Though it May seem to have unity with all the scriptures in the letter , yet it cannot have unity with one scripture in the life : for its nature is shut out of the nature of the things there witnessed . As for instance , it May have a literal knowledge of Christ , according as the scripture relates : of his birth , preaching , miracles , death , resurrection , ascension , intercession , &c.  yea , but the thing spoken of , it knoweth not . The nature of Christ ( Which is the Christ ) is hide from that eye . So it May have a literal knowledge of the blood of Christ , and of justification , but the life of the blood which livingly justifieth , that birth cannot feel ; but can only talk of it , according to the relation it reads in the scripture . So it May have a literal knowledge of sanctification , but the thing that sanctifieth , it cannot receive into itself . So for redemption , peace , joy , hope , love , &c. it May get into the outward part of all these , but the inward part , the life , the spirit of them , it is shut out of , and cannot touch or come near , nor can it witness that change , which is felt and known here . And here is the great contention in the world , between these two births , the one contending for their knowledge in the letter , and the other contending for their knowledge in the life ▪ the one setting up their faith from the natural part , calling it spiritual , and the other who have felt the stroke of God upon this ( And thereby come to know the difference ) setting up the faith of the true heir , which faith hath a different beginning , and a different growth from the other , and will be welcomed into the land and kingdom of life , when the other will be manifested to be but the birth of the bondwoman , and be thrust forth with its mother to seek their bread abroad : for the seed of the bondwoman is not to inherit with Isaac , the seed of promise . 

quest . what then is that faith which is the gift of God , and which is distinct from this ? 

answ. it is that power of believing which springs out of the seed of eternal life , and leavens the heart , not with notions of knowledge , but with the powers of life . The other faith is drawn out of man's nature , by considerations which affect the natural part , and is kept alive by natural exercises of reading , hearing , praying , studying , meditating in that part ; but this springs out of a seed of life given , and grows up in the life of that seed , and feeds on nothing but the flesh and blood of Christ , in which is the living virtue , and immortal nourishment of that which is immortal . This faith at its first entrance , strikes that part dead in which the other faith did grow : and by its growth perfects that death , and raiseth up a life which is of another nature , than ever entered into the heart of man to conceive . And by the death of this part in us , we come to know and enjoy life : and by the life we have received , know , and enjoy , we come to see that which other men call life ( And which we ourselves were apt to call life formerly ) to be but death . And from this true knowledge , we give a true testimony to the world of what we have seen and felt , but no man receiveth our testimony . It grieves us to the heart , to see men set up a perishing thing as the way to life , and our bowels are exceedingly kindled , when we behold an honest zeal and simplicity betrayed , and in tender love do we warn men of the pi• , into which they are generally running so fast , though men reward us with hatred for our good will , and become ou• bitter enemies because we tell them the truth , and the most necessary truth for them to know ; which they can bear neither in plain words , nor yet in parables . Yet be not rough and angry , but meekly wait to read this following parable aright , and it will open into life . The parable is briefly this . 

That which sold the birthright , seeks the birth right , with tears and great pains , but shall never recover it : but there is one which lies dead ( Which hath the promise ) which stirs not , which seeks not , till he is raised by the power of the father's life , and then he wrestles with the father , prevails , and gets the blessing from him . Therefore know that part which is up first , and is so busy in the willing and in the running , and makes such a noise about duties , and ordinances , and graces , to keep down the life which it hath slain : and know that seed of life which is the heir , which lies underneath all this , and must remain slain , while this lives ; but if ever ye hear the voice of the son of God , this will live , and the other die . And happy for ever will he be , who knows this ! but misery will be his portion , who cannot witness a thorough change by the almighty power of the living God , but hath only painted the old nature and sepulchre , but never knew the old bottle broken , and a new one form , which alone is able to receive and retain the new wine of the kingdom , whereas the other ( Pharisee like ) can only receive a relation of the letter concerning the kingdom . 

Some assertions concerning faith , its nature , rise , &c. with its receiving of Christ , and what follows thereupon , namely , a growing in his living virtue , with a knowledge of the true , living , unerring rule , and an obedience to it in the life . 

Assertion i.  

that the true faith , the faith of the gospel , the faith of the elect , the faith which saves the sinner from sin , and makes him more than a conqueror over sin and the powers of darkness , is a belief in the nature of God ; which belief giveth entrance into , fixeth in , and causeth an abiding in that nature . U•belief entereth into death , and fixeth in the death : faith giveth entrance into , and fixeth in the life . Faith is an engrafting into the vine , a partaking of the nature of the vine , a sucking of the juice of life from the vine , which nothing is able to do but the faith , but the belief in the nature . ( And nothing can believe in the nature , but what is one with the nature . ) So then , faith is not a believing the history of the scripture , or a believing and applying the promises , or a believing that Christ died for sinners in general , or for me in particular ; for all this May be done by the unbelieving nature ( Like the Jew ) but an uniting to the nature of God in Christ , which the unbeliever starts from , in the midst of his believing of these . Yet i do not deny that all these things are to be believed , and are believed with the true faith : but this i affirm , that they also May be believed without the true faith , and that such a belief of these doth not determine a man to be a believer in the sight of God , but only the union with the nature of that life from whence all these sprang , and in which alone they have their true value . 

Ii  

that the true faith springs from the true knowledge , or comes with the true knowledge of the true nature of God in Christ , which it believes in . He can never believe in the nature of God , who hath not first the nature of God revealed to him . If a man search the scriptures all his days , hear all that can be said by men concerning God , Christ , faith , justification , &c. be able to dispute about them , and think he can make his tenets good against all the world ; yet if he hath not received the true knowledge of the nature of these things , all his professed faith in them cannot be true . 

Iii  

that the true knowledge , is only to be had by the immediate revelation of Christ on the soul . No man knows the father , but the son , and he to whom the son reveals him . The dead shall hear the voice of the son of God , and they that hear , shall live . there is no raising of a dead soul to life , but by the immediate voice of Christ . Outward preaching , reading the scriptures etc May direct , and encourage men to hearken after and wait for the voice , but it is the immediate voice of Christ in the soul , which alone can quicken the soul to God : and till the light of life shine immediately from Christ in the heart , the true knowledge is never given , 2 cor. 4. 6.  Therefore they that never yet heard the immediate voice of Christ , are still dead in their sins , and have not yet received the true living knowledge , but a dead literal knowledge , which gives a false shining of things in the dead part , but kills the life . Indeed the proper use of all means , is to bring to the immediate voice , life , and power ; and till this be done , till the soul come to that , to hear that , to feel that , to be rooted there , there is nothing done that will stand , but men stick by the way , crying up the means the means , and never knowing , tasting , or enjoying the thing which the means point to ▪ but he that knows God , comes into the immediate presence ; and he that daily lives in God , lives in the immediate life ; and the true faith leads to this , giving the soul such a touch and taste of it at first , as makes it unsatisfiable without it . By this Christ cuts off the Jews with all their zeal and knowledge , joh. 5. 37 , 38.  ye have not heard his voice at any time , nor seen his shape ▪ and ye have not his word abiding in you . there 's the hearing of the voice , the sight of the shape , and the having of the word of God abiding in the heart , which gives both the hearing of the voice , and the sight of the shape , and keeps the soul quick and living in the life . The voice gives life , the sight of the shape daily conforms into the image , which is beheld by the eye of life , and the word abiding in the heart nourishes , and feeds the living soul with the pure bread of life . But the Jews knew not this , but were crying up their Sabbaths , the law of Moses , the ordinances of Moses , the temple of God , the instituted worship of God , and so were shut out of the thing itself , ( Which those things ended in ) and out of a capacity of receiving it . And thus many zealous ones at this day , not having come to this , no more than the Jews did , but sticking in the letter of the gospel , as the Jews did in the letter of the law , stumble at the present dispensation of life , and cannot do otherwise . 

Iv.  

that Christ's immediate revelation of the nature of his father , is to his babes . not to the wise , not to the zealous , not to the studious , not to the devout , not to the rich in the knowledge of the scriptures without : but to the weak , the foolish , the poor , the lowly in the heart . And man receives not these revelations by study , by reading , by willing , by running , &c. but by being form in the will of life , by being begotten of the will of the father , & by coming forth in the will , and lying still in the will , and growing up in the will , here the child receives the wisdom which is from above , and daily learns that cross which crucifies the other wisdom , which joins with and pleases the other will , which loves to be feeding on the shadowy and husky part of knowledge without life . Therefore if ever thou desire to receive this knowledge from Christ , know that eye in thyself that is to be blinded , which Christ will never reveal the father to : read at home , know the wise and prudent there , whom Christ excludes from the living knowledge . And if thou canst bear it , that eye that can read the scriptures with the light of its own understanding , that can consider , and debate , and take up senses and meanings of it , without the immediate life and power : that 's the eye , that May gather what it can from the letter , but shall never see into the life , nor •ast of the true knowledge : for Christ ▪ who alone opens and gives the knowledge , hides the pearl from that eye . 

The true knowledge is only poured into the new vessel . It is the living soul alone , that receives the living knowledge of the living god from Christ the life . The old nature , the old understanding is for death and destruction . The wisdom of flesh ( Though painted never so like to the spiritual wisdom ) is not to be spared anywhere , but that wisdom with all its zeal , and growth , and progress in religion must perish . All men's knowledge of the scriptures which they have gathered into that part , will profit them nothing , but hinder them . Every building which the leprosy of sin hath overspread , is to be pulled down : therefore he that hath had only the old house swept and garnished , never received the true knowledge ( From whence the true faith spring ▪ ) but his life lies in the oldness of the letter ( In the conformity of the dead part to that ) and he knows not the virtue of the knowledge of God in the newness of the spirit ( The vailt being over his heart ) which is only given to the new understanding . 

V.  

that this faith , which springs from the true knowledge , is God's gift , and is not that power of believing which is to be found in man's nature , but of another nature , even of the nature of the giver . And when man is called to believe , he is not called to put forth that faith wherewith he believeth other things , but to receive and exercise the gift of faith which is from above . That which is to be believed in , is spiritual : and that must be spiritual which believes in it . Man , with all the powers of his nature , is shut out : it is another thing , distinct from man , which is let into life , and which lets man in . For man receiving the faith , entering into the faith , and becoming new-formed in the faith , than he also May enter : but till than he is shut out , and knoweth not the life , let him believe , and read , and pray , and hear , and exercise himself in that which he calls duties and ordinances never so much : for all these , set up in the wrong part in man , they only feed the wrong part ; and that withal its food and nourishment , falls short of the life . Therefore the true entrance into religion , is to feel that power , which slays man's natural ability and propensity to believe , that so the gift of the true faith May be received : for there is no rising up and living of the second , without the death of the first , with all his natural faculties and powers . 

Vi . 

that by this faith alone which is the gift , which is from above , ( And not that faith which grows either in the wilderness or garden of the old nature , and is fed by the oldness of the letter , and not by the newness of the spirit ) is Christ received . for Christ can be received , by the faith alone that comes from him : and that faith which comes from him , cannot but receive him . Man's faith refuseth him : it receiveth a literal knowledge of him from what it heareth from men , or from what it readeth related in the scripture concerning him , but refuseth the nature of the thing : and it cannot be otherwise ; for man's faith not being of the nature of it , cannot but refuse it . But this faith , which is given of God , which is from above , being of the same life and nature with Christ , cannot refuse the spring of its own life , but receiveth him immediately . There is no distance of time , but so soon as faith is received , Christ is received , and the soul united to him in the faith . As unbelief immediately shuts him out , so faith lets him in immediately , and centres the soul in him : and the immortal soul feels the immortal virtue , and rejoices in the proper spring of its own immortal nature . But the faith of man never reaches this , never receives Christ , but only a relation of things concerning him : and with that faith which stands in the letter , opposes that faith which stands in the life . And here 's the spirit of Antichrist , here 's the mystery of iniquity working out of one form into another : for Antichrist does not directly deny Christ , or deny the letter , but cries up Christ , cries up the letter , cries up ordinances , but so as they May feed the faith of his own nature , and maintain an hope there . And thus the spirit of man is at unity with what will feed his own , with what interpretations his own understanding can gather out of the scriptures . And thus can he cry up Christ , and say he hopes to be saved by him , while the spirit of enmity against the nature of Christ lodgeth in his heart . This is Antichrist , where ever he is found , and this is his faith , and great is his knowledge , and many are his coverings ; but the Lord is searching him out , who will strip him , and make his nakedness appear . 

Vii . 

that Christ is received as a grain of mustard seed . Christ is such a thing , as every eye , but the eye of this faith despiseth . He is the stone , which the wisdom of the builders in all ages hath rejected . They look for a glorious Messiah , but they know him not in his humiliation in the little seed , out of which he is to grow up into his glory : and so they missing of the thing , build up only with high imaginations in the airy mind concerning the thing . As when God sent Christ in the flesh , there was no form nor beauty in him ; the Jews , whose hope and expectation lay there , yet saw no manner of comeliness , no desirableness in him : even so is it now ; when God comes to offer him to those , that think they place all their hopes in him , they see no loveliness in him , but refuse him daily . What this little thing , small like a grain of mustardseed , can this be the glorious Christ , which the scriptures have spoke so much of ? why we know the descent of this ( Its father mother and kindred are with us ) we find this in our own nature . Thus , like the Jews of old , they make a great noise about Christ , but refuse the thing itself . And this is for want of the true eye of faith , for if they had that eye , they would see the virtue in the little seed , and receive him in his humiliation in their hearts , where he knocks daily for entrance , and be content to wait till this grain of mustardseed grow up into a great and glorious tree . But for want of this eye , they keep him out , and let in the painted murderer , who dwells in them , and covers himself , with a knowledge , a zeal , a faith , an hope , &c. in the old nature , in the old vessel , in the old understanding : & thus they give God and Christ good words , while the evil spirit has their hearts , and dwells there , bringing forth his own old evil fruit under an appearance of devotion and holiness . Hear now , ye wise in the letter , but strangers to the life ; there is a twofold appearance of Christ in the heart . There is an appearance of him as a servant to obey the law , to fulfil the will of the father in that body , which the father prepares there for him : and there is an appearance of him in glory , to reign in the life and power of the father . And he that knows not the first of these in his heart , shall never know the second there . And he that knows not these inwardly , shall never know any outward visible coming to their comfort . For if Christ should come outwardly to reign ( As many expect ) yet to be sure he would not reign in thee , whose heart he hath not first entered into and subdued to himself , which is only to be done by his appearance there first as a servant , and then as a King . But what estate are Christians ( So called ) now in , who know not him in them who is able to serve the Lord , but are striving and fighting in that nature where sin hath the power , and which can never overcome , being not in union with , but strangers to that life and power which is the conqueror ? Therefore let all consider in the depth of their heart , for this is infallibly true : they that never received the seed of life in their hearts , never received Christ ; and such shall never and such shall never be free from sin while they live ( For having not received the son , who makes free , how can they be free indeed ? nor be free from wrath when they are dead : for that faith concerning Christ will not save them hereafter , which did not bring them to receive Christ here . 

Viii . 

that this seed being received , groweth up into its own form , or is form in that creature , into which it is received . It there groweth up into the body , in which it is to serve the Lord , and which body is to be glorified , when it hath finished its service . As a seed cast into fitted earth , or the seed of man or beast sowed in a fitting womb , receiveth form and growth into a plant or living creature : so is it with this seed in its earth . Open the true eye , oh ye Christians , and begin to read the mystery of godliness ! 

Ix. . 

that this creature , or the spirit of life this creature ( Which it is in union with , and which is never separated from it ) is the Christians rule , gal. 6. 15 , 16. 1  John 2. 27.  Heb. 8. 10 , 11.  The son is never without the spirit of the father , no not in the seed : and the spirit of the father is the son's rule . Outward rules were given to a state without , to men who were not brought to the life , but were exercised under shadows and representations of the life : but the son who is within , who is the substance of all , who is the life , who is one with the father , whose proper right the spirit is , he is not tied to any outward rule , but is to live and walk in the immediate light of the spirit of his own life . And he that hath the son , hath this rule : and he that hath not this rule , hath not the son . And he that hath not the son , hath not the true faith ( Which immediately receives him ) and so is no Christian , but hath stolen the name from the letter , having never received the nature from the spirit , to which alone the name belongs . 

X.  

he that hath Christ ( Or the seed of eternal life , which is Christ ) form in him , which seed the spirit always dwells in , and utaer is absent from , which is the same spirit which gave forth the scriptures , he is a capacity of understanding those scriptures which that spirit gave forth , as that spirit leads him into the understanding of them . but he that hath not received that which is like the grain of mustard seed , and so hath not Christ , nor his spirit ( What ever he May pretend to ) he by all his studies , arts , languages , reading of expositors , conferences , nay experiences , can never come to the true knowledge of the scriptures : for he wants the true key , which alone can open . He May have got a great many wrong keys , none of which can open , but wants the true key of the true knowledge , and so is shut out of that , and only let into such a kind of knowledge , as the wrong key can open into . And with this kind of knowledge the merchants of Babylon have long traded , but their day is expiring apace , and their night of lamentation and howling hasteneth . 

Xi . 

though he can understand the scriptures , as the spirit leads him into the knowledge of them , and can set his zeal to the truth of them , yet he cannot call them his rule : for having received the life for his rule , and knowing it to be so , he cannot call another thing it . He that hath received the new covenant into his heart , with the laws of the life thereof written there by the spirit of life , who doth write them there even in the least of all that believe , as well as in the greatest , he knoweth that this living writing is his rule . The scriptures give relation where the covenant and law of life is writ , and if i will read it , thither must i go whither the scriptures point me . I must go to Christ the book of life , and read there with that eye which Christ gives , if i read the things of life . And the scriptures are willing to surrender up their glory to Christ , who was before them , and is above them , and shall be after them : but there is a false spirit , which hath seated itself in a literal knowledge of the scriptures , and hath form images and likenesses of truth from it ( Every one after the imaginations of his own heart ) and all these fall , if Christ the life appear : and so this spirit cries up the scriptures now in a way of deceit , just as the Jews cried up Moses . it was a good remove to withdraw the ear from the false church , and to listen to the true testimony which the scriptures give of Christ : but it is the seducing spirit which tempts to stick by the way , and to rear up buildings and forms of knowledge from the letter of the scriptures , and not to come to feel after , unity with , and live in Christ the life . And unless ye come to this , your reading of the scripture is vain , and all your gathering rules of practice , and comforts from promises , will end in vanity : for until ye know , and have received the thing itself , ye are at a distance from that to which all belongs . A lively and glorious testimony of truth hath God held forth in this age , at which all that stick in the letter cannot but stumble ; and there is no poss of knowing or receiving it , but by feeling the true touch of the inward life of it . Wisdom is justified of her children : but they that are not born of her , cannot justify her womb or birth . 

To the Jews who were an outward persons , there was an outward rule given , a law of commandments , statutes , judgements , and ordinances , proper to that state wherein they were , and to that thing to which the ministry was : but all this was to be done away , and to end in that which all this represented . So that to Christians , Christ the substance being come , which is the end of all these shadows , the true Jew being raised in the immediate life , now there is a necessity of the immediate life for the rule . To them under the gospel , to them who are come to the substance , to them who are begotten and born in the life , there can be norule proportionable to their state , but Christ the substance , Christ the life , here he alone is the light , the way , the truth , the rule , the spirit is here the rule , the new creature the rule , the new covenant the rule , all which are in unity together , and he that hath one of them , hath them all , and he that hath not them all , hath none of them . So that directions taken out of the scripture , cannot be the rule to him who is the true Christian , but the measure of grace , the measure of light , the measure of the spirit , the measure of the gift received into the living soul from the spring of life , this is the alone rule of life . But Christians in the degeneration have lost this , and so have taken up words for a rule , ( Which were not given to that end ) and so with deductions by the earthly part , they feed the earthly part . What is fed by men's scripture knowledge , but the earthly understanding ? the earthly will heated , the earthly affections warmed ; and of the fruits of this earth they bring sacrifices to God : and they are angry that God hath raised up Abel , their younger brother , who offers up the lamb of God to God , and serves the living god in his own living spirit , and with the faith that comes from him . Abel's religion stands not in that part wherein all other men's religion stands , but in the death of that part ; and in the raising up of another part , wherein life springs . Can ye mildly receive these gentle leadings ? do not provoke the the tender heart of the lamb against you , who also hath the voice of a lion , and can roar terribly out of his holy mountain against the enemies of his life and spirit . 

A necessary warning , and of very great importance to all that call themselves Christians , and hope for a share in the book of life , and the escaping the damnation of hell , which is their portion whose names are written in the book of death , and blotted by God out of the book of life , though they hope to find them written there . Here and consider . 

It is recorded , rev. 22. 18 , 19  

if any man shall add unto these things , God shall add unto him the plagues , that are written in this book . And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy , God shall take away his part out of the book of life , and out of the holy city , and from the things which are written in this book . 



Great are the plagues that are written in this book , even the pouring out of eternal wrath without mixture , torment day and night in the presence of the lamb , &c.  As the growth , and fullness of the mystery of iniquity is spoken of in this book : so the measuring out of the fullness of wrath to it , is spoken of also . And great is the life and blessedness , that is here promised to those that fight with , and overcome the mystery of iniquity , and receive not any of the marks or names of the beast , nor are subject to any of his horns , though •e push never so hard with them . Now to meet with all the plagues here threatened , and to miss of all the blessedness here promised , is it not a sad state ? Why , he that addeth to these things here spoken , or diminisheth from the words of this prophecy , the Lord hath said this shall befall him . Therefore in the fear of that god who hath spoken this , and will make it good , let every one search who is the adder , who is the diminisher ? 

Now mark , see if this be not a clear thing . He that giveth any other meaning of any scripture , than what is the true proper meaning thereof , he both addeth and diminisheth ▪ he taketh away the true sense , he addeth a sense that is not true . The spirit of the Lord is the true expositor of scriptures , he never addeth nor diminisheth : but man ( Being without that spirit ) doth but guess , doth but imagine , doth but study or invent a meaning , and so he is ever adding or diminishing . This is the sense saith one , this is the sense saith another , this is the sense saith a third , this saith , a fourth : another that is witty , and large in his comprehension , he says they will all stand : another , perhaps more witty than he , says none of them will stand , and he invents a meaning different from them all . And then , when they are thus expounding them they will say , take the sense thus , it will yield this observation , or take it thus , and it will afford this observation . Doth not this plainly show , that he who thus saith , hath not the spirit of the Lord to open the scripture to him , and manifest which is the true sense , but is working in the misery of darkness ? And yet this very person , who is thus working with his own dark spirit in the dark , will in words confess , that there is no true understanding or opening of scripture but by the spirit of God . If it be so , how darest thou set thy imagination , thy fancy , thy reason , thy understanding on work , and so be guessing at that which the spirit doth not open to thee , and so art found adding and diminishing ? 

Now he that is adder , he that is the diminisher , he cryeth out against the spirit of the Lord , and chargeth him with adding and diminishing : for man being judge , he will judge his own way to be true , and gods to be false . That which is the adding and diminishing , he calls the true expounding of the place : but if the spirit of the Lord immediately open any thing to any son or daughter , he cries this is an adding to the word : the scripture is written , there are no more revelations to be expected now , the curse saith he , is to them that add . Thus he removes the curse from his own spirit , and way of study and invention to which it appertains , and casts it upon the spirit of the Lord . And man cannot possibly avoid this in the way that he is in : for having first judged his own darkness to be light , then in the next place he must needs judge the true light to be darkness . He that hath aforehand set up his own invented meaning of any scripture to be the true meaning he must needs oppose the true meaning , and call it false , and so apply himself to form all the arguments he can out of other scriptures , to make it appear false . Thus man , having begun wrong in his knowledge of the scriptures , stands engaged to make use of them against the Lord , and against his own soul ; and yet really in himself thinks that he makes a right use of them , and that he serves the Lord , and that he is not opposing his truth , but opposing error and heresy ; while he himself is in the error , and in the heresy , and against the truth , being a stranger to that spirit , in whose immediate life and presence the truth grows . 

Did the Lord in these words , of forbidding to add or diminish upon so great a penalty , lay a restraint and limit upon his own spirit , that it should no more hereafter speak in his sons & daughters , or did he intend to lay bounds upon the unruly spirit of man ? Did God leave man's spirit at liberty to invent and form meanings of his words , and bind up his own spirit from speaking further words afterwards ? When Moses said , thou shalt not add nor diminish , was this to be any stop to the prophets , in whom God should speak afterwards ? Is not this one of the subtle serpent's inventions , to keep up the esteem of man's invented meanings as the true sense , and to make a fortification against the entrance of that spirit , which can discover all his false interpretations of the true words of God , and to make him see that he is the adder and the diminisher , and that his name will not be found in the book of life , when the true light is held forth to read by . 

But this is general , extending to all scriptures , my drift is more particular concerning adding to the things , or diminishing from the words of the book of this prophecy . 

There are two things chiefly spoken of in this book , Mistery-sion , Mistery-babilon : the true church , the false church : the lambs wise , the whore : the hiding of Mistery-sion , the appearing of Mistery-babilon in her place : the flying of the church out of her heaven into the wilderness , leaving all behind her which she could not carry along with her , even all the ordinances and institutions of Christ , wherein once she appeared worshipping and serving God ; and the starting of the false church into her place ; taking up all that she had left , even all the ordinances and institutions of Christ in the letter , thus covering herself with the form of godliness , with the sheep's clothing , that she Might pass the better for the true church : and the dragon , who managed the war against the woman and her seed , raiseth up first one beast , and then another , and sets this whore on the top of them , who with the cup of fornication makes all the earth drunk , all nations , peoples , kindreds , tongues , languages . And the beast he has his horns everywhere , his marks everywhere , his names everywhere , and also his image in every part of Babylon . and who will not worship him , he fights with ; yea such as are led by God to rent from the whore , he calls schismatics , heretics , blasphemers , and persecutes them as persons not worthy to live . Thus the state of things is quite changed , the power of truth lost , the form set up without it ; those that seek after the power hated , persecuted and blasphemed , those that lie still under any of the beasts forms , they go for good Christians ; for members of the visible church , •o called by them . 

Now mark : he that calls any thing the church , but what this book calls the church , he adds : he that doth not know the wilderness , and own the church in the wilderness , he diminishes : the church of Rome is not the church in the wilderness , the church of Scotland is not the church is the wilderness , the church of England is not the church in the wilderness , the several gathered churches are none of them the church in the wilderness : all these have sprung up since the church's flight , and have appeared in her ab•ence ▪ usurping her name , appropriating it to themselves , but God ( Who gave it to the church ) hath not given it them ; and so they must loose it again , when God brings back the church out of the wilderness . So he that calls those , which formerly w•re the institutions and ordinances of Christ , which the woman left behind her , and which the harlot hath got and attired herself with , which she now appears in , and wherewith the dragon is now worshipped , he adds to this book , which says the outward court was given to the gentiles , and the true church had nothing left her but the inward temple , wherein alone the true worshippers worshipped : and they that worship elsewhere , are the false worshippers worshipping in false temples , in temples of the whorish spirits building take it either outwardly or inwardly , for it holds true in both : he that makes the beasts names fewer than they are , or his marks fewer than they are , or his horns fewer than they are , or his image less than it is , be diminishes . And the danger hereof is not small . for if any man worship the beast and his image , and receive his mark in his forehead , or in his hand , the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God , which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation , and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels , and in the presence of the lamb : and the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever . And they have no rest day nor night , who worship the beast and his image , and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name , rev. 14. 9 c.  

Now this i affirm , whosoever has not the name of Zion , the mark of Zion , which he received of her in the wilderness , where the living God is with her , and where he is taught by God the laws of the wilderness-worship , and in some measure to testify against all the corrupted ordinances , and institutions which have the beasts marks , and go now abroad in the world under the beasts name : i say , whoever has not the true mark of Zion , it is impossible for him to avoid the mark of Babylon : and he who avoids not the mark , cannot escape the plagues . But he that hath the mark of Zion , he by a secret inward instinct of true life , is led from the marks of Babylon : and if he faithfully follow the guidance , from out of all the names , and from under all the horns . 

It is nor enough to rent from popery , and sit down under the power and government of the same spirit in another form , or to rent from episcopacy , and the same spirit sit down in presbytery ; or to rent from presbytery , and the same spirit sit down in a form of independency , or Anabaptism ; or to rent from these , and the same spirit sit down in a way of seeking and waiting , and reading of words of scripture , and gathering things from thence without the life : but the true religion consists in knowing , and following a true guide to the church in the wilderness , and there to receive the mark , the living mark , which will preserve out of all inventions , and further progress of the dead spirit . 

Now therefore look about you , know the spirit of whoredom , and see how ye have been begotten in the adultery , and born of the whore , and have served the dragon , and worshipped his dead idols , and not the living God . And be not satisfied with changing of forms & dresses ) which are but the several deceitful appearances of the whore ( But put off that spirit ; least when ye have hated the whore , and burned her flesh as she appeared in one form , ye give yourselves up to her again , when she appears in another form : for the plagues are not so much to the form wherein the whore appears , as to the whorish spirit : and whosoever is found under her dominion , in any of her territories , under any of her forms , with that mark of hers upon them which belongs to that particular form , though never so curiously painted , he shall drink of the unmixed cup of wrath . 

Therefore tremble all sorts of persons , pluck off your false coverings , see the shame of your nakedness , while it May be for your advantage so to do . The angel is gone forth , the corn is reaping and gathering into the garner , many lambs are brought into the fold of everlasting rest , Zion is redeeming , the true life is rising , the whorish spirit is judging , the door of life is yet open : do not lie secure in the whore's wisdom ! Do not lie slumbering , and reasoning , and disputing from the letter of the scripture , till the gathering be finished , till the door be shut , till the eternal flames seize upon you , and ye find yourselves in the bosom of hell unawares , and see the children of the kingdom in Abraham's bosom , but yourselves shut out , and left to weep and wail and gnash your teeth . 

quest . but how May i avoid adding to the things , and dimishing from the words of this prophecy , and of other scriptures , that i May not meet with the weight of this curse , or miss of the blessing ? 

answ. dost thou ask this question from thy heart , in the simplicity , out of the fleshly wisdom ? then hearken with that ear , and thou shalt set thy seal to mine answer . 

1.  Wait for the key of knowledge , which is God's free gift . Do not go with a false key to the scriptures of truth , for it will not open them . Man is too hasty to know the meaning of the scriptures , and to enter into the things of God , and so he climbs up over the door with his own understanding , but he has not patience to wait to know the door , and to receive the key which opens and shuts the door : and by this means he gathers death , out of words which came from life . And this i dare positively affirm , that all that have gone this way to work , have but a dead knowledge , and it is death in them that feeds upon this knowledge , and the life is not raised . Consider now the weight of this council in the true balance ! There is no opening of the scriptures , but by the true key : nor is there any coming at the key , till the Lord please to give it . What then is to be done , but only to wait ( In the silence of that part which would be forward , and running before hand ) till the key be given , and to know how to receive it , as it is offered in the light , and not to wait in the will , or expect to receive it according to observations in the fleshly wisdom from the letter ? 

2.  Let not thy understanding have the managing of this key , when it is given , but know the true opener , the skilful user of the key , the hand which can only turn the key aright : and let him have the managing both of his own key , and of thine understanding . Do not run in thine own understanding , or in thine own will to search out the meaning of scripture : for than thou feedest with the scripture , that which it is the intent all words of life to destroy : but as thou waitest for the key at first , so continually wait for the appearances and movings of the user of the key , and he will shut out thy understanding and will continually , which would still be running after the literal part of scriptures , and let thee into the life both of the prophecies and doctrines thereof . Man when he hath received a true gift from God , he would be managing of it himself , and to be sure he will manage it for himself ( For the gratifying and pleasing of himself , and not for God ) and then God , being provoked , takes away the substance , and leaves him the shell . Therefore he that hath received a gift , must be very watchful against that which would betray , or he May easily loose it : for though the gifts and caling of God are without repentance , yet if that lay hold of the gift which was not called , and to which it was not given , the Lord will thrust that by , and take away his gift from it . 

3.  Do not graced any of the fruit of the tree of life upon the tree of knowledge , for it will not grow there : an appearance , a likeness of the true fruit May grow there , but the true fruit itself will not . My meaning is , do not make a treasury of knowledge in the understanding part which is to perish , but know the true treasury of all the things of life , which is in the life itself , and in that understanding which is form , kept , and lives in the life . Lay no manna by to feed upon in the old store house ( Lest the fleshly part should be running thither , when its fleshly appetite is kindled after food ) but daily receive the continual bread from the hand of life . The wisdom of the life strikes at •hy wisdom and understanding , and if ever thou wilt grow wise any more there , thou losest this , and canst not possibly retain it : for that part is then getting up in thee , in which it cannot be held , but only a shadow , an image , a resemblance and likeness of it , which feeds and pleases that part , which fain would have life , but cannot know it , and therefore is necessitated to make images and likenesses , of things in heaven or things in earth , that it Might have somewhat . 

4.  Take not up a rest in openings of things , though by the true key . Take heed of over-valluing that kind of knowledge : for that part which over-vallues that knowledge , will presently be post up with it : but there is a more excellent , and safer kind of knowledge to be pressed after , which is a knowledge of things by receiving of them . There is a knowledge of things , by the spirits opening the words which speak of them ( Or by inward immediate prophecies from the word of life in the heart : ) this is an excellent knowledge , and not to be found in the earthly part of man ; yet the earthly part ( When this knowledge is given ) is very apt to be swollen and exalted with it : but then there is also a knowledge , which ariseth from the gift of the thing itself . This knowledge is very precious , and much more full and certain than the other , having the nature and immediate power of life in itself , and so is perfectly able to preserve . As for instance , to make it more plain : there May be a knowledge of justification , by the spirits opening the words written in scripture concerning justification , and the blood of sprinkling , ( And this is a good knowledge , where there is a true opening of it from the spirit : ) but then there is a knowledge by feeling of the blood of sprinkling in the heart , and by seeing with the new eye the way of its justification ; and in this knowledge is the power and the cleansing of the life received , which in the other was but spoken of . Therefore rest not in openings , or prophecies , or true meanings of these things ( Though this kind of knowledge is very excellent , and hath been very rare ) but wait to feel the thing itself , which the words speak of , and to be united by the living spirit to that , and then thou hast a knowledge from the nature of the thing itself : and this is more deep and inward , than all the knowledge that can be had from words concerning the thing . 

5.  When thou feelest things , then seek their preservation in the proper spring of their own life . Let the root bear thee , and all thy knowledge , with all that 's freely given thee of God . When thou feelest thyself leavened with the life , and become a branch shot out of the life , then learn how to abide in the life , and to keep all that 's given thee there , and have nothing which thou Mayst call thine own any more , but to be lost in thyself , and found in him . Know the land of the living , wherein all the things of life live , and can live nowhere else . 

Now in all this , in this whole course , from the very first step of it , there 's certainty , there 's stability , there 's infallibility . From the very first opening of the true key , i begin to learn somewhat of God , and to learn certainly , and feel an assurance and establishment in it : and growing up here , i grow up in the true learning , and in the true settlement , and so i am not unlearned and unstable , wresting the scriptures to my own destruction : for i take none of the knowledge of the scriptures from myself , from my own understanding , from my own study and invention , or from the studies of other expositors , but from a certain hand . And how can he rest scripture , who is kept single , and has no desire to have any thing to be the meaning of it , but what is the meaning , nor no will to know the meaning , further than the good will of him whose spirit penned it , thinks good to give forth the meaning to him ; and who waits to receive this , not to feed the lustful knowing pare in himself , but to feed the life with it ? and when the life hath no use for it , he is content to have it shut up , and to be without it : i say , how is it possible for this man to wrest scriptures ? But now , a man that hath taken in a body of knowledge already , he goes to the scripture , and bends it to make it speak answerable to that : and where it speaks contrary , he invents a way to make it comply , and so wrists scriptures forward & backward , to make them speak agreeable to what he has already received and believed . Thus every sort of persons , papists and Protestant's , bend the scriptures , to make them speak conformable to their opinions and practices , not having the true , learning , which gives to read them in the true original , where the knowledge of what they speak and mean is certain : and so they are also unstable , and subject to be shaken by a wind of reason which is stronger than their own . And this wresting of scripture is to their own destruction ; for that part , which is so much as desirous to bend a scripture , is to be destroyed ; and that part cannot receive the true knowledge , but stumbles in its own wisdom and way of seeking , at the wisdom of cod , and at the true way of finding . 

But the foregoing council , faithfully harkened unto , will preserve out of this , and also bring to the true means , and to the true use of the means , which all nations , who have drunk of the whore's cup , have erred concerning , and taken the false for the true . The strength of this wine hath made all nations , peoples , tongues and languages to mistake , who in the heat of their drink have cried up the means , the means , the ordinances , the ordinances &c. not perceiving how this heat came from the spirits of the whore's wine , and not from the sober , meek , calm , gentle leadings of the spirit of Christ , and so in a fleshly zeal have set up the whore's means instead of the lambs means , and contend for them with the whore's spirit and weapons . Now it is impossible for any man so , much as to know the true means , till the whore's wine be purged out of him : for that will make him err in judgement , and take the false for the true . And which way shall he ever come to the kingdom , which has lighted upon the wrong means ? or how shall he ever come to the true means , who never yet saw the witchery of the whorish spirit from the life , and how he himself has been bewitched , and cozened with the false instead of the true ? as for instance . 

prayer , that is generally taken for a means , ask , and it shall be given you ; seek and ye shall find : knock and it shall be opened to you . If parents , which are evil , know how to give good gifts to their children : how much more shall the heavenly father give the holy spirit to them that ask him . this therefore is an undoubted thing , that prayer is a means . 

answ. true , there is a prayer which is a means , and there is a prayer which is not a means . There is a prayer which is an ordinance , and there is a prayer which is an invention . There is a prayer which is the breath of the true child , and there is a prayer which is the breath of the fleshly part , a breath of the whorish spirit . There is a prayer of the first birth , and there is a prayer of the second birth , both which cry and weep to God for the something . Now the one of these is the true means , the other not : one of them is Christ's ordinance , the other is antichrists ordinance . Now the question is , which of these thy prayer is ? whether it be thine own breath , or God's breath ? whether it come from the renewings of the spirit of life , or from thine own natural part painted ? for accordingly , it is either the true means , or the false means . If it be the true means , it shall have the thing , the spirit , the life , the kingdom it prays for : if it be the false means , it can never obtain it . Papists , they pray ; Protestant's , they pray ; some in forms , some without forms ; some meditating before hand , some not meditating : are all these the true means , or are any of them the true means ? The breath of the true child is the only true prayer ; and he prays only in the moving , and in the leading of that spirit that begat him : and this is a prayer according to the will , in the life , and from the power . But all men's prayers , according to times they set the themselves . or according to formings of desires in their own minds , which they offer up to God with the nature and heart that sinneth against him , these are false means , and May satisfy the drunken spirit erred from the li•e , but are no means to the truth . 

Canst thou pray ? how camest thou to learn to pray ? wast thou taught from above ? or didst thou gain the skill and ability , by the exercise and improvement of thine , own natural part ? Didst thou begin with sighs and groans , staying there , till the same spirit that taught thee to groan , taught thee also to speak ? Wast thou ever able to distinguish the sighs and groans of the spirits begetting , from the sighs and groans of thy own natural and affectionate part ? and hath that part , with all its sighing• , groaning , desires , endeavours , etc been thrust aside , and the seed immortal raised , by the spirit of eternal life , which teacheth to cry and mourn , and at length to speak to the father for the preservation and nourishment of its life ? If it hath been thus with thee , than thou hast known that prayer which is the true means . But if otherwise , though thou pray never so long , and with never so great affections and strong desires , this is all but the false means , with its false warmth from the fall fire , this is but the means which the whorish spirit ( Which is not in union with the life and power , but keeps the seed in bandage ) has set up instead of the true means . And this can never lead to truth , but keeps alive God's enemy under this pleasant covering : neither is this the worship of the living God , but as it is from another spirit , so it is to another spirit . 

Oh learn to be sober ! come out of this drunken fury , and consider things mildly and seriously . Do not make a great outcry of ordinances , ordinances ; the means , the means . This is the voice of the clamorous woman , who with her loud noise , would fain keep you from listening after the still voice of true wisdom , which cannot be heard in the midst of this great noise and hurry in your spirits ; but consider which are the true ordinances , which are the true means ; which are the likenesses man has framed , and which is the true thing itself . And if ye could once be mild , gentle and calm , & turn from your own wisdom and fleshly knowledge of things it Might please God to remove your stumbling blocks , and to open that eye in you which can see the Antichristian nature , and discern between the coverings , which it hath form to hide its deceitful spirit under , and the true garment and clothing of life . But the seed of the kingdom is little , and ye are great , how can ye enter into it ? the pearl lies hide in the field , and ye are gazing up to heaven how can ye see it ? Christ is descended into the lower parts of the earth , and ye are using means to ascend upwards in the wrong nature , how can ye meet with him ? the gospel hath been hide , the sun hath not shined , it hath been night , and ye have got many false candles ; which way can ye acknowledge the little glimmering of the day star , who have such satisfaction in the warmth of your false fires ? ye are far from the true light , who have not yet received so much of it , as to discover the darkness of the night ! Ye are too high , too wise , too knowing for Christ , or for the sight and acknowledgement of the true means which lead to life . And if ye could once come to see this , there Might be some hope but in that wisdom wherein your life and knowledge stands , ye are shut out : and ye are reasoning and stumbling at the stone , while others ( Who are broken in spirit , and in meekness and humility led to try ) find it a sure foundation , even a foundation of eternal life for the true seed of life , and are built into the living city , which is made without hands , and without any of the tools of man's wisdom . 

A brief history of the state of the church since the days of the apostles , with the living seal to it , which he that hath eternal life abiding , in him , can read and witness ; but that wisdom zeal and devotion which is in the death , cannot . 

After the universal degeneration and corruption of the Jewish state , and the putting an end to the shadows thereof , by the appearance and succession of the substance , it pleased God to dissolve that persons , state and policy , and by the power of his life ( Without either the wisdom or strength of man ) to set upon the heathenish world , which he subdued and brought under the power of his life . By his apostles and messengers , who preached the everlasting gospel , the word of eternal life , he gathered assemblies up and down the nations , whom the nations by all their persecutions could not subject ; but they reigned over them in the power , authority , and dominion of God : for they were Kings and priests to God in the sight of all the nations , and they did reign upon the earth ; in somuch as the heathenish spirit of man , observing their order in the spirit , and the wisdom and power of the spirit among them , who by his living light was able to search the hearts of those that came to observe them , could not but acknowledge , that God was in them of a truth . 

Now the next thing to be expected , is Satan's opposition against this power of life , & his stratagems to undermine it . He withstood the growth and settlement of the church , all that he could by open force , making use both of the heathenish devout worshippers , who fought for their Jupiter , their Diana , and other gods and goddesses , and of the Jewish devout worshippers , who fought for their temple-worship , with the laws and ordinances of Moses , which were now expired . But neither of these would do , but the church in the power of life gained ground upon him , and did rather thrive and increase , then diminish by this opposition . Therefore now he falls to this stratagems , he gets some false brethren out of the church ( they went out from us ) these he clothes as angels of light , puts the sheep's clothing on their wolvish nature , makes them appear as like the apostles as May be , endues them with an excellent taking knowledge of life and spirituality in appearance , forms in them an image of the truth , and inspires this image with the spirit of his own life , and with these he goes forth into the world , and gathers the world about him . Now the world was presently taken with this ( the world went after him ) for this is that the world would have , an appearance of religion , an image of truth , but their own spirit in it . The worldly spirit , that flies off from the life , from the power , can readily close with this , because it is its own . Bring forth never so high notions of religion and spiritual wisdom , the world will hug them , the world will feed on them , the world will clothe itself with them . The world can swallow , and digest any thing but life . Any pleasant picture of things in heaven will down with the world : but the nature , the life , the truth , the spirit , Christ in his true arid living cross , this will not down with the world . 

Now the devil having thus set up his false image in the world , and gathered a party after him , than he sets upon the church : and the battle goeth very hard , life striving to defend , and death to overcome , how hard did the apostles strive in their day , to keep their converts to the simplicity of truth , & to the way thereof ( Which even then began to be evil spoken of ) writing epistles to the churches , warning them of the false apostles , and wishing them to stand their ground ! yea Christ himself writes several epistles from heaven to some of them , cheking their backslidings and encouraging them to renew their zeal and strength , putting them in mind of the crown which attended the victory . But at length the devil with his stratagems prevails , gets the possession of the churches territories , and the church is fain to fly for her preservation : and such of her seed as are left behind her , the enemy makes war against , slays , drinks their blood . 

Now here 's an end of all the glory of that state : now the devil hath gained the world again : the same spirit , that lost it under the heathenish power ( For there he was conquered ) recovers it under an Antichristian appearance ; setting up the same wickedness , and the same course and current of death under forms of Antichristian religion , as he had done before under forms of heathenish devotion . 

Thus the devil being conqueror , having gained the field , he divides the spoils among his army : he tak•s whatever was the churches , and make , his own , and ranks them in his way of Antichristian religion and devotion : so that now hence forward , those things which were once Christ's and the churches , they are no• all his , and distributed by him among his followers . He gives the name church to the whore which he sets up , he gives the name Christian to his disciple , he prescribes baptism , and the supper ( Which he calls sacraments ) and praying , and preaching , and singing , which he calls public ordinances , and be prescribes private duties and exercises of devotion ; and he gets the letter of the scriptures , and forms multitudes of meanings and expositions , and has lying signs and wonders for such as need them , that he Might keep all the several brigades of his army quiet under his pay , and Might have some pleasing wares of traffic for every sort of his merchants in his Babylon . for this is the city of that King which he built aster his conquest over the life , and which he hath enriched with the spoils from the life . And here all his subjects shall have content , they shall have what they will , if they will but be faithsull to him in the main . Call for what likeness , what invention , what appearance of truth they will , they shall have it , so they will but be content without life . No notion about the spirit will be deny them , so they will be content with the notion without the presence of the living spirit . They shall have light in their understandings , warmth in their affections , joy , peace , hope , comfort out of the scriptures . They shall apply as many promises to themselves as they will , have what they will , do what they will , so they keep out of the feeling of the living principle : but if once that stir , and there be any harkening after that , than he begins to show his tyranny on the one hand to force them back , and his stratagems on the other hand to tempt them aside from it . 

The devil having thus gained the form , and enriched himself with the church's spoils , and slain them which had the living testimony , than he falls to corrupting the form : for that filthy spirit , though he can clothe himself with the form to deceive from the life , & abide there , to keep down the life ; yet he does not much love it , he loves his own form better : and when he is out of fear of assaults from the life , than he returns to his own form again , or patches up a garment more suitable to his own nature , taking i• somewhat of the other with it , to make his own pass the better ( For if he should have returned to the direct heathenish forms of idolatry and false worship he could not so well have •ayn hide : therefore he makes a mix u•e of somewhat which was prescribed the Jews , with some things sound practised among the Christians . ) Thus he brought in inventions of crosses , and images , and beads , and pictures , and relics , and ceremonies beyond number , insomuch as not only the life and power was lost , but the true likeness also , even so lost , that it is impossible for all the wisdom of man , to recover the knowledge of the likeness again . Men have striven much , but they never could form a true likeness of the primitive church , and the way thereof . 

Now , though it is the desire of the devil to keep men in the grossness of darkness , yet rather than loose them , he will let them have some part of the form again : nay he will tempt them with a gaudy appearance of the form , to keep them from meeting with the power and life , when he perceives true secret inward stirrings in them , which will not be quieted without somewhat . Thus , when there was a stirring against popery , he tempted a•i•e into episcopacy : when that would hold no longer , then to presbytery : when that will not serve , into independency : when that will not keep quiet , but still there are searchings further , into Anabaptism : if that will not do , into a way of seeking and waiting : if this will not satisfy , they shall have high notions , yea most pleasant notions concerning the spirit , and concerning the life , if they will be but satisfied without the life : yea they shall have all the liberty in the creatures they can desire ( The best painted liberty ) if they will but be satisfied without that liberty , which stands not in the creatures out of the life , but over the creatures in the life . And he that turns aside to any of these , he is still under the dominion of that spirit , and there he holds his knowledge , and there he performs his worship , and there he has his unity , his liberty , his life , his rest , his peace , his joy , his hope . Now no man can worship God , till he comes out of every part of this Babylon , and his feet touch Zion , though there May be a secret panting , and an unknown safety , and an acceptation of the poor mourning soul in the passage yea , all sorts of persons , here ye were accepted , in your stirrings after life , in harkening to the leadings of life from out of the Babylonish spirit : but your turning aside to the Babylonish wisdom in a new dress , and sitting down in a new form of her inventing , hath brought you to a loss of life , and hath made you hateful to the living God , who hath drawn his sword against you , and hath prepared his vials , his thunders , his plagues , his woes : and ye must drink of his cup with sorrow , as ye have drunk of the whore's cup with pleasure . Ye that have found a bed of pleasure in any of your forms , or in any of your notions , and so have found ease in the Zion of the whores painting ; ye must be cast into the bed of sorrow , and know the fire the gods Zion , and the furnace in his Jerusalem , if ever ye become an habitation for God , or expect to feed on his holy mountain . 

The condition of the church all this while ( All this time of Satan's reign in forms of knowledge and worship ) hath been very lamentable , and is expressed in scripture by parables and resemblances of a sad state . She hath been as a city pulled down , like a ruined city , which needs rebuilding , before she can come to be a city again , ( when the Lord shall build up Zion . ) She hath been like a wilderness , barren , undressed , unregarded . She hath been like a mournful widow , whose husband hath been rent from her , and her children slain . She hath lost all her ornaments , all her garments , all her ordinances , all her appearances and ways of life , in somuch as the ways of Zion mourn . but Babylon , the mother of harlots , she has got all the beauty , all the glory , all the church's attire , all the churches ordinances , and all the trade and traffic runs thither , and she is cried up for the true church ; and if any dare speak a word against her , & for the true church indeed , they are exclaimed against for schismatics , and heretics , and war prepared against them , and some or other of the beasts horns presently pushing at them . Thus it has gone all the time of the apostasy , the whore has flourished with the name of the church making great merchandise of souls , selling their formal stuff for money ; and abundance of children hath the whore brought forth , and nourished with her milk of deceit : but the true woman , the lamb's wife with her seed , and the living food from her living breasts , have had no place on the earth . 

But this state of things is ended in part , and ending apace . The Lord God of life is arisen out of his holy habitation to assault the dragon , to discover and strip the whore , to recover a possession for his life in the earth , to make room in the world for his church , which he is bringing out of the wilderness . The battle is begun , the territories of Antichrist are assaulted , the lamb hath appeared on his white horse , and hath gathered many of his called , faithful and chosen about him , the ensign is li•ted up : the light ( Which searcheth the innards of the enemies dominions ) hath appeared , and his inmost power and wisdom is not feared , but the Lord God is feared , and the dragon's arm withers , and the head of his policy ( Whereby he ensnared & entangled from the life ) is crushing , glory to the endless power of life for ever and for ever . 

Be wise now therefore , & loose not your share in the immortal crown . Take heed how ye be found fighters against the lamb , in the wisdom & power of Babylon which is to fall , painting will not pass now : that blood of the lamb is felt , which washes off the whores paint , even all her painted notions of the blood of Christ , & of sanctification and redemption , &c. the whorish nature being discovered underneath all these . Ye have got the name of church , the name of Christians , the name of ordinances , &c. by the whores help , but the nature of life ye want : and the living power is come to recover the name from you , and we , his living witnesses , testify to your faces , that ye shall not enjoy it , but the name and the thing shall go together ; and he that hath not the thing , shall also loose the name . Yea , your eyes shall see that ye have been the sacrilegious ones , who have stolen holy names and tirles , which ye never received from the hand of God ; but the whorish spirit ( Which out of the life , and an enemy to the life ) hath handed them to you . And this is told you in dear and tender love , that ye Might not perish , but have eternal life abiding in your hearts , and the new name written by the spirit of life on your foreheads , which all that know the writing of the life , May be able to read and acknowledge . 

There are several touches of these things , in diverse of of the epistles of the apostles : but the full relation is given forth in that book of the revelation , which was penned by the spirit of God , to be read in the light of the spirit , and so to be a preservative against the overspreading contagion of Antichristianism . Adn it is said , at the entrance into it , blessed is he that readeth , & they that hear the words of this prophests , & ke•p those things which are written therein . but men having lost the spirit , have not been able to read it , and having lost the right ear , they have not been able to hear the words it speaks : and how then could they keep the things written therein ? He that doth •ot understand what he is warned against , how is it likely he should be preserved by the warning ? The spirit of God judged this warning necessary but the spirit of deceit cries it is a deep thing , not to be meddled with . Now this is a plain demonstration , that men generally are overtaken with the whoredom , and drink of the whore's cup , & submit themselves to the beast , and exalt his horns , and receive his mark , and some or other of his names ; because they have not the knowledge of that which discovers these things , and was given by the spirit of God to forewarn , and so to preserve out of them . He that knoweth not the mystery of iniquity working under a form of godliness , May not he easily be deceived with the mystery of iniquity ? He that knoweth not what is become of the true church & ministry , and where to look for them , May not he easily own a fall church and ministry ? He that knoweth not the spirit of the scriptures , which the church carried with her , when she left the letter behind her , May not he easily set up the letter for his rule ? He that knoweth not the living mark and name of a Christian , with which the spirit of life seals all the lambs , of Christ in the life , May not he easily give this name to himself , and to others who have not this mark , but the beasts mark ? He that knoweth not the true faith , the true love , the true hope , the true joy , the true peace , the true rest , the true consolation in Christ the life ( The true meekness and patience of the s•intss , &c. ) May not he easily set up shadows , or liknesses of these ( Which he gathers from the letter of the scriptures , and the promises thereof , receiving the knowledge of them into the wrong part , & applying them to the wrong thing ) instead of these ? Ah poor hearts ! The book of the revelation is easy to that spirit that wrote it : and it was not given forth to be laid by as useless ; but to be serviceable in the hand of the spirit , for the ages after the days of the apostles ; and in the true light it is easily read : and they that can read it , can see that in it , which they that cannot read it , cannot believe . And this is plainly seen , that the•e is but the spirit of truth , and the spirit of deceit : but the lamb's wife , and the whore ( Which hath whored from the spirit , which hath made use of the lotter , to run a-whoring from that spirit that wrote it : ) that there is but the true church , and the false church : but life , and death : but form , and power : but Christ the mystery of godliness , and Antichrist the mistary of iniquity : but God , and the dragon : God in the church or temple in the wilderness , and the dragon in the worlds , churches and temples , appearing there as if he were God , giving forth laws and ordinances like God : and all the world falls down before him , and worships him as if he were God ; and hopes by this worship which they perform to him , and by their faith and hope which they receive from him , to be saved at last . I say there are but these two : and he that is joined to the one of these , is not joined to the other . Let him that readeth , understand : which he May easily do by the wisdom of the spirit , but never can by the wisdom of the letter . For though we know how to join these two in the life , yet there is a necessity of separating them at present , till the letter be gained out of the hands of the whorish spirit , which hath built up several forms of knowledge , religion , and worship in Mistery-babilon , by the letter without the life , all which must fall with Babylon . 

An exhortation , relating to the workings of the mystery of iniquity ; and the mystery of godliness in this present age . 

All persons upon earth , who love your souls , and have any true secret pantings after God , look to the nature of your spirits , and look to the nature of those things ye let into your minds ; least ye take in death for life , error for truth , and so sow to yourselves corruption , and rear up a fabric in mystery . Babylon , which will be turned into desolation and utter ruins , by the power of life from Zion . 

Strong is the spirit of deceit that is entered into the world , and glorious and very taking are his images and likenesses of truth , which will deceive all but the very elect , who were chosen from the foundation of the world , and whose eyes are opened to see the foundation of life , which was before the foundation of the world . 

It hath been an heavy dull time for many ages : there have only been witnesses hitherto raised against Antichrist , and he hath sound it an easy matter to knock them down , and keep up his ways of profaneness , and of formal superstitious kinds of devotion , up and down all the nations . But now it is a quick time , the spirit of the Lord God hath arisen , the searching eye is opened , the pursuit after the very spirit of Antichrist is begun , yea very quick and fresh is the scent of that spirit which hunteth the whore ; and now she goes forward and backward , traverses her ground , changes her paint and colours often , shifts her garments continually , and uses all the art she can to save her life . Now the King of Babylon opens his treasury , brings forth all his likenesses , all his images , all his appearances ; with some or other of them ( If it be possible ) to tempt the simple soul , and keep it satisfied therewith , in some of his chambers of darkness and imagery , out of the life and power . 

Therefore now be warned and look about you , and be not cozened with any of the wares of Babylon , where the merchandise and traffic is for souls , and where all the wares of deceit are , which are proper to cozen souls : but seek for the nature of that thing , which the inward pantings of your heart at any time have been after ; and waif for the opening of that eye , which can see , through all manner of paint , to that nature : and keep low in the life , simple and honest-hearted , and then gaudy appearances will not take with you ; for they are only temptations to the aspiring part , which is lifted up above the pure , low , humble principle : and if that part were brought down , ye would be safe : but while that stands , ye will not be out of the danger of temptations . Now this know : 

There is nothing whereof Zion is built , but the likeness of it is in Babylon : and the likeness is very taking , even more taking to that eye which is open in men , than the truth itself . The truth is a plain simple thing , it is not gaudy in appearance , its excellency lies in its nature ▪ but the appearances of truth which Satan paints , are very gaudy , very glorious , seemingly very spiritual , very pure , very precious , very sweet ; they , many times , even ravish that understainding and those affections , that are out of the life , oh what shall i say ! shall i speak a little of the wares of Babylon ? where is there an ear which can hear me ? yet he that opens my mouth , can open thine ear . Therefore set me speak a little plainly . 

1.  There are many glorious false births in Babylon . there is no inheriting the kingdom , but by being born again . This doctrine the King of Babylon preacheth : he is fain to do so , else the letter of the scripture would overthrow his kingdom . Now therefore to keep from the true new birth , he hath his images of the new birth , his several false births . A great while outward baptism , and a formal knowledge was enough to make a man a Christian : but now since that is discovered , and will not do , he brings forth better births ; he hath inward changes of the mind ( Multitudes of them ) fit for every one who is seeking after the life , to be tempted from the life with : and he tempts every one with a proper bait , with that which is taking to him in his present estate . What changes any kind of knowledge by virtue of the notion ( With the devil's quickening power added to it ) can produce in any man , the devil can transform man into . Yea many are these changes : and he that doth not know the nature of the true birth , May easily be deceived with that which is just like the thing he looks for . A man looks for a new birth , for an inward change : he looks for a knowledge to change him : he shall have just the very likeness of that which his heart desires , the lively likenese , the devil is ready at hand to furnish him with it : which way can the man , who never saw the true thing , espy the cheat ? 

2.  There are many glorious desires in Babylon , many pantings , many breathings after that which this birth of Babylon takes to be life . The devil hath these wares , these images in his shop too . As he hath a false birth in imitation of the true , so he hath false breathings for his false birth . If his child could not seemingly breathe towards God ( As if he were a natural child of God ) he would soon be detected : therefore he inflames him with desires of growth , with desires of enjoyment of that which he calls life , with seeming desires of serving and glorifying God : and here come in the prayers of the fleshly birth , which are many times carried on with exceeding great earnestness of the fl•shly part to which also the father of this birth given answers . And now which way can deceit be so much as suspected here ? And yet here also the deceiver lodgeth , and herein he worketh , raising strong desires in that part wherein he dwells , that he May alla• those pure desires , which otherwise would be arising from the life underneath , and which ( Notwithstanding all this ) sometimes do arise , especially when the soul is in anguish . 

3.  there 's false food in Babylon , false knowledge to feed this wrong nature with . there 's knowledge falsely so called . there 's several appearances of all the truths in Zion . there 's outward knowledge of the letter , and there 's inward mystical knowledges and each of these have their warmth , and their freshness , and do nourish up this child , and cause it to grow . Yea what knowledge and experience ; ( Which at first sprang from the true life ) this spirit makes a prey of , and daily brings into his Babylon , therewith to feed and fatten that which is born of him , and to cover the old deceitful nature under , which is not slain thereby , but daily lives and moves and puts forth itself : this is certainly felt by that , which is made sensible in the life , but hard to be spoken , because the deceived heart is so gross ▪ and the ear so heavy now here the painted whore , which hath dealt treacherously with the life , fits as a Queen , and saves , she shall see no sorrow : this knowledge is certain to her , these experiences , she hath had the feeling of , and knows they can never be shaken . But oh thou Princess of Babylon , the Lord will strip the , the Lord will unbare thy innards , & thine own eyes shall see they nakedness , which shall be for a perpetual reproach among all the inhabitants of Zion : and then thy dark deceitful spirit , shall have no more to say against those , who now see through thy covering to thy nature , in the light ; and judge thee ( Not of themselves , nor in their own wills and understandings ) but from the true power , and in the true guidance of the life , whose work it is to pursue , overtake and judge dea•h even to death . For all this knowledge , and all these experiences in thee ( Though thou seest it not , nor canst see it with that eye wherewith thou lookest to see ) are held captive by that which transgressed and hath erred from the life , and are made use of to keep thy soul in bands : and as they are thus held , death and the curse must overtake them , or that life in thee , from which they first sprang , can possibly arise . Grasp not after the knowledge of this in the understanding part , but wait for the sense of it from that life , which lies slain underneath these , and by that part which exalt• these . 

4.  There are false keys to open the several chambers of imagery in Babylon . this food man cannot gather of himself , it must be given to him : this knowledge man cannot get into by himself , but as this spirit leads him , and opens to him : for he hath the keys of death , and opens into the treasures of death . Now this hugely confirms a man in the deceit , without the least suspicion of it . Why , saith he , i had not this knowledge from myself , i came not to it by mine own skill or understanding , but it was given me , it was opened to me : and it came in fresh , and warmed my heart , begetting sweet and pure desires in me , and hath made me eye the glory of God , and not myself . Ye• , it Might come thus in the likeness , and work the likeness of this in thee ; and yet itself not be truth , nor be able to work the truth of this to thee and this is proper to deceive thy very heart , and make thee a pleasant inhabitant of Babylon , and a joyful worshipper of the kingt thereof , whom through this deep deceit , and most subtle false appearances in thy heart , thou mistakest for the King of Zion . 

5.  This false spirit hath his false crosses , his self combats and fightings . The very Papists have not only their wooden and stone crosses , but they have also then ways of self-denial , their ways of crossing the natural part , of resignation to the divine will ( As they call it ) of fighting against corruption , &c.  it is manifest , that a man must deny himself , or else he cannot be a christi•n ( His own will must not , cannot live , if he truly give himself up to Christ : ) therefore that spirit , which lieth lurking to deceive , both several ways of self denial to teach ( All which must have some hardness in them to the natural part , or else they would not pass : ) and these May produce great , and constant conflicting in the flesh , and yet the fleshly nature be still kept alive under all these conflicts and exercises of self denial . He hath a circumcising knife , which cuts off a great deal , but always spares the nature : and as long as the nature is speard , the devil still hath that wherein he can dwell . 

6.  He hath his false love to God and man , and his false zeal for God love and zeal are two distinguishing things . All men conclude , that love determines a man to be a Christian , and so they take up some appearance or other of love , somewhat that satisfies themselves that their love is right , both to God and man . The very Papists , who are full of blood and cruelty , yet pretend to love : they have an image of love which contents them . But there are far higher images , even images of universal love and sweetness , which no eye can perceive , but that which knows the truth . And take one word from me , ye to whom it belongs : all ye that cry up universal love , from the sweet sense of its image , ye shall one day know , that one act of particular love from the true nature , exceeds this in its utmost extent . 

7.  He hath his false life . The devil hath not only a dead formal religion , but he hath a resemblance , and imitation of the quickenings of the spirit . The devil puts his life into this image , where need requires . He hath not only a dead literal knowledge , but he hath paintings of the life : he draws a thing to the life : he makes his dead image of truth , as like the living substance of truth , as possibly he can ; insomuch as his images of life , at a distance , without being beheld in the true life , cannot but be taken for living . Now here is the depth of deceit , when the devils images of life in the heart , are taken for the living thin , for the life itself . 

8.  He hath his false liberty . There is a glorious liberty in the gospel : there is perfect freedom in the service of the life : there is liberty in the power of the life over all the creatures . God made all things for man , and he denies him nothing , he being in subjection to him in the life , and using all in the dominion of the life . Now the devil paints a liberty like this , yea a liberty that seems greater than this , even a liberty wherein the fleshly part ( Whose very nature is eternally shut out of the nature of true liberty ) hath scope ; which liberty is not surrounded , nor cannot be surrounded by the power of life , as this is : and in this painted liberty , that spirit which painted it lives , which : paint the true liberty takes off , slaying that which calls it liberty , and gathering in the name of liberty from this false appearance , to that which is liberty indeed . And by the way , he that can read this , let him : the perfection of the true liberty lies in the perfection of bonds , in the perfect binding down of that which is out of the life : for the true liberty , is the liberty of the life , and of nothing else : and when all that is contrary to the life , is perfectly bound down , than the life hath its full scope , without the least control of the fleshly pa•t : and when the life lives , than that which is joined to the life lives also . 

Now here 's the mystery of iniquity , here 's the inward kingdom of darkness , here 's the glory of Babylon ! here 's he that contends for the kingdom , for the inheritance ! Here the son of the bondwoman ( Thus dressed , thus furnished , thus filled within and without ) will have it go for granted that he is the right heir : and yet all this while wants the nature of that which is to inherit , and cannot possibly receive that nature into himself , but only such images afore mentioned . And if in tender love to his soul , from a clear sight of this thing , we warn him , and bid him look about , he cries do not judge . He really thinks he is right in the main , and he seems willing to refer it to the day of trial . Ah poor hearts ! the eye is opened which can see . That which hath judged the deceit in us , can also judge the deceit in thee . Cannot the spiritual eye see things in its kind ? to what end hath God given it ? Canst 〈◊〉 see and judge natural things in the natural part ? So can they see and judge spiritual things who are in the light , and who live in the life : yea we shall continue judging thee in the •e•• , and in the humility , till God open that in thee which can s••l to our judgement . 

object . how difficult do you make the way to life , if not utterly impossible ? If all this be true , who can be saved ? 

answ. the way to life is very difficult , yea and impossible to that part in man , which is so busy in willing and running towards life : but it is as easy on the other hand , to that which the father begetteth , raiseth up , & leadeth . the wayfairing man though a fool shall not err . the wisest and richest merchant in Babylon , cannot set one step in it : the least child in Zion cannot err there . Therefore know that in thyself , to which it is so hard ; and know that which God hath given to thee , which will make it easy . 

Thou hast a living talon given thee by God , let not thine eye be drawn from that ; but join to that : keep there , and thou art safe : and that will open thine eye to see all deceits , just in the very season and hour of temptation . For thou must expect to meet with all these temptations , as thy growth makes thee capable of receiving them . And as they come , the true eye being kept open , they will be seen : and being seen , they will easily be avoided in the power of life , for in vain the net is spread in sight of the bird . Therefore that thou Mayst be safe . 

1.  Know the light , the eternal light of life , the little glimmerings and shinings of it in thy soul . This comes from the rock , to lead thee to the rock : and if thou follow it , it will fix thee upon the rock where thou canst not be shaken . 

2.  Keep in the light , keep within the the hedge , step not out of thine own , keep out of the circumference of the spirit of deceit , the power of whose witchery and sorcery extends all over the regions of darkness . 

3.  Love simplicity , love the nakedness of life , stand single in the honesty of the heart , out of the intricate subtle reasonings , and wise consultings about things : for by these means the serpent comes to twine about and deceive thy soul : but in the simplicity of the movings of life , in the light , lies the power , the strength , the safety . 

4.  Lie very low continually , even at the foot of the lowest breathing and appearances of the light . Take heed of being above that wherein thy life lies : for the wisdom , the power the strength , yea the great glory lies in the humility : and thou must never be exalted , thou must never come out of the humility , but find and enjoy the honour and glory of the life in the humility . 

5.  Mind the reproofs of the light , for that will still be setting thee to rights . That will still be bringing down that which would get up above , and there lies the preservation . Oh the chastenings of the light , the sweet chastenings of the love by the light ! These are healing stripes . This brings down the exalter , and that in thee which loves to be exalted , and to be seeking the honour of the spiritual riches , before the humility is perfected . 

Thus in love to souls , have i poured out my soul before the Lord , and held forth gentle leadings , even to the most stubborn and stiffnecked . 

The end . 































































































