A question 

Propounded to the rulers , teachers , and persons of the nation of England , for them singly to answer in their hearts and consciences , in the fear and dread of the mighty God of heaven and earth , whose mighty arm of power is stretched out in this nation , first to overturn what stands in his way , and then to establish ( In the place thereof ) what he hath purposed in his heart . And this is the thing which the Lord hath determined to do , both particularly in persons , and generally throughout the earth ; namely to pull down the mighty from their seats , and to exalt the humble and meek , ( Who are made such by the presence and power of his life in them ) that he alone May be exalted in the spirits of his persons , and throughout the earth . And this work hath the Lord begun already ; for his great and notable day hath appeared , and breaketh forth apace , though the eye which is closed cannot see it , nor the benumbed sense feel it . But he that hath an ear , let him hear the sound of the Lord's trumpet , which saith in the mighty breath of his spirit of life , a wake ye dead , and stand up to judgement ; for the day of recompense is come , the day of the eternal vengeance of our God , and the day of his everlasting mercy and plentiful redemption . The question is as followeth . 

Question . 

when this nation was rent from popery ( In part i mean , for wholly it was never rent , but did still retain the same spirit , though by the magistrates sword it was forced from that form and way of worship , which the Pope had established ) did it wait on the Lord for the guidance of his spirit and power , thereby to build up a true church and habitation for God in the spirit ? Or did it take such materials as were ready at hand , and frame up a building as well as it could , wherewith the consciences of many ( that were tender hearted towards God ) were even then disatisfied , and felt , in the eternal life of God , the reformation not to be right in its beginning ? 

This is a weighty question : for an error at first , an error in the foundation is great , and the cause of many following errors . If the spirit of God was not then consulted with , and waited upon , if he did not raise the fabric , surely the building was not right . It was the spirit of God which rent men from popery ( So far as they were acted upon pure & honest principles ) showing the blackness and darkness thereof , and kindling desires in men after a more inward and spiritual way of worship ; thus far was of him . But if men did then consult with their own wisdom , for the ordering and carrying on of the reformation , and so upon politic grounds and reasons , did raise up a building , and not wait on the Lord for his light and power to build with ; then surely that building was not of God , nor could he be honoured thereby , nor his truth preserved , nor the integrity and conscientiousness of his people's hearts towards him cherished : but all this would suffer , and be in danger by this building , and a contrary spirit be pleased with it , and thrive under it . And hath it not been so ? were not the Non-conformists to it ( Though known to be precious persons in the savour and life of God ) looked upon and dealt with as enemies , while such conformistss as were known to be loose and scandalous , yet could flourish well enough , & make a fair show in this national church , and be zealous contenders for the way of worship and government in it ? Yea , those that have been strict in their lives and conversations , and truly zealous towards God , in their souls and spirits , pressing after righteousness and purity ; such as these though they Might conform , yet were they not hated , nicknamed , in scorn called Puritans , and snares laid for them to entrap them ? And how could it be otherwise ? For •f the building was not right , if the constitution and government of this church was not of God , than it could not favour and cherish that which was of God , than it could not nourish or be pleased with obedience to his pure life and spirit , but rather with obedience to its carnal form . For so it is in truth and reality before God , this church with its whole constitution , government , order , and way of worship was either of God's spirit , and so spiritual , or of man's wisdom , and so carnal . If of God's spirit , than it will be a friend to that which is spiritual , and an enemy to that which is carnal : if of man's wisdom , than it will be a friend to that which is carnal , and an enemy to that which is spiritual . And this is a true mark of the true church , and of the true church power and government , it begets and preserves that which is spiritual , it beats down the carnal ; whereas that church power and government which is carnal , preserves that which is carnal ( A carnal unity , a carnal uniformity in worship &c. ) but checks , snibbs , smites , and persecutes that which is spiritual : and such a kind of power and government to be set up , the carnal part in every man contends and cries out for . And so long as there is any change made in this church by the same wisdom it will never be otherwise , it will be but from carnal to carnal , and so still against that which is spiritual . Therefore look back singly , and consider what the building was , and how it was reared up ; and see whether it was of God , or no ? Or whether it was built up in the forwardness of man's spirit , by carnal reasonings and consultings , accommodating things to the present state of the nation , and not to the plain and clear measure of God's truth . 

First , see what the materials were whereof this church was built . Were they materials fit to make up a true church of ? Was it built up of a persons truly converted to God ? Of persons changed in heart ? Of persons sensible of the fore going idolatry , and turned in their souls , minds , and spirits from dead idols towards the living God ? Or was not rather the heart of the nation still inclined towards popery , even while it was turning into a Protestant church ? And was it not chiefly made a Protestant church by the force of the civil power , which wound in by degrees a Protestant interest , the heart of the persons still remaining unchanged , and hankering after popery , but at length , in tract of time , seeing they knew not how to help it , won over to protestanism with the same heart and spirit , that they came out of popery with ? Consider seriously in the sight of God ( Who looketh both forward and backward upon things with a true eye ) whether it hath been thus or no ? 

Secondly , see what kind of ministry was then set up . Was it a new ministry ( As John Huss that famous Bohemian martyr prophesied should arise , and as Luther saw the neccessity of , utterly disclaiming the deriving of orders from popish Bishops ) or was it the same ministry which was derived from Rome ? it is a sore stress the ministers of England have been put to , namely , to plead for the truth of the ministry of the church of Rome , that thereby they Might defend their own . Now mark this thing following , there arose false apostles , false prophets , false teachers in the apostle days , whom Satan clothed like true apostles , like true prophets , like ministers of righteousness . thus they appeared , thus they seemed to be , but they were not of God , but Satan ; not sent of God , not inspired by God , but inspired and sent by Satan . These false apostles , these false prophets fought against the true church , and true ministry of Christ . And though they were oftentimes discovered , by the spirit of Christ in his church , and the church preserved from them , yet we find related in scripture , that at length they did prevail , insomuch as the third part of the true ministers was shaken , and swept down from their place and standing by them , rev. 12. 4. yea and at length the church herself ( As to the truth of her outward state ) overcome , and fled into the wilderness , vers. 6.  & 14. and a false church got up in her stead , which hath a cup of fornication to make persons spiritually drunk , and to bewitch them from the true worship of God , into imitations and likenesses , rev. 17. 4. and those who will not acknowledge her likenesses & imitations to be the truth , but in the word of the lamb's testimony witness against them , she drinks their blood , ver. 6.  Now can any man of any manner of seriousness and sobriety of spirit , ( Who is not drunk & overcome with this whore's wine ) believe , that after false Porphets' had got the day , and set up the false church , that they would setup the true ministry in it ? Oh how blind have men been , that they should go about , and take such pains to derive a succession of the true ministry , from the ministers or prophets of the false church ! 

Thirdly , what kind of maintenance was set up for this ministry ? Was it a gospel maintenance ? Was it that they should live of the gospel , which cannot but open men's spirits to the true ministers thereof ? Or was it a maintenance forced from the persons , by that outward power which set up the church ? And was this maintenance like unto , or the same with the maintenance which the popish ministry had before in this nation , for their idolatrous service ? 

Fourthly , what kind of worship was it , which was set up ? Was it the worship of the gospel , which is in spirit and truth ? Or was it a form of worship invented by man , and so accommodated to the present temper of the nation , that they Might with the more ease and willingness step out of popery into it , because of its nearness and likeness thereto ? 

Fifthly , what kind of church government was set up ? Was it a pure spiritual government ? Was it put into the hands of the spirit ? ( For nothing is to govern , or can rightly govern over the spirits of Christ's persons in spiritual things , but the spirit of Christ . ) Or did men frame up a church government by their wisdom , and put it into the hands of such , as Might exercise it without , yea and against the spirit ? 

Sixthly , what kind of order was set up in this church ? Was it the true gospel order ? Was it the order of Christ's spirit , whereby the carnal wisdom of man Might be quenched , and his spirit have scope ? Or was it a carnal order , whereby the carnal wisdom , learning , knowledge , and arts of man Might have scope , and the spirit in its motions be quenched ? 

Seventhly , by what wisdom was the common prayer book compiled and set up , and surplices , crosses , and other ceremonies enjoined ? Was it by the wisdom of God's spirit , for the building up of the spirits of his persons in the faith ? Or was it for the pleasing and satisfying of the carnal part in persons ? And what sort of persons were they who did most contend for , and were most pleased with these ? Were they , for the generality , the stricter , or the loser sort ? 

Eightly , how came it about , that the supreme magistrate of this nation , was made chief head and governor of this church under Christ ? Was this from Christ's institution , or of man's wisdom and invention ? If of man's inventing wisdom , then against Christ , then of antichrists spirit , who exalteth that which is not of Christ , to sit and govern in his temple . 

Oh weigh these things , look about thee , oh England : oh rulers , teachers , and persons look about you ? And if it plainly , upon a naked search appear , that there was at the very first a foundation laid of suppressing the true worship , and the witnesses to it , do not shut your eyes . Have not the persons of God still been misrepresented , had reproachful names cast upon them , and in some degree or other been persecuted from the beginning of the reformation ? And though names change , and rulers change , and the teachers change , and the persons also change in their religion and worships , yet is not the persecuting spirit still the same , and the persecuted spirit still the same also . The persecuting spirit changeth its cover often , but still retains its nature , hunting after the life and pure power of the spirit , in the children which are begotten of God . Are not the persons of God in every change a despised persons , and their integrity towards God still struck at ? When the Lord began a little to wipe off the reproach from them , at the beginning of these troubles , and the persecuting spirit could not so conveniently hunt them any longer under the name of Puritans , than other names were invented for them , whereby the same spirit sought to make them appear odious again , under a new reproachful title , that so it Might be persecuting the same thing afresh ? Oh how mightily hath the Lord striven to keep the powers and persons of this nation from falling upon his persons ! and yet still so soon as they come to any peace , and feeling of power , they are at it again . Oh England , thy persisting in this , cannot but bring wrath upon thee . What wouldst thou have of us ? Shall we not fear the Lord ? Shall we not obey the Lord ? Shall we not worship the Lord our God , who hath redeemed , and is redeeming our souls from death ? Shall we not be Protestant's in truth and uprightness of heart before the Lord ? Shall we not testify against the popish spirit , and popish practices , and all new inventions of the same spirit ( Though they get never so fine a covering ) in the church of England , as well as against them in the church of Rome ? the Lord is our witness , we would not offend thee , oh England , no not the meanest persons of the whole nation : but from out of popery are we called ( And from what ever else the same nature and spirit May take up in the stead of it ) to follow the Lord our god towards the land of the living ; and follow him we must , however thou deal with us . Oh England , if it had been so , that thy rulers had built up a true church , yet the evil spirit , the unclean spirit would have endeavoured to pollute it , to provoke the lor• to remove his candlestick ( Which is an inward act of his spirit , the outward building Might stand notwithstanding ) and then thy house must have been left desolate , and the same spirit would then have called his persons out of it : but if thy building hath not been spiritual , and in the spirit , how can the spirit of the Lord , suffer the children begotten by him , to lodge in it ! Oh when wilt thou have an ear to hear , that the Lord's wrath May assuage towards thee , which kindleth more and more , and is entering a pace within thy bowels ! This , this is the Lord's charge against thee , thou art for the Protestant name ( It is now become thy interest , and a goodly covering in thy eyes ) but against the Protestant spirit , which the Lord calleth to follow him further and further from all the things of popery , and from all the things like popery . And the Lord will put a difference between the Protestant name , and the Protestant spirit : between them that serve him in the fear which he begets in the heart , and them that set up that kind of fear which is taught by the precepts of men . Oh England , we are now seemingly in thy hands ( Who hast long handled us very roughly ) and we have no strength against thee , nor no hope of deliverance from thee , but in the Lord our God , and there we are at rest , waiting upon him in the innocency , and integrity which he hath begotten in our hearts , until he plead our cause . And in that day , thou wilt see that we have not been thine enemies , and then thou wilt mourn over that mist of darkness , which hath withheld thine eye from discerning what true friends we have been to thee , and how we have endeavoured , and sought with our hearts to prevent thy drinking of that bitter cup , which is to go round the nations . And if thine ear could have been opened , thou Mightest have been spared . 

Postscript . 

The gospel is free , the grace and mercy thereof free , the spirit a free spirit ( Freely given of God , and freely ministering for God ) the church a spiritual building , built in the freedom and liberty of the life of the spirit , the order a•• government of the church is from and in the same free , sp•rit , guiding a persons whom God makes willing in the day of his power , the maintenance of the ministry a free maintenance , t•• whole obedience and worship free , in the free spirit , and in t•• truth which is begotten in the heart by the free spirit . The he•• of this church is Christ , the living spirit , who hath appointed none to be head under him here on earth , nor hath giv•• power to any to make any laws concerning his kingdom , the government thereof , concerning his ministry , or •t maintenance thereof . ( Is it not thus ? Doth not the least child light see it to be thus ? ) But the church of England was church built up by force , settled by force , upheld by force , her ministers maintained by force , her order , unity , uniformity and government forcible , and the free pure spirit of life can have no scope in her , but according to the wills of her rulers , teachers , and persons : if it move otherwise , if it appear otherwise , it is sure to be nick named and persecuted . Oh England , England , can God always suffer these things ? Will not his hand at length be stretched forth against thee ? 

Given forth by Isaac Penington ( The younger ) in the fear and dread of the most high . 14. of 12.  Month , 1659.  

the day of the Lord so cemeth , as a thief in the night . For when they shall say , peace and safety ; then sudden destruction cometh upon them , as travail upon a woman with child , and they shall not escape , 1 thes. 5 , 2 , 3.  And when the Lord cometh , woe to him who is found beating his fellow servants , and endeavouring to force the conscience , ( Which God hath made tender and pliable to the voice of his spirit ) from its obedience and subjection thereto . 

The end . 

London , printed for l. Lloyd , at the castle in Cornhill , 1659.  























