The Jew outward : being a glass for the professors of this age : wherein , if they read with meekness , and in the true light , such of them as have not overslipped the day of their visitation , May see their own spirits , to their own everlasting advantage and comfort , by learning subjection to that , which hath power in it to destroy this evil spirit in them . Containing some exceptions and arguments of the Jews , against Christ's appearance in that fleshly form of his in their days , which the present professors May view , and compare with their exceptions and arguments against his appearance in spirit in this age , that they May see and consider which of them are the more , and the more weighty . By Isaac Penington , the younger . 

London , printed by g. d. for Lodowick Lloyd , and are to be sold at the sign of the castle in Cornhill , 1659.  

The preface . 

The Lord God of infinite goodness , who hath ever dearly loved mankind , yet could never so appear to them since the transgression , as to be owned by them , till the vail was taken from before their hearts . Israel in Egypt harkened not to Moses , because of their anguish and bondage . When they were led out , they were ever and anon murmuring , and picking quarrels against him . Samuel they rejected ( As the Lord lays to their charge ) though they Might excuse themselves , and say they had just exceptions against his sons . Elijah , that mighty man of God , the great restorer of Israel , and pleader against Baal by fire , his life was sought for . And though there be not a particular record of their usage of the prophets about those days , yet in general he complains that they were all slain but himself , 1 king. 19.10 . Micaiah was smote on the cheek and jeered by the false prophet which smote him , and said , which way went the spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee ? And he was commanded to be put in prison , and fed with bread of affliction , and water of affliction . Jeremiah was put in the dungeon , even to the danger of his life : and by those few that were left , that seemed singly to inquire by him concerning the will of the Lord , ( jer. 42.2 , 3. ) disdainfully rejected , chap. 43.2 . what should i spend time in particular instances ? What prophet can i except ? for though all their bad dealings with them , are not related in scripture , yet Christ testifies that they did deal badly with them all , some of them they stoned , some of them they scourged in their synagogues , some of them they killed and crucified , and others they persecuted from city to city . Yea , saith Stephen , which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted ? and they have stain them which showed before of the coming of the just one . Ye make it such a strange thing , that if Christ had been a prophet , ye should not own him : why which of the prophets was owned ? ye have still some exception or other against us , that we are not the prophets of God ; and against our message , that it is not the mind of God . Ye take arguments from one prophets words , to oppose another prophet with ; and from one prophets manner of coming , to oppose another prophet's manner of coming . If John come neither eating nor drinking , ye reject him for his austereness : if Christ come both eating and drinking , ye reject him for his liberty and freedom in the life . Now what is the reason of this ? Christ himself gives the reason , mat. 11.19 . Wisdom is justified of her children . ye are not the children of wisdom , ye are not begotten of the life , of the spirit of the prophets , and so cannot justify that spirit . Ye have got the letter of the prophets , •e are born of that ; but ye are not born of the life , ye are not born of the wisdom . And so , whoever comes forth in the same birth from the letter with you , him ye can own : but if any prophet come forth with that same spirit , him ye cannot own . He that is born after the flesh , cannot but persecute him that is born after the spirit : Jerusalem was all along the persecuter of the prophets , from the beginning to the end . 

And is this nothing to you , oh ye professors of this age ? Search and see who have been the persecutors among you , but they who have had the name of the church and her prophets ? Who hath slain the witnesses ? The church of Rome hath slain the witnesses against her , and the Protestant's have slain the witnesses against them . About the beginning of these troubles , if a man were never so truly zealous , yet if he could not conform to the common-prayer-book and ceremonies , how was he persecuted ? A Nonconformist , a separatist , a Brownist , an Anabaptist ( Though owning the same Christ in his very heart and soul ) yet because his practice was a testimony against the false church-worship of the common Protestant , must be hunted up and down to courts , imprisoned , fixed , banished . And to this day , the Lord can bring forth no birth of his spirit , but the zealous professor hates , reviles , and seeks to destroy . If the Lord lay any law upon the conscience , if it be not suitable to their apprehensions from the letter , how do they reproach , disdain , revile , and endeavour to render such odious to the magistrates , and to the persons ! 

But why should we wonder at these things ? There is no new thing under the sun . The state of the world is just as it always was . The power of truth in every age , hath been still opposed by those who cried up the form . It were a wonder if it should be otherwise . I should much more , wonder , if the teachers and professors of this age should own . Truth , than that they fight against it and persecute it . Well friends and brethren , be strong in the Lord , and faithful to his truth in the power of his might ; bear the reproach , the afflictions of this age , the persecutions of this your day : verily your eyes shall see that there is a reward for the righteous , and your hearts shall be satisfied with it , when the children of the kingdom ( Of this age , as well as of Christ's , and all former ages ) shall be shut out in utter darkness , where shall be weeping , and wailing , and gnashing of teeth . 

Some exceptions and arguments of the Jews , against Christ's appearance , &c.  

The Jews were once the only outward visible persons of God , who were chosen by God for a peculiar persons , who had the promise of , and expected the Messiah , whose faith and hope of salvation was in him , yea , and at that very time they were looking for him ; yet when he came , he was a stone of stumbling , and a rock of offence to them , and they could by no means receive him . They were full of reasonings , and doubts , and contendings about it , but could never with all their wisdom from the letter , determine that that was he . Though he lived as never man lived , though he spoke as never man spoke , though he did what never man did ; yet still some exception or other they had from the letter of the scriptures , to which his manner of appearance , his conversation , and his doctrine did not suit in their judgement ; and so after many disputes and debates , they at length deliver him up to death , as a blasphemer , a deceiver , a seducer of the persons . 

Many exceptions and arguments they had against him , against his descent , his doctrine , his practices , his miracles , his followers , &c. which i shall refer to heads , to make them more obvious . 

1.  They excepted at his descent and kindred . Is not this the carpenters son ? Is not his mother called Mary ? and his brethren , James , and Joses , and Simon , and Judas ? and his sisters are they not all with us ? matt. 13.55 , 56.  ( What this the glorious Messiah , the great King of glory , of whom all the prophets have prophesied and spoke such great things ! surely it cannot be . ) and they were offended in him , vers. 57  It was this made them they could not receive that heavenly doctrine of his , which otherwise Might have been life to them , when he taught them that he was the bread of life that came down from heaven : but they murmured because of it , and said , is not this Jesus the son of Joseph , whose father and mother we know 〈◊〉 how is it then that he saith , i came down from heaven , John 6 , •1 , 42.  So again , John 7.27 . we know this man whence he is ; but when Christ cometh , no man knoweth whence he is . this was a close argument , and was raised up to eat out a deep impression of his being the Christ , as May appear from the foregoing verse . He speaketh indeed boldly , and deep things , &c. as if he were the Christ ; but how can he be he , seeing it is known from whence he comes ? 

2.  At his country , or place of his education and residence , which was Nazareth of Galilee . Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth ? John 1.46 . shall Christ come out of Galilee ? John 7.41 . search and look ; for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet , verse 52.  

3.  at the time and season of his coming . he came ( As to their sense ) before Elias . with this argument they pinched the disciple , as is signified in that query of theirs to Christ , why then say the scribes that Elias must first come ? matt. 17.10 this could not but be a sore argument in the mouth of the scribes , who Might reason with the disciple on this wise : what poor , ignorant , sottish , deluded persons are you , to own this man for your Master , and take him for the Messiah ? Elias must first come , and restore all things . If this man preached never so heavenly doctrine , and did never so many miracles , yet if he pretend to be the Messiah , he can be but a deceiver ; for the true Messiah comes not before Elias ; and every one knows that Elias is not yet come , nor his work of restoring all things , so much as begun . 

4.  His doctrine administered abundance of offence to them , and they were continually stumbling at it . That heavenly doctrine mentioned a little before , that he was the bread of life , they murmured at it , John 6.41 . When he did but say , God was his father , they presently flew out upon him , and said he made himself equal with God , John 5.18 . When he said , destroy this temple , and in three days i will raise it up ; they misunderstood him , and brought it forth as an argument against him at the time of his suffering , mat. 26.61 . And cast it as a jeer in his teeth , mat. 27.40 . When he did but say to the man sick of the palsy , son thy sins are forgiven thee ; the scribes and Pharisees presently exclaimed against him , who is this which speaketh blasphemies ? who can forgive sins , but God alone ? Luke 5.21 . and chap. 7.49 . When he preached very powerfully against covetousness , the Pharisees derided him , Luke 16.14 . Yea , when he did but preach a parable or two about the widow of Sarepta , and Naaman the Syrian ( It coming a little close to their state ) all they in the synagogue were so filled with wrath , that they rose up and thrust him out of the city , and led him unto the brow of the hill to cast him down headlong , Luke 4.28 , 29.  At his saying that Abraham rejoiced to see his day , and he saw it , and was glad ; the Jews replied , thou art not yet fifty years old , and hast thou seen Abraham ? John 8.57 . How absurd and impossible was this to them , that a man of not fifty years , should say that Abraham ( Who lived so many ages before ) saw his day ; and instead of giving them an argument to demonstrate it to them , he only returns them a more confident affirmation , verily , verily , i say unto you , before Abraham was i am ; vers. 58. which so enraged them , that they took up stones to cast at him , vers. 59  Now mark , the life speaks what it sees and knows , and so it gives forth its testimony : the wise professor not being in the life , he cannot know or receive the testimony , but calls for arguments and damonstrations to his wise eye , the life refuseth to answer him , but instead thereof , only affirmeth the thing more strongly & confidently ; this ( Being so far from that which he looks for and requires to satisfy him ) kindles disdain and rage in him : and he looks upon the life , for this way of proceeding , as worthy to be stoned . What , when they should lay before Christ a fair argument , whereby they Might plainly convince him by evident reason , that he could not see Abraham's day ; and he instead of answering it , should only bring forth a more confident affirmation . Would not men's wisdom in this age , even hiss at such a thing ? yet this was the way of the life then , in that day ; and the life May at his pleasure , take the same way again now , to offend the wise and knowing . 

When he spoke of his being the good shepherd , and of his laying down his life for the sheep ( And of the hirelings fleeing in time of danger to save himself ) John 10 , vers. 11.12 . &c. many of the Jews said , he hath a devil , and is mad , why hear ye him ? vers. 20.  Many of them that were then the persons of God ( The separated persons : for the Jews were a persons separated from the world , and studied the law , and observed the ordinances of Moses ) looked upon Christ , as a man not fit to be heard speak , but as a mad man , as one that had a devil , as one that Might have great power of deceit from the devil , to bewitch men from truth ; why hear ye him ? what good can ye expect from him ? he hath a devil , and is mad . oh how desperately will bold flesh venture to judge of the life and power of God , when it hath got a little knowledge from the scriptures , and a way of worship , duties , and ordinances ! 

When he said , i and my father are one , John 10.30 . they took up stones again to stone him , vers. 31. and made no question but they did well in doing of it , as appears by their answer to his demand ; for which of his good works they stoned him ? They reply very confidently , for a good work we stone thee not , but for blasphemy , and because thou being a man , makest thyself god , vers. 32 , 33.  And when he said , if a man keep my saying , he shall never see death , John 8.51 . Then said the Jews unto him , now we know that thou hast a devil . Abraham is dead , and the prophets are dead , who makest thou thyself ? vers. 53.  Were not Abraham and the prophets holy men ? had not they the sayings of God ? and did not they keep the sayings of God ? yet they are dead . Such a kind of speech as this must needs be from the devil . Now thou makest manifest from what spirit thou speakest , now know we that thou hast a devil . and indeed how could the professors of that age digest such things , being so contrary to what appeared to them , to be certain truth in the scriptures . 

And there were many other things as hard to them , though the exceptions which Might or did arise in their minds , are not particularly mentioned : as when he saith , i am the door of the sheep . All that came before me are thieves and robbers , but the sheep did not hear them , John 10.7 , 8.  How offensive must this doctrine needs have been to them , going carnally to understand and reason about it ? What were all the prophets and holy men before thee , thieves and robbers ? did the truth never come , till thou brought'st it ? What became of our forefathers in former ages ? were they none of them God's sheep ? did none of them find the door ? for thou sayst thou art the door , and thou hast been but of late . And whereas thou sayst , the sheep did not hear them , that 's utterly false : for they did hear Moses , and they did hear the prophets : and we have their writings , and will keep to them for all thee , let who will be thy sheep . When he said , that he came not to send peace but division , mat. 10.25 . How readily Might they reply , that his own mouth discovered him , not to be the Messiah , the saviour , the peacemaker , but the worker of divisions , the causer of breaches in families ; setting three against two , and two against three , Luke 21.51 . When he said , whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin , John 8.34 . Might not they well except against this , as condemning the whole generation of the righteous , and making null the way of sacrifices which God had appointed for sins committed at any time by his persons , which could not but presuppose their commission of sin ? did not Abraham , Isaac , David , Moses , & the rest of the prophets all commit sin , and were they servants of sin ? He taught also , that the children of the kingdom should be cast into utter darkness , mat. 8.12 . Oh how harsh would this sound in the ears of the zealous professing Jew , who was waiting and hoping for the kingdom ! So in his doctrine there seemed many contradictions to the fleshly understanding , for one while he said , i judge no man , for i came not to condemn the world : and yet was he not continually judging and condemning the scribes , the Pharisees , the priests , the lawyers , and that whole generation of professors ? So again he came to seek and save that which was lost , to preach the gospel of peace : and yet another while he saith , he came not to send peace but a sword , and to kindle a fire , and to set men at variance , &c.  Again , one while he said , i and my father are one , another time , my father is greater than i ; one while he bid men do as the scribes and Pharisees , taught ; another while he bid men beware of the leaven , or doctrine of the Prarisees and Saduces , mat. 16.12 . 

But to what purpose should i heap up any more instances ? Oh thou that readest this , wait to know in thyself the ear that cannot hear Christ's doctrine , and while thou condemnest the Jews , do not run into the same error of unbelief and gainsaying , but wait to know the voice of Christ in this day , and to receive the ear that can hear it , for though thou shouldst be willing to hear , yet thou canst not , till thy ear be opened . Nicodemus who could acknowledge Christ a teacher come from God , yet could not receive the doctrine of the new birth from him , John 3.4 . and there were many things the disciple themselves were not able to bear , for when , at a certain time , he spoke of giving his flesh to eat , not only the Jews , John 6.52 . but they also stumbled , ver. 61. and who is there among professors , that can now bear it , or receive Christ's own interpretation of it ? who saith , that the flesh ( Which they understood ) profiteth nothing , but the flesh which he meant was spirit and life , ver. 63.  

5.  at his practices , and conversation , how is it that he eateth and drinketh , with publicans and sinners , Mark 2.16 . behold a gluttonous man , and a wine bibber , a friend of publicans and sinners , Luke 7.14 . this man if he were a prophet , would have known who , and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him ; for she is a sinner , Luke 7.39 . At the publicans and sinners drawing nigh to hear him , the Pharisees and scribes were offended , and murmured saying , this man receiveth sinners , and eateth with them , Luke 15.1 , 2. and when he went to Zacheus house , they all murmured , saying , that he was gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner , Luke 19.7 . 

Again , because he healed on the Sabbath , and justified his disciple in plucking of ears of corn on the Sabbath , they were filled with madness , and communed what they Might do to him , Luke 6. ver. 3. and ver. 10 , 11. and took counsel how they Might destroy him , Mark 3.5 , 6.  Another time , the ruler of the synagogue spoke with indignation about it , Luke 13.14 . Yea , the Jews did persecute Jesus , and sought to slay him because he had healed a man , and bid him take up his bed and walkon the Sabbath day , John 5. ver. 8 , 16. and some of them made it a strong argument against him , this man is not of God , because he keepeth not the Sabbath day , John 9.16 . What come from God , and be a breaker of his ordinances ? Can these two stand together ? Read and consider , what more strict ordinance of God under the law , than the Sabbath ? What one ordinance more conducing to the honour and worship of God ? Did not their whole religion and worship much depend upon it ? How could this possibly but be a great offence to them in that spirit , and literal wisdom from the scriptures , wherein they stood ? Yet Christ , in his fleshly appearance , was Lord of the Sabbath ; and in his spiritual appearance he doth not lose his dominion . 

Again they excepted against him , that he did not teach his disciple to fast and pray as John did , Luke 5.33 . but could suffer them to transgress the traditions of the elders , mat. 15.2 . he was not strict after the Jewish way of devotion , not strict after John's way neither ; but against the traditions of the godly elders of the Jewish church , against sanctifying of the Lord's Sabbath ( Justifying his disciple in plucking ears of corn thereon , whereas their forefathers the Jews , were not so much as to gather manna on that day ) against fasting and prayer , for he justified his disciple in that they did not fast and pray as John did , saying , how could they while the bridegroom was with them ? Mat. 9.15 . and consider which way the Jews ( In the state they stood ) could understand such an answer as this , to rest sastified therewith ? 

6.  They excepted against his miracles , partly because he did them on the Sabbath day , John 9.16 . whereupon they concluded he could not be of God ( For if he had been of God , he would have observed the day which God commanded ) & if he wrought them not by the power of God , by whose power then must he work them ? So they concluded , he casteth out devils , through the Prince of devils , mat. 9.34 . he hath Belzebub , and by the Prince of devils casteth he out devils , Mark . 3.32 . and having thus concluded in themselves , there was no ear open in them , to hear any thing that Might be said to the contrary . And again partly , because he did not answer their wills , in giving them such a sign as they required : for this was still their tone , Master , we would see a sign from thee , mat. 12.38 . what sign showest thou unto us , seeing that thou dost these things ? John 2.18 . and they more particularly express what sign they would have , they would have a sign from heaven , Luke 11.18 . what sign showest thou , that we May see and believe thee ? John 6.30 . We are ready to be convinced , we are ready to believe , if thou would give us sufficient ground of believing in thee . As for all thy healing persons , and casting out devils , Belzebub ( The Prince of devils ) May furnish thee with power ) therewith , to deceive and bewitch us from the law and ordinances of Moses ( Which we are sure are of God ) but show us a sign from heaven , or else blame us not for not leaving Moses to run after thee . 

7.  They excepted at the testimony , which the spirit of God in him , gave concerning him . when he spoke the inward testimony , which the spirit of God gave from within , saying , i am the light of the world , he that followeth me , shall not walk in darkness , but shall have the light of life , John 8.13 . they presently cried out thou bearest record of thyself , thy record is not true , verse 14. mark his answer , it is written in your law , that the testimony of two men is true , i am one that bear witness of myself , and the father that sent me beareth witness of me , verse 17.18 . How would such an answer pass now in these days , though the same life should speak it ? would not the wise professors of this age even hoot at it ? yet the thing is known at this day , even the life which the father begets , and the fathers testifying of it , and with it : and thou that readest this , Mightest know it , couldst thou wait in the loss of thine own life , ( Wisdom , and knowledge ) for it . 

8.  They excepted against his disciple and followers , which were women , publicans and sinners , the common persons , yea the meanest , the poorest , and most ignorant ( In their account ) who were fittest to be deluded and led away . are ye also deceived ? Have any of the rulers , or of the Pharisees believed on him ? but this persons who knoweth not the law , are cursed , John 7.47 , 48 , 49. the common persons , the ignorant persons , the unsettled persons , such as know not the law , such as understand not the scriptures , they run after him , and cry him up : but which of the settled ones , which of the truly zealous ones , which of the wise men in the knowledge of the law and prophets , which of the orthodox scribes and Pharisees , who keep close to Moses , which of these believe in him ? whom of them can he deceive ? As for the heady persons , who ( For want of knowledge of the scriptures ) are ready to run after every new fangle , they are not worth the minding , they are accursed , and therefore no marvel though God give them up to follow this deceiver , & to cry up his new light , and forsake the good old light of Moses & the prophets . 

9  They excepted against him , that he did not rebuke his disciple , and the multitude ( Spreading their garments , cutting down branches from the trees and strowing them in the way ) with the children that cried hosanna to him , as he rode on the ass colt to Jerusalem : but he rather justified them , Luke 19.31 . and mat 21.15 , 16. what a ridiculous , and vainglorious piece of pageantry would this seem to the fleshly wise eye ? 

10.  That he did not show sufficient authority for what he did . by what authority dost thou these things ? and who gave thee this authority , &c. Mark 11.28 . Thou takest upon thee great authority over the persons of God , over their teachers , yea over God's temple , Sabbath , and ordinances ; but where 's thy authority so to do ? Show us that , &c.  

11.  They excepted when he spoke of his sufferings and death , we have heard in our law , that Christ abideth for ever ; and how sayst thou , the son of man must be lift up ? Who is the son of man ? John 12.34 . Sure he that is to be lift up , cannot be the Christ which is to abide for ever , and not to die : so that here ( In one breath ) thou hast overthrown all that thou hast been setting up by thy preaching and miracles . Now which way could they understand this thing ? Nay the very disciple themselves could not swallow it , but were startled at it , and Christ was fain to hide it a long time from them . And yet if there be any thing held forth now in these days by the same spirit , ( As concerning light and perfection , or other truths which are seen in the spirit ) because men cannot apprehend them with their carnal understanding , and make them agree with their carnal knowledge of the scriptures , what liberty do they take to themselves to speak both against the truth itself , and also against them who have seen these things in the spirit , and speak them from the spirit ? Now whosoever becomes a disciple , must wait in the obedience to know the doctrine , and not think to enter with that wisdom , and carnal reasoning from scriptures , which the scribes and Pharisees , and professors of that age were shut out with . 

There were many other things which they could not but except against , as at his answers to their questions , to which sometimes he was silent and gave no answer at all . At other times , he answered not directly , but in parables ( And how offensive is this to man's wisdom , who requires a positive and direct answer ? ) And sometimes his answers Might seem quite from the thing , as John 12.34 , 35.  

His not giving respect to persons ( For it was a known thing of him , that he regarded not men's persons , mat. 22.16 . ) could not be very pleasing to them , who loved greetings , and sought honour one of another . He showed not respect to Herod the King , ( But spoke contemptuously of him , as men would account it ) go saith he , and tell that fox . he did not show respect to the reverend and grave doctors of the law , nay nor to the high priest himself . Nay he did not show respect to his own disciple , but said to Peter , ( When he mildly and affectionately desired his death Might be avoided ) get thee behind me Satan . how harsh and rough a reply Might this seem ? If Peter had erred , through his affection and tenderness to his Master , a meek spirit would gently have informed him ; but to call him devil , and say , get thee behind me ; what kind of spirit doth this favour of , would that professing Jew say , who knoweth not the true meekness , but seeks after a fleshly meekness , which is a servant to the fleshly wisdom and prudence , but not true born ? Nay he did not speak respectively to his own mother , ( As man's spirit , by its rule of respect would judge and condemn him ) but said , woman , what have i to do with thee ? John 2.4 . and in a manner denied all his relations , mat. 12.48 . 

Lastly , ( To instance no more ) at his harsh censures of all the professors of that age , ( Which observed the law of Moses , and Israel's statutes ) with all their laborious and godly teachers , justifying none but himself , and what he taught , and a few of his followers . He told them that they had not the love of God in them , John 5.42 . Did not this ( Think ye ) seem to them a very harsh charge ? And why not the love of God ? because they did not follow him , and his new doctrine ? yea , would they be ready to say , they did love God , and kept his commandments , Sabbaths , and ordinances , which he transgressed . 

He laid this also to their charge , that they did not believe Moses , John 5.46 . What an unjust charge Might this seem , when they were so zealous for Moses , and their very dislike of him , and controversy against him , was for the sake of the law and ordinances of Moses ? 

Another charge he laid to them was , that they were not the children of Abraham , or of God , but of the devil , John 8. ver. 39 , 42 , 44.  What a rash censorious man Might they account him thus to speak of them , who were the human seed of Abraham , who were such strict observers of God's laws and ordinances , ( Which is the property of his children ) and such enemies to the devil , that they would not be drawn from the truths , and way of worship taught by Moses and the prophets , no not by all the miracles he could work ? 

He called them a faithless and perverse generation , ma 1 t. 17.17 . 

He told them that they did not know God , though they said with confidence that he was their god , John 12.54 , 55.  How could they bear this ? They had been studying the law and prophets , and had a great stock of knowledge from thence , and were strict and exact in worship ( Some of them , as well as Paul , Might be according to the law blameless ) and now to be told they did not know God ? Nay , he that aboundeth in knowledge , devotion , and worship , yet being not in the life and pure power of the spirit , hath not one dram of the true knowledge . 

He told them that they should die in their sins , John 8.21 . ( Oh hard word , and severe judgement ! ) And yet he had told them a little before that he judged no man , ver. 15. yea they did think themselves exceedingly wronged by him , and thought that no man that had any thing of God in him could speak such things , but only one that was an enemy to the persons of God , and led by the spirit of Satan . To this effect they express themselves , verse 48. of that chap.  Say we not well , that thou art a Samaritan , and hath a devil ! 

Yea when Christ charged them with going about to kill him , they seemed to themselves so clear in their own consciences , that they answered , thou hast a devil , who goes about to kill thee ? John 7.29 . how easily Might they closeup the controversy , and by this very thing conclude him to be a false prophet ? He says we went about to till him , when ( God knows ) there was not such a thing in our hearts . Can this man be a true prophet ? yet Christ knew the prefessing Jews to be the murderer , and in and for his religion sake still seeking to slay him . And there is no such murderer of Christ ( The life ) upon the earth , as the zealous professor and worshipper out of the life . He that is in the life cannot persecute any man ; he that is out of the life , cannot but persecute him that is in the life . Hereby the true and false Christian May be discrened , by the weakest simple and single eye . 

And then for their teachers and expounders of the law , how exceeding bitter did be seem against them ? and how heavy things was he continually laying to their charge ? He called them blind guides , hypocrites , painted sepulchers , graves which appears not , and pronounced woe upon woe against them . Read that one place , mat. 23.33 , ye serpents , ye generation of vipers , how can ye escape the damnation of hell ? what speak thus of our zealous teachers , who study the law , are strict in practising of the ordinances , and take such pains to ininstruct us in the mind of God , from Moses and the prophets ? was such a man as this fit to live ? Nay and he does not show a gospel spirit , mark how sharp and bitter his words came from him ( For indeed a sharper speech , with greater vehemency and indignation of spirit , can hardly be spoken ) and they Might seem to aggravate this sharp condemnation of his , from his own confession : he himself had confessed that they sat in Moses chair ( Now he Might have shown some honour to Moses chair , and to their office , which was of God , and doubtless good ) and not have gone about to make them thus odious in the eyes of the persons . Nay he himself had bid men do as they said , but in ver. 3. of that chap. now was it likely that ever men should mind what they said , or observe their doctrine , when he had thus represented them , as oppressors of the conscience , ver. 4. as devourers of widow's houses , and making long prayers in hypocrisy , ver. 15. as making their proselytes more the children of hell than themselves , ver. 15. as neglecters of the weightier matters of the law , judgement , mercy and faith , ver. 2.3 . as appearing righteous to men , but full of hypocrisy and iniquity , ver. 28. as of the same generation that killed the prophets , ver. 31.32 . as deceivers , as such as led into the ditch , ( and bid men beware of their leaven ) were not these good kind of encouragements for persons to hear them ? Yea he charged them with shutting up the kingdom of heaven against men , and not going in themselves , nor suffering men to enter that were going in , ver. 13.  How could they observe what they taught without hearing them ? and would Christ wish any to hear such men as these ? Yet for all this , without doubt they were not without their justifications against Christ in these respects , and also had their charges ( On the other hand ) ready against him . Now how did they shut up the kingdom of heaven against men ? Did not they teach the law , and direct men to the ordinances of God , and open the prophet's words to them ? was this shutting up the kingdom of heaven ? And would not they suffer men to enter ? Why , their work was to win persons to their profession , they would compass sea and land to make a proselyte . How stiffly Might the Jews have pleaded against Christ , that he did slander their godly ministers , who were very painful and zealous in opening the scriptures , and teaching the way of God ? nay he himself could not deny but they taught well : for he himself saith , whatsoever they bid you observe , that observe and do , mat. 23.3 . But mark now , that ye May understand the thing , it is thus . Any teaching , or expounding of scriptures out of the life , shuts up the kingdom : for the life is the kingdom : and words from the life yield the savour of the kingdom : but words out of it ( Though never so good and true ) reach not to the life in another , but only build up a knowledge in the contrary wisdom , and teach to hold the truth in the unrighteousness , where Satan's kingdom stands , and where he hath the dominion over all that is brought thither . And so this kind of teaching and knowledge shuts up the door and way of life ; and must be lost , before the kingdom can be found . 

They shut up the true kingdom , but they opened another kingdom , they opened the kingdom another way , ( Which was in truth shutting of it , ) and they had disciple and children of the kingdom ▪ whom they tickled with the hope of life , and fed with promises and comforts : but these the Lord would shut out . many shall come from the East and West , and shall sit down with Abraham , and Isaac , and Jacob , in the kingdom of heaven : but the children of the kingdom , shall be cast out into utter darkness , mat. 8.11 , 12.  This is as true at this day , in this present dispensation , as it was then in that dispensation , though men make it a great accusation against us , charging us that we say none are the persons of God but ourselves , and as if all were damned but we . These are men's harsh and unsavoury expressions ; we use not to speak after this manner , but soberly open the state of the thing , as it stands in the truth ( And as it hath been revealed unto us , by him who is true , and cannot lie , ) which is thus : 

That through which men are saved , is the dispensation of truth in their age . The measure of light , which God gives forth in every age ; that is the means and proper way of salvation in that age : and what ever men get , or profess of the knowledge of truth , declared in former ages , yet making use of that to withstand the present dispensation of truth in their age , they cannot thereby be saved , but May thereby be hardened against that which should save them . And this we are assured of from the Lord , that as the Jews could not be saved by the law of Moses ( Making use of it in opposition to the shining of the light of God in the prophets in their present ages ) nor afterwards could be saved by magnifiing and observing both the words of Moses and the prophets , and their belief from thence of a Messiah to come , ( Making use of these things to oppose that appearance of Christ in the flesh , which was the dispensation of their day then . ) No more can any professors be saved now , by belief of a Christ come , or any thing which they can learn or practise from the scriptures , making use thereof to oppose the dispensation of this day ; which dispensation is the immediate and powerful breaking forth of the light of the spitit , in the hearts of God's persons ( Who have earnestly sought , and in much sorrow and perplexity of spirit , longed and waited for him ) after this long dark night of the Antichristian apostasy . 

There remain yet some other exceptions against him , about the time of his suffering death , with his hard usage , which would not wholly be passed over . 

As first , his disrespective or irreverend answering of the high priest , ( As it seemed to them ) when he asked him of his doctrine , John 18. vers. 19  His answer was , that he spoke openly in the world , not in secret , why askest thou me ? ask them that heard me ; whereupon one of the officers struck him , saying ; answerest thou the high priest so ? vers. 22.  The plainness and simplicity of the life ( Which bows to God , and cannot regard man in the transgression ) seems rude and unmannerly to the lofty spirit of the world . 

2.  His silence at the testimonies brought against him , and to the high priest when he questioned him , Mark 14.60 , 61.  Indeed either the speaking or silence in the life , is offensive to the carnal professor , who knoweth not the law of the life in this particular , but can either speak or be silent according to his own will . This is the difference between the true and the false Christian ; the false Christian , his knowledge and religion stands in his own will , in his own understanding , ( He speaks in his own time ) both which are crucified in him that is born of the spirit . 

3.  When he did speak the truth of himself , the high priest rent his clothes , and charged him with blasphemy , mat. 26.64 . And those that were by , fell in with the high priest , and said he was guilty of death , vers. 66.  Then they spit on his face and buffeted him , and smote him , and mocked him , and blindfolded him , and struck him on the face , bidding him prophesy , who smote him , mat. 26.67 , 68 and Luke 22.63 , 64.  

When they brought him to Pilate , they would have Pilate take it for granted that he was an evil doer , and worthy of death , for when Pilate asked for their accusation against him , they answer , if he were not a malefactor , we would not have delivered him up unto thee , John 18.29 , 30.  Pilate refusing so to proceed in judgement , ( vers. 31. ) they begin to bring in their charges , we found this fellow perverting the nation , and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar , saying , that he himself is Christ a King , Luke 23.2 . Pilate examines him herein , but professes he can find no fault in him at all , John 18.38 . Then the chief priests accused him of many other things , ( Mark 15.3 . and were more fierce , saying , he stirreth up the persons , teaching throughout all jury , beginning from Galilee to this place . ( This indeed was his great offence , he taught with the authority of the spirit , and not as the scribes . ) Then Pilate sent him to Herod ( Where the chief priests and scribes stood vehemently accusing him ) who questioned him much , but he answered him nothing . And Herod , with his men of war , set him at naught , and mocked him , and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe , and sent him back to Pilate , Luke 23.9 , 10 , 11.  Pilate professed that he could not find him guilty of this second charge neither of perverting the persons , vers. 14. therefore chastising him , he would release him , vers. 16.  But the persons ( By the persuasion of the chief priests and elders ) cried all at once , away with this man , and release unto us barbas , vers. 18. but let him be crucified , crucify him , crucify him , vers. 21. &c. now when Pilate had scourged him , and the soldiers had stripped him , and put on him a scarlet robe , and had put a crown of plaited thorns on his head , and a reed in his right hand , and had bowed the knee to him in mockery , and spit on him , and smote him with a reed , he brings him forth to them again , hoping this Might appease there malice , and they Might be content to spare his being crucified . They tell him they have a law , and by their law he ought to die , because he made himself the son of God , John 19 vers. 4. to 8. ( See how they turn and wind every way to make the innocent an offender , and to make some law , of one kind or other , take hold of him ! ) But when all their accusations would not prevail with Pilate , but still ( From the sense of his innocency ) he had a mind to release him , they use another subtle artifice , telling him , if he let this man go , he was not Caesar's friend , John 19.12 . This carries it with Pilate , now he disputes no further , but delivers him up to their will , Luke 23.5 . 

Now thou , who readest this , take heed of judging the Jews for all this wickedness , while the same nature is alive in thee , which did all this in them : for assuredly thou ( In whom that nature , which did it in them , is not subdued ) wouldst have done the same thing , hadst thou lived in those days . Thou that disdainest and persecutest the appearance of Christ in this age , whuldst have disdained , & have persecuted his appearance in that age , do not deceive thy soul . 

The Jews did as little think , that ever they should have put a prophet , or any good man to death ( Much less the Messiah ) as thou canst : yea , they could blame their fathers for killing the prophets , and say ; if they had lived in those days , they would not have done it : and yet dost thou not read what they did ? The persecuting spirit was ever blind , and could in no age read its evil and bitter nature , and its enmity against the life and power . Be not thou blind in thy day ( As they were in theirs ) and an enemy under pretence of being a friend . 

4.  Another exception or argument against him about the time of his suffering death , was , that he did not put forth his power to save himself from the cross , he saved others , let him save himself , if he be Christ the chosen of God , Luke 23.35 . Is it likely that this is the son of God , and that he did so many miracles by the power of God , and cannot now save himself from the cross ? This his suffering death on the cross did a little stumble some of the disciple ( As May appear , Luke 24.20 , 21. ) and was enough to have overturned the faith ( Of any ) which stood not in the spirit , and in the power . The soldiers also could mock and manage this argument against him , saying , if thou be the King of the Jews , save thyself , Luke 23.37 . And they that passed by , reviled him , wagging their heads and saying , thou that destroyest the temple , and buildest it in three days , save thyself ; if thou be the son of God , come down from the cross , mat. 27.39 , 40.  Likewise the chief priests with the scribes and elders , mocked among themselves , saying , he saved others , himself he cannot save . Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross , that we May see and believe , Mark . 15.31 , 32.  One of the thieves also railed on him saying , if thou be the Christ save thyself and us , Luke 23.39 . And when he cried out to his God , Eli , Eli , &c. they derided him , this man calleth for Elias , let us see whether Elias will come to save him , mat. 27.47 , 49.  And after he was dead , the chief priests and Pharisees spoke of him , as of a known deceiver , vers. 63.  And seem in a pious zeal for the church , to take care that there be no further occasion after his death , for the reviving and spreading of his deceit and errors , vers. 64.  Thus the holy one , the pure one , the just and true one , ( In whose heart and mouth was no guile found ) was numbered among transgressors , accounted a deceiver , and put to death as a blasphemer by the zealous priests and professors of that age , who were so confident of the righteousness of their cause ( On the behalf of the law of Moses , and their Sabbaths , temple , &c. ) against him , that when Pilate washed his hands as clear of his blood , all the persons answered and said , his blood be on us , and on our children , mat. 27.25 . 

Now let men consider what the great exceptions are , which they have against the living appearance of Christ in his spirit ( Now towards the close of the apostasy ) and against us his witnesses , whom the Lord hath called forth to testify to his name . Many exceptions men have against our persons , our doctrine , our practices , for want of miracles , &c.  Is this generation more wise , or just in their exceptions then the former was ? Consider the main ones a little . 

Their great exceptions against our doctrine are . 

1.  that we preach up a light within , and that he that receiveth that light receiveth a perfect gift ; and growing up in it , groweth up to perfection , which in this life ( through faith and obedience to this light or perfect gift ) May be attained , and the body of sin put off , and the new man Christ put on . 

answ. indeed we cannot but preach up the light within , and declare unto men how great things it hath done for us , even that which we could never by any means meet with , from any light without . And this is perfect , and tends to make perfect , carrying on its work daily . Now he that feels its virtue , cannot doubt of its power . He that seeth the body of sin daily going off , cannot doubt but he May be stripped . Indeed if a man strive against sin in his own will , ( And by his own gathered knowledge ) he cannot get much ground , and so it is hard for him to believe perfection . But he that feels unity with that which is perfect , cannot but acknowledge that it is able to perfect him , and in faith and patience is encouraged to hope and wait for it . 

2.  that we deny that Christ which died at Jerusalem , and his imputed righteousness , and set up an inherent righteousness . 

answ. we know no other Christ then that which died at Jerusalem , only we confess our chief knowledge of him is in spirit . And as Christ said in the days of his flesh , that the way to know his father , was to know him ; and that he that knew him , knew the father also . So we now witness , that the way to know Christ is to know the spirit ; and that he that knoweth the spirit , knoweth Christ also , with whom Christ is one , and from whom he cannot be separated . And as for imputed righteousness , it is too precious a thing to us for to be denied by us . That which we deny is men's putting of it out of its place , applying it to them who are not in the true faith , and walk not in the true light : for in the true light ( Where the fellowship is with the father and the son ) there alone the blood cleanseth , 1 John 1.7 . and there alone the righteousness is imputed to him , who is cleansed by the blood in the light , and not to him who knows it not . And as for inherent righteousness , we meddle not with that word , but this we say ; that our life exceedingly lies in feeling the righteousness of Christ wrought , and revealed in us ; and we wish men could come out of the reasoning about it , into the feeling of the same thing with us : for than we are sure they would not so sharply , nor so long contend . 

3.  that we deny the ordinances and means of salvation . 

answ. we deny nothing that the apostles or Christians formerly practised , nor do we deny any thing that any now practise in the light , and in the faith : but the setting up of such things in the will , that we deny ; or the imitating these without the command of the spirit , that we deny also . And this we testify , that Antichrist crept in here , and that they are his great cover to keep men from the life , and therefore warn men to mind the life , and to take heed they be not kept from the substance by the shadows , where Antichrist lies lurking to bewitch from the substance . And we are sure that these in antichrists hands , are not the means of salvation ; but keep from the sight of the holy city , where the life and salvation is . And we read that the outward court was given to the gentiles ; who trod under foot the holy city , revel. 11.2 . And we have found by experience , that while we ourselves were crying up the outward court , we did trample under foot the holy city , though we then knew it not . 

Their exceptions against our persons are , that we are ignorant , illiterate , and also unsettled persons ( Who have still been seeking up and down , &c. ) 

answ. what persons are fittest for God to make use of , towards the recovery of his persons out of the apostasy ? Doth not God choose that which is weak , and mean , and contemptible , that his glory Might the more appear ? Is not this a more likely way for him to steal upon the world , then if he appeared in the wise and learned ones ? And among whom is his appearing to be expected ? among those who are settled upon their lees in the apostasy ; or among those who have mourned , panted , and sought to come out of it , and could not be settled without his appearing to them , and fixing of their feet upon the rock . But have we been unsettled , since God hath fastened us on the living foundation ? Nay , here is no more going out , but he that abides faithful , remains a pillar in the house of God . 

Men except likewise against our practices , as that we show not respect to persons , and that we are not strict ( After their manner ) in duties , &c.  

answ. we have heard that voice , fear God , and give glory to him , revel. 14.7 . ( Not only as it is written there , but in spirit : ) and where the Lord is exalted , the glory of the creature falls : read isa. 2. how all falls in that day , that God alone Might be exalted . And we cannot , in this mighty day of the Lord , any longer give to man that honour which he hath gathered in the fall , and which pleaseth the fallen nature , and not that which is born of God . And for duties , we have bewailed ( In the sight of the Lord ) our former running into duties without his spirit : and we must confess we can only pray in the spirit , sing in the spirit , wait in the spirit , speak in the spirit ( As that gives utterance ) and not of ourselves , or when we will , but as we feel life ( Strength and power from on high ) leading and assisting us . And our religion consists neither in willing nor running , but in waiting on the spirit and power of the Lord , to work all in us and for us . All these things we look upon to be our duty , and practise them . 

It is likewise excepted against us , that we do not work miracles . 

answ. we point to that which wrought all the outward miracles formerly , and which now worketh great inward miracles in spirit : and we are sure the same power ( Which we have received the gospel in ) is of the same healing virtue . But that power worketh according to the purpose of its own will , and not according to the will of man ( Yea though Paul had the gift of healing , yet he left Trophimus at Miletum sick , 2 tim. 4.20 . ) neither was the will or wisdom of man satisfied in all those miracles which Christ and the apostles wrought . It is enough for us to feel and live in the moving of the power , in which we rejoice and are more satisfied ( That by it our names are written in the book of life ) than we could by any such outward and visible appearance and manifestation of it . But if we did work outward miracles , yet if thou hadst not an inward eye to see them with , thou wouldst not be able to distinguish by what power they were wrought . 

To what purpose should i mention any more particulars ? Is it not enough ? Oh fear before the Lord , and do not lose the present dispensation of life through mistake ( Or because ye cannot have things suited to your corrupt wills ) but know the gospel , which is an inward dispensation , and doth not consist in outward shadows , but in inward virtue , life and power : for the kingdom of God is righteousness , and peace , and joy in the holy spirit . come to wait for that , to feel that , to unite there ; and then we shall not differ about that which is outward . But it is antichrists way ( By the magistrates power ) to force an agreement about the outward , which destroys that tenderness of conscience which prefer us the inward . 

And now let me put one question to you ; where is the deceit of the ages after Christ to be expected ? Did the Jews deny Moses and the prophet's writings , or ordinances ? nay were they not very zealous for these ? and were not these their cover , under which they persecuted Christ , and vented all their malice against him ? So can it be expected now , that the deceivers of this age should deny the apostles writings , or the practices therein mentioned ? Or is it not rather to be expected , that under their crying up of these , they should hide their enmity against the life ? Search and see , hath not every after-age of professors took up the words and practices of them who were persecuted in the foregoing age , and under the profession of those words and practices , have hide their spirit of persecution ? There is a remnant only among professors to be saved , the generality of them have still been persecutors , creeping into the form , getting that for a cover upon their backs , and then fighting against the life and power . Oh wait on the Lord in his fear , that ye May be found worthy to know the persecuted truth on the one hand , and the persecuting spirit on the other hand in this day of large profession , and also of bitter persecution ! 

Now what Might be the cause , or how could it come to pass , that the zealous worshippers of that age should thus err in their zeal , and be thus heady and rash against him , whom they looked for to be their saviour ? How came they thus to err in vision , and stumble in judgement in so weighty a matter ? Show unto us the cause , that we May see whether the same cause be not in us ? for undoubtedly if it be , it will produce the same effect , and so we May ignorantly draw upon our heads the same heavy wrath in our day , that they did in their day . 

answ. the causes were very many , i May mention some few of the principal ones , which if they be seen into and removed , ( By that power which is able to do it ) such as are of a more inferior influence , will not be able to stand . 

1.  One cause of their blind zeal , and bitterness against Christ , was , their ignorance of the scriptures , and of the power of God . if they had known the scriptures in the true light , they could not but have known Christ , from whom the scriptures were given forth ; and if they had known the power of God , they could not but have known him who came in the power , yea who was the power . They had knowledge enough of both these one way , that is in the letter ; they knew the words of scripture ( They could make large expositions of them ) they knew what was said in scripture concerning the power of God , but they knew not the thing itself ; and so turned against it , and made use of the words ( Which came from it , and testified of it ) against it . 

2.  A second cause of this their sad miscarriage in their zeal , was , their putting the law and ordinancee , and writings of the prophets out of their proper place . they exceedingly magnified , and cried them up , in that carnal way wherein they apprehend and practised them , but understood not the right end and use of them . And by these means , practising the shadows in the carnal mind , they lost the substance , which the proper use of the shadows was to have pointed them unto . 

3.  their high conceits of the goodness of their state in relation to God , and of the certainty of their knowledge of the truths of God from Moses and the prophets . they were confident that they knew God aright , and that he was their father , and that they were his children and persons . And so Christ appearing in a seeming contrariety to these ( Notwithstanding all his powerful preaching and miracles ) they made no question but they Might boldly conclude him , not to be of God . 

4.  Christ's coming in a way that they looked not for him . they had concluded from the scriptures , how Christ must appear , and he coming in a far different manner , they could not own him , but looked upon him as a deceiver , one that pretended to be Christ , but was not like to what the scripture said of Christ . So what the scripture saith of Christ's second coming , is hide as much from the carnal eye of professors in this age , as what was said concerning his first coming , was hide from them in their age ; and he will steal upon them as a thief , at a time , and in a way , and after a manner that they expect not . 

5.  ( Which is the main one , and the cause of all the former ) because they were from the light within , from the true light in their own hearts and consciences . The light within is the great ordinance of God , and the proper means to give the knowledge of him , ( 2. cor. 4.6 . ) without which it was never received under any dispensation : for the light that shines abroad ( Or from without ) can alone be known and received by the light that shines within . Christ himself opens this in a parable ; the light of the body ( Saith he ) is the eye ; if therefore thine eye be single , ( Clear , without beams or moats ) thy whole body shall be full of light , mat. 6.22 . But if that be evil , if that be dark , if that be closed by the god of the world , all Moses words , all the prophet's words , yea all Christ's and his apostles words , cannot give thee light . Can i see the light of the sun , moon , or stars , ( Or of any fire or candle ) if i have not a natural eye , and if that natural eye be not open ? So neither can i see the light of any dispensation of life , if i have not an eye within me open , wherewith to see it . So that that which gives me the sight of the things of God , is the eye which God hath given me . By that May be read the eternal power and godhead in the creatures , in the books of Moses and the prophets , in the writings of the evangelists and apostles , as the spirit leads and opens . Yea the same spirit that opened to these without books , May again open to any of us without books at his pleasure , ( And will not be limited to books ) and we than May read also as they did , even within in the spirit , and in the immediate life ; but without this , can none of the things of God be read aright . Now the god of this world had blinded this eye in the Jews , yea they themselves had stopped their ears , and closed their eyes , &c. they would not see this way , they would not be converted and healed this way . They would keep up the knowledge , which they had gathered from Moses and the prophets without this eye ; and with that they would see , or not at all . 

Thus being from the light within , they could not see the place of life within , where life is to be received : they could not see the womb of wisdom , which is within , and so could not enter into it , and be born again . And being not born of the wisdom , how could they justify the wisdom ? being not born of the light , how could they know or own Christ , whose coming and appearance was in the light ? For that appearance of Christ the life , in that body of flesh , could not be discerned by all men's wisdom in the letter , ( The disciple themselves came not so to know it ) but my father which is in heaven hath revealed it to you . and mark it , the disciple , who were illiterate and not so knowing of the scriptures that were written of Christ , yet they knew Christ : and the scribes and Pharisees , which were very skilful in the letter , could not know him . What was the reason ? The reason lay in the difference of the eye , or light wherewith they looked : the one looked with an outward eye , the other with an inward eye . And a little inward light will do that , which a great deal of outward light will not do . And this i can certainly affirm , that all the light that men can gather from the scriptures , cannot give them the knowledge of Christ as he hath appeared in this age , nay nor as he hath appeared in any age since the days of the apostles : but a little true inward light will give the knowledge of this thing , and open those scriptures infallibly ( In its season ) which all the generations of wise and learned men have been controverting and disputing about , in that wisdom and searching spirit which is never to understand them . This then is the main and full reason of this deep error of the Jews , and their desperate splitting upon the rock , which would have saved them , they were begotten of the letter which was given forth in former ages , but not of the life which was raised up in their age : and so they knew not how to turn to the light within , which alone was able to give them the true and certain knowledge of the things of God . 

Now consider these things well . Oh ye professors of this age , and take heed that ye do not fall after the same example of unbelief . be not high minded , but fear . be not so confident of what you have gathered by your wisdom for truth from the scriptures , ( After the manner that they were , of what they had gathered by their wisdom ) but fear lest ye should be mistaken , as they were : and wait for the opening of that eye in you , which was shut in them , even the true eye , in the true light , by the holy anointing , where there never was , nor can be any mistake . The Jews fell by unbelief ; unbelief of what ? They believed the scriptures , they believed according to that knowledge they had gathered from the scriptures : but they did not believe in the living word . They had a knowledge abiding in them , which they had gathered from the scriptures , but they had not the living word abiding in them ; and so their faith was but unbelief : ( For the living faith , stands in belief of the living word in the heart , which the scriptures direct to ; without the knowledge of which , all knowledge of words is vain ; and without faith in which , all faith is vain also ) now saith the apostle to the Gentile-christians , thou standest by faith , rom. 11.20 . by what faith ? By faith in that word in the heart , which they neglected and turned from , rom. 10.8 . for Moses had taught them , after the laws and ordinances , about worship and sacrifices , that the word that they were to obey and do ( The word that could give them life , and make them obedient to all the commandments without ) was in their heart and mouth , deut. 30.14 . and so the prophet Micah , when they proposed sacrifices , and oil , to please God with , he brings them to this which was given to them in common with mankind , mich. 6.8 . for all ordinances and laws , and observations , and practices without , are but to bring to the life within , which is to be found again there , where it was lost , and still lies slain and hide ( Even in the field , or house where it was lost . ) And he that seeks abroad , never finds it ; but when the candle is lighted in his own house , and he searches narrowly in the field in his own heart , and the eternal eye begins to open in him , than he cries out , God was in this place , and i was not aware of it ah how the enemy bewiched me , to run from mountain to mountain , and from hill to hill , and hath hereby covered my eye from beholding the mountain of the Lord's house , and from feeling the spring of my life , which i further and further run from , all the while i was seeking abroad . Therefore oh ye professors , be not so conceited like the Jews , and running after them into their desolation and misery , but learn wisdom by their fall ! Do not you set up your ordinances and scriptures , after the manner that they set up theirs : for this is your danger : for this i clearly , in the light of the Lord , testify to you : that if ye gather a knowledge and wisdom from the letter of the scriptures , after the manner that they did , without knowledge of the word within , and without a light within from that word , ye lose the living faith , ye are but dead branches , and all your knowledge of scriptures , and practices , and faith , and duties , &c. that ye here hold and observe , are but for the fire ; and the flames of eternal wrath , shall kindle more fiercely upon you because of them , then upon the Jews : for ye stumble at the same stumbling stone , at which they stumbled and fell , and it will fall upon you also . And as you have more scriptures , than they had , and the experience of their fall to warn you : so your destruction will be exceeding dreadful if ye neglect so great salvation , where of at this day there are so many living & powerful witnesses , as they are known and owned to be in the light of the Lord , though despised in your exalted and conceited wisdom . 

Now to help any honest and single hearts among you , over this great stumbling block of a light within , consider these few things . 

1.  That all the knowledge ( All the true knowledge ) that ever ye had of God was from a light within . I do not deny that ye Might receive your knowledge through the scriptures ( And some warmth formerly in those things which ye call ordinances , and duties ) but that whereby ye received the knowledge , was the light within , the eye that God secretly opened in your spirits . This was the way ye then came by it , though ye perhaps Might feel the thing , but not know how ye came by it : even as a babe May see truly , but doth not understand its own eye , or knows how it sees . 

2.  While this eye was kept open in you , your knowledge was true in its measure , and serviceable to you , and did draw you nearer to God , making ye truly tender , meek , sweet , humble , patient , loving , gentle , and full of precious breathings towards God , and after righteousness . Oh how lovely were you to God in this state ! when Israel was a child , i loved him . God remembreth at this day the kindness of your youth , and is seeking after you , oh why do ye so harden your hearts against him ! 

3.  That wherever this eye is shut , the virtue of the true knowledge is lost , and the sweet fruits thereof wither . The outward part of the knowledge May be retained , yea , perhaps much increased , but the life is gone , and the pure sweet savouriness ( To God ) vanished . And if this eye were but a little opened again in you , your death and unsavouriness Might be soon seen and felt by you in all your knowledge , duties , ordinances , yea in your very graces and experiences . You have a faith still , yea , but it wants the savour of your former faith : ye have some kind of love , gentleness , and meekness ; yea , but it is but a thing form by the fleshly wisdom and reasoning , but not natural from the living spring , not such as ye once felt , &c. for the true and living eye being shut , that which is then best ( Or afterwards attained ) is held but in the dead part , and serves but to feed death . 

4.  The great work and design of the enemy of your souls , is not to steal away the bulk of your knowledge , or to draw you from ordinances , or duties , but to steal the life out of your spirits . This i have experimented from my childhood , i Might still have knowledge enough of any kind , but that which i wanted was life , and i was still sick under all the sorts of knowledge that ever i met with , and under all ordinances and duties , for want of life . The Lord had given my soul a taste of true life , whereby i became unsatisfied without it , and no manner of knowledge or enjoyment could take me up by the way : yea , when through extremity , i seemed willing to be content with any thing , yet still my heart was sick after that one thing , which alone could truly ease and satisfy it . Now if the enemy can but prevail herein , to blind the inward eye , and steal away the life within , he hath enough . Then abound , as much as thou wilt , in knowledge , in zeal , in duties , in ordinances , in reading scriptures , praying , meditating , &c. thou art the surer his hereby , and so much the better servant to him : for how much the richer thou art in knowledge , experiences , hopes and assurance ( Without the life and power ) so much the more acceptable , and honourable , and useful art thou in his kingdom . 

Therefore see where ye are ; is the inward eye open in you ? do ye know the light within ? ( Surely he that sees by a light within , can hardly speak evil of it ! ) or hath the enemy , by some of his artifices , drawn a vail over that eye , wherewith ye once saw in some measure ? Oh be not slight in a matter of so great weight ! Oh please not yourselves with the eye of the perishing wisdom , with death's eye , and with death's knowledge of scriptures , and of the son of God , which speaks great words of the fame of true wisdom , but is a stranger and enemy to the thing ! Oh , life is precious , eternal life is precious . To have the word of God abiding in the heart , and to feel the true light giving the true life , who can set a value on this ! Ah do not loose your souls for a trifle , for a little such knowledge of scriptures as the earthly part can gather ! ( This i cannot but exceedingly despise , although the scriptures i truly honour , for their testimony of that whereby i live ) if ye see not the way of life by the inward light ( Which alone can show it ) ye loose your souls . If the god of the world hath blinded that eye in you , what are all your treasures of wisdom and knowledge ? What are all your hopes ? and what will become of you ? All these sparks of your own kindling from scripture , will not secure you from the bed of sorrow . Oh several sorts of professors why will ye die with the uncircumcised ? why will ye go down into the pit , among them that know not the Lord ? 

But what shall i say to this generation ? The spiritually-wise forseeth the storm , and hideth himself ; but the spiritually-foollish run on headily , and are punished . The clouds have long been gathering , but the sick eye cannot discern the signs and seasons of the times , and so because judgement comes not as men expected , they grow hard , and wear off the the sense , wherewith they were somewhat affected at the first threatening of it . But assuredly both judgement and mercy hasten , and they will come , and will not tarry . 

For the same Lord God almighty , which confounded the heathens Babel ( When their sins and vain confidence was ripe ) which they built to prevent any future flood . For though they once had the true knowledge of God from an inward light , rom. 1.21 . yet they soon left that , not liking to retain God in their knowledge , vers. 28. but running out into imaginations , and so building a Babel , whereby their foolish hearts became darkened to the light , which God had made to shine in them , which showed what Might be known of God unto them , vers. 19  

Yea the Lord God which overthrew the Jews Babel , which they had built from their knowledge of the laws and ordinances of Moses , and the scriptures written to them ( They running out into imaginations also ) whereby they likewise thought to prevent the overflowing scourge from coming near them , isa. 28.15 . 

The same God will overthrow the Christians Babel , which they have built from the prophets and apostles words , ( By their own imaginations , and conceivings , in the high mindedness , out of the fear ) whereby they think to escape the deluge of eternal wrath : ( For their city also shall be thrown down with violence , and shall be found no more at all , revel. 18.21 . ) And the great work o• this day is to discover the rottenness of their wall , and the untemperedness of the mortar wherewith they have daubed it . He that readeth let him understand : but the uncircumcised in heart and ears , cannot . 

The end 

















