INNOCENCY WITH Her open Face PRESENTED By way of Apology for the Book entitled The Sandy Foundation Shaken , To all Serious and Enquiring persons , PARTICULARLY The Inhabitants of the City of LONDON : 

By W. P. i.  

He that uttereth a Slander is a Fool ; and a False Balance is an Abomination to the Lord , 

prov. 10. 18. and 11. 1.  



Printed in the Year , 1669.  

RELIGION , Although there can be nothing of greater concernment , nor which doth more essencially import the immortal happiness of men ; yet such is the calamity of the Age , that there is not any thing they are lesle solicitous about , or serious in the prosecution of , vainly imagining it to consist in the implicit subscription and verbal confession of men's invented Traditions and Precepts , whilst they neglect that more Orthodox definition of the Apostle James , ( viz. ) Pure Religion and undefiled before God is , to visit the Fatherless , and to keep himself unspotted from the World ; and instead thereof , believe they are performing the best of Services , in sacrificing the Reputation , Liberty , Estate , if not Life itself of others to their own tenatious conceptions ; because perhaps though persons of more virtue , they cannot in all punctillioes correspond therewith ; how much I have been made an instance must needs be too notorious to any that hold the least intelligence with common fame , that scarce ever took more pains to make the Proverb good , by proving herself a Liar , then in my concern ; having been most egregiously slandered , reviled and defamed by Pulpit , Press and Talk , terming me a Blasphemer , Seducer , Socinian , denying the Divinity of Christ the Saviour , and what not ? And all this about my late Answer to a Disputation with some Presbyterians : but how unjustly ; it is the business of this short Apology to show , which had not been thus long retorted , if an expectation first to have been brought upon my examination had not required a suspense ; and if I shall acquit myself from the injurious imputations of my Adversaries , I hope the cry will have an end ; to which purpose , let but my innocency have your hearing in her own defence , who as she never can detract from her intentions in what she really hath done ; so will she as easily disprove her Enemies , in manifesting their Accusations to be fictitious : judge not before you read , neither believe any further than you see . 

I That which I am credibly informed to be the greatest reason for my Imprisonment , and that noise of Blasphemy , which hath pierced so many Ears of late , is , my denying the Divinity of Christ , and divesting him of his Eternal Godhead , which most busily hath been suggested as well to those in Authority , as maliciously insinuated amongst the People ; wherefore let me beseech you to be impartial , and considerate in the perusal of my Vindication , which being in the fear of the Almighty God , and the simplicity of Scripture dialect presented to you , I hope my Innocency will appear beyond a scruple . The Proverbs which most agree , intent Christ the Saviour , speak in this manner ; By me King's reign , and Princes decree justice ; I ( Wisdom ) lead in the midst of the Paths of Judgement : I was set up from Everlasting ; to which Paul's words allude , unto them which are called ( we preach ) Christ the Power of God , and the Wisdom of God ; from whence I conclude Christ the Saviour to be God ; for otherwise God would not be himself ; since if Christ be distinct from God , and yet God's Power and Wisdom , God would be without his own Power and Wisdom ; but inasmuch as it is impossible God's Power and Wisdom should be distinct or divided from himself , it reasonably follows , that Christ , who is that Power and Wisdom is not distinct from God , but entirely that very same God.  

Next , the Prophets , David and Isaiah speak thus , The Lord is my Light and my Salvation ; I will give thee for a Light unto the Gentiles ; and speaking to the Church , for the Lord shall be thine Everlasting Light ; to which the Evangelist adds , concerning Christ , That was the true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the World ; God is Light , and in him is no darkness at all ; from whence I assert the unity of God and Christ , because though nominally distinguished , yet essentially the same Divine Light ; for if Christ be that Light , and that Light be God , then is Christ God ; or if God be that Light , and that Light be Christ , then is God Christ . Again , And the City had no need of the Sun , for the glory of God did lighten it , and the Lamb ( Christ ) is the Light thereof , by which the oneness of the nature of these Lights plainly appears ; for since God is not God without his own glory , and that his glory lightens , ( which it could never do if it were not Light ) and that the Lamb ; or Christ is that very same Light , what can follow , but that Christ the Light , and God the Light are ONE pure and eternal Light ? 

Next , from the word Saviour its manifest , I even I am the Lord , and besides me there is no Saviour : And thou shalt know no God but me , for there is no Saviour besides Me. And Mary said , my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour : And the Samaritans said unto the Woman , Now we know that this is indeed the Christ the Saviour of the World : according to his grace made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ . Simon Peter to them that have obtained like precious Faith with us , through the Righteousness of God , and our Saviour Jesus Christ . For therefore we suffer reproach because we trust in the Living God , the Saviour of all men : To the only wise God our Saviour be glory , etc.  From which I conclude Christ to be God ; for if none can save , or be styled properly a Saviour but God , and yet that Christ is said to save , and properly called a Saviour , it must needs follow , that Christ the Saviour is God.  

Lastly , In the beginning was the ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ) Word , ( which the Greeks sometimes understood for Wisdom and divine Reason ) and the Word was with God , and the Word was God : all things were made by him , and without him was not any thing made that was made ; for by him were all things created that are in Heaven , and that are in Earth : He is before all things , and by him all things consist , upholding all things by the Word of his Power , etc. wherefore I am still confirmed in the belief of Christ the Saviour's Divinity ; for he that made all things , and by whom they consist and are upheld , because before all things ; he was not made nor upheld by another , and consequently is God : now that this 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 or Word that was made Flesh , or Christ the Light , Power and wisdom of God , and Saviour of men , hath made all things , and is him by whom they only consist and are upheld , because before them , is most evident from the recited passages of Scripture ; therefore he was not made , nor is he upheld by any other power then his own , and consequently is truly God : In short , this conclusive Argument for the proof of Christ the Saviour's being God , should certainly persuade all sober persons of my Innocency , and my Adversaries Malice , He that is the Everlasting Wisdom , the Divine Power , the true Light , the only Saviour , the creating Word of all things , ( whether visible or invisible ) and their Upholder by his own Power , is without contradiction God ; but all these qualifications and divine properties are by the concurrant testimonies of Scripture ascribed to the Lord Jesus Christ ; therefore , without a scruple , I call and believe him really to be the Mighty God. And for a more ample satisfaction , let but the 28th page of my Reply to J. Clapham be perused , in which Christ's Divinity and Eternity is very fully asserted . 

Judge then impartial Readers , ( to whom I appeal in this : concern ) whether my Christian Reputation hath not been unworthily traduced ; and that those several persons who have been posting out their Books against me ( whilst a close Prisoner ) have not been beating the Air , and fight with their own Shadows , in supposing what I never thought , much lesle written of , to be the intendment of my Book ; and then as furiously have fastened on their own conceits , expecting I should feel the smart of every blow , who thus far am no ways interressed in their heat . 

As for my being a Socinian , I must confess I have read of one Socinus , of ( that they call ) a noble Family in Seine in Italy , who about the year 1574 , being a young man , voluntarily did abandon the glories , pleasures and honours of the great Duke of Tuskany's Court at Florence , ( that noted place for all worldly delicacies ) and became a perpetual Exile for his Conscience , whose parts , wisdom , gravity and just behaviour made him the most famous with the Polonian and Transylvanian Churches ; but I was never baptised into his name , and therefore deny that reproachful Epithet ; and if in any thing I acknowledge the verity of his Doctrine , it is for the truth 's sake , of which , in many things , he had a clearer prospect than most of his Contempories ; but not therefore a Socinian , any more than a Son of the English-church , whilst esteemed a Quaker , because I justify many of her Principles , since the Reformation , against the Roman Church . 

II As for the business of satisfaction , I am prevented by a Person whose reputation is generally great amongst the protestants of these Nations ; for since the Doctrine against which I mostly leveled my Arguments , was , the impossibility of God's forgiving sin upon repentance , without Christ's paying his Justice , by suffering Infinite Vengeance and Eternal Death for Sins past , present , and to come , he plainly in his late Discourse about Christ's Sufferings , against Crellius , acknowledges me no lesle by granting , upon a new state of the controversy , both the possibility of Gods pardoning sins , as debts , without such a rigid satisfaction , and the impossibility of Christ's so suffering for the World ; reflecting closely upon those persons , as giving so just an occasion to the Church's Adversaries to think they triumph over her Faith , whilst it is only over their Mistakes , who argue with more zeal than judgement : Nay , one of the main ends which first induced me to that Discourse , I find thus delivered by him , namely ; If they did believe Christ came into the World to reform it , That the Wrath of God is now revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness , that his Love which is shown to the World , is to deliver them from the hand of their Enemies , that they might serve him in righteousness and holiness all the days of their lives , they could never imagine that Salvation is entailed by the Gospel upon a mighty confidence , or vehement persuasion of what Christ hath done and suffered for them ; 

thus doth he confess upon my Hipothesis , or Proposition what I mainly contend for ; and however , positively I may reject or deny my Adversaries unscriptural and imaginary Satisfaction ; let all know this , that I pretend to know no other name by which Remission , Atonement and Salvation can be obtained , but Jesus Christ the Saviour , who is the Power and Wisdom of God , what apprehensions soever people may have entertained concerning me . 

III As for Justification by an imputed righteousness , I still say , that whosoever believes in Christ shall have Remission and Justification ; but than it must be such a Faith as can no more live without Works , than a Body without a Spirit ; wherefore I conclude , that true Faith comprehends Evangelical Obedience ; and here the same Doctor Stillingflees comes into my relief ( though it 's not wanting ) by a plain Assertion of the necessity of obedience ( viz. ) such who make no other condition of the Gospel but believing , aught to have a great care to keep their hearts sounder than their heads ; thereby intimating the grand imperfection and danger of such a notion ; and therefore ( God Almighty bears me record ) my design was nothing lesle , or more , then to wrist those beloved and sin-pleasing Principles out of the hands , heads and hearts of people , that by the fond persuasion of being justified from the personal righteousness of another , without relation to their own obedience , they might not sin on upon trust , till the Arrest of Eternal Vengeance should irrecoverably overtake them , that all might be induced to an earnest pursuit after holiness by a circumspect observance to God's holy Spirit , As without which none shall ever see the Lord And ( to shut up my Apology for religious matters ) that all may see the simplicity , Scripture Doctrine , and phrase of my Faith , in the most important matters of Eternal Life , I shall here subjoin a short Confession . 

I sincerely own , and unfeignedly believe ( by virtue of the sound knowledge and experience received from the gift of that holy Unction , and divine Grace inspired from on high ) in one holy , just , merciful , almighty and eternal God , who is the Father of all things ; that appeared to the holy Patriarches and Prophets of old , at sundry times , and in diverse manners ; And in ONE Lord Jesus Christ , the everlasting Wisdom , divine Power , true Light , only Saviour and preserver of all , the same one holy , just , merciful , almighty and eternal God , who in the fullness of time took , and was manifested in the Flesh , at which time he preached ( and his Disciples after him ) the Everlasting Gospel of Repentance , and promise of Remission of Sins , and Eternal Life to all that heard and obeyed ; who said , he that is with you ( in the Flesh ) shall be in you , ( by the Spirit ) and though he left them , ( as to the Flesh ) yet not comfortless , for he would come to them again , ( in the Spirit ) for a little while and they should not see him ( as to the Flesh ; ) again , a little while and they should see him ( in the Spirit , ) for the Lord ( Jesus Christ ) is that Spirit , a Manifestation whereof is given to every one to profit withal , In which holy Spirit I believe , as the same Almighty and Eternal God , who , as in those times ended all shadows and became the infallible Guide to them that walked therein , by which they were adopted Heirs and Coheirs of Glory ; so am I a living witness , that the same holy , just , merciful , almighty and eternal God , is now , as then , ( after this tedious night of Idolatry , Superstition and human inventions that hath overspread the World ) gloriously manifested to discover and save from all iniquity , and to conduct unto the Holy Land of pure and endless Peace ; in a word , to tabernacle in men : and I also firmly believe , that without repenting and forsaking of past sins , and walking in obedience to this heavenly voice , which would guide into all Truth , and establish there , Remission and Eternal Life can never be obtained , but unto them that fear his Name and keep his Commandments , they , and they only shall have right unto the Tree of Life , for whose Name sakes I have been made willing to relinquish and forsake all the vain fashions , enticing pleasures ; alluring honours and glittering gloglories of this transitory World , and readily to accept the portion of a Fool from this deriding Generation , and become a man of sorrows , and of perpetual reproach to my Familiars ; yea , and with the greatest cheerfulness can obsignate and confirm , ( with no lesle seal , than the loss of whatsoever this doting World accounts dear ) this faithful Confession , having my eye fixed upon a more enduring Substance , and lasting Inheritance ; and being most infallibly assured , that when time shall be no more . I shall ( if faithful here unto ) possess the Mansions of Eternal Life , and be received into his Everlasting Habitations of Rest and Glory . 

IU. Lastly , It may not be unreasonable to obse ve , that ( however industrious some ( and those Dissenters too ) have been to represent me as a person disturbing the Civil Peace ) I have not violaced any truly Fundamental Law which relates to external property and good behaviour , and not to religious apprehensions , it being the constant Principle of myself and Friends , to maintain good works , and keep our Consciences void of offence , paying active or passive obedience , suitable to the meek Example of our Lord Jesus Christ ; nor would I have any ignorant , how forward I was by Messages , Letters and Visits , to have determined this debate in a sober and select Assembly , notwithstanding the rude entertainment we had met with before ; but contrary to their own appointments our Adversaries failed us , which necessitated me to that defence ; and finding the Truth so pressed with slander , I cannot but say I saw my just call to her relief : but , alas ! how hath those two or three extempore sheets been tossed , tumbled , and torn on all hands , yea aggrevated to a monstrous design , even the subversion of the Christian Religion , than which there could be nothing more repugnant to my Principle and purpose ; wherefore how very intemperate as well as unjust have all my Adversaries been in their revile , slanders and defamations ? using the most approbrious terms of Seducer , Heretic , Blasphemer , Deceiver , Socinian , Pelagian , Simon Magus , Impiously robbing Christ of his Divinity , for whom the Vengeance of the Great Day is reserved , etc. nor have these things been whispered , but in one Book and Pulpit after another , have more or lesle been thundered out against me , as if some Bull had lately been arrived from Rome ; and all this acted under the foul pretence of zeal and love to Jesus Christ , whose meek and gentle Example always taught it for a principle mark of true Christianity , to suffer the most outrageous injuries , but never to return any ; nay , if my Adversaries would but be just and constant to themselves , how can they offer to conspire my destruction upon a Religious ground , who either are themselves under a present limitation , or have been formerly by the Papists : Tell me , I pray , did Luther , that grand Reformer , whom you so much reverence justly demand from the Emperor at the Diet of Worms ( where he was summoned to appear ) that none should sit judge upon his Doctrines but the Scripture , and in case they should be cast , that no other Sentence should be passed upon him , than what Gamaliel offered to the Jewish Council , If it were not of God it would not stand ? and if you will not censure him who first of all arraigned the Christian World ( so called ) at the Bar of his private judgement , ( that had so many hundred years sound slept , without so much as giving one considerable shrug or turn , during that tedious winter night of dark Apostasy , but justify his proceedings ) can you so furiously assault others ? but above all , you who refuse conformity to others , and that have been writing these eight years for Liberty of Conscience , and take it at this very season by an indulgent connivance ; what pregnant testimonies do you give of your unwillingness to grant that to others you so earnestly beg for yourselves ? Doth it not discover your injustice , and plainly express what only want of power hinders you to act ? But of all protestants in general I demand , Do you believe that Persecution to be Christian in yourselves , that you condemned for Antichristian in the Papists ? you judged it a weakness in their Religion , and is it a cogent Argument in your ? nay , is it not the readiest way to enhance and propagate the reputation of what you would depress ? If you were displeased at their assuming an infallibility , will you believe it impossible in yourselves to err ? Have Whitker , Rynolds , Laud , Owen , Baxter , Stillingfleet , Poole , etc. disarmed the Romanists of these inhuman Weapons , that you might imply them against your inoffensive Countrymen ? let the Example & holy Precepts of Christ dissuade you , who came not to destroy , but save ; and soberly reflect upon his equal Law of doing as you would be done unto . Remember I have not dethroned a Diviny , subverted Faith , made void obedience , nor frustrated the hope of an Eternal Recompense ; much lesle have I injured your persons , or in any thing deviated from that 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , or holy Principle , so much insisted on by Philosophers and Lawyers as the Original of good Laws , and Life : no , your own Consciences shall advocate on my behalf . Let it suffice then , that we who are Nicknamed Quakers have under every revolution of Power and Religion been the most reviled , contemned and persecuted , as if God indeed had set us forth in these last days as a Spectacle to the World , to Angels and to Men ; and treat us not as if by being what we are , our common right and interest in human Societies were forfeited ; neither accept that for a true Measure of our Life and Doctrines , which hath been taken by the ill-will or ignorance of others ; but rather make an impartial examination , that what you judge may be from what you know , and not from what you hear at second hand ; and then we shall as little question your just opinion of our innocency , as we have too much been made sensible of the sad effects that follow an ignorant and unadvised zeal ; for so monstrously fond are some of their persuasions , and doting on the Patrons of them , that seldom they have discretion , much lesle religious desires to consider how true or false an other Religion is , or what may be the consequence of its toleration ; but with a fury , not inferior to their ignorance , cry , Crucify , crucify ; and Pharisee-like , out of pretence of honour and service done to God Almighty , and the memory of his holy Prophets , not stick to persecute his beloved Son , and righteous Servants , so Cruel , Blind , and Obstinate is Persecution : Be therefore advised in the words of that meek Example Jesus Christ , Call not for fire any more ; let the Tares grow with the wheat ; neither employ that Sword any more , which was commanded to be sheathed so many hundred years ago ( suppose we were Enemies to the true Religion ; but have a care you are not upon one of Saul's errands to Damascus , and helping the mighty against God and his Anointed ; ) and rather choose by fair and moderate debates ( not penalties ratified by Imperial Decrees ) to determine religious differences ; so will you at least obtain Tranquillity which may be called a Civil-unity . But if you are resolved severity shall take its course , in this ; our case can never change , nor happiness abate , that no human Edict can possibly deprive us of his glorious Presence , who is able to make the dismal'st Prison so many receptacles of Pleasure , and whose Heavenly Fellowship doth unspeakably replenish our solitary Souls with Divine Consolation ; by whose Holy , Meek and Harmless Spirit I have been taught most freely to forgive , and not lesle earnestly to solicit the Temporal and Eternal good of all my Adversaries : Farewell . 

William Penn , jun.  

A Questionary Postscript . 

Where doth the Scripture say that Christ suffered an Eternal Death and Infinite Vengeance ? for did not Christ rise the third day ? and is not infinite vengeance and eternal death without end ? and doth not God say he was well pleased with his Son before his death ? and was not his Offering acceptable ? and did not the Apostle say that the Saints were accepted in Christ that was God's beloved ? and this was after Christ died and rose ; and God was said to be wellpleased with his Son , both before he suffered , in his suffering , and after he suffered , though displeased with those that caused him to suffer . 

These Lines were added by a Friend . 

WE are bought with a price , and therefore we are to glorify God with our bodies , souls and spirits , which are his ; and not to live in sin which dishonours God ; and Christ tasted death for every man ; not that men should live in sin and death : Christ's Blood was shed for all men ; and by his Blood he redeems from iniquity ; not that people should live in iniquity , and die in their sins ; for he came to make an end of sin : Christ's Righteousness is not put upon people that life's and dies in unrighteousness ; for Abraham believed , and it was counted to him for righteousness , as it is written , he that doth righteousness , is righteous , even as he is righteous ; and he that commits sin is of the Devil : and he that hath the Son hath Life , and he that hath not the Son hath not Life ; and Christ was the Offering , not for our sins only , but for the sins of the whole World ; and so he is the Way & the Mediator ; and so Christ's Birth , Blood , Offering , Death , Mediatorship , Covenant , his being Priest , Prophet and King , is owned according to the Scriptures of Truth , and all the Prophecies of him : And Christ who is the Foundation which no other can be laid , than what is already laid ( the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles ) we own ; and there are three that bear record in Heaven , the Father , the Word , and the Spirit , which are one ; and there are three that bear record in the Earth , the Spirit , the Water , and the Blood , and these three agree in one . 

THE END . 





Jam. 1. 27.  prov. 8. 12 , 15 , 20 , 23.  1 Cor. 1. 24.  Psal . 27. 1.  Isa . 49. 6. and chap. 60. 20.  Joh. 1. 9 1  Joh. 1. 5.  rev. 21. 23.  Isa . 43. 11.  Hos . 13. 4.  Luke 1 47.  Joh. 4. 42.  2 Tim. 1. 9 10.  2 Pet 1. 1.  1 Tim. 4. 10.  Jud. v. 25.  Joh. 1. 1. 3.  Col 1. 16 , 17.  Hebr. 1. 3. 10.  Joh. 1 , 24.  Guide Mistaken , p. 28. con . 9  Clap.  Still . con . Cr●ll . pag. 269 , 270 , 271. 272 , 273 , 274.  p. 160.  Jam. 2. 26.  Id. pag. 164 , 165 , 166.  1 Cor. 8. 5. 6.  Hebr. 1. 1.  1 Cor. 8. 6.  Joh. 1. 14.  1 Tim. 3. 16.  Mat. 4. 17.  Luk. 24. 47.  Joh. 14. 17 , 3 , 18.  Ch. 16. 16.  2 Cor. 3. 17.  1 Cor. 1● . 7.  Rom. 8. 14. 17.  rev. 21. 3  prov. 28. 13.  Luke . 14.  ●● . 〈…〉  〈…〉 . Mat. 10. 37 , 38 , 39  Luke 18. 32. and  Ch. 23. 36.  1 Pet. 4. 14.  See Tho. Vincent's late railing piece against the Quakers , also Tho. Danson's and Doctor Owen's . Mat. 5. 39 39 40.  Coun. Trent . p. 14.  1 Cor 21. 9  