A VISITATION OF LOVE , AND Gentle Greeting OF THE TURK , And tender trial of his thoughts for God , and proof of the hearts of his Court , and the spirits of the people round about him , in his own Dominion , and the Inhabitants of the Earth that are borderers upon his skirts , in their declared Religious ways . 

And is a warning to all men that are in the corrupted ways of sin and iniquity , to repent and turn to the living God , who dwelleth in the light , before the Rod of his Vengeance destroys the evil doers of the Nations . 

To which is annexed a book , entitled , Immanuel , the Salvation of Israel . 

Written in the Will and Countenance of God , by a Servant of the Lord , who am called by scorners in England , Quaker , and was named in the flesh , JOHN PERROT . 

LONDON , Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate , 1660.  

Then arose up certain of the Elders of the Land , and spoke to all the Assembly of the people , saying , Micah the Morashite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah King of Judah , and spoke to all the people of Judah , saying , Thus saith the Lord of Hosts , Zion shall be ploughed like a field , and Jernsalem shall become heaps , and the Mountain of the House as the high places of the Forest ; Did Hezekiah the King of Judah and all Judah , put him at all to death ? Did he not fear the Lord , and the Lord repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them ? thus might we procure great evil against our souls . 

This is recorded in the Book of the Prophesy of JEREMIAH , chap. 26.  



A Visitation , Trial , and Warning to repent . 

I am the light of the world , saith the Prophet whom God hath raised up like unto Moses , saying , I will raise them up a Prophet from amoug their brethren , like unto thee , and I will put my words in his mouth , and he shall speak unto them all which I shall command him ; & it shall come to , pass , that whosoever will not bearken unto my words which he shall speak in my Name I will require it of him . He is the true light of the world , the true Prophet , which cometh in the Name of the most high God , that sent him a light into the world , to give light unto all Nations , that all Nations through him who is the light of the world , may come to believe and know the Almighty power of the Lord God , who is working a work in our days , at which the ears of many shall tingle : And in this his mighty and terrible day which is at hand , he is bringing to pass , to make many tongues , and languages , and people , and the people of many Nations , of one heart , and of one mind and soul , and to set up his Standard in Zion , and his salvation in jerusalem : And such their Authority and Dominion will he establish , who seeks in the spirit of pure love and meekness , to see his Sceptre of righteousness lifted over all the Heads of the ungodly , who are out of the fear of the eternal dreadful God of life , and everlasting power , working their own works , and establishing their own wills . 

And with this voice do I cry unto thee OH TURK , who are set over many Regions , that over many more thou mayst reign , until all the earth be subdued for thee , for evermore to stand under thy Authority , the Dominion of the Seed to be over the whole Earth ; being sent of the Almighty God unto thee , and unto thy whole Nation , with the Message of everlasting Peace in my mouth , which if ye receive ▪ the Lord my God will be your rewarder in righteousness ; and behold , thy honour shall be made greater , and thy borders enlarged , and great prosperity shall compass the dwelling of the desolate , the fatherless and the widows , and not one begging bread shall be in thy Dominion from the one end thereof unto the other ; but all shall see the plentiful day of God , and the seed of the next generation shall bless the remembrance of thee , and their posterity for ever , even from one generation to another , shall declare thy memorial , which shall never be blotted out . 

But if otherwise thou resist , and incline not thine ear unto counsel , but resist the Message of the Lord God of eternal life , and infinite power , behold I return , ( if unto the Tombs of my Fathers ) with my peace with me , which God hath given me and no man can take from me , and the hand of the dreadful Lord God of Hosts will follow me , which Nations shall taste of , in sore displeasure , that resist my testimony of this Prophet whom I declare is the light of the world . 

Whom I declare , that him who is the light of the world , all Nations may come to know , that all Nations may worship but one God , and have but one King and chief authority to rule and reign over them , and that by him who is the light of the world , you may be taught all things , as from the mouth of the Lord daily , that no strength may exceed your power , as ye shall know the hand of the Lord to be with you , and no wisdom like unto your understanding as you take counsel of the Lord , and not of man , by which you shall see the utter overthrow and confusion , yea the everlasting desolation of all that shall conspire against you , and the whole strength and wisdom of man to be but as dust , and as a thing lighter than vanity in the air , that shall imbody themselves as Hosts , striving to work your overthrow . 

And this in the remembrance of God's Decree of loving kindness to the least in your Nation , is tendered to try your willingness to be everlastingly established . 

Behold , behold I cry , the Prophet of the Lord , the light of the would draweth nigh your gates , and knocketh at the door of your hearts . O Turk ! thou the greatest in strength ( of the arm of flesh ) and mightiest in power in that which ( as grass ) is subject to wither , beyond many people , yea , even all the Nations of the Earth . 

thou oughtest to know this one thing chiefly , that the dreadful Almighty God is King of the whole earth , and Lord of the Heavens also , with whom all nations are but as the dust of the balance , and drop of a bucket , who measureth the Heavens as with a span , and holdeth the earth and the seas in the hollow of his hand , he is infinite in his Decrees , and his ways past finding out ; he hath overturned many Princes by his power , and overthrown Kings by his might , and made many nations heaps of desolation , and laid the pleasant places waste ; forasmuch as the Lord of Hosts is jealous of his glory , which many have turned into contempt , even as the proud and lofty in heart have said , Is there a God over us , that we should fear to execute our wills upon any ? And so have turned equity backward , and have not had regard unto the Commandments of God , and have frustrated his Law , and cast his holy Precepts behind their backs ; and have devoured the man of low degree , and oppressed the fatherless and the widow , and have not had regard to the stranger which hath visited them in loving kindness , but rather , have sought to swallow up the innocent in his simplicity , with their horrid abominable cruelty . 

And in this the glory of the Lord hath been defaced , and is defaced by all that walk in the crookedness of the imaginations of their own hearts , strengthening themselves in their own ways , making Fences for their safeguard in iniquity , and Bulwarks for their strength in unrighteousness , and yet calls upon the name of the Lord , as if God had regard unto the cries of the wicked , who will punish the sinner in Zion , and reward the evil-worker in Jerusalem . 

And therefore all nations ought to be awakened lest the sons of men are cut off in the corruption of their ways . And thou above all Princes and Kings , as the greatest in all parts of the earth , oughtest to shine forth as the brightness of the Sun at noon day , and as the chiefest of all nations in example of righteousness , and purity of heart , which will crown thee with everlasting honour , far exceeding the honours of the Kingdoms of men , and cause thy name never to be forgotten from generation to generation , for ever , to be remembered after thee by all the Lords people , and servants of the living God ; that thy sound also may strike a dread through all the dead Worshippers of Images in all lquarters of the whole world ; and than it will come to pass , that many will stand amazed at the excellency of thybeauty and renown , and those that hate thee shall be tormentedbecause of thee , and gnash their teeth at thy prosperity , and lie down in restless pangs of perplexity . 

And therefore for the glory of the Almighty God's sake , and that with it thou mayest be established , and a holy seed after thee in perpetual praise . 

Arise and stand up , and shine forth in the excellency of meekness , and in the humbleness , & patience , and forbearance of thy heart , and in this most noble and excellent understanding , and choicest wisdom , listen for a season , and incline thine ear in due time to that in thee which is not of the Kingdoms of men ; and behold from the Lord God , I show thee the coming of the Prophet in a Parable . 

Like as the glory of the Sun arising in the East in mighty irresistible power , dispersing and sending all the black clouds beyond the appearance of the West , where place cannot hide their blackness , as the Sun follows in his glorious flaming course , making all to pass a way as in shame and great fear . 

O what can stand before the brightness of the DAY ? is not all the first in a tottering frame when the glory of the most high breaks forth ? Men of strength may wonderfully strive , and men of prudence dive deeply , but no man is hid from the day . 

Neither knoweth he the wisdom of the whole World from whence the breath of the wind cometh , and out of what it breaketh . 

no man hath descended into the deep to count the sands hid with the waters of the Ocean . Who then can fathom wisdom to understand that which the natural never saw nor thought of ? 

Under this I conclude the whole world ; All flesh hath corrupted its way before the Lord , and the wisdom of the first man Adam is not regained ; forasmuch as the restauration hath been hid from ages , which unto the desolate is tendered , that a broken wall may not remain without repair in a whole Nation . 

And behold it is coming , it is coming , and with blessing thou wilt be blessed , and the seed of the whole Dominion , if thou stop not the course of blessing from thine own head . 

Many generations before thee would have rejoiced to have seen this day which is coming towards thee of good things ; if thou harken to God , and despitest not the Messengers and Ministers of his word , but listenest with open ear to instruction , that thou mayest be established for ever , the Throne of righteousness to be the Lords , and thou the instrument in the Lord's hand , whereby justice , Mercy and Peace may be established , and this know thee , That the Lord God of Heaven and Earth , whose dread reaches unto the ends of all Dominions of the earth , Jehovah the Lord of Hosts is his Name , can work without thee and beyond thee , and over the heads of all powers , who can change all hearts and affections in a moment , and in the twinkling of an eye ; and make all affected only with his own glory ; but my God is the unspeakable Fountain of mercy , and long suffering , who is risen to prove and try many people , and behold he lays this work , and is laying it now at thy gates , & one that love's thy soul is sent unto thee , that cannot flatter thee , but speaks the simplicity of truth unto thee , and not his own words , as a lying divination . 

But this is truth from him that dwelleth with the truth , God is light , and in him is no darkness at all , who is arisen to try thee that thou mayst be proved , whether in the pure tender love thou fingly standest , or in the obstinacy restest , as one sat down in a Chair of carved stone . 

I say , Thus is the Lord God arisen to try thee , even as he is coming to make true proof of thy ways , and to know therein whether thou art able to bear and endure , and pass a trial of thy ways , in which the Lord who regardeth only an humble heart will altogether sift thee as unto the bottom , and prove thee , whether thou standest as the holy Fathers and Kings did in the days of old , as David , who with an humble heart received the reproof and judgement of Nathan , and many more , who were precious patterns unto thee , and Examples before thee . 

May I be blamed in all this ? doth not Wisdom belong to the mighty , and doth not counsel become the King's Court , and understanding the chiefest palaces ? and hath God blessed me with his word , and showed me his wonders which are coming to pass , and can I hide them from the King ? Hath God put understanding in my heart , to understand the deep things which have been hid from ages , and shall I darken and make void the blessing with silence ? Hath God showed me the blessings of a people , and the curse of a Nation , and shall I bury this in the womb of obscurity , and not publish the revelation of God , & so through a careless heart come to be numbered among the cursed for ever ? 

Nay , nay , let all men shoot at me with their arrows , let their sword touch me , and let death compass me on every hand , rather than mine Inheritance of blessing I may lose from the hand of the Lord , and peace to my conscience for ever . 

And verily in this I know the hazard of much , whilst in all I seek but the salvation of souls , and that thou with many mayest come to the receiving of the immortal Treasure of Wisdom ; and can the spirits of men take offence at me in this thing ? Can not I try the choicest in their ways , as plainly as the greatest Apostates who have lost the state of Manhood , in whom brutishness is seated , and violence , as the chief Governor of the bodies of people ? who have lost the first ear that could hear through the degeneration of him that begat them , and mankind springing from the same Root of Adam's polluted nature ? Yea without a Parable may I not plainly prove all Nations that stumbles , the honest part of thy inquiry ? and cannot I reach unto Rome , Pope , and over the darkness and sottishness of all people ? who blindly will speak and question things as to matter of evil consequences , calling them so in their inquiries , before they come to see the substance of the good which cometh only from God , and thereby in perverse ignorance calls the good evil , and are setters up of evil for good . 

Should the love of God extend beyond measure , & compassion reach over a Nation , to touch idolatry with a tender visitation of putting a people upon enquiry , before wrath as an overflowing Flood doth overwhelm ; and if the people of that Nation should rise up against the servant in that work , and slay him that the Master sent ; would not such a people plainly appear to be fallen below the spirits of men ? yea far below a beastly part which are naturally out of the sense of rewarding their kind , so unspeakably full of evil , and wickedly . 

Many such things came to pass through the cruelty of the ungodly , forwhich cause God overturned , and utterly overthrowed the places of great renown , and made beautiful Palaces a howling Wilderness , when in ages past their iniquities , Whoredoms and Murders were filled up . 

But this I show as to what hath been chiefly ; now that which is to be , I write . 

I cannot run from the Porch of wisdoms Gates , or fly from the door of her House ; forasmuch as I would show the greatest among men the entrance into her habitation , that that only beautiful habitation may be known to be the King's Palace , where Infamy shall never touch the Head of his Dignity . 

And here is Wisdom for the Emperor , to know the birth of the Immortal Seed in him ; to know something of God brought forth unto Majesty and Dominion in him , which shall rule the Nations as with a rod of Iron . 

Many parables might my life utter , and seal up the Mystrie in hidden sentences , and leave the sons of men in the same obscurity , grovelling as in the night-season , and groping as in a black Dungeon , and after wearisome times to lie down in sorrows , and never able to come to know the light of the Day of God , which is more clear than Crystal , and the Wisdom springing from it , which is more excellent than Rubies , and more refined and precious , then pure Gold , which is the defence of Armies , and strength of Nations . 

O how might the aged solace themselves in the meditation thereof ? and the yonng men take pleasure in the exercise of the infinite virtue which is hid therein ? which maketh all shine as a Diadem , yet hideth the comely parts from the eye of the vulturous , that the unclean may not see the face of the King : so that the prudent in a pure life can only draw nigh in the presence of wisdom , to stand justified in the King's Court.  

O that the greatest among men in authority did but see my affection to the least in the Land ! O that mine hand might touch his head : that he might suck of the Breasts of my Mother which bore me , that he might drink and live for ever , and have a dwelling-place over death , to see the powers thereof swallowed up into Victory ! 

Had I began my meditation in the dawning of the day , and written since the timely sunrising , and contained to the hour of this season ; yea , could I have pondered since he hour of my conception , and meditated in the Chambers of the Womb , and written since the hour of my birth , yet could not I speak of that which is , as it is , nor that which is to come in the infinite fullness as it is ready to break forth . 

I may cry wisdom in the streets , and spread forth mine arms in the gates , and open my mouth in the pleasant Fields , and say , Return OH ye sons of men , return to the Lord God , whom the whole world hath for saken , and gone a whoring after other gods , and sought strange things , and planted themselves Trees in a wilderness , but behold , the fruits thereof the Lord hath no regard unto ; for how is it that the sons of men are calling upon God with their mouth , whilst they profane his holy Name in their hearts . 



God heareth not the prayers of the ungodly , and their cry in their early season is but as the barking of a dog at midnight , and but as the skreech of a devouring beast seeking his prey in his wandering course at evening in the wilderness . 





Verily I say unto all mankind upon the Face of the Earth , God is wearied , yea the Lord God is burdened , and his soul is laden with the sacrifice of the unclean ; yea how can it be declared in this generation how the Lord hath waited for many generations to be gracious unto the sons of men ; but their iniquities have turned aside his blessing ; for thus it hath been even over the face of the whole Earth , the sons of men in all their ways have spoken of God's worship , and have worshipped in this place , and upon that Mountain , and in this Form , and in another Administration so called ; but as soon almost as they are removed from their seats in their Temples made with hands , where they were worshipping the works of their own hands , and the imaginations of their hearts , they turn into lewdn ess , and lying , and swearing , and whoredom , and drunkenness , and robbery , and envy , and hatred , and murder , and scoffing , and scorning , and into the lust of uncleanness , and their sacrifice the Lord God requires not , until they have washed their hands of blood , and their hearts of iniquity , and their whole body of the pollution of their Life . 

And lo I show this unto the JEWS of all sorts , that the Jews also may come to be converted , and come to know the healing ; They must all come to the cleansiug of the heart by blood , and the purifying of their consciences by the blood of sprinkling ; which is not used ( in this the mighty day of God , which is dawned ) as an Ordinance of a carnal Commandment , but is come , and coming , as the substance of the eternal Decree of God concerning the redemption from all the former , and restauration unto the first , and as the fulfilling of the promise of an endless life . 

And therefore be awakened all ye that have slumbered , and are slumbering in the night of your Fathers , who were in the rebellion against God , notwithstanding they had the Law and the Precepts of God , even as from the mouth of God : O how did your Fathers the Jews rebel and tempt the Lord God , although his mercies unto them were the greatest ! Yea ▪ I may say there was not a Nation that tasted of mercy as your fathers did , eat and drink of salvation from many Enemies , and deliverance from numberless afflictions ; yet how was it from age unto ages ? often in their straits they murmured , and when they were at ease they waxed fat through mercies , and kicked against God , until Shiloh came , the promise unto the Remnants of your Seed ▪ but he coming not according to your Father's expectation , even as the wonders of God in all ages were wrought contrary to the expectations or imaginations of the hearts of men , and therefore they took counsel together , and put him to death : And thus the promise came unto many , for without blood there could be no remission of sins ; although by the wilfulness of your Fathers in this matter ye have from that time been as a curse over the whole earth . 

Nevertheless for you there is a hope left , yea for you a promise remains , if yet ye return and inquire , and seek diligently as in the morning , and be found early , and earnestly striving as in the timely season , before the advantage of the day pass over your heads , and ye be left as in the place of blindness , where all your hope and expectation shall wither , and be made fruitless as a thing of naught . 

And therefore I say , Not as you will have times and seasons , and Days and Worships , and Deliverances come to pass , shall it come to pass unto you , or be brought to pass concerning you ; but as the Word of the Lord God is and hath been the same from Ages which reaches also unto this Age , from the Dread of which the sons of men shall not escape , nor find a hiding-place to rest themselves , who walks in the ways of uncleanness and doth traverse the paths of iniquity and unrighteousness . 

And therefore wait for the word of the Lord God unto you , that you may come to know your motion in righteousness , that you may feel the vengeance removed which hath been long over your heads , that thereby you may come toknow the redemption in your days , and the restauration of God in the season of his appointed time ; until which , in vain is all your Synagogue and Temple-worships , and Altar-offerings . And therefore all people upon the face of the Earth , Jew and Gentile , Barbarian , Scythian , Bond and Free must all come to know that principle and measure of the gift of God , which is in bondage in them , to be made free by the powerful operation of the work of the Lord through them , which thousands , and ten thousands for want of the good understanding are strangers unto , and therefore are found actors daily in enmity to the motions of it ; and that is a dangerous state , in whom the God of this world ( whom the Heathen worships ) hath blinded the eye of their minds , mark , hath blinded the eye of their minds , whereby the whole world are but in the History , out of the understanding of the Mystery and Power of godliness , and life of the Prophets , and holy men of God of old . 

I say therefore unto all flesh living , Keep silence , and listen to the word of the Lord God in silence , ( mark ) listen to hear the word of the Lord in spirit , in silence , when all reason and earthly consultations and dispute , and questioning in the mind , is cast out , in the bed , in the vineyards , in the secret closet , in the fields , and then it shall come to pass to your remembrance , that there is something in man which convinceth a man of the evil of his ways , and that will show a man the iniquities of his youth and the sins of his riper years , and bring all unto his remembrance in the fight of the Lord ; and than it will be seen , that not any Sacrifice or Oblation hath blotted out any one sin out of the remembrance of God , when as man in his own Conscience is accused for all ; yea , then is the sacrifice short of blotting out iniquity , and his prayers short of removing his transgressions : nay further , If a man should offer ten thousand Rivers of Oil , and the blood of a thousand Bulls and He-goats , and as many Rams , and were it the Fruit of his body for the sin of his soul , it cannot purge the heart , or cleanse the spirit , and therefore not clear the conscience from the just accusation of God in the hidden parts of a man's mind , and secret meditations of his spirit ; and if in this state a man perishes , where is the refuge which he shall fly unto in the last hour ? and in what standeth the hope of life everlasting ? all sober hearts in this may read the danger of ignorance and peril of blindness in the lust of sin and unrighteousness , out of the true understanding of the true worship and service of God.  

And forasmuch as wisdom removeth the vails of darkness , and openeth the path of iniquity , and leads to the Fountain of righteousness , and bringeth to the Wellspring of truth , I hereby hold forth the ground thereof , and from whence it spring's , and how it comes to be received and stood in , to the honour of the living God , and beautifying the Face of the just , and renown of the upright . 

The dreadful God of Heaven and Earth , who is a spirit infinite , who is light , is the Virtue , Fountain and Treasure of wisdom , peace , and life everlasting . [ Mark and read with understanding . ] God who hath been a stranger unto the Inhabitants of the Earth , is light , who searcheth every heart , and trieth the reinss , and the hidden part of the bowels , hath sent his only begotten Son a Light into the world , whose light shines in the consciences of every man that cometh into the world ; by which light in a man's conscience he is convinced and condemned for his wickedness . This light convinceth a man in his own heart and understanding , of lying and swearing , and pride and envy , and persecution , and dissimulation , and murder and whoredom , and all unrighteousness , and uncleanness both of flesh and spirit . 

This light is pure , which showeth a man every unclean spot of his life ; and unto this light in a man's conscience must a man turn in his mind , to be guided by it in his heart , which cometh from God who is light ; and by it which cometh from God , who is the Fountain , a man will be led to the first principle of the good understanding , that is to say , unto the fear of the Lord , which is the beginning of wisdom , which Solomon the wise King spoke , which was not only his words but also it was his life , whereby he came to grow in the wonderful Understanding and admired wisdom , which Regions round about were amazed at . 

And unto this day the Lord God is the same to all that fear his Name in truth , and his loving kindness is not shortened , not his mercy and favour slackened , but as man hath slackened his steps in diligence , waiting upon the Lord in the fear and dread , and awe of his Name . 

Therefore I cease not to cry , Fear , fear , dread and tremble , tremble before the Lord God of Hosts ye Sons and Daughters of Adam , be ye shaken as in a tempest , ye strong Oaks and tall Cedars , bow down ye lofty Hills and exalted Mountains ; let the Rocks , and stony places of the Nations be rend , let all be made as a smooth place for the Lord God to execute his judgements in righteousness , that the Lord God alone may be exalted in majesty in every heart ; let all knees bow , & every tongue confess his Dread and infinite Power , that under the Fountain , the Nations and People may stand , that the streams may issue and run down upon every head , and make glad every heart , with the oil of anointing , the living , and pouring wisdom down as Floods , making way in the hearts of the sons of men , in counsel and prudence , to receive the Oracles of God as a portion of a plenteous Treasure , thereby to increase in the virtue thereof , which shall cause a man's brightness to glimmer in the eye of his enemies , & make the Heathen wonder at the appearance thereof , & make the fool roar out when he feels his back smitten with the Rod of Prudence , which his younger in years bears in his right hand , ruling the heart in uprightness . 

This is the Treasure , [ Wisdom ] whereof the Messiah is the Fountain , who hath revealed himself the light of the understanding of the heart of man , who is the seed made manifest , which was spoken of ( after man fell into the degeneration & subversion ) should come and bruise the Serpent's head , to restore again that Image which was lost through man's disobedience . 

And now unto the appearance of his grace , that is to say , the light wherewith every man is lightened which cometh from the Messiah , they must be turned , which shines in their consciences , which ( as I have said ) doth show a man in spirit and in secret his sins and the reward and wages thereof , which is death everlasting to all that die and perish in their sins : And this light in a man's conscience will keep his heart pure , and in pure fear , out of the offence , as he is led by it , & it will lead into patience , temperance , meekness , chastity , charity , peace , and all virtues , so that every day of a man's years , shall add to the understanding of his heart , until all the gloominess of the former time , and darkness of the night be driven away by the dawning of the day , & daystar arising in the heart , & the revelation of the Son of righteousness in the glory of his light and life . 

And much more of the beauty and virtue than I do mention it will lead unto , as unto quietness and settledness , out of strife and hard contentions , fight and quarrellings , or raising of tumults or seditions , or heresies , or sects , or many Opinions , to the dividing of Nations , but will unite all , and make all of one heart and of one mind , to establish Authority , & set the supreme in his Seat of Dominion to rule in righteousness , and establish his Seed for ever , and will lead all into subjection to Authority , and all unto the knowledge and Understanding of the true Power of Authority , and Office of Magistracy in the place thereof , which is , for the punishment of evil doers , and for the praise of them that do well . 

How might this be spoken of ! O how might it be declared ! no Sceptre so glorious , no power so strong , no Dominion so certain & stable , as his who walks in the light , by it to be redeemed from under every curse of God ; ( mark ) I say , Redemption and blessing stands only to the Seed , and the Seed is the light of the world . He that hath an ear , let him hear . 

And to this Seed in man must man come , that is to say , to the light wherewith he is lightened , that the Seed may live , unto which the promise of Life and blessing is ; for not unto Seeds , as unto many , was the promise made unto Abraham , but unto thy Seed ; in which God spoke a parable to the whole world ; so that mankind in the blindness hath stood , out of the knowledge of the Promise , and that unto which the Promise was made , and therefore far from receiving the blessing which is with the Promise unto the Seed . 

This is the sum . Man must know the Light in his conscience to rule him , else he is as a wild Ass , unruly , without a brdile in his mouth , or kerb to his way , and knows no restraint to the wickedness of his heart , but is ready to run swiftly in the open passages of mischief , and rushes on fiercely in wickedness , as a fed Horse in the battle , having not in his heart the regard of God , or his soul , and so he murders Abel the just Seed in him , and that let's out a man's heart to murder the just man upon the earth without him , as if blood were of no price or value , or as if it should never more be required by the Lord at the hands of the guilty and bloodthirsty . 

I say , A man must know a guide in spirit , the light in his conscience to rule his mind and heart , that by the light in his conscience he may witness and know what the abundance of his heart is , and so see whether everlasting blessing or cursing is to it ; for thus it is , out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh , and so doth every member of the body act , whether good or evil . 

Let all hearts ponder this thing , and know , That God's blessings are not to the wicked , murderers , bloodthirsty , Whoremongers , covetous , lustful-hearted , abominable beastly natured ; but his heavy curses , and vengeance and judgements and plagues hangs over the heads of the ungodly and corrupt walkers ; and behold , the day cometh which shall burn as a Furnace seven times overheated , and as an oven filled with burning flames , and all the proud , and all the Adulterers , whores and whoremongers , envious and wicked-hearted , the Drunkard and all manner of the ungodly , shall be as straw in the drought of Summer , and shall be consumed in perplexity and horror ; many than shall seek a hiding place , but shall not find any . 

And the wicked Kings and Princes of the Earth shall arise unto that great judgement , and shall feel the terrors of Hell , and Wrath and Woe from the Lord God of Hosts , to compass them on every hand , and the recompense of fools shall be the reward of the unrighteous , who have sinned out their time in pleasure and delight in corruption . 

Had I the tongues of many Orators , and the hands of many swift writers , I could not express the misery and infinite endless horror of God's fierce Wrath and Vengeance , which shall overtake the wicked as a snare ; and how the Lord God will be avenged of all those that have slaughtered ( mocked or reviled their neighbours , or the man of a meek heart ) his Prophets and Messengers , as in all ages they were persecuted as heretics and seducers . 

And therefore a warning to the whole Earth is sounded forth ; Repent , repent , repent , the mighty day of the Lord God of Hosts is at hand , a day of howling draweth nigh and the hour of bitter lamentation cometh to pass , and thousands , and ten thousands shall roar and lament , and curse the day that ever they were born , and yet not find ease of their misery ; behold , behold , God's jealousy even already burns like fire , and who can quench the flames ? 

Come forth , come forth , o ye sons of men , who have had ease in the flesh for many years , & have sported yourselves in the pleasure thereof , and made your hearts gross in uncleanness , and fatted yourselves with fraud and with the slaughter of your innocent Neighbour ; repent , and turn from your sins , let the Elders of the Nations lament themselves , and the inhabitants of the earth rend their hearts , whilst the Lord God is warning and visiting you , before his judgements in sore displeasure as an overflowing irresistible flood overtakes the people , and sweeps the Nations as with a beasom of utter destruction , and scatters the wicked as the dust and chaff of the highways , as in a tempest of a mighty Wind , with the breath of his mouth , and there be not a resting place upon the face of the earth left for the sons of men to inhabit , because of their abominations and transgressions , which God will repay with vengeance . 

Remember Sodom , and call to mind the destruction of Gomorah , 

Nineveh also was warned , and Nineveh repented , and was spared in the days of jonah , and be it known unto you , this also is the day of your visitation , written forth according to the commandment of God , and the motion of his word from on high . 

And therefore whilst ye have time , prise it , that as wise , ye may learn wisdom , and live , and not as fools , hate instruction , and persh . 

I say unto thee OH Turk , the Great One , I am not come into thy Coasts to hide knowledge from thine eyes , or understanding from thine heart , but in love to visit thee with the Message of a goodly Treasure , which never failed to strengthen my Fathers in a strange Land , or to nourish their seed in a Wilderness , or to give courage to them in weakness to vanquish the mighty force of their Enemies , that thou mayest come to the same , to drink of the same , and eat of the same , to be nourished with the same , unto the same life & dignity which the Lord giveth , which excelleth the honour of all mortal flesh , which the Lord God will slain , that his honour , and such as he honours , may be only honourable . 

Lo , I declare the substance of all things , that thou mayest apply thy heart in diligence to the fear of the Lord , that thereby thou mayest know the operation of the substance in thee , that with the virtue , power and life thereof , thou mayest come to prophesy upon thy Throne , as David did upon his Throne ; and judge in Wisdom in thy Palace , as Solomon did in his Palace and Court , unto whom a heart of understanding was given , that he judged the people aright , and sought not for counsel , or instruction , or advice from man , but had the word from the Lord , of Counsel , of Prudence , and of pure judgement ; so that his Courts was bounded with Peace as with an Iron Band , and fenced as with a Fort of Brass , until Solomon committed idolatry , and then was an adversary stirred up against him . Behold the Lord God will work mighty wonders by thee , and thorough thee , if thou takes counsel of him with an upright sober heart , upon thy bed ; God is a Spirit and in spirit the Lord God will enrich thee , if thou keepest thy mind to the Light in thy conscience , to be ruled by it , that thou mayest rule and govern according to it , all that are thy Subjects , the inhabitans and people that are within the compass of thy Dominion . 

And herein thou shalt come to bear me testimony in the Spirit of Light ( as thou turns thy mind to the Light which shows thee thy sins ) that will cleanse thy heart , and purify thy mind from the thoughts and motions of sin and evil , and redeem thy soul and spirit from corruption , and restore thee as in the day of the first Adam , in innocency , out of hurt and abuse , unto that state which God Almighty blessed , and all the creatures thou wilt come to have Dominion over , and the Earth subdue , and many will bless the day of thy birth , if God's Seed in thee comes to live , that thy Seed may replenish every Island and Continent of the Earth ; thou knowest not Gods work what he is about to do ; if thou harken , and obey , and with one heart , and with one consent thy Nobles and Nation says Amen , Let the work of the Lord be done . I say then , If thy Ancients , and thy honourable men , and the Mothers of many children in thy Coasts , with the man of low degree , turns from the evil of their walking , and corruption of their ways , unto the Light in all their consciences , to stand in righteousness for the renown of the Lord , even the jealous God of his glory , as they come to honour and worship in spirit , them will he crown with dignity , and cause their fame to spread ; and make the frame of thy Dominion to be the pattrens of his mighty work , until the whole Earth be subject unto the same dreadful authority and power ; and behold , this is the good which I show thee , and the evil I have not hid from thy heart , that thou mayest not meditate it upon thy bed ; but have opened both , and therefore choose thee whether ; my conscience to thee in the sight of the Lord God I have cleared ( touching this matter ) in tender pure love to thy soul , and prosperity of thy Nation in every quarter thereof . 

Finally , Take this for thy standing place , that thou mayest never be removed , Stand in the Light , as thy heart comes to be turned to it , and thou shalt know , that as thou stands in it , wisdom will never depart thy habitation , and the deepest counsel , thy secret Chamber , which will establish thee in thy Throne , as it did Solomon the wise King in his Throne . 

But as thou hast sinned with thy lips , so thou must come to the mourning of a broken heart , that God may be honoured in the humility of thy soul and spirit , and thou thereby come in mercy to be exalted in his Kingdom of peace , plenty , and prosperity ; Remember Nebucadnezzar the King , unto whom Daniel the Prophet prophesied , and showed him the interpretation of hard things , chap 4.  

Now I come to question a few things , that the worth of Wisdom may be noted , which giveth always the answer of true things , and such as none other can stand against , to overturn , or gainsay . 

Query 1  God looked upon the earth , and behold , all flesh had corrupted his way before the Lord upon the earth . Now I do ask , In what can the truth and true worship of God be rightly holden ? and who are the sons of men that are not in the corrupted ways ? and what is that which they have attained unto , which will lead out of the corrupted ways ? and are not all Nations living in lying , and swearing , and whoredom , and pride , and envy , and murder , and drunkenness , in the corrupted ways ? 

Q. 2.  By what is it that God trieth the ways of men ? and what makes the truth and error , the corruption and incorruption of all ways manifest to man , whereby man comes to have assurance beyond all the traditions of his forefathers , that he is in the true way , a faithful servant of the Lord , or that he is out of the true way of God , a servaut of Satan , through the lust of corruption in sin and transgression ? 

Q. 3.  What is the equal measure in man , which when the hand of the just measureth , giveth unto every man full due , and keepeth not back the due from his Neighbour , neither can oppress any , but giveth unto his Enemies just weight and full measure also , and loveth his enemies , and rewardeth his enemies good for evil , showing by his good , that his conversation is just , and his Religion not in vain ? 

Q. 4.  Whether is it love or wrath , patience or rashness , humbleness or pride , temperence or immoderacy in life and gefture towards acquaintance or stranger , the good or the evil , that establisheth the Prince or the King upon the Throne ? and what is the good that leads unto the good order of the best part ? and how ought a man to follow it to be established in righteousness and in peace to the end ? And whether if a man knows not the good in him to guide him , is not his foot subject to slip , and he to fall ? 

Q. 5.  Whether would my owning of one Prophet in virtue , before another Prophet's life , avail me any thing if I had not received the spirit of the Prophets ? And how can the confession of any Prophet's Name , show thereby that a people is of the Truth ? And what if any man should own God in words , and all the Prophets in words , and the Messiah in words what would that avail any man if he were not in the same pure way which the Prophets stood in , and knew something in him which is of the nature of God ? 

Q 6.  Will not that which trieth all people and Nations , try all Elders and Prophets also in all nations , and give testimony unto all people fearing God , whether they are of God , yea or nay ? And is not this also the testimony of false Prophets , to say it shall come to pass according to the words of their Prophecy , and it comes not at all to pass , but they speak presumptuously , as saith the Lord unto Moses concerning the false Prophets ? And doth not this give testimony of a true Prophet , when the word of the Prophet cometh to pass according to his Prophecy , that the Prophet shall be known to the people that the Lord hath truly sent him ? 

Q. 7.  The Messiah was the promise of God from the beginning , and he was manifest in the flesh in spirit ; but how doth he now bruise the Serpent's head ? and what part in man is that which is the Serpent ? and who hath felt the power and operation of the other Seed in his heart to bruise the Serpent's Head without which there is no Salvation ? 

Q. 8.  What and how is the world set in man's heart ( as saith Solomon ) whereby a man cannot find out the beginning or the end of the work of God ? And how comes the mystery of the writings of the Prophets , which speaks of the Kingdom and glory of the living God tobe known & understood in spirit and life , as they were given forth . 

Q 9  Let me ask of the Prophets in Asia , and inquire of those that prophesy in Africa , what is the interpretation of my vision ; & let the Emperor inquire of them one by one , lest they dream a Divination of their own heart , and consent together in falsehood , and so deceive thee , and but mock him that uprightly enquireth , that the Emperor may have the understanding of the Times . 

In my Vision I saw seven Trees planted in seven places , and the ground of six of them ( where they grew ) was of one nature , and each Tree had his Fence about him ; and I saw many Workmen labouring to raise the defence higher ; they began to labour when it was a little light , & the night shortly overtook them all that they could not work any longer ; so that they saw not good of the works of their hands , and therefore they sat down and slept in sorrow . 

And it came to pass that there arose a Star , which while the Workmen slumbered , it showed me , that the first Tree was full of Moss , and withered without shooting a leaf , & so waxed rotten ; and I heard one say , that notwithstanding it should remain for a season , until a fire be kindled . 

The second sprouted out some certain leaves , and it grew into two bodies from one root , the one was more green & fresh in colour then the other ; and it came to pass that a wind blue , and they dashed each other , but the green part stood longest , although her leaves falled therewith , and the body waxed dry at the Root . 

The third prospered for a little season , but much heat parched the branches thereof , and that also decayed . 

The fourth had a time of prosperity , but the Winter-season blowed cold winds over her boughs , insomuch that the rind thereof peeled away , so that the body was left naked , and it with ▪ red standing . 

The fifth grew by a pleasant Brook , & the Waters thereof refreshed her Root , but the ground being not good to retain the moisture although that she buded and blossomed , yet it came to pass that a wind from the north , gently blue over it , and many of the blossoms were blasted , and the rest that remained , although they came to grow towards the goodness of Fruits , yet afterwards there came a rushing wind from the rising of the Sun , and they all fell in an untimely season . 

The sixth grew mightily , more tall and lofty than all the other five , and was the most of all beautified with the largest leaves , and delightful coloured blossoms , which covered her large quick spouting boughs , but imediately her root became a nurse of rottenness . 

And I saw an Axe ▪ blade in the hand of a certain Shepherd , and Io he looked over all the six , and said , This is because of their unfruitfulness , and yet a sorer thing must come to pass ; and he turned unto the seventh Tree , which was planted in a low valley , unploughed , and behold her body bowed , and she stooped unto him that had the Axe blade in his right hand , & he took a member of that Tree , without hurt to the body , and he made therewith a Helve for the Axe , and fastened it thereunto . And he turned again towards the sixth Tree , and smote it that it fell to the ground , and so he passed to the Fences of all the other five first , and made breaches upon them , that they may all utterly become a desolation for ever . 

And he again said , Even so must it be unto many Oaks and Cedars , and wild Apple Trees , in the Woods , and Wilderness of the Forest of the Regions of the Earth . ▪ And. ▪ ●… he returned to the seventh Tree , and digged about it , and pruned it , and it bare Fruit to his pleasure . And he again uttered his word , and said , This is to spread , and I will dig a well by her , and make her field pleasant , and a refreshing River shall compass her banks , that my flocks which I have in secret places may openly feed as one Herd within the compass of this Fence which I have framed , and will build it round about , that no Thief may reach to taste of her fruit . 

And I saw it , and blessed the Lord , and magnified the Name of the Most high God.  

Q. 10.  Is there any pure Religion upon the Face of the Earth , but where the people doth do unto all men as they would men should do unto them , which the light in a man's conscience teacheth to do ? And is not all profession of pure Religion and holiness without that pure peaceable practice , any other than abomination and rottenness in the account of the holy , just God ? 

Q. 11 ▪ God blessed me in the womb , and sanctified me in the day of my birth , who hath separated me from the land of my natural nativity ; and now how if my love is constrained to be more towards the Seed in the Turk then unto the flesh of England's Inhabitants ? aught I therefore the more to be cursed by my own Nation , or less blessed by thy Nation ? Or am I faulty to stand against iniquity in the gate , to stop the flood of wrath which is ready to enter in as through a gap ? or may I be blamed in wrestling , that blessing may overspread the length and breadth of thy Dominion ? 

Q. 12.  I would not offend the just , or trouble the righteous , yet I inquire of the wise men of thy Court , whether is it against the Law of God , and life of the holy men , to try all things , and hold fast that which is good ? and how shall any know the good simply as it comes from the Fountain , so as to be plainly distinguishable from that which is but a show in hypocrisy ? is there any thing that makes manifest , or that can make manifest truth in a man's spirit , and seal it to his heart , beyond the traditions of men or the persuasions of women , besides the light in a man's conscience , which convinceth him of his sins ? 

Now I query concerning that which will discover such in the Closet of a man's heart , who are in other Nations , to be a people walking in the pure Religion : there is a stone to try all metals by . 

Q. 13 And what is the Touchstone of trial of all Nations ? What is that by which Abel , and Enoch , and Noah , and Abraham , and Isaac and jacob walked , who walked by a Rule before Moses was , to whom first the Law in Tables of stone was given ? what was the Rule before the Prophets or the Scriptures , and the Law in Tables , by which the Holy men of God had the witness & testimony of the truth and Kingdom of God , which if the Scriptures and the writings of the Law given in tables of stone , had been always hid from this generation , & the prophet's writings from the people of this age , yet might the seed have the same testimony by the same thing which Abel and Enoch had of God , and which Gods servants now have . 

Q. 14.  Hath thy Nation the Faith of living after death ? if they have not , I am then answered before I ask ; but if they have that Faith , I then inquire , whether is it better to die as a stranger among men for conscience sake , and be received as an everlasting sojourner with the Lord in the endless day of blessing , then to be the most acquainted and beloved amongst men , and after the time of man to perish worse than the beasts of the field ? And what is honour or profit of riches in this life , to be for ever miserable in the life to come ? 

Q. 15 It was the great sin of the Jews in the days of old , in making Idols of Gold , and Silver , and Stone , and Wood , and Men , and Prophets , and of their own strength ; it was also their sin in having the Law and the Commandments , and yet walked with loose hearts , worshipping only with their lips and mouth , and in spirit and mind , were strangers to God , the eternal spirit : And is it an evil for me to say , Inquire and see , and search in thy own borders to find out if such a thing , or the resemblance of this thing be not within the compass of thy Dominion . 

Postscript . 

Friend , Thus the Lord God gently tries thee , who is jealous of his glory , and yet further will he search thy heart , and try thee as gold , if thy countenance turns unto purity ; yet thus far thou mayest not be jealous of any other thing to hurt thee ; for behold , God hath turned my face towards the Jews scattered in thy borders , and hanging upon thy skirts , that they may be turned in spirit unto Shiloh , that in peace they may for ever rest in the Dominion , out of all heartburning , or evil surmizes , in the best content , not by constraint only , but of a willing mind and heart in the sight of God.  

And the Lord God of truth knoweth the uprightness of my heart , that I deceive thee not with flatteries , whose servant I am in dread and fear , and not my own . 

JOHN PERROT . 

The end . 

Immanuel The Salvation of ISRAEL . 

The Word of the Lord came unto me the twelfth day of the sixth Month , in the year accounted , 1657. concerning the Jews and scattered Tribes of ISRAEL , As I was waiting upon the Lord in spirit , in Legorne in Italy , which in the Name of the Lord I give forth to be copied , and sent throughout the World.  

Written by a lover of Righteousness , a mourner over the scattered Tribes , a seeker of the lost , that the Remnant may be saved , J. P.  

LONDON , Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate , 1660.  

The word of the Commandment of the Lord to his Servant concerning the scattered Jews in Italy , Spain , Portugal , France Holland , and the rest of the Regions , and every Island throughout the Earth and the Seas , to write these words following to them all . 

Whether you will hear , or forbear , this is the word of the Lord God unto all you scattered Jews throughout the whole Earth , God of a truth is arisen to gather unto himself his peculiar Seed , from the four winds of the Earth , that Jacob may possess and inhabit his inheritance , and the Seed of Israel the Holy land  

And according to the Prophets , he hath begun at the North , and is stretching , and hath streched forth his Arm over the South , and over the East , and over the West . 

And behold it cometh to pass , and is at hand , and not as a day afar off , but even nigh unto the door , that the Lord will separate of all Nations , both Jew , and gentile , the just from the vile , him that feareth God , from him that feareh him not ; him that keepeth the Law of God which is written in his heart , ( through the sanctification thereof by the power of the Lord ruling in his conscience , mind , spirit and life , from him that in words which professeth God , and his Law and Statutes , and ordinances , and yet walks in his life and daily practices , contrary to the Law written in the heart , which God spoke unto Moses saying , The word is nigh thee , in thy mouth and in thy heart , that thou mayest do it , See , I have set before thee this day life and good , death and evil . 

And unto ye , O Jews is the same come , and before you , in the Name of the Lord coming unto you , do I set life and death , light and darkness , in this the day of the Lord , which is dawned . unto ▪ a measure of the Remnant , even in this day which is light and not darkness , wherein the promise of God is fulfilled , and it came to pass according to the Prophecy , in a day when it was neither night nor day , neither dark nor light , but in the evening it was a little light . 

And not as from the traditions of my forefathers , or the generations of men in the corrupt and polluted nature , in the degeneration from God , and alienation from the Covenant of life and promise : ( who confessed the Messiah as this generation doth , to be come in words , with their corrupted tongues , and polluted lips , but in their works , and by their practice and life , make his coming void , and of non-effect unto them ) neither by the reading of the Scriptures came I to know that he was come as he is come , but by the spirit of the Lord , ▪ by which I was chosen in the womb , and sanctified in the day of my birth , by which also I am separated from the Land of my natural nativity , and brought unto the feeling of sorrows in a strange Land for your sakes ) I come to know , and now to declare unto you , that Immanuel , who is God with us , who is the light of the world , the Messiah in the power of God , who is a spirit , is come reigning in spirit in the hearts of his people , over whom , and in whom he rules as King , treading down , and trampling upon all principalities and powers , making the Earth new , and the Heavens also , warring against all which is contrary to his own pure nature , in many , until he hath put all his enemies under his feet , and then will he give up the Kingdom to the Father , that God may be all in all . 

And for this cause also , even for your sakes ( who are of most men despised in heart ) I pass as one desolate , and despised , and hated and mocked of many , and many more of the nation of my natural birth would gladly have my blood ; yet am I not forsaken of him that sent me with his message unto you of salvation , and everlasting glad tidings of Redemption . 

And now he that hath an ear , let him hear , and a heart to perceive , let him understand . 

Be it known unto you all , That God hath more regard to your souls then that you should perish in your sins , and your souls is more precious in his eye ( for which he hath ordained life everlasting , for as many as come to believe ) then the pleasure and ease of your corrupt careases , which are to rot in Graves and Sepulchers . 

And therefore for the Lord to regain his own Image which is lost in man through fall in the transgression , and to r store man unto the same uprightness , where in man was created which was the promise of God unto man in this wise , the seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpent's head . 

Behold unto you it is given forth and declared , for the redemption and restauration of the seed , the Messiah came , and now is coming the second time without fin unto salvation , even he cometh now in spirit and in power , who was the Rock whom your Fathers in the Wilderness forsaken ; and the light of the world whom your Fathers slew at jerusalem , which brought a grievous curse upon you of being a people trodden upon by all the world , and not only so , but the most lamentable thing and curse which is over you , for which cause my soul mourns for you , that such cruel hardheartedness , distrust , doubt , jealousies and unbelief , coveting , fraud , deceit , dissimulation , and Hypocrifie hath veiled your hearts , and grossly darkened your understandings . 

O that is the worst of all ! that is the greatest curse , in how much throughout ages , the jews have been given over unto vile affections , hardheartedness , sin and unbelief ; which is the cause why ye cannot rightly speak of the things of God , and understand the Prophet's writings which were spoken , and do stand as mysteries , yea deep mysteries to your thick hearts , your understandings being covered as with a thick cloud of darkness , ( which now we the seed Abraham , of the true jew inwardly , do walk by the light thereof as a Pillar of fire by night ) and therefore said the Lord by his Prophet , for want of knowledge my people perish . 

The Prophets they prophesied of the Messiah to come in spirit , in a mystery to the whole world jew and Gentile , so that when he came he was not received but by the Remnant in them days , as he is received now in these days ; but unto whom the spirit of wisdom and understanding was given , to read and understand that which the Prophets spoke forth in Parables , to the whole world of mankind , which lay in sin and wickedness ▪ 

And therefore ye jews now in these days , ye ought not to speak of God , or to name his name in perverseness , whilst ye hate to be reform in your hearts , minds and spirits , but ye ought to hear the Message of the Lord God , and to ponder it in your hearts , that you may see how far ye are yet from the Promise , being not come in truth , in spirit and in life , unto the condition thereof fulfilled and made up in you , until which ye cannot justly expect the fulfilling of the promise unto you in the substance . 

For whilst you are in your sins , as your Fathers were in their sins in the day that they slew Jesus at jerusalem , you cannot but as men in the flesh , look with any other than an eye of flesh , for a God of flesh to come among you , and to save you by the Arm of flesh . O blind and sottish , of dull ears and dark understandings ! and so could not your Fathers , neither can you now as you stand , see him that cometh to ransom the seed in spirit and in power . 

Behold none other but Immanuel the Messiah which is God with us ▪ the light of the world that is come unto us , and is passing through the whole world , who will smite the earth with the Rod of his mouth , and with the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked . 

Now this is wisdom , to know and understand that birth and nature of the wicked in you , and to feel the power of that breath in you , thereby to taste of the pangs of that slaughter in you , and then ye will witness the Messiah come in you in spirit , and in wisdom , and in a deep and quick understanding , making the Heaven's new in you , and the earth new in you , as Solomon saith , God hath set the world in man's heart , wherefore man cannot find out the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end thereof ; he that hath an ear to hear , and heart to understand , may now come to discern and read ( Nations , Kingdoms , Countries , Armies , Philistines , Egyptians , Aliens , the seed of the jew , and the generation of the gentile ) in him , Mountains , heaps of Stones , Sodom Built , and Gomorrah fenced , jerusalem trodden down , Zion and her Daughter in bondage , and her seed in great Captivity , lamenting as in solitary places , left and forsaken as in a wilderness , and as a Virgin Daughter in a strange land altogether left comfortless , the poor , the widow and the fatherless , the blind , the halt , and the maimed , all left without pity ; I say , search your hearts in secret , and see if this be not truth , the light of Immanuel , answering in all your consciences and hidden parts . 

Again , I say wait upon God , with your minds stayed upon the light in all your consciences , and thereby God will show you , even by the coming of his son jesus the Messiah the light of the World , the fulfilling of the Law and of the Prophets in you , ( that is to say , thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart , with all thy mind , and with all thy soul , and thy Neighbour as thyself , ) this is the sum and substance of all , which the light in all your consciences if ye follow it in your minds , will perfectly lead to the fulfilling of ; and than ye will know that Immanuel the light of the World , came not to destroy the Law but to fulfil the Law ; that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us , who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit ; which is according to the leading of the light in all our consciences , and this is from the Lord both to the jew and the gentile . 

Furthermore to the scattered Tribes of the house of Israel , this is the word of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth , who is the God of Abraham , Isaac and Jacob , who by a mighty hand and outstretched arm , by the hand of Moses his Prophet and Messenger unto the seed in Bondage in great Captivity , brought the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt : Even unto you O ye jews this is the word of the dreadful Lo●d God of Hosts , and as a sign unto you , and among you , and in you , it shall stand unto the end of your days , if you perish in unbelief and in your sins ; that the Messiah is come , Jesus whom your Fathers slew through unbelief and hard-heartednesse in their days , who slew him for saying in words , that which they themselves did own concerning themselves in the substance , according to their profession , that is to say , he declared that he was the Son of God , and therefore they put him to death as a Blasphemer , and they said that God was their Father , yet were in their wilfulness so far blinded that they could not discern that their words in manner of the declaration , tended to the same thing , and was of the same nature , and this shall stand the sign thereof unto the end , if ye perish in unbelief to your perpetual judgement , that he hath lightened you all with his true light which shines in all your conscences , which showeth you in secret the deceitfulness of your hearts , and convinceth you in your minds , of lying , cheating , coveting , envy and of all sin and unrighteousness , ( which is not according to the Law of God , written in your hearts , this sign ) the light in your consciences shall never die in you , which all your burning Lamps , and washings , and Altars , and vails , and holiest of holiest , and all the other ceremonies were but signs and figures and shadows of this everlasting sign and substance , which shall perpetually stand to justify you if you love it , and follow it , and walk according to it , or to condemn you for evermore if ye hate it , and walk contrary to it . 

And be it also known unto you , that if you expect another Messiah then him that is come ( which is Immanuel , God with us in spirit and in life and power ) leading out of sin , the land of bondage and darkness , and in virtue , and in wisdom , and in counsel , and in judgement , not judging according to the seeing of the eye , or hearing of the ear , but with righteous judgement in spirit , who searcheth every spirit , and the bottom of every heart with his light in every conscience ; ye are but Seekers unto this day for flesh to come , yet farther to be an ease unto your flesh , and to purchase more ease and liberty for your flesh , in which state ye already stand , even in the ease and lust of the flesh , which God Almighty by the coming of his Son will destroy , for because of sin and iniquity , and men living in the ease and lust of the flesh , the Lord God will hasten judgement upon the earth . 

Now consider , search and see , ponder it and lay it to heart , that you may know what you have waited for ; that you may understand whether you have waited and sought for the true thing to come to pass , that henceforth ye may seek aright , else you may all wait till your limbs fails you , and your eyes perish in their holes , end in the end you fail of the expectation and fulfilling of your vain conceptions , and blind imaginations ; wait therefore in spirit in humility of heart , that Immanuel the light of the World , jesus the Messiah , by whom ye are lightened , ye may come to know and feel the power of his light in your consciences , by it leading you out of all your sins and iniquities , which is Satan's bond , the Devil's chain of darkness , linking you together in hard-heartednesse , and binding you in the lusts , ceremonies , customs , and traditions of blindness and ignorance , thereby ruling in your minds and spirits , that knowing him , ye may also know by him the breaking of the bonds of Hell , and the disannulling of the Covenant , which is made with death , & ye set at liberty in life and spirit , to serve the Lord God of life who is a spirit ( and of purer eyes than to behold iniquity or countenance sinners in their evil ways ) in the uprightness of your hearts and integrity of your souls , that ye may be made unto him the praise of his name throughout the whole earth , according to his promise , that so ye may discern and feel the curse removed and taken from you , which for many ages past , hath stood upon the heads of the generations of your forefathers , and remains unto this time upon you , until the eye of your minds which the God of this world hath blinded , be opened by the Messiah , which is come and coming to open the eye of the blind , and to give the simple an understanding to discern the day of redemption , and to be made partaker of his hour of salvation , which is held and hid in a mystery , who is appointed for a way , and to be a high way for the ransomed of the Lord , such as the wayfaring men , though fools shall not err therein . 

O how do I mourn ! O how do I travel as in pain and great grief and sorrow for your sakes OH ye jews ! reading , seeing and feeling , that darkness which is over your hearts , even the same which was , and is in Egypt ( Spiritual Sodom and Egypt ) even such thick darkness as may be felt . 

O why do ye yet in your hearts seek murder ? Why say and contend ye for more blood ? Seeing the slaughtered Lamb is already come , whom you say is to come , and not yet come ; for if he were to come , whom I declare in the name of the Lord is already come , behold your generation are to be his slaughterer's , and the shedders of his innocent blood , for the fulfilling of the Prophets , that by the offering of his blood once for all , he may for ever perfect them whom God sanctifies , read Isa . 53.  Chapter , which is fulfilled , and see how far you put ourselves from salvation , by seeking yet cruelty & murder in your hearts , which your unbelief and wilfulness is the ground of . 

How many signs would ye have ? ye have heard how many were showed unto Pharaoh , yet would not he let Israel go free , and will ye have , or do ye seek greater than the Sun to be darkened , and the Moon not to give her light , and the stars of heaven to fall ? and is not this manifest unto thousands ? And cannot you yet read within ? Will you say that you believe all that the Prophets have written ? Or can you say so , and speak truth , whilst you have not that spirit by which the Prophets written forth the Scriptures ? Or could your Fathers understand the writings of the Prophets , who wickedly persecuted and slew the Prophets ? Nay , nay . 

Behold this is the word of the Lord unto you all , jesus the Messiah hath cast his Rod before Pharaoh , the Prince of darkness in you , and it is become a serpent which woundeth you in secret ( I speak unto you that have any sense or the least feeling of God ) and it devours your rods , yea and will eat your life , and will bring all the plagues of Pharaoh upon you , ( for as much as your unbelief is but his sin ) until destruction unto death as a flood overwhelms you , except ye repent , that God may be entreated for you . 

And know ye that God hath been long suffering , and now showeth his mercy in this visitation of his love unto you , showing you the Messiah which is come , and hath lightened you , and is the light of the Gentiles also , that he may be the salvation of God unto the ends of the earth . 

Of a truth from this ye cannot be hid , neither can ye in righteousness deny but that ye are lightened with the light of the world , which is Immanuel the light of the Gentili's , which also enlighteneth the understanding of the jews , else could not the jews unto this day understand that Moses was a Prophet of the Lord , for he was and is the same , even the word from the beginning , which God said unto Moses is nigh thee , in thy mouth , and in thy heart , which showed him the Law to be nigh , and not to be sought for from a strange Land , by which the children of Israel were condemned for their sins , so that the guilt thereof stood upon their heads from year to year , as in like manner the guilt of your transgressions stands unto this day upon your heads , which your sacrifices cannot clear you in your consciences from , for it is impossible that the carnal things can make satisfaction unto infinite justice , which standeth over , and measureth all transgression , and therefore saith the Prophet , Wherewith shall I come before the Lard ? and bow myself before the high God ? shall I come before him with burned offerings , with calves of a year old ? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams ? Or with ten thousand Rivers of oil ? Shall I give my first born for my transgression , the fruits of my body , for the sin of my soul ? He hath showed thee OH man what is good , and what doth the Lord require of thee ? but to do justly , to love mercy , and to walk humbly with thy God.  

In this ye are all concluded with the great idolaters of the earth , and with the Arminans and heathens also , they have their Images without , that is to say , beads , crosses , pictures , vessels , and herein the jews in the nature are also one with them , who have their synagogues , and vessels , and Offerings , and knows not him whom you imagine you make offerings unto , and these are offerings of strange fire unto the Lord , for which cause God hath not regard unto your services ; for your Fathers forsaken the fountain of living mercies in their days , and then he spoke by the mouth of his Prophet , saying who hath required these things at your hands ? your solemn meetings are abomination unto me . 

And ye are now in the same footsteps of your forefathers in the corrupted way of sin , and blind path of hardheartedness and unbelief , and yet ye say , ye worship God aright ; and furthermore this is your great sin and dangerous evil , as other professions , have their abominable Idolatries in the show without , your Idols are set up in your hearts , and ye put the stumbling block of your iniquity before your face ; read diligently with true understanding , Isa . 8. 14. 15. and mark your stumbling offence and fall . 

And with you in the same nature all the protestants , Presbyterians , Independents , Baptists , Seekers , Ranters , and the rest called Christians in general do worship , although you and they are all diverse in the Traditions of your and their Fathers in the manner of the practising your services , yet in the substance , you are but one , that is to say , Cains nature ruling in you all , who offered a sacrifice and killed the just in him ; he killed just Abel without him , and that nature which murdered Abel without him slew the just within him , and so your several words , and diversities of opinions , which stands but in the shadow , is not at all that which makes a difference , in the ground and substance , being all but in one nature of transgression , and way of the ungodly in unrighteousness ; and you cannot one stain or spot another , or take glory unto yourselves over another , seeing the best of all your sects upon the face of the earth , are but speckled beasts , and particoloured birds , and not one of you all are come into the way of the promise of God , which is come to pass , wherein the ransomed of the Lord shall only walk , and no unclean thing can tread therein . 

And as for us who are the remnant of God , and his seed gathered to his honour , praise , infinite , endless , everlasting glory ; all ungodliness and worldly lusts our life abhors , and we are the redeemed of the Lord , through the purchase of the blood of Immanuel , the light with us , and in us , by which we are kept in the pure fear of the Lord God eternal , to spread his name among you , unto whom also the promise is , that the seed shall be gathered . 

God hath begun in the north Islands to perfect his prais throughout the earth ; and because the Lord hath redemeed us from Nations , Kindred's , Countries , tongues and people , we are despised of all Nations , both jew and Gentile , and of the scornful people of our own Nation England , are called Quakers , who are the Servauts of the Lord in spirit . 

This is written by an upright tender lover of all souls , John Perrot . THE END . 





Isa 41. 25.  Jer. 23. 6 , 7 , 8.  Jer. 16. 14 , 15 , 16.  Ezek. 20. 41. to the end . Deut. 30. 14  ; 15.  ●…ch . 14.  Ezek. 17. 2.  Hos 4 1 , to 9  Jer ▪ 23. 22  Jer 31. 22  Jer. 30. 6 ▪  ●…k . 20.  ●…sa . 11. 4.  Isa . 11. 2.  Eccle. 3. 11 ▪  Isa . 28.  Hab. 1. 13.  Isa 42. 7.  Isa . 35. 8.  ●oel 2. 31.  Isa . 49. 6.  Isa 60. 1. 3. 19  Isa . 42. 6.  Mic ▪ 6. 6. 7. 8.  Jer. 2. 3.  Isa . 1. 11. 12 , 13 , 14  Ezek. 1●… 4.  