

Pictor adumbravit vultum guem cernimus , aft hic 
Non vaset egregias pingere mentis opens 
Has siscire cupis , sua consule carmina , in illis 
Dotes percipies pectoris eximias . 
What here we see is but a graved face . 
Onoly the shadow of that brittle case 
Wherein were treasured up those gems , which he 
Hath left behind him to posterity . 
Al : Ross . W M Sculy : 

Solomon's recantation , entitled Ecclesiastes , paraphrased . With a soliloquy or meditation upon every chapter . very seasonable and useful for these times . 

By Francis Quarles . 

With a short relation of his life and death . 

The third edition . 

oh curas hominum ! Oh quantum est in rebus inane ! 

London . printed for Richard Royston , and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the angel in Ivy-lane . 1648.  

A short relation of the life and death of Mr. Francis Quarles , by Ursula Quarles , his sorrowful widow . 

Though it be inconsistent with the duty of a wife , to be injurious in any respect to her husband ; yet in this my bold undertaking i fear i shall be so to mine : which i doubt not but he would have forgiven , if he had been living , as proceeding from love ; and i hope his friends will pardon ( Now he is dead ) as being the last duty i can perform to a loving husband . Those that see with what pen his works are written , will say his life deserved a more skilful artist to set it forth : which office though many Might have been procured to undertake ; and to which i doubt not , but some would voluntarily have offered themselves , if they had known that such a thing had been intended : yet have i ( With much zeal , though small discretion ) adventured upon it myself , as being fully assured that none can be more sensible of the loss of him , than i , though thousands Might have expressed that loss to the world with more art and better judgement . 

He was a gentleman both by birth and desert : descended of an ancient family , and yet ( Which is rare in these last and worst times ) he was an ornament to his ancestors . His father was James Quarles of Rumford esquire , clerk of the green-cloth , and purveyor of the navy to Queen Elizabeth , and younger brother to Sir Robert Quarles . his education was suitable to his birth ; first , at school in the country , where his schoolfellows will say , he surpassed all his equals ; afterward at Christ's college in Cambridge , where how he profited , i am not able to judge , but am fully assured by men of much learning and judgement , that his works in very many places do sufficiently testify more than ordinary fruits of his university studies . Last of all , he was transplanted from thence to Lincoln's inn , where for some years he studied the laws of England ; not so much out of desire to benefit himself thereby , as his friends and neighbours , ( Showing therein his continual inclination to peace ) by composing suits and differences amongst them . 

After he came to maturity , he was not desirous to put himself into the world , otherwise he Might have had greater preferments than he had : he was neither so unfit for court preferment , nor so ill beloved there , but that he Might have raised his fortunes thereby , if he had had any inclination that way . But his mind was chiefly set upon his devotion and study : yet not altogether so much , but that he faithfully discharged the place of cupbearer to the Queen of Bohemia , and the office of secretary to the reverend and learned Lord primate of Ireland , that now is ; and of chronologer to the famous city of London ; which place he held to his death , and would have given that city ( And the world ) a testimony that he was their faithful servant therein , if it had pleased God to bless him with life to perfect what he had begun . He was the husband of one wife , by whom he had eighteen children ; and how faithful and loving he was , my pen and their tears are not able to express . 

In all his duties to God and man , he was conscionable and orderly : he preferred God and religion to the first place in his thoughts , his King & country to the second , his family and studies he reserved to the last : as for God , he was frequent in his devotions and prayers to him , and almost constant in reading or meditating on his holy word , as his divine fancies and other parts of his works will sufficiently testify . For his religion , he was a true son of the church of England ; an even Protestant , not in the least degree biased to this hand of superstition , or that of schism , though both those factions were ready to cry him down for his inclination to the contrary . His love to his King and country in these late unhappy times of distraction , was manifest , in that he used his pen , and poured out his continual prayers and tears to quench this miserable fire of dissension , while too many others added daily fuel unto it . And for his family , his care was very great over that , even then , when his occasions caused his absence from it . And when he was at home his exhortations to us to continue in virtue and godly life , were so pious and frequent ; his admonitions so grave and piercing ; his reprehensions so mild and gentle , and ( Above all ) his own example in every religious and moral duty , so constant and manifest , that his equal May be desired , but can hardly be met withal . 

Neither was his good example of a godly life contained only with•n his own family : others as well as we , have ( Or at least Might have ) made good use of it . For he was not addicted to any notorious vice whatsoever : he was courteous and affable to all ; moderate and discreet in all his actions : and though it be too frequent a fault ( As we see by experience ) in gentlemen whose dispositions incline them to the study of poetry , to be loose and debauched in their lives and conversations ; yet was it very far from him : their delight could not be greater in the tavern , than his was in his study ; to which he devoted himself late and early , usually by three a clock in the morning . The fruits thereof are best tasted by those , who have most perused his works , and therefore i shall be silent in that particular . For though it had been necessary in another to have spoken somewh•t of his writings ; yet i hope it will not be expected from me , seeing that neither the judgement of my sex can be thought competent , nor ( If it were ) would the nearness of my relation to him suffer me to praise that ,  commendations whereof from others , i have often blushed . 

I shall therefore rather desire le•ve to speak a word or two concerning the blessed end of my dear husband , which was every way answerable to his godly life ; or rather ( Indeed ) surpassed it . For as gold is purified in the fire , so were all his Christian virtues more refined and remarkable during the time of his sickness . 

His patience was wonderful , insomuch as he would confess no pain , even than when •ll his friends perceived his disease to be mortal ; but still rendered thanks to God for his special love to him , in taking him into his own hands to chastise , while others were exposed to the fury of their enemies , the power of pistols , and the trampling of horses . 

He expressed great sorrow for his sins , and when it was told him , that his friends conceived he did thereby much harm to himself : he answered , they were not his friends , that would not give him leave to be penitent . 

His exhortations to his friends that came to visit him were most divine ; wishing them to have a care of the expense of their time , and every day to call themselves to an account , that so when they come to their bed of sickness , they Might lie upon it with a rejoicing heart . and doubtless such an one was his : insomuch as he thanked God , that whereas he Might have justly expected , that his conscience should look him in the face like a lion , it rather looked upon him like a lamb : and that God had forgiven him his sins , and that night sealed him his pardon : and many other heavenly expressions to the like effect . I Might here add what blessed advice he gave to me in particular , still to trust in God , whose promise is , to provide for the widow and fatherless , &c. but this is already imprinted in my heart ; and therefore i shall not need here again to insert it . 

His charity was extraordinary , in freely forgiving his greatest enemies , even those who were the cause of his sickness , and by consequence of his death . For , whereas a petition full of unjust aspersions , was preferred against him by eight men , ( Whereof he knew not any two , nor they him , save only by sight ) the first news of it struck him so to the heart , that he never recovered it , but said plainly , it would be his death . and when his friends ( To comfort him ) told him that Mr. i. s. ( The chief promoter thereof ) was called to an account for it , and would go near to be punished ; his answer was , God forbid , i seek not revenge , i freely forgive him , and the rest ; only i desire to be vindicated from their unjust aspersions ; especially . [ that for ought they know i May be a Papist ] whereas i never spoke word to any of them in my life . which imputation , how slanderous it was , May e•sily be discovered by a pass•ge in his greatest extremity , wherein his discretion May ( Perhaps ) be taxed by some , but his religion cannot be questioned by any . For , a very able doctor of the Romish religion , being sent unto him by a friend , he would not take what he had prescribed , only because he was a Papist . 

These were the remarkable passages in him during his sickness : the rest of the time he spent in contemplation of God , and meditating upon his word ; especially upon Christ's sufferings , and what a benefit those have , that by faith could lay hold on him , and what virtue there was in the least drop of his precious blood : intermingling here and there many devout prayers and ejaculations ; which continue with him as long as his speech : and after , as we could perceive by some imperfect expressions . At which time a friend of his exhorting him to apply himself to finish his course here , and prepare himself for the world to come ; he spoke in Latin to this effect ( As i am told ) o dulcis salvator mundi , sint tua ultima verba in cruce , mea ultima verba in luce : in manus tuas domine commendo spiritum meum . Et quae ore meo fari non possint , ab animo & corde sint à te te accepta . Oh sweet saviour of the world , let thy last words upon the cross , be my last words in this world : into thy hands Lord i commend my spirit : and what i cannot utter with my mouth , accept from my heart and soul . which words being uttered distinctly , to the understanding of his friend , he fell again into his former contemplations and prayers ; and so quietly gave up his soul to God , the eight day of September , 1644. after he had lived two and fifty years , and lieth buried in the parish church of s. Foster , London . 

Thus departed that blessed soul , whose loss i have great reason to bewail , and many others in time will be sensible of . But my particular comfort is in his dying words , that God will be a husband to the widow : and that which May comfort others as well as me , is ( What a reverend divine wrote to a friend concerning his death ) that our loss is gain to him , who could not live in a worse age , nor die in a better time . 

And here again , i humbly beg the readers pardon . For i cannot expect but to be censured , by some for writing thus much , and by others for writing no more . To both which , my excuse is , my want of ability and judgement in matters of this nature . I was more averse ( Indeed ) from meddling with the petition , than any other thing i have touched upon ; lest ( Perhaps ) it should be thought to savour a little of revenge ; but God is my witness i had no such intention . My only aim and scope was , to fulfil the desires and commands of my dying husband . Who wished all his friends to take notice , and make it known , that as be was trained up and lived in the true Protestant religion , so in that religion he died . 

Ursula Quarles . 

A letter from a learned divine upon the news of the death of Master Quarles . 

My worthy friend m. Hawkins . 

I received your letter joyfully , but the news ( Therein contained ) sadly and heavily ; it met me upon my return home from Sturbridge ; and did work on myself and wife , i pray God it May work kindly on us all . We have lost a true friend ; and were the loss only mine or yours , it were the less , but thousands have a loss in him ; yea , the generations which shall come after will lament it . But our loss is gain to him , ( Who could not live in a worse age , nor die in a better time ) let us endeavour like good gamesters to make the best we May of this throw , cast us by the hand of God's good providence , that it May likewise prove gain to us ; which will be , if in case we draw nearer unto him , and take off our hearts from all earthly hopes and comforts ; using this world as if we used it not ; so shall we rejoice as if we rejoiced not in their using , and mourn as if we mourned not in the parting with them . — 

Essex . sept. 12. 1644.  Your assured friend Nehemiah Rogers . 

Solomon's recantation , entitled Ecclesiastes . 

Cap. i.  

1 the preacher showeth that all human courses are vain : 4 because the creatures are restless in their courses , 9 they bring forth nothing new , and all old things are forgotten , 12 and because he hath found it so in the studies of wisdom . 

Vers. 1.  

Thus says the best of preachers and of Kings , 
Thus Solomon the son of David sings . 
2.  

The greatest happiness that earth can prize 
Is all most vain , and vainest vanities . 
3.  

What profit can accrue to man ? what gains 
Can crown his actions , or reward his pains ? 
Beneath the orb of heavens surrounding sun , 
What worth his labour hath his labour done ? 
4.  

One generation gives another way , 
But earth abides in one perpetual stay : 
5.  

The Prince of light puts on his morning crown , 
And in the evening lays his glory down : 
Where leaving earth to take a short repose , 
He soon returns , and rises where he rose : 
6.  

The troubled air provokes the Southern states , 
And then it blusters at the Borean gates ; 
It whirls about in his uncertain sphere , 
And rides his unknown circuit every where ; 
7.  

All rivers to the seas their tribute yield , 
And yet th' hydropic seas are never filled , 
Their sliding streams pursue their passage home , 
And drive their hasty tides from whence they come . 
8.  

The world is all composed of change ; nor can 
Her vanity be charactered by man : 
The eye 's not satisfied ; and what we hear , 
Fills not the concave of th' insatiate ear : 
9  

The thing that heretofore hath been , we see 
Is but the same that is , and is to be : 
And what is done , is what is to be done ; 
there 's nothing that is new beneath the sun . 
10.  

What novelty can earth proclaim , and say , 
It had no precedent before this day ? 
No , no , there 's nothing modern times can own , 
The which precedent ages have not known : 
11.  

The deeds of former days expire their date 
In our collapsed memories , and what 
Times early sunshine hath not ripened yet , 
Succeeding generations shall forget . 
12.  

I Solomon , whose choice affections own 
The church's service dearer than my throne , 
Was chosen and anointed King , and now 
Wear Israel's crown upon my studious brow : 
13.  

I bent my heart , by wisdom , to descry 
What are subsists beneath the spangled sky ; 
With such hard travel hath our god thought good 
To exercise the souls of flesh and blood . 
14.  

My thoughts have pondered all that hath been done 
Betwixt the solid centre and the sun , 
And lo ! the object of my contemplation 
Is but mere vanity , and souls vexation . 
15.  

Not all this knowledge can reduce the state 
Of crooked nature to a perfect straight ; 
nor sum our ignorances , which surmount 
The language of arithmeticks account . 
16.  

I viewed my heart , and there found greater store 
Of wisdom , than all those that lived before : 
No knowledge could remain , no wisdom lie 
Close from mine ear , nor clouded from mine eye . 
17.  

I gave my all enquiring heart to know 
Not wisdom only , but even folly too : 
And i perceived that all this contemplation 
Was vain , and nothing but the soul's vexation : 
18.  

For he that labours for much wisdom , gains 
Grief in th' enjoyment ; in pursuit but pains : 
And who improves his knowledge , strives to borrow 
A fair advantage to increase his sorrow . 
Soliloquy i.  

How are the vain desires of flesh and blood 
Befoold in that mistaken thing called good ! 
How travel seeks it ! How unwearied hearts 
Make it the object both of arms and arts ! 
How many certain obvious evils attend 
The way to this uncertain journeys end ! 
We tire the night in thought , the day in toil , 
Spare neither sweat nor lucubrated oil , 
To seek the thing we cannot find ; or found , 
We cannot hold ; or held , we cannot ground 
So firm , as to resist the various swings 
Of fickle fortune , or the frowns of Kings . 
Poor fruitless labours of deluded man ! 
How vainly are ye spent ? How short a span 
Of seeming pleasure serves ye to requite 
Long leagues of travel ? For one drops delight 
of airy froth , how are ye forced to borrow 
Strong gales of hope , to sail through seas of sorrow ? 
Why do we thus afflict our l•b'ring souls 
With dregs of wormwood , and carouse full bowls 
Of boiling anguish ? To what hopeful end 
Droyl we our crazy bodies , and expend 
Our sorrow-wasted spirits , to acquire 
A good , not worth a breath of our desire ? 
A good , whose fulsome sweetness clogs and cloys 
The soul , but neither lasts nor satisfies : 
How poor an object pleases ! And how soon 
That pleasure finds an end ! How quickly noon 
How quickly night ! and what to day we prize 
Above our souls , to morrow we despise 
Beneath a trifle : what in former times 
We owned as virtue , now we tax as crimes . 
What is this world , but even a great exchange 
Of dear-bought pen worths , all composed of change ? 
Where frothy honour May be bought and sold 
With heart-corrupting , eye-beguiling gold : 
Where sullen wealth , and friend-betraying treasure 
May pass in barter for repent pleasure : 
Where painted sweetness ( Though a grain too light ) 
Shall buy a Lord's estate for one poor night : 
Where unstained beauty's youth shall buy an old 
Breath-tainted churl , diseased with gouts and gold : 
Where birth-rights , blessings , nay and souls to boot 
( And yet not deemed a pen'worth under foot ) 
Shall pass for fond delights : where very names 
Without an alias , ( To lay after claims 
To a poor lordship ) shall be swept away 
For clods of earth , and those for one night's play . 
Tell me , my puzzled soul , what wouldst thou buy ? 
Go in and cheapen : let thy curious eye . 
Make her own choice : they will present thy view 
With numerous joys : buy something that is new : 
Alas ! there 's nothing new beneath the sky . 
Look further ; further yet : go please thine eye , 
Search , till the object and thine eye agrees : 
thine eye 's not satisfied with what it sees . 
Buy something that will last ; that will remain 
To after days : all 's momentary , all 's vain . 
Ay , but my soul , here 's fairer merchandise , 
wisdom and knowledge : that to make thee wise ; 
This to instruct thee : come , thou needst not fear 
Too hard a bargain : go , and purchase there : 
Alas ! much wisdom makes thy grief but double ; 
Increase of knowledge brings increase of trouble . 
Ay , but my soul , the gracious eye of heaven 
Hath smiled upon thee . His full hand hath given 
A large addition to thy thriu'n estate ; 
Thy barns and bags are filled ; thy servants wait 
Upon thy business , and their shoulders bear 
Thy fruitful burdens ; who like pilots steer 
Thy reeling vessel : thou art richly  Endowed 
With knowledge , wisdom , judgement , and allowed 
Some grains to make thee weight : me thinks , thy heart 
So armed with strong resolves should never start 
At threatening evils : me thinks , thy daring eye 
( If all the crystal rafters of the sky 
Should make one ruin , and that ruin fall 
About thine ears ) should be unmoved at all . 
No , no , my soul , 't is neither barn nor purse 
Crammed up with coin or corn , can balk the curse 
Entailed upon thy sin : nor height of blood , 
Nor all that this mistaken earth calls good : 
Not very knowledge , no nor wisdom can 
Exempt thee from the common lot of man . 
The wisest Prince that ever blessed a nation 
Found all things vain , and when enjoyed , vexation . 
Cap. ii  

1 the vanity of human courses in the works of pleasure . 12.  Though the wise be better than the fool , yet both have but one event . 18.  The vanity of human labour , in leaving it they know not to whom . 24.  Nothing better than joy in our labour , but that is God's gift . 

1.  

Since knowledge than affords my soul no rest , 
My roving thoughts tried mirth , & were possessed 
Of all the pleasures earth could lend ; yet i 
Found mirth and pleasure all but vanity : 
2.  

I laughed at laughter as a toyish antic ; 
And Counted all my mirth no less than frantic : 
3.  

My heart ( But wisely foolish ) did incline 
To costly fare , and frolic cups of wine , 
That in these pleasures i Might find some good , 
To crown the short lived days of flesh and blood : 
4.  

I built magnific palaces , did frame 
Great buildings to the glory of my name : 
I planted vineyards , whose plump clusters Might 
Rejoice my heart , and lend my soul delight : 
5.  

I made me fruitful orchards for my pleasure , 
And curious gardens to refesh my leisure ; 
I stored them with trees , and these with bowers , 
And made a paradise of fruits and flowers : 
6.  

I made me standing pools , to entertain 
My breathless guests and all their numerous train : 
I cut me aquiducts , whose current flees 
And water all my wilderness of trees : 
7.  

Armies of servants do attend my state , 
Both foreigners , and born within my gate : 
Herds i possessed , and flocks above all them 
That reigned before me in Jerusalem : 
8.  

Abundant silver , gold , and precious stones 
By Kings presented , my exchequer owns : 
All sorts of music ( Earth's delight ) had i 
To feed mine ear , beauties to please mine eye : 
Such state , magnificence , and princely store 
9  

Wondering Jerus'lem never saw before : 
In all this pomp , my heart had not forgot 
The lawful use : my wisdom failed me not : 
I gave mine eyes what ere mine eyes required , 
10.  

Denied my hearts no mirth my heart desired : 
For my poor heart's delight was all my gains , 
My pleasure was the portion of my pains . 
At length i cast my serious eye upon 
11.  

My painful works , & what my hands have done : 
But lo , beneath the sun no contentation , 
All , all was vanity , and souls vexation . 
With that i turned my weary thoughts again 
12.  

On wisdom , and the foolishness of men ; 
( Search they that please to search , alas  've none 
Can search the truth more strict than Solomon ) 
When my impartial judgement did compare 
13.  

Folly with wisdom , this doth even as far 
Excel the other , as meridian light 
Excels the shadows of the darkest night : 
The wise man eyes are in his head ; they stand 
14.  

Like watchmen in the tower , to guard the land : 
But fools haunt darkness ; yet myself perceive 
The selfsame lot both fools and wisemen have . 
Ah! then ( Said i ) if equal fortune lies 
15.  

For fools and me , what vantage to be wise ? 
What profit hath my wisdom ? Then thought i 
The height of wisdom hath her vanity . 
16.  

The foolish bauble , and the learned bays 
Are both forgotten in succeeding days : 
Impartial death shall close the dying eyes 
Both of the fool , and also of the wise : 
17.  

Therefore i hated life , for from th' events : 
Of human actions flow my discontents : 
Life spent in action , or in contemplation , 
Is all but vanity , and souls vexation . 
18.  

I hated all that e'er my hands had done 
In seeking happiness beneath the sun ; 
For what i did i cannot call mine own , 
Another's hand must reap , what mine hath sown . 
19  

Who knows if my successor is to be 
A wise man or a fool ? Howe'er 't is he 
Must spend with ease , what i have earned with pain 
And souls vexation ; this is also vain : 
20.  

For which , my soul ( Thus fooled with vain pursuit 
Of blossomed happiness that bears no fruit ) 
Whispered despair of all that i had done 
To purchase perfect good beneath the sun . 
21.  

Some men there be whose more elaborate gains 
( The fruits of lawful cares , and prudent pains ) 
Descend to those that knew nor pains nor art ; 
This is a vanity and afflicts the heart . 
22.  

For what reward hath man of all his droyl 
His evening trouble , and his morning toil , 
His heart's vexation , and his griefs that run 
Through all his labours underneath the sun ? 
13.  

His days are sorrows ; tedious griefs attend 
His travail , hopeless of a journey's end ; 
His restless nights afford his closed eye 
No slumbers : this is also vanity . 
24.  

there 's nothing sweeter than to take repast 
Of meats and drinks , and now and then to cast 
Griefs burden off , and gently loose the reins 
By intermingling pleasures with our pains : 
But this , i know , lies not in our command , 
It is a blessing from th' almighty's hand : 
25.  

For who can eat ? what mortal can apply 
His heart to force a pleasure more than i ? 
26.  

Heaven gives the just man wisdom , knowledge , mirth ; 
To sinners , travel ; to heap earth to earth ; 
Wherewith t' enrich the righteous generation ; 
This is his vanity , and souls vexation . 
Soliloquy ii  

But stay my soul ! Art thou resolved , than , 
T' abjure delight , and turn Capuccian ? 
Because thy earth hath thus eclipsed the light 
Of thy contentment , wilt thou make it night ? 
Wert thou condemned to sorrows ? wert thou born 
To live in languishment , and die forlorn ? 
Abuse not thy creation : thou wert made 
Not thus to starve thy blossoms in the shade 
Of barren melancholy ; or to wast 
Thy pensive hours in the boisterous blast . 
Of stormy discontent : come , come , my soul , 
hoist up thy sails to mirth : let others howl 
And whine : let such as always are at wars 
With their own fortunes , curse their ill faced stars : 
Pass thou thy frolic youth in revels , sports , 
And fresh delights : frequent the purple courts 
Of prosperous Princes : st•e thy heart in mirth , 
And crush the child of sorrow in her birth : 
oh but , my soul , what profit can accrue 
from lavish mirth ? what pleasure is 't , to screw 
An antic face and grim ? or to enforce 
An empty laughter in a vain discourse ? 
Why then my soul , go wind the plummets up 
of thy down spirits , with a chirping cup : 
Redeem thee from the gripes of care , and rapes 
Of grief , and drench them in the blood of grapes . 
Ay , but perchance in that sad heart of thine 
There is a wound , craves rather oil than wine . 
If then thy cure prove worse than thy disease , 
That grief thou dar'st not cure , attempt to ease : 
Forget thy sorrows ; or if rugged sense 
Will not be wooed by language to dispense 
With her provoking foe , advise with art : 
Those stubborn streams thou canst not stop , divert : 
And like a pain-afflicted stripling , play 
With some new toy , to while thy grief away . 
Go , raise great works , whose structure May impart 
The Master's wisdom , and the builders' art : 
build houses , whose magnificence May proclaim 
Thy worth , as lasting monuments of thy name . 
plant orchards for thy pleasure : deck thy bowers 
With dainty fruits , and delectable flowers : 
Cut waterworks : instruct the silver tide 
To wanton up and down : teach her to slide 
In soft meanders , through the fluid veins 
Of the green breasted stream embroidered plains ; 
Ravish thy soul with music , and refresh 
The wasted spirits of thy unwieldy flesh 
With highbred raptures : let harmonious airs 
Compose the discords of thy droyling cares : 
Take pleasure in thy pale-enclosed grounds , 
And let the rhetoric of thy deep-mouthed hounds 
persuade thy headstrong sorrows so to fly 
Before thy heard , as they before the cry . 
Alas , alas , my poor deluded soul , 
Think'st thou to quench thy fire with oil , or cool 
Thy flame with cordials ? Can thy born disease 
Expect a cure from such receipts as these ? 
No no , these bellows mount the blaze the higher , 
Thou leap'st but from the pan into the fire . 
Ay , but my soul , methinks a wife forecast 
( Though not redress the mischiefs that are past ) 
May claim some kind of privilege to prevent 
The evils that future changes May present ; 
If not , what harm , what disconvenience lies 
In being fool ? what vantage to wise 
both fool and wise must pay an equal shot 
at nature's table ; have the selfsame lot . 
Why then , my soul , since sorrow needs must haunt 
Thy life , condemned to labour , cease to daunt 
Thy bold endeavours with the sense of care , 
Cheer up thy whining heart , and take thy share 
Of all thy labours , eat , and drink ; and let 
Thy sense enjoy the wages of thy sweat : 
't is all thy portion : take what May be had ; 
Bad is the best , then make the best of bad : 
Sweeten thy pains ; mix pleasure with thy sorrow ; 
Who knows to day , what shall betide to morrow ? 
Cap. iii  

1 by the necessary change of times , vanity is added to human travail , 11 there is an excellency in God's works : 16 but as for man , God shall judge his works there , and here he shall be like a beast . 

Vers. 1.  

The great creator in his wise decree 
Hath pitched a time when every change shall be , 
And through his watchful providence hath given 
A season to each purpose under heaven ; 
2.  

There is a time appointed for our birth , 
And there 's a time for earth to turn to earth : 
There is a time to plant ; a time wherein 
To pluck those plants , thus planted , up again : 
3.  

There is a season when to build , even so , 
There is a season to demolish too : 
There is a season to inflict a wound , 
And there'is another season to make sound : 
4.  

There is a time for tears to drown thy eye ; 
A time to laugh and lay thy sorrows by : 
There is a time to mourn ; a time to meet 
The sprightly music with thy numerours' feet : 
5.  

There is a due appointed season , either 
To scatter stones , or gather stones together : 
There is a time t' embrace , and there be spaces 
Of time , appointed to resrain embraces : 
6.  

There is a time to gain , and there 's ordained 
An other time to lose the things we gained ; 
There is a time to recollect and lay 
Thy treasure up ; a time to cast away : 
7.  

There is a time appointed when to rend ; 
And there 's a time appointed when to mend : 
a time for silence , and a time to break 
Reserved silence ; there 's a time to speak : 
8.  

A time to love , and there 's a time t' abate 
Our warm affections ; there 's a time to hate : 
A time of war , and there 's a time to cease 
The bloody battle : there 's a time for peace . 
9  

If heavens decree thus bound the works of men , 
What profit gains the fruitless worker then ? 
What boots our travel , or those works of ours , 
If all our plots depend on heavenly powers ? 
10.  

Nor are our actions , or their secret ends 
Governed by chance ; nor do our works depend 
On hood winked fortune ; no , pleased heaven thinks good 
To exercise the soul of flesh and blood : 
11.  

What ere he did , is fair , and timely done , 
He gave the world for man to muse upon : 
Whose eye , with admiration May discover 
The motion , not the progress of the mover . 
12.  

I know , that from the works of flesh and blood 
As they are man's , there can arise no good ; 
Unless perchance to qualify with oil 
The soul-afflicting vin'gre of his toil ; 
13.  

Or if it happen that his soul May eat 
And drink , and reap the harvest of his sweat 
To sweeten sorrows , May we understand 
It is a gift from the almigties' hand : 
14.  

I know that heaven's decree is sealed . and free 
From alteration , a most firm decree : 
And so or dained , that the presumptuous race 
Of man May fear the majesty of 's face : 
15.  

The thing that is , hath been ; and what of old 
Hath been , succeeding ages shall behold : 
The great disposer keeps the selfsame tract 
And calls his timely revolutions back . 
16.  

I viewed the chair of judgement , where i saw 
In stead of righteousness , perverted law : 
I viewed the courts of equity , and spied 
Corruption there , and justice warped aside . 
17.  

Oh then ( Thought i ) the judge of heaven shall do 
Right to the wicked , and the righteous too . 
For there 's a time true justice shall proceed 
On every purpose , upon every deed . 
18.  

Then puzzeled in my thoughts , i thus advised , 
Heaven suffers mortals to be exercised 
In their own miseries , that they May see 
they 're not more happy than the sensuals be . 
19  

To man and beast the selfsame lots befall ; 
Man dyes , so dyes the beast : alas they all 
Enjoy one breath ; what royalties remain 
To man above a beast : for both are vain ; 
20.  

Both travel to the self same place ; both tend 
Their paces to the selfsame journeys end : 
The substance of their flesh is both the same , 
But dust , to dust both turn from whence they came . 
21.  

What curious inquisitor doth know 
The place whereto ascending souls do go ? 
Or can renowned philosophy declare 
Whither the dying spirits of beasts repair ? 
22.  

This rightly weighed , it seems the better choice 
For man to suck his labours , and rejoice : 
't is all the portion he is like to have : 
Who knows the entertainments of the grave ? 
Soliloquy iii  

Come now my soul , thou hast with toilsome pains 
Outworn the day ; and , with thy dear-bought gains , 
thou hast refreshed thy spirits ; and , at length , 
With lusty diet , hast redeemed thy strength ; 
Thou hast forgot thy labours , and thy rest 
Hath crowned contentment in thy peace full breast : 
Art thou now pleased ? what can thy heart require , 
More than thou hast , to fill thy vast desire ? 
True , if my bubble life could get a lease 
Of his small rest , nay , if the present peace 
Were but secured from this succeeding sorrow , 
Long since designed to the next neighbouring morrow , 
It were some happiness , and would present 
A large proportion of a short content : 
But change ( The moth of transitory things 
that 's never worse than when the seasons brings 
A flash of good ) doth all things so unframe 
That earth's content doth scarce deserve the name 
Of common happiness ; which like the wind , 
Varits , still meeting with a various mind . 
Unconstant earth ! what can thy treasure show , 
That is not , like thyself , unconstant too ? 
How full of change ! How full of alteration ! 
Nay , fixed in nothing but thy mere foundation . 
And like thyself , our natural parent , we 
Constant in nothing , but in loving thee ! 
One while we plunge in tears ; and by and by , 
We rage in laughter , yet not knowing why : 
To day , the zeal of our affection 's such , 
We burn in love , to marrow , hate as much : 
Sometimes we fear not when our evils appear ; 
Sometimes , affrighted at no cause of fear : 
One while we should and will not , will and should not ; 
Nay , at the self same moment , would not would not . 
To day we feast , and quaff in frolic bowls ; 
To morrow fast , and pinch our guilty souls : 
now music , now a knell salutes our ears ; 
At noon we swim in wine , at night in tears . 
O'er night our vows are made , our joy concluded : 
To day the danger 's past , and heaven deluded : 
The last six months our fortune swelled with store , 
And now they break , was never Job so poor : 
Time was , that peace enriched our joyful i and ; 
Time is , our martial drum beats war at hand . 
Unconstant earth ! Oh , is it not enough 
Thy days are evil at best ; and but a puff 
At longest ? At the fruitfullest but vain ? 
But sad , at merriest ; and at sweetest , pain ? 
Is not all this enough ? enough to make 
The miserable child of man forsake 
The false protection of thy magic eye , 
With out th' addition of inconstancy ? 
It't not enough that we poor farmers pay 
Quitrent to nature at the very day , 
And at our dying hour bequeathe to thee 
Our whole subsistence for a legacy ? 
But thou must leave our frailties as a prey 
To time born change , that will permit no stay 
In one estate , nor give us leave to lie 
Sad patients in a quiet misery ! 
Oh but my saul , why dost thou thus contend 
With thy creator's pleasure ? Cease to spend 
This needless breath : shall thy disordered will 
Confront his providence ? or call that ill , 
Which he thinks good ? Tell me , my soul , shall he 
That gave thee being , be prescribed by thee ? 
He made thee for his glory ; not to spend 
Thy days in slavish labour , nor to end 
Thy painful travel in the shades of death : 
But thou hast tainted that immortal breath , 
which qualifed thy life , and made thee free 
Of heau•n and earth , and joint patentee 
With smooth faced cherubims ; and too too proud 
Of thy short honour , wrapped thy thoughts , and bowed 
Thy straight desires to unknown delight , 
And wrapped thy glory in the clouds of night : 
Lost thy freewill to good , didst overthrow 
Thy perfect knowledge with desire to know ; 
Berest of wisdom labouring to be wise , 
now peered with beasts , that only works and dyes . 
Both , born to sorrow , breathe the self same breath ; 
Live both alike , both die the self same death : 
Since then , my soul , thy hopes May not aspire 
To what thou wouldst , suit thy suppressed desire 
To what thou Mayst : and let thy wisdom play 
Bad cards with best advantage : what the day 
Brings in by travel , let the frolic night 
Consume in mirth , and spend in full delight : 
Take thou to day let others take to morrow ; 
He earns the solace , that endures the sorrow . 
Cap. iv.  

1.  Vanity is increased unto men by oppression , 4.  By envy , 5.  By idleness , 7.  By covetousness , 9  By solitariness , 13.  By wilfulness . 

1.  

My soul returned and fixed her thoughts upon 
The hard oppressions made beneath the sun ; 
And , lo . the tears of captives in distress , 
Cried loud for comfort , yet were comfortless ; 
Great was th' oppressors power , yet the grief 
Of the oppressed was void of all relief : 
2.  

Oh , than i Counted their condition blessed , 
Whom death hath lulled in everlasting rest ; 
Yea , far more blessed than those that live , to stand 
Afflicted patients at th' oppressors hand . 
3.  

Nay , far than both are they more blessed , whom 
Conception never hanselled in the womb ; 
Or those abortives , whom untimely birth 
Excused from all the sorrows of the earth . 
4.  

I mused again , and found when pains had cracked 
The harder shell to some heroic act , 
Pale envy strikes the kernel with taxation ; 
Oh , this is vanity , and souls vexation . 
5.  

The sluggish fool that solitary stands , 
With yawning lips , and bosom-folded hands , 
Consumes his empty days , at last , is fed 
With his own flesh , that would not move for bread : 
6.  

His idle tongue thus pleading for his sloth , 
Better one hand be filled with rest , than both 
Stretched forth in travel , to prepare full diet , 
With heart's vexation , and the souls disquiet . 
7.  

Thus pausing contemplation showed mine eye 
A new prospect of human vanity ; 
8.  

There is a lonely man that hath none other 
To foster then himself , nor child nor brother , 
Whose droyling hands think nothing can supply 
The greedy wants of his insatiate eye ; 
He robs himself , nor knows for whose relief ; 
This is a vanity and wounding grief . 
9  

The single state of him that lives alone 
Is double grief ; two better is then one : 
For two can share the sorrows that befall 
To one ; one 's worse then not to be at all ; 
10.  

If either's drooping shoulders be betrayed 
To a sad burden , there 's a mutual aid : 
woe to the man whom danger meets alone , 
For there 's no arm to help him but his own : 
11.  

When two divide the comforts of a bed , 
If one gains kindly warmth , the others sped : 
But warmth turns back to him that lies alone ; 
The steel will yield no sparks without the stone . 
12.  

If fury from a stronger arm assails , 
One falls before the foe when two prevails : 
But if a third put in a timely stroke , 
The cord that 's threefold , is not quickly broke . 
13.  

To be a poor wise child , is jud'gd a thing 
More honourable than to be a King 
that 's old and foolish , and whose disposition 
Checks at advice , and spurns at admonition . 
14.  

The low and lank estates are often known 
To climb from prisons , to the princely throne ; 
And glorious monarchs have been seen to fail , 
And change their glittering glory for a goal . 
15.  

So have i seen the vulgar hearts grow cold 
To with'ring greatness , whilst their eyes behold 
The blooming heir , to whom affections run 
Like morning eyes to greet the rising sun . 
16.  

Past ages quench the father's fading light 
In the sons hopes , and future days benight 
The son in his succeeders expectation ; 
Oh , this is vanity and souls vexation . 
Soliloquy iv.  

My soul , to what a strange disguised good 
Art thou bewitched ! Oh how hath flesh and blood 
Betrayed thee to a happiness that brings 
No comfort but from transitory things ! 
How is thy freedom kerbed ! How art thou clogged 
With dull mortality , bestowed and bogged 
In thine own frailty ! How art thou reposed 
In sin . polluted dust ! embraced , enclosed 
In the foul arms of thy own base corruptions ! 
How is thy will disturbed with th' inturruptions 
Of cross desires ? desires , not knowing where 
To find a centre , rambling here and there ; 
Which , like their objects , alterable , roam 
Like idle vagrants without pass , or home . 
Review thyself my soul ; cast up thy days , 
They are but few ; thy life is but a blaze : 
Go take an inventory of those joys 
Which thy false earth allows : i hey are but toys , 
To mock the frailty of thy flattered sense , 
Attended with a thousand discontents : 
Hath heaven enriched thy pains with thriving drifts 
Of mighty gold ? endowed thy mind with gifts 
Of sacred art ? Or glorified thy name 
With honour posted on the wings of fame ? 
What is there then , that lies in earth's election 
To raise thy happiness to more higb perfection ? 
Ay , but my soul , what great , what higher hand 
Shall stop the mouth of envy ? or command 
Her snake devouring fangs to keep the peace 
Upon thy worried name ? To every lease 
Of earth's best granted happiness , belongs 
The sharp proviso of malicious tongues : 
They , they shall blast thy fortunes ; leave a tang 
Upon thy new broached honour : they shall hang 
Like burrs , upon thy welfare , and destroy , 
Like th' Easternworm , the gourd of all thy joy . 
Or if thou chance to scape the whispering tongue 
Of secret envy , force , and boldfaced wrong , 
May hap to roar upon thy full mouthed sails , 
And rude opression with her harpy nails , 
May gripe thy fair prosperity , and great 
Upon the vastness of thy great estate . 
Or if those foreign dangers should forbear 
To make ; assault , or made , prove less severe ; 
From out thy very bosom May arise 
Intestine foes , to make thy peace , their prize : 
If that dull worm , that clothes the mossy land 
Withrags , but kissethy bosom-folded hand , 
It eats thy treasure with a secret rust , 
And lays thy bedrid honour in the dust . 
Or if thy droiling hand should once beslave 
Thy glorious freedom with a thirst to have , 
And take thee prisoner to thy loose desirets , 
Thy happiness , even whilst enjoyed , expires . 
Or if a liberal content should crown 
Thy gold with rest , and make thine own , thine own ; 
Perchance , thou wantest a partner , that May share 
In all thy fortunes : or ( If sped ) an heir , 
Whose worth , and hopeful merits May revive 
Thy hovored dust , and keep thy name alive . 
Or if the pleased hand of heaven subscribe 
To those desires , a self-conceit May bribe 
Thy passion guided will to take up arms 
Against sovereign reason , at whose bold alarm 's 
Thy false affections May riseup , and shake 
Thy fancy-baffled judgement , and so make 
A gap for mischief , which May reccommend 
Thy reeling fortunes to aruinous end 
Now tell me , oh my soul ! wherein can earth 
Deserve thy pains , or gratify thy birth , 
In framing equal happiness ; nay , in freeing 
Thy partial heart from unrepented being ? 
Oh , is 't not better , not to thirst at all , 
Then thirst in vain , or quench thy thirst with gall ? 
Are not the cloisters of the barren womb , 
Far more desiderable , then to come 
Into the wild , into the common hall 
Of troubled natures factious court , where all 
Move in their orbs of care , and several ways , 
Fulfil their revolutions of sad days ? 
Are not the shady bowers of death more sweet 
Than the bold sunshine , where we hourly meet 
Fresh evils , like atoms , whose deluding breath 
Tickles our fancies till we laugh to death ? 
Our day of birth leads in our days of trouble ; 
My soul prize not this earth ; this toy ; this bubble . 
Cap. v.  

1 vanities in divine service , 8 in murmuring against oppression , 9 and in riches . 18 joy in riches is the gift of God . 

1.  

Attend thy footsteps when thou drawest near 
The house of God ; and be more apt to hear , 
Then give the sacrifice of fools , which know 
Not in their sacrifice what evil they do : 
2.  

Let not thy tongue be rash ; commit no wast 
Of words before thy god by over haste ; 
Since he from heaven beholds thy actions here , 
All lavish babbling let thy lips forbear : 
3.  

As dreams and rest-disturbing fancies flow 
From floods of business which by day we do ; 
So multitude of words are daily sprung 
From th' idle fountain of a foolish tongue . 
4.  

When thou hast bound thee to thy God by vow 
Defer not payment , but perform it thou : 
Discharge thy bonds , for heaven takes no delight 
In fools , that violate the faith they plight ; 
5.  

Far safer 't is thy vows were never made , 
Then heaven promised payment , never paid . 
6.  

Let not thy lips ensnare thee ; plead not thou 
Before thy angel , 't was too rash a vow : 
Oh why shouldst thou provoke thy god , and dare 
His curse upon thy practice , and thy prayer ? 
7.  

Dreams oft are vain , and folly'is mixed among 
The language of a multiloquious tongue ; 
But let the wisdom of thy lips appear 
Before thy god with reverential fear . 
8.  

Seest thou perverred justice in the land , 
And poor men gripped beneath th' oppressors hand 
Stand not amazed : th' almighty views their way , 
And there be powers at hand more high than they . 
9  

The fruitful surface of the pregnant soil , 
Enriched by the laborious ploughman's toil , 
Brings forth to all ; nay , very Kings do build 
Their whole subsistence from the fertile field : 
10.  

't is not full heaps of eye-rejoycing gold 
Can feed , or screen thy nakedness from cold : 
Nor can the piles of treasured wealth sustain 
Thy drooping spirits : this is also vain . 
11.  

As goods increase . even so their number , who 
Must share the goods increase , increaseth too . 
What hath the owner more than they , but this , 
What they consume , his eyes behold as his ? 
12.  

How sweetly pleasant is the sleep of such 
As labour , eat they little , or eat much ? 
When as the wealth of idle owners , keep 
Their heart from quiet , and their eyes from sleep : 
13.  

There is an evil that happens now and then 
Beneath the sun , among the sons of men . 
Oft have i seen increasing riches grow 
To be their great made owners overthrow ; 
And vex their souls with care and then repay 
Unprosp'rous pains with grief , and melt away . 
14.  

His wealth is fled , and when he should transfer it 
Upon his heir , there 's nothing to inherit . 
15.  

Look how he came into the world , the same 
He shall go out , as naked as he came ; 
Of what his labouring arm hath brought about , 
His dying hand shall carry nothing out : 
16.  

This is a wounding grief , that as he came , 
In every point , he shall return the same , 
What profit can his soul's affliction find , 
That toils for air , and travels but for wind ? 
17.  

The pilgrimage of his laborious days , 
Is sordid and obscure , and all his ways 
Are blocked with troubles , and his souls disquiet , 
To gain his very life-sustaining diet . 
18.  

I hold it therefore the most happy lot , 
To eat and drink , and reap what pains hath got , 
To crown those days which his creator gave ; 
't is all the portion he is like to have : 
19  

All such to whom the bounteous hand of heaven 
Gives wealth , and license to enjoy it given , 
To sweeten labour , May they understand , 
It is a favour from th' almighty's hand : 
20.  

Such , doubtless , in their labour , shall forget 
Their painful sorrows , and their toilsome sweat ; 
For heaven , hath crowned their fair desires , and sent 
A peaceful conscience , and a pleased content . 
Soliloquy . V.  

But hark , my soul , the morning bells invite 
Thy early paces to a new delight : 
Away , away ; the holy saints-bell rings , 
Put on thy robes , and oil thy sacred wings : 
Call home thy heart , and bid thy thoughts surcease 
To be thy thoughts ; go , bind them to the peace ; 
Take good security , or if such fail , 
Commit them to the all-commanding jail 
Of thy cramed bags , there to lie close and fast 
Until thy heaven atoning vows be past : 
Confine thy rambling pleasures to the trust 
Of vacant hours : and let thy wisdom thrust 
Indulgent Hagar , and her base born child 
From thy sad gates ; let them be both exiled 
From thy soft b•some ; let not Ishmael share 
With holy Isa'c ; Isa'c must be heir : 
Nor let thy sorrow melted heart bemoan 
Thy banished bondslave , nor her thirsty son : 
Take thou no care for them ; heaven will supply 
Their craving thirst with bottles from thine eye : 
Leave all thy servile fancies in the vale , 
Mount thou the sacred hill , and there , bewail 
Thy dying Isa'c , whose free gift May be 
A living pledge betwixt thy god and thee . 
Here Mayst thou feast thy soul , and fill thy breast 
With heavenly raptures , and with holy rest.  
Here shall thy piety sweeten all thy pains , 
And grace shall here replieve what grief distrains : 
Here Mayst thou shroud thee from those evils that wait 
Upon the frailty of thy frail estate . 
Here May thy griefs unbosom all their groans , 
And find redress from the high throne of thrones . 
Hast then ; oh hie thee to that sacred place : 
Why stayest thou ? See , the widened arms of grace 
Invite thy presence , and with open breast 
Promise fair welcome to so fair a guest ! 
Oh but my zeal-transported soul , take heed ; 
Too rash a haste brings oft too dear a speed : 
observe thy steps ; thy feet are apt to slide , 
If thy misguided paces swerve aside ; 
Death waits at either hand , to make a prize 
Of wavering footsteps , and miswandring eyes : 
Near the best blessings neighbouring dangers dwell , 
The very suburbs of blessed heaven , is hell . 
Thus when thy awful presence shall draw near 
These hallalujous courts , advise , and fear ; 
Put off thy shoes ; 't is holy ground thou treadest : 
Be not too bold ; thou diest unless thou dreadest . 
Now , May thy holy boldness safely venture 
To pass these delectable ports , and enter . 
Now clothe thy heart with reverence ; be filled 
With secret raptures ; let thy fancy build 
No castles here ; beware thou banish hence 
The sinful objects of invited sense : 
Make heaven's command ( And let thy zealous motion 
Subscribe to that ) the cause of thy devotion ; 
Let heaven's direction be thy form , and bend 
Thy endfull heart to make heaven's glory th' end : 
Worship that 's moulded in traditious schools , 
Is but the sensual sacrifice of fools . 
Be wisely careful what thy lips impart ; 
Bring thy soft tongue acquainted with thy heart : 
Be slow to speak , and be as quick to hear ; 
Heaven loves a single tongue , a double care : 
make haste to pay what thy vowed promise owes ; 
Destruction dwells in unperformed vows . 
Thus Mayst thou break the heart-corroding fangs 
Of gripping care , and scape the dying pangs 
Of living death : here , here , thou Mayst control 
Earth's power , and imparadise thy soul 
In soft and sacred rest beyond th' extent 
Of whining grief , and murmuring discontent . 
Ay , but my soul , gross vanity even dwells 
In thy devotion , whose rank offering smells 
So strong of earth , that very heavens deride 
Our very altars , and abhor the pride 
Of our disguised humility , which brings 
A secret curse upon our holiest things : 
Hence , hence , my soul , proceed those boisterous waves 
That plunge our frailties : this , oh this enslaves 
Our •ravened spirits so , that we even fail 
Or shrink before the combat , and turn tail 
To every slight affliction : this unlevells 
Thy even-wayed peace , with indigested evils : 
This sowers all thy sweets , sads all thy rest , 
Nay dispossesses thee , even whilst possessed 
Of thy imperious treasure . — 
Oh then my soul , where shall thy wounds obtain 
That sovereign balsam ? who shall ease thy pain ? 
In what blessed ear will thy complaints find place ? 
What holy altar shall thy arms embrace ? 
If here be no protection for oppressed 
And labouring souls , where shall poor souls have rest ? 
Earth's joys are vain , and they that shall commit 
Trust in vain earth , are far more vain than it , 
Cap. : vi . 

2 the vanity of riches without use . 3.  Of children , 6 and old age without riches . 9  The vanity of sight and wand'ring desires . 11.  The conclusion of vanities . 

Vers. 1.  

There is an evil , which my observing eye 
Hath taken notice of beneath the sky ; 
It is an evil frequents the troubled breast 
Of wretched man , and robs him of his rest . 
2.  

To see where God hath multiplied and given 
What wealth and honour earth can beg of heaven , 
And yet no power to use it , but descends 
To very strangers : oh , this grief transcends ! 
3.  

Who multiply their loins and years , yet have 
Souls unsufficed with good , and soil the grave 
With blemished and dishonoured names , i say 
Abortive births are better far than they : 
4.  

For he can hardly own a being , whom 
Nature casts forth from the untimely womb : 
Darkness infolds him in her secret shades , 
His name 's forgotten , and his memory fades . 
5.  

The world's surveighing lamp does not affright 
The pleasing slumbers of his peaceful night : 
There be no ears , no eyes , to hear , to see , 
The living soul hath not such rest as he : 
6.  

Yea though he live a thousand years twice told , 
What worth his eyes , can his sad eyes behold ? 
Do they not both arrive , not both resort 
To the dull portals of the selfsame port ? 
7.  

The best reward of man's laborious sweat 
Is but a morsel of quotidian meat : 
this May suffice his body , but the will 
Of his insatiate soul what hand can fill ? 
8.  

What is it then the wiseman's labour gains 
More than the painful fool by all his pains ? 
What wants the poor man that by prudent labour 
Knows how to live , more than his wealthy neighbour ? 
9  

Better enjoy a competence , and crave not 
More wealth , then still desire the wealth we have not 
To wish , what if enjoyed brings molestation , 
Is but mere vanity , and souls vexation . 
10.  

The worldly confluence of treasure can 
Exempt no mortal from the lot of man , 
Nor can his wealth instruct him to withstand 
The angry strokes of the almighty's hand : 
11.  

Since the increase of wealth procured by pain , 
Preserved with fear , with sorrow lost again , 
Increaseth grief in the possessors breast , 
What vantage then hath man to be possessed ? 
12.  

Who knows , what 's good for man in his dull blaze 
Of life , his swift , his shadow flying days ? 
Or who can tell , when his short hour is run , 
Th' event of all his toil beneath the sun ? 
Soliloquy . Vi . 

What meant that great creating power to frame 
This spacious universe ? was not his name 
Glorious enough without a witness ? Why 
Did that corrected twilight of his eye 
Unmuzzle darkness , and with morning light 
Redeem the day from new baptised night ? 
What meant that sacred power to command 
Divorce betwixt united sea and land ? 
Why wrapped he earth ( As yet untouched with showers ) 
In a green robe embroid red all with flowers ? 
What meant the beams of his refulgent eyes 
To print their image in the crystal skies ? 
What princely guests with all their numerous train 
Did he expect ? was he to entertain ? 
That his magnificent , his bounteous hand 
Made such provision both by sea and land ? 
What royal state 's at hand ? what potentate ? 
On whom must all these royal armies wait ? 
Who worthy of so great a preparation , 
Is th' object of such royal expectation , 
What Prince is to be born ? What glorious birth 
Is to be celebrated ? 
Groaning earth 
Brought forth a lump not much above a span , 
A little , naked , puling thing , called man . 
man , a poor shiftless transitory thing , 
Born without sword or shield , not having wing 
To fly from threatening danger , not an arm 
To grapple with these numerous evils that swarm 
About his newborn frailty , warped aside 
From fair obedience to rebellious pride . 
man , in whose frame the great three-one advised , 
And with a studied hand epitomised 
The large , voluminous , and perfect story 
Of all his works ; the manual of his glory : 
man , in whose soul , the all-eternal drew 
The image of himself , for earth to view 
With fear and wonder , in whose sovereign eye 
He breathed the flames of dreadful majesty , 
Filled him with power , entrusted to his hand 
Earth's empire , and the lower world's command ; 
Crowned him with glory , made him little lower 
Then heaven-bred angles that excel in power . 
Oh but my soul , how is that hand ashamed 
Of his own work ! How is this frame unframed ! 
How is this manual blotted ? Every word 
How interlined ? How is this image blurred ? 
How are those sparks of majesty , that were 
So bright , now baffled with degenerous fear ? 
How is that power that was bred and born 
The earth commander , now become the scorn 
Of dunghill passion , shipwrecked with the gust 
Of every fatuous and inferior lust ! 
How is the Sunbright honour of his name 
Eclipsed ! How is his glory clothed with shame ! 
Reflect upon thyself , my soul : inquire 
Into the vastness of thy vain desire : 
What wouldst thou have , which being had ) May fill 
Th' unfathomed gulf of thy insatiate will ? 
Thou levelest at ? A good : Whrrein consists 
The good thou levelest at to what strange lists 
Is her concealed omnipotence confined ? 
Where is this will-commanding saint enshrined ? 
Is not her royal person gone to view 
The mines of Ophir , to the rich Peru ? 
Or is she gone to oil the wings of time 
With unctuous pleasures in some foreign clime ? 
Or is she mounted on the slippery throne 
Of staggering honour , there disguised , unknown ? 
Alas , my soul , if heaven should suit thy store 
With thy desire , then wouldst desire yet more : 
Or if spring tides of gold should a degree 
Transcend thy wish , perchance it would want thee : 
What if a numerous offspring should proclaim 
A perpetuity to th' lasting name ; 
Or if the even-spun twine should be extended 
Till thou couldst number nations all descended 
from thine own loins ; yet , if the sparing hand 
Of wayward providence should chance to brand 
Thy days with poverty , th' abortive birth 
Is more indebted to the gracious earth 
Than thou , whose shadow-grasping hand even tires 
Upon the vanity of the vast desires : 
Nay , if both beau'n and earth should undertake 
T' extract the best from all mankind to make 
One perfect happy man , and thou wert he ; 
Thy finite fortunes still would disagree 
With thy insatiate soul : some q•almeses of earth , 
Hereditary to thy human birth , 
Would print thy pampered soul with such a fresh 
And lively character of feeble flesh , 
That all thy joys ( Do fortune what she can ) 
May not exempt thee from the lot of man . 
Cap. vii . 

1 remedies against vanity , are a good name . 2 mortification 7 patience . 11 wisdom . 23.  The difficulty of wisdom . 

1.  

A good reputed name is sweeter far 
Than breathes of aromatic ointments are : 
And that sad day when first we drew our breath 
Is not so happy as the day of death . 
2.  

Better it is to be a funeral gust , 
Then find the welcomes of a frolic feast : 
There Mayest thou view thy end , and take occasion 
T' enrich thy thoughts with friutful contemplation . 
3.  

Better to cloud thy face with grief , then show 
The lavish wrinkles of a laughing brow ; 
for by the sad demeanour of thine eyes 
The heart 's instructed , and becomes more wise 
4.  

The wise man's sober heart is always turning 
His wary footsteps to the house of mourning ; 
But fools consume , and revel out the night 
In dalliance , and the day in loose delight . 
5.  

The virtue of a wise man's fair reproof , 
Brings greater benefit to a man's behoof , 
Then all those ear-bewitching sweets that can 
Belch from the language of a foolish man . 
6.  

Look how the crackling thorns under the pot 
Blaze for a season , but continue not ; 
Even so do foolish flatteries entertain 
Our souls with joy ; but all that joy is vain . 
7.  

When wisemen turn oppressors , they have cracked 
Their understandings in the very act ; 
And the acceptance of a bribe destroys 
The grounds of judgement , and it blinds her eyes . 
8.  

In all attempts the onset does not lend 
So sweet a satisfaction , as the end : 
And he whose gentle spirit is endowed 
With meekness , is far better than the proud . 
9  

Let not thy hot-mouthed , spirit entertain 
Too sudden passion with too slack a rain ; 
For rash and unadvised anger rests 
Embosom , and abides in foolish breasts . 
10.  

Let not thy murmuring tongue desire to know 
Why former days were not so bad as now ; 
Where heaven declares a will . no wise man's eye 
Should search a cause , or lips inquire a why . 
11.  

Wisdom is profitable to advance 
Man's welfare , joined with inheritance ; 
By this conjunction profit doth arise 
To those that toil beneath the sweltering skies . 
12.  

Wisdome's a guard ; and treasure , a defence 
To supersede our wants , relieved from thence . 
13.  

Wisdom's th' extract of knowledge , and conveys 
To the possessor everlasting days . 
Oh let thy thoughts inquire and understand 
The well-weighed works of the almighty's hand . 
What he hath settled in a crooked state , 
No industry of man can make it straight . 
14.  

In thy good day take pleasure , and be wise ; 
In thy bad day have patience , and advice ; 
For heaven gives both by turns , to let man see 
How alterable earthly pleasures be . 
15.  

Much have i seen in this my short-lived day ; 
Among the rest , the just man snatched away 
In his just works , whilst wicked find success , 
And prosper in their long-lived wickedness . 
16.  

Since then th' upright man's recompense is such , 
Be not too wise , nor righteous over much ; 
Why should they too much righteousness betray 
Thy dangered life , and make thy life a prey ? 
17.  

Nor let the flesh suggest thee , or advise 
Thy thoughts to be too wicked , too unwise . 
Why should thy folly captivate thy breath , 
And make thee prisoner to untimely death ? 
18.  

In all thy courses threfore it is best 
To lodge uprightness in thy constant breast . 
For he that feareth the almighty , shall 
Outwear his evil , or find no evil at all : 
19  

Wisdom affords more strength , more fortifies 
The undejected courage of the wise , 
Then all the twisted power of those that are 
The guides of cities , or their men of war ; 
20.  

Yet is there none beneath the crystal skies 
So just in action , or in word so wise ; 
that doth always good , or hath not been 
Sometimes polluted with the stains of sin . 
21.  

At passion's language stop thy gentle ear , 
Least if thy servant curse thee thou shouldst hear . 
22.  

For often times thy heart will let thee see 
That others like wise have been cursed by thee . 
23.  

This wisdom by my travel i attained 
And in my thoughts conceived that i had gained 
No common height , but on a strict revise 
I found my wisdom came far short of wise . 
24.  

Objects far distant , secrets too profound 
What eye can entertain ; what heart can sound ? 
25.  

I bent my studies heart to search and pry 
Into the bosom of philosophy ; 
I gave myself to understand the art 
Of folly , and the madness of the heart : 
26.  

I found the harlot's ways more bitter are 
Then death , whose arms are begins , whose heart 's a snare 
Whom heaven doth favour shall decline her gates , 
But sinners shall be taken by her baits . 
27.  

Lo this i have observed , ( The preacher says ) 
By strict enquest into their several ways : 
28.  

Whereof my restless , my laborious mind 
Would make discovery , but despairs to find ; 
Among a thousand men perchance that one 
May be traced out , but among women , none . 
29.  

Lo here the fruits of all my disquisition , 
Only to know the devious condition 
Of poor degenerous man , whose first estate 
Heaven copied from himself , upright , and straight . 
Soliloquy vii . 

Since than my soul , the frail and false estate 
Of fading happiness cannot create 
The least contentment in thy various mind , 
Whose fancy-guided motion cannot find 
The point of rest , but like the boiling waves 
Tossed in the storms of earth , sometimes outbraves 
The threatening firmament , then at a breath 
Darts down , and dashes at the doors of death ; 
Since waxen-winged honour is not void 
Of danger , whether aimed at , or enjoyed ; 
Since heart enchanting profit hath not fruit , 
But care , both in fruition , and pursuit ; 
Since pleasure like a wanton itch doth breed 
In the rank flesh , but scratched until it bleed ; 
Since laughter is but madness , and high diet 
Th' officious pander of our own disquiet ; 
Since glorious buildings , and magnific towers , 
Fructiferous orchards , odoriferous bowers ; 
Full clustered vineyards , beauties , and the choice 
Of music both by instrument and voice , 
Can lend thy heart no full content , nor still 
The various clamours of th' insatiate will ; 
Since human wisdom is but human trouble , 
And double knowledge makes our sorrow double ; 
Since what we have but lights our wish to more , 
And in the height of plenty makes us poor ; 
And what we have not , too too apt to crave , 
Even dispossesses us of what we have ; 
Nay since the very act of our devotion 
Can bring no rest , nor qualify the motion 
of our unbounded thoughts , to sweeten out 
This span of frailty , plunged , and orbed about 
With floods of bitterness : since none of these , 
Nor all can crown our labours , nor appease 
Our raging hearts , oh my deceived soul , 
Where wilt thou purchase peace ? Who shall control , 
Who shall suppress those passions that contest 
Within the kingdom of thy troubled breast ? 
Whither ? to what strange region wilt thou fly 
To find content , and balk that vanity 
Which haunts this bubble earth , and makes thee still 
A slave to thy infatuated will ? 
Call home thyself : inspect thyself a new , 
And take thy birthright to a fresh review : 
Thou art immortal ; art divine by birth , 
A spark of heaven ; thou art not born of earth ; 
Earth is the foot stool of thy heavenly throne ; 
Made for thy base parts to trample on . 
Look not so low , my soul , there 's nothing there : 
Fit for thy sacred view ; it is no sphere 
For thee to move in : no , let worms and beasts 
And savage brutes trade there , and lay their gests 
Of progress , to surround with weary paces 
The base confines of those inferior places . 
Ay , but my soul , th' alliance of my flesh 
Claims kindred there , takes pleasure to refresh 
Her wasted body there : earth is her mother , 
The worm her sister , and the beast her brother . 
't is true , she is thy spouse , heaven tied the knot 
For none to loose but heaven : i know her lot 
Is mortal , frail , and being born of earth , 
Corrupt , and wears the badges of her birth . 
If she transgress , it 's thou must bear the blame , 
And all her deeds reflect upon thy name ; 
oh then beware , and if she needs must go 
To visit earth , first , let her frailty know , 
How apt she is to fall , and eke how prone 
To blur , and strain thy honour and her own . 
a name unblemished with the sinful soil 
of sordid earth , is as a precious oil , 
Which like a sovereign antidote prevents 
That plague of vanity which earth presents . 
Then tell her , tell her , that her mother earth 
Must give her burial as she gave her birth : 
Tell her , oh tell her , every gasp of breath 
Are minutes moving to the hour of death : 
And let her know , the house of mourning brings 
More profit than the palaces of Kings : 
Tell her , lessereall happiness doth dwell 
In a full banquet , than a passing-bell . 
Arm her with patience apt to entertain 
Thy wisereproofs : but if her passion reign , 
Correct it wisely : teach her sober eye 
A willing ignorance in things too high 
If liberal earth should chance to crown her store , 
Let her wise modesty receive no more 
Than she can manage ; pilots that are wise 
Proportion out their canvas to the skies . 
Let not her knowledge with the eagle fly , 
Ilulesse her wisdom have an eagles' eye . 
wisdom digests what knowledge did devour , 
Things sweet in taste , are indigested sour . 
In prosperous fortunes let her joy be such , 
That in hard times she May not grieve too much . 
Let her Count wisdom as her chiefest good , 
And the price easy , whether sweat or blood : 
And let the perclose of her thoughts be this , 
To study what man was , and what man is . 
So now my soul , thy will instructed flesh 
May visit earth , and with her sweets refresh , 
Thy wasted spirit , secure from all those ills 
Which threaten ruin to distempered wills : 
Now Mayst thou eat and drink , and make supplies 
For after days , and close thy peaceful eyes 
In calm content , and scape those hidden snares 
That lurk in pleasures , and increase our cares . 
He only takes advantage of his lot , 
That uses earth , as if he used it not . 
Cap. viii . 

1 Kings are greatly to be respected , 6 divine providence is to be observed . 12 it is better with the godly in adversity , then with the wicked in prosperity . 16 the work of God is unsearchable , 

1.  

who 's equal to the wiseman ? who but he 
Can judge of things , or what their natures be : 
Wisdom adorns the cheek with lovely grace ; 
And plants courageous boldness in the face . 
2.  

Let me advise the subjects heart to stand 
Devoted always to the King's command : 
For having sworn allegiance to him , both 
Heaven and thy conscience do attest thy oath . 
3.  

Let not thy discontented haste incite 
Abrupt departure from his awful sight : 
If thou hast erred , continue not in ill , 
For Prince's acts are guided by their will : 
4.  

The potent majesty of a Prince's word 
Is backed and made authentic by the sword : 
What venturous tongue dare question or demand 
The least account from his illustrious hand ? 
5.  

Whose loyal breasts observe the laws of Kings , 
Shall never know the grief rebellion brings : 
The wiseman's heart knows times , and judgement too , 
Not only when to speak , but what to do . 
6.  

For there 's to every purpose among men 
A judgement how to do , a season when , 
Which if mistaken , or not understood , 
Brings so much misery upon flesh and blood . 
7.  

For man is ignorant of what May fall , 
And who is he can tell him when it shall . 
8.  

No man hath power to prolong his breath , 
Or make him shot-free in the day of death : 
there 's no retreat in that sad war , nor can 
Man's wickedness preserve the wicked man . 
9  

All this have i observed , and have given 
My heart to note each action under heaven : 
There was a time when th' oppressors arm 
Oppressed his brother to th' oppressor's harm . 
10.  

So have i seen grave judges ( But unjust ) 
That sat in judgement , honoured to the dust 
Which hide their crimes ; these seemed to obtain 
Some happiness : this happiness is vain . 
11.  

Because a present sentence is not past 
Upon the wicked , their dull hearts at last 
Grow quite obdure ; resolved , and fully bent . 
To act what evils their greedy lusts present . 
12.  

Put case the sinner multiply his crime , 
And his long days , even rust the scythe of time : 
Yet well i know they only shall be blessed , 
That sear th' almighty with a filial breast . 
13.  

Ay , but the wicked shall not scape secure , 
Though he live long , he shall not long endure , 
But like a shadow shall his days appear , 
Because he feared not whom he ought to fear . 
14.  

There is a vanity reigns here below , 
I see the wise man reap what sinners sow , 
And sinners share when just men sow the seed ; 
This grief ( Said i ) all other griefs exceed . 
15.  

Then praised i mirth , and held it the best choice 
Beneath the sun , to eat , and to rejoice : 
For this is all the good , this all the gains 
Is like to cheer our days , and crown our pains . 
16.  

But when i set my busy heart to know 
Wisdom , and heaven's strange working here below : 
( For day and night my studies did deny 
Sleep to mine eyelids , slumbers to mine eye ) 
17.  

Oh than i found his works beneath the sun 
Past finding out ; my fruitless thoughts did run 
This heavenly maze , till they at length concluded , 
Man's wit stoops here ; here wisdom stands deluded . 
Soliloquy viii . 

But stay , my soul ! What language does appear ? 
Am i deceived ? Or did i seem to hear ? 
Which tenet shall i balk ? And which , embrace ? 
Hath truth like Janus , got a double face ? 
Did not that voice , that voted wisdom vain 
But very now , now cry it up again ? 
Shall what was late condemned as a disease , 
Now prove a remedy ? Such slips as these 
Are brands of human frailty , which belong 
To us and ours ; it well be seems our tongue 
To contradict and jangle : error 's known 
By many faces ; truth admits but one : 
How haps it then , that wisdom , whose increase 
Adds to our grief , yet crowns our days with peace ? 
Be not deceived , my soul ; let not one name 
Confound two natures , and make two the same : 
Shall names give natures ? dare thy tongue profess 
An equal privilege to curse and bless 
For one names sake ? No , my deluded soul , 
Sooner May light and Darknese , fair and foul , 
Sooner May good and evil ; nay , heaven and hell 
May sooner startle from their parallel , 
And turn joint-tenants in one perfect line , 
Then these two wisdoms , human and divine . 
That breeds a tumour in the flatuous breast ; 
This lays it : that brings trouble , and this rest : 
That kindles fires , and those fires increase 
To self-contention ; this concludes a peace : 
That dulls the thoughts , suppressed with low desires ; 
This mounts thy soul with more heroic fires : 
That cannot brook the transitory frown 
Of fortune's brow ; this makes a cross a crown : 
That fills thy hopes with froth , and blurs thy youth 
With black-mouthed error ; this directs to truth : 
That scorns advice , and like an own-self lover 
Befools thee ; but this honours the reprover : 
That fears , and flees , or false at every breath 
Of discontent : this triumphs , even in death ; 
That breaks relations , and for private ends , 
Dissolves allegiance , and disbands true friends ; 
This loves society , calls not mine , but ours , 
Yields due obedience to superior powers : 
That pricked by passion rushes into crimes ; 
This backed with reason counsels with the times : 
That gives the name of power ; this the thing : 
That makes a tyrant ; this creates a King : 
That lights thy honour , fading like a blaze ; 
This crowns thy name with everlasting days : 
that breeds a serpent ; this brings forth a dove : 
That works a servile fear ; this filial love : 
That deads' thy spirit ; this makes thee wisely bold : 
That scours thy brass ; but this refines thy gold : 
That fills thy feast with cares ; with fears , thy breast ; 
This makes thy morsel a perpetual feast : 
That cools thy palate , but inflames thy fire ; 
This slakes thy thirst , and satiates thy desire . 
Oh then , my soul , correct that flesh and blood 
That blinds thee so ; and , like a gloomy cloud , 
Thus interposes , and obscurely flies , 
Betwixt the sacred object , and thine eyes : 
Clear up , my soul , and like the eye of day , 
Chastise that peccant darkness , and display 
Those mists of earth , which like false glasses show 
Fanatic figures , and present thy view 
With specious objects , precious in esteem , 
( Alas ) but nothing less , than what they seem . 
Then shall the wisdom of that scarlet whore 
And all her baldpate panders , painted o'er 
With counterfeited holiness , appear 
In her true colours , so that every ear 
That hears her base impostures , and the fame 
Of her lewd piety , shall abhor the name 
Of bloody Rome : then shall the spotted beast 
Put off her golden trappings ; and undressed 
Of all her glory , be turned out to graze 
In uncouth deserts , and consume her days 
With dragons , tigers , and those savage things , 
Now pampered with the blood of saints and Kings . 
Oh then the crooked paths of error , fraud , 
And candle-light devotion , trimed and strawed 
With sweet-lipped roses , shall appear as plain , 
As tide-forsaken rocks along the main . 
Then shall true wisdom , like fair Sheba's Queen , 
Begin her royal progress , and now seen 
In perfect beauty , shall erect her throne 
In every breast , and every Solomon 
Shall court her glory , and entranced in pleasure , 
Shall smell her spices , and divide her treasure . 
Cap. ix. . 

1 like things happen to good and bad . 4.  There is a necessity of death unto men . 7 comfort is all their portion in this jife . 11 God's providence ruleth over all . 13 wisdom is better than strength . 

Vers. 1.  

All this i pondered , and at length i found 
All actions , whether just or wise are crowned 
By secret providence : and no man knows , 
God's love or hate , by blessings or by blows . 
2.  

All haps alike to all ; the same things do 
Befall the righteous and th' unrighteous too . 
Th' unclean , and clean , have here the selfsame pay ; 
And he that prays , and he that doth not pray : 
Alike befalls to good and bad , and both 
To him that swears , and him that fears an oath : 
3.  

It is a grief that grates beneath the sun , 
That like events betide to every one ; 
Which makes the desperate hearts of men to rave 
With mischief , till they drop into the grave . 
4.  

For the ambition of their hopes extend 
But to this life , and with this life they end : 
Better to be a living dog ( They plead ) 
Then to be known a lion that is dead : 
5.  

For they that live know well that they shall die , 
And therefore take their time ; but they that lie 
raked up in deaths cold embers , they know not 
Or good or ill ; their names are quite forgot : 
6.  

They have no friends to love , no foes to hate ; 
They know no virtue to spit venom at ; 
They sell no sweat for gains , nor do they buy 
Pleasure with pains , or trade beneath the sky : 
7.  

Go then , rejoice , and eat : let a full bowl 
Cashier thy cares , and cheer thy frolic soul ; 
What heaven hath lent thee with a liberal hand , 
To serve , and cheer thy frailty up , command . 
8.  

Indulge thy careful flesh with new supply , 
And change of garments of the purest die ; 
Refresh thy limbs , annoyed with sweat and toil , 
With costly baths , thy head with precious oil . 
9  

Delight thyself in thy delicious wife 
All the vain days of thy vain wasting life ; 
Of all the works thy painful hand hath done , 
This , this is all the price beneath the sun . 
10.  

What ere thy hand endeavours , that May gain 
Contentment , spare not either cost or pain ; 
For there 's no hand to work , no power to have , 
No wisdom to contrive within the grave . 
11.  

I find the swift not always win the prize , 
Nor strength of arm the battle , nor the wise 
Grow rich in fortunes , nor the men of skill 
In favour ; all as time and fortune will . 
12.  

Man knoweth not his time ; as fish are 
Snared in the net , birds tangled in the snare , 
So be the sons of men surprised with snares , 
When mischief false upon them unawares . 
13.  

This wisdom have i seen beneath the sky , 
Which wisely weighed , deserves a wise man's eye . 
14.  

There was a little city poorly manned , 
Against which a potent King brought up a band 
of martial strength , besieged it , and withal 
Built mighty bulwarks against her slender wall ; 
15.  

In this half conquered city there was found 
A poor wise man , whose wisdom did confound 
Both them & all the works their strength could plant ; 
Yet no reward relieved this poor man's want . 
16.  

Oh then ( Thought i ) poor wisdom will at length 
Discover greater worth than golden strength ; 
Yet is the poor man's wisdom poorly prized , 
His word 's not heard , or being heard , despised : 
17.  

The whispering wise man's tongue prevaileth more , 
Then when the lips of foolish rulers roar : 
18.  

Prudent advise is more transcendent far , 
Then strength of arm , or instruments of war : 
But rash attempts of a misguided hand 
Defeat themselves , and ruin all the land . 
Soliloquy ix. . 

But ah , my soul , what boots it to be wise ? 
Or what advantage ? what great profit lies 
In a fair journey ? to be well supplied 
With all accoutrements , a knowing guide , 
A mettled steed , a sweet and temperate sky , 
Short miles , and way-beguiling company ; 
When armed death stands ready to attend 
Thy parting stirrup at thy journeys end ? 
Thy wisdom cannot save thee ; has no power 
To keep thee shot-free , or to quit that hour . 
Dull nabals howreglasse runs as slow a pace 
As active Solomons : an equal space 
Divides their minutes ; deaths impartial hand 
Wounds all alike , and death will give no sand . 
What then my soul ? If wisdom should entail 
Our happiness on this life , or fill our sail 
In this wild ocean with perpetual breath , 
When should we find a haven ? if partial death 
Should favour wisdom , and not exercise 
Her office there , 't were misery to be wise : 
The prudent pilot , whose marinall skill 
Makes the proud winds obedient to his will , 
And ploughs the billows with less fear than wrong , 
Takes no delight to make his voyage long ; 
But with his wise endeavours seeks to guide 
His slender pinnace , and to curb the pride 
Of the rebellious waves , and doth address 
His care to crown his voyage with success : 
Our life 's the voyage , and this world the ocean ; 
Our cares are waves tossed in continual motion ; 
Our thoughts are busy winds , that often blow 
Too strong a gale , and tosses to and fro 
Our crazy vessels : every soul does bear 
The office of a pilot , now to steer , 
Now to advise ; and still to lay commands 
Upon th' affection-saylors , whose rude hands 
Are always active , ready to fulfil 
The wise directions of the pilots will . 
It matters not , my soul , how long or short 
Thy voyage be , if safe ; they gain the port 
With best advantage , that in peace arrive 
With ribs unshook ; and all their men alive . 
It lies not in the skilful pilots power 
T' avoid tempestuous seas , but to endure ; 
't is wisdom to endure , as well as do ; 
Who bravely suffers , is victorious too . 
Then cheer , my soul ; let not the frowns of earth 
Disturb thy peace , or interrupt thy mirth : 
let not that rude , that Apogean storm 
Of flesh and blood dismay thee , or deform 
The beauty of thy thoughts , or cast thy mind 
Into a base despondence : let the wind 
Blow were it please , a well-prepared breast 
Will give thee shelter , and afford thee rest . 
When worldly crosses tempt thee , understand 
Heaven tries thy temper then ; if then thou stand 
Upright in court , and of unshaken mind , 
The test approves thee , and thou art refined . 
Then cheer , my soul ; let not the rubs of earth 
Disturb thy peace , or interrupt thy mirth ; 
If heaven hath crowned thy labours with success , 
Enjoy it freely ; eat and drink , and bless 
The gracious giver ; let thy soul rejoice 
And take a cheerful pleasure in the choice 
Of all delights ; and what his bounty gave 
With a free hand , fear not thou to receive 
With a free heart : refresh thy fainting head 
with precious oils , and change thy careful bread 
To feasts of joy ; or if a cross should greet 
Thy frolic soul , March bravely on , and meet 
Adversity half way ; and with a heart 
Too great for earth to wrong , shake hands and part . 
Cheer then my soul ; let not the rubs of earth 
Disturb thy peace , or interrupt thy mirth : 
Go , sweeten up thy labours and thy life 
With fresh delights : rejoice thee in the wife 
And partner of thy bosom ; let her breast 
Suffice thee as the centre of thy rest : 
Deny thy heart no pleasure , that May lie 
Within the lawful limits of thine eye . 
take time while time shall serve ; to morrow May 
Be none of ours ; come , come , be wise to day ; 
and teach thy labours to bestow their sorrow 
On those that practice to be fools to morrow . 
Cap. x.  

1 observations of wisdom and folly . 16 of riot , 18 slothfulness , 19 and money . 20 men's thoughts of Kings ought to be reverenced . 

Vers. 1.  

Look how dead flies ( Thoughfew in number ) soil , 
Corrupt and putrefy the purest oil : 
Even so a little folly stains his fame 
Whom fair repute for wisdom lends a name . 
2.  

A wise man's heart is placed at his right hand , 
His plots and counsels are of strong command ; 
But hearts of fools are weak and rash , bereft 
Of sage advice ; their hearts are at their left . 
3.  

Nay , if their steps but measure out the way , 
Their garb , their looks , their language do betray 
Their folly , read by whomsoe'er they meet ; 
Themselves proclaim their selves in every street . 
4.  

If thy superior happen to incense 
His jealous wrath at thy supposed offence , 
Do thou thy part and yield , for yielding slakes 
The raging flame , that great transgression makes . 
5.  

I see an evil beneath the sun that springs 
From error , reigning in the breasts of Kings : 
6.  

Fools are made statesmen , & command at court , 
And men of parts are made the lower sort . 
7.  

So have i seen proud servants mounted high 
On lordly steeds , and Lords to lackey by . 
8.  

He that shall dig a pit , that shall prepare 
A snare , shall be ensnared in his own snare . 
And he that tramples down a hedge shall meet 
A serpent to salute his trampling feet . 
9  

He that shall shake a stone-compacted wall , 
Shall undergo the danger of the fall : 
Who undertakes to cleave the knotty oak , 
Shall be a painful partner in the stroke : 
10.  

But if th' unwhetted edge be blunt , the arm 
Must give more strength , & so receive more harm ; 
But if he challenge wisdom for his guide , 
Wisdom will do , what painful strength denied . 
11.  

The rash reproving mouth of fools are armed 
Like unenchaunted serpents , if not charmed . 
12.  

The wise man's words are gracious , where they go , 
But foolish language doth themselves o'erthrow . 
13.  

Folly brings in the prologue with his tongue , 
Whose epilogue is rage and open wrong . 
14.  

The fool abounds in tongue , there 's none can know 
What his words mean , or what he means to do . 
15.  

The tedious actions of a fool doth try 
The patience of the weary slander by ; 
Because his weakness knows not how to lay 
His actions posture in a civil way . 
16.  

Woe to the land , whose Princes wisdom sways 
The sceptre , in the nonage of her days ; 
And whose grave rulers , that should haunt the seat 
Of sacred justice , rise betime to eat . 
17.  

Blessed art thou o land , when as thy King 
Derives his royal blood from th' ancient spring 
Of majesty , and rulers timely diet 
Serves to maintain their strength , & not their riot . 
18.  

By too much slothfulness the building false 
Into decay , and ruin strikes her walls , 
And through the sluggish posture of his hand 
The weather-beaten house forgets to stand : 
19  

Who eats and drinks and frolicks , uncontrolled , 
Maintaining riot with his wanton gold . 
20.  

Curse not the King , nor them that bear the sword , 
No , not in thought , tho thought express no word ; 
The fowls of heaven shall vent such hideous things , 
And swift report shall fly with secret wings . 
Soliloquy x.  

But ah , my soul ! How closely folly cleaves 
To flesh & blood ! How mongrel nature weaves 
Wisdom and folly in the selfsame loom , 
Like web and woof , whereby they both become 
One perfect web to clothe our imperfections 
With linsey-woolsey , and our mixed affections 
With foolish wisdom ! Oh how full of earth 
Was our first ore , which at our sinful birth 
Was taken from the womb ; now purified 
In sacred fires , and more than seven times tried 
In sharp afflictions furnace ; yet how base 
Our bullion is ! not worthy of the face 
That makes us currant ; oh how apt and prone 
Is flesh and blood to fall , if let alone 
But one poor minute ! Most in danger then 
To be surprised and foiled with folly , when 
Our bold presumption tempts our thoughts to prize 
Our wisdoms overmuch , and seem too wise . 
How one rash action ; oh how one dead fly 
Embalmed in thy sweet oil does putrefy 
Thy box of spikenard ! how it casts a shame 
Upon the beauty of thy honoured name ! 
Oh then , my soul , take heed to keep thy heart 
At thy right hand ; there , there she will impart 
continual secrets , and direct thy ways 
In sacred ethics , sweetening out thy days 
With seasoned knowledge , knowledge past the reach 
Of black-mouthed error , shall instruct and teach 
Thy tongue wise silence ; wisdom when to break 
Thy closed lips , and judgement how to speak : 
she 'll teach thee Christian policy , and how 
To keep thee safe when as thy Prince's brow 
Shall threaten death , even when the flame shall fly 
Like horrid lightning from his wrathful eye . 
Ay , but the rage of Princes oftentimes 
Darts lightning at the person , not his crimes ; 
And their misguided will oft times demands 
Obedience there , where conscience countermands . 
Take heed , my soul ; thou treadest upon the ice , 
Be not too venturous here , nor too too nice : 
Rush not too bold ; thou Mayst as soon convince 
An error in thy conscience , as thy Prince . 
To lay commands upon ind•fferent things , 
Is a sole royalty belongs to Kings . 
If here thy conscience doubt , the book of life 
Must cast the balance , and decide the strife : 
If this way , thy enforced obedience then 
Must stoop ; if that , please rather God than men . 
If th' embers of his rage should chance to lie 
Raked up , or furnace from his angry eye , 
quit not thy duty : 't is thy part t' assuage 
The jealous flames of his consuming rage . 
What , if through error or misguided will 
He leaves the way to good , and cleaves to ill ; 
Lend him thy prayers ; lament , advise , persuade , 
Lift not thy hand , nor let thy tongue upbraid 
His sacred person ; he 's by heaven appointed 
To be thy Prince ; oh touch not heavens anointed . 
What , if he lend the fullness of his power 
To those imperious spirits that devour 
Subjects like bread , and drink the loyal blood 
Of men like water ; men , not once allowed 
To plead for life ; but silently subscribe 
To those that cannot judge without a bribe ? 
What , if his power pleases to commit 
His pastoral staff to such as are more fit 
To kill and eat , or recommend his flocks 
To such dumb dogs , of whom nor wolf nor fox 
Will stand in awe , or show their fears by flight , 
That have not tongues to bark , nor teeth to bite ? 
Rebel not thou , nor in a hostile way 
Accost thy Prince ; or suffer or obey . 
What if the common favourite of the times 
( The courtly fool , grown great with countenance climbs ) 
Up to a lordship , when the man of merit 
Broke on the wheel of fortune must inherit 
Nothing but scorn and want ; and a poor name 
Betrayed to pity , and to empty fame ? 
Be thou thyself , let not thine eye be evil : 
To a wise heart both hills and dales are level . 
How happy is that land , how blessed the nation 
Whose Prince directs by power , not by passion ? 
Whose sacred wisdom knows how great a price 
True virtue bears , and how to punish vice ; 
Whose royal majesty , and princely love 
Can both incorporate , and jointly move 
In a self glorious orb , and from one sphere 
Breathe such rare influence of love , and fear 
Into the hearts of men , that all the land 
Shall cry a Solomon , and sweetly stand 
Rapt with sweet peace , and sacred admiration : 
How happy is that land , how blessed the nation ! 
Cap. ii  

1 directions for charity . 7 death in life , 9 and the day of judgement in the days of youth , are to be thought on . 

Vers. 1.  

Upon the waters let thy bread be cast , 
And thou shalt find it when some days are past . 
2.  

Give liberal alms , for it 's unknown to thee 
How full of wants thy after days shall be . 
3.  

If clouds be full , will they deny to power 
Their fruitful blessings in a liberal shower ? 
Or North , or South , or wheresoever the tree 
Shall fall , no question it shall fall to thee . 
4.  

He that observes the wind shall never sow : 
Who marks the clouds shall never reap nor mow . 
5.  

Like as the embryo's growth within their wombs , 
Is strange to thee , and how the soul becomes 
The body's inmate , even so all the rest 
Of heavens' high works are strangers to thy breast . 
6.  

Cast thou thy morning seed upon the land , 
And at the evening hold not back thy hand ; 
For who is he can tell thee which of these 
Shall prosper best , or bring the best increase ? 
7.  

't is true , the light is sweet , and every one 
Takes pleasure in the world-rejoycing sun : 
8.  

But who lives many joyful years , if he 
But Count how long his after shades shall be 
In earth's dark bosom , how can he refrain 
To think these short-lived flattering pleasures vain ? 
9  

Rejoice , o young man in thy youthful ways ; 
Let thy heart cheer thee in thy youthful days , 
delight thine eyes , thy heart , and take thy way ; 
But know that heaven's account will find a day . 
10.  

Then banish false-eyed mirth : be dispossessed 
Of those lewd fires that so inflame thy breast ; 
For childhood , youth , and all their joys remain 
But for a season , and they all are vain . 
Soliloquy xi . 

So now my soul , thy wisdom-seasoned breast 
May eat and drink , and labour , and digest 
Thy careful morsels , and with holy mirth 
Disperse the clouds of melancholy earth : 
Now Mayst thou sit beneath thy clustered vine , 
And press thy grapes , and drink thy frolic wine 
In soft and plenteous peace , and leave tomorrow 
To bear the burden of her selfe-borne sorrow : 
Now Mayst thou walk secure from all those threats 
Of peevish fortune , and the sly deceits 
Of flattering pleasure : plenty cannot drown 
Thine eyes in mirth , nor misery cast thee down : 
If the blue rafters of the falling skies 
Should leave their spangled mansion , and surprise 
Thy feeble strength , well May their ruins smite thee ; 
And grind thy clod to dust , but not affright thee . 
What wantest thou then , my soul , that May augment 
The real happiness of a true content ? 
What virtue 's wanting now , whose absence May 
Encourage boldfaced vanity to betray 
Thy even-spun days to sorrow ; or occasion 
Thy fair-contrived designs to taste vexation ? 
Wouldst thou have honour ? thou enjoyest it : treasure ? 
Thou hast it : wouldst thou gain the greater pleasure 
of a true noble spouse ; whose life May show 
Virtues rare quintessence ? Thou hast that too : 
Wouldst thou have hopeful sons to crown thy last 
With peace and honour ? Such rare sons thou hast : 
Thy Prince's favour ? Or thy people's love ? 
All this thou hast ; wisdom in things above ? 
Thou hast it : knowledge in these toys beneath ? 
Thou hast it : skill in th' arts ? or curious breath 
Of whispering state ? all this thou hast : where , then , 
Shall thy new wishes •ix , rare man of men ? 
Ay , but my soul , one good is wanting still 
To sum a full perfection , and to fill 
Thy Cruise with happiness : which if possessed , 
Thou hast a diadem , crowns all the rest : 
Hadst thou the tongues of men , and couldst thou break 
Thy lips in oracles ; or couldst thou speak 
The dialects of angels when they sing 
Their sacred canzons to their sovereign King , 
a tinkling cymbal , or the hideous sounds 
Of discomposed discords , or the rounds 
Of frolic midnight madness would requite 
Thy wild attention with as much delight , 
And breathe as sweetly in the almighty's ear 
If heart-rejoicing charity be not there : 
Hadst thou what strength the Parnassean muse 
Can bless thy fancy with , or heaven infuse ; 
Hadst thou a faith to make the mountains fly 
In the vast orb , like atoms in thine eye ; 
Less than those atoms would thy faith appear , 
If faith-confirming charity be not there : 
Shouldst thou , to purchase heaven , renounce thy right 
Of all thy goods , and turn an anchorite ; 
Or should thy courage , to deserve the name 
Of martyr , give thy body to the flame , 
when that blood pleads , heaven will not lend an ear 
If heau'n-engaging charity be not there . 
Since then , my soul , both faith and works lie dead 
If charity fail , be wise , and cast thy bread 
upon the waters ; as the waters run 
Deal thou thy dole , until thy dole be done . 
man is God's husbandry ; if then the plough 
Of careful want hath struck the furrowed brow , 
And make it fit for seed ; hold not thy hand ; 
He robs himself that faintly sows the land : 
Stay not for showers ; the soil , if overflown , 
Will drown thy seed-corn , and return thee none : 
Let not some weeds discourage thee to sow , 
The plough will root them up ; or if they grow 
Too sturdy for the coulters' point to kill , 
Fear not thy harvest ; a hard winter will . 
Cast not lank grain upon too lean a ground , 
Fair crops from off all corn are rarely found . 
Sow closely what thou sowest , and least in sight , 
The eyes of doves will make thy harvest light : 
But stay ! Thou Mayst surcharge as well as starve 
The soil ; but wise men know what seed will serve : 
Thy work thus wisely done ; what , then , remains ? 
Give heaven the glory , and expect the gains . 
Cap. xii . 

1 the creator is to be remembered in due time . 8 the preachers care to edify . 13 the fear of God is the chief antidote of vanity . 

Remember thy creator in thy prime 
Of present youth , before the black-mouthed time 
of sullen age approach ; before the day 
Thy dying pleasures find a dull decay ; 
2.  

Before the sun , and moon , and stars appear 
Dark in thy microcosmall hemisphere ; 
3.  

Before the clouds of sorrows multitiply , 
And hide the crystal of the gloomy sky ; 
Before the keepers of thy crazy tower 
Be palsie-striken , and thy men of power 
Sink as they March , and grinders cease to grind 
Distasteful bread , and windows are grown blind . 
4.  

Then shall the castles two-leafd gates be barred 
When as the millstones language is not heard ; 
The horn-mouth Belman shall affright thy slumbers , 
Thy untuned ear shall loath harmonious numbers : 
5.  

Each obvious molehill shall increase thy fears , 
And careful snow shall blanch thy falling hairs ; 
A fly shall load thy shoulders : thy desire 
And all thy bedrid passions shall expire . 
Pale death 's at hand , and mourners come to meet 
Thy tear-bedabled fun'rals in the street . 
6.  

Then shall the sinews silver cord be loosed , 
Thy brains gold bowl be broke : the undisposed 
And idle liver 's fountain dried ; 
The bloods meandring cisterns unsupplied . 
7.  

Then shall the dust her dust to dust deliver , 
Whose spirit shall return to God the giver . 
8.  

Whereto th' ecclesiastic thus replies , 
All , all is vain , and vainest vanities . 
9  

Because his true repentant soul was wise , 
He read this wisdom-lecture , did advise 
And search the fountain , whence he did convey 
The fruitful streams in a proverbial way . 
10.  

He sought and found such words , which had the might 
To entermingle profit with delight ; 
and what his spirit-prompted pen did write 
Was truth itself , and most exact upright . 
11.  

The wise man's words are like to goads , that do 
Stir up the drowsy , and spur up the slow : 
And like to nails to be made fast and driven 
By hands to th' hearts of men sent down from heaven . 
12.  

Make use , my son , of what this hand hath penned , 
There is no end of pamphlets to no end ; 
These tire the flesh , and after age is spent , 
They breathe some knowledge , but no true content . 
13.  

Mark then the ground where the main building stands , 
fear thou thy God , observe his just commands . 
Within the limits of this sacred ground 
Man's duty lies ; true happiness is found : 
14.  

No work shall pass untried : no hand hath done 
What shall not plead at heaven's tribunal throne : 
All secrets good and bad attend his eye ; 
His eyes behold where day could never pry . 
deus his quoque finem . 
Soliloquy xii . 

Now launch , my soul , into this sea of tears ; 
Fear storms and rocks , yet smile upon thy fears ; 
Weigh anchor ; hoist thy weather-beaten sails ; 
The tides run smooth ; the wind breathes prosperous gales . 
Tridented Neptune now hath struck a peace 
With full-mouthed Aeolus , and the wars surcease : 
They sound a parley , and begin to treat , 
And Sea-green Triton sounds a shrill retreat . 
March now , my soul , through Hadadrimmons vale 
Without a tear ; or if thou must bewail , 
Mourn for vain earth , and drop in alms one tear 
For him that finds no happiness but there . 
Now Mayst thou trample on the asp , and tread 
On the young lion , and th' old dragon's head ; 
Wisdom shall guide thee , love shall circumclose thee , 
That fraud shall not beguile , or force oppose thee . 
Thy Prince shall honour thee , thy peers embrace thee ; 
No crime shall shame thee , & no tongue disgrace thee ; 
The rich shall reverence thee , the poor shall bless thee ; 
Wrath shall not overrule , nor pride oppress thee ; 
Thy want shall not afflict , nor wealth betray thee , 
This shall not puff thee up , nor chat dismay thee : 
Pleasure shall not ensnare , nor pains torment thee , 
This shall not make thee sad , nor that repent thee . 
Blessed shall thy labours be , and sweet thy rest ; 
Blest shall thy thoughts be , and thy actions blessed ; 
Blessed in thy peace , and blessed in thy promotion ; 
Blessed in thy sports , and blessed in thy devotion ; 
Blessed in thy losses , blessed in thy increases ; 
Blessed in thy health , and blessed in thy diseases ; 
Blessed in thy knowledge , blessed in thy corrections ; 
Blessed in thy soul , and blessed in thy affections . 
Oh then , my soul , let thy affections flow 
In streams of love to him that loved thee so ; 
Let not his high-prized benefits depart 
From thy remembrance , grave them in thy heart 
With tools of adamant , that they May last 
To aftertimes , that when thy days be past , 
Thy well-instructed children May emblaze 
Thy maker's goodness to the last of days . 
Bless thou the Lord , my soul ; let thy whole frame , 
And all within thee magnify that name 
that blessed thee so ; bless thou the Lord , my soul , 
Report his precious favours , and enroll 
His numerous mercies in thy grateful breast : 
remember thy creator ; oh protest 
His praises to the world , and let thy tongue 
Make him the subject of thy youthful song ; 
Give him the firstlings of thy strength , even than 
When fading childhood seeks to ripen man 
Upon the downy cheeks ; when vigour trains 
The sparkling blood through thy meandring veins ; 
Before thy flowing marrow shall foment 
Thy lust full fires ; before the false content 
Of frothy pleasures shall begin t' invite 
Thy fond affections to a vain delight . 
Then , then , my soul , whilst thy supplies are fresh 
And strong , wage war with thy rebellious flesh ; 
Gird up thy loins , and March , spare neither sweat 
Nor blood , take courage , strike , subdue , defeat : 
Sing a triumphant song , sing Io Paean ; 
Adorn thy brows with palm , and again sing Io Paean . 
Take time while time shall serve ; 't is thine to day , 
But secret danger still attends delay . 
Do while thou Mayst ; to day has eagle wings , 
And who can tell what change to morrow brings ? 
Advantage wastes , and strength of body wears , 
Life has no lease ; and youth , no term for years : 
When creeping age shall quench thy sprightly fires , 
And breathe cold winter on thy chill desires , 
What fire shall burn thy offerings ? Oh what praise 
Can issue forth from cold decrepit days ? 
When ebbing bloods neap-tides shall strike thy limbs 
With trembling palsies ; when dry age bedims 
The optic sunshine of thy bedrid days , 
What boots thy cold , thy paralytic praise ? 
When secret ulcers shall attaint thy breath 
With fumes more noisome than the sinks of death , 
What pleasure shall thy great creator raise 
From thy breath tainted , and unsavoury praise ? 
Come then , my soul , rouse up thy dull desire , 
And quicken thy faint coals of sacred fire , 
That lie raked up in th' embers of thy flesh ; 
Fetch breath from heaven , & with that breath refresh 
Thy glim'ring sharks : brook not the least delay , 
Embers grow cold , and sparks will soon decay . 
The end . 

In obitum viri clarissimi , atque ingeniosissimi poëtae , francisci Quarles , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} 

ay Cygne felix , ocyùs avola , 
Cantator ales , cùm neque jam vada 
Ripis supersint , nec quietae 
Purus aquae fluat ( Ecce ! ) rivus ; 
Fontes nec ipsi : sanguine , sanguine 
( Heu ! cuncta manant ; quod mare civicae 
Non decolorauêre caedes ? 
Ipsa , vides , rubet Hippocrene . 
Et quis poëtis jam locus aut latex ? 
Quae lympha musis ? cùm cruor undique . 
Hinc , hinc migrandum , ni bibemus 
Purpureas Heliconis undas . 
At o camaenarum & dolor & decus ; 
Tu si recedas , quis tua funera 
Cantabit , o divine vates ? 
Quo moritur moriente Phoebus . 
Quisquámne fundet jam querulum melos ? 
( Falsum nec omen nominis hoc tui ; ) 
Moestúmve panget carmen art• , 
Melpomenes citharâ canorus ? 
Quis sertacoelojam dabit ? aut pium 
Emblema texet floribus ingenî ? 
Quis symbolorum voce pictâ 
Vnà oculos animúmque , pascet ? 
Quis melle puro jam , calami potens , 
Condîta promet dia poëmata ? 
Aut funditabit , grande , sacro 
Enthea metra calens furore ? 
Quis sanctitatem nectáre carminis 
Tinctam propinans , digna deo canet ? 
Coelúmque , versu claudet omni , 
Atque fidem fidibus sonabit ? 
Tu nempe litem , si pote , publicam 
Compescuisses dulcisonis modis , 
Ni laeva nobis mens , & orbi 
Harmoniam reducem dedisses . 
Mollîsse magnos tu poter as deuces , 
Fer as ut Orpheus flexanimis sonis ; 
Pacémque pulsam , júsque mundo , a• 
Eurydicen retulisse cantu . 
Per te coîssent dissita pectora , 
Per te coîssent diruta moenia : 
Tu solus Amphion peri•us 
Vel lapides sociare plectro . 
Postquàm hoc negatum ; ponere nover as 
Emblema saltem flebile seculi , 
Bellique : nostris sed nec ullum 
Par hieroglyphicum ruinis . 
Quando ergo te nec terra capit , tuis 
Nec digna musis ; i , pete coelites , 
Intérque coetus angelorum 
Perpetuum modulare carmen . 
Jacobus Duport , graecae linguae professor cantab.  

An elegle upon the famous poet Francis Quarles . 

Is Quarles dead ? his active spirit flown 
And none to lend a tear , a sigh , a groan , 
For the world's loss ? methinks at least all eyes 
( Since tongues can not ) should weep large elegies . 
Expect no muses ; for they at his death 
Compassionate , lost their poetic breath . 
Expect no marble tomb ; he 's above fate ; 
His name ( If learning live ) shall know no date : 
His issue shall survive posterity , 
This age and th' next , and so t' eternity . 
Peruse his fancies , and his emblems wrapped ; 
And see s. Paul into the third heavens rapt : 
Or else some cherubin sent down from thence 
T' unfold heavens mysteries in heaven's eloquence . 
A poet-saint he was , in him each line 
Speaks out at large rare poet , choice divine . 
His message done , he flies unto his maker , 
Of what he told us here , to be partaker . 
His prisoned soul was so harmonious here ; 
Now loose , what music , think you , makes she there ! 
She wept , then sung ; now sung ,  Gain wept in rhyme : 
Her rests now know no stop , her joy no time . 
Her fancy vision is , she now doth live 
With angel's food , knowledge intuitive . 
By emblems dark to spell the deity 
She taught before , now sees divinity . 
But stay my muse : the clouds do interpose 
'Twixt thee and her ; 't is better for thee close , 
Then pierce , or peep too far . Phoebus is set ; 
 've paid thy tribute light , thy tribute heat , 
Sigh out the rest : or wouldst thou to him go , 
Thy love , thy life ? Go be entombed too . 
R. stable . 

Finis . 





vide psal. 31. ver. 7.  & 20.  i have hated them that hold of superstitious vanities : and my trust hath been in the Lord . let the lying lips be put to silence : which cruelly , disdainfully , and despitefully speak against the righteous . 

postscript . 

vers. 9  vers. 8  vers. 2  vers. 16  vers. 18  vers. 17  vers. 16  

vers. 1  vers. 2  vers. 3  vers. 4  vers. 5  vers. 6  vers. 12  vers. 13  vers. 15  vers. 24  

vers. 1  vers. 4  vers. 8  vers. 4  vers. 8  vers. •• vers. •• vers. 19  vers. 22  

vers. 4  vers. 1  vers. 5  vers. 8  vers. 9  vers. 13  vers. 2  vers. 3  

vers. 1  vers. 2  vers. 4  

vers. • vers. 2  vers. 3  vers. 5  vers. 7  

vers. 1  vers. 2  vers. 3  vers. 8  vers. 10  vers. 11  vers. 12  vers. 14  vers. 25  vers. 29  

chap. 1. 18  chap. 8. 1.  

vers. 2  vers. 8  vers. 9  vers. 10  

vers. 1  vers. 2  vers. 4  vers. 4  vers. 6  vers. 17  

vers. 1  vers. 6  

vers. 6  vers. 3  vers. 2  
















































