A sermon touching the use of human learning , preached in mercers-chapel , at the funeral of that learned gentleman , M   John Langley , late schoolmaster of Paul's school in London , on the 21 day of September , 1657.  

By ed Reynolds , d. d.  

London , printed by t. n. for George Thomason at the rose and crown in Paul's churchyard , 1658.  

To the honourable Sir Henry Yeluerton , baronet . 

Sir , 

There i• none amongst all my ••ble friends unto whom the ded•cation of this sermon doth more properly be long , then unto yourself . For •esides that debt of honour which i owe to •our family , not only for the favors received from yourself , but from your noble father and grandfather , n•w with God ; when i consider the ve•y great love , and high esteem which your father did bear to that good man , at whose funeral this sermon was preached ▪ unto whose care •e in••usted the two •ropss of his family , yourself , and your most hopeful brother ( Whom God took from that school to a celestial academy ▪ ) and with all , your own hereditary possession of the same love and esteem , as a grateful return unto this learned man for his special care in your education ; and when i further remember the noble thoughts and singular honour which this worthy man ever had towards your father , yourself , and all the relations of your family ; it was not possible for me to look further for a name to inscribe before this small book . I have therefore assumed the boldness to put so poor a testimony of those honourable affections which i owe unto you , and of that great love which i bear to the nam• of that good man , who was so dear unto you , into your hands ; as knowing withal how much the argument of this sermon would be acceptable unto you , who can experimentally subscribe to the excellency and use of that learning which it pleadeth for , and as an eye and ear witness can attest the character of that worthy pe•son , to whose obsequ•es this last office of love was performed . My hearty prayer for you unto God is , that he will crown all those great blessings which he hath bestowed upon you , with  more abundant greatness of his heavenly grace , tha• you May be eminently serviceable to his great name , and May so tread in the steps of your worthy progenitors ( Which i persuade myself you do ) as not only to keep up the life and power of godliness in your own heart , and family , but further to be a comforter , countenancer , and encourager ( As they were ) both of learned and godly ministers , and of others who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity . To his gracious protection and blessing i commend you , and all yours , desiring to be esteemed 

Your most faithful and humble servant ed. Reynolds . 

A sermon touching the use of human learning . 

Acts 7.22 . 

And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians , and was mighty in words and in deeds . 



In the former chapter we read of a dispute between Stephen , and the members of a certain synagogue in Jerusalem , called the synagogue of the libertines , of such Jews , who having been servants to the Romans , were manumitted and made free ; for such the Romans called libertines ; of which sort of Jews , coming out of several parts of the world that college or convention seemeth to have been made up . Or , as Grotius supposeth , was built by them at Jerusalem for their countrymen and proselytes , as there are at Rome and Rheims colleges for English Papists . 

the issue of this disputation was , that being worsted at arguments , these libertines do betake themselves to calumnies , and false accusations , as the Pharisees when their reasons were spent , were wont to take up stones to throw at Christ . They bring him from a scholastical to a judicial defence , from the •olledge to the council , and by false witnesses charge him with blasphemy against Moses and God . whereupon , being pro forma , permitted to make his defence ( For persecutors will manage their cruelties under a form of law , that they May appear the more specious ) he doth it largely with much wisdom and courage . 

The scope of the sermon is to show ( Upon a fair issue with his accusers ) that he was not guilty of the charge given in against him , that it did not follow , because he affirmed that Christ would destroy the temple , and change the customs which M•ses deliu•red , that therefore he blasphemed either Moses or God ; the argument of his justification , is by an historical induction . 1.  If Abraham , Isaak , Jacob ▪ and Joseph worshipped God without a temple , and without such customs as Moses delivered , and Moses did without blasphemy against them , make that alteration which God was pleased to command him to make : then the worship of God is not peremptorily confined to an outward temple , or a mo•aical ministration . But Abraham , Isaak , Jacob and Joseph by obeying the commands and believing the promises of God , did acceptably worship him without a •emple or mosaical ceremonies ; therefore it is no blasphemy to say that God May so be worshipped . 2.  Again , if Moses , a great , a learned , a mighty ruler and deliverer , did assure the persons that a prophet God would raise who should do as he had done , make new institutions , and set up a more excellent way of worship , than it was no blasphemy against Moses or God , to say , that 〈◊〉 customs by him introduced should be by that prophet altered . But Moses himself did teach the persons thus to believe : therefore Stephen teaching the same did not blaspheme Moses . 3.  Again , that which was not blasphemy to affirm of the tabernacle , though it were set up by God's special appointment unto Moses , is not blasphemy to affirm of the temple . But it was not blasphemy to affirm the use of the tabernacle to have been temporary , and consequently alterable ; therefore to affirm the same of the temple is not blasphemy . Especially , since the Lord hath said , that he dwelleth not in temples made with hands . 

Together with these strong arguments are interwoven apologetical reprehensions ; Stephen justifying himself against their accusations now , by the same argument whereby Moses was to be justified against their fathers before . Moses did by wonders and signs in Egypt , in the red sea , in the wilderness prove himself to be a ruler and judge sent of God , and yet your fathers would not obey but thrust him from them , and made a calf to worship . Now the Lord hath raised up the prophet whom Mose• foretold , who by signs and wonders did prove himself to be of God , but you thrust him from you , and resist the holy ghost as your fathers did . and your refusing of Jesus is no more argument against his doctrine and institutions , than their refusing of Moses , was an argument against his . In as much as you are not able to allege any thing why your fathers should have believed Moses , which we are not able to allege , why you ought 〈◊〉 to believe Christ . 

Unto this strong defence of Stephen , neither the judges nor his accusers make any reply by way of argument ; but though he professed himself to be at that time an eye witness of the truth of Jesus his being in glory , yet in a rage and outcry they cast him out of the city and stoned him . the stronger were his arguments for the truth , the more excessive was their malice against him for it . 

The words of the text are a branch of the second argument , drawn from the testimony of Moses , and the historical narration touching him : and they contain the fruit which followed upon the noble education , which he received from the hand and care of Pharaoh's daughter ; he so prospered under it , that he became learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians , and was a mighty man both for oratory and action . the Lord by these civil accomplishments fitting him in part for the government whereunto he reserved him . 

In the words we have first , his intellectual perfections . he was learned and instructed , together with the object of that learning , all the wisdom of the Egyptians . 

Secondly , his civil , moral and religious perfections ; a mighty man for elocution , a mighty man for action . he improved and put forth his intellectual abilities for the good and service of others , laid up all his power to do good to his brethren , in due time when God should call him thereunto . 

Moses was learned , or instructed and instituted . It noteth acquired knowledge , by the benefit of learned education . in all the wisdom of the Egyptians ; that nation was anciently famous for wisdom : from thence some think that the Grecians derived their learning ; for we read in Diodorus s•culus , and others , that Orpheus , Homer , Pythagoras , Plato , Lycurgus , Solon , and others did travel into Egypt for institution . but Cadmus who first brought letters into Greece , was a phanitian , as Eusebius , and after him other learned men have fully proved . Therefore from the Egyptians the Greeks did not primitively derive their learning . What this wisdom of the Egyptians was , wherein Moses was learned , is by Philo in the life of Moses , by Diodorus Siculus , lib. 1. c. 2.  By Sixtus Senensis , biblioth. lib. 2. and others described , viz. mathematics , astronomy , geometry , arithmetic , music , natural philosophy , physic , symbolical , and hieroglyphical writing , civil and political knowledge , for which that persons seemeth to have been famous , isa. 19.11 — 14.  

I shall not here inquire into the most ancient rise or original of learning , or seat thereof , which some carry beyond the flood , and tell us of pillars with Hebrew inscriptions and characters set up by Enoch and Seth ; nor shall i inquire whence the Egyptians derived their learning , which some ascribe to Joseph and the persons of the Jews living there : others to Abraham , of whose being in Egypt we read , gen. 12.10 . It is sufficient for us to know , that at this time there was learning there , and that Moses was brought up and proved excellent in it . 

Now we May here observe , first , the great care of the King's daughter to bring up Moses in in all kind of good literature , that thereby he Might be fit for such great services , as his so near relation to a Prince's court Might probably have brought him unto . And truly so great hath been the care of w•se heathens in this particular ( As we read of the Lacedæmonians , Persians' , and others ) as May justly put to shame many Christians , who breed up their children many times so loosely , so ignorantly , so sensually , to gaming , sporting and excess , as if an inheritance did serve to no other purpose but to make the heir of it useless , and good for nothing . And as we see many times good ground grow moss• and barren for want of culture ; so is it with good wits , which being neglected do usually become more vicious than those of less hope and pregnancy . The foundations of an honourable and comfortable age are laid in the minority of children ; if the plant be not kept strait at first , the tree will be crooked incurably at the last . No doubt but David had special care of the education of Solomon ; for quickness of parts , without special culture would hardly have arrived at so great a pitch of learning , especially in a disposition , as the event proved , by nature sensual enough , and therefore he maketh mention both of his fathers and his mothers teaching him , prov. 4.1.31.1 . It is as great a folly to lay up estates for children , and to take no care of themselves who must enjoy them , as to be curious for an handsome shoe , and then to put it upon a gouty f•ot . 

And the greater men are , the greater should their care be for free and honourable , learned and religious education of their children . First , because it is a very incongruous mixture , greatness of estate , and meanness of understanding ; the one will be a perpetual blemish and reproach unto the other . Secondly , because there will be the more fuel of lust , if learning and piety be not laid up to season a full estate . We see nothing grow upon a fat heap of muck , but weeds and trash : therefore we find what great care Theodosius had to have a good tutor to shape the minds and manners of his children the famous Arsenius , and Josephus telleth us that Moses had a special care of the education of children in good literature , and we find some evidence of it in the scripture , where he commandeth the persons to teach the words of the law diligently unto their children , deut. 6.7 . 

And herein must our care exceed this of Pharaoh's daughter , we must so provide to breed up our children unto wisdom , as that we forget not the chief thing to have them seasoned with the knowledge and fear of God , which is the only true wisdom , Job 28.28 . Julian the apostate had great scholars , Mardonius and Maximus to his tutors , but being profane heathens and scoffers at Christian religion , they laid the foundations of that desperate apostasy , whereby he fell from Christ to the devil . He that begets a fool , or by careless breeding maketh one , hath been the author of his own sorrow ; a wise son maketh a glad father . If thine heart be wise , saith Solomon . i shall rejoice , prov. 23.15 . It is very sad for children to have wicked parents , who wholly neglect their education , and of whom Cyprian tells us they will cry out at the last day , parents sensimus parricidas . our parents have been our parricides . 

Now then by this important duty we learn , 1.  To set an high value upon such wise , learned and religious tutors as at any time we enjoy for the discharge of this great work . And 2.  To bewail it as a more than ordinary loss , when men whom God hath every way fitted with learning , industry , piety , and fidelity for so excellent a work are by a sudden stroke taken away from us . 

We have considered the care of the King's daughter for the education of Moses ; let us in the next place consider , the blessing of God upon it , in that thereby Moses was learned in all the learning of the Egyptians . 

Where first , it is very observable , the different end which God had in his providence , and she in her particular care ; she intended , no doubt , the service of Pharaoh , God intended to qualify him the better , to be a ruler and a deliverer of his persons from Pharaoh ; she intended the good of Egypt , God intended the good of Israel . many times the wise and holy providence of God , useth the diligence of one man to bring about effects for the good of others , which he never intended ; as we see in Joseph's brethren , and Haman's dictating the honour which was conferred upon Mordecai at that time , when he came to beg him for the gallows which he had erected . God useth the counsels of men , to effect things by them which they never thought of . The Assyrian had his work , and God had his , isa. 10.6 , 7.  Judas looked after money , Caiphas and the high priests after interest and revenge , Pilate after Caesar and his favour ; but God's end was the salvation of the world by the death of Christ . in re una quam fecerunt , causa non una propter quam fecerunt . God and Christ did it in charitate , Judas and the Jews in proditione . 

2.  We May here observe , that Moses that great prophet , whom the Lord did after speak unto mouth to mouth , num. 12.8 . is commended for his skill in the learning and wisdom of the Egyptians , a profane nation . ven human , secul•r , and exotic learning is a noble gift of God ; and a very great ornament and honour un•o the most excellent men . As it was mentioned for the honour of Daniel and his three companions , that God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom , dan. 1.17 . meaning , as appears ver. 4. the learning of the Chaldeans : not as if they were soothsayers , as the wise men of Caldea were ; or Moses , a magician and sorcerer , as the wisemen of Egypt were , and as heathen writers charge him to have been . For the great miracles which Moses did ; and the interpretations of dreams and visions by Daniel , were from God , and not from the devil , by the help of any magical enchantments . In like manner Bezaleel and Aholiab are commended by God for that wisdom and understanding , which they had in all manner of cunning workmanship , exod. 31.3 — 6.  And it is mentioned for the honour of Jabal , Jubal , and Tubal Cain , that they were the first inventors of some particular useful arts for the good of human society , gen. 4.20 , 21 , 22.  And of Solomon , that he spoke of trees from the cedar tree in Lebanon , unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall , and that he spoke also of beasts , and of fowl , and of creeping things , and of fish , 1 reg. 4.33 . The high esteem which the heathen had of the first inventors of liberal sciences and necessary arts and manufactures , is noted as one principal cause by Diodorus Si•ulus , and others , of the divine titles and honours which were given unto them . And Paul mentions it amongst other his privileges , that he was brought up a scholar at the feet of the learned •amaliel , act. 22.3 . Yea by that apostle the Lord hath given so much honour unto human learning , as three times to make mention of heathen poets , and their sayings . Aratus , act. 17.28 . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Me•ander , 1 cor ▪ 15.33 . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Epimenides , tit. 1.12 . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , &c. truth is God's where ever it is found , res fisci est ubicunque natat ; as a mine of gold or silver is the Kings in whose ground soever it be discovered . christianus domini sui esse intelligit ubicunque invenerit veritatem , saith Austin . a Christian knows that truth belongeth to Christ wheresoever he finds it . And again , tibi serviat , saith he , quicquid utile puer didici . as Israel took of the Egyptians , jewels of silver and jewels of gold , as David consecrate the spoils of the Philistines , Moabites , Syrians , and all nations whom he subdued to the Lord , 2 sam. 8.11 . as the crown of the King of Rabbah , was set upon the head of David , 2 sam. 12.30 . so the spoils of all secular learning are to be dedicated unto Christ , and the use of his church , who is said to take from Satan all his armour , and to divide the spoil , luk. 11.22 . For so in triumphs the enemies was disarmed , and the spoils carried in state before the victor's chariot . Such spoils did Origen , Tertullian , Cyprian , Clemens alex. Justin , Cyril ▪ Lactantius , Hierom , Austin , Basil , Nazianzen , Arnobius , &c. take from the gentile writers and devote them to the service of the church of Christ . It is noted of Theodosius the Emperor , that when he destroyed the temples of the heathen idols , in Alexandria , yet all the vessels and statues of gold and silver he converted to the use of the Christian churches . Yea •etrus Aerodius a learned civilian out of Procopius telleth us , that the Christians did convert the very idol temples themselves into churches , wherein to worship Christ . For if an idol , being nothing , did not so , defile meat , but that as a good creature ( Though not in idol communion ) it Might be eaten , if the conscience of no man were thereby offended , as the apostle teacheth , 1 cor. 8 . 4-7 . 10.25.28 . Certainly neither doth it leave any such abiding pollution to any place , but that therein God May be worshipped , 2 tim. 2.8 . 

First , all good learning and wisdom is per se , and in its own nature desirable , as an ornament and perfection to the mind , as a part of that truth whereof God is the author . There is a knowledge of God natural in and by his works : and a knowledge supernatural by revelation out of the word ; and though this be the principal , yet the other is not to be undervalved . for the works of God are great , sought out of all them that have pleasure therein ▪ psal. 111.2 . Now all secular learning is the knowledge of God's works , aeternae verita•is particula ; a small emanation from eternal verity . philosophical and mathematical learning , the knowledge of his works of creation . Historical and political learning , the knowledge of his works of providence . Moral and oeconomical and civil learning , the knowledge of those remainders of his image and law , which are left in the minds of men , for their direction and conviction . grammatical , rhetorical and logical learning , the knowledge of the use of that reason which God giveth us for imparting our minds , and evidencing our conceptions unto one another . So than all true learning being a knowledge of the works of God , and of that truth which he , who is the supreme verity , hath implanted in them , must needs be such as the works of God themselves are , honourable and excellent , and so per se desirable . 

Secondly , all true learning is desirable , for the uses whereunto it May be applied ▪ we will consider these uses . 

1.  In regard of evil men , many of whom are great scholars , and eminent for various learning . 

First , it serves to beautify even them , and render them , as learned men , great ornaments to their generation ; as many harmful herbs do bear beautiful flowers , and are upon that account special ornaments to the gardens were they grow . Goodly statues of gold or silver , though dead , though hollow , and without heart or vital parts , are yet of great value , and special honour to the places where erected . Such are even profane learned men , in regard of their learning . 

Secondly , it is useful unto them to convince them of God's glory and greatness , of his sovereignty and will ; and so if it be not praeexercitamentum , as Clemens Alexandrinus calleth it , unto the more comfortable knowledge of him out of his word , namely , to kindle in them a desire to know more of so great a god from thence , it will render them without excuse for abusing the knowledge which they have , rom. 1.19 , 20.  

Thirdly , it is by accident useful another way , viz. by honest and assiduous labours in the pursuit of learning , to keep them from the temptations of divers lusts , which by a loose and an idle life would be more ready to assault them . If David had been at his study , when he was on his house top , he had not been tempted unto adultery . 

Fourthly , it makes them thus adorned serviceable to human society . singular use have all ages had of the learned labors of profane historians , philosophers , poets , orators , mathematicians , physicians , artists in divers kinds . And• it is a comfort to any man to live to some good purpose , and to be serviceable to his own and future generations . 

Fifthly , they are hereby useful to the church of God : that God who can make use of the sins of men to do his persons good by them , as of Joseph's brethren , to make way , by s•••ng him , unto the safety of Israel and his family ; can make use of the gifts and talents he bestows on wicked men for the service of good men . The hands of those that did themselves perish in the flood , were employed in building the ark for Noah and his family . It is true , very often wicked men do use their learning against God , as they do all other his good blessings . Learned wickedness is arm•ta• nequitia , such learning degenerates into pride , arrogance , scorn , atheism , heresy , contempt of godliness , ( As philosophers are called by the fathers , haereticorum patriarchae , but all this is accidental , and the fruit of lust . ) Yet , as a malignant planet , when in conjunction with a good one May have a benign influence ; so it doth often fall out that they who are by sin enemies , May by learning be useful to the church . The Jews are bitter enemies to Christ , yet God hath by their care preserved the old scriptures from danger of corruption . 

2.  In regard of holy men . 

First , though learning be much inferior to holiness ; there are learned devils , there cannot be holy devils ( For holiness is the character of celestial not of infernal angels , deut. 33.2 . ) yet in holy men learning is a rare ornament and accession , as the golden ring to the gem which is in it . Like the marriage of an holy David to a beautiful Abigail . 

Secondly , it enableth them to do the more service unto the church of God , and the truths of religion . Every good gift sanctified is in such a way useful to the church , as the proper nature and excellency of the gift doth admit . Sanctified wit beautifies religion , sanctified reason defends it , sanctified power protects it , sanctified elocution persuades others to the love of it . As different gifts of the persons , did with a different value serve the tabernacle , the stones of the ephod , more precious than the badgers skins ; so though every good man is ready to offer willingly to the service of the church , yet great difference between the learning of a Paul , or the elequence of an Apollo , or the power of a Constantine , or the acuteness of an Austin , or the courage of an Athanasius , and the ordinary qualifications of inferior good men . 

Thirdly , it enableth them to procure more favour and to bring more reputation unto religion ▪ by the greatness of parts wherein they May be otherwise serviceable unto them , with whom it concerneth religion to have the honour thereof preserved . God is pleased in his holy providence to make other interests , sometimes a preservative unto religion , where itself is not immediately and per se regarded . Ahasuerus was amorous and uxorious , and that induced him to favour the Jews , whose worship he cared not for . Thus it is useful in regard of holy men . 

3.  In regard of the church and truth of religion ; it is useful as an handmaid , in a way of attendance thereupon , and subserviency thereunto several ways . 

First , hereby the ancient fathers of the church were furnished to confute the pagan and idolatrous worship of the heathens out of their own writers , as Paul did the idolatry of Athens by the inscription of their own altar , act. 17 , 23.  As David killed Goliath with his own sword , as a tree is cut down by an axe , the helve whereof was made out of a bough of the same tree ; this course origin , clem.  Alex. Justin , Eusebius , Tertullian , Minutius Felix , and many others of the ancients have taken , as likewise to show that many doctrines of the scripture have been owned even by profane writers ; one God by Plato , one first cause by Aristotle , divine providence by Cicero , the last conflagration by the Stoics , &c.  

Secondly , hereby we shame Christians , when out of profane writers we let them understand of the continency , justice , temperance , meekness , clemency , and other amiable moral virtues of heathen men , which they having abundantly more means , come so exceeding short of ; and that Fabritius , Aristides , Antoninus , Epictetus , and many other virtuous heathens shall rise up in judgement against them . 

Thirdly , scriptures have much of poetry , philosophy , mathematics , law• , antiquities and customs of other countries in them ; in the understanding of which by secular learning we May be much assisted . physics in genesis , ethics in proverbs , logic in the disputations of the prophets , of Christ and his apostles , allusions to the natures of beasts , sheep , goats , wolves , lions , doves , &c.  many allusions in the books of Ezra , Nehemiah , and Esther , to the customs of the Persians' , many passages in the prophets illustrable out of the histories of the times and places to which they refer , many expressions in the new testament best explicable out of the Roman laws and antiquities . Many passages tightly paralleled in human authors , and receiving much light from them , as that learned and good man Mr. Gataker hath observed . 

Fourthly , the histories of the scriptures , and the miracles of Moses , of Christ and his apostles May even out of heathen writers be confirmed ( And a testimony from adversaries is of great validity ) this hath been largely and learnedly proved by Mornay and Grotius in their books de veritate christianae religionis . 

Fifthly , the knowledge of times by the olympiads , the fasti consulares , and other standing ways of computation are exceeding necessary to the the exact distinguishing and digesting of sacred chronology , and of the occurrences of scripture to their proper times , as Austin hath noted . 

Sixthly , many ecclesiastical writers , who either write against the gentiles , or apologetical discourses for Christian religion , cannot be clearly understood without the reading of secular authors ; those kind of writings , as Origen against Celsus , Tertullian's apology , Theodoret de curandis graec•rum affectibus , cyprian de idolorum vanitate , Austin de civitate dei , Minutius Felix his Octavius , and other the like , being brimful of such kind of learning , and allusions thereunto . 

To say nothing of the necessity of grammar and tongues to understand the words of scripture ; of logic to understand the contexture , method , argumentation , and analysis of scripture ; of rhetoric to understand the Eleganc•eses of scripture . 

When i consider all these things i cannot but believe that the more learned men are ( Having gracious hearts as well as learned heads ) the more sensible they are of their insufficiency , for so tremendous an employment as the sound , solid , and judicious preaching of the word of God ; and are more dismayed at the sense of their own wants for so weighty and arduous a service , than they do wonder at the boldness of illiterate men , who therefore venture with more confidence upon it , because they know not that variety of learning , as well as of spiritual wisdom and grace , which is requisite unto such an able discharge of it , as whereby a man May appear to be a workman who needeth not to be ashamed , rightly dividing the word of truth . 

We have considered some of the many uses of sec•lar learning , and that within the sphere of one only profession , that it is as a dead hedge wherewith men use to fence a quick one , or as Basil's similitude is , as those fulcimenta upon which men do raise and bear up their vines ; or as ground colours upon which gold is to be over-laid . I shall conclude with a few inferences from this point for our use . 

First , though there be excellent use to be made of human learning , yet it is to be used with much caution , as physicians use opium , or other dangerous things with their due correctives . 

1.  Use it , not unnecessarily where the nature of the matter doth not rationally call for it . Some learned men have upon this account blamed some of the ancients , Origen , Justin , Clemens Alexandrinus and others , for mixing philosophy with theology , out of an opinion thereby the easier to gain the gentil•ss unto the Christian faith . but none have been more blame-worthy in this case than the old schoolmen , of whom Melancthon saith , that their doctrine is chiefly made up of two things , philosophy and superstition ; and therefore it is well observed by a learned man that schoolmen and canonists have been the fountains of that corruption which hath infected the church of Christ ; the schoolmen in doctrine , by opinions of popery ; and the canonists in discipline by the state of the papacy , of which the main cause hath been the admitting of Aristotle and his philosophy , in ipsa adyta & penetralia ecclesiarum , as H•spinian speaketh . We find even amongst the heathens , men were punished for presuming to dispute of heavenly things , in the same manner as they did of natural causes ; and for the like reason Aetius the heretic being given to an er•stical and contentious way of arguing in divine things , as one much addicted to aristotelical learning , thereby purchased unto himself the title of atheist , as Socrates and Sozomen tell us . 

2.  Use it not vaingloriously , and unto ostentation . It is a puffing , a windy , a flatulent thing ; knowledge puffeth up , 1 cor. 8.1 . Tertullian calleth philosophers , gloriae animalia . and i believe that this vanity doth scarce in any thing moat put forth itself then in pride of wit or memory in this way of learning . We May learn the danger of it by the example of Herod , act. 12. who was smitten with worms because he gave not God the glory . 

3 use it not proudly with contempt and disdain of the word of God , like that profane wit who said , he did not dare to read the scripture for fear of spoiling his stile . I have heard of some wretches even amongst us in our days , who presume to magnify Socrates above Moses or Paul . 

4.  Use it not heretically in defence of error , as Erasmus saith of the Arrians , hoc ipso fuere pestilentiores quod aristotelicis argutiis essent instructi ; and as Hierom complains that they rose è platonis & Aristophanis sinu in episcopatum . we must take heed of making our reason judge of articles of faith , or setting human learning in the tribunal against divine truth . For this it was that Tertullian calleth philosophers the patriarchs of heretics , and that the apostle exhorteth us to take heed no man spoil us through philosophy and vain deceit , col. 2.8 . He meaneth not solid philosophy , the genuine issue of right reason ; but the arrogance of human reason to sit as a judge of those things that are supernatural and of divine revelation , as articles of faith and forms of worship , when it will acknowledge no religion but what is deducible out of the princples of corrupted reason , nor admit any conclusions which are not consonant to those principles . 

5.  Use it not profanely , to inflame lust , as some elegant writers do more corrupt by their lasciviousness ▪ then benefit by their politeness , as ma•tial , Petronius arbiter , * &c.  Cyprian said of the adulteries of the heathen gods , that by their examples fiunt miseris delicta religiosa . in such a use we May justly fear the rebuke which † Jerom saith he had , Ciceronianus es , non christianus . 

But use it with humility , moderation , sobriety , as an handmaid to Christ ; as painters lay a worse colour , when they mean to superinduce another . Pare the na•lss , cut the hair , land the luxuriances , carry it through the fire , as the spoils were appointed to be , that it May be purged for the use of the temple . 

Secondly , this justly reproveth all the enemies of learning ; who because the apostle forbiddeth deceitful philosophy , and telleth us how vain the professors thereof became in their imaginations , do thence condemn all the sober and just use of true learning . such the weigel•anss , who tell us that there is no knowledge of Christ in any universities ; that all schools and academies are enemies unto Christ , and all their learning merae corruptelae ; who shut all learning out of the church , and all learned men out of heaven . such was it seems friar Francis the popish saint , who cursed a learned minister of Bononia for going about to set up there a school of learning without his leave . Yea , such it seems was Pope Paul the second , of whom Platina telleth us , that he did so hate human learning , that he esteemed the lovers thereof heretics , and exhorted the Romans not to breed up their children thereunto . This hatred of learning must needs proceed either from ignorance , for scientia neminem habet inimicum nisi ignorantem : or from malice , and a desire to have religion betrayed ; ( And therefore it is reckoned amongst the persecutions of the church , that Julian prohibited the children of Christians to be trained up in the schools of learning : ) or from avarice , and out of a sacrilegious desire to devour those revenues wherewith the bounty of benefactors hath from time to time endowed the schools of learning . I shall not spend time to confute so ignorant an absurdity . Ar•tius a learned Protestant hath fully done it to my hand . But i cannot but take notice of it , as doubtless a calumny cast upon carolostadius and Melanchton , as if they taught the youth at Wittenberg to cast off all philosophy and human learning , having been themselves so taught by Luther , and that they turned to mechanic employments , one to husbandry , the other to the art of baking , and that thereupon many young men did burn their books of liberal arts , and betook themselves to manufactures . But how honourably both Luther and Melanchton thought of human learning in itself ( Though they Might inveigh against the abuse of it in popish academies ) is by learned men so abundantly cleared out of their own practice and writings , that i shall not need add any more in their vindication . 

Thirdly , we must get our learning seasoned with holiness , else it will not serve us to repress any temptation . Great learning will consist with monstrous wickedness . who more learned than the scribes and Pharisees , and who more graceless , and more bitter enemies to the doctrine of salvation ? Who more learned than the Athenian philosophers , and who greater deriders of the apostles preaching ? never had Christian religion more bitter enemies than Celsus , Porphyry , Julian , Libanius , and the like great professors of human learning . None do the devil more service in his opposition to the church of God , than men of great parts , that are enemies to godliness . A proud heart , and a learned brain , are Satan's warehouses , and armouries , the forge where he shapeth all his cyclopical weapons against divine truth . The Egyptians here are noted for wise men , and yet they were of all others the most sottish idolaters ; insomuch that other idolaters derided them for theirs , as we find in Juvenal ; Oppida t•ta canem venerantur , nemo dianam . 
Oh sanctas gentes quibus hac nascuntur in hortis numina ! 




Though therefore we must covet the best gifts , yet we must still remember there is a more excellent way ; and consider if the knowledge of the wisdom of egppt be so honourable , how glorious is the excellency of the knowledge of Christ , in comparison whereof all other knowledge is loss and dung ? si tanti-vitrum , quanti veram margaritam ? if a glass jewel be so valuable , how excellent is an inestimable pearl ? 

Themistocles though he was ignorant of music , yet knew how to govern a state ; and a believer , though he be ignorant of all other learning , yet by the knowledge of Christ will be a blessed man , whereas all the learning in the world , without this , will leave a man miserable . To know the whole creation , and to be ignorant of the creator ; to know all histories and antiquities , and to be unacquainted with our own hearts ; to be good logicians to other purposes , and in the mean time to be cheated by Satan with paralogisms in the business of our own salvation ; to be powerful orators with men , and never to prevail with God ; to know the constellations , motions , and influences of heavenly bodies , and have still unheavenly souls ; to know exactly the laws of men , and be ignorant and rebellious against the laws of God ; to abound with worldly wisdom , and be destitute of the fear of God , which makes wise to salvation , is all but a better kind of refined misery ; the devils have much more than all this comes to , and yet are damned . We must therefore study to improve our learning unto the use and furtherance of holiness , to better our minds , to order our affections , to civilize our manners , to reform our lives , to adorn and render our profession the more amiable , to consecrate all our other endowments as spoils unto Christ , to lay our crowns at his feet , and make all our other abilities and acquirements handmaids unto his glory . When learning is thus a servant unto godliness , godliness will be an honour unto learning . 

Fourthly , since learning is so excellent an endowment , the teachers of it ought to be had in great honour . and i scarce know a greater defect in this nation , than the want of such encouragement and maintenance as Might render the calling of a schoolmaster so honourable , as men of great learning Might be invited unto that service . Errors in the first concoction , are not mended in the second , what is lost in the school , is hardly ever fully recovered in the university . And by how much the fewer men of great worth and parts are employed in that service , by so much the more should the loss of rare and worthy men in that way be bewailed by us . And certainly were they while we enjoy them so honoured as they should be , they would be as much lamented when we are deprived of them . We read of the honourable interment which Augustus gave unto his Master . of an honourable statue with m. Antoninus philosophus erected unto his . Gratianus the Emperor made Ansonius his Master consul : and Achilles made his a fellow-sharer with him in his own honour . and we read in the imperial law , that learned grammarians , after they had taught diligently for twenty years , had special honour conferred upon them , and were numbered amongst those who were vica•iae dignitatis . 

What necessity there is to have the minds and manners of children form and seasoned , while they are pliant and ductile , before licence break out into pride and luxury , before lust grows headstrong and intractable , while they are a rasa tabula , tender trees , and capable of shaping , we need not to be told . omnium hominum gravida est anima , said Philo , and want Masters , as midwives to shape and fashion the offspring of them : and even heathen men have complained of the carelessness and neglect of parents in this particular . Diogenès was wont to say that a man were better be some men's sheep then their son ; the care of their cattle being greater than of their children . If then you set a value upon your children , you ought accordingly to prize religious and learned instructors of them , and to take care to put them under such . For if grammar schools had everywhere holy and learned men set over them , not only the brains but the souls of children Might be there enriched , and the work both of learning and of conversion and grace be timely wrought in them . 

Great was the happiness of this city in this particular , while it enjoyed this worthy man , and great the loss in being deprived of him ; for though through God's goodness there be many excellent men remaining , out of whom some reparation May be made of so great a damage ; yet still i look on the departure of this man , as if the middle and most precious stone in a rich jewel should drop out , which though many others remain in , cannot but be greatly missed , and bewailed . 

Moses was unto the persons of Israel , poedagogus ad christum , as the apostle speaks of the law , gal. 3.25 . and of other teachers , 1 cor. 4.15 . And although he were so great a man , as no other prophet ( Much less ordinary person ) could parallel , numb 12.6 , 7 , 8. yet there May be resemblance where there is not equality . 

Give me leave to make the comparison in several particulars ; three of which we have in the text , Moses was learned and mighty in word and deed , in which three , consisteth the excellency of a teacher , and therefore the same is noted of Christ the great prophet of the church , Luke 24.19 . act. 1.1 . learning qualifieth the teacher ; word and work , doctrine and life , institution and example leadeth and directeth the scholar . and so Homer describeth phoenix the Master and instructor of Achilles , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . 

First , our dear brother was a learned man , learned in the whole body of learning ; not only an excellent linguist and grammarian , historian , cosmographer , artist , but a most judicious divine , and a great antiquary in the most memorable things of this nation . Into whatsoever parts of the land he traveled , he was able to refresh and to instruct his fellow-travellers in the most remarkable particulars of every country . Pausanias was not more accurate in the description of Greece , than he of England . and i have heard , that he had it sometimes in his thoughts to have published some thing in this kind . He was a man of a solid judgement ; he always spoke è sulco pectoris , and i have , not without very great satisfaction , heard him give his notions upon difficult places of scripture , and arguments of divinity in ordinary discourse , as if he had elaborately studied them . 

Secondly , he was mighty in word , able out of a full treasury , and storehouse of learning , to bring forth both new and old . i never knew any learned subject spoken of in his company , wherein he was not able most dexterously to deliver his opinion . He was a man of a copious discourse , but withal so solid and judicious as did ever delight his auditors , never weary them . As Livy said of Cato , natum ad id diceres quodcunque ageret , we May say of him , doctum in hoc uno crederes , quodcunque diceret . 

Thirdly , he was as Moses , a worker as well as a speaker , he was not a barren figtree , that had leaves without fruit ; nor a tinkling cimbale , noise without love ; he taught by his life as well as by his learning . Verbis tantum philosophari non est doctoris sed histrionis , as he said ; and dicta factis deficientibus erubescunt , saith Tertullian . and indeed he was a man of fixed and resolved honesty , and wondered in his sickness what men did learn Christianity for , if it were not in every condition to practise it , and adorn the profession of it . Time was , when fearing whether his conscience and his employment would consist together , he put himself to much pain and trouble to resign the place , which he then held in the city of Gloucester . for the times were then such , that many durst not take his resignation , till at last he met with a worthy gentleman , who feared no man's displeasure in doing that which he knew was his duty . 

Fourthly , he was as Moses , a patient man ; patient in his business , Moses was patient in his judicature from morning to evening , exod. 18.13 . and he patient in his school in like manner . Patient in his sufferings , willingly with Moses bearing the reproach of Christ , and not fearing the wrath of any man in comparison of the reverence he did bear to his own conscience . Patient in sickness , composing himself with as an unshaken confidence to die , as in time of health he would have gone about any other business . 

Fifthly , he was as Moses , a faithful man , heb. 3.5 . most exactly answerable to the trust of his place : opprimi potius onere officii maluit , quàm illud deponere , as once Tully spoke . It was hardly possible for any friend by any importunity to draw him from a most punctual observation of timely attendance upon the duties of his place . And so tenderly fearful was he of miscarriage herein , and so sensible of any the least defect , that in a former sickness he desired , if he should then have died , to have been buried at the school door , in regard he had in his ministration there come short of the duties which he owed unto the school . And this we shall ever find true , the more active , able , conscientious , faithful , any are in discharge of duty , the more humble , the more jealous , the more fearful they are of their coming short of it . the fullest and best ears of corn hang lowest towards the ground ; and so those men that are fullest of worth , are most humble , and apprehensive of their own failings . 

Sixthly ▪ he was as Moses , a constant , resolved , steady man . Moses would not bate Pharaoh an hoof , kept close to every tittle of his commission , exod ▪ 10.9 , 26.  So was he punctual and unmovable from honest principles . Vir rigidae innocentiae , as Livy said of Cato . he was of Polemon his judgement in this point , debere , inesse quand•m mo•ibus contumaciam , that men having proved all things should hold fast the best , and be pertinacious in goodness . 

Seventhly , he was as Moses , a wise man ; Moses was often put to the use of his wisdom to compose the distempers of a froward persons ; and a masculine prudence is requisite to tame and calm the wild and unswaied humours of young children . It is noted as a special piece of Socrates his wisdom , that he did by his institution fix and reduce the wandering and vicious inclinations of alcib•adeses . i Might go on in this parallel , and instance in the authority , gravity , meekness and zeal for the truth , which were observable in this our dear friend , as they were eminent in Moses . but i shall add only this one thing more , the great care which he had of the school at his last , that there Might be an able successor chosen . Of Moses his care in this particular we read , numb 27.15 , 16 , 17.  And this good man the evening before he died with great earnestness commended it to the company , by a member thereof , who came to visit him , that they should use their uttermost wisdom and care to choose an able , learned , religious , and orthodox man into the place , naming one of whose fitness , both he , and the company , and school had had before great experience . And so much were they pleased to honour the judgement and integrity of this worthy man , that presently after his death they pitched upon an excellent learned man whom he had so providently commended unto them . 

I Might add one parallel more , in the death of this good man to Moses . the Lord bid Moses go up to the mount and die , deut. 32.49 , 50. and he did so , deut. 34.1.5 . This worthy friend of mine , the Friday and Saturday before his own fit , was pleased to visit me , lying at that time under a sore fit of the stone . It pleased the Lord the Monday following to bring a like fit upon him , and sending to inquire of his condition , he sent me word how it was with him , and that he looked on this fit as a messenger of death from God unto him . And accordingly though in obedience to God's appointment , he made use of means , yet he still insisted upon it , that his time of dissolution was now come , and accordingly , with great composedness and resolvedness of spirit , waited for death as a man doth for a loving friend whom he is willing to embrace . I assure myself that he had with Moses a sight of Canaan , which made him so undauntedly look death in the face . 

I shall conclude with that exhortation , let us go up to the mount , and by faith look into our heavenly country ; let us have our eyes fastened upon Christ our salvation , and then we May with old Simeon sing our nunc dimittis ; with the apostle be willing to depart and to be with Christ , which is best of all ; and with Moses die not only patiently but obediently , as knowing that we have a city which hath foundations made without hands , eternal in the heavens , whose builder and maker is God . 

Finis . 





Justin , instit. l. 1. tit. 5.  vid. rosin . Antiq. rom. l. 1. c 20.  et calvin• lexic juridic . istae sunt haeretic•rum machinae , ut convic•i de pe•fi•ia , ad ma•edicta se conferant hier.  Apol. 2. advers. russianum . diod. si••l . l. 1.  euseb. De praep. evang. l. 10. sect. 5.  Bochart . Geograph . sacra . lib. 1. c. 19.20 . Joseph . Antiq. l. 1. alex. Poly hist. apud euseb. de oraepar . Evang. l. 9 c. 17·  niceph. l. 12.  Joseph . contr. Appion . l. 2.  ennopius in maxim. s•z•m . lib 5 c. 2.  vid. aug. in psal. 75.  & 93. & tract. 7. in ep. 1.  Joannis . & epist. 48. ad vincentium . plin. l. 30. c. 1.  lib 3. cap. 5. & i• . 5. c. 15.  iustin. apol. 1.  de doctr. Christ . L 2. cap. 18.39 , 43.  confes. l.  . c. 15.  ••v . dec . 4 l. 9  socrat. l. 5. c. 16  decret. l. 1. tit. 8 sect. 4.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . arist. •het , tertul. ont . Hermog . c. 8.  apol. c 47 , vid. aug. de civ. dei l. 18. c. 46. & in psal. 58.  legimus non ut teneamus sed ut repudiemus , ambros. proaem . in luc. terul . de testim animae cap. 1.  1 cor. 11.14 . vid. Alting . probl. 2.  cinnus lib. 2. cap. 13.  hier. in dan. 1.  Mornay . cap. 26  grot. lib. 1. sect. 16 & lib. 2 sect. 5.  de doct. Christ . l. 2. c. 28.  1 ▪ th'  5.21  h•xam . Home 5  Alting . The•l . Pr•bls p•rt . 1. problem 2. melanct. epist. pag 890.  Raynold ▪ confer. with hart. p. 72. vid. ora• 2.  Anti•weigel . su•vissimi •oc•issimique viri d. i an. A•rowsmith . Hospinian . Hist. Jesuit . in prae• . et hist. sacram. p 401.  cic. de nat. deorum lib. 1. de prota.  Abderit . Plutarch . in Nicia & in pericle , de anax.  Socrat. l. 2 c 28 sozom. l. 2. c. 4.  h•er . advers. Luciferan . Vid. Tert , apol. c 46. de pres•r . c. 7. de anim . c. 1 , 2 , 3. vid. daven. in col. 2.8 . Alting . Theol. problem . p. 1• . n•s à prophetis & christ• , n•n à philosophis & Epicuro erudimur . Te•tul . conn . Marc l. 2. c. 16 vid. danaeam in aug Euchirid . c. 4. sect. 9.10 . * prohibe•ur christianis figmenta legere po•tarum , quia p•r oblectame•ta inanium fa••l•rum mentem excitan• ad incentiva libidinum , i•id lib 3. sent. de summo b•no• cap. 13.  vid. tertul. de Idol•lat . cap 10.  & Isidor . Pelut . lib. 1 ▪ epist 63.  † ad eustochium de custodiâ virginitatis , aug.  Epist. 119.  basil. de leg. lib. Gentil . Hieron ad pammachium de obitu paulinae . & epist. ad magnum orat . num . 31.23.24 ▪  Hoorubec . Commantar . de •eige• . Baldw . Casus . Conscien . lib. 4 c. 2 case 9  greg. Tholos . de re•ub . lib. 17. cap. 12. sect. 5.  plati• . in fi•e vitae pauli ▪ 1 , 2  aug. de civ. dei l 18. c 52.  confess l 8. c. 5.  Greg naz. orat . 1.  aret. problem . loc. 151.  sarius comment . rerum in •be gesta•um ▪ ann• 1522. p. 116.  Baldw . Cas. consc. l 4. c. 2 case 9  d. arrow . orat . 3 An•i •e•g . joh. 7.48 . act. 17 32.  Juvenal . Satyr . lib. 5.  aug. ep. 36.  quid mihi pro derat ingenium per illas doctrinas agile , cum def•rmiter & sa•rilegâ turpi tudine in doctrina pietatis errarem ! Aug confess . l. 4. c. 16. lib. 1 ▪ c. 8.  quis enim •irtutem amplectitur ipsam . Praemia si tollas ? Iuven. sat. 10.  Dion . lib. 48. p. 376.  iul. Capital . Auson. in g•at . Act. Homer . Iliad . 9  cod. l. 10. tit. 15  vid. Qui•til . l.  . 1 , 2.  Philo de praeir . & paen . Aelian . var• hist. l· 12.  diog. laert. l. 6.  Homer . Iliad . 9  tertul. de patientia c  1.  diog. laeril . 4.  vid. greg. Tholos . de repub. l. 15. c 1.  











































































































