〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 OR WISDOM and PRUDENCE , Exhibited in a SERMON Before the Right Honourable The LORD Chief JUSTICE RAINSFORD , And the Lord Chief Justice NORTH . In their late Western Circuit . 

By Tho. Tanner , Rector of Brightstone in H●ntss . 

〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

Rom. 1. 16.  



London , Printed for William Keblewhite Bookseller at Newport in the Isle of Wight . 

To the 〈◊〉 Honourable Sir Courtenay Pole , Baronet ; Colonel-general of the Eastern Division of Devon , a Member of the Parliament , etc.  

SIR , 

YOU may well wonder to be surprised with a Letter from me , which is first exposed unto public view , together with a Sermon out of date . The acceptance whereof from your Candour , I had no reason to doubt howsoever : but rather how it may be entertained abroad ; since there were no end of printing , if every Sermon that hath been preached in an honourable Audience , were to be divulged . Nor yet did I intend to have done this , having kept it above a twelvemonth by me , without such a thought till now . If my Reader will vouchsafe to know the reasons of it , it was preached at your request , as some part of a Sundays entertainment , belonging to the Reverend Judges , who were treated otherwise by you , with great Magnificence . If it pleased in the heaing ( being but dense of matter ) why may it not be more profitable in the reading , and never out of season ? we have heretofore been taken up in comparing spiritual things with spiritual , but since through a surquedry of new models ( which did not answer expectation ) men have come to take offence at Religion itself , in whatsoever dress she doth appear : so that we have been reduced to compare even natural things with spiritual ; and by this discourse ( I trust ) it will appear , that the later hath infinitely the more advantages . What others have written lately to the like effect ought not to withhold me : for the better cause requireth 〈…〉 evidence ; and number itself is not despised in the case : besides that a new form is like clothing of the first matter with a new existence . Which is all the apology that I need to make unto the public , more than others that have gone before ; especially confessing , that private reasons joined with it , did over-poise me . 

Such as these : you were lately my Maecenas , and your brave house , and Family my Municipium , wherein I did enjoy much liberty , and privilege . You were also a part of my late charge , which I was forced to leave more abruptly than I intended , and so , there remaineth to me now no other way of preaching to you , besides this . So that I send it as a kind of token to you first , and by you to the rest , to make up some part of my Apology ; and to return to you with such a foot as I had left , to set forward ( being enclosed with the Seas ) such an one as is shod with the wings of Mercury , of which we use to make our pens . In fine , it is almost the only way , that men of our condition have to testify their gratitude unto persons of your Quality ( to coin somewhat that may bear the superscription of your names ) which lies the more upon me , since your respects have so often followed me hither : which seldom happens when interest , and Relation cease . Let this therefore pass by your hand , and it will add more to the great cumble of favours , wherein you have still taken pleasure to oblige , 

Sir , Your most affectionate and faithful Servant Thomas Tanner . Brightston in the Isle of Wight Sept. 24. 1677.  

prov. 8. 12.  

I Wisdom dwell with Prudence — 

This is gracious condescension of Wisdom ( by which name all the World imagines an high Sovereign , or a kind of Deity to be intended ) to tell us where she dwelleth . Every one might think , that he knew before ; yet all are in the quest still , and few do find it , because she dwells with Prudence , A Lady that doth often change her seats , and delight herself in labyrinths , which are in-accessible , without a certain clue . But since Wisdom seem to be ( as it were ) at board with Prudence , whether is the greater ? which of these is the Dowager , and which the Daughter ? might it not as well have been said , I prudence dwell with wisdom , as I wisdom dwell with prudence ? if the King say , I dwell in my Court : and the Court say , I am wheresoever the King is ; which is the readiest enquiry to bring us into the presence of the Royal Majesty ? so when wisdom tells us , that she dwells with prudence , and an imprudent man knows not where that is , what is he the wiser for this direction ? 

The truth is , it is not fit , that the man which wanteth wisdom , should find it without some certain travail : for , she is to be sought for as Silver , and searched for as hidden treasures . Nay , to be concealed too , after finding ; as the Merchant did by the rich pearl , found in the midst of a Field , till he could purchase all together ; lest another man should come between him , and his prize . 

What shall we do ? shall we preserve the state of wisdom any longer ? or put the clue immediately into your hands , that we may all proceed together , to wait at the gates of wisdom ? we are in haste ; let me lose no time to do it ! 

Wisdom is the same , that we call Religion , the way of happiness here , and hereafter ; and she dwells with Prudence , that is , in the breasts of such as will obey her . For , unto man he said , Behold , the fear of the Lord , that is wisdom , and to depart from evil , that is understanding , or a right Prudence . In Philosophy , Wisdom is the knowledge of choice things , and Prudence is a practical disposition of applying so much of it unto use , as may do a man good , when the case requireth . This maketh men to enlarge their studies ; that if it be possible , they may not be to seek in any case to know , when they should be ready to do . So though wisdom be the greater , yet Prudence entertains her , to her own profit , and is never able to exhausted her treasures . What availeth knowledge , if a man have not a present mind to do himself good by it ? 

So likewise in Divinity , wisdom is the knowledge of the Word of God , which is unsearchable : and Prudence is a right obedience to it , which hath no bounds , nor limits . Let us therefore measure our steps from hence , from one degree to another ; and when we come near enough to be informed ; no doubt , but we may find ourselves to be arrived unto some attainment higher , then to what the world doth call its own wisdom , or its own pretended virtues whatsoever . And the first hint to be observed is this . 

Point . 1.  That Religion is no carnal Policy , or wisdom ; but Wisdom of God himself . 

Distinguish of Religion natural , or Christian : it holds in either of them . Be it true or degenerous , so much as there is of Religion in the breasts of men , it is of God and not of men , and it is the first Wisdom in the World.  

Let us put this first principle out of doubt , because it has been questioned , whether there be any religion at all by nature , or whether that which is , hath entered merely through Art , and Policy , the wiser taking advantage of the ignorance ; and the stronger of the fears of the simpler sort , for ends of their own . Let me pitch my banner here a little , while I labour to reduce this sconce , which it is not safe to leave behind me . 

I say then , that there are certain common Principles , or notions of religion , imprinted by nature ( which is the immediate work , or protoplasm of the Divine wisdom , and power ) in the hearts of all men indelebly . Which notions , though possibly they may be tainted at the very springhead , by idolatrous , or erroneous education ; yet so much as there is of religion , to be discerned through these , it is of God , that did at first implant it , and ever since maintain it , in the hearts of men ; that he himself might be justified ; and such as obey it not , may be judged by it , and left without excuse . So that , this must needs be the Wisdom of God in men , and no human policy . 

For else , whereas it hath been said , that fear at first , brought in all religion , it might have been showed by such , as have written de primis rerum inventoribus , of the Authors , and beginnings of all Arts , and Sciences ; when religion also had its first beginning . But this they could not do , though they could tell when Saturn , Jupiter , and the rest of their greater Deities began to be worshipped : an argument , that worship , or religion was before Idolatry . 

Much lesle , can they tell when such fear began , as they conceive to have been the cause of religion : as sure an argument , that it had no beginning , but in that nature , which God created at the first , after his own image . Of this Moses alone hath given us the right knowledge , but if any one had rather credit the Heathen Poets , or Historians ( which are many ages junior unto him ) the elder of them describe unto us the superstition of the Gentiles , which was their religion ; and their superstition ever was meticulous : but I say , which of these hath showed us , when this tardy humour had its first Original ? Therefore it was ab origine . 

Again , if religion were but of human policy ; it could not have passed thorough all Nations , and that , thorough all ages hitherto . Quae regio in terris ? ubi gentium ? ubi temporis , aut loci ? in what Country , or at what time , was there no religion amongst the inhabitants of the Earth ? as for his own age , and all before , which he had ever heard , or read of , Cicero hath testified ; that although some barbarous people wanted walls and Laws ; yet none were without some sort of Religion . Before him , the great Stagyrite , unworthily suspected of Atheism ; and below him , Seneca , and Plutarch ; and indeed , as many before , and after , as have written any thing at all only , of later times , since new discoveries , a few barbarous people have been questioned ; but the relators are not agreed . 

But suppose the generality of the vulgar could have been imposed upon in this kind ; certainly , some of the Philosophers , who had searched into Nature , and the Policies of States , could easily have discovered this imposture ; and would have adventured to achieve so great a glory , as to have redeemed their own sects , & followers from the muffler of the common people : yet , we meet with none so bold , as to deny a Deity , besides one Diagoras , who could not make a Sect ; but affected rather ( like that mad-fellow , who burned the Temple of Diana , only that he might be talked of , after he was dead , whatsoever he suffered for it , ) to be infamous for ever , among the Heathen themselves , then to die in his obscurity . And one Epicurus only , denied a special providence ; making a Sect in other Tenants , but never able to prevail with any of them , not to pray in a storm , or tempest , which Plutarch doth retort upon them . But rather , as the Poet did observe . High sunt qui trepidant , quos omnia sulgura terrent . 

Now , some of these have looked upon religion , as a great trouble unto States , and private persons ; and laboured to set men free from the apprehensions of it : had it been but of Art , or human Wisdom , what should hinder but they might have done it , one time or another , since the lower Sects , as the humour of respective ages took , did oft surmount the reputation of the greater ? but it could never go this way . 

If it be suggested , that the Philosophers were deterred by the example of Socrates , from intermeddling with this mystery of Government , what deterred the Martial men , and Politicians , from age to age , why they durst not meddle with it ; why were they held by these cobwebs ? nay , why more fast than others ? not to speak of the Grecians ( because the time will not permit ) who were more superstitious than the Romans . Among these later , who so superstitious , as Camillus , and the Deccis , and the Curij , and the Fabiuses , and the Scipio's , and the Cato's ; and the rest of greater note ? only , Caesar seemed to despise the auguries , yet , he was not a little troubled at the little river Rubicon . 

Numa , and Lycurgus founded their estates , and governments by superstitious rites , using them only as an thank upon the people ; and dissembling things that were not true ; which they themselves neither feared , nor believed . It may be so : doth it hence follow , that religion is but a stalking horse , or stratagem of Policy ? nay , it rather followeth , that if the sense of some religion had not been before , most strongly grounded in the minds of the generality of men , there could have been no policy ( of which the Atheist would seem to be more fond than any other ) in laying that upon them , which either would not take , or could not hold . It had been in vain to go about to establish a religion , if there had not been such a disposition in the people before , as we have hinted , Certainly , Numa could not infuse such a disposition into the minds of men , that were born before him ( many of which he governed ) but had he brought the people to a form , for a time ; it had died with him : or , when that form of policy had ceased , either that form of religion , or all religion , if it had been but a mere imposture , had ceased with it . 

In the issue it remains , that as men were never of any other mind , but that by force , or choice , they must have some religion ; so , they are never like to have any other power , or inclination , for the future : let the Atheist try his art , or power to the utmost ! but , though more may be made of religion , than there should ; yet there is so much of it written in human nature ; that as the statuary engraved his own name in his work , so that no one could efface it , without the demolishing of the whole ; so no human wit , or malice , can obliterate religion out of human nature , without the destruction of humanity together with it , because it is of an higher impress ; even the devise , and the motto of Almighty God in all his reasonable Creatures . To come to the Christian religion in particular . In this indeed was the manifold wisdom of God made manifest above the rest . Among the Gentiles there were as many Gods , as Nations , as many Idols as there were Hills , and Valleys . And they worshipped one another's Gods , when they came into one another's Country ( even as some of our gentile Protestant-travellers make no matter , to bow to every Popish Relic where they pass ) there was no enmity betwixt Idolaters upon the account of their religions ( only all abhorred the true worshippers ) but rather , Athens sent to Egypt to learn what they could of their absurd Rites , and Mysteries : and the great Philosophers commented upon their hieroglyphics or sacred sphinxes ; even as wise men make morals upon some foolish fable . Rome again translated her laws , and rites from Athens first , and then from other places , till the City began to be so full of religions , that the Senate was said to take order against admitting more . But when the Christian religion come to be set on foot , it soon reduced all to one . 

That you may perceive the wisdom , and the power of God therein , and have the better prospect into wonder : take account in what posture the world stood , when the Gospel first began to be divulged . 

Our Lord himself , the Son of a Carpenter ( as he was reputed ) preached three years ; and then was so disgraced by the cross , and the malice of his own Countrymen ; that one would have thought , there had been an end of him , and of all his new Doctrine ; yet he left twelve Fishermen behind him to uphold it , for which they were to die too . The Jews hated these , beyond any patience : the Gentiles had them at first , in derision , after in suspicion . whither should they go ? or what should they do ? must they persuade the Jews against the Law of Moses ? this they must do . Must they persuade the Gentiles to abandon their Idolatry ? the Gods which they feared , and loved ; the magnificence of sumptuous shows , and Temples , and such feast as they chiefly used after sacrifice and oblations ? this they must do . A likely matter to take effect , or to take the world by so much as by the little finger . 

could these , or any of their followers raise an army ? it is hard to imagine out of what quarters : but what if they could ? had they then been but once beaten ( as Gamaliel did observe ) they had been for ever quelled : or , if they had prevailed , and attained to an Empire ( as some have arose from small beginnings ) yet their fate might have been like that of all before , and since . Which did you ever read of , that hath lasted 1600 years with advantage , and rooted itself so invincibly in Asia , Europe , Africa , and America , still proceeding conquering , and to conquer ? which besides , did ever possess any one of these ; and , next consider how and what way Christianity is bound to subdue them all . 

By Faith , and patience ; by prayers , and intercessions for all men : especially for Kings and all that were in Authority over Christians , that under them , they might lead a quiet , and peaceable life in all Godliness , and honesty . OH ridiculous Wisdom in the eye of carnal policy ; and yet it over-swayed all ! 

In above 300 years we read of no insurrection of theirs against oppression , though they swarmed in all Provinces of the Empire long before that : the Roman legions were full of Christian Soldiers , and never mutinied ; though Constantine came with the greater favour to the Imperial Crown , because he was a Christian , and so many of his Veterans of the same profession . 

So that Prophecy was accomplished : Not by might , or army , ( as the Turkish Empire , and religion ) but by my Spirit , saith the Lord Which turned the heart of the Fathers to the Children , and the heart of the Children to the Fathers , and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just , to make ready a people , prepared for the Lord  

But it may be , that which was wanting in an army might be supplied by policy ? 

One might think so indeed , if the greater number of the wise , and potent men of the world had taken this way . But St. Paul ( who had his hand from the beginning in this work , and had the best experience of it ) witnesseth after this manner . The foolishness of God is wiser than men : for ye see your calling , brethren , how that not many wise men after the Flesh ; not many mighty , not many noble are called , though some of all these . 

Instead of aids therefore , put into the contrary balance ; that all the might , and policy of the world ; all that enraged Jews , and Idolaters could do , was set against it . And yet , ( by a new example ) men delightted to die for religion , which was never known before , at least , amongst the Gentiles : and out of their blood ( as out of the Teeth that Cadmus sowed ) an innumerable power of supplies rose out of the earth . Of which it was foretold , that it should befriend the Woman , and help her , swallowing up that stood , which the dragon cast out of his mouth to drown her . Like Hydra's heads cut off one , and more started up in the stead of it : persecution wrought nothing but increase , as mowing maketh the grass to grow . It wrought nothing else but a sweeter smell , and savour to Christianity : even as when a roller is driven o'er a walk of Camomile , what could it avail to hinder ? 

I have said but little yet ( though it tend to admiration ) let the unbeliever mark , and be astonished at that , which follows . 

Said not the proud Assyrian to the servants of King Hezekiah ; Have any of the Gods of the Nations delivered at all his Land ( for every Nation then made choice of some especial Numen to be their Protector ) out of the hand of the King of Assyria : where are the Gods of Hamath and of Arphad ? where are the Gods of Sepharvaim ? but now , where are the Gods of Assyria itself ? We need such a learned Antiquary as your Selden , to let us know their names . Where are the Gods that Greece , and Rome adored ; why is there never a Temple ( at the least ) of Jupiter's remaining , who was styled the Father of Gods , and men ? what ailed thee , OH thou dreadful Oracle at Delphos , that thou madest such pitiful excuses ( as thou didst ) and then retired'st with the rest ( who made none ) to everlasting silence , to deceive the world no more ? it was not because ye were dis-obliged by the Heathen all the world over , at the same time . It was because ye could not choose : it was not because there was an earthly power to depress ye ; but another spirit , which ye were not able to withstand . Rise again , if ye are able , to answer these reproaches ! that part of the world is forced to bow with you , which is not ready to adore ! 

more closely to the case in hand still : how came the despised Land of Jewry to send a Law forth to all the world , and yet themselves to be dissipated so , as never people were and this has lasted above these 1600 years , wherein ( however ) as there is not a Roman left , so there is not a Jew lost ; but there is a mark upon them . A mighty people , if they could be gathered : but they are cast far back for that , for it is not like to be , till the fullness of the Gentiles is come in . 

There is now but one God , and where Mahomet is professed , Christ is also acknowledged to have been a great Prophet before Him : and they have the history of the Gospel , upon which they raise their damned Idol , which is confounding evidence against these Apostates from the Faith ; and together with it , confounders of that civility , that was in the world before . 

This one God is worshipped according to the Law , which he gave from the beginning of the world , which no false religion can pretend to in the least . Before , there was no enmity betwixt nations on the account of religion : but now , it is the greatest point , and ground of amity , or enmity . As it was said in Genesis , I will put enmity between thy Seed , and between her Seed . So more expressly in the Gospel , our Lord himself doth testify , saying , I came not to send Peace upon the Earth , but a Sword , and to set men at variance upon this account of religion only . Which many Statesmen , having well observed , would fain have taken another order with religion , if they had been able ; but it was too far above them . Christianity hath abolished Idolatry , Philosophy , Policy , and brought in other orders , and Governments among the Nations , than the wisemen of the world allowed . All which doth show , and prove ; that the Christian religion is the wisdom of God above all ; and not of man : that as it was raised at first , so it doth still subsist by miracles , and therefore is invincible ; so that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it . 

But , since we have said so much concerning this wisdom , viz. that it hath abolished , not Idolatry only , but Philosophy ; not the Jewish Law alone , but the civil ; not established governments , but subverted them not brought in peace but war , it is high time , that we take some caution concerning prudence , with which this wisdom is said to dwell ; lest she be misprised for a destroyer of the house , wherein she liveth ; since such things as these cannot consist with prudence . Let us therefore pass to the second , and the last point , to show . 

Point . 2.  That this wisdom dwells with prudence , and is the best policy : for so saith the context , and find out the knowledge of witty inventions , that is , the choice expedients of felicity for all estates . 

What though the Christian religion hath beaten down the galleries of the Cynics , Stoics , Skepticks , Epicureans , and all other heresies of true Philosophy , as well as the Altars of the Idols ? yet , it hath no more abolished Philosophy , rightly so called , than it hath religion . But rather , since the spreading of Christianity , multi transierunt , & aucta est scientia . Many have traveled to augment learning , and to redeem Philosophy from all the errors , wherein it was before entangled . 

St. Paul exhorteth the Colossians , to beware least any man should spoil them through Philosophy , and vain deceit , after the rudiments of the world , and not after Christ : for though all the Sects called themselves the Philosophers , and theirs the Philosophy ; even as our Sects in religion do imitate the ancient usurpation ; yet it is plain , that the Apostle cautions them against no other Philosophy , but such as is vain deceit , and opposite unto the simplicity of the Faith of Christ ; which no real knowledge is . 

Again , he admonisheth them against a show of wisdom in will worship , and humility , and neglecting of the body . It is but the show of wisdom , which really is not such , that he cautions them against ; especially such a show , as ministered before to heathen superstition , and being brought into the Christian Church , might tend to corrupt it with the old leaven , the rudiments of the world . 

In the mean time , he himself disputed with the Stoics , and Epicureans , and other Philosophers , according to their own Notions , which he had learned at the feet of Gamaliel ; being as conversant in the Learning of the Greeks , as Moses had been before in that of the Egyptians . The rest of the Apostles were endued from above with tongues , and all knowledge ; so that they were reputed at the first , amongst the Gentiles , as a new sect of Philosophers . 

In the next succession , the prime Fathers of the Church were of the converted Rhetors , and Philosophers , as Ignatius , Clemens , Irenaeus , Justin Martyr , Athenagoras , Tertullian , Origen , Lactantius , and diverse others . What hath since been added to the magazine of learning , I may safely leave to be demonstrated by the ROYAL SOCIETY . 

What if the Christian religion hath almost antiquated the Civil Law in diverse Countries ? it is only so far as it hath abolished slavery , and brought in Christian liberty , even in civil things , wheresoever a Christian Government has been established . Neither has it subverted any other , but to bring in better , and a sweeter order . As may appear at this day , by comparing Christendom , howsoever corrupted , with the Turkish , or Pagan dominations . Wheresoever the Christian yoke lieth not on Princes , and their Governments , they are barbarous , and cruel : whereas in Christendom , ( especially amongst the Princes , and the States of the Reformation ) there is more property , immunity , and privilege to the lower states : and in case of trespass , there are more pardons , and impunities : in case of punishment , more mercy , Malefactors are chastised , or put to death with the less severity , and horror ; and the poor are not exposed . 

In a word ; though by accident , Christianity draw the hatred of the unbeleiving world , as being opposed to the power of Satan , who worketh in the children of disobedience : yet , it hath made even wars themselves more gentle , than they were before , both in sieges , and in battles , sparing the effusion of blood ( which the Romans glorified in ) affording ransom , enslaving none of the Christian profession . And where they trespass ( possibly ) upon Christian tenderness in enslaving Turks , or Infidels ; they seem to make some amends by better usage of them , than our own poor Captives do expect in Barbary . 

Content ( may some one say ) we are for religion , and for the Christian too above all ; but not with such hankes as are put upon us , under this pretence , to the prejudice of civil life ; and therefore , contrary unto common prudence . 

And first , because it is an hindrance to preferment , to be held to such rules as may be given us : if a Kingdom , or a great estate or fortune , lie before me ; must I let another carry them before me , if there be but a scruple about the title , or the circumstances of proceeding ? if I have made a promise ; must I keep it to my own wrong ? 

Machiavelli observes , that those Princes have been but unfortunate , who have suffered themselves to be hampered by a word , or to be in earnest , too religious [ but he is very unfortunate himself in the instances , which he giveth of some , that seemed to have prospered by their falseness , and impiety . ] What shall we return to this ? 

We say first , that , that which hath been called virtue ( for the most part ) is a certain strain of natural piety , even in the Heathens , so far as it can go : and that such of those ( whether private men , or Princes ) as lived most according unto true virtue , were the most prosperous , and glorious . But because the lives of private men are apt to be buried in obscurity ▪ after a small time ; let us take account of Princes , whose memories remain sacred , when they have done virtuously ; as their persons were before ( whether they were Pagan , or whether they were Christian ) while the issue's hung in suspense , and the ages under awe , wherein they lived . 

Who can be compared with Augustus , Titus , Trajan , Antoninus , Constantine the great , and the rest of better note ? as for the vicious monsters of the Empire , who by ambition , and deceit attained , and managed the sway for a time ; which of them came to a timely end ? as for those that retained wicked policies with a show , and some pretence of virtue : which of these did not spoil all the rest thereby ? I cannot stand to speak of Tiberius , Galba , Severus , Julian , and others of them . Much less , to verify the same from our own Chronicles ( which might seem to exceed the lists of my profession ) to leave to every one their own . 

We say again , that looking upon examples in the Scripture ; we have found none to have flourished like those , that had the zeal of true religion ; as David , So. lomon , Asa , Jehosaphat , Hezekiah , etc.  Only , good Josiah perished at the last , by admitting a little policy , to be tempered with his piety : and out of a Princely emulation ( as it might be thought ) in his youth , to show his valour . 

On the other side , the wicked Princes fell by their own vices : and had been likely so to do , though there had been none but men to punish them . The Princes that compounded , or confounded their pretences to religion with other policies , fell ever short of their own designs , which they pursued , under the veil , or mask of hypocrisy ; as Saul , and Jeroboam , and Jehu , and Amaziah , and the rest . 

then comes another in , with such a complaint as this , to render this pretended prudence of ours to be but foolishness ( according to their shallow reasoning ) shall I part with a certainty for an uncertainty ? quit my delights , and pleasures to embrace Melancholy , and to solace myself with deaths-heads , and Coffins set before me , while I walk in youth , or strength ? shall I bind a carcase to my living body , and go about with it , like a ghost , through the terror of a resurrection , and a future judgement , whilst it seems to common observation , that death is but a mere extinction ; and as such , despised by the bravest men ? 

First , it is Popish superstition , that hath painted out religion in solitudes , and penances : and it is the modern Catharism only , that hath sequestered it from society , and civility ; wherein the highest satisfactions of life consist ; and certainly , men are rendered the more civil , and not the lesle , by a right temper of religion , which is wisdom dwelling in the Court of prudence , the bond of all humanity . So that impiety doth but put an ugly vizard on religion , or cloth it in a Bears-skin , to work its prejudice , when it sets it forth after this manner . It is far from being sad , and melancholy , when it is rightly understood ; but is rather to be described , as the Christian Philosopher describeth wisdom , to be like a woman of a Matronly-look , having piercing eyes , and a lively colour ; and though far above our age , seeming yet to retain the flower of her youth . 

Again , there is no certainty to be parted with by a religious life , seeing all other things are uncertain here , unless it be this truth ; that all good things are the certain free gifts of God , dispensed much according to meet rewards of piety and virtue : and so it often goeth , whilst all the superfluity of divine bounty , being no way prodigal , is unaccountable unto men . But uncertainty there can be none about the future hopes , and fears , till any man hath answered the evidence , which we have given in before of the Christian religion . Which we also presume to be un answerable by all the wits of men , though they were even granted a Bacchanalian liberty . 

Let us cast up the count ( if you please ) on either hand , what mischief comes by irreligion , and what benefits do accompany an unfeigned Christian Piety . 

First , An irreligious life , through private lusts , and passions , destroyeth bodies , and estates , and the public weal ; which are all saved , and advanced by the prudence , and goodness of a Christian life , how many bodies have been ruined by intemperance , and lust ? but who was ever hurt by Continence and Abstinence ? How many men have perished by the persecution of revenge ? but who ever came to any great disaster by gentleness , and patience ? How many estates have been confounded by a prodigal profusion upon vanities ? but what estate did ever suffer by frugality , with an abhorrency from all vainglory , and impertinent delights ? what confusion hath it brought into States , and Kingdoms , when particular persons , having power in their hands , have disregarded , and hindered the public good , for their private ends , and satisfactions ? but when was the State ever hurt by a public spirit , and by self-denial ? the ungodly life of a few men bringeth judgements on the land ; but the Godly lie of fewer stinteth the divine wrath , and bringeth blessings , not only on themselves , but on many more . 

2.  An irreligious life bringeth men under great bondage ; but a religious life ( according unto this prudence ) doth set them free , and far above all fears , or the causes of them . The one is in bondage unto meats , and drinks , to make provision for the Flesh ; enough to furnish out a voyage : not ( as it is usually pretended ) for hospitality , but because he wants them : whereas nature is contented with a little , and piety with less . The one is tempted with the forbidden fruit , and is in bondage , because he will be satisfied ; though it be through dishonour , and a cumble of inconveniences . But unto purer minds there ariseth little trouble of this kind : either their mind is free from the power of such temptations ; or else , it is purged by repentance , and every lust is mortified . The one cannot live comfortably ( as he conceives ) without his lusts , and the other cannot live at all with them . 

The weight of an ungodly man's bondage follows yet ( as the wain must follow the wheels . ) When an ungodly man hath pursued his ambition , pride , revenge , covetise , or any of his pleasures to the height ; he is still so far from being satisfied , that he is rather sad and discomposed , partly through vanity of the Creature , and partly through the remorse of his Conscience , reflecting upon so much of the vanity of Sin , as he is sensible of , in the things that he hath acted , or wherewithal he was affected for the time . So , that instead of recovering himself by reason , and by resolution , he is usually re-mitted to the same disease to be healed , as they say , that a second burning of the finger will cure the first . Now , if this part of a man's soul ( if I may divide it into parts ) troubled the Heathen themselves ( as I cannot stand to cite sentences , and instances , that might be quoted out of Authors ) how much more , may I presume , it may do in such , as have heard the Gospel preached all their days , from which they cannot choose , but to have received some impressions , howsoever impregnable they may pretend to be . 

In a word , whereas true religion pacifies the conscience , and alone is able to render that tranquillity of mind , which the Gentiles sought in vain ; an irreligious life maketh men meticulous , as oft as the wind doth blow , or the clouds are rend with thunder . A religious man is in peace at home , impavidum ferient ruinae ; The end of the world will be no amazement to him ; though the heaven's fall , or glow with fervent fire , as they must do at the last , he is not to be dismayed by it . 

Thirdly and Lastly , There is as much latitude in Christian prudence , as a wise man could wish : For there is nothing in religion , that makes against a right prudence ; nay , it comprehendeth all , and far excelleth human prudence : you cannot instance in a case , wherein you may not be , the best resolved . Hence Philosophers have prescribed much austerity , and Idolaters have used ( and do use ) great severity , but the Christian Religion required nothing , but what is gentle , and agreeable unto nature , and civility . There is enough in it to preserve the Temporal felicity , and to augment it . Enjoy as much of the goods , that God hath given you , as will do you good : and be sure , if God had not known better than we , what was good for us , he would have allowed to us the larger size . 

Some restraints indeed , we must acknowledge , but such as are for our greater privilege , and enlargement another way . Some think it a restraint if they may not riot , but if they do , it spoileth bodies , and estates : others , that there is no Community ; but where there is most impunity for that , the blood is most corrupted . Others , that Polygamy ( at least ) is not permitted ; but where it is , it engendereth unto feuds , more than unto love . And when community was once too much indulged , the Romans were fain to provide by law , that every man of such a quality , should have ( at least ) one wife . The Laws of God therefore are the basis of all other prudence , the establishment of the earth ; such as far exceeded those of all other Nations , to make both the public ; and the private man the happier , so that every way it is the better policy . 

I think our own Law approves of it , and hath this rule , Lex Dei est lex terrae ; The Law of God is the Law of the Land : and that , there is no such preamble to any of our Statutes , as , nos mitigantes regorem juris divini , etc. do enact , that it shall not be accounted murder in a Noble man , if he kill a Paisan . If it were so , it would not only be a violation of religion , but much against the policy of ENGLAND . 

Certainly then this Christian prudence cannot interfere with the Civil , because it doth not only far surmount , but comprehend it . . It hath been said , that all virtue is comprised in justice : much more in piety , which is not only the greatest motive unto justice ; but the primum mobile , a superior orb , that doth contain , and carry it about with its own motion . Whatsoever therefore makes against piety , makes as much against justice , and all other virtues , and as much against the felicity of mankind , even in this civil life . 

Add to this the vantage , we have showed , that true religion lays but few and light restraints ; but it opens such enlargements of happiness , and fruition , on another hand , as are neither to be counted by curious observation ; nor yet to be expressed , or uttered by the tongues of men , and Angels , 

What if I should resume my text ( but that it is too late ) to be expounded mystically , and yet without an allegory ? you see that wisdom and prudence are here set forth as two persons : and prudence for her part as if she had an house large enough to entertain wisdom . What if I should say , upon the whole , that it is not obscurely signified by this ; that Christ , the Son of God , the wisdom of the father , dwelleth in them that do believe , by his own spirit ? whereby he is as much the soul of their souls , as their souls are the life of their bodies : and so doth prompt , and inspire them by his grace , in such a manner , that they shall not only , not lightly forego , or so much as slip any point , that tendeth to their happiness temporal , or eternal ( for , all things work together for good to them that love God ) but doth also fill them full of such inward joys , as carnal wisdom is not able to conceive . 

Such as have been addicted to their studies , have placed the chiefest felicity of life in contemplation ( we must suppose that a man be of sufficiency to be vacant to it , and to make his choice of what he liketh ) because this is the pleasure of the mind . So our master Aristotle , although his own speculations were but dry ( 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . ) But Sencea distinguisheth betwixt that part of Philosophy , which is conversant about the natural questions , and that which riseth up to the researches , that are concerning God ; speaking of this later as being above the other , as much as the Heaven is above the Earth : yet he moveth only such remote questions of contemplation as these are , what the nature of God is ; and whether he be wholly intent upon himself , or hath sometimes regard to us : pronouncing ( notwithstanding ) of this later part , that it is more high , and sprightly than the other : and such as wraps us up above this darkness , wherein we were mantled before as in thick clouds , and brings us near unto that light , from whence itself doth shine , Such pleasures did they pretend to take in their poor , and low sentiments of Philosophy , the highest of which do hardly reach the threshold of Divinity ! 

The Poets seemed to be full of one of the nine Goddesses , the Muses , and to take great pleasure in it , when their Genius worked kindly towards verses : and therefore used to begin their poems with a prayer to one , or other of them , which was counted most propitious unto such a vein , or strain of Poesy , as they then intended . The Heathen Priests in their Temples gloryed in being possessed with the Daemon , strutting in the Penetralia , like the bird of Juno . 

Cicero delighted in the notion of immortality : but it was of name only : that of the Soul he accounted as a problem . Of death he therefore maketh the lesle account , ( as other of the Heathens ) who thought it but indifferent , because it brought as much good , as evil with it . 

Cato was much taken with Socrates his discourses about the immortality of the soul , when he was about to kill himself : and uttered strange , and admirable sayings to the Heathen hearers : yet he dreamt not of a resurrection , an Heaven ; or but only of Elysian fields , or shades : and so he died , not so much out of goodwill , as to save himself from falling into the hands of enemies , which he thought would use him contumeliously . 

But when we come to contemplate one God , distinguished ( and not divided ) into three persons , for our sakes : in the works of creation , redemption , and sanctification unto glory ; how infinitely far is our contemplation enlarged beyond theirs ? when we meditate on the attributes of his glory , as that he is merciful , and bounteous , and the rest : in a word , that he is light and love , ; which are unfolded only in the Scriptures : what an infinite of tenters arethere , to extend this wooff , until there be no more place , nor space , but that which runs into eternity ? 

When we shall consider what he is in respect to us : In whom we live , and move , and have our beings : who covered us , when we were made in secret ; and in whose book our members were all written , being yet unperfect , who was not only the Father of our Fathers ; but much more than a Father to every one of us in particular ; giving us all the good that ever we did enjoy , and is never weary of it : but above all , who is our redeemer , and the Father of Our Lord , and husband , together with himself , God blessed for ever . OH admirable contemplations ! OH what peculiar pleasures do belong to this adoption ! OH the ecstasies of study , love and wonder ! what can there be wanting , if we think but of the least of these , to raise our souls up to a near alliance with the Angels , that are in Heaven ? it is from this doctrine , that the soul comes to have her wings full summed , that were hardly imped before , that did but hover about ( indeed ) in clouds of darkness . 

What though the Poets boast of raptures ? they terminate in a Woman : and for the most part , desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne . What though the heathen Priests seemed to have some familiarity with the Gods , in whose Temples they did attend , and serve ? they were usually deadly sick with it . Let Cicero please himself about an immortal name : we should not know him from another man , though we should meet him : though we talk of him , he cannot hear us : and if he be not , what is he the nearer , as Valla argueth . Let Cato speak bravely of the immortality of the soul itself , since he thought it better to die , then to protract his misery : yet none of his admirers could sinned in his heart to quit an indifferent life here , for the best that they could make of the other . 

But since it is another kind of immortality , that the Christian faith doth grasp , and gasp after : no wonder if the excellency of so sublime an object do draw them up far above the state of other men , that seem to have more in them , than themselves : and give them other manner of fruitions , which are unspeakable and full of glory , without deceit , or stilt : in a word , that it silleth them not only with a true contempt of death ( which the other do but seign ) but impelleth them to triumph over it , and often to provoke it in the way of Martyrdom . Let us move yet but one step further , that we may reach the goal . 

Others are not much addicted unto contemplation ( but rather leave it as a fancy to them that like it better ) yet they will not quit their own pretensions unto happiness . They had rather have it placed in an active , or a quiet life , supported with such means , and aides , as may best administer unto either of them , as they themselves should choose . Be it so , we are at all points ready to show where happiness is , sooner than any other , for Godliness is profitable unto all things , having the promises of this life , and of that which is to come . 

Carnal wisdom seems to teach how to enjoy , and manage the goods of fortune but it cannot get them : whereas the true wisdom hath length of days in her right hand , and in her left riches and honour . 

Carnal wisdom teacheth to enjoy them alone , but this how to enjoy God together with them , which is much more . Carnal Wisdom teacheth a pretended equanimity , and indifference in adversity ( which it cannot possibly prevent ) but it can no more do it , than it can satisfy thirst , and hunger with dainty words ; whereas this wisdom and prudence , whereof we speak , affords such a true support within , as hath really made many ( and still doth ) to rejoice in tribulations . 

And if you ask me what this inward support is . I answer , it is the spirit of Union , through faith , whereof I gave you but an hint before , indeed , how the Saints are united mystically unto Christ , and have thereby unspeakable enjoyments , and full of glory : we cannot show in Act , because it is internal , and a mystery : but it plainly appeareth by the effects : for , they are oft transported in their private prayers , who have Communion with the Father , and with his Son Jesus Christ , they have admirable gifts when they come abroad . That Spirit , which we accounted as their higher souls or by way of eminence , showeth wonders , when occasion draws it forth to outward observation . But it is not according to the will of man : neither of him that hath it , always to exert the power of it , nor of others to make collusion with it : but rather , it makes but little show to the world ( till God himself do set it forth to action , or to patience ) because it aboundeth most in mortified men : who being filled with the Spirit , look never the fuller for it ; and while they are invincible in the Faith , do but show to be the meekest men . And so each one doth acknowledge for himself , when he professeth with St. Paul , The Life which I seem to live in the stesh , I live not ; but my life is hid with Christ in God.  

To conclude ( since we must needs be reduced unto some bounds , though our subject cannot ) here is the highest pitch of this excellency , which hath no perch below the clouds ; but pierceth into the Empyrean heavens . This wisdom doth secure us of a better life ( while it is so far from diminishing , that it added unto this , as I have showed you ) but irreligion hazards both , upon a fond supposition ; what if there be no resurrection ? yet , by piety , you shall live more happily here , then without it . The madman that had great joys to go unto the Port , and to see the Ships come in , conceiting that they were all his own , proved but melancholy , when he was cured . Better it were to be deceived with godliness , which is profitable unto all things , then to be deluded by the world , that yieldeth no security , or felicity to them , that stick the closest to it . 

But what if there be a resurrection at the last ? insipientis erit tum dicere , non putaram . It will be but folly to pled then ; I had not thought , that it would have proved so . And it will be too late to put in any other plea : for this very wisdom will then come in , in evidence ; and after speak like a judge from the bench , in this manner . Since ye have set at naught all my Counsel , and would none of my reproof , I also will laugh at your calamity , I will mock when your fear cometh ; when your fear cometh as desolation , and your destruction as a whirlwind ; when distress , and anguish cometh on you . then shall they call upon me , but I will not answer : they shall seek me early , but they shall not find me . 

This is the sum of my exhortation , and my argument . To day while it is called to day , let us harken to the voice of wisdom , let us clasp this prudence , and never part with it : but let us keep it so , that it my keep us for ever . And the peace of God which passeth all understanding , shall keep your hearts , and minds through Christ Jesus . Now the God of peace , that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus , the great Shepherd of the Sheep , through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant , make you perfect in every good work , to do his will , working in you that , which is wellpleasing in his sight , through Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be praise and glory for ever and ever . 

AMEN . 





Chap. 2. 4.  Math. 13. 45.  Job 28. 28.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ? Primus in orbe deos secit timor . Hesiod . etc. Quae est gens , aut quod genus hominum , quod non habeat sine doctrina , anticipationem quandam deorum , Cic. 1. de nat . deorum , Nulla gens tam fera , cujusimentem non imbuerit deorum opinio . Tusc. qu. 1.  Nulla gens usquam est adeo extra leges , moresque projecta , ut non aliquos deos credat . Sen. Ep. 117.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Arist ● de coelo . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Plut. in amator . etc.  Plut. adv . epicur . Ut passim est videre in Lucretio . Lucan l. 1.  Plut. in vitis  Livy . Act. 5. 37.  rev. 13. 10.  1 Tim. 2. 1. 2.   He began his reign A. D. 310  Zech. 4. 6.  Mal. 4. 6.  Luk. 1. 17.  1 Cor. 1. 25.  rev. 12. 16.  1 Kings 18. 33.  Libro de Djs Syris . Plut. de orac . Rom. 11. 25.  Gen. 3.  Matth. 10. 34.  Matth. 16. 18.  Col. 2. 8.  verse 22.  Acts 7. 22.  Eph. 2. 2.   Qui praemia , & triumphos decrevere , secundum numerum hostium occisorum . Si violandum est jus , regnandi causa . Caesar ex Eurip.  de principe . Both . de consolat . philosophiae . l. 1.  Mulier reverendi admodum vultus , oculis ardentibus , colore vivido , atque in exhausti vigoris , quamvis ita aevi plena soret , ut nullo modo nostrae crederetur aetatis . Referente mihi nobili Polono de ●ua gente . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Rom. 8. 18.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ad Nicom . l. 10. cap. 7.   Altior est haec , & animosior , & multo hanc caliginem in qua volutamur , excedit , & e tenebris creptos illo producit , unde lucct . pri . nat . quaest . In Parad.  Plutarch in vit . Cat. min. In Phaedone Platonio . Grandia morituri verba catonis discere , ab insano multùm Laudanda Magistro , Pers. Sat. 3.  Act. 1● . Ps. 139. 15.  etc.  Sic Just. Mart. ( ni malè memini ) retundit Poetas Ethnicos , quorum , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . Horat. the art . poet . 1 Tim. 4. 8.  prov. 3. 16.  2 Cor. 6. 10. 74  Rom. 5. 3.  1 Pet. 1. 8.  1 Joh. 1. 3. 4.  Eph. 5. 18.  Gal. 2. 20.  Col 3 , 3.  Prov , 1. 24.  etc.  Heb 3. 15. 4. 7.  Phil. 4. 7.  Heb. 13. 20.  