CHRISTIAN AND CONJUGAL COUNSEL OR , Christian Counsel , applied unto the MARRIED ESTATE . 

By William Thomas , Minister of the Gospel , and Rector of the Church of Ubley . 

Heb. 13. 4.  

Marriage is honourable in all , and the bed undefiled . 



Bernard . super Cantica . Serm. 66.  

Tolle de Ecclesia honorabile connubium & ●●●um immaculatum , nun reples eam concubinariis incestuosis , semini●luis mollibus , masculorum concubitoribus , & omni deniquè genere immundorum ? 



London , Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain . 1661. 

To the CHRISTIAN READER . 

These Meditations ( Good Reader ) were long since conceived and imparted for the use of one entr● into the Married state ▪ and coming afterwards into more hands , the printing of them hath been long since desired , which ( the World being full of Books , and myself of Weakness ) I diverted , and ●●ve hitherto deserved . 

Yet fearing lest being fixed among 〈◊〉 few in a private place , I should be wanting to more ▪ and considering that what I have here written is so little , as that it is not like to be tedious ; and of such a subject as toucheth upon the substance of Godliness , and so may be some way profitable , I have , at length , advenred to let it see the light . 

And that the rather , because I would have this imprinted in the hearts of Christians , that Religion is much seen in Relations ; Hence the Apostles proceeding in their Epistles from matters of doctrine to prescripts of practice , do therein descend , and disperse their directions into several Callings and Conditions , as of Magistrates and Subjects , Ministers and People , Husband and Wife , Parents and Children , Masters and Servants ; Many of which are contained and concerned in the Married estate : Even Nature and Reason make Offices and Societie-services the trial of Virtue , it being an easy matter to creep into a Cell , and under a pretence of Devotion to serve and satisfy Selfwill : but to appear in the sight of the Sun , and to appear approved when there are many quicksighted , and some severe observers ; this will find work enough for the greatest grace where it is , and too much for the best nature where it is not . 

This difficulty , and the excellency of walking with approbation in the works and offices belonging to all and every one , in their particular place and calling , I am the more willing to note , because I have heard diverse Godly persons complain , that having had in the Single estate much liberty for sweet and Soul-refreshing conversing with God , being afterwards married , and having a Family to look to , they have been so forced from them , as to find a great loss in their acquaintance with God , in regard of that frequent enlarged and uninterrupted communion with him which they formerly enjoyed . But let not such who would fain be communing with God if they could , and at Jesus feet if they might , droop or be disconsolate , much less dismayed , for now ( being entered into society ) they come to make use of that habit , and those helps of holiness , which they got and laid up in the single estate ; And this may be a Rule , that the Use of all preparatory exercises and assistances is better than the Using of them : They therefore that show forth the power of their former religious performances , do not lose , but make a gainful exchange , They do but come from the exercises of Religion , to the exercise , which is the end , ornament , perfection , and compliment of all Exercises . 

it 's true as the Apostle saith , He that is Unmarried careth for the things belonging to the Lord , how he may please the Lord , that is , having not other things to care for , he is more free for it ; He doth not say that every one that is married taketh that care , or that if a man be once married , he taketh it not , but only that the Unmarried have an advantage , and may do it more and more easily Again , He that is married careth for the things that are of the World , how he may please his wife , but then this is to be noted that he performs a good office in it , his Care is not his Sin but his Duty ; and every Duty hath its comfort and reward ; Yea that care and sorrow which women are called to in the Married estate , hath this comfort assured to it , that ( their continuance in Faith , Charity , Holiness and Sobriety being supposed ) they shall be saved in Child-bearing , that is , the conscientious and patient performance of the offices , and undergoing the afflictions of Childbearing women , is their proper way to Heaven ; for that 's the work which God hath committed to them to do , and the thing wherein the reality of their Religion is to discover itself . 

Yet here there is need to annex a Caution , to wit , that though the external duties of religion be lessened by marriage ( I mean to some , for diverse that had less liberty before marriage have more by it , ) I say , though religious duties be lessened by marriage , yet they must not be left ; Christians , whether married or unmarried must still acquaint their hearts with wisdom , and be provident to preserve their Fellowship with God ; They that can be content with an Husband , with a Wife and Children ( and all Worldly accommodations ) without God , never knew what it was to enjoy God. Nay rather , They that have Wives must be as if they had none , that is , in regard of their readiness for the service of God. A Husband must not say , I have married a Wife , and therefore I cannot come , Nor the Wife , I have a Husband , therefore God cannot have me ; but though they be not able to take ( as some unmarried may ) every opportunity , yet they must not neglect those they may take , nor make themselves liable to that most sad Charge of making light of God's Ordinances and gracious invitations . 

But the Gate grows wide for so little an House ( although it may be reckoned a part of the House , I shall hasten therefore ; If any require why I publish this at this time , it might be enough for me so aged ) to answer , Because every man should do what good he can while he hath time ; yet something more may be said in regard of the present time , wherein the great God ( whose Works are like Himself ) by rare providences , I say , rare and admirable providences , both because so high and so dry , hath in such sort altered and bettered the state of things amongst us , that our rightful , gracious and accomplished King is returned unto us , which , if our high sins , our broad and spreading profaneness , and deep security do not hinder , promises unto us an happy Settlement . Now , as times of trouble and persecution detain and deter from marriage , so times of peace ( albeit marriage should have some further and greater reason than National rest ) I say , times of peace and establishment , give encouragement to it , and consequently make these and the like Scripture-directions seasonable for the rendering of it more holy , and thereby more happy . 

And to say all , though this advice reflect on the married estate , yet it is not so appropriated to it , but that there is use of it , as there is of that godliness and regular Walking , that it persuades unto , in every estate : It is Christian as well as Conjugal counsel , and though it be composed for , and contrived into the married condition , yet ( that estate being so comprehensive ) much of it may serve indifferently for Christians in every Condition . 

Desiring thy prayers ( Christian Reader ) that the Author of the Counsel ( or rather the weak Instrument ) may be Himself the Observer ; I rest , 

Thy Servant for Jesus sake , William Thomas . 

ERRATA . 

Epistle , P. 4. concentred r. concerned . 

P. 27.  Christian , r. Christian.  

P. 41.  Col. 1. 17. r. Col. 4. 17.  

P. 69. l. 8. damage , r danger . 

P. 63. l. 7. comfort , r. consort . 

P. 84. l. 8. rustles , r. justles . 

P. 88 l. 2. it combines , r. is comeliness . 

The Matter of the ensuing MEDITATIONS Summed up , and referred to the several Numbers and Partitions of them : WHEREIN — 

1 Marriage dignity and duty is generally mentioned . N. 1 , 2 , 3.  
2 Four Requisites in Marriage . 1 Zeal in Religion . N. 5.  
2 Patience in all Occasions . N 6. where is further declared concerning Impatience — 1 The evils of it , as being an Enemy to comfortable Society , 1 With God. N 9 , 10.  
2 With Men. N. 11.  
3 With our own Consciences . N. 12.  

2 Supports for those that groan under it . N. 14 , etc.  
3 The cure of it . N. 17.  Viz.  1 Consideration of God's providence . N. 19  
2 Of our own faults . N. 21.  
3 Communing with our own hearts . N. 22.  
4 Faithful friends . N. 23.  
5 Prayer . N. 24.  


3 Wisdom : And that — — 1 In matters of Religion : ] Particularly , in using and ordering 1 Of religious Exercises . N. 26 , 27.  
2 Of Christian and edifying conference and admonition , enlarged with diverse particular directions from N. 28 , to N. 41.  

2 In duties of Relation : Namely , relating — 1 To Ministers . N. 41 , to 49.  
2 To Neighbours and Friends . N. 49 , to . 53.  
3 To those in the Family . N. 53.  Viz. — 1 Equals . N. 54.  
2 Inferiors . N. 55.  
3 Man and Wife : where there are diverse advertisements for both . N. 56 , to N. 66.  
4 Children , to whom Parents owe 1 Instruction . N. 66 , to 69.  
2 Correction . N. 69.  
3 Disposition into a Calling . N. 70.  
4 Disposition in Marriage — to a Consort religious , discreet , with respect to Person and Portion . N. 71 , 72 , 73 , 74.  





CHRISTIAN COUNSEL , applied to the Married Estate . 

1.  Marriage is an estate honourable in all ; And they fall below the nature and worth of men , ( and much more of Christians ) who quarrel that estate which God hath ordained for the comfort , benefit , and increase of mankind . 

2.  The honour of the married estate is preserved , while the bed is kept without being defiled either by falseness or filthiness . 

3.  But the duty of the estate is as difficult as the dignity is great , and a business it is of far greater virtue for any to acquit himself in the married , then in the single estate . 

4.  A single and solitary estate is the touchstone of sincerity , and they are surely good that are good secretly , but of our wisdom , patience , and zeal , society is the truest trial . 

5.  Of zeal in regard of religious exercises and private conversing with God ; for which , to gain a competent time , and therein , to come before God with a clear heart in the multitude and number of worldly businesses , will undoubtedly make Christians to bestir themselves . 

6.  And of patience also in regard of Family-occasions , and the many vexations of spirit that do arise both from things and persons . 

7.  it 's true that diverse occasions of disturbance and distemper , may by providence , and prudence be prevented ; and our little stock of patience bespeaks the best assistance of that providence ; but to avoid & discharge ourselves of all , is no more in our power , then to command the course of providence , or to alter the nature and dispositions of people . 

8.  We have need of patience therefore , that what we are not able to prevent we may be willing to endure . 

9  Nor doth patience endure it only , but abate and end it ; and this is the common fruit of our impatience , the doubling of our disturbance . 

10.  And consider here ( to make patience more precious ) that perturbations of spirit are great molesters of piety , and interrupt our society with God ; for the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God , that is , a wrathful person , ( especially in a wrathful passion ) is very unfit to do the will of God , either in works of Religion , that require a quiet and peaceable heart ; or in works of Righteousness , that require an equal and dispassionated judgement , 2 Chron. 16. 10.  

11.  Wrathful distempers also dissweeten our society with men : Needs must others lesle comfortably come near us , and we lesle honourably converse with them , if we shall ( though but in some degrees ) resemble that Nabal who was so froward ( as his Servants said , and none is able to shake off what Servants say truly , Job 31. 13.  ) that a man could not tell how to speak to him , 1 Sam 25. 17.  

12.  Add to this , that the comfortable society with ourselves , and our own Consciences is hindered while we give way to those passionate words and carriages wherewith the Conscience , upon serious and sober consideration cannot choose but be much grieved , 1 Sam. 25. 31.  

13.  Now why should we have any fellowship with that which darkens and disturbs all fellowship both with God , and Men , and with our own Consciences ? 

14.  Not that all comfort is lost by the crossness and cursedness of our nature ; Divers belong to God that are very unpleasant and troublesome to M●n . God hath some knotty timber in his Carmel ; All that serve him are not like his Servant Moses , ( you may find me●ker men on Earth , ( haply ) in Hell too , in regard of natural meekness ) but some as Jonah . And yet to speak the truth ( not to protect Perverseness , but to support those that groan under the Burden of it ) the harshest Good-christian is better than the sweetest either Heathen or Hypocrite ; and the worst Child God hath is better than the best the Devil hath . 

15.  But though sincerity of Heart , and sourness of Carriage may stand together , yet they stand as two Enemies in the Field , and many sad Fights there be in that divided-heart that is the seat of that War , the reason whereof is , because the one Enemy , I mean a crooked nature , is so unweariable ; and the other , that is , the divine nature , the grace of God , the Rose among the Thorns , is so unconquerable , and so irreconcilable . 

16.  This combat , hard as it is , is often the best hold that a Christian hath , and is so necessary a fruit of Sincerity , that they never feared God truly that endured their inordinate passions patiently . Impatience , with others is their fault , to be impatient with themselves for it , is their comfort . 

17.  Yet trouble with our Frowardness is the more uncomfortable part of our Comfort ; To God all things are possible ▪ and , howsoever we can no more quite put off our Naughtiness here , than our Natures , yet by prayer and care ( God's power , and God's course ) this disease may receive some competent cure . 

18.  To this cure , it conduceth much ; First , seriously to consider God's providence . Secondly , to call to mind our own faults . And Thirdly , to common with our own hearts . 

19  That diverse molestations arise in our affairs , may be the fruit of our ▪ own Improvidence , and then our anger should abide at home , but ( howsoever ) diverse cross things there are enwrapped within the course of divine providence , wherein ( therefore ) a perverse Impatience amounts to this , the ▪ charging of God foolishly ▪ That which is crocked cannot be made straight , the more need had we to set ourselves straight , for if they be crooked and we too , though God can make their Crookedness end in his glory , yet ours will end in our own smart . 

20.  Besides that , they that can bear nothing forget why they were born , for , Man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward , Job 5. 7.  

21.  Withal , our own faults , ( both past and present ) feelingly mind us of forbearance in the faults and wrongs of others : we do not only need Patience ( for ) others , but ( in ) others ; if they need ours , consider also , that we exercise theirs , Eccles. 7. 22.  

22.  As the considering of our own faults persuades Patience , so communing with our own hearts , works it ; I mean communing , not in our fits , ( for then Passion is the Judge , and nothing is pleasing but what pierces ) but on our Beds , and in cool blood , for then Reason is the judge ; then God is the Judge , and it is for Patience that he passes Sentence ; He is not in these winds and earthquakes , and fires , but in a soft and still voice , 1 King. 19 11 , 12.  They that common with their own hearts most , are like to chide least , for the upshot of that is , Be still , Ps. 4. 4.  

23.  To these may be added as an happy help , a patient and prudent Friend , what would David have done if Abigail had not been ? If a Woman may prevail so much with a Superior , why not a Man with an equal , with an inferior ? if not , while the fit lasts , yet that it may not last ; Passion is but the turning of Reason out of office . Now as the Flatterer takes part with the Beast in Man , and the sensual part , so doth a true Friend with the understanding part , and a Christian Friend with the regenerate part . Hence , ( by his help ) Reason and Grace is restored , and Passion expelled . 

True it is , that Patience is an hard task in a choleric temper ; the more need had such of greater care , and wiser company , and ( to say all ) to make the more earnest Prayers , and as faithful as earnest ; for what Heart is so rebellious and impetuous but He can put bounds unto it , who says unto the Sea itself , Hitherto shalt thou go , and no further , and here shall thy proud waves be stayed ? Job 38. 11.  

24.  But as Society tries our Zeal and our Patience , so it puts us much to the proof of our wisdom , and that both in matters of Religion and Relation . 

25.  And as concerning matters of Religion , both in the carriage of religious exercises , and of religious conference . 

26.  Religious exercises are as necessary as it is to depend upon God for the prosperous carriage of our affairs ; for God will be depended upon in his own way ; It is the base and atheistical opinion that people have of having to do with God ( as if it were but so much labour lost ) that makes them grudge the time for holy Duties , and make as if a day of humiliation would undo them . Look upon prayer as a familiar communing with the most glorious God ; as the Supplyer of all wants ; as a Shelter from all dangers ; as the Settler , Sanctifier , and Prosperer of all Businesses ; and is it possible to neglect it ? Worthy thoughts of better things will shifted for time , and device ways whereby to enjoy them , only Infidelity abandons Duty . 

27.  Let it be the shame therefore of those that profess themselves Believers , to think that Piety is against Profit , and that there is no gain in Godliness ; yet times for our general and particular Calling should be discreetly divided ; religious exercises should be fitly ordered , and those Prayers ( in particular ) that are made with others should be framed according to the State and Condition of our Family or Company ; Not so hard and high as that the Simple cannot understand them ; not so simple and insufficient as that they that have understanding cannot relish them ; not so long as that the weak cannot bear them ; nor so short and overly as to nourish Security , and to accommodate Unghostly men in their averseness from holy Duties by the sleightnesse and cursorinesse of them . 

28.  As for Christian and Spiritual conference , and that continual , ( as opportunity shall offer itself ) it is both the duty of men faithful , who are called upon to exhort one another daily ; and the character and mark of men fearing God , who speak often one to another , Mal. 3. 16.  

29.  Yet difference is to be made between persons and persons ; Some be Superiors in age , abilities , office , before whom it becomes Inferiors rather to offer things to consideration , than to affirm ; Some are weaker , and of better hearts , others wiser and of better parts ; good and ghostly things will be accepted of those , but wiser things as well as better must be brought to these , for though they approve all holy things , yet they relish higher . Again . Some are willing and able to speak of better things , ( and haply not able to speak well of other things ) to these come purposely to talk of God and Heaven , and do it plentifully ; but give not Weaklings more of Spiritual conference than they are able to accept ; rather mix ( as Sauces ) civil , moral , pleasant , ( but some way profitable ) speeches ; yea , if men be so unghostly and Ungodly , that religious conference will not be admitted , join with them in civil , to prevent profane . 

30.  And distinguish also between Times and Times ; between a private visit , ( wherein Christians shall do well to sit together on Earth as Saints in Heaven , and to pour forth themselves one to another in the fullness of Spiritual discourse ) and a common feast , wherein though they ought principally to intend God's glory , yet they are permitted also to cheer up themselves with such things and words as are suitable for 〈◊〉 refreshing of the outward man in an human 〈◊〉 : Not but that ●…en in such meetings ●…ere should be a mixture●… ●… better things , ( and ●…me be so happy as to ●… merry and wise too , ●…d to convey pious ●…ingss with pleasure and ●…th power also ) I say , ●…t but that in such mee●…gss there should be a ●…ixture of better things ●…hats no Christian mee●…g that shuts out Christ ) ●…t in other meetings , ●… when people be more ●… both to speak and to ●… ear things spiritual ) a greater measure . 

31.  Such cautions being observed , they that fear God do like themselves in speaking often one to another . But often is not all ; Christians must be good and wise ; Goodness speaks much , and Wisdom speaks well ; and very well it should be , because when they that fear God speak often , God still stands by with his book of remembrance ; and how wise should the Speaker be when God himself is the Noter . 

32.  That Christians may admonish one another , the word of God must dwell in them ; it 's the great fault ( I do not say of Christian but of ) Christians - conference , that they speak out of their own heads , without their books or their guide , their Bible or their Pastor , and of those things most whereof the Scripture speaks least ; indeed of things curious and disputable , rather than necessary and profitable : A thing the more to be both marked and feared , because the spending and engaging of men's time and talk , and wits , and zeal in niceties and more refined Speculations , tends — 1. to a slighting and a kind of loathing of the plain and main things of Scripture , as ●oo low for so great Proficients to look upon : and 2. to a separating from ●he Churches of God , as ●oo corrupt for men so ghostly to abide in . 

33.  To prevent this the better , as the word of God must dwell in us , so it must dwell in us richly , that we may not need to rove other where to make ourselves rich in Religion . Now because men may talk much of Scripture , and yet talk but little Scripture ; ( for Scripture is not itself unless taken and spoken ▪ in its right sense ) therefore ▪ the word of God must not only dwell in us richly , but rightly , and in all wisdom , that is , with a right and judicious interpretation and apprehension , that so we may the better , when we meet together , teach and admonish one another . 

34.  Withal , Christian Conference must not only abound , and be sound , but it must ( as the Scripture every where speaks ) edify , that is , it must be seasonable , suitable , and so ordered and carried as shall be most for the building up of the Company before whom it is delivered . 

35.  He that builds must first clear the soil , that is , get some rights and interests , some good affections and estimations among them to whom he speaks ; or ( at least ) be able to produce a good calling , that he may not be diverted with this sad and sour demand , upon what acquaintance or title do you make so bold as to build here . 

36.  Next , he must lay a good foundation ; and not rear a high and weighty frame ( such as Zeal is willing to make ) upon such sand and soluble matter as will not abide a Storm . Good things had need to be so much the better laid , by how much they are worse loved , and he that would speak hopefully in things not pleasing to nature , is put to it to speak convincingly , for men will never receive things against their will and their reason too . 

37.  A sound foundation being laid , he must build , not hay and stubble upon it , but what will abide trial ; for as a man would be loath that all his building should fall with the foundation , so he may be very sorry too that all the building should fail but the foundation ; to wit , for want of a right and workman ▪ like raising his frame upon it . Wisdom is needful for every Builder , though most for a Minister , who , though he be not a Paul , yet may be called , in respect of People , a Master-builder , 1 Cor. 3. 10.  

38.  The manner of Building is a material thing also ; knotty timber requires the Axe much , and some must be saved with Fear , whether they like it or no , for its sure ( if they be saved ) they will like it ; others ( happily ) are so meekned and made ready by the grace and hand of God , that there 's no cause why hammer or axe , or any iron or harder tool should be heard , and if it be so , he hath a hard heart that will strike but one needless stroke , on such have compassion , Judas v. 22 , 23.  

39  As for the fashion of the Building , wisdom is a winner , and the commendation of a Spiritual builder is , to raise upon a good foundation , a substantial frame , in an amiable form ; amiable , and yet variable . All men love not to have their Houses built alike : Some love higher Houses , and delight that others should set up in their hearts , a most spiritual and heavenly structure : others love a lower piece , and cannot be abstracted from the world , and from affairs , yet in truth they are : and upon Meditation , but not in such a height , and with such devotion , either because of the necessity of their Calling , or the propension of their minds to secular employments and engagements : in which respect something must be yielded , and they that would edify , must ( as our Saviour speaks ) tell them of earthly things that is , speak of heavenly things in a more human and rational , rather than in a more ghostly and spiritual way ; and ( withal ) so limit their Christian discourse , as to let them see that as they be willing to advantage them in regard of their Souls : So they be loath to prejudice them in regard of their Affairs . To go on , Some there be that like a Wide house , and to be left wholly to that large room which the Scripture puts them into in its general rules ; others love lesser rooms , and to have the generalities of Scripture drawn down for a regular and strict course in all particulars ; for where grace is less advantaged by natural abilities , it had need be more assisted and encouraged by outward observances . Thus there being a latitude in Religion , and God being pleased to dwell in Houses of different Forms ; Building-christians may not contend to have all as one , neither stand with men that are truly willing , that with them Christ should have a house to put his head in , about the fashion of the building ; only the foundation , the materials , and the main parts of the building must be alike in all . 

40.  Generally , As the Constitution of the Patient regulates the Physician's Prescript ; So we should observe in all religious Communications what will take , and how much : Give Christians leave to leave with an appetite , even when the Conference is pleasing ; and if ( haply ) it be lesle grateful , and carry a reproof with it , then , as the main project of the Physician is to preserve nature , and to maintain himself a party , in the body of the Patient ; so ever look to this , to preserve love : Be so wise at one time as to be welcome at another , yea so sweet at one time as to be sem for at another . 

41.  As Christian wisdom is seen in the exercises of Religion , so also in our ordinary relations , amongst which that of Pastors may well challenge the first place ; concerning whom , the Rule is , esteem them very highly in love for their works sake . Nor is due and just estimation to be entertained only , but ( as there is occasion ) to be declared ; for as outward expressions without inward and real respects are reputed a Flattery ; so an inward estimation , not seconded by outward and answerable acknowledgements , is in danger to be reckoned a Dissimulation . The heart is the treasury of good affections , not the prison . 

42.  Yet Ministers require no such respect as to debar their People from being their private and modest Remembrancers , whether of defects or faults ; for as People have from Pastors a ministerial , so Pastors have from People a christian assistance ; but its sufficient when they have to do with Ministers and men apprehensive ▪ to intimate the former ; and while they have to do with men conscientious and tender , to touch the latter . Not that things not justifiable should be favoured in any : but Men look to have so much right done them as not to be worse thought of than they are . Now a frequent and importunate Monitor , reports himself to have either a dull or an hardhearted ▪ hearer . 

43.  Christian Remembrances from People to their Pastor , as they ever require due observance , so do they relish best , when they are tendered to them ( and so it is when they are tendered to any other ) as acts of obedience and conscience , proceeding from them not as men affecting such an office , but as not daring to omit such a duty : its one thing to speak of things amiss ( especially to Superiors ) as those that are bound to do it , another thing to speak as those that are bend to do it . 

44.  it 's good also to be sure things are amiss before a man signify it , else he must needs discover a want either of a good judgement , or of good will , which , though the wisdom and humility of Ministers and good Christians will and should cover , yet People should provide not to discover . Two things are due to all good People , in particular ; to a Pastor , Love and Honour : Love covers a multitude of things that are truly unblameable : but Honour will not so much as mention that that is questionable . 

45.  Such things as these are requisite , in point of prudence between People and their Pastor : but the best wisdom of a Hearer is , to make the best use of his Minister , for which purpose Disciples shall do well to propound , and Ministers to accept and countenance , useful Questions : but propounded they should be at fit times without molestation , and urged with modesty , as by those whose meaning is not to maintain an Argument ( there 's difference between a Disciple and a Disputant ) but to obtain an Answer . 

46.  Upon such Proposals , Ministers do for present ( as need requires , and as occasions permit ) debate the matter , and perhaps deliver their judgements , which people are reverently to receive , and to entertain , as those that are willing to take resolution as well as to seek it ; not but that they may examine any man's judgements ( as the Bereans did Paul's Sermon ) by Scripture , or by Reason ; but not oppose it by mere opinion . I grant indeed there may be some belonging to a Ministers charge of extraordinary parts , knowledge , and judgement , to whom therefore more is to be granted ; but ( to speak of that which is ordinary ) it is not equal nor modest ( when Teachers and Scholars confer together , ) for the Scholar and Disciple to oppose judgement with judgement , nor to be high and peremptory , ( though with some show of reason ) for if the Teacher have not better reason for the present , yet he may have . 

47.  But whatever Pastors and Teachers say for the present , yet as preaching is a Ministers principal task , so is it a Hearers highest help ; what Hearers propound , Ministers do ( perhaps ) more observe than answer when they propound it , and choose rather to speak better in public , than more in private ; and public Sermon-solutions are absolutely best , ( unless in some private and personal Cases ) as being — 1. more general ; what satisfaction I alone should have in private , many by my means and proposals have in public — 2. more full ; and ( by reason of study and meditation ) more full of sufficiency than those can be that are delivered suddenly — 3. and more effectual ; by informing the mind , and satisfying the conscience , as being held forth in God's principal Ordinance , to which he hath promised his special presence and blessing , and with the prayers of the Minister and the whole Congregation that that blessing may be bestowed . 

48.  Yet the occasions , gifts , and dispositions of men being different , and some being more addicted to Discourse than Meditation , ( and more happy in it also ) nothing can be here certainly defined , nor is it needful ; for the wise and careful Christian will quickly see what he may have , and how he may best have it , and accordingly manage the matter so as to obtain his own best assistance , with his Pastor's best acceptance . 

49.  Next to the Minister , our Wisdom will be well employed in carrying ourselves commendably to our Neighbours and Friends , whether called by the grace of God , and sanctified , or ( as yet ) uncalled . 

50.  With those that are truly good , we shall do well to converse — 1. with more familiarity and openesse of heart , as being of one household , however Un-united by external allyances ; — 2. with entireness of affection as being children of one Father , whatever outward distances there be ; — 3 with respect to edification , as being Servants of the same Master , for whose use we ought to improve one another ; In this regard , the sum of our Duty is , to assist in persons regenerate , the part regenerate , and that according to that good and perfect , and acceptable will of God , whereby the renewed mind ought to be guided . A thing the rather to be marked , that our Zeal in the pressing of persons well affected , may be employed with respect to Duty , not Fancy ▪ so as to nourish grace in them , not humour ; and so as to beaten down sin in them , not civility and humanity : In brief , that that is contrary to God's word , not our way . 

51.  As for those that are Un-called , the rule is , to carry ourselves towards them wisely ; It sufficeth ( in a sort ) to carry ourselves towards the good innocently , but as for those that be without , as all Un-converted persons are in a true and a sad sense ; Innocency needs Wisdoms assistance for the avoiding of any thing unblameable , though but in appearance . It belongs to our Sanctity and Sincerity , not to be Faulty , but to our Wisdom , not to seem so . 

52.  Particularly , we shall do well before unregenerate Neighbours and Friends , to carry our selves , — 1.  Innocently , then shall not they harm us , then may we the better hope to win them . — 2.  Meekly , for if they be bad , so were we , and if we be good , so may they . — 3.  Kindly , if Barbarians show no small kindness to Christians , shall Christians show no great kindness to Barbarians , and persons unacquainted with religion ? if those that we wish were good were found to be very neighbourly , shall we harden them in their Condition by being behind with them in Kindness ? — — 4.  Courteously , being affable , amiable , willing to keep correspondence and to comply with others , not against Conscience , but against natural Disposition , and the bent of our Spirits ; which must be so far ordered and mastered , as that we withdraw not from Neighbours and Friends , as those that be loath to look upon them ; that 's against humanity : nor be sour towards them , that 's against civility : nor refrain causelessly common meetings with them , that 's against the laws of love and human society . — 5.  Christianly , in regard of all the former , carrying them all with an aim at their Conversion ; and trying them whether they may be made good by any good words or ways of love ; but not tiring them in the trial . By such courses as these we shall either allure them to our Profession , and ( if God will ) gain them , or else honour our Profession before them . 

53.  But Friends and Acquaintance are further off ; In the Family , where our residence is most required , our prudence is tied to a continual task . 

54.  Therein ( haply ) some are Equals ; and toward these we must carry ourselves humbly , not haughtily ; and cheerfully , not dully and lumpishly ; one Friend is not to be a Stone to another , out of which nothing can be gotten ; but a whet stone , to sharpen and quicken to such conference and converse as is both pious and profitable , both for the advantage of their Souls and their affairs . 

55.  Others in the Family are Inferiors , towards whom we must be careful to exercise Religion , Justice , Patience : — 1.  Religion in the countenancing of that that is good , and discountenancing of every thing that is evil . It is not to be spoken how much good Superiors do by casting their favours upon them that fear God ; and their frowns upon the Sins and corruptions of their Charges . — 2.  Justice , The care of those that are not equal ( but advanced above others ) is to do that that is equal ; trembling to abuse their power and pre-eminence to oppression . — 3.  Patience and condescending , and that so far as to let my Servant know , that as I am his Master , so Reason is mine , and much more Religion . 

56 The nearest Family-relation , and the dearest , is that of man and wife , wherein Love is the wife's due , and Subjection the husbands ; Honour is a thing belonging to them both ; to the husband as the Worthier , to the wife as the Weaker ; as a costly piece of Plate is laid up choycely , and a curious Glass handled tenderly ; the one because of the value , the other because of the beauty and bricklenesse . 

57  it 's an easy matter for the Wife that is the less and the tenderer , to love the Husband ; but of greater virtue for the Husband ( that is the higher ) to love the Wife , and of especial efficacy also , turning all the wheels in the Wife's frame for the Husband's use ; for Love in itself is an amiable and attracting Virtue , but withal it includes an estimation ; hence the love of eminent men is a Rarity ; for they look upon what is in others as great Merchants upon petty Markets , wherein there is nothing but things too poor for them to prize . Now Estimation is the greatest encouragement to Action and Accommodation ; the Wife therefore discerning herself to be a Person prized and her Husband's delight . Delights to do that only ( and all that ) that may accomplish the Husband's desire . 

58.  A Husband's love will never take away the Wife's fear : Virtue begets Reverence ( especially in those who do not only behold the beauty , but enjoy the benefit of it ) and love is the Husband's proper Virtue : Familiarity may breed Contempt in a political and civil distance , but not in a conjugal ; which is not like the head politic and the body , in which either part uses too much to shifted for itself , that to maintain an honour , and this to obtain a benefit : but like the head natural , and the members that are so endeared , that the head is never in damage of contempt for dealing kindly with the inferior members . Besides , that God so blesses what he requires in the Husband , that is , entire love , that it shall never hinder him of what the same God requires in the Wife , that is , hearty and seemly respect . 

59  As Love must be the Husband's study , so is Subjection the Wife's duty , I say , Subjection ; a sad word , but a thing not only easy , but sweet , if the Husband mind his duty first ; The Husband love's , the Wife serves ; and who are not Servants most willingly when they are loved most dearly ? Love was never yet known to be a Tyrant . Besides , in him that guide's and carries things by his Command the ability is required , and by him the adventure is born ; the Wife hath the ease to walk only in the way chaulked out , neither cumbered with the managing of the business , if it be difficult , nor blamed for the success , if it be disastrous ; Add to this , that it is the custom of Love in the Husband to put the Wife's counsel into his own Command , and so to obey him , is to please herself , and to fulfil her own mind . 

60.  If it so fall out , that the Husband be more imperious than wise , and have more mind to rule than to love , it sends the sad Wife to see why she choose him , but doth not privilege her to disobey him ; here her Wisdom must facilitate her Subjection , which in stead of denying Obedience , prevents Commands ; for which purpose , if she foresee any thing unlawful , her piety pleads for the prevention ; ( and that so , as to take no Nay ) if unreasonable , her wit ; if unpleasing , her interests ; and by these means ( but ever with prayer to God , for though it do not belong to Wives to rule their Husbands , yet to God it doth ) I say , by these means , the matter is like to be well amended : If any thing be yet heavier ▪ that will not make Disobedience lawful , but it will make Obedience laudable , and much more thankworthy : and its like to be as profitable to the Wife , as commenlable in her , the doing of what God requires of her , being the only way to change and mollify her hard Husband , not only because meekness and submissiveness hath a melting quality in any heart that can relent , but because where Gods will is performed , God's power ( that is able to alter and order all things and persons ) is more hopefully expected , and the more like sooner or later ) to be obtained . 

60.  Nothing more alienates Married ▪ persons than the studying of each others imperfections and errors , which as they should keep as much as may be from others eyes , so from their own thoughts ; the observation of them is too much for others , the meditation for themselves . 

62.  The best way to live comfortably ( therefore ) is , for the Wife or Husband to look upon their own faults , but upon the virtues or perfections of their comfort ; the first of these begets Patience ; the later maintains Love.  

63.  Wilfullness is a fault inexcusable every where ; but if a Wife's Weakness raise up stirs and debates , that 's the Husband's fault , for why is he a Man ( endued of God with more knowledge ) but that he should dwell with his wife according to knowledge , that is , according to that knowledge that is in him , not that infirmity that is in her , using his wit for the covering of her weakness ? or why is he a Husband , but to put a veil over , and to cast an honour upon the weaker part of himself ? and equal it is that he should be a covering to her when she needs it , who , when she needs it not ( and out of the case of weakness ) is a crown to him . 

64.  To sum up all Man and Wife should live together as Fellow heirs of the grace of life , and those that stand Godward , and Heaven-ward , in an equality ; if life belongs to him , so doth it to her ; if grace help her to that life , so doth it him ; if he be an heir of this life , in that she is his fellow . This should make the Wife bear her Subjection with much more meekness , and the Husband also to carry his Superiority with much modesty and mildness . 

65.  Yea , both of them to use Mariage-contentments with much moderation , to wit , as those that are to live together but for a while here , but hereafter for ever ; and that after another fashion ; for the fashion of this world passeth away , & no estate here affords any other than a perishing come for 't ; and a poor also , as being of too low a nature to be heard of when once we come to Heaven , and why should we that are appointed to heavenly glory , engage our affections in those pleasures that are altogether unworthy that place , and not rather enter ( as much as may be ) into acquaintance with those comforts which we shall never shake hands withal , but have a full fellowship with hereafter ? Meat and Drink , and Marriage , are for our need ( while we are here below ) rather than for our honour ; it becomes us not ( therefore ) to lie down , and wallow in them , but to lap ( with our hands ) and leave , reserving our hearts for and settling them upon the glories of that place , wherein , they neither marry , nor are given in marriage , but are as the Angels of God.  

66.  If the Family , be blessed with Children , God must be blessed for them , and thankfulness must be showed in carrying the course of our dealing so with them , as to sit them for his use , from whom we have them . In this care , the whole Family ( if it may be ) should concur●e , ( the unregenerate part gets strength , if there be but a Servant to hold with it ) but ( however ) Father and Mother should perfectly agree together , that children may not take a boldness to themselves in things evil , by discerning ( which they are quick to do ) a protection for their Unjustifiable ways in Parent's discords . Joint Opposition masters Corruption , but Family-faction is the bane of Education . 

67.  The rule of this Education is , Teach a Child ; it 's true , such cannot understand what is taught them in the things of God ; nor did Christ's Disciples underderstand diverse things that he taught them while he was amongst them ; it 's well that the seed is sown , and good things lodged in the heart ; the fruit must be expected ; and when the Spirit comes ( that quickeneth all things ) it will be produced from that very seed that in Childhood was received , nor shall they depart from that very teaching when they be old , whereof they seemed to take no notice when they were young ; Not but that ( diverse times ) i● falls out otherwise : but the course ( for all that ) is God's course , which he will make effectual according to his own counsel , and which ( if it reach not further , yet prevails ordinarily for some good restraint , 2 King. 12. 2.  

68  The best time and ways of instruction , Parents themselves ( that mind the duty ) will well discern , only the thing must be done , and neither idleness and dullness , nor averseness from better things ( when twice so much time is spent in impertinencies ) nor an indisposition to that particular duty , nor worldlyness and business ( which is so presented by Satan , as if half an hours Catechising were an irrecoverable impediment ) I say , neither these , nor any the like things should hinder the bringing up of Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord  

69.  Unto instruction , correction must be added , that puts in wisdom , this drives out folly ; of this Correction there must be , — 1. a clear cause , to wit , the child's foolishness , not the correctors frowardness ; — 2.  In it there must be a calm heart ; it is not good to give a Medicine scalding hot ; and — 3. ejaculations and prayers to God do well with correction ; for the rod is not only an instrument , ( fit in reason , to do a child good ) but an ordinance appointed of God for that purpose , unto which also God hath annexed a promise that it shall drive out and scatter , even Fast-boundfolly ; now every promise bespeaks a prayer . 

70.  It belongs to Parents to lay up for children , but withal , to make them able ( in a way wherein they shall glorify God and profit others ) to lay up for themselves ; This is done by disposing them into a sit and useful calling , with respect to the abilities God hath bestowed on them , and the inclinations he hath planted in them : for their condition must not appoint their calling , but their Talon ; A man must not seek out such a Calling as will provide best for him , but wherein he shall do most for God : Not but that a man may look to live by his Calling , and according to the charge of Children he hath , to lay up with it : but first seek the kingdom of God , and the glory of God , that other things may ( and then other things shall ) be ministered and added . 

71.  Disposition in marriage is ( for Parents ) the highest duty , and for Children ( being well discharged ) the happiest , wherein the principal thing to be regarded is , the fear of God : for let the World esteem or disesteem Religion as they please , yet this is the Sentence of Scripture , Favour is deceitful , and Beauty is vain , but a woman that feareth the Lord , ( and it 's true of a man also ) she shall be praised . it 's not to be denied but a good nature ( if any nature were good ) is a great sweetner of Society , and would do pretty well if man and wife were to live together only in a human way , ( wherein virtuous Heathens will completely keep them company ) but being that they are to live together , as Christian and Christian , that they are to walk together with God as well as with Man , and with one another , yea and to converse together as Fellow-heirs of the grace of life ; what 's a good nature ( in reference to these things ) but the white of an egg , which hath this in it , that it offends not ; but this withal , that it relisheth not ? Let it be the praise of good natures , that they contradict not goodness , but is not this a deep defect that they contribute nothing to it ? Good they be for the six days , but on the Lord's day , what is there pleasant in them but their Patience ? it 's true that a fair nature rustles with religion in a froward , and seems to get the better ; yet to them that love to live in a course beyond nature , and to see God in a Companion ( not Cato , Socrates , Photion , etc. ) Grace with all its faults will be better than refined Nature : A piece of Gold is better though it needs its allowance , than the compleatest piece of Silver , and fretful Ionas will be found more lovely than the meekest Mariner , or the sweetest Ninevite . 

72.  The next thing to be looked at ( after the religion of a Consort ) is the good discretion ; for Wisdom exceeds Folly , as much as Light exceeds Darkness . This is true in all , but in those especially of better parts . If a Daughter be to be disposed of ( of more worth ) nothing is more to be feared ( next to an Ungodly ) than an Unworthy Husband ; for the duty of a Wife is to be subject , and with what patience shall wisdom be subject to Folly ? It may better be born if there be eminency of gifts on the Husband's part , and infirmity on the Wives ; and yet , this is a business also , for a Husband ought to love his Wife , and there 's such a distance between Wisdom and Weakness , that there will be work enough for a more than ordinary Wisdom to love ( with a Husband's love ) a Woman of more than ordinary Weakness . 

73.  After this , Mariage-affection requires a pleasing person , I say after this discretion , which is of the greater consequence ( even in the matter of affection ) than an external amiableness is ; for this is the difference between Discretion and Beauty , that Discretion is a thing still continuing and still thriving ; hence the love grounded upon that , both stays and grows : but Beauty may be gone suddenly and ( howsoever ) is going continually ; hereupon , the affection must needs fall with the foundation ; yet it combines on both sides ( in her especially that is to be the desire of a man's eye , ) of no small importance , which , suppose ( erelong ) it lose its lustre : yet diverse things that will not abide to the last , may serve for the rooting and settling of affection at the first . 

74.  Nor is a Patrimony and Portion to be contemned where a Family and Posterity is to be raised ; Fathers must not only lay out , but lay up for their Children , and it is not easy , nor a thing so likely that they should lay up much who begin with nothing : Besides , we would be willing to live so , as to express Virtue , and draw a just reputation from others by the beams of beneficence dispersed from ourselves ; now though Wisdom and Virtue be truly , yea and eminently good in itself ; yet it is evidently good with an inheritance , in which regard , howsoever a worldly portion is justly reckoned a very bad Leader , yet neglect not to look upon it as a useful Follower . 

75.  All these things do in special manner concern the Parties themselves that are towards marriage ; only Parents are to see that they do not ( out of self will and imperiousness , or for vain and worldly ends , or out of self-respects ) hinder their Children from walking in , but rather do all they can by their counsel and authority , to guide and carry them in a right and regular way in a matter of so great importance . When God hath given Children unto them , as his Trustees , a chief part of their care lies in this , to take ●eed how they give them away , and into what hands they put them for a continual , and perpetual abode . 

76.  Marriage being according to these ( and the like ) Rules religiously managed , as it is an estate honourable in itself , and in God's account , so shall it be honourable also in the judgement of all those that do impartially observe it , yea and in the Consciences of those Men that do ungroundedly oppose it . 

FINIS . 





Magistratus Virum indicat  He that will prove his yoke of Oxen proves them best by putting them into the yoke , Luk. 14. 19 ▪ with 2 Cor. 6. 14.   Gen. 28 . 33.   Luk. 10. 39   1 Cor. 7. 32 , 33 , 34.   1 Tim , 2. 15.   Mark 13 , ●4 .  Eccles. 2. 2.   1 Cor. ● . 29.   Luke 14. 20.   Mat. 22. 5.  

 Hebr. 13. 4.  Requisites in marriage . 1.  Zeal . 2.  Patience .  Ecc'es' . 1. 15.  Impatience an enemy to Society  1 ▪ With God ▪   Jam. 1. 20.   1 Tim. 2. 8.  2.  With Man  3.  With our own Consciences . Comforts in crossness of nature .  Numb 12. 3.   Jonah 4. 9   2 Pet. 1. 4.  The cure of Impatience . 1.  Consideration of God's providence .  Job 1.  ●2 .  Eccles. ● . 15.  2.  Of our own faults . 3.  A Communing with our own hearts . 4.  A friend to us , and an enemy to our frowardness .  Plutarch de Adulat , & Amici discrim . Prayers . 3.  Wisdom . In matters of Religion .  Gen. 18. 33.   Luke 11. 9 , 10.   Ezra 8. 21 , 22.   Gen. 24. 12 , 15 , 7.  1.  In religious exercises .  1 Cor. 14. 16.   Jer. 48. 10.   Mat. 9 16 , 17.  2.  In Christian conference .  Heb. 3. 12 , 13.   1 Cor. 10. 31.   Gen. 43 34.  Judg. 14. 12.   Mal. 3. 16.   Mal. 3. 16.   Col. 3. 16.   Coloss. 3. 16.  To edifying is required , 1 Clearing the soil . 2.  A good foundation . 3.  A ●ight frame . 4 A meet manner of build ing .  Judas , v. 23.   1 Kings 6 , 7.   prov . 11. 30.   John 3. 12.   Ephes' 2. 22.  Duties of Relation  1.  For Ministers   1 Thess. 5. 13.   Col. 1. 17.  1.  2.  3.   Mat. 28.  ●0 . 2.  For Neighbours & Friends . 1.   Gal. 6 10.  2.   2 Cor. 6. last .  Ps. 119. 69.  3.   Rom. 12. 2.   Coloss. 4. 5.   Mark 4. 11.   1 Thes. 5. 22.  1.   1 Pet. 3 13.   1 Pet. 2. 12.  2.   Tit. 3. 2 , 3.  3.   Act 28. 2.  4.  5.  3.  For those in the Family . 1. Equals   Rom. 12. 10.   prov. 27. 17.  ● : Inferiors . 1.  Ps. 101. 4 , 5 , 6 , 7.  2.   Col. ● . 1.   Job 31. 21 , ●3 . 3.   Job 31. 13.  3.  Man and wife .  1 Pet. 3. 7.  Ephe. 5.  ●5 . Col. 3. 14.   Eph. 5. 33.   1 Pet. 2. 19   Judg. 8 ▪ CITIZEN , 2 , 3   Phil. 3. 21.  prov. 21. 1.   1 Pet. 3. 7.  b Gen. 20. 16.   1 Pet. 3. 7.   1 Cor. 7. 29 , 31.   Lu. 20 35 , 36.   Judg. 7. 5 , 7.   Gen. 33. 5.  1.  Children .  prov. 22. 6.   Joh. 2. 22.   prov. 22. 6.   prov. 22. 15.  1.  2.  3.   prov. 22. 15.   2 Sam. 7. 27.   2 Cor. 12 ▪ 14 ▪   Mat. 6. 33.   prov. 31. 30   1 Pet. 3. 7.   Eccles. ● . 13.   Ezek. 24. 16 , 18.   2 Cor. 11. 14.   Eccles 7. 11.  1 Pet. 3. 7.  