A Just Reprehension TO JOHN NORRIS Of Newton st Lo , FOR HIS Unjust REFLECTION on the QUAKERS , In his Book , Entitled , Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life , etc.  

Together with his False Representation of their Principle of the Light , in his Postscript , wherein he Opposes it to his Notion of the divine 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 or Ideal world , as he terms it . 

His Confusion and Self-contradiction therein manifested ; and the Doctrine and Principle of the Quakers thereby cleared from his Abuse ; occasionally written by way of Letter , with Advice to him , and may serve for a better Information of the Quakers Principle , to whom the knowledge of his and this shall come . 

By Richard Vickris . 

Printed , and Sold by T. S. at the Crooked-billet , in Holywell-lane , in Shoreditch , 1691.  

A Just Reprehension to john Norris of Newton St. Lo , for his Unjust Reflection on the Quakers , in his Book , Entitled , Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life , etc.  

john Norris , 

I Need no Apology for this brief Reprehension , if thou think'st I do Review the first page of thy Epistle Dedicatory , ( viz. ) He that shall point out any of the Irregularites or Mistakes of the Conduct of Human Life , aught to be looked upon as a universal Friend , and promoter of the public Happiness ; and the more severe he is in his Censure ( provided it be true and well grounded ) the more charitable he is in his undertaking , and the more like to be serviceable in his performance . 

When first I perused thy Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life , with reference to the study of Learning and Knowledge , I was and still am pleased with all that tends to the propagation of Original and necessary Truth , but rejoice where I find it spring from an upright mind , pure intention , and clean Vessel ; for whoso undertakes to reprehend the intelligible Conduct of Human Life , ought first to purge himself from the Irregularities of his moral Conduct , which doth cloud and darken his understanding . 

Howbeit , I was so far from a Spirit of Detraction or Emulation , that considering from whence it came , I in some sort rejoiced in it so far as it was sound and true , hoping and desiring that what was either clearly and rightly detected , or equally and fairly recommended , might gain upon the Understanding of such whose Education and Literature had either prejudiced , or at best mistated and unfit them for receiving the same Truth , and divine Principle by meaner Instruments , respecting worldly esteem ; which Principle hath been and is by many such faithful Witnesses plentifully born testimony to , as well by doing as suffering , by the supposed learned Rabbis of our day , as also by Doctrine , in Word and Writing , though not altogether under some of thy Terms , or pretended Philosophical Notions ; yet according to the Demonstration of the Spirit , and in words approved and chosen of God to make known himself by , and taught us in the holy Scriptures , God having in his divine Wisdom in this Age , as in former Ages , 1 Cor. 1.27 , 28 , 29.  chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the Wise ; and the Weak things of the world to confound the things that are mighty , and base things of the world , and things that are despised hath God chosen ; yea , things which are not , to bring to naught things which are , that no Flesh should glory in his presence . Agreeable to this is that divine acknowledgement of Christ Jesus to his Father , Matth. 1.11 , and 25.  I thank thee , OH Father , Lord of Heaven and Earth , that thou hast hid these things from the Wise and Prudent , and hast revealed them unto Babes . Matth. 18.10 . Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones : I fear thou art guilty in this particular , viz. of despising the Testimony of God in this Age through the meanness of the Instruments ; Consider what is said , Thes. 10.4.8 . He therefore that despiseth , despiseth not man , but God , who hath also given unto us his holy Spirit . From the too apparent Reflection thou makes in the 77th page of thy Book New Edition , one might at first think , that thou wert a great stranger to the Conversation of the People , called Quakers , and more especially to their writings , which had unwarily subjected thee to a rash and immature Censure , in rendering them dark , awkward , untoward , and unprincipled in the way of representing their Principle , viz. the Light within , thereby discrediting , as thou sayest , one of the noblest Theories in the World ; but the thing in itself , rightly understood , is true . I being under some dissatisfaction about these Expressions of thine , took occasion to visit joseph Langton of Newton Saint Lo , a person of my respect and acquaintance , and near Neighbour of thine , with whom I had some discourse about thy aforesaid Book , and in particular the above recited passage , recommending to him Robert Barclay's Apology for the true Christian Divinity for thy perusal , and having understood by him , thou hadst been Conversant with it , I confess it extremely dampt me , and gave occasion for other thoughts than a supposed Ignorance of the persons , and manner of their representing their Principle , whom thou hadst thus evilly treated , and exposed without reason or provocation as I know of ; and now I shall proceed to show thee wherein , though I presume thou already knowest : Robert Barclay in his fifth and sixth Propositions treating of this universal and saving Light of Jesus Christ , page 110. calls it supernatural Light and Grace , quotes john 1.9 . That was the true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the World. Which place , as he observes , doth so clearly favour the Quakers Doctrine , that it is called their Text ; hence he draws this necessary Conclusion , That the Life that is in him , viz. the Word Christ , is the Light of Men , john 1.4 . In other places he calls it according to Divine Instruction , The Seed sown in several sorts of Ground , The Word of the Kingdom , The Word of Faith , The Implanted or Engrafted Word which is able to save the Soul ; quoting Cyrillus Alexandrinus , Clemens Alexandrinus , Augustine , Buchanan , etc. in confirmation of this Doctrine , as thou mayst see at large , whereby it appears , whatever thou art , he was so far from the Ambition of being thought the first promulgator of that heavenly Doctrine of the Universallity and Sufficiency of this Light within for Salvation , that he rejoices to meet with it , embracing it wherever he finds it , improves the interest of it , and instead of calumniating its Votaries , represents it to the world , Cleared from the Rust of darker Ages , and advantaged with the Confessions and Testimonies of purer Primitive Times . 

And now I Inquire , what are the Dark , awkward and untoward Expressions , and unprincipled way of representing this Principle that thou allegest the Quakers are guilty of ? are any of these here quoted out of the aforementioned Author part thereof ? or in what other Book or Writing of the Quakers may they be found ? 

I shall now farther say , that this Divine Word , Light , Grace and Truth , or whatever else it hath been called by its Followers through divine instruction in any age , is a wise and understanding Spirit , Holy , etc. according as 't is written in the Book of Wisdom , Chap. 7.  In all Ages entering into holy Souls , maketh them Friends of God and Prophets . And in Chap. 4. vers . 4.  it 's said , Into a malicious Soul Wisdom will not enter , nor dwell in the Body that is subject unto Sin ; for the holy Spirit of Discipline will fly Deceit , and remove from Thoughts that are without understanding , and will not abide when Vnrighteousness cometh in ; for Wisdom is a loving Spirit , and will not acquit a Blasphemer of his Words , for God is witness of his Reinss , and a true beholder of his Heart , and a hearer of his Tongue . Vers. 8.  Therefore he that speaketh unrighteous things can't be hid , neither shall Vengeance when it punisheth pass by him . Now seeing these sayings are true and righteous , and that it is possible to profess this Doctrine of the Divine Word , Light , Grace , Spirit of Wisdom and Truth , and the Teaching of it , and yet not possess it nor be learned of it , nor led by it , but whilst preaching of it to others , but a Cast away : I advice thee to consider in what ground and nature thou yet standest and liv'st in , and what Spirit life's and rules in thee : hath not Unrighteousness entered in through Self-love and Esteem , which blinds the Eye , and causeth the Tongue to speak unrighteous things ? Is not self exalted to sit in the Temple of God , as God in thee ? And art thou not decking thyself with thy corrupt wisdom , which is the forbidden Fruit , and will prove folly in the end ? Be not highminded , but fear , so shalt thou learn the Ways of the Lord , and walk therein safely , and have unity and fellowship with the Saints in Light , not in the talk and profession of it only , though never so high ; for with the Heart man must believe , before with his Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation . 

Who knows this Work , can glorify God , and bear Testimony of his Son Christ Jesus ; and the work he hath done in his earthen vessel , which none else could do , viz. of Sanctification & Redemption through the Truth , whose Word is Truth , whereof he hath made many living Witnesses to the Praise of his Name , whose own Works praise him , and to the joy of the upright for evermore . And this is better and beyond all the high Notions , and Selfconceited Imaginations from the wisdom that is below , and who is brought to this estate , and abide therein , walking in Wisdom's Path , dare not speak unrighteous things , knowing he cannot be hid , nor be a Blasphemer of his words ; for God is witness of his Reinss , and a true beholder of his Heart ; know therefore , it 's not a light thing to speak Evil of things one understands not ; read 2 Pet. 2. vers . 12. and jude 10. much lesle wilfully to blast the Fame of God's Name and Work in the Earth , in and by his People , because they agree not with man's ways and conceited wise Notions , which God's wisdom from above ever did , and will confound ; and how greatly thou art found guilty in this particular , by the following Reflections on thy Postscript may appear : And so I conclude this part , having discharged myself to thee on the aforementioned occasion . 

Since my first perusal of thy Book , I have lately met with thy Postscript , whereby I perceive thou art zealous of being esteemed a Proselyte to the Quakers Doctrine ; I am ready to believe thy above recited Ignominious Reflection , was calculated to obviate such an Imputation , which perhaps thou thought would be as little honour to thee , as they may justly conclude thy Pretensions to their Principle would be a Credit to it ; for they desire no such Proselytes who affects not their Principle for its own sake , but for some worldly Honour and Esteem they hope to get by it ; Therefore though theirs , if rightly understood , be true , as thou confessest thyself , page 77. and that it is such Quakerism as makes a good part of N-ab John's Gospel , and N-ab Augustine's Works ; and according to thy Postscript , if the Quakers understood their own Notion , it would not very much differ from thine , which I take to imply a sort of Confession to their Principle ; for Truth and Error are opposite , the Defect it seems must lie somewhere , and that according to thy Judgement must be the Quakers Ignorance , how to explain their Notion of the Light , and into what Principles to resolve it ; but seeing this would imply a Difference only in Terminis , and so not reach thy Case , like one that forgets what he had said last , thou proceeds to magnify the difference to set thee far enough from being reputed a Proselyte , which to avoid them needed a greater Discrimination ; This I take to be the Design of thy Postscript , where thou undertakes to explain the Quakers Principle , by thy Suppositions & false Distinctions the better to set off & expose thine , by rendering it the more novel to this age , and so to avoid symbolising with the Quakers in thy notion of the Divine Light ; how unfairly and unsincerely , as also confusedly , with respect both to their and thy own Principle thou hast dealt herein , is my present design to manifest ; whoso undertakes to Confute the Principles of any People , aught to take them up and state them rightly , and honestly , according as they are believed and owned by themselves , quoting their own Words and Authors , and not barely as he conceives and imagines them to be , as suiting his design : Otherwise he is unjust , and quarrels with his own Shadow , and is like a man that beats the Air , which in thy Postscript thou art found doing ; for first thou sayst , The Quakers usually talk of this Light within , as of some Divine Communication and manifestation ( only : ) How does this appear to be true , thou quotes no Author for it , I apprehend thou intendest hereby , or else thy assertion has little weight or matter in it , viz. that the Quakers own the Light within to be an accident , and not a substantial inherent Principle of Divine Excellency , which is a great mistake , and it is to be feared a wilful one too , seeing 't is generally known , and thou confessest it too , that they quote the Testimony of john the Evangelist for their Principle , as thou hast done for thine , they believing according thereunto , Chap 1. vers . 4.  In him was Life , and the Life was the Light of Men : And if the Life of the Word be the Light of men , then surely the Quakers cannot be supposed to believe it any thing lesle than a Real Spiritual Substance , which the Soul of man is capable to feel and apprehend ; For all things were made by him , and without him was not any thing made that was made , John 1.3 . Thus thy first distinction falls to the ground : Thy second is as insignificant , and like an Arrow shot at Random , lights on thy own head , being attended with some Contradiction to thy former , viz. thou sayest , The Quakers represent this Light within as a sort of extraordinary Inspiration : Where learned thou this ? Before it was a Divine Communication and Manifestation only ; and now an Extraordinary Inspiration . thou wouldst have done well to have let the Quakers Principle alone till thou hadst learned it better , and more honestly to represent it : Is not Extraordinary more than Common , or Communication and manifestation ( only ? ) Have not the Quakers declared the Light to be Universal , as well as Divine , in its gift and manifestation to the Sons of men ? It is certainly true they have , and yet I deny not but such who apply their minds in Obedience to the teaching of this Light and heavenly Gift , may be made partakers of more , viz. extraordinary Gifts and Graces by the Inspiration of the same Spirit , etc.  If for this they have the Name of Enthusiasts given them , as in the Section of thy Postscript ; Though it be in Derision , they will rejoice in it , for it shall be as an Ornament of Grace to their Head , and Chains about their Neck . Again , in the same Section thou sayst , I suppose it , viz. The Light within to be a man's natural and ordinary way of understanding . And just before thou made it to be the very Essence and Substance of the Deity , which are thy own express words ; see thy Confusion and Self-contradiction ; by these Words , ( viz. ) a man's natural and ordinary way of understanding , I take thee to intend the same thing as in page 77. where thou call'st it Reason and Conscience ; and yet at the same time call'st it , The divine 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and Region of Truth , in which are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge , the great and universal Oracle lodged in every man's Breast , whereof the ancient Urim and Thummim was an express Type or Emblem . Here thou Debasest and Confoundest thy Principle , making it to be a part of man's Nature , whereas the Principle or divine Light , as held by the Quakers , is a distinct thing from man's Soul , Reason , or natural Conscience , viz. a more excellent Spirit and Principle . And herein I confess is a material Difference betwixt thy principle of Light , and the Quakers , as thou hast expressed it ; sure I am it is a great Error to render the Divine 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , by which all things were made , and are upheld , to be no higher a Principle than man's Reason and Conscience , or natural and ordinary way of understanding , which reason is a property Essential to him as Man I confess , to know the things of a man , according to that Scripture , 1 Cor. 2.9 , 10 , 11.  But as it is written , Eye hath not seen , nor Ear heard , neither have entered into the Heart of man the things that God hath prepared for them that love him , but God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit ; for the Spirit searcheth all things , yea , the Deep things of God : for what man knows the things of a man save the Spirit of a man that is in him , even so the things of God knoweth no man but the Spirit of God. Again , Mat. 11.27 . Neither knoweth any man the Father , save the Son , and he to whom the Son will reveal him . By which it manifestly appears , that the true knowledge of God and Spiritual things are attained by the Spirit , which is superior to man's rational Principle or natural Conscience , which may be defiled , and corrupted , as 't is said expressly of the Impure , that even their Mind and Conscience is defiled , Tit. 1.15 . 

In thy third Sestion , thou comest in with ( a Salvo Errore ) If I mistake not ) the Quakers confine their Light within to some certain Objects , namely Moral and Spiritual Truths , in order only to the direction of Practice . How shouldst thou do otherwise but mistake the Principles of others , seeing thou art so confused about thine own ? however , I must tell thee it 's no small Fault at such an uncertainty to Expose people's Principles , and 't is an abuse to say the Quakers confine the Light within : It is Divine , Supernatural and Uncircumscribeable , in it are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge ; where have the Quakers taught otherwise ? Have they not testified and declared the Light and the Spirit of Truth are one and the same in Being , which will guide into all Truth , john 16.13 . The Quakers believe this divine Light to be the quickness of their understandings to know , and of their wills to love , and practical Truth , and that it assists the natural Faculties of the Soul in the attainments of necessary Arts and Sciences , as well as capacitate it to know and practise Moral and Spiritual Truths . thou mayst read what the Author to the Book of Wisdom says on this subject , in the 9th and 10th Chapters . 

And whereas thou sayst , The Quakers make the Light within a Supplement to Scripture , which they say is not sufficient without it , nor indeed any more than a mere dead Letter . 

I Answer ; These words Supplement to Scripture are thy own , not ours , and this seems to be a Composition of thy own notion of the Quakers Faith concerning the holy Scriptures , without any quotation of their Words or writings , and as 't is an objection is built upon thy mistake . In thy former Section , viz. The Quakers represent this Light within as a sort of extraordinary Inspiration ; Which hath been already answered , proving the Universallity of the Divine Light in man , which considered , there 's no just cause for this as an Objection against the Quakers , assigning the Scriptures to be insufficient without the Light , because the knowledge of the holy Scriptures cannot occur to the understanding without it , and the formal reason thereof is its presence and manifestation . The Quakers believe that Christ Jesus by his divine Light within , doth in these days , as in the Days of his Flesh , expound , fulfil and open to the true Believers the holy Scriptures , which according to the Apostle's exhortation to Timothy , Chap. 2.3 , 15.  Are able to make wise unto Salvation ( note ) THROUGH FAITH which is in Christ jesus . The word Supplement in this sense , I hope , will be found no Error , but according to thy Construction of the Quakers representing the Light within as a sort of extraordinary Inspiration , Sect 2.  Or special privilege of a certain order of men their own party , as in Sect. 4.  And then making them to say the Scriptures with relation only to the Direction of Practice , as thy Lines import , Sect. 3. are not sufficient without it , nor indeed any more than a mere dead Letter , is to render the Quakers not only singular and Erroneous in their Principle of the Light , ( which shall be more duly observed in its place ) but also Contemptuous of the holy Scriptures , as useless and insufficient to all but themselves , which is a great and heinous abuse of a Society of People , without cause and provocation , and contrary to their public and known Assertions , both by Word and Writing , who believe according to the same Apostle to Timothy , Chap. 2.3.16 , 17.  That all Scripture given by Inspiration of God , is profitable for Doctrine , for Reproof , for Correction , for Instruction in Righteousness , that the man of God may be Perfect , thoroughly furnished unto all good Works . And this shall suffice for an Answer to thy third Section . 

The fourth is a downright falsity ( viz. ) The Quakers make their Light within a special Privilege of a certain Order of men their own party , not indeed as to the possibility , yet they do as to the act making none but those of their own way to be actually enlightened by it . 

This is so abundantly Confuted by the writings in general of those People , more particularly in the afore-recited Book of Robert Barclays , which considering thou hast read , I am the more amazed at thy Assertion : They say all are actually enlightened by it , all are Called , but all have not obeyed , according to these Scriptures , Micah 6.8 . He hath showed thee , OH man , what is Good , and what doth the Lord require of thee , but to do justly , and to love Mercy , and to walk Humbly with thy God , 1 John 9.3.19 . 1 Cor. 13.7 . Tit. 2.11 . etc. Thy distinction of a possibility , and not actually with respect to the Divine Illumination of this Principle , is trivial , though not with respect to Salvation by it : The Capacity or Possibility is not , nor can be in man abstract from the actual Illuminating Power and Spirit , no more than seeing if the light be separate from the Eye ; The Quakers have , and still do declare , that Christ Jesus , the Light of the World , is the universal free Gift of God , for the benefit of all men , in order to their Salvation ; and is not this Common yet Special privilege , because dearly purchased and freely bestowed on lost man , that thou mayst not want occasion to traduce the Quakers , thou hast so much overdone it in this Section , as to contradict thyself in the fifth ; as for instance , Sect. 4. to be actaully enlightened according to thy Principle , is no special privilege , but the common and universal benefit of all men , yea , of all the intelligent Creation , who all see and understand in this Light of God , without which there would be neither Truth nor Understanding : On the contrary , Postscript Sect. 5. thou sayst , Thy Light does not formally enlighten or instruct thee , but when thou carefully attends to and consults it , and read what is written in those Divine Ideal Characters : The like Doctrine thou hast , pag. 71. of thy Book , Sect. 5. and 6. wheres treating of thy double illumination of thy divine 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , viz. Fundamentally and Potentially , or else effectually or actually , in the former sense ( thou sayest ) he enlightens every man in the latter , only those who duly consult him , and attend to him . See what Contradiction thy strained Notions run thee into one while to be actually enlightened , is the Common and Universal benefit of all men ; another while only of those who Consult it , and attend to it , and all to avoid being thought to Symbolise with the Quakers in thy notion of the Divine Light ; thy Distinction of Potentially and Actually can have no more in it than the Difference in the subject , the one universal act of the Word or Light , enlightening every man , comprehends both ; these are but new invented terms to express the most ancient , and more Divinely , and better revealed Truths of the Gospel : Thy fifth I take in the first part of it to be the same in substance with thy first , Differing in form of expressions , viz. The Quakers by their Light within understand some Determinate form dictate or proposition expressly or positively directing or instructing them to do so or so ; as in thy first thou call'st it , some divine Communication or Manifestation ONLY . Where didst thou learn this definition of the Quakers Faith and Doctrine of the Light within ? The Quakers believe the Light of Christ within to be God's divine Oracle of Wisdom in the Soul , the former Dictater , and determiner of heavenly Propositions , their Directing and Instructing what to choose , and what to refuse , as the original Cause of the knowledge and love of Truth , which are its proper effects . Now wherein is the Quakers Light , as thou termest it , Inferior to that which thou call'st thine , except in the Differing Character thou givest it ? they own the Real and Substantial Truth of God , the Life of the Word , the Light of men , as Christ said of himself , I am the Way , the Truth and the Life : That this divine Light which is the Light of men , is always in some degree and measure present in the Soul , by which it is upheld either in God's love or anger , the Quakers believe ; and that in him we live , move and have our being , though with respect to operation after a different manner and measure , and passing the understanding of man And whereas thou sayest , Thy Light is only the essential Truth of God : This is a high presumption , about which I have already showed thy Confusion in other places , calling it Reason and Conscience , and a man's natural and ordinary way of understanding ; consider Mat. 6.22.23 . The Light of the Body is the Eye ; if therefore thy Eye be single , thy whole Body shall be full of Light : but if thine Eye be evil , thy whole Body shall be full of Darkness ; if therefore the Light that is in thee be Darkness , how great is that Darkness ? So may I say , if that Doctrine & Principle thou recommendest to the World for Truth & Excellency , be erroneous and faulty , how great is that Error and Fault ? Again , thou sayest , Thy Light is always present to thy understanding , and Intimately united with it still , Sect. 5.  Which in thy sense of the Light , is to say , thy Soul is never without thy Reason and Conscience ; I wish they were both reform , that thou mayst be no more guilty of these and such like false Aspersions ; That the Light , as supposing it to be what really it is , viz. a Distinct Principle from the Soul is always present to the understanding , which implies its operation upon the natural Capacity , or Organ , the ordinary means of knowing , I conceive is more than can be safely or experimentally said , because the Organ may be hurt , and the understanding in that sense interrupted , and consequently no fit Medium or Receptacle either for the Soul or its Light : besides , the Soul may be absent from the natural understanding , by the interposition of Spiritual , as well as Natural causes , and yet present with the Light in its spiritual way of understanding : But to say as thou dost , that Thy Light is only the Essential Truth of God , and that it is always present to thy understanding , and intimately united with it , and yet that it does not formally enlighten or instruct it , but when carefully attended to and consulted ; seems to discover a Contradiction in itself , and to the formal Reason of its Being , and Presence , and Sufficiency in the one act of the same Principle , as well as to the state and nature of Intimate Union ; for how can any thing be intimately united to its Principle , and not partake of its Nature and Influences , which is the reason and manner of its union ? And how can this be , and not carefully attended to and consulted ? is not this manifest Confusion ? That the presence of the Light does enlighten and instruct all in some sense and degree , is sufficiently proved by Scripture ; By thy word formally enlighten , I apprehend thou intendest the operative Exercise , as in page 17. and as here applied to , Light signifies no more than actually to enlighten , ex parte objecti ; I grant such as do not carefully attend to and consult this Divine Light , does not witness the increases of it unto the Redemption and Salvation of their Souls . 

It is the Path of the Just that is as the shining Light , that shines more and more unto the perfect day ; if the Light , as thou asserts , doth not formally enlighten or instruct , but when carefully attended to and consulted , how then should it quicken and raise the Soul from Death to Life , according to the multiplied Experience of holy David ? And how doth God speak once , yea , twice , yet man perceiveth it not ? job 33.14 , 15 , 16 , 17.  In a Dream , in a Vision of the Night , when deep Sleep falleth upon men , in slumbering upon the Bed , than he openeth the Ears of Men , and sealeth their Instruction , that he may withdraw man from his purpose , and hide Pride from man Again , in Isa. 65.  I am sought of them that asked not for me , I am found of them that sought me not : I said , Behold me , behold me , to a Nation that was not called by my Name . How frequently doth the Lord complain by his Prophets of his Calling to his people to return and Repent , but they would not answer . Note , the Call of God is not without Instruction ; read Micah 6.8 . and prov. 1. from 20. to the end . And see what Wisdom does also in Nehemiah , how they rebelled against God , notwithstanding he gave his good Spirit to Instruct them . The Testimony of john the Evangelist , the 5th and 21st . Eph. 2.1 . 4 , 5.  You hath he quickened , who were Dead in Trespasses and Sins ; but God who is rich in Mercy for his great love wherewith he hath loved us , even when we were dead in Sins , hath quickened us together in Christ , by Grace ye are saved . 2 Cor. 4.6 , 7.  God who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness , hath shined in our Hearts , to give us the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of jesus Christ ; but we have this Treasure in earthen Vessels , that the excellency of the Power may be of God , and not us . These and many other Texts abundantly prove that God quickens and enlightens man , before man can turn unto him : Thy sixth and last Section , I take to be an extravagant noise and bluster against the Quakers , to supply the want of real matter of Objection ; what means else so great and general Reflections , without offering any Proof , or reducing it to a particular Charge , to say the Quakers do not offer any rational or intelligible account of their Light within proves nothing ; to tell the world , as thou dost , they Cant in some loose & general Expressions about the Light , does little else but impose upon trust , which is to beg Credit , whilst thou mentions not what those loose and general Expressions are ; but to say they Confirm them by the authority of N-ab John's Gospel , is in some sort to contradict thy assertion , for so to confirm them , argues they agree to what is there taught , and if so , as is most certainly true , and that the Quakers do adhere to those divine Words and Expressions ; it looks like too much profaneness , to accounted them lose and Canting ; and to say , that the Quakers understand neither the Light which they profess , nor N-ab John's Gospel , is an Evil presumption , and what if I say Blasphemy , against some that dwell in Heaven . As for thy terms , viz. Omniformity of the Ideal world , they may be either thy own , or some borrowed Invention , which not being taught them by the holy Spirit and divine Testimony thereof in the holy Scriptures , the Quakers reject the more , seeing it is such an Idol , that although they sincerely confess and believe in the Light , according to John's Gospel , they shall not be allowed to understand either , without bowing thereto ; What art thou OH man , that boasteth thyself ? art thou wiser than thy Maker ? whose Wisdom hath brought forth and taught his People these expressions ; Canst thou by searching find out God , or the Almighty unto perfection ? I tell thee nay , but God will confound thy Wisdom , and bring to naught thy understanding , wherein it is exalted ; for he hath Determined to slain the Pride of all Flesh , the Mouth of the Lord hath spoken it . 

This is written for the clearing of truth 's Testimony from the Rubbish thou hast cast thereon , in good Will to all , and desiring thy Soul's welfare . 

By R. v.  THE END . 

