A discourse concerning the beauty of providence in all the rugged passages of it . 

Very seasonable to quiet and support the heart in these times of public confusion . 

By John Wilkins . B. d.  

psal. 25. 10.  

all the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth , to such as keep his co•••••• and his testimonies . 

London : printed for sa : ge••ibrand at the brazen serpent in St. Paul's churchyard . 1649.  

The preface to the reader . 

Amongst all other doctrines , this of providence ( Though it do properly belong to natural theology , yet ) is of as universal concernment , both for knowledge and practice , as any other point , in Christian divinity . 

The very heathen have acknowledged , not only a universal providence of God , which puts the general kinds of things into a regular way of working , but his particular providence likewise , which takes care of individual persons and actions . Why else do all religions oblige men to pray unto him , and to expect his special assistance , in every kind of want or necessity ? 

But now , though this common principle be so universally acknowledged in the notion of it , yet men are generally very negligent in the practical application of it , to particular times and conditions ; and so loose that comfort and satisfaction that May be reaped from it . 

It is the chief aim and business of this discourse , to convince and quicken men unto this duty , as being by so much the more seasonable for these times , by how much the present troubles and confusions do now call upon us for it . 

It cannot but occasion some suggestions of diffidence and infidelity , to consider those many strange revolutions and changes in the world , which in outward appearance , seem so full of disorder and wild contingencies . And therefore it must needs be of special consequence for a man to have his heart established in the knowledge and belief of this truth here insisted upon . 

In all ages of the world men have been much startled in their judgements , by that unequal dispensation which seems to be in these outward things . that one event should be to the righteous and the wicked . nay , that a just man should perish in his righteousness , and the wicked should prosper in his wickedness . That on the side of the oppressor there should be might , and the oppressed should have none to comfort them . this hath sometimes so amazed and perplexed the thoughts of considering men , that whilst they looked barely upon events , they could not tell how to extricate themselves from these difficulties ; which occasioned that speech of Solomon , surely oppression makes a wise man mad : that is , puts him to his wit's end , transports him with wild imaginations , whilst he knows not readily what to answer in defence of such proceedings . 

But now , he that shall seriously consider , how every thing is managed by an all-seeing providence , which is exactly careful , and infinitely wise , such a man will be easily satisfied , that in all these obscure administrations , ( Which seem unto us so full of casual , negligent , promiscuous events ) there is an admirable , ( Though unsearchable ) contrivance . 

As for the particular design which providence May aim at in some dispensations , this doth not always fall under our reach . it is the glory of God to conceal a matter . and many of his works are so ordered , that though a man labour to seek them out , yet he shall not find them . yea further , though a wise man think to know them , yet shall he not be able to find them . and therefore , where we cannot understand his ways , it is there our duty , with an humble reverence to believe and admire the wisdom of them . 

How would this , ( If rightly considered and applied ) silence all those unseemly murmurings & complaints of men in these times . Remember , there is nothing befalls us but what the counsel of God had before determined to be done . and he can order things for the best , as well when they cross our desires , as when they comply with them . 

And therefore when you see the violent perverting of judgement and justice in a province , marvel not at the matter . that is , be not transported with wonder or impatience , or unbelief , as if the providence of God were regardless or negligent . for he that is higher than the highest regardeth . though they that have the highest power amongst men , May be so far from remedying , that they rather encourage such disorders , yet God hath a strict , watchful eye upon them . And though men May be apt to secure themselves in such proceedings , by the greatness of their own strength , as if there were nothing above them , yet there are higher than they . and there is a time , when God will judge both the righteous and the wicked . 

Let us be careful of our own duty , to serve providence in the usual means , and leave the disposal of events to him . It should be every man's chief business , to clear up the evidences of his particular title and relation , unto this great governor of the world , and this will be the surest means to set us above the fear or hurt of all outward changes . 

We see with what artifice and compliance men will insinuate themselves , into the affection of those who ( According to several revolutions ) are advaneed into the places of power . Of how much greater advantage would it be , to get an interest in his favour , who doth and shall always rule over the sons of men , having all times at his disposal , out of whose hands no strength or policy , shall ever be able to wrest the sway and dominion of things . 

It cannot but afford strong consolation unto every true believer to consider , that he who hath the chief influence , in all these great changes and variety of events in the world , is both his god , and his father . 

How did this quiet the heart of old Eli , i sam. 3. 18.  it is the Lord , let him do what seenieth him good . and David upon the same consideration professeth , i was dumb , and opened not my mouth , because thou didst it . and our blessed saviour himself makes use of this argument . the cup that my father hath given me , shall i not drink it ? though the potion be bitter , and displeasing , yet so long as it comes from a loving and careful father , we have no reason to fear any hurt by it . 

And on the other side , much of men's unquietness and dejection , is occasioned , either by the want of this evidence , or by the neglect of applying it . When they terminate their thoughts upon secondary instruments , fearing men that shall die , and the sons of men that shall be made as grafse : forgetting the Lord their maker , who stretched forth the heavens , & laid the foundations of the earth . this is that which makes men to fear continually , because of the fury of the oppressor . 

How would it compose all these fears and distempers , if men would but labour after this assurance of their interest in God with the same zeal and intention of mind wherewith they prosecute their particular engagements , and animosities against one another . He that hath God for his strength and refuge , is always sure to be on the strongest side , & need not fear the most tempestuous mutations . though the earth be removed , and the mountains should be carried into the midst of the sea : though the waters thereof roar , and be troubled , and the mountains shake with the swelling thereof . 

Thus much i thought fit to premise in the general , concerning the necessity , and seasonableness of this subject . 

As for the particular occasion of publishing this discourse , i have nothing to say but this : that being solicited for a copy of it , by divers persons ( And some of eminent quality ) before whom it was occasionally preached , i knew not any more convenient way to satisfy their desires , than by such a public communication of it . 

I could speak something from my own experience concerning the efficacy of this doctrine against those damps and dejections of mind , unto which , such times as these , will expose a man . It is my hearty prayer , that it May be useful to others also in this respect . 

Farewell . 

The beauty of providence . 

eccles. 3. 11.  

He hath made every thing beautiful in his time : also he hath set the world in their heart , yet no man can find out the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end . 



This book contains Solomon's experience in his search for contentment ; which being not to be found amongst any of the creatures , he advices , never to trouble ourselves in an eager prosecution after them , but to enjoy our possessions with a cheerful liberal mind , without perplexing ourselves in such cares & labours , as May defraud us of those honest comforts to be had by them . for there is nothing better for a man then that he should eat and drink , and make his soul enjoy good in his labour . ca. 2. v. 24.  that 's one of the conclusions which Solomon in•ers from his former discourse , and which he further an , and confirms in the following parts of his sermon . It being his chief scope in this book , to direct men how to behave themselves with cheerfulness and contentment , under all those great revolutions , and that variety of events , which May befall them in the world . 

This chapter contains a discourse concerning God's government and disposal of times ; and is therefore not unfitly styled , the calendar or Ephemerides of seasons : whence the wiseman with divers arguments urges upon us what he had before commended , a cheerful and contented mind . 

The text is one of these arguments : God hath made every thing beautiful in his time ; that is , there is a wise order and contrivance in all the works of providence ; every particular event is most seasonable in that time which God appoints ; and therefore we have no reason to repine at our condition , as if matters did not go well with us , for 't is impossible they should have been better than they are , though they do cross our private hopes and desires ; yet God best understands the fittest order and season for all things , making them beautiful in his time . 

also he hath set the world in their heart : by world here is not meant this material world , but seculum , the succession and course of things , as the original word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} does properly import . This God hath set in , or * ex . pounded unto men's hearts , that is , he hath endowed us with an ability to discern in some measure that seasonableness which he observes in the government of the world . 

yet there is no man can find out the work that God makes from the beginning to the end : that is , 't is above human ability to comprehend the reason of all divine proceedings , we cannot find them fully out from the beginning to the end . 

Others conceive that the words May be more properly rendered thus : as long as the world shall last , God doth reveal unto men's hearts , the work which he makes , from the beginning to the end , excepting only some things unto which man cannot attain . as if he should have said , in all ages of the world , here are still some passages of providence , wherein men May be able to discern a beauty and comeliness though there are some other particulars , which we cannot understand . The sense of both interpretations , being for the substance , much alike . 

that 's the connexion and meaning of the whole verse . The text according to its natural fullness doth compr•ze in it these three particulars . 

1.  Every thing has its time . 

2.  Every thing in its time is beautiful . 

3.  That is the proper season for all things which God appoints . 

1.  Every thing has its time . to all things there is an appointed season . ver. 1.  Not only for such natural events , as bear in them a kind of necessity , as a time to be born , and a time to die : ver. 2.  But also for those voluntary actions , that seem to be most alterable & contingent , a time to weep , and a time to laugh ; ver. 4.  The wisdom of providence in the government of this lower world , hath disposed to every thing its particular season . This is that which we call , the fullness of time , the ripeness of season . prov. 27. 1. the wiseman says there , that the day brings forth events , paritura est dies , alluding to a teeming mother , to whom there is a set date for her delivery . So doth time travail with the decrees of providence , and for each several action , there is a pregnancy , a fullness of time . 

2.  Every thing in its time is beautiful , even such matters as in their own natures are not without some deformity . a time to kill , ver. 3.  a time to mourn , ver. 4.  a time of hate , and a time of war , ver. 8.  The scorching of summer , & the extreme cold of winter , though both in themselves alike distaftfull , yet are comely in their seasons , and those times would not be so beautiful without them . Nor is it the natural goodness of any thing that can make it comely , out of its proper season . That which beauty is in bodies , and harmony in sounds , that is opportunity in time ; now as white and red , which are the usual materials of beauty , as those particular notes of which music doth consist , May be so disposed of , as to cause deformity and discord . so actions which in themselves are good , May be depraved by their unseasonableness . 

3.  That is the proper season for all things which God appoints . Or thus . Every particular event , is most beautiful in that time which the providence of God hath allotted to it . 't is above the contrivance of human policy to bring matters about in their fittest order . And therefore ' twere but folly to conclude that things do not fall out well , unless they answer our desires ; for god best understands the fittest season for every purpose . And whatsoever , or whensoever he works , you May be sure , 't is both beautiful , and in its time ; even those events , which do most thwart our private ends , ( Could all circumstances be duly considered ) we should find them to be performed , in their most comely order , and best opportunity . 

As for the two first particulars , though they are employed in the text , yet are they more expressly handled in the former verses . And therefore i shall pass them over , without any further enlargement , insisting only upon this latter , as being more directly agreeable to the main scope of the words . 

And 't is a subject , that in many respects will deserve your more especial attention ; 't is not commonly treated of . And besides , it May very much conduce to our contentment , to settle our hearts , against all those conditions that May be fall us in the world . 't is of very general use and concernment , suitable to all times and occasions . For times of suffering , to make us patient and submissive ; for times of mercy , to make us cheerful , and thankful . In brief , it extends to all persons , relations , businesses , seasons ; nothing is more generally useful than this , to have our hearts fully persuaded of that wise order and contrivance which there is , in the disposal of every particular event in the world . And 't is more especially seasonable for times of trouble and confusion , when men are apt to mistrust the government of providence , as if he did neglect the care of this lower world , and leave all things to their own jarring principles . Then ( I say ) 't is more especially seasonable , to vindicate the care and wisdom of providence , to show that every thing which God doth is best , and consequently , that these many distractions and confusions under which we suffer are far better , than any other ( Though the most flourishing ) condition could be . And that 's the subject i am now to insist upon . The point is this . 

every particular event is most beautiful in that time , which the providence of God hath allotted to it . 

A truth , by so much the more seasonable for these times , by how much 't is now the more difficult to believe it . 

The observation lies plainly both in the scope of the place , and the most obvious sense of the words . 

The scripture is copious in other proofs to this purpose . deut. 32. 4.  his work is perfect , and his ways are judgement , a god of truth and without iniquity , just and right . not only his first work of creation is exactly good and perfect ; but his ways of providence also are disposed with judgement and righteousness . 

So again , isa. 28. 29.  the Lord of hosts is wonderful in counsel , and excellent in working . that is , every event of providence , is managed & preordained by an admirable wisdom , and therefore must needs be of excellent contrivance . 

And again . dan. 2. 20 , 21.  wisdom and might are his , he changeth the times and the seasons : he removeth Kings , and he setteth up Kings . those two attributes of strength & wisdom are for the most part put together in scripture ; God never shows any argument of his strength , but his wisdom is engaged in it also . Those great alterations & subversions , which happen in the world , do not more demonstrate the greatness of his power in the doing of them , than the greatness of his wisdom , in disposing of them for the best . 

And again . psal. 104. 24.  oh Lord how manifold are thy works , in wisdom hast thou made them all , the earth is full of thy riches . which is as well true of the works of providence , as of the works of creation . 

But this truth is more directly intimated by that vision of Ezekiel , in the first chapter of his prophecy , wherein he doth express how all events in the world are wisely disposed of , by the care and government of providence . The scope of that vision was to confirm the faith of the prophet in the certainty of those things which he was to foretell ; because God himself by whom he was inspired , had such a special influence , in the orderly managing of all inferior events . 

Though matters Might seem to run upon wheels ( As we say ) to follow their own courses , without any special guidance , to go at random , yet these wheels have eyes in them , v. 18. that is , there is the eye of providence which directs them in their revolutions . and then besides , these wheels are likewise governed by the four living creatures , that is , by the angels of God , who are fitted for all their services , with four remarkableendowments 

1.  With wisdom and prudence , typified in that vision , by the face of a man . 

2.  Courage and resolution , the face of a lion . 

3.  Sedulity , and diligence , the face of an ox . 

4.  Swiftness and dispatch , the face of an eagle . 

In all which the prophet doth at large explain unto us , with what deliberate care and forecast , the providence of God doth dispose of all these inferior events . 

This truth May yet be further evidenced , from the very light of nature , and the testimony of the heathen . Hence was it that the ancients did set forth their gods with harps in their hands , to show the harmony they observed in the government of the world . And Mid•• was condemned to wear asses ears , because he preferred Pan's pipe before Apollo's lute ; human policy , before divine providence . 

Nay the devil himself doth acknowledge the wisdom and seasonableness of divine proceedings , and therefore would fain have sheltered himself under this pretence , matth. 8. 29.  art thou come to torment us before our time ? implying that it would not become the god of order to do any thing untimely . and doubtless that must needs be an evident and a great truth , which is confessed by the mouth of so great a liar . 

For the further confirmation of this , let us a little consider , some of those rugged passages of providence , which seem to be performed with the greatest negligence and deformity . 

Look upon the history of Joseph , he was ( You know ) one of the promised seed , concerning whom , God had foretold , a superiority and dominion , over the rest of his family . Now , that after this , he should be exposed to the treachery of his malicious brethren ; that besides his nearness to slaughter from their hands , he should be sold into a far country , whence there was no hopes ever to hear of him again ; that there he should be so endangered by the rage of a lustful woman , and suffer so tedious and unjust an imprisonment , all this Might seem to be an oversight and neglect of providence , as if it had forgotten that promotion which Joseph was designed to . And yet do but reflect upon the latter part of the story , and you shall find , how all these misfortunes did mightily conduce , not only to his advancement , but alto to the safety and preservation of that whole family , which was then the visible church . So that if each of his brethren had given him as much money as they sold him for , it had not been so great a kindness as he received from their intended cruelty . 

It is an elegant gloss of St. Gregory upon this story , divino judicio quod declinare conati sunt , renitendo servierunt : ideo venditus est à fratribus Joseph , ne adoraretur , sed ideo est adoratus quia venditus . it was so ordered by providence , that what they sought to decline , they did promote , even by their striving against it ; Joseph was therefore sold by his brethren , that he Might not be worshipped , and yet he was therefore worshipped because he was sold . sic divinum consilium dum devitatur , impletur ; sic humana sapientia dum reluctatur , comprehenditur . even so the divine counsel is accomplished in being opposed ; so human policy is defeated by the means of promoting it . 

Thus also is it in the history of David , he was ( You know ) designed to a kingdom , but how many straits was he put to before he attained it ? being forced into the wilderness like a wand'ring outlaw , and followed there by a company of discontented persons , who were as ready perhaps , upon every trivial occasion to revolt from him , as before from Saul . but above all the rest , his last distress was one of the most desperate , when he was spoilt at Ziglag , not only of his goods , but his wives and children too , when his own soldiers in their mutiny and discontent were ready to stone him ; there being then but little hopes to save his life , much less to get a kingdom : and yet this distress also , was in the event of it contrived to his advantage . For having afterwards pursued the amalekites , he not only recovered his own , but got also such abundance of other spoils from them , as served him for rich presents , whereby he Might renew and confirm the friendship of his wellwishers in Israel , that after the death of Saul ( Which presently followed ) he Might by their free votes be chose to succeed him . 1 sam. 30. and chap. 31.  

You May observe likewise somewhat to this purpose in the story of Jonah , when he was sent to Nineveh about so weighty a matter as the safety of that great populous city , and that too , when their destruction was within ken , but forty days off , that he should now make delays and fly to Tarshish , that upon such a straight , he should run himself into hazards , Might seem to argue some carelessness , and neglect in the government of providence . And yet this error of his was so wisely managed in the event , that it proved a great advantage to the main end of his business . For 't is a probable opinion that these mariners , who cast Jonah into the sea , were a special occasion that his preaching was so successful afterwards . The ninivites being by them informed , that this was that prophet , for whom they had lately suffered so violent a tempest , how the wind ceased , and all was calmed again , when they had once cast him into the sea ; from whence it was not possible he should be delivered but by a miracle . And therefore they concluded , that this must needs be some man extraordinarily inspired from above , and that his preaching was not idle threats , but such as Might justly fright them into that rigorous fast which afterwards we read of , both for man and beast . It being the wisdom of providence so to contrive it , that this offence of Jonah should mightilyadvantage that end , which it did seem most directly to oppose . 

So likewise for that distention betwixt Paul and Barnabas , act 15. it Might seem the unseasonable breach , that could possibly be imagined , when the church of the Christians was now in its beginnings and infancy , that then the two chief members of it should fall at variance amongst themselves , was such an untimely dissension that an enemy could not wish them worse . Nothing could more thwart the promulgation of the gospel of peace , than the contentions of those that preach it . If that state which is already established into a kingdom , divided against itself , cannot stand , much less could those small beginnings think to increase into a church by divisions . 

And yet this likewise was so disposed of in the event , that it did mightily conduce to the propagation of the gospel thorough the whole world ; for by this means , those two parted asunder , the one into Cyprus , the other into Syria and Cylicia , and like two mighty streams spread themselves several ways , that so they Might the better water the barren and thirsty corners of the world . 

Thus have you seen the beauty of providence in some rugged passages of it . 't is so in everyother partincular , though seeming unto us never so deformed . But man cannot find out the work of God from the beginning to the end . 

For the further evidencing of this truth , there are two grounds upon which 't is bottomed , that being rightly understood and considered , will make the point very clear . 

1.  God is exactly careful of every thing . 

2.  He is infinitely wise for the disposal of all to the best . 

1.  God doth overlook all things by an especial providence . ephes. 1. 11.  he worketh all things after the counsel of his own will . there is no event in the world but it is ordered both according to God's will , and by his counsel . Psal. 135. 6.  whatsoever the Lord pleased , that did he , both in heaven , and in earth , and in the sea , and in all deep places . not only in the heaven , where his glory is more especially conspicuous , but in the earth too , where matters seem to be full of confusion ; and in the sea , and in all deep places , where we cannot so much as take notice of them . There is nothing so great but is under his power ; nothing so little but is within his care . those actions and events that seem unto us most free , casual , inconsiderable , are all of them ordered by his providence . 

1.  That which is most free , the hearts and affections of men do follow the guidance of his decrees ; men May do after their own counsels and inclinations , but they are still suitable to his providence ; there is nothing more in our command , than our thoughts and words , and yet both the preparation of the heart , and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord . prov. 16. 1.  

2.  That which seems most casual , the disposing the lot is from him . prov. 16. 33.  He who is accidentally slain by another is said to be delivered into his hands by God . Exod. 21. 13.  That casual arrow shot at random was directed by providence to fulfil the prediction of ahaós death . 1 kin. 22. 34  There is no liberty for causes to operate in a loose and straggling way , but in matters of greatest uncertainty there is a preordained course of effects . 

3.  the least most inconsiderable things , are not neglected by providence . It was a * profane speech of the Aramites , that God was the god of the mountains , not of the valleys . 1 king. 20. 23. whereas he regards the lowest the least thing as well as the greatest . the young lions , psal. 104. 21.  The ravens , psal. 147. 9 are provided for by him . He feeds the fowls of the air , adorns the lily , and clothes the grass of the field , which to day is , and to morrow is cast into the oven . sparrows ( You know ) are but cheap birds , are not two of them sold for a farthing ? matth. 10. 29.  and yet not one of these doth fall to the ground without your father . he must give the fowler leave to kill them ; nay when they are upon the wing in their frequent and often repeated motions , yet than it is he that must appoint them the time and place when and where they shall settle ; and in this sense also , not one of them doth fall to the ground without your father . the hairs of our head , are yet less observable , contemptible even to a proverb , Pili non facio , ne pilo quidem melius . and yet these with God , are inter numerata , amongst those things whereof he takes an exact account . 

That place , 1 cor. 9 9  doth God take care for oxen ? doth not simply exempt such things from thelaw of his providence ; but 't is argumentum a minori , and doth imply his more especial care of that higher rank of creatures to whom these are subordinate . The plain meaning of it is , that if God hath by a particular law provided that the ox should not be muzzled , which treads out the corn , he will be much more careful of the labourers in his harvest . 

't is recorded to the glory of some ancient generals , that they were able to call every common soldier by his own name , and careful to provide , not only pay for their captains , but litter also for the meanest beast that did serve the camp . Now you know there is not any creature but is a soldier to the Lord of hosts , he doth sometimes muster up an army of lice & flies , and therefore 't is but reason that his providence should take care for such things also . Why should it not be as great an argument of his power to preserve and order these lesser creatures , as it was at first to make them ? the creation of a glorious angel , did not cost him more , then that of a despicable fly . Was it not he , that out of the same primitive nothing , put that difference , which there is amongst several natures ? And if the painter in the same piece draw a silken & a woollen garment , why should he value the one above the other , since it was the same art that did both make and distinguish them ? 

2.  As his providence doth extend to all things ; so likewise does his wisdom . as he is exactly careful , so is he infinitely wise ; & therefore as able for the contrivance of every the least particular thing , as he would be , if he had nothing but that to look after . If the providence of God had but one project on foot , we could easily conceive how he Might be able to drive that through all the windings and circumstances of it , with care and wisdom . Nay we would trust any wise man with the managing of a single business , when he had nothing else to distract his endeavours : but for all those multitude of affairs amongst men and angels , nay for the very circumstances and manner of all those several actions and motions , which are performed in every moment of time through the whole world ; we cannot conceive but that in such a tumult of business , the eye of providence May be sometimes over-seen . But this arises from our mistake of the divine nature , we measure God by our own finite abilities , whereas we should consider , that that which is infinite cannot be confined by time , or number , or place ; but is as well able at all times , to look to all things , in all places , as if there were only one business to be cared for : you May see some imperfect resemblance of this amongst the creatures . Do but consider the sun how that at the same time , without labour or confusion , is employed in divers services for all the creatures under heaven . The distinctions of seasons , the growth of several plants , its various influence upon minerals , the cherishing of living creatures , with sundry other such variety of employments , which we are not able so much as to take notice of . Or else , do but mark the nature of the soul , which at the same time perhaps doth contemplate heaven , direct the body in its sundry motions , distribute the food in a wise proportion to the several parts , not neglecting so much as the least hair about it , but supplying that with suitable nourishment . And all this it does without weariness or distraction . And if a creature can do thus , much more than the creator , who gives to every thing its proper ability , and doth actuate all things , by a more immediate assistance than the soul itself . So that though we suppose infinite occasions , ( Which notwithstanding creatures are not capable of ) yet the providence and wisdom of God is infinite also ; and there is the same proportion of infinite to infinite , as of one to one . 

Now put both these reasons together , if the providence of God be thus exactly careful of every the least particular : if he be thus infinitely wise for the disposal of all to the best , no wonder then , though every event in the world be both beautiful , and in its time . 

For the further clearing of this truth , there are two doubts or queries to be resolved , that seem to oppose it . 

1.  what 's the reason why this beauty of providence doth not appear to us , but that many things seem so full of disorder and confusion in the world ? 

2.  How May this consist with the permission of sinful actions , which can neither be beautiful nor seasonable ? 

I begin with the first , to show the reason why in so many things we cannot discern this beauty of providence . The verse of the text tells us , that man cannot find out the work of God from the beginning to the end : that is , 't is above human capacity to comprehend the reason of all divine proceedings , we cannot find them fully out , from the beginning to the end . And so Job 9 10.  he doth great things past finding out : lo , he goeth by me , and i see him not ; he passeth on also but i perceive him not . and again , chap. 23. 8 , 9  behold , i go forward , but he is not there ; and backward , but i cannot perceive him : on the left hand where he doth work , but i cannot behold him ; he hideth himself on the right hand , that i cannot see him . the meaning is , that where ever Job turned his eyes , there were still some passages of providence which he could not apprehend the meaning of . God hath reserved this as a peculiar prerogative to himself . it is not for us to know the times and the seasons , which the father hath put in his own power . act. 1. 7.  

There May be a twofold reason of this . 

1.  The obscurity of the things themselves . There are treasures of wisdom , col. 2. 3.  Not only for their preciousness , but for their privateness too . hidden wisdom , 2 cor. 1. 7.  secrets of wisdom , and these are double to that which is ( As Zophar speaks ) Job 11. 6. that is , those concealed providences , which we do not discern the reason of , are of much greater proportion than those that appear . We read in that forecited place , ezek. 1. 16. of a wheel within a wheel , signifying those involutions and intricacies which there are in the ways of providence . And the psalmist tells us that his way is in the sea , and his paths in the great waters ; and his footsteps are not known . psal. 77. 19  

As it is in the works of nature , where there are many common things of excellent beauty , which for their littleness do not fall under our sense ; they that have experimented the use of microscopes ; can tell , how in the parts of the most minute creatures , there May be discerned such gildings and embroideries , and such curious variety as another would scarce believe . Why 't is so in the works of providence , there are very many passages of frequent daily occurrence , whose excellent contrivance doth not fall under our sense or observation . 

2.  Our own ignorance and short sightedness , and that in a twofold respect . 

1.  We cannot see that end and drift which providence aims at in many particulars ; and therefore , no wonder though they seem unto us rude and uncomely . We measure things by this false balance of opinion , which weighs only their outsides , and doth not look upon their ends and relations . now the beauty of things doth consist much in their tendency and reference to their proper ends . If an ignoraut man that knows not the reason of a windmill or water-mill , should look upon them only as places of habitation , he cannot think them well situated , where they are so much exposed to the violence of winds & waves : whereas he that understands how the wisdom of the artificer hath contrived those motions unto useful ends , must needs confess a beauty and comeliness in the work . 't is so likewise in the events of providence , which none can rightly apprehend , but he that understands the special drift and purposes which they are designed to . 

2.  We cannot see the whole frame of things , how sundry particular events in a mutual relation do concur to make up the beauty of the whole . He that can discern only two or three wheels in a clock , how they move one against another , would presently think , that there were contrariety and confusion in the work . Whereas he that beholds the whole frame , and discerns how all those divers motions do jointly conduce to the same end , cannot choose but acknowledge a wise order in the contrivance of it . So likewise is it in the frame of times , where he alone is fit to judge of particulars , who understands how they refer to the general . but now we are but of yesterday and know nothing , because our days upon earth are as a shadow ( Saith Bildad ) Job 8. 9  We look upon things according to a short succession , and so are not able to discern that beauty which there is in their references to other matters a far of . but now to God a thousand years are but as one day . he beholds all things whether past or to come in the same instant . there is no succession in eternity , but all things within the reach of time are present unto that . Though in the revolution of a wheel , there be a mutual succession betwixt the parts contained in it ; yet an eye that is placed without can at the same time discern the whole motion . Thus also is it in the revolution of time , where though there be a mutual succession , betwixt those things that are contained under time , yet God who is without and above it , doth at the same view behold all together . So that 't is no wonder , though many things seem beautiful to him , which to us who are so shortsighted May appear harsh and deformed . 

2.  The 2d . query was this . If there be such an overruling providence , which doth dispose of all to the best ; how comes it to pass that there are so many sinful actions in the world ? 

To this i answer two things . 

1.  when men thwart God's will of precept , they serve his will of providence . those particular intersts of gain , honour , pleasure , revenge , which sway men's desires and actions , are wisely contrived to the promoting of God's decrees and glory . When Augustus made the general tax upon the world , his end was to enrich himself , and fill his coffers but God used it as a means to fulfil the prophecy of Christ's birth at Bethlehem . Rehoboam , and Jehu , and Cyrus , had all their several aims , in those works , wherein they were subservient to providence and they did still accomplish his counsel in prosecuting their own designs . 

2.  that which in respect of man's execution is wicked and disorderly , in respect of God's appointment is beautiful and comely . there could not be any more horrid act , than the betraying and crucifying of our blessed saviour ; and yet even in this , as it was decreed by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God : act. 2. 23. there was the greatest miracle of divine wisdom that ever was extended to the creature . Such depths of policy , which all the subtlety of men or angels , was not able to contrive , no nor to suspect , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as the apostle calls it , ephes. 3. 10.  interchangeable wisdom , of curious variety , as the word signifies . Now if God could thus manage the worst action of man to the best advantage of man , well than May we conclude , that every event of providence is beautiful in its time . 

I have now done with the explication and confirmation of the text . In the application , it May be useful for these lessons . 

1.  For information , and that in a twofold respect . 

1.  It May teach us our duty to take notice of , and observe the works of providence . 

2.  It May direct us what to judge of the affairs of these times , under which we are fallen . 

1.  If all the events of providence , be so wisely contrived , 't is certainly then our duty to consider and to take notice of them . psal. 111. 2.  the works of the Lord are great , sought out of all them that have pleasure therein . and again , v. 4.  he hath so done his marvellous works that they ought to be had in remembrance . now a man cannot be said to seek out or to remember that which he doth not carefully observe . 't is the chief scope of that psalm to excite men unto this duty . And David makes it a note of piety for men to delight themselves in the contemplation of God's works , to remember him in his ways , as the prophet Isaiah speaks . This , Asaph found by experience to be a special antidote against all diffidence and carnal fears . In the 77.  psalm when he was surprised with those sad thoughts , will the Lord cast us off for ever , and will he be no more entreated ? Hatb God forgotten to be gracious ? &c. he presently applies himself to this remedy , v. 11 , 12.  i will remember the works of the Lord , surely i will remember thy wonders of old : i will meditate also of thy works , and talk of thy doings . 

If a man were but well read in the story and various passages of his life , he Might be able to make an experimental divinity of his own . He that is observant of God's former dealings and dispensations towards him , May be thence furnished with a rich treasury of experience against all future conditions . 

There are very many duties that depend upon a right understanding of the times . A man knows not how to order his services of prayer and praises , without some observation and skill in these . It was a great commendation which was given to the men of Issachar , that they had understanding in the times to know what Israel ought to do . 1 chron. 12. 32.  And the ignorance of these , the wise man complains of , as being a very great evil : eccles. 9 12.  for man knoweth not his time , but as fishes are taken in an evil net , and as birds are caught in the snare , so are the sons of men snared in an evil time when it false suddenly upon them . 

Now this observance of God's works and dispensations , is a duty always seasonable , but more especially in such times as these . 't is commonly observed , that though smooth and peaceable times are best for the liver , the man that lives in them ; yet times that are full of change and vicissitude are best for the writer , the historian that writes of them ; so though quiet seasons May best suit with our desires and outward condition , yet these disturbed confused times , May be best improved by observation , and do most set forth the wisdom of providence . 

The common providence of God in the various seasons and order of nature , May afford excellent matter for contemplation , much more that special providence of his in the guidance of human affairs , which have been always managed with various wisdom . 

But especially in his dispensations towards these later ages , wherein there have been many new , unusual emergencies , such as our forefathers have not known . 

How many strange observable passages , May a considering man pick out , amongst the affairs of these few last years ? How strangely hath the whole course of things both in church & state , been turned about , beyond all men's imaginations ! How hath God in every respect , and on all sides , puzzled the wisdom of the wise , and enfeebled the strength of the mighty , abating the glory of all human power , lifting himself up above others , in those things wherein they dealt most proudly , effecting great matters , by despised means ; what strange ebbs and flows of hope have we known ? When men have been most full of confidence , than some unexpected accident hath intervened , and disappointed all . So that the wisest men have been often put to stand at a gaze , not knowing what to judge of the issue of things ; and ( Though we have not had leisure to observe it , yet ) there has been something equivalent to this , in other nations ▪ the whole Christian world being generally full of strange commotions . Now we May certainly conclude , that all these unusual turns and changes of things are not for nothing . There is some great design to be accomplished by them . 't is our duty with diligence to observe the passages , and with patience to attend the issue . 

2.  This May direct us what to judge of the present times under which we are fallen . If it be so that every particular event is so exactly regular and beautiful ; hence than we May infer , how all that confusion and disorder , which seems to be in the affairs of these times , is not so much in the things themselves , as in our mistake of them . The roughest seasons , ( Though they May be unsuitable to our desires ) yet have in them a proper comeliness , as well as times of the greatest serenity . 

True indeed , the scripture doth sometimes mention evil days ; but this is not so to be understood as if time in itself could be evil , either naturally , for so God pronounced it good ; or morally , because 't is not subjected to any moral rule : but only accidentally in respect of our mistake and abuse of it : when either we judge of it according to our own wishes , or misspend it according to our own lusts . 't is only unwise , unholy men , that make unhappy times . 

As in the works of creation nothing is properly deformed , but every thing hath a peculiar beauty , according to than rank and station wherein 't is placed ; though in vulgar speech we use to call a toad and a serpent ugly , yet that is only in reference to common esteem ; whereas in respect of the universe they are as regular and comely parts as any of the rest ; their outward shapes being suitable to their inward forms , and those purposes for which they were intended . So is it likewise in the ways of providence , those designs that in respect of our apprehensions are carried on by a crypticall involved method , are yet in themselves of as excellent contrivance , as any of those , that seem to be of more facile and perspicuous order . 

If a man in these times shall with his reason consult only the outward face of things , they must needs seem full of irregularities & disorder ; when the spirits of men in the prosecution of the same ends , and the pretence of public welfare shall be imbittered against one another , even to public ruin , When there is a violent perverting of judgement and justice in a nation ; and on the side of the oppressor there is might , but the oppressed have none to comfort them . 

When there is a total subversion of those degrees , in which the order and harmony of things doth consist , servants being on horses , and Princes walking as servants on the earth . When the mountains are removed , and the pillars of the earth tremble . when religion and laws ( Which are the foundations of a persons ) are out of course . 

And yet even in all this , there May be a design of providence for our good . This is certain , all God's promises to his church are infallibly true , and all his dispensations ( Though never so cross in outward appearance ) have a tendency towards the fulfilling of those promises . And why should not a man rest himself in this belief ? 

In our natural inquiries after the efficient cause of things , when our reason is at a stand , we are fain sometimes to sit down , and satisfy ourselves , in the notion of occult qualities ; and therefore much more should we be content to be ignorant in the final cause of things , which lie more deep & obscure then the other . 

Let no man than presume to censure the several vicissitudes & changes of things , as if they were unseasonable and ill contrived . Remember we are but shortsighted , and cannot discern the various , references , and dependencies , amongst the great affairs in the world , and therefore May be easily mistaken in our opinion of them . We do in this world ( For the most part ) see only the dark side of providence . At the last & great day of manifestation , when the whole plot of divine love shall be laid open , than we shall be able to discern the beauty of providence in all the rugged passages of it , how tribulation , distress , persecution , famine , nakedness , peril , and the sword , do all work for the best to those that love God . 

judge nothing therefore before its time : 1 cor. 4. 5.  Consider , we cannot see the works of God from the beginning to the end . and you know there is a vast difference , betwixt the beginning and the end of a building . It May be our lots perhaps in these times , to see only the beginning of the fabric , when the old frame is demolished , the rubbish lies scattered about , the new materials being so gathered into heaps posterity perhaps May see the end of it , when all these confused preparations shall be made up into a beautiful structure . 

2.  This May serve for reproof of two sorts of persons . 

1.  Those that do not observe or regard the works of the Lord . 

2.  Those that murmur and repine at them . 

1.  This May reprove those that do not observe or regard the works of the Lord . 't is a great argument of infidelity and irreligion , when men let many remarkable providences pass by them without notice or observation . Or when they look upon them only in a slight and superficial manner , like those whom the prophet Isaiah complains of , seeing many things , but observing not . 

This sin of inadvertency of God's various providences , hath been oftentimes severely threatened and punished in scripture . isa. 5. 12.  because they regard not the work of the Lord , nor consider the operation of his hands , therefore is my persons gone into captivity . and again , jer. 12. 11.  the whole land is made desolate , because no man layeth it to heart . 

The heaviest judgements that can befall a nation , are captivity and desalation . and yet they are both denounced against this stupidity and carelessness of spirit . And you May guess at the heinousness of the sin , by the greatness of the punishment . 

't is a sin , that is after a more especial manner appropriated to wicked men . psal. 10. 4 , 5.  the wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God ; God is not in all his thoughts . Thy judgements are far above out of his sight . things that he never inquires after or regards , as if he were not at all concerned in them . que supra •os nihil ad nos . he •ooks no further than second causes , unto which he ascribes the success or miscarriage of events ; and doth not take notice of that divine providence by whose influence they are guided . You see , this is made the note of wicked men . And therefore , as we would avoid that censure , so will it concern us to avoid the sign . 

2.  This May serve for the reproof of those , that murmur and repine at the works of providence , that take upon them the magisterial judgement of events ; as if they could tell , how to frame things much better , and to contrive the issue of things to greater advantage . How ordinary is it , for men to discourse thus , concerning the great changes of these times ? As if the unsearchable ways of God , were to be judged before the tribunal of human reason ; who art thou oh man that disputest with God ? ( Saith the apostle ) how despicable in comparison to his infinite majesty and wisdom . If there be a commonwealth amongst ants and bees ( As some naturalists say there is ) 't would make a man smile to think , that they should take upon them the censure of state matters amongst us men ; and yet here the disproportion is finite , whereas betwixt God and man 't is infinite . as the heavens are higher than the earth , so are my thoughts higher than your thoughts ; and my ways then your ways . 

He that will take upon him to mend the contrivance of things , let him remember ( Says one of the Stoics ) that the first thing he is to do , is to mend God , to teach him wisdom and care . And if he shall think himself unfit for that , let him not presume upon this . For consider , is not the providence of God exactly careful of every thing ? Is not he infinitely wise to dispose of all to the best ? Are not all things subservient to his will ? Why certainly then , ( However matters May appear to us ) yet nothing could have been better than it is . Every thing shall prove for the best in respect of his glory , and ( If we belong to him ) in respect of our good too . 

't is an observable check which Solomon gives to such presumptuous persons as are apt to repine at , and censure the course of things . eccles. 7. 10.  say not thou , what is the cause why the former days were better than these ? far thou dost not inquire wisely concerning this . it should seem , that those flourishing days of Solomon , so very eminent for all kind of plenty and peace ( silver being in Jerusalem as stones ; & cedars , as the sycamores in the vale for abundance ) were not yet without some morose repining spirits , who were still maligning the present condition of things ; and therefore no wonder , if we find the like humour amongst men in other times . 

This the wiseman doth here reprove , both by a prohibition and a reason . 

1.  A prohibition . say not thou , what is the cause why the former days were better than these ? that is , be not transported with that common humour , of censuring and condemning the present state of times , and commending the times past ; as if the course of events were not managed by the same wise providence now , which governed the world before . He doth not forbid men to inquire after the cause of public sufferings ; for this is frequently elsewhere enjoined in scripture , that upon the occasion of any special judgement , we should search and try our hearts , consider our ways , and our doings , labouring to find out the cause of God's displeasure , that we May accordingly meet him in his ways . But the meaning is , that we should not take upon us the peremptory censure of times and dispensations , presuming to condemn those things , which we cannot understand . 

2.  The reason . for thou dost not inquire wisely concerning this thing . that 's a figurative expression styled a meiosis , when a phrase signifies much more than the naked words do import . The meaning is , 't is extreme folly for men to take upon them the censure of times and providences , as if they were competent judges of such matters . 

There are two places of scripture , that will make up a syllogism to prove this conclusion . 

he that judgeth of a matter before he hath enquired into , and understands it , it is folly and shame unto him : prov. 18. 13.  But now , it doth not belong unto us to know the times and the seasons which the father hath kept in his own power . act. 1. 7.  And therefore it must needs be folly to take upon us the magisterial censure of such things . 

Every day hath its proper evil , as well the former as these ; and every day hath its proper advantage , as well these as the former . The very dregs of time , if we endeavour to make a right use of them , May be redeemed into opportunity . 

There are two reasons of men's offending in this kind . 

1.  When they look only upon some particulars , without the consideration of their proper ends , or general frame ; now 't is true indeed that some particular events , singly looked upon , May seem very prejudicial ; but the whole contexture of affairs in their cooperation shall prove for the best . All things shall work together , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} for good to those that love God . ro. 8. 28.  

But now 't is above our capacity to comprehend the whole frame of things ; and that is not disorder in respect of the whole , which to us May appear so , being compared with some particulars . you know , that in the natural body , the variety and dissimilitude of parts , is required to the beauty of the whole ; the roundness of the head , the length of the arm , the flatness of the hand , blackness in one part , and whiteness in another ; all these being singly compared amongst themselves , though they May seem to argue some opposition and difformity , yet look upon them as they stand in relation to the whole frame , and it will appear how in their several ways , they do each of them conduce to its comeliness and order . If this lower world had in it no changes and varieties , but were in all respects alike , it would not then be so properly {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} a beautiful world , as {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , a lump or mass . 

2.  Another occasion of men's offending in this kind , is , when they will judge of events , according as they suit with their own wishes . And in this case , 't is impossible that every humour should be satisfied ; because particular desires , ( Besides their opposition to one another ) will likewise be inconsistent with the general design . It would seem better perhaps to every private man , if he himself were a magistrate , or a King , and every common soldier a commander , or a general . But how could this consist with the exigencies of a commonwealth , or an army , where there must be degrees , and disproportion of places according to the necessity of several employments . 't is so in the government of this great universe : that difference which there is , betwixt particular things , and times and persons , doth much conduce to the beauty and convenience of the whole . 

't is our safest way than to conclude that all matters are for the best , beautiful in their times , though to us they May seem full of disorder and contrariety . Thus the apostle , in that remarkable place rom. 11. 33. speaking concerning the rejection of the Jews , when God would cast off & destroy his peculiar persons , and that for his own glory and advantage , he concludes , his judgements are unsearchable , and his ways past finding out . But of him , and to him , are all things . as if he should have said , God will do this strange work , and though for my part , i know not the reason of it . his judgements are unsearchable , &c. yet sure i am , that of him , and to him are all things ; that is , as the making of all things , was of his power , so the resolution of all things shall be to his glory . 

Though his judgements are as the great deep , for their obscurity and unmeasurableness , not to be fathomed by our shallow apprehensions ; yet his righteousness is as the strong mountains , for their eminency and stableness . psal. 36. 6.  though clouds and darkness May be round about him , yet righteousness and judgement are the habitation of his throne . psal. 97. 2.  

3.  This May serve for exhortation , to persuade us unto these four duties . 

1.  Not to be too hasty in our desire or prosecution of any thing . 

2.  Not to trouble ourselves with any solicitous care about the success of things . 

3.  To be equally prepared for all future events . 

4.  To behave ourselves with cheerfulness and contentment in all conditions . 

1.  Hence we learn not to be too hasty in our desire or prosecution of any thing . God best knows the fittest season for every event ; we shall have it when its time is come , and before that , 't would not be beautiful : like snow in harvest ( As the wiseman speaks ) which though it Might possibly be some refreshment to our particular , yet would be a deformity in the course of nature . 

There are some men , whom the prophet styles of a hasty heart , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} isa. 35. 4. who are too heady and impatient in their hopes . And it is a weakness that arises from our infidelity and distrust of providence . for he that believeth , maketh not haste . cap. 28. 16.  't is God's usual course to defer what he promises , thereby to exercise our faith , to put an edge on our desires , and a value upon the blessing . In natural affairs , we are fain to expect the proper season , and maturity of things ; the husbandman will wait for his harvest , he doth not expect to sow and reap both in a day . It should be so likewise in other matters ; and since that is always the fittest time for every thing which God appoints , it will become us then patiently to wait his leisure , and not with overhasty desires to run before him . 

Abraham was fain to tarry a long time for a son , David for a kingdom ; and the whole world for Christ . he that rightly understands the worth of any blessing , & his own want , cannot think much to wait for it . The poor man , at the pool of Bethesda , being sensible of his own lameness , was content to tarry there 38. years in hopes of remedy . Suppose a promise were deserred to the utmost , yet do but compare the shortness of our lives , with the duration of our souls and then no delay can seem tedious . neque enim est aliquid in tam brevibus vitae metis ita serum quod longum expectaere immortalis putet animus . a man conscious to himself of his own immortality , cannot think any time long , which is confined within the narrow bounds of life . 

Is there then any mercy which thou expectest ? do not over rashly hasten it , with any indirect project , as if thou wert able to help the providence of God , with wiles and devises of thine own . Though it be long in coming , yet it will come at last , it cannot be more slow than sure . When Isaac was laid upon the altar , and bound for a sacrifice , and his father's hand lift up for the fatal blow , yet than there came a rescue from heaven , which would not have been so beautiful , if by any unlawful act it had been hastened before that time , either by Abraham's sparing his son , or Isaac's resisting his father . 

Joseph did undergo a tedious imprisonment in the land of Egypt ; 't is likely , being the key-keeper , he Might have taken his own time , and have scaped when he would but than he had lost his preferment ; whereas by tarrying God's leisure , he was delivered with advantage . Though David had been a long while anointed to a kingdom , yet because he did not use any hasty means for the enjoying of it , therefore did providence clear the passage for him , and prospered it to him afterwards . He Might have killed Saul in the cave , and Abner too , when he found them sleeping ; but than he had been overhasty : 't were better they should fall by their enemies . the Lord shall smite them when their day shall come to die . 1 sam. 26. 10.  And before that , 't would be but rashness to attempt it . And so likewise when he stopped himself in his haste after nabals life , you know within awhile after , God took him away by his own immediate hand , and gave both his wife and estate to David . 

An over forwardness in the hastening of our hopes , is the ready way to embitter them unto us . You know how much trouble and contention there grew , from that hasty act of Sarah , when in her distrust of the promise , and fear of being childless , she must needs give Hagar to Abraham . So likewise for Jacob's too much haste in getting the blessing by a wrong means ; you know it cost him afterwards , many dangers , and a tedious exile . Whereas if he had tarried longer , God would have brought it about for him by a more easy and beautiful way . 

God's time is the best , and he never fails his own season , i the Lord will hasten it in its time . isa. 60 22.  For us to measure the fitness of seasons by our own weak apprehensions , is not this to set the son by our dial ? We are too shortsighted , apt to ante-date the promises . the Lord will arise and have mercy upon Zion , wben the time to favour her ; ye a when the set time is come . psal. 102. 13.  

2.  Hence we learn not to trouble ourselves with any solicitous care about the success of things . To serve providence is the usual means , that is our work ; but the issue and event of things that's God's work , we , have nothing to do in it . That which is not under our power , should not be under our care . if there be nothing at our disposal , but that all events do depend upon an higher providence , 't were but a vain thing then to busy ourselves , with hopes and fears about them . Much of the disquietness amongst men in the world arises from hence , that they busy themselves about God's work , and neglect their own . 

Is there then an evil thou fearest , why 't is not in the power of any creatureto hurt thee . Though men should use plots , and threats against thee , yet they can do nothing . They sat together , and counselled against David , devising to take away his life , psal. 31. 13.  But what was his comfort , why , saith he , ver. 15.  my times are in thy hands oh Lord . he knew that no ill success towards him , was in the power of others . 

Or is there an evil thou feelest ? why it comes from the hand of God . Be not then impatient at the instrument . 't is but a childish , currish thing to beat the rod , or bite the stone that hurt thee . David could quietly undergo the railing of Shimei , when once he had discerned in it the providence of God . 

Or is there a good thou hopest for ? why it is not within the reach of thy abilities . And therefore 't were but in vain to think thou couldst command it by thine own endeavours . We should Count it a mad thing for one that is naturally low , to busy himself in the study and labour of growing tall , because this is not alterable by any thing in our power ; since no man can add one cubit to his stature . why 't is so in other things likewise , God doth as well set bounds to our estates , as to our statures ; and of ourselves , we can as little add one penny to that , as one cubit to this . And therefore , never let any one think that he can raise himself as he pleases , and be the Master of his own fortunes . Though he were furnished with the greatest helps and probabilities of advancement . Yet the battle is not always to the strong , nor the race to the swift ; neither bread to the wise , nor yet riches to men of understanding , nor yet favour to men of skill ; but time and ehance happens to them all . that is , there is a secret providence , which doth so unavoidably dispose of these lower events , that the likeliest means we can use , cannot promise us any certain success . 

They that with a compass wisdom will belay events , that with forecasts , and provisions will bind providence , for the most part , are not only disappointed in what they hoped for , but do meet with a curse instead of it . See that place , isa. 50. 11.  behold , all ye that kindle a fire , that compass yourselves about with sparks , walk in the light of your fire , and in the sparks that you have kindled ; this shall you have of my hands , you shall lie down in sorrow . 

3.  Hence we learn to be equally prepared for all future events , not wishing for one more than another . What ever comes to pass shall be beautiful , and therefore should be welcome . all things that befall us shall lead us on to the same journey's end , happiness . And therefore we should not in our expectation of future matters engage ourselves in the desire of any particular success . But with a travellers indifferency ( As Epictetus speaks in Arian . ) who when he comesto doubtful turnings , doth not desire one way should be true more than another . So should we entertain every thing that we meet with in our passage through this life . Especially since we are sure , that there is none of them , but if we belong to God , shall further us in that which is our main business , our journey to happiness . And therefore to be very solicitous about any particular success , what is it but to limit and confine the power of God ? nay , to prefer our own policy before the wisdom of providence , as if we alone were able to discern what would be the best issue of things . Mark how the same heathen bespeaks such a person . Thou foolish man ( Saith he ) dost thou not desire that which will be most convenient for thee ? And can there be any thing better than what God appoints . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . Wherefore by such immoderate and eager desires , thou dost ( As much as in thee lies ) to corrupt thy judge , and seduce thy counsellor . 

The Stoics have many excellent passages to this purpose . nunquam sapientem poenitentia subit , ( Saith Seneca ) quia nihil melius illo tempore fieri potuit quam quod factum est . a wise man is never troubled at any cross event , he knows nothing could have been better than it is . omnia illi succedunt , nihil praeter opinionem accidit . all things are successful to him , he is disappointed in nothing , because indifferent to every thing . Whilst others are tossed up and down betwixt hopes and fears , his mind is established . 

Now if mere reason could advance heathen men to such resolutions , much more than should a Christians faith in the providence of God , with those many promises wherein he hath an interest , raise his mind to this heroic temper , and make him bend himself with a submissive compliance unto every condition . 

ob. but what then , May not a man ( Nay should he not ) be very earnest in his desires and prayers , for some particusar deliverance or blessing ? 

I answer . Yes . But in all temporal matters , it must be still with a tacit submission to the will of God , who knows better what is fit for us , than we ourselves . See the example of David to this purpose . 2 sam. 15. 25.  He was there put to a very great exigence , his son Absalon , had suddenly raised a great army against him , in so much as he was fain to fly for his life . There were some of the priests adhered to him , and followed him with the ark . But he , upon serious thoughts desires them to return again . For ( Saith he ) if i shall find favour in the eyes of the Lord , he will bring me again , and show me both it and his hahitation ; but if he thus say unto me , i have no delight in thee , behold here i am , let him do to me , as seemeth good unto him . here 's no deep anxiety or aestuation of spirit . No bitter exclaiming against his unnatural son , and disloyal subjects , but a quiet succumbency , an indifferent composure of mind , which resolves to be content in every condition . He puts the case both ways , and is provided for either . If it prove after this manner , why then so . If otherwise , than thus . So true is that common emblem , that every wise man is a cube or die , not to be flung from his bottom . Let him be cast any way , he still lights upon his right basis , whatever his condition May be , si fractus illabotur orbis , yet his mind is still calm and peaceable . 

ob. but would you have a man turn Stoic ? should he not be troubled at the afflictions that befall him ? 

sol. i answer . Yes : he must be sensible of his sufferings , and consequently cannot but grieve under them ; especially so far as his own sin and neglect hath occasioned them . But than it should be his care to quiet his heart from immoderate trouble , by the consideration of that wise providence , who doth dispose of all for the best . 

4.  Lastly , hence we learn , to behave ourselves with cheerfulness and contentment under all those conditions which the providence of God shall think fittest for us . 't is the wiseman's own inference from the text , in the verses immediately after it . there is nothing better than for a man to rejoice , and do good in his life ; that he should eat and drink , and enjoy the good of his labour . For if every thing be best which God appoints , we have no reason then to be troubled at any event . What though it do cross our desires , yet 't would not have been so well , if it had been otherwise . Things cannot be better with us than they are . David thought it a hard case , that his child by Bathsheba must die . But did he loose any thing by it ? was it not better for him to have such a legitimate heir as Solomon was ? We are but ill contrivers of our own welfare , and therefore should without murmuring submit ourselves and affairs to the government of providence . What though that do straightened us in our desires ? you are content to let the physician bar you of many things , because he hath cast your water , felt your pulse . Consider then , doth it not as much concern us to provide for the salvation of our souls , as the health of our bodies ? or doth not God understand this , as well as the physician that ? What reason have we then to repine at his proceedings ? He was a wise son in Plutarch , who being told by a friend that his father would disinherit him ; answered , non faciet nisi faciendum : he will do nothing but what he should . Thus should a Christian willingly resign up himself in every condition to the disposal of providence . 

Do but apply this consideration according to the several occasions of your lives . When your hearts are at any time amazed or dejected with the thought of the public confusions ; remember , that God sits in heaven , observing and ordering all these inferior motions for the best . 

And so too in the case of particular sufferings , 't is likely that there is not any amongst you , but hath some kind of private trouble & grievance to which he is more especially exposed . Either weakness of body , or too narrow a fortune , losses in your estates , disappointment in yourhopes , unhappy relations , or the like . And these things as we are men , cannot choose but grate upon our spirits , with some kind of harshness and discontent . But now , as believers , we have a remedy against them . For consider , there is nothing befalls us by chance . All things are ordered by the deliberate counsel and foreknowledge of God . He is as exactly careful of every one of us , as if he had nothing else to look after . Do not think that any trouble befalls you ( Because he doth not regard , for his care & providence doth extend to all things ; nor because he cannot help , for he is almighty ; nor because he will not , for he is equally infinite in all his attributes ; but because his wisdom finds that condition to be fittest for thee ; there is some thing amiss which should be mended . When the superfluous humour is corrected , the physical potion shall be taken away . And 't is not reasonable to expect physic and health both together . When the wound is healed , the smarting plaster shall be removed . And thou Mayest confidently say with David , psal. 119. 75.  i know oh Lord that thy judgements are right , and that thou in faithfulness hast afflicted me . 

How happy Might we be , if we could settle our hearts upon these considerations ? 

Finis . 





psal. 73.  Ier. 12.  eccles. 9 2  cap. 7. 15.  c. 8. 14.  c. 4 v. 1  c. 7. v. 7.  prov. 25. 2  Eccles 8. 17.  act. 4. 28.  eccles. 5. 8.  c. 3. 17.  psal. 39 9  ioh. 18. 11  isa. 51. 12 , 13.  psal. 46. 1 , 2 , 3.  

* {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} this very suitable to the original . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} propos.  confirmation by testimony divine . so ier. 32. 19  Job 36. 5.  chron. 6 9  Prov. 15. 3  ver. 10.  human testimony . Bacon's sap. vet.  examples . David . Jonah . Paul & Barnabas . matth. 12. 25.  ver. 39 , 40 , 41.  confirmation by reason . 1 reason . * like that of the poet : non vacat exiguis rebus adesse jovi . 2 reas.  vindication from doubts & objections  psal. 90. 4. 2 pet. 3. 8.  application . 1 use . for information . isa 64. 5.  v. 7 , 8 , 9  ephes. 5. 16.  2 tim 3. 1 , 5.  eccles. 5. 8  cap. 4. 1.  eccles. 10. 7.  Job 95 , 6.  psal. 11. 3.  rom. 8. 28. 35.  2 use . for reproof . isa. 42. 20.  isa 55. 8 , 9  Epictetus  1 king. 10. 7.  matt. 6. 34  ephes. 5. 16.  3 use . for exhortation . prov. 25. 13.  translat . Fearful . Boetius . Consol. lib 4.  1 sam. 24. 11. 26. 7.  psal 27. 13  ver. 9  eccles. 9 11.  disert. li . 2. ca. 7.  de benef. lib. 4. 34.  ob.  sol.  ob.  sol.  v. 12 , 13.  aequum est ut homini placet , quicquid placet deo.  
















































