The trial of true wisdom ; with how to become wise indeed . Or , a choice and cheap gift for a friend ; both to please and pleasure him : be he inferior or superior , sinful or faithful , ignorant or intelligent . 

by r. young of roxwel in Essex , floreligus . 

Add this as an apendix , or third part , to the heart's index . and , a short and sure way , to grace and salvation . 

section 41.  

Lucian tells of an Egyptian King , who had apes taught ( When they were young ) to dance , and keep their postures with much art : these he would put into rich coats , and have them in some great presence to exercise their skill ; which was to the admiration of such as knew them not , what little sort of active , nimble men the King had got : and such as knew them , thought it no less strange ; that they should be trained up to so manlike , and handsome a deportment . but a subtle fellow that was once admitted to see them , brought and threw amongst them , a handful of nuts : which they no sooner spied ; but they presently left off their dance , fell a scrambling , tore one another's rich coats ; and to the derision of the beholders ( Who before admired them ) they discovered themselves to be mere apes . 

These ensuing notions ( Which i have purposely taken , as a handful out of the whole sack , to squander away amongst my acquaintance ) are such nuts , as will discover not a few ( Who are men in appearance , and their own opinion ) to be as wise , and well affected as Aesop's cock ; that preferred a barley corn , before a pearl : or Pliny's Moal , that would dig under ground with great dexterity : but was blind , it brought into the sun . or diaphontus , that refused his mother's blessing , to hear a song : or the Israelites , who preferred garlic and onions , before quails and manna . 

men no more differ from beasts , plants , stones ; in speech , reason , shape , than some differ from others , in heart , in brain , in life . whence the very heathen poets usually & most fitly compare some men to stones , for their hardness , and insensibleness ; others to plants , that only fill their veins ; a third sort to beasts , that please their senses too ; a fourth to evil angels , that only sin , and cause others to sin ; a fift to good angels , that are still in motion , always serving God and doing good , yet ever rest . 

Again , experience teaches , that men's judgements and censures are as various , as their palates : for what one admires , another slights ; as is evident by our saviour's auditors ; of which some admired , others censured , a third sort wept , a fourth scoffed , a fift trembled , a fixed blasphemed when they heard him . And how should it be otherwise , when the greater part , are as deeply in love with vice and error ; as the rest are with virtue , and truth . when men's conditions , and constitutions vary as much ; as their faces . as the holy ghost intimates , in comparing several men , to almost every several creature in the universe . nor is the epicure more like a swine , the lustful person a goat , the fraudulent man a fox , the backbiter a barking dog , the slanderer an asp , the oppressor a wolf , the persecutor a tiger , the church-robber a wild bore , the seducer a serpent , yea a devil , the traitor a viper , &c.  2 tim. 4 17.  luk. 13. 32.  phil. 3. 2. psal. 22. 12 , 13 , 16 , 20 , 21.  & 74. 13 , 14 , 19  & 80. 13.  matth. 23. 33.  dan. 7. 4 , 5 , 6 , &c. zeph. 3. 3 , 4 , &c. cant. 2. 15 , 17 , &c. than every of them is unlike another . 

Amid such a world of variety , i have chosen to set forth , how one man differs from , and excels another in brain , and to prove , that to be wise indeed , is the portion but of a few , even amongst us . And this discovery alone ( As i deem ) will be richly worth my pains , and each man's serious observation . 

sect. 42.  

Now all sorts of men , May be comprised , under one of these three heads : the sensual . 
rational . 
spiritual . 


For if you observe it , some men like the moon at full , have all their light towards earth , none towards heaven : others like the moon at wain , or change , have all their light to heaven wards , none to the earth : a third sort like to the moon in eclipse , as having no light in itself , neither towards earth , nor towards heaven . 

Touching these three degrees of comparison , you shall find , that the one exceeds the other ( In wisdom ) as the stars exceed one another in glory . of which particularly . 

First , there is no less difference , between the rational and sensual , the wise and simple , the learned and unlearned , than there is between men and beasts ; as Menander speaks . Or between the living and the dead , as another hath it . And yet the rational , do not so far excel the sensual , as the spiritual excel the rational . 

sensual men are so benighted , and puzzled with blindness , that they know no other way than the flesh leads them . It is the weight that sets all their wheels a going ; the horses that draw their chariot , the very life of their corruption , the corruption of their life , without which they do nothing . 

The minds of brutish men , that have been ill bred , are so drowned in sin , and sensuality ; and their spirits so frozen , and pitifully benumed with worldliness , and wicked customs , that they cannot judge aright , either of spiritual matters , or rectified reason . Yea , in matters experimental , they are of as deep a judgement as was callico , who stuffed his pillow ( A brass pot ) with straw , to make it soft . Or that German clow• , who undertook to be very ready in the ten commandments : but being demanded by the minister which was the first ? made answer , thou shall not eat . or that simple fellow , who thought Pontius Pilate must needs be a saint , because his name was put into the creed . they are like the ostrich , Job 9 17. whom God hath deprived of wisdom , and to whom he hath given no part of understanding . 

Which men also , are so far from receiving instruction , that they will scorn and scoff at their admonisher . As they have no reason , so they will hear none . nor will they believe any thing , but what they see , or feel : and he that learns of none but himself , hath a fool to his t•acher . yea , such as refuse admonition , are by wise Solomon branded , for the most incorigible fools alive ; so that their knowledge is ignorance , their wisdom folly , their sight blindness . they neither consider what reason speaketh , or religion commandeth ; but what the will and appetite affecteth . for will is the axletree , lusts and passions the wheels whereupon all their actions are carried and do run . appetite being their Lord , reason their servant , and religion their slave . whereas religion should govern their judgement , judgement and reason their wills and affections ; as Adam should have done Eve . They that are after the flesh , do mind the things of the flesh : the carnal mind is enmity against God , for it is not subject to the law of God , neither indeed can be , rom. 8. 5. to 9  And which leaves them without all hope of being wiser , they had rather keep conscience blind , that it May flatter them , than inform it , that it May give a just verdict against them , Counting it less trouble , to believe a favourable falsehood , than to examine whether it be true . so that it is impossible for fleshly minded men , to believe what sots they are , touching the good of their souls . Wherefore when we see the folly , and misery of those that serve sin and Satan , and how peevishly averse they are to their own eternal salvation , let us pity them , as being so much more worthy our commiseration , as they are more uncapable of their own misery . And so much of the first sort , namely , sensuallists . 

sect. 43.  

Secondly , there is another degree of knowledge , that is accrued or obtained , by education and learning , observation and experience , called natural or speculative knowledge , or reason improved . for human learning , is as oil to the lamp of our reason , and makes it burn clearer : but faith and illumination of the spirit , more than doubles the sight of our minds ; as a prospective glass does the corporal sight , matth. 16. 17. 1 cor. 2. 7. to 17.  joh. 12. 46.  For as the soul is the lamp of the body , and reason of the soul , and religion of reason , and faith of religion : so Christ is the light , and life of faith , joh. 1. 9  & 8. 12.  act. 26. 18.  eph. 5. 14.  Christ is the sun of the soul ; reason and faith the two eyes : reason discerns natural objects , faith spiritual and supernatural . we May see far with our bodily eye sense , farther with the mind's eye reason ; but farther with the soul's eye faith than with both . And the believer hath the addition of God's spirit , and faith above all other men . i am the light of the world , saith our saviour , he that followeth me ( Meaning by a lively faith ) shall not walk in darkness , but shall have the light of life , joh. 8. 12. and more see two eyes than one : yea , the day with one eye , does far more things descry , than night can do with more than Argos eyes . so that as mere sense is uncapable of the rules of reason ; so reason is no less uncapable , of the things that are divine and supernatural , jer. 10. 14. 1 cor. 2. 14 , 15 , 16.  eph. 5. 8.  And as to speak is only proper to men : so to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven , is only proper to believers , psal. 25. 14.  prov. 3. 32.  amos. 3. 7.  

Now of natural and speculative knowledge , the wicked have as large a share as the godly : but of spiritual , experimental , and saving knowledge which is supernatural , and descendeth from above , jam. 3. 17. and keepeth a man from every evil way , prov. 2. 12. the wicked have no part with the godly . whence all men in their natural condition are said to be blind and in darkness , matth. 4. 16.  & 15. 14.  eph. 4. 18 , 19  & 5. 8.  Whereas believers , are called children of light , and of the day , 1 thes. 5. 5. 1 pet. 2. 9  

Nor is this kind of knowledge , any way attainable , but by grace from above . No learning , experience , or pains in study and books , will bring them to it , ephe. 1. 17 , 18.  & 3. 19 except they become new creatures , have hearts , eyes , and ears sanctified from above ; and that the holy ghost becomes their teacher , deut. 29. 2 , 3 , 4. psal. 111. 10.  joh.  . 15.  rom. 8. 14 , 15.  

Nor is it saving knowledge that they seek after : for though many of them , be great seekers after knowledge , great pains-takers to become wise : yet it is not divine and supernatural knowledge , that they labour for , or desire . 

Indeed wisdom in the largest sense , hath ever carried that show of excellency with it , that not only the good have highly affected it , ( As Moses who studied for wisdom ; and Solomon who prayed for wisdom ; and the Queen of Sheba who traveled for wisdom ; and David who to get wisdom , made the word his counsellor , hated every false way , and was a man after God's own heart ) but the very wicked have laboured for it , who are ashamed of other virtues ; as , oh the pleasure that rational men take in it ! prov. 2. 3 , 10 , 11.  & 10. 14.  phil. 3. 8.  

knowledge is so fair a virgin , that every clear eye is in love with her ; it is a pearl despised of none but swine , prov. 2. 3. 10. 11.  ( Whereas brutish and blockish men , as little regard it ) they who care not for one dram of goodness , would yet have a full scale of knowledge . Amongst all the trees of the garden , none so pleaseth them as the tree of knowledge . and as wisdom is excellent above all , so it is affected of all , as oil was both of the wise and foolish virgins . it hath been a mark that every man hath shot at , ever since Eve sought to be as wise as her maker : but as a hundreth shoot , for one that hits the white : so an hundred aim at wisdom , for one that lights upon it , eccles. 7. 28. because they are mistaken in the thing . For as Jacob in the dark mistake Leah for Rachael , so many a blind soul , takes that to be wisdom , which is not like Eve , who thought it wisdom to eat the forbidden fruit , and Absalon , who thought it wisdom to lie with his father's concubines in the sight of all the persons ; and the false steward , who thought it wisdom to deceive his Master . and so of Joseph's brethren , of Pharaoh and his deep counsellors , of Achitophel , of Herod , of the Pharisees in their project to destroy Jesus ; and many the like . All these thought they did wisely , but they were mistaken , and their projects proved foolish , and turned to their own ruin . 

sect. 44.  

But take some instances , to prove that all sorts of Naturians are fools , in comparison of the godly . I 'll begin with those that rep••e themselves , and are reputed by others , the wisest amongst men : and they are your profound humanists , and cunning politicians , wherein you shall see , whether the most and greatest number are not grossly mistaken , in their opinions and verdicts touching wisdom . 

First for profound Hamanists , a man would think that they were incomparably wise ; for none so thirst after knowledge and wisdom as they ; & to get it they are no niggards of their labour : nor do they leave any thing unstudied but themselves . they know all parts and places of the create world , can discourse of every thing visible and invisible , divine , human and mundane ; whether it be meant of substances or accidents , are ignorant of nothing but the way to heaven , are acquainted with all laws and customs , save the law of God , and customs of Christianity ; they are strangers nowhere but in the court of their own consciences : yea , they build as hard , and erect as high as did the babel-builders ; but all to no purpose : they never come to the roof , and when they die they are undone . they spend all their time in seeking after wisdom ; as alchemists spend all their estates , to find out the philosopher's stone ; but never find it ; they never attain to that , which is true wisdom indeed . For as the ragged poet told Petronius , that poetry was a kind of learning , that never made any man rich : so human learning of itself , never made a wise man . 

As thus ( If i May be so bold ) what is it , or what does it profit a man , to have the etymology , and derivation of wisdom and knowledge , without being affected with that , which is true wisdom indeed to be able to decline virtue , yet not love it ? to have the theory , & be able to prattle of wisdom by rote ; yet not know what it is by effect and experience ? to have as expert a tongue , and as quick a memory as Portius ; a perfect understanding , great science , profound eloquence , a sweet stile ? To have the force of Demosthenes , the depth of Theseus' , the persuasive art of Tully , &c. if withal he wants grace , and lives remissely ? With the astronomer , to observe the motions of the heavens ; while his heart is buried in the earth ? to search out the cause of many effects , and let pass the consideration of the principal , and most necessary ? With the historian , to know what others have done , and how they have sped ; while he neglecteth the imitation of such , as are gone the right way ? With the lawmaker , to set down many laws in particular , and not to remember the common law of nature , or law general that all must die ? Or lastly , with Adam to know the nature of all the creatures : and with Solomon to be able to dispute of every thing , even from the cedar to the hyssop or pellitory ; when in the mean time he lives like dives , dies like naba•• and after all goes to his own place with Judas ? alas ! many a fool goes to hell with less cost , less pains , and far more quiet : that is but raw knowledge , which is not digested into practice : it is not worth the ••me of knowledge , that May be heard only and not seen , ioh. 13. 17  〈◊〉 . 4. 6.  good discourse is but the froth of wisdom : the sweet and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 of it , is in well framed actions : that is true knowledge , that makes the knower blessed . We only praise that mariner , that brings the 〈◊〉 safe to the haven . 

What says Aristotle ? to be wise and happy are terms reciprocal . And Socrates , that learning , saith he , pleaseth me but a little , which nothing profits the owner of it , either to virtue , or happiness : and being demanded , who was the wisest and happiest man ? He answered , he that offends least . He is the best scholar , that learns of Christ obedience , humility , &c.  he is the best arithmetician , that can add grace to grace ; he is the best learned , that knows how to be saved . yea , all the arts in the world , are artless arts to this . 

sect. 45.  

The best knowledge is about the best things ; and the perfection of all knowledge , to know God , and ourselves : knowledge and learning , saith Aristotle , consisteth not so much in the quantity , as in the quality ; not in the greatness , but in the goodness of it . A little gold ( We know ) is more worth than much dross : a little diamond , than a rocky mountain . so one drop of wisdom , guided by the fear of God ; one spark of spiritual , experimental , and saving knowledge , is more worth than all human wisdom and learning : yea , one scruple of holiness , one dram of faith , one grain of grace , is more worth than many pounds , of natural parts . and indeed faith , and holiness , are the nerves , and sinews ; yea , the soul of saving knowledge . 

What saith Aristotle ? no more than the knowledge of goodness , maketh one to be named a good man ; no more doth the knowledge of wisdom alone , cause any person properly to be called a wise man . Saving knowledge of the truth , works a love of the truth known : yea it is a uniform consent , of knowledge and action . He only is wise , that is wise for his own soul : he whose conscience pulleth all he hears , and reads to his heart , and his heart to God : who turneth his knowledge to faith , his faith to feeling , and all to walk worthy of his redeemer . he that subdues his sensual desires and appetite , to the more noble faculties of reason , and understanding ; and makes that understanding of his to serve him , by whom it is , and doth understand . He that subdues his lusts to his will , submits his will to reason ; his reason to faith ; his faith , his reason , his will , himself to the will of God : this is practical , experimental , and saving knowledge ; to which the other is but a bare name , or title . a competnet estate ( We know ) well husbanded , is better than a vast patrimony neglected . never any mere man ( Since the first ) knew so much as Solomon : many that have known less , have had more command of themselves . 

Alas ! they are not always the wisest , that know most : for none more wise and learned in the world's account , than the scribes and Pharisees : yet Christ calls them four times blind , and twice fools in one chapter , matth. 23.  And the like of Balaam , 2 pet. 2. 16. who had such a prophetical knowledge , that scarce any of the prophets , had a clearer revelation of the Messiah to come . And the same May be affirmed of Judas , and Achitophel ; for many that know a great deal less , are far wiser . Yea , one poor crucified thief , being converted , in an hours time , had more true wisdom and knowledge infused into him , than had all the rulers , scribes , and Pharisees . 

It is very observable , what the high priest told the council , as they were set to condemn Christ ; ye know nothing at all : he spoke truer than he meant it ; for if we know not the Lord Jesus , our knowledge is either nothing , or nothing worth . rightly a man knows no more than he practiseth . It is said of Christ , 2 cor. 5. 21. that he knew no sin ; because he did no sin ; in which sense , he knows no good , that doth no good . These things if ye know ( Saith our saviour ) happy are ye , if ye do them , joh. 13. 17.  And in deut. 4. 6.  keep the commandments of God , and do them : for this is your wisdom , and understanding before God , and man . 

What is the notional sweetness of honey , to the experimental taste of it ? It is one thing to know what riches are , and another thing to be Master of them : it is not the knowing , but the possessing of them that makes rich . many have a depth of knowledge , and yet are not soul-wise ; have a liberary of divinity in their heads , not so much as the least catechism in their consciences ; full brains , empty hearts . yea , you shall hear a flood in the tongue , when you cannot see one drop in the life . insomuch , that in the midst of our so much light , and means of grace , there be few i fear , that have the sound , and saving knowledge of Jesus Christ , and him crucified , which was the only care , and study of St. Paul , 1 cor. 2. 2.  

sect. 46.  

And that i am not mistaken , the effect shows : for if men knew either God , or Christ , they could not but love him ; and loveing him , they would keep his commandments , ioh. 14. 15.  For hereby ( Saith St. John ) it is manifest that we know him , if we keep his commandments , 1 joh. 2. 3.  But he that sayeth , i know him , and yet keepeth not his commandments is a liar , and there is no truth in him , ver. 4.  What saith our saviour ? This is life eternal to know thee the only true God , and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent , joh. 17. 3.  But how shall a man know , whether he hath this knowledge ? answ. St. John tells you in those last words mentioned , and so plainly , that you cannot be deceived , except you desire to deceive your own soul . 

The knowledge of God that saves us , is more than a bare apprehension of him ; it knows his power , and therefore fears him ; knows his justice , and therefore serves him ; knows his mercy , and therefore trusts him ; knows his goodness , and therefore loves him , &c.  For he that hath the saving knowledge of God , or of Christ , hath every other grace : there is a sweet correspondence between every one , where there is any one in truth : as in the generation , the head is not without the body , nor the body without each member , nor the soul without its powers and faculties ; so in the regeneration , where there is any one grace in truth , there is every one , 2 cor. 5. 17.  If you will see it in particulars , read psa. 9 10.  jer. 9 24. 1 joh. 4. 6.  joh. 4. 10. 1 joh 4. 7 , 8.  & 2. 3. joh 42. 5 , 6. 1 ioh. 4. 7. which scriptures show , that as feeling is inseparable to all the organs of sense ; the eye sees and feels , the ear hears and feels , the palate tastes and feels , the nostrils smell and feel ; so knowledge is involved in every grace : faith knows and believes , charity knows and loves , patience knows and suffers , temperance knows and abstains , humility knows and stoops , repentance knows and mourns , obedience knows and does , confidence knows and rejoices , hope knows and expects , compassion knows and pities . yea , as there is a power of water in every thing that grows ; it is fatness in the olive , sweetness in the fig , cheerfulness in the grape , strength in the oak , taleness in the cedar , redness in the rose , whiteness in the lily , &c. so knowledge is in the hand obedience , in the mouth benediction , in the knee humility , in the eye compassion , in the heart charity , in the whole body and soul , piety . 

Alas ! If men had the true knowledge of Jesus Christ , it would disperse and dispel , all the black clouds of their reigning sins in a moment ; as the sun does no sooner show his face , but the darkness vanisheth : or as Caesar did no sooner look upon his enemies , but they were gone : Egypt swarmed with locusts , till the West wind came , that left not one : he cannot delight in sin , nor dote upon this world , that knows Christ savingly . 

virtue is ordained a wife for knowledge ; and where these two join , there will proceed from them a noble progine , a generation of good works . again , as the water engendereth ice , and the ice again engendereth water ; so knowledge begets righteousness , and righteousness again begetteth knowledge . it is between science and conscience , as it is between the stomach and the head ; for as in man's body , the raw stomach maketh a thumatick head , and the thumatick head maketh a raw stomach ; so science makes our conscience good , and conscience makes our science good : nor is it so much scientiae capitis , as conscientia cordis , that knows Christ and ourselves ; whence Solomon saith , give thine heart to wisdom , prov. 2. 10. and let wisdom enter into thine heart , prov. 4. 4.  And when he would acquaint us how to become wise , he tells us , that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom , prov. 1. 7. as if the first lesson to be wise , were to be holy . again , if it be asked , why the natural man perceiveth not the things of the spirit of God ? saint Paul answers , he cannot know them , because they are spiritually discerned , 1 cor. 2. 14 and indeed if they are spiritually discerned , how should they discern them that have not the spirit ? for though the outward man receives the elements and rudiments of religion by breeding and education , yet his inward man receiveth them by heavenly inspiration , 1 〈◊〉 2. 11 , 12 , 13.  & 12. 3. 8.  matth. 16. 16 , 17.  deut. 29 2 , 3 , 4 , psa. 111. 10.  Luke 24. 45.  ioh. 15. 15.  And this alone is enough to prove , that no wicked man is a wise man ; for if God alone be the giver of it , we May be sure that he will reveal his secrets to none but such as he knows will improve their knowledge to his glory , and the good of others : even as the husband man will not cast his seed but into ground that will return him a good harvest , psa. 25. 14.  Luke 24. 45.  Mark 4. 34.  gen. 18. 17. 1 joh. 4. 7.  

sect. 47.  

But would these men ( Any one , even the best of them ) thus improve , or employ their knowledge ? Or do they desire it to any such end ? No : but to some other end , as i shall in the next place acquaint you . 

Some men desire not to know , some desire only to know ; or rather thus , few men in comparison desire knowledge , fewer that desire divine and supernatural knowledge ; fewest of all that desire to be the better , or that others should be the better for their knowledge : more particularly , a world of men desire knowledge for no other end but to remove their ignorance ; as Pharach used Moses , but to remove the plagues . others again study the scriptures , and other good books , only to make gain thereof ; or to be the abler to dispute and discourse , as boys go into the water , only to play and paddle there , not to wash and be clean . with Eve , they highly desire the tree of knowledge , but regard not the tree of life . 

As i would fain know , what fruit or effect the knowledge of most men produces in them , except it be to enable them to dispute and discourse , to increase wit , or to increase wealth , or to increase pride , or perhaps to increase Athiesm , and to make them the more able and cunning to argue against the truth and power of religion ? Whether the utmost of their aim be not to enrich , dignify , and please themselves ; not once casting the eye of their souls at God's glory , their neighbours good , or their own salvation ? whether their main drift be not purchasing of a great estate for them and theirs , with out either fear of God , regard of men , or the discharge of their duty and calling ? Again , whereas a godly man and a good Christian , thinks himself as happy in giving light to others , as in receiving it himself ; how many are there , who as themselves are never the better , ( I mean in regard of grace ) for their great wisdom and learning , so no more are others ; for commonly they resemble dark lanterns which have light , but so shut up and reserved as if it were not : and what is the difference betwixt concealed skill , and ignorance ; it is the nature and praise of good , to be communicative , whereas if their hidden knowledge do ever look out , it casts so sparing a light , that it only argues itself to have an unprofitable being . 

And for the most part these men if they May be thought great rabbis , deep and profound scholars ; this is the height of their ambition , though neither the church be benefited , nor God glorified by it ; whereas they ought the contrary : for as the grace of God is the fountain from which our wisdom flows ; so the glory of God should be the ocean to which it should run : yea , that God May be honoured with , and by our wisdom , is the only end for which he gives us to be 〈◊〉 : and for default of this end , he not seldom croffeth the mean• , whereby while men strive to expel ignorance , they fall into 〈◊〉 ; as an E••••rick to cure one disease , causeth a worse . briefly , to conclude this 〈◊〉 , so many as are pust up with their knowledge , or do not part with their sins , th•w that they never sought it for God's glory , but for their own honour and glory . and certainly if we seek not God's glory in doing his work , he will give us no wages at the latter end . 

sect. 48.  

But for men to do no good with then gifts , is not all ; yea , it were well if that were the worst , for not a few of them resembl Achitophel , and Jonadab , who employed their wit wickedly , and do mischief instead of good with their wisdom : like Herod , when you shall see turning over the bible , searching the scriptures , examining the prophets ; but to what end and purpose ? to know good , but to do evil : yea , the greatest evil under the sun , slay Christ in the cradle : with many , their knowledge and learning is not for God and for Gideon ; but for Antichrist and for Babylon ; and so of all other gifts ; how many are the worse for them ? As give Saul a kingdom , and he will tyrannize ; give Nabal plenty , and he will be drunk ; give Judas an apostleship , and he will sell his Master for money ; let Sarmantus have a good wit , he will exercise it in scoffing at holiness . briefly , how oft doth wisdom without grace prove like a fair estate in the hands of a sool , which not seldom becomes the owner's ruin ? or Absoloms' hair , which was an ornament , wherewith he hanged himself : so that wisdom without grace is nothing else but a cunning way of undoing ourselves at the last . Many men's knowledge to them , being like the ark to the Philistines , which did them more hurt than good : when their knowledge makes them prouder , not better ; more rebellious , not more serviceable ; as it is isa. 47. 10.  thy wisdom and thy knowledge they have caused thee to rebel : and very often this falls out , that as the best soil usually yieldeth the worst air , so without grace there is nothing more pestilent than a deep wit , no such prey for the devil , as a good wit unsanctified . wit and jearning well used , is like the golden earrings and bracelets of the Israelites , abused like the same gold cast into an idol ; than which , nothing more abominable . 

Now when it comes to this , that they fight against God with the weapon he hath given them ; when with those the psalmist speaks of , psal. 73. 9  they set their mouths against heaven , and are like an unruly jade , that being full fed kicks at his Master ; what course doth the Lord take with them ? answ. read but that parable , luk 19 24.  Job 7. 17. it will inform you : for to him that useth his talon of knowledge well , he giveth more ; as to the servant that used his talents well , he doubled them : but to them that use not their knowledge well , much more if they abuse it , he taketh away that which he had formerly given them : as he took heat from the fire when it would burn his children , dan. 3. 27.  As you  , isa. 44. 25. 2 thess. 2. 10 , 11 , 12.  iob. 7. 17.  psa. 111. 10. 1 cor. 〈◊〉 15.  eccles. 2. 26.  prov. 28 5.  matth. 21. 43.  Acts 26. 18  isa. 29 14.  & 44 25.  & 6. 9 , 10.  dan. 2. 19 23.  Job 5. 13 , 14.  Job 9 39  & 12. 40.  rom. 1. 28.  ephe. 4. 18 , 19 1 cor. 1. 20. 2 thess. 2. 10 , 11 , 12. turn to the places , for they are rare . I will destroy the tokens of the soothsayers , and make them that conjecture , fools : i will turn the wise men backward , and make their knowledge foolishness , saith the Lord , isa. 44. 25.  he taketh the wise in their own craftiness , and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish , Job . 5. 13. the case of Achitophel : and justly are they forsaken of their reason , who have abandoned God ; yea , most just it is , that they who want grace , should want wit too . And so much of abusing their gifts . 

Lastly , these great knowers and wise men are so far from desiring soul wisdom , and saving-knowledge to the ends before specified , that they do not at all desire it , for that it suits not with their condition . For Naturalmen desire only human and mundane knowledge : spiritual men , that which is heavenly and supernatural ; and the reason why they desire it not , is , for that they know it not . a man desireth not that he knoweth not , says Chrisostome ; neither are unknown evils feared : wherefore the work of regeneration begins at illumination , acts 26. 18.  coll. 1. 13. 1 pet. 2. 9  

Now according as men are wise , they prize and value this wisdom , and endeavour to obtain it , prov. 18. 15.  For it is more true of divine wisdom , than it was of that Grecian beauty : no man ever loved her , that never saw her ; no man ever saw her , but he loved her . 

And so on the contrary , according as men are ignorant and blockish , they undervalue and disesteem it , hate it , and are prejudiced against it : and hereupon carnal men being blinded by the Prince of darkness , together with their own wickedness , and being of a reprobate judgement , do most usually and familiarly term and esteem this soul-wisdom , this divine , spiritual , experimental , and saving-knowledge to be mere foolishness , or madness , wisd. 5. 3. to 9 and the professors thereof to be fools & madmen ; Elisha was Counted no better , 2 king. 9 11. and the rest of the prophets , Hosea 9 7. and Paul , Acts 26. 20. and all the apostles , 1 cor. 4. 10.  Yea , our saviour Christ himself with open mouth was pronounced mad by his carnal hearers , joh. 10. 20.  Mark . 3. 21. and this hath been the world's vote ever since . The sinceer Christian was so reputed in Pliny's time , and after in St.  Augustine's time : yea , Julian the Pelagian could gibe St. Austin , that he had none of the wise sages , nor the learned senate of philosophers on his side ; but only a company of mean tradesmen , of the vulgar sort , that took part with him : whose answer was , thou reproachest the weak things of the world , which God hath chosen to confound the things that are mighty . 

To worldly men Christian wisdom seems folly , saith Gregory . and well it May , for even the wisdom of God is foolishness with the world , 1 cor. 1. 18 23. therefore no disparagement to us his servants , if they repute us fools ; nor i think any honour to such sensualists that so repute us : however we will give them their due : for , 

sect. 49.  

I grant that in some kind of skill they outstrip the best of God's persons , who , if they are put to it , May answer as Themistocles did when one invited him to touch a lute ; for as he said , i cannot fiddle ; but i can make a small town a great state : so the godly May say , we cannot give a solid reason in nature , why Nilus should overflow only in the summer , when waters are at the lowest ? why the loadstone should draw iron , or incline to the polestar ? how the heat of the stomach , and the strength of the nether chap should be so great ? Why a flash of lightning should melt the sword without making any impression in the scabbard ? Kill the child in the womb , and never hurt the mother ? how the waters should stand upon a heap , and yet not overflow the earth ? why the clouds above being heavy with water , should not fall to the earth suddenly , seeing every heavy thing descendeth ? except the reason which God giveth , gen. 1. 6.  & Job 38 8. to 12.  & 26. 8.  psal. 104. 9  But we know the mystery of the gospel , and what it is to be born a new , and can give a solid reason of our faith : we know that God is reconciled to us , the law satisfied for us , our sins pardoned , our souls acquitted , and that we are in favour with God ; which many of these with their great learning do not know . and thus the godly are proved wiser than the wisest humanist that wants grace . You have likewise the reasons why these great knowers , know nothing yet as they Might and aught to know : that is to say , 

First , because they are mistaken in the thing ; they take speculative knowledge for soul wisdom ; & soul saving wisdom to be foolishness & madness . now if a man take his aim amiss , he May shoot long enough ere he hit the white : and these men are as one that is gone a good part of his journey , but must come back again because he hath mistaken his way . 

Secondly , because they are unregenerate , and want the eye of faith . 

Thirdly , for that they seek not to God for it who is the giver thereof , and without whose spirit there is no attaining it . 

Fourthly , because they are proud , and so seek not after it , as supposing they have it already . 

Fiftly , because if they had never so much knowledge , they would be never the holier , or the better for it , but rather the worse ; nor would they employ it to the honour of God , or the good of others . 

Sixtly , because they either do , or would do mischief instead of good with their knowledge . 

Seventhly , because they will not consult with the word about it , nor advise with others that have already attained to it . Or thus , they read and hear the scriptures and mind not , ( I mean the spirituality of the word ) or mind and understand not , or understand and remember not , or remember and practise not . No , this they intend not of all the rest ; and they that are unwilling to obey , God thinks unworthy to know . 

When the serpent taught knowledge , he said , if ye eat the forbidden fruit , your eyes shall be opened , and you shall know good and evil : but God teacheth another lesson , and saith , if ye will not eat the forbidden fruit , your eyes shall be opened , and you shall know good and evil , rom. 12. 2.  See psa. 111. 10.  & 119. 97 , 98 , 99 , 100  Or if you do eat it , you shall be like images that have ears and cannot hear , rom. 11. 8.  Isa. 6. 10.  Matth. 13. 14.  Psal. 115. 6.  

From all which reasons we May collect , that there are but a few amongst us , that are wise indeed , and to purpose ; for these seven hindrances are appliable to seventy seven parts of men in the nation . besides , if these great knowers know so little , how ignorant are the rude rabble , that despise all knowledge ? Nor can it be denied but all impenitent persons , all unbelievers ( Who prefer their profits and pleasures before pleasing of God ; as Herodias preferred John Baptist head before the one half of Herod's kingdom , ) are arrant fools ; yea , fools in folio : for if they were wise , says Bernard , they would foresee the torments of hell , and prevent them . 

And so wise are the godly , for they prefer grace , and glory , and God's favour , before ten thousand worlds . 

sect. 50.  

object . but here thou wilt say , ( Or at least thou hast reason to say ) if there be so few that are soul-wise , i have all the reason in the world to mistrust myself ; wherefore good Sir , tell me how i shall be able to get ihis spiritual and experimental knowledge ? this divine and supernatural wisdom ? 

answ. by observing these five rules : 

First , let such a willing and ingenuous soul , resolve to practise what he does already know , or shall hereafter be acquainted with from the word of God and Christ's faithful messengers : for he that will do my father's will , says our saviour , shall know the doctrine , whether it be of God orno , joh. 7. 17.  a good understanding have all they that keep the commandments , ( Says holy David ) psal. 111. 10. and proves it true by his own example and experience : i understood ( Says he ) more than the ancient , and became wiser than my teachers , because i kept thy precepts , psal. 119. 97 , 98 , 99 , 100  to a man that is good in his sight , God giveth knowledge and wisdom , eccles. 2. 26.  the spiritual man understandeth all things , 1 cor. 2. 15.  wicked men understand not judgement , but they that seek the Lord , understand all things , prov. 28. 5.  admirable encouragements for men to become godly and conscientious ; i mean practical Christians . 

Secondly , if thou wouldst get this precious grace of saving knowledge ; the way is , to be frequent in hearing the word preached , and to become studious in the scriptures , for they and they alone make wise to salvation , 2 tim. 3. 15.  ye err ( Saith our saviour ) not knowing the scriptures , matth. 22. 29.  Mark 12. 24.  We must not in the search of heavenly matters , either do as we see others do ; neither must we follow the blind guide carnal reason , or the deceitful guide our corrupt hearts ; but the undeceivable , and infallible guide of God's word which is truth itself : and great need there is ; for as we cannot perceive the foulness of our faces unless it be told us , or we take a glass and look ourselves therein : so neither can we see the blemishes of our souls , which is a notable degree of spiritual wisdom , but either God must make it known to us by his spirit , or we must collect the same out of the scriptures , that celestial glass ; though this also must be done by the spirits help . therefore 

Thirdly , if thou wilt be soul-wise and truly profit by studying the scriptures , be frequent and fervent in prayer to God who is the only giver of it , for the direction of his holy spirit : for first , humble and faithful prayer , ushered in by meditation , is the cure of all obscurity . especially being accompanied with fervour and fervency ; as you May see , matth. 21. 22.  if any lack wisdom , saith St. James , let him ask of God who giveth to all men liberally and reproacheth no man , and it shall be given him , jam. 1. 5.  Mark the words , it is said if any ; wherefore let no man deny his soul this comfort . Again , ask and have ; it cannot come upon easier terms . Yea , God seems to like this suit so well in Solomon , as if he were beholding to his creature , for wishing well to itself . And in vain do we expect that alms of grace , for which we do not so much as beg . but in praying for wisdom , do not pray for it without putting difference ; desire not so much brain-knowledge as to be soul-wise , and then you will employ your wisdom to the glory of the giver . let thine hearts desire be to know God in Christ , Christ in faith , faith in good works ; to know gods will that thou Mayest do it ; and before the knowledge of all other things , desire to know thyself ; & in thyself , not so much thy strength , as thy weakness : pray that thine heart May serve thee instead of a commentary , to help thee understand such points of religion as are most needful and necessary , and that thy life May be an ••••sition of thy inward man , that there May be a sweet harmony betwixt God's word , thy judgement , and whole conversation , that what the natural man knoweth by rote , thou Mayst double by feeling the same in thine heart and affections . as indeed experimental and saving knowledge is no less felt than known ; and , i cannot tell how , comes rather out of the abundance of the heart , than by extreme study ; or rather is sent by God unto good men , like the ram that was brought to Abraham when he would have sacrificed his son Isaak . when Christ taught in the temple , they asked , how knoweth this man the scriptures , seeing he never learned them ? so it is a wonder what learning some men have , that have no learning ! like Prisilla and Aquila , poor tent-makers , who were able to school Apollo's that great clerk , a man renowned for his learning : what can we say to it ? For no other reason can be given but as Christ said , father so it pleaseth thee : for as Jacob said of his venison , when his father asked how he came by it so suddenly ? Because the Lord thy God brought it suddenly to my hands . so holy and righteous men do more easily understand the words of God , than do the wicked , because God brings the meaning suddenly to their hearts ; as we read , luk. 24.  That Christ ( standing in the midst of his apostles after he was risen from the dead ) opened their understandings , that they Might understand clearly the scriptures , and what was written of him in the law of Moses , and in the prophets , and in the psalms , vers. 44. 45.  Lo how suddenly their knowledge came unto them ! But see what a general promise ( God in the person of wisdom ) hatth made to all that serve him , prov. 1.  turn you at my reproof , and behold i will pour out my spirit unto you , and make known my words unto you , vers. 23.  And psal. 25.  the secrets of the Lord are revealed to them that fear him , and his covenant is to give them understanding , vers 14.  These secrets are hide from the wicked , neither hath he made any such covenant with them but the contrary : as see , dan. 12. 10.  unto you it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven , but to others in Parrables , that they seeing should not see , and hearing they should not understand , Luke 8. 10  : mark : 3 : 11 : matth : 13 : 13 : 

Again , it is not enough to pray , except also it be in Christ's name , and accrding to his will , believing to be heard for his sake , and that it be the intercession of God's own spirit in you : and ( Being truly sensible of your sins and wants ) that you chiefly pray for the pardon of sin , the effusion of grace , and for the assistance of God's spirit : that you May more firmly believe , more soundly repent , more zealously do , more patiently suffer , and more constantly persevere in the practice and profession of every duty . 

But above all you must know , that as Samson's companions , could never have found out his riddle , if they had not ploughed with his heifer : so no man can know the secrets of God , but by the revelation of his spirit , 1 cor. 12. 8.  mat. 16. 17.  Yea , suppose a man be not inferior to Portius , or Pythagoras , who kept all things in memory , that ever they had read , heard , or seen : to Virgil , of whom it is reported , that if all sciences were lost , they Might be found again in him : to Aben Ezra , of whom it was said , that if knowledge had put out her candle , at his brain she Might light it again ; and that his head was a throne of wisdom : or Josephus Scaliger , who was skilled in thirty languages : yet if he want the spirit of God to be his teacher , he is a dunce to the meanest , and most illiterate believer . for one excellent , and necessary prerogative of the spiritual man is this ; he hath God for his teacher ; he learns the counsels of God , of that spirit which only knoweth God's counsels , luk. 21. 15. which is no small privilege : for the scholar learns quickly , when the holy ghost is his teacher ; the eye sees distinctly , when the holy ghost doth enlighten it . with the spirits help , the means can never be too weak : without , never strong enough , luk. 24. 44 , 45.  pro. 1. 23.  

§ 51.  

Fourthly , thou must get an humble conceit of thine own wisdom . the first step to knowledge , is to know our own ignorance . we must become fools in our own opinion , before we can be truly wise , as the apostle sets it down , 1 cor. 3. 18.  And indeed , the opinion of our knowing enough , is one of the greatest causes of our knowing so little : for what we presume to have attained , we seek not after . Yea , the very first lesson of a Christian is humility . He will teach the humble his way , psalm . 25. 9  Jam. 4. 6. 1 pet. 5. 5.  And he that hath not learned the first lesson , is not fit to take out a new . Pride is a great let to true wisdom : for God resisteth the proud , and giveth grace to the humble , jam. 4. 6. 1 pet. 5. 5.  Whence it comes to pass , that few proud wits are reform , John 9 39  And for this cause also did our saviour propound his woes to the Pharisees , his doctrines to the persons . 

A heart full of pride , is like a vessel full of air : this self opinion must be blown out of us , before saving knowledge will be poured into us . Christ will know none but the humble , and none but humble souls truly know Christ . 

Now the way to become humble , is , by taking a serious view of our wants . the peacock's pride is much abated , when she looks on the blackness of her legs and feet . now suppose we know never so much ; yet that which we know , is far less than that which we are ignorant of : and the more we know , the more we know we want , pro. 1. 5 , 7.  psal. 73. 22.  And the less sensible we are of our blindness , sickness , deformity , &c. the more blind , sick , and deformed we are . 

Fifthly , thou must labour to get a true and lively faith : for as without faith we cannot please God : so without faith , no man can know God . faith most clearly beholds those things which are hide both from the eye of sense , and the eye of reason , John 12. 46.  unregenerate men , that what faith , are like blind Samson without his guide : or like Poliphemus , who never had but one eye , and that Ulysses put out . for so does the pleasure and custom of sin blind the sensuallist . 

We must have minds lifted above nature , to see and love things above nature : heavenly wisdom , to see heavenly truth ; or else that truth which is saving , will be to us a mystery , Mark . 4. 11.  If it seem not foolishness , 1 cor. 2. 7 , 8 , 14.  to them that are lost , the gospel is hide , 2 cor. 4. 3 , 4.  Whereas the believer discerns all things , even the deep things of God , 1 cor. 2. 10. 12. 15 , 16.  Yea , God giveth him a mouth and wisdom , where against all his adversaries , shall not be able to speak or resist , luk. 21. 15.  These are the five steps , which lead up to the palace of wisdom , which all must ascend by , that mean to enter . If you have once attained this precious grace of saving knowledge , you will as much as in you lies , employ the same to the glory of the giver , and so much to prove , that he is the wisest man , whose knowledge lies in the best things , ( As the weaker vessel May hold the better liquor ) and that if men be never so learned , except they have learned the mystery of the gospel , and what it is to be born again by their own experience , ( Which few with their great learning do indeed know ) they are in God's account , no better than fools . i come now to prove , that the greatest politician is a verier fool than the former . 

§ 52.  

Secondly , if we shall look upon the most cunning politician , with a single eye : judge righteous judgement , and not according to appearance only , we shall find that the greatest Polilician is the greatest fool . for he turns all his religion into hypocrisy , into statism , yea , into atheism , making Christianity a very footstool to policy . 

I confess they are wiser in their generation , than the children of light ; and are so acknowledged by Christ himself , Luke 16. 8.  But why ? not that there is a deficiency of power in the godly , but will : for could not David go as far as Achitophel ? could not Paul show as much cunning as Tertullus ? yes , surely if they would : but because their Master , Christ , hath commanded them to be innocent as doves ; they have resolved in an heroical disposition with Abraham , gen. 14. 22. that the King of Sodom shall not make them rich . no crooked , or indirect means , shall bring them in profit ; they will not be beholding to the King of hell for a shoo-ty . and hereupon the fox's wiles , never enter into the lion's head . 

But to speak of them as they are : these cunning politicians , in stead of being wise as serpents , they are wise serpents . they are so arted in subtleties , through time and practice , that they are near upon as wise , as that old serpent the devil . indeed he hath one trick beyond all theirs ; for like a cunning fencer , he that taught them all their tricks , kept this one to himself , namely , how to cheat them of their souls . but take a short character of them . 

They are such cunning dissemblers , that like Pope Alexander the sixth , what they think , they never speak . Why is this cast away , saith Judas ? Crafty cub , he would have had it himself . They are like a fellow that rides to the pillory , they go not the way they look . they will cut a man's throat under colour of courtesy , as Ulysses by gold , and forged letters , was the means of stoning Palamedes , even while he made show of defending him . and then to wipe off all suspicion from themselves , their gesture and countenance shall be like Julius Caesar's ; who seeing Pompey's head fell a-weeping , as if he had been sorry for it , when by his only means it was cut off . So like rowers in a boat , whilst in their pretence they look one way , in their intent they go the choir contrary : as our saviour found it to fare with the Pharisees , and Sadducees , matth. 16. 1 , 3. which made him to conclude , with , oh hypocrites ! nor shall any man be able to determine , either by their gesture , words , or actions , what they resolve , though like Hebrew letters , you spell them backward . only this you May be sure of , that they do not intend , what they pretend ; like as in juggling feats , though we know not how they are done , yet we know well , that they are not done as they seem to be . 

Now if they can any way advantage themselves by another's ruin , and do it cunningly ; as Jezabel did , when she killed Naboth , by suborning false witness against him , and proclaimed a fast before the murder : though all such policy be but misery , and all such knowledge , ignorance , yet , o how wise they think themselves ! but they are grossly mistaken : for wherein does this their great wisdom consist ? but first ; in being wise to deceive others : as the old serpent did our first parents ; or secondly in the end to deceive themselves , as the same serpent did , which brought a curse upon himself for so doing , gen. 3.  The crafty fox hugged himself to think how he had cozened the crow of her breakfast : but when he had eaten it , and found himself poisoned with it , he wished the crow her own again . Wealth got by deceit , is like a piece of buttered sponge , an Italian trick , it goes down glib ; but in the stomach swells , and will never be got out again . the gains a man gets by deceiving , at last he May put in his eye , and yet see himself miserable . sin is the greatest cheater in the world , for it deceives the deceiver . 

§. 53 

That it is so with them , and all others who go to counsel , and leave the god of wisdom behind them : let their case be viewed in other persons . What saith Pharaoh to his deep counsellors ? Come , let us do wisely , when indeed he went about that which destroyed both him and his country . the scribes , Pharisees , and elders , took counsel against Christ ; as though they would most wisely prevent their own salvation . Joseph's brethren , to prevent his having dominion over them , ( As his dreams imported ) thought they had taken a very wise course , in selling him to the Ishmaelitish merchants , which was indeed the only means to effect it . they murder Christ , lest the Romans should come : and by so doing , their coming was hastened . The Jews say , come let us kill him , that the inheritance May be ours : but in killing him , they lost the inheritance and themselves too . And so it always fares with our Machivillians in the end , speed they never so well for a time . For let the devil promise them never so fair , ( Suppose it be a kingdom ) the upshot will be but sad and doleful : as it fared with Athaliah , who having slain all the King's seed , that she alone Might reign , lost both the government , and her life too . or as it did with Abimelech , who slew seventy of his brethren , that he Might with safety enjoy the kingdom lost both it , and his life with it . and many the like we read of . 

Whence St. Ambrose observes , that the plots of the wicked , always return upon their own heads . as Pope Hildebrand's servant , by stumbling , was killed with that stone he should have thrown down on Frderick the Emperor , at his devotions . Or as Griphus his mother , was made to take that draught , wherewith she intended to poison him . Yea , how little was Judas set by of the high priests , when once he had served their turn ? How did they shake him off in that pitiful distress , with look thou to it ? and so how poor are the witches , that in confidence of these promises , even sell their souls to the devil . 

See here in these few examples , you have the depth and solidity of our greatest and wisest politicians , and yet lewd men , most ridiculously and absurdly , call wicked policies , wisdom , and their success , happiness . but herein Satan makes them of all fools the superlative , in mistaking villainy and madness for the best virtues . and what is the summa totalis of all but this ? faux-like , they project other men's overthrow , purchase their own . neither hath any man been wise to do evil , but his wisdom hath had an evil end . as o the multitude of examples that are recorded , to give credit to this doctrine ! Was not the wisdom of the serpent turned into a curse ? the wisdom of the Pharisees into a woe ? the wisdom of Achitophel into folly ? the wisdom of Nimrod into confusion ? the wisdom of the unjust steward into expulsion out of heaven ? the wisdom of Jezabel , into a shameful death ? &c. so that in the issue , their case proves but like the spiders , that was weaving a curious net to catch thè swallow : who when she came , bore away both net , and web , and weaver too . Wherefore , o God , make me but soul-wise , and i shall never envy their knowledge , that pity my simplicity : let me be weak in policy , so i May be wise to salvation . 

And i cannot but wonder to see , how the most are mistaken in them : but being thus discovered , i hope it will appear , that as love & lust are not all one , so a cunning politician & a wise man are not both one . as we have seen some that could pack the cards , & yet were not able to play well . 

§ 54.  

True , if men shall look upon them sideways , as Appelles' painted Antigonus , that is , upon their strength of •rain and parts alone , and not consider them whole , and together , their abilities , with their deficiencies , they will take them for wise men , and so be mistaken . but 

If you would know how to call them , they are properly subtle persens ? as the holy ghost styles Jonadab , who gave that wicked and crafty counsel to Amnon , 2 sam. 13. 3 , 5.  And the woman of Tekoah , 2 sam. 14. 2.  And Elimas , act. 13. 10. as being rarely gifted to deceive , and more crafty and wily then is usual . But not wise men ; for this is rather wisdom backward , and to study the dangerous art of self-sophysiry , to the end they May play wily beguile themselves , and to plot self-treason , than which there is no greater , when the betrayer and betrayed , spell but one man . 

Again , admit them the most , they are not wise in good , though they be wise to do evil : or if you will , wise in goods , not wise in grace : for as that old serpent seemed to boast , that he was richer than Christ , when he said , all these are mine , matth. 4. 9  So the politician May truly say , for the most part , i am wiser than my plain dealing neighbour by five hundred pounds . so that in some sense it May be said of them , as one speaks of women , though partially , that they are more witty in wickedness than men . nor can i more fitly compare them , then to dats , night-crows , owls , and cats , which can see better in the dark , then in the light . their wisdom is like that of the Polipus : which is a most stupid and foolish fish , yet useth great skill in taking of other fishes . Never the less , yield them all that hath been mentioned , this is the upshot . They are blind , and in darkness , as having their beginning from Satan , the Prince of darkness , and their end in hell , which is the pit of darkness : and because they are wise only to evil , their wisdom shall have but an evil end . 

In the dialect of the wise man , the greatest sinner is the greatest fool , prov. 1. 7.  And David thinks , there is no fool to the atheist , psal. 53. 1.  & 49. 13.  And saint Austin tells us , that the wisest politician upon earth , the most ample , and cunning Machiavellian that lives , be he a doctor in that deep reaching faculty , is worse than a fool : for if the holy ghost , saith he , terms him a fool that only laid up his own goods , Luke 12. 18 , 20. find out a name for him , that takes away other men's . and though worldly men call the simple fools , yet God calls the crafty fools , jer. 8. 9  mat. 6. 23.  And of all atheisis , and fools , which seem wise , there be no such fools in the world , as they that love money better than themselves . 

And so you have the wisdom of humanists , and politicians deciphered ; together with the wisdom of God's servants . you see the difference between them , and therein as i suppose , that neither of the former are so wise as the godly man , nor so wise as the world reputes them , or they themselves . 

I confess the one speak Latin , Greek , and Hebrew , the other statutes , history , and husbandry , well enough to make their neighbours think them wise : but the truth is , they seem wiser than they are , as is said of the Spaniard ; whereas the godly , like the French , are wiser than they seem . The former are wise men in foolish things , and foolish men in wise things . Sharpeyed as eagles , in the things of the earth , but blind as beetles in the matters of heaven . oh that they had but the wit to know , that when all is done , heaven is a brave place , where are such joys , as eye hath not seen , nor care heard , neither hath it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things which God hath prepared there for them that love him , 1 cor. 2. 9  

§. 55.  

Now as i have shown these two sorts of men their folly , to the end some of them May be convinced , and ashamed , and consequently become soul-wise , that so they May be saved ; which is the principal thing i drive at ( For i take no pleasure in disgracing men purposely . ) So it were as easy to prove , that all sorts of sinners , are no better than sots , and shallow-brains , in comparison of the conscientious Christian . Nor do i see , but it May prove of great , and general concernment : therefore that others also May have benefit by the same , i will briefly touch upon some particulars . And the next that i will speak to , shall be such as come nearest to these last mentioned ; that is , your covetous , miserly muck-worms , who though they be near neighbours to those ambodexters i last spoke of , yet they are not the same men . 

Now although you cannot name one property of a natural fool , but the covetous man is in that particular a greater fool : yet i will make the parallel in one only : lest i should weary my reader , before i have dispatched all my clients , or half listed my men . 

The covetous miser , if you mark it , esteems not of things according to their true value ; but preferreth babbles and trifles before things of greatest worth , which is the most remarkable property of a natural fool , that is , being like the ignorant Indian's in Florida , Virginia , new England , and K•nida , who for a copper kettle , and a few toys , as beads , and hatchets , will depart from the purest gold , and sell you a whole country , with the houses and ground which they dwell upon . 

As Judas preferred thirty pieces of silver , before him that was Lord of the whole world , and ransom of mankind : so the covetous man prefers earth , yea hell to heaven , time to eternity , his body before his soul ; yea , his outward estate before either soul or body . whereas the godly care for the soul , as the chief jewel , and only treasure ; and for the body for the soul's sake ; and settle their inheritance in no land but the land of promise ; their end being to possess a kingdom without end . they are not like Shebna , who built his sepulchre in one country , and was buried in another : but like our English merchants , that traffic in Turkey , get wealth in Turkey , yet plant not in Turkey , but transport for England . it cannot be said of them , as it May of the most ; that they worship the golden calf : because they consider , that pecunia , the world's Queen , ( I mean that world , whereof the devil is King ) extends her regiments , but to the brim of the grave , and is not current one step farther . 

Worldly hearts are penny-wise , and pound-foolish ; they know how to set high prizes upon the worthless trash of this world ; but for heavenly things , or the god that owns them , they shamefully undervalue . Like Judas , who valued Mary's ointment , which she bestowed upon the feet of Christ , at three hundred pieces of silver , and sold his Master , on whom that odour was spent , for thirty . but it is not so with the godly ; they think it the best purchase that ever was in the world , to buy him who bought them ; in comparison of whom all things else are dross and dung , as Paul speaks , phil. 3. 8.  And indeed if we once have him , we have all thing , as the apostle argues , rom. 8. 32. 1 cor. 3. 21 , 22 , 23.  So that the godly's man is only rich , the servant of Christ is Lord of all . whereas by a just judgement of God upon the covetous miser , who makes Mammon his god : the devil makes them his drudges , to get and bring him in gold , as the King of Spain does the poor Indian's ) that he May keep it in bank , for the next prodigal to spend as ill , as the other got it . as how often is that spent upon one Christmas revelling by the son , which was forty years a getting by the father ? oh fools , incomparable ! to take a world of care and pains , endure so much grief , sting of conscience , loss of credit , to deprive themselves of heaven , damn their own souls , to get wealth : and when they have got it , not to be a jot the better for it . Yea , they are less satisfied , and contented then other men , meanlier accommedated then mean men : yea , a poor beggar that hath nothing here , is in better estate , than a rich miser , that hath nothing in effect , either here or hereafter . oh that they would but use that ! yea , half that wit , study , and industry hereafter , to save their souls , that they have formerly done to damn them . but hear more . 

Aristippus cared only for his body , as if he had had no soul : Zeno but for his soul , as if he had had no : Achitophel for his family alone , as if neither soul nor body had been worth caring for : but these neither for body , nor soul , nor any thing , but for a little muck to leave behind them . Yea , he can find in his heart to go to hell for another , that wishes him gone , and will damn his own soul to leave his son rich . Yea , what a deal of pains and care does the covetous man take for his own damnation ? ever tormenting himself to get that ; for getting whereof he shall be tormented : so himself is voluntarily miserable here , and hereafter , that others May be happy . and so much of the miser . the next i will fall upon , shall be such as equal these in their idolatry another way ; as 

§ 56.  

Fourthly , what think you of common idolaters ? are not they arrant fools ? I 'll give you but one instance mentioned , exod. 32. and you will need no more . Turn to the place , and there you shall find , that those blockish Israelites made them a melted calf , and then said , this is thy god , that brought thee out of the land of Egypt , ver. 34.  This is such a pregnant example , that there needs no more to prove it ; that a beast should be their god ; yea , and a beast of their own making , and that this beast should have brought them out of Egypt , which could not move itself , but as it was moved , and that before it had any being . This is such a blockish absurdity , that as one would think , should never enter into the heart of him , who is endowed with a reasonable soul . but what can the Prince of darkness propound ? that a wicked heart , ( Blinded with the custom of sin , and given up by God , to be further blinded by Satan ) will not believe , as appears by our ranters , Shakers , and Quakers at this day . 

And such other fools are the Papists , though great clerks , and wise men : who ( If i could intend to acquaint you ) maintain a thousand ridiculous tenants , stif•y defending those things for truth , which the holy ghost calls in express words , the doctrine of devils , 1 tim. 4. 1 , 2 , 3.  And most justly are they forsaken of their reason , who have abandoned God . yea , most just it is , that they who want grace , should want wit too . If idolaters will need set up a false god for the true , is it not equal , that the true God should give them over to the false ? again , 

Fifthly , how does lust blind and besot men ? when the adulterer prefers a filthy strumpet before his own chaste wife , though his own lawful consort is known to be more comely , and lovely than the strange woman . yea , when they shall confess the same ( As it was the speech of one too great to name ) that were she not his wife , he could love her above all women in the world ; a word able to rot out the tongue that spoke it . But take an instance of this nature , I 'll give you one amongst many very remarkable . We read , judges 16. that Samson cared more for his pleasure in this kind , than his li•t . oh strange debauchedness ! his filthy lust of a Nazarite , leaves him scarce a man ! He that Might not drink wine , is drunk with the cup of fornication . how could he other than think , if lust had not blinded and bewitched him ? She whose body is mercenary to me , will easily fell me to others ? she will be false , if she will be an harlot . was there ever such a motion made to a reasonable man ? tell me , wherewith thou Mayest be bound to do thee hurt ? who would not have spurned such a suitor out of doors ? And when upon the trial he saw such apparent treachery , he yet wilfully betrays his life , by her to his enemies . All sins , all passions have power to blind , and infatuate ; but lust most of all . Never man that had drank flagons of wine , had less reason left him , than this Nazarite . many an one loses his life , but he casts it away ; not in hatred to himself , but in love to a strumpet , he knew she aimed at nothing but his slavery , and death , yet had not power to deny her . He had wit enough to deceive her thrice , not enough to keep himself from being deceived by her . thrice had he seen the Philistines in her chamber , ready to surprise him upon her bands ; and yet will needs be a slave to his traitor . yea , in effect , bids her bind him , and call in her executioners to cut his throat . oh beware of a harlot , as you would of the devil ! and the rather , for that under the habit of a woman , it May be the devil in shape of a woman , as some have so been cheated . but 

Sixthly , what can we think of an improvident gamester ? is not he a fool ? who will hazard his whole estate upon the chance of a treacherous dye , that flatters him with his own hand , to throw away his wealth to another . and a thief he is too , for if he wins , he robs another ; if he loses , he no less robs himself . 

§ 57  

Seventhly , let me refer it to any rational man , whether the voluptuous prodigal is not a stark fool ? who suffers himself to be stolen away for an apple : for , for a little tickling of the palate , a kind of running banquet , he will hazard the loss of eternal comfort , and expose himself to a devouring fire , an everlasting burning ? isa. 33. 14.  And what greater folly ? Is it not a dear purchase ? an ill pennyworth ? yea , a desperate madness , to buy the merriment of a day , ( Yea , possibly the pleasure of an hour , May deterimine it ) with ages of pangs , with eternity of unsufferable torments , that are capable of neither ease 1. or end . 

Nor is this all , for they run upon God's judgements , as Balaam did upon the sword's point in the angel's hand , and yet are so far from being afraid , that they applaud their own wisdom , for giving such liberty to their lusts ; thinking no men in the world enjoy the like freedom . when indeed their bondage is much worse than the cruel and tyrannical bondage , and slavery of Egypt . for first , that bondage was of the body only , but the service of sin is of the whole man , body and soul . 

Secondly , in the bondage of Egypt , they served men ; but in this bondage , service is done to sin & Satan , most vile Lords , which command most base , and filthy works . 

Thirdly , in the bondage of Egypt , the most harm was temporal , loss of liberty , smart and pain of body , in this service of sin , the loss is eternal , even destruction in hell for ever ( Without the infinite goodness of God . ) Fourthly , in this bondage under Pharaoh , they had a sense of their thraldom , and desired liberty ; in this of sin , men do not so much as suspect themselves to be bound , but think themselves free , and despise liberty . lastly , in all outward bondage , they which are bound May possibly help themselves ; as by running away , or by entreaty , or by ransom : in this bondage we lie still , as it were , bound hand and foot ( Till God by his mercy deliver us ) not having so much as the least thought of relieving ourselves . By all which it appears , that such who take the most liberty to sin , are the most perfect slaves in the world ; because most voluntary slaves : and that Christ's service is the only true freedom ; his yoke an easy yoke ; his burden but as the burden of wings to a bird ; which makes her fly the higher . Wherefore , as we serve the laws , that we May be free : so let us serve Christ , and we shall be the freest persons alive . 

A godly man being demanded , what he thought was the strangest , and foolishest thing in the world , answered , an impenitent sinner , or an unbeliever : for , said he , that a man should provoke God , so gracious and mighty , that he should believe Satan the father of lies and cruelty , forget his own death so imminent and in-evitable ; obey the command of his flesh , a drudge so ignoble , admire the world so fickle and dangerous , prefer it before heaven so blessed & glorious ; wilfully cast himself into hell , a place so woeful and dolorous , and all for vanity , such a wretched emptiness ; that he should fear the blasts of men's breath , and not the fire of God's wrath ; weep for the loss of friends , & not for his soul : and lastly , that Christ should stand at the door of his heart , craving for entrance , that he May remedy all , and make him everlastingly happy ; and God call him every day , either by his word in the mouths of his messengers , or by strange judgements , or extraordinary mercies upon himself , or others , and all in vain such an one , says he , is the most foolish and degenerate creature alive : 

Thus i Might go on to traitors , murderers , back-biters , seducers , drunkards , blasphemers , persecutors of the godly , proud persons , hypocrites , thieves , atheists , and what other sinners you can name : and prove them all fools alike . but i have already ( Upon one occasion or other ) done it in some other tract. nor do i love to tautologize , except it be for a great advantage to my reader , and for others good : though in such a case , i can , i thank God , dishonour myself , that i May honour my maker . the which if men did well ponder , they would be more sparing of their censures ; however i could wish , that our reverend divines would afford themselves more liberty in this case than they do . There be some expressions , that we borrow from our predecessors , that deserve to be mentioned , or used ( By a minister that remains perhaps twenty , or thirty years in a parish ) more than once , though it be to the same congregation ( For that which takes not , or is not minded at one time , May at another : and how many have been converted , by that only argument ? that God seeth all things even in the dark , when the doors are shut , and the curtains drawn . ) nor do i think , that a dull and flat tool , or instrument would be used , when a more quick , and sharp one May be had at as easy a rate , and perhaps nearer at hand . but we are mostly ( Even the best of us ) loathe to deny ourselves ; though it be for our Masters , ( & many of our brethren's great gain and ) advantage . But of this by the way only , a word or two more , that May reach to all , that are in their natural condition , and i shall conclude . 

§ 58.  

In the last place , are not all wilful sinners arrant fools ? who adam-like , will receive whatever comes , or is offered them ? be it bribe , or other sinful bait , not once thinking this is forbidden fruit , and thou shalt die the death . that think the vowed enemy of their souls , can offer them a bait without a hook ? you cannot but acknowledge them stark fools , though thou thyself be'st one of the number . 

Again , for men to dishonour God , and blaspheme his name , while he does support and relieve them , to run from him , while he does call them , and forget him , while he does feed them . To imitate the common Protestant's in Queen Mary's time , who laughed the martyrs to scorn , and esteemed them superstitious fools , to lose their lives and fortunes , for matters of religion , accounting faith , holiness , immortality of the soul , &c. mere fopperies and illusions . To be quicksighted in other men's failings , and blind to their own . are not these so many infallible properties of a fool ? and yet these are the lively characters , of every sensuallist . In so much , that if i should give you a list , or catalogue of all the fools in one city , or county : you would bless yourselves , that there are so few bedlam houses , and yet so many out of their wits , that can not perceive or discern the same . And yet no wonder ; for as i told you-ere-while , sensual men are so benighted , and puzzled with blindness , that they know no other way , than the flesh leads them . yea , many by loss of conscience become atheists ; and by loss of reason , beasts . yea , to any thing that is spiritually good , the natural man is blind , and deaf , and dead , as ye May see by these ensuing scriptures , 1 tim. 5. 6.  Rom. 1. 21 , 22 , 25.  Ephes. 5. 14.  Isa. 6. 9 , 10.  John 12 40.  Psal. 69. 23.  Matth. 4. 16  & 15. 14.  Ephes. 4. 18 , 19  & 5. 8. 1 pet. 2 9  Acts 28. 27.  Rom. 11. 8.  Matth. 23. 16 , 17. 19 24. 26.  & 27. 3 , 4 , 5. 2 pet. 2. 16.  Revel. 3. 17.  Rom. 6. 13.  & 8. 11.  Micah 7. 16.  Psal. 58. 4. eph. 2. 1.  if our gospel be hide , it is hide to them that are lost , in whom the god of this world hath blinded , 2 cor. 4. 3 , 4.  

But it is otherwise with the godly : as let Satan , or the world offer a wise Christian the bait of pleasure , or profit : his answer shall be , i will not buy repentance so dear : i will not lose my soul , to please my sense . if affliction comes , he will consider , that God's punishments for sin , calls for conversion from sin : and in case God speaks to him by his word , to forsake his evil ways , and turn again to him , he will amend his course , lest if he hear not the word , he should feel the sword . whereas nothing will confute a fool , but fire and brimstone . 

the Lord spoke to Manasses and to his persons ; but they would not regard : wherefore the Lord brought upon them the captains of the host of the King of Ashur , that took Manasses , and put him in fetters , and brought him in chains , and carried him to Babel , 2 chron. 33. 10 , 11.  

fools , saith holy David , by reason of their transgression , and because of their iniquity , psal. 107. 17.  From which words , musculus infers , that all wilful transgressors are arrant fools . and it is the saying of Cardan : that dishonesty is nothing else but folly and madness . yea , Solomon throughout all his proverbs , by a fool , means the natural man ; and by a wise man , a man sanctified . oh that it were rightly learned , and laid to heart by all , that are yet in the state of unregeneracy ! for it is every one of their cases . To conclude in a word , without knowledge , the soul is not good , prov. 19 2.  The ignorant cannot be innocent . I am the light of the world ( Says our saviour ) John 8. 12.  & 12. 46.  where light is not , Christ is not : for Christ is light . 

§ 59  

And so according to my skill , i have performed what i at first promised . it remains before we leave it , that some use be made thereof , that so both wise and weak , May learn something from what hath been spoken of this subject . Wherefore , in the first place , if it be so , that both the sensual and rational , even all that are yet in their natural estate , are uncapable of divine , and supernatural knowledge , that they are blind touching spiritual things . then let not any carnal wretch hereafter dare to speak evil of the things , actions , or persons , that are out of the reach of his capacity , but silently suspend his judgement , until he be better informed : for as it pertaineth not to the rustic , to jugde of letters : so it belongeth not to natural men to judge of spiritual things . yea , let those ignorant ones , that have used to speak evil of the way of truth , learn to kick no more against the pricks , lest they bring upon themselves the same curse , that their fellows did , who brought up an evil report of the holy land , num. 13. 32 , 33.  & 14. 23 , 24.  Yea , put case they shall think they do God good service in it , as many do in persecuting , and putting to death his children and ambassadors , John 16. 2. as a world of examples witness . Yea , the Jews thought they did marvellous well , in crucifying the Lord of life . but what says the holy ghost , prov. 14.  there is a way that seemeth right unto a man : but the end thereof are the ways of death , vers. 12.  Even the powder-traitors thought they merited , when they intended to blow up the whole state . 

Alas , natural men are no more fit to judge of spiritual matters , then blind men are fit to judge of colours . and yet none more forward than they ; as you May see by those blind sodomites , that dealt so roughly and coursely with Lot and his two angel• , gen. 19 1. to 12.  

That they are ignorant , and so unfit , is evident of what is recorded of Michol , 2 sam. 6. 16.  Of Nichodemus , John 3. 4.  Of Festus , Acts 26. 24.  And lastly , of Paul before his conversion . i was , saith he , a blasphemer , a persecutor , and an opposer of Christ and his members ; but i did it ignorantly through unbelief , 1 tim. 1. 13.  it 's worth your observing too , that he was no sooner enlightened with the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ , but he was of a contrary judgement , and preached that faith which before he condemned and persecuted . and this will be every one of their cases , in the end ; if not in this life , yet hereafter , when hell flames hath opened their eyes , they will confess . We fools thought his life madness , and his end to be without honour : how is he now numbered with the children of God , and his lot among the saints ? And when they shall see it , they shall be troubled with horrible fear , and shall be amazed at the strangeness of his salvation , so far beyond all that they looked for : and groaning for anguish of spirit , shall say within themselves , this is he whom we once had in derision , and in a proverb of reproach , therefore have we erred from the way of truth , we wearied ourselves in the way of wickedness and destruction : but as for the way of the Lord , we have not known it . The light of righteousness hath not shined unto us , nor hath the son of righteousness arose upon us . What hath pride profited us ? or what good hath our riches and our vaunting brought us ? with more of the like , for which read , wisdom 5.  And what is the cause they acknowledge not the same now , but their blindness and folly ? and because they put their own faults in that part of the wallet that is behind them ; but ours in the other part , or end which is before them : for self-examination would make their judgements more charitable . read al•o these testimonies , John 15. 21.  & 16. 2 , 3. mat. 16. 23.  & 22. 29. 1 cor. 2. 8.  Isa. 5. 20.  But i will give you other instances . Was it not an a gu••nt that Haman was blind ? who thought mordecaies not bowing the knee to hi• , a more heinous offence , than his own murdering of thousands ? were not the Jews , scribes & Pharisees blind , who could see more unlawfulness in the disciple plucking a few ears of corn on the sabbath-day ? and the palsy man's carrying his bed ; then in their own devouring of widows houses ? who thought they Might better murder Christ , than others believe in him ? and be themselves the greatest of sinners , than our saviour to be in company with sinners ? was not Ahab blind ? who thought Elijah more troubled Israel , in doing the will of the Lord , than himself in provoking the Lord above all the Kings of Israel that were before him . And the like in our days . Is it not the manner of thousands with us ? not only of clowns , and ill-bred persons , who walk after the flesh , in the lusts of uncleanness ( Whom St. Peter calls bruit beasts , led with sensuality , and made to be taken and destroyed . ) but of proud wits , who one would think should have more brains , and know something , to speak evil of the things which they understand not , 2 pet. 2. 12.  Yea , how severely will they censure , not only things indifferent , but the most holy and approved good duties in the godly ? while they will patiently pass by the most heinous crimes , as cursing , blaspheming , &c. in themselves and others ; an infallible sign of a man not born anew . Yea , will they not more deeply censure our serving of God , than their own blaspheming of him ? and think it a more heinous offence in us to be holy , then for themselves to be profane , and persecute holiness . 

And what one does , is a law to the rest , being like a flock of sheep ; which if they but see one take a wrong way , all the rest will follow . as you May see in the example of Corah , and his two hundred and fifty followers , in Demetrius and his fellows , in their quarrel against Paul and his companions . and lastly , in Lot's neighbours , gen. 19 where you shall read , that when some godless persons had assaulted him , and his two angels ; before night , all the men of the city , from the young even to the old , from all quarters compassed the house round , seeking to break it open , railing upon , and reviling him . Yea , though they were struck with blindness , they would not leave off , until they had wearied themselves , and felt fire and brimstone about their cars , vers. 4 to 2 5.  

Natural men in heavenly things , resemble shellfish , that have no smell : or the cam•lion that hath no taste . nor do they see any more , than the mere bark or out-side•f spiritual performances , 2 sam. 6. 16.  And the flesh ( Satan's ready instrument ) will be ever suggesting to them strange surmises , touching what the religious either say , or do . 

And still , the more sottish , the more censorious : for where is least brain , there is most tongue , and loudest . even as a brewer's cart upon the stones , makes the loudest noise , when his barrels are emptiest . they that knowleast , will censure most , and most deeply . it is from the weakest judgements , that the heaviest judgement comes . And so the more censorious , the more sottish , seem they never so wise in the world's account : for admit the•have a show of wisdom ; yet for matter of religion and saving knowledge , they know not their right hand from their left ; as it fared with those sixscore thousand Ninevites , Jonas 4. 11.  

So that it 's no disparagement to us , seem they never so learned : as what but their ignorance makes them so censure us . They suspect much , because they know little ; as children in the dark , suppose they see what they see not . yea , a dog will be very violent in barking at his own shadow on a wall , or face in a glass . the Duke of Von•osme seeing his own and others faces in a well , called for aid against the antipodes . Paglarencis thought himself cozened , when he saw his sow had eleven pigs , and his mare but one foal that would be confessed . So that they are like harpast , a blind woman in Seneca's family , who found fault with the darkness of the house when the fault was in her want of sight . or the owl , that complained of the glory of the sun , when the fault was in her own eyes . or like Pentheus , in Euripides his Bacchus , who supposed he saw two suns , two Thebes , every thing double : when his brain alone was troubled . Or those that are vertiginous , who think all things turn round , all e•re : when the error is only in their own brains . and so much for caution to the one . 

§ 60.  

Secondly , for comfort to the other ; if all natural men are ( Like Samson without his guide , ) not able without the holy ghosts direction , to find out the pillars of the house , the principles of faith : let us not wonder , that they swerve so much from the godly in their judgement , and practice : as is it any strange thing to see a blind man stumble and fall ? neither let us be discouraged , maugre all their slander & opposition . Nor think the worse of ourselves , if such shall reproach us never so : the Corinthians exceedingly slighted Paul , he was this , and he was that ; but what says Paul ? With me it is a very small thing that i should be judged of you , 1 cor. 4. 3 , 4.  We know little children will often laugh at wise men , when they are about serious and necessary affairs : which notwithstanding is not an argument of the unworthiness of the things they laugh at , but of the folly of them which laugh . Will the merchant be discouraged because his wine pleaseth not a sick man's palate ? much less cause have we to be discouraged by their distaste , or dislike of us and our actions , as having more certainty to rely upon ; they perhaps have sense , reason , and experience to rely upon , but we have them with the advantage of God's word , and spirit , and faith , three infallible witnesses . yea , we have great cause to rejoice , that they revile , and speak evil of us . For his is both a token of perdition to them , and to us of salvation , and that of God , as the apostle phraseth it , phil. 1. 28.  

True , they May raise any slander upon the best of us , as the chief priests did upon our saviour , math. 28. 13 , 14. and that slander May be believed time out of mind , ( As the Jews to this day believe that his disciple stole him cut of the sepulchre ) matth. 28. 15. to the hardening of many in their atheism , and unbelief : for what should hinder ? When Naboth was proved to be a blasphemer of God , and Susanna a whore upon oath ; and the same recorded to posterity ; when Jeremiah was reported to be an enemy to the state ? Paul a polluter of the temple ? Steven a destroyer of the law ? all the disciple deceivers , and Christ himself a wine-bibber , a sabbath-breaker , a seducer of the persons , a Belzebub , &c.  So we May perhaps undergo the like , in one kind or other ( As the devil's servants , want neither wit nor malice to device ; ) but what need it trouble us , so long as it shall add weight to our crowns ? for if we any way suffer for Christ , be it but rebuke for his sake , happy are we here , and great shall our reward be in heaven , mat. 5. 11 , 12.  

Wherhfore let us never be ashamed of our Master's service , nor of their censures : no matter what Judas saith touching Mary's ointment , so long as Christ approves of it . Did our saviour Christ forbear to heal on the Sabbath day , because the scribes and Pharisees took it •ll ? no , but rather did it the more , Luke 6. 7. to 12. and Luke 13. 31 , 32.  When Peter and John were charged to speak no more in the name of Jesus ; their answer was , we cannot but speak that which we have heard and seen , acts 4. 20.  When Michol scoffed David , and called him fool for his dancing before the ark , his answer was , i will be yet more vile , and more lowly in mine own eyes . he knew that nothing could be more heroical , than this very abasement . and it is our very case . Every scoffing Michol , ( For none else will do it ) every drunken sot , derides our holy profession : but with God and the gracious , we shall be had in honour . Yea , our very malicious , and scoffing adversaries shall honour us , by deriding us . Their dispraise is a man's honour , their praise his dishonour . wherhfore let us imitate St. Austin ; who as he feared the praise of good men , so he detested that of evil , and ungodly men . And take our saviour's counsel ; seek to justify our judgements , to the children of wisdom , of whom she is justified ; and not to fools , by whom she is daily crucified . Neither let any think the better of such whom they extol ; for the blind eat many a fly . 

§ 61.  

Thirdly , are the one regenerate , the other carnal ? the one of this world , the other chosen out of it ? the one children of light , and of the day , the other blind and in darkness ? the one Christ's friends , the other his enemies ? do the one live after the flesh , the other after the spirit , gal. 5. 15. 1 pet. 4. 2.  Then look we for no love from , or peace with them : different dispositions can never agree . there can be no amity , where there is no sympathy . Athens and Sparta could never agree , for that the one was addicted to serve Minerva , the other Mars . yea , when it was said of Phocian and Demosthenes , that they could never agree ; it was answered , no , how should they ? when the one drinks water , and the other wine . much more May it be applied to these , when the holy ghost says , 2 cor. 6.  what communion between light and darkness ? what peace between the believer and the infidel ? or unbeliever , vers. 14 , 15.  And in another place ; know ye not , that the amity of the world , is the enmity of God ? And that whosoever will be a friend of the world , maketh himself the enemy of God , jam. 4. 4.  And again , he that is born after the flesh , will persecute him that is born after the spirit , gal. 4. 29.  Yea , Solomon tells us directly , and in plain terms , that a wicked man is abomination to the just ; and that he who is upright in his way , is abomination to the wicked , pro. 29. 27.  Even our very ways which God hath commanded us to walk in , are abomination to them . 

Whence it is , that the natural man can agree with all that be natural ; be they civil , or profane , Turks , or Jews , Papists or atheists , because all these agree with him in blindness , and darkness : but with a sincere , and holy Christian , a practicer of piety , he can never agree , because his light is contrary to the natural man's darkness ; grace in the one , is a secret disgrace to the other . wherhfore to be without enemies , or to have such our friends , we May rather wish than hope ; yea , once to expect it , were an effect of frenzy , not of hope . only let not us by our offending god , or jarring amongst ourselves , put weapons into their hands to wound us withal : and then we are sure to have Christ ( Who is able enough to vindicate all our wrongs ) to assist us , and prevent our enemies . 

§ 62.  

Fourthly , if none be truly wise , but such as have passed the second birth ; and that this wisdom which makes us differ , cometh down from the father of lights ; and that we cannot have it , except God vouchsafe to give it us : it May teach us to be humble , Job 42. 6.  And not like the ape , that is proud of his Master's jacket : and thankful , for heavenly notions , grow not in us ; we spin them not out of our own breasts . Nor was there any thing in us , that makes us differ : we slept nigh half our time in ignorance , and that we ever awakened , it was only God's infinite goodness and free grace . what cause have we then to bless the giver ? And to become suiters to our saviour in their behalf , who are not yet awake : that he will be pleased to open their eyes , and remove that vail which is laid over their hearts , in their hearing the gospel , 2 cor. 3. 14 , 15 , 16.  And in the meantime , let us condole their disastres , and drop some tears in pity and compassion for their great and grievous misery . 

Fifthly , and lastly , if with God one spark of spiritual , experimental , and saving knowledge , be of more worth than all human wisdom and learning , then strive we after that knowledge that will make us for ever blessed . Let us so be learned , that we May be saved . let us not in our hearing , reading , and communication , do as little children , that look only upon the babies in a book , without regard to the matter therein contained . But like men in years , have more respect to the pith , and solidity of the matter , then to the phrase ; and to the profit of our souls , than the pleasing of our senses . yea , let us so mind what we either hear or read ; that if any virtue be commended , we practice it ; if any vice condemned , we avoid it ; if any consolation be insinuated , we appropriate it ; if any good example be propounded , we follow it . yea , so mind we what we hear , or read , as if it were spoke only to each of us in particular ; which to do , is to be for ever happy . good counsel for our young gulls , who will hear no other ministers but such as flatter sin , and flout holiness ; nor read other books , than such as fill them with pride , and lust , and the devil . 

So i have given you a good , and profitable book , one faultless fault being born with . an answer that May satisfy such as shall make the objection i expect , viz. about repetition , which i take to be a fault deserving thanks . 

If any shall find themselves gainers by reading of this piece , let them also peruse the two foregoing parts , viz. the heart's index , and a short and sure way to grace and salvation , as treating upon the most needful subjects for a natural man's conversion , that i could think of : the which being small things , are sold only by James Crump , in little Bartholomews , well-yard ; and by Henry Cripps , in Popes-head alley . 

Errata . 

not to mention all the literal mistakes , and points misplaced ; there is one fault in the title page so gross , ( though it past the view , both of transcriber , composer , corrector , and author , without being discerned : ) that it would be mended with a pen , and of floreligus , made Florilegus . 

Finis . 


























































