Elias redivivus : a sermon preached before the honourable house of Commons , in the parish of saint Margaret's West minster , at the public fast , March 29 , 1643.  By John Lightfoot , preacher of the gospel at Bartholomew exchange , London . 

London , printed by r. Cotes , for Andrew Crook , and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the green dragon , in Paul's churchyard . 1643.  

To the honourable the house of Commons assembled in parliament . 

Right honourable , 

The great council of Jerusalem sat near the temple , and the greatest managings of the council , were the matters of religion . such hath been the posture of your desires , and such the bent of your endeavours in all your sitting : and as it is ingratitude in any degrees of men not to serve you , who strive so much to preserve the state , so especially is it in the ministers of the temple , since you labour so much also to serve the temple . Obedience to your commands is the lowest expression of such a service , because it is so naturally due , yet is it the highest that my meanness can reach unto ; readiness being joined to that obedience : these are the two mites that i can tender unto your Corban , and the two turtles that i have to offer at your altar , not having a better or more valuable gift and offering to bring , your nobleness will please to accept of the gift because of the heart of the giver given with it , and like him whom ye represent , to account . to obey , to be better than sacrifice , and to hearken , better than the fat of rams . what in obedience to your command was humbly presented to your ears and hearing not long ago , is now upon the like command in the same obedience and humility presented to your eyes and reading . If it shall find acceptance with you , it secureth me against all thought or care of inferiors displeasure or exceptions . I most humbly and submissively cast it , myself , and all that i am or can at the feet and disposal of your honourable house : and because short discourse best fitteth your great occasions , cease to trouble you with more words : but shall never cease to solicit the throne of grace for continue defence and blessing upon your persons and endeavours ; that the lawgiver May never fail till Shiloh come as we desire amongst us : and so ever prayeth , 

Your most unworthy , but truly devoted servant , John Lightfoot . 

A sermon preached before the honourable house of Commons , at the public fast holden , March 29. 1643.  In the parish church of s. Margaret's Westminster . 

Luke , 1. 17.  

and he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children , and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just . 

If ever the hearts of the fathers had need to be turned to the children , that need is now , and if ever the disobedient had need to be reduced to the wisdom of the just , that need is now also : but where is the spirit , and where the power ? where an Elias , or where a Baptist to do the work ? For if ever those searching and trying times , which were spoken of so long ago by our saviour in the twelfth of luk. and the three and fiftieth have overtaken any nation , they have overtaken this of ours : five in one house , and they divided , three against two , and two against three . The father divided against the son , and the son against the father ; the mother against the daughter , and the daughter against the mother ; the mother in law against her daughter in law , and the daughter in law against her mother in law . And a man's enemies are they of his own household . and if ever those irregular and exorbitant behaviours , which were spoken of so long ago , by the prophet Esay , in the third of Esay and the fifth , have overrun and foraged any persons , they have done so by this of ours . the persons oppressed every one by another , and every one by his neighbour : the child behaving himself proudly against the ancient , and the base against the honourable . these are our sorrows , but where our remedy ? this our misery , but where our redress ? For the divisions of Reuben , there are great thoughts of heart , but who can help them ? for the divisions in the church , for divisions in the state , divisions in families , divisions in opinions , divisions in affections , ( The Lord keep them out of your two houses ) divisions in every division , but who can heal them ? As the host at Nola in the story , who when he was commanded by the Roman censor to go & call the good men of the city to appear before him , went to the churchyard , and there called at the graves of the dead , oh ye good men of Nola come away , for the Roman censor calls for your appearance : for he knew not where to find a good man alive . So in these distractions and distempers of this our land , if we would find out a joiner of hearts and a moulder of humours , that could piece again the disunited affections , and form again the unfashioned demeanours of men towards men , we Might go and look for the mansion of Elias , or go and knock at the grave of John the Baptist , and call them to come to such a cure as this , for they once have wrought so great a cure ; but who can do it that is now alive ? Oh how happy were the case with us , if the spirit and power of Elias were as ready to be found in your two houses as they were once to be found in John the Baptist , and as they are to be seen in the words of the text . 

But as the ark and the ephod at the sacking of nob , they which should always have remained together , were by that doleful accident parted asunder , and kept at distance : even so these two which God once joined together in Elias and in the Baptist , and which the holy ghost hath joined together in the words of the text , some evil counsel hath put asunder , so that the spirit is with you , but the power removed a great way off . What our saviour saith concerning offences , it cannot be but offences will come , but woe to him by whom the offence cometh : so May we dolefully concerning this , it is our misery that this divorce is come among us , but woe to that counsel by whom the divorce first came , it had been good for that counsellor had he never been born . 

How happy are those days which are spoken of by the psalmist , when mercy and truth are met together , and righteousness and peace do kiss each other ? and how happily should we hope to see those days , and those things in this land to meet , if we could but see these two to meet again that are now so unhappily removed to distance ? Well , all that we can do is to seek to drive them together with our prayers , and as Moses for the urim and thummim upon Levi , so we for these united upon you to pray in public , and to pray in private , to pray on the Lord's day , and to pray on other days ; and it is to be a main petition on this solemn day of humiliation , that as the Lord hath put the spirit of Elias into your hearts , so that he would put the power of Elias into your hands , that as he hath made you willing , so would he also make you able , to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children , and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous . 

The words of the text are the last words of the old testament , there uttered by a prophet , here expounded by an angel : there concluding the law , and here beginning the gospel : behold , saith Malachi , mal. 4. 5.  I will send you Eliah the prophet : and he saith , the angel , shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias . and he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children , saith the one ; and to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children , saith the other . Thus sweetly and nearly should the two testaments join together , and thus divinely would they kiss each other , but that the wretched apocrypha doth thrust in between : like the two * cherubims in the temple oracle , as with their outer-wings , they touch the two sides of the house , from in the beginning , to come Lord Jesus , so with their inner , they would touch each other , the end of the law with the beginning of the gospel , did not this patchery of human invention divorce them a funder . 

It is a thing not a little to be admired , how this apocrypha could ever get such place in the hearts , and in the bibles of the primitive times , as to come to sit in the very centre of them both : but to this wonderment there May be some satisfaction given , namely because that these books came to them from among the Jews , as well as the old testament and the new . And because that the Jews alone , and alone so long , had had the knowledge of divinity and religion among them , the converted gentiles could not but give their writings extraordinary esteem . And because the Talmud not being yet written , the world was not acquainted with the vanity and strain of Jewish learning , those insuspecting times did swallow these books , as not tasting as yet how unsavoury that was , nor distinguishing these to be of the same taste . It is therefore more to be admired , that when the Talmud was written , and the impious and ridiculous doctrines and fables of the Jewish schools laid open to the world , that then these books which show themselves to be of the very same stamp in many things , should not only not be refused out the bibles and out men's good conceit , but also get better and further footing in the same : but to this wonderment some satisfaction also May be given : namely that superstition begun then to grow in the church every day more and more , and it became a religion to do as their forefathers had done before , and to retain what they had retained , be it whatsoever it would , and of what ungroundlessness soever . 

But it is a wonder to which i could never yet receive satisfaction , that in churches that are reform , that have shaken off the yoke of superstition , and unpinned themselves from off the sleeve of former customs or doing as their ancestors have done : yet in such a thing as this , and of so great import , should do as first ignorance , and then superstition hath done before them : it is true indeed that they have refused these books out of the canon , but they have reserved them still in the bible : as if God should have cast Adam out of the state of happiness , and yet have continue him in the place of happiness . Not to insist upon this , which is some digression , you know the counsel of Sarah concerning Ishmael , and in that she outstripped Abraham in the spirit of prophecy , cast out the bondwoman and her son , for the son of the bondwoman May not be heir with the son of the free . 

In the words of the text you May see your own work and task : and those two things that you have so long laboured under , and that we have so long longed after , reconciliation and reformation . you May behold in a part of the text , reconciliation in these words , to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children : and reformation in the other , and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just . these are the two hands of our Master which is in heaven , or rather the two good things in his hands , after which we his servants have looked so long , and do look this day , and cannot be taken off till he give them to us . These are the hands of your two houses , or rather the two great gifts which we wait till God put into your hands to convey them towards us . These are the two pillars , Jachin & Boaz , firmness and strength , that we long to see set up at the door of that temple that you are in building : and these are the two twins for which the Tamar of our England is in travail and is pained to be delivered , if there be but strength to bring them forth . 

These two things contained in the latter part of the text , are set forth and illustrated by two circumstances in the former : first , by the party and the function of that party that must perform so great a work , those included in these words , he shall go before him : secondly , the qualifications and endowments of that party for the function , and for the work , that expressed in these ; in the spirit and power of Elias . the party rare , the function honourable , his endowments singular , his work divine , he shall go before him , &c.  

We will take up the words according to this division , but not according to this order : for as in nature the agent is before the action , and as in the text , the workman is named before the work , so are they fit to be considered , and so will we take them into our handling , and so shall we take them as they lie in the text , and first of the first , he shall go before him . 

Who are meant by the he and the him in this part of the text the dimmest eye that is , will easily judge and discern , upon its own reading , namely John the Baptist , and our saviour Christ . two that were in a very near relation one to another by nature , for they were kinsmen according to the flesh , but of a nearer and of a higher relation in regard of their function , for they were they that began the gospel , or the one begun & the other perfected ; & they were they that were the two great prophets of the new testament , or the one greater than a prophet , and the other greater than a man . I cannot omit that which is not , nor cannot be omitted by any expositor it is so plain upon the him in this part : namely , that in the verse next before , he is called the god of Israel , he shall turn many of the children to the Lord their God , and in this verse and in this whole passage he is showed to be Christ , of whom is spoken which giveth a pregnant and undeniable proof that Christ is God , against the wicked Arius that held him for a creature . 

The Baptist went before our saviour in divers particulars ; in his conception , in his birth , in his preaching , in his death . For the miraculous conception and birth of John , went before the more miraculous conception and birth of Christ ; his powerful preaching , before the others more powerful ; and his renowned death , before the others more renowned . But the words do not mean so much his going before him in time , as his going before him in ministry , nor his appearing before him in the world , as his appearing before him to do him service , as a servant doth before his Master to provide for his entertainment ; and so the words following do explain it , he shall go before him , to make ready a persons prepared for the Lord : and so the seventy disciple are said to be sent before our saviour two and two before his face , that is , to prepare men for his receiving against that he himself should come . 

All the prophets went before our saviour in their ministry , in their divers generations , but John in a more special manner above them all . They like Balaam in the four and twentyeth of numbers , did behold him , but not now , did foretell him , but not near ; but he beheld him face to face , and he told of him standing by . And hence it is , that our saviour calls him more than a prophet , mat. 11. 9 nay as much or more than any mere man that was naturally born of a woman : more than a prophet , because he went before Christ as his forerunner ; and as great as any that was ever born , because he was the beginner of the gospel . The ministry of John the Baptist , and the publishing of the gospel , like time and the motion of the heavens , began together , and in one and the same instant . So hath mark conjoined them , in the very beginning of the gospel , Mark . 1. 1.  The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ , as it is written in the prophets , behold , i send my messenger before thee . so likewise , in the first of the acts and the two and twenty , Peter proposing a disciple to be chosen in stead of Judaas , of these men , saith he , which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us , beginning from the baptism of John : and so in the tenth chapter of the same book of the acts , and the thirty seventh . the word you know which was published throughout all Judea , and began from Galilee after the baptism which John preached . and one place for all . mat. 11. 13.  All the prophets and the law prophesied until John , and from him began the gospel . So that what some of the fathers say concerning Malachi , that he was limbs Judeismi & christianismi , we May not unfitly say , concerning him , that he was the bounds of Judaism and Christianity , the limits from whence the law and the prophets took their conclusion , and the gospel , and the kingdom of heaven their beginning . 

Now as the ministry of John consisted of two distinct and considerable parts , preaching and baptising , [ like as the gift of prophecy had consisted in times before , of a double spirit , or to speak more properly , of a double power of one and the same spirit , to foretell things to come and to work miracles ; ] so by both these did he begin the gospel , and by both these did he go before our saviour . These were , as it were the two hands with which he laid the foundation , and began to build up the fabric of the Evangelical temple . And these two hath mark joined together in his relation , as John did in the exercise of his function , mar. 1. 4.  John did baptise in the wilderness and preach the baptism of repentance . 

By both these he began the gospel , and first by his baptism : for , 

First , baptism was used in the times before and under the law , but it was to admit proselytes to the religion of the Jews : but the Baptist now cometh with a baptism to admit the Jews to another religion besides their own . Jacob in gen. 35. when he is to enter and admit the remnant of Sichem that escaped the sword into his family and religion , he doth it by baptism . put away , saith he , the strange gods that are among you , and be clean and change your garments , where , by the second injunction , be clean , Aben Ezra ▪ well observeth is meant the washing of their bodies in water , and indeed nothing else can so properly be meant , which what was it else but a baptising ? And so rambam or Maimonides in his epitome of the Talmud , relateth from thence , that in the times of David and Solomon , when heathens came into the Jews religion by thousands ( For a hundred three and fifty thousand of them helped to build the temple ) they were admitted thereinto by baptism , or by being washed , and not by circumcision . Thus was baptism used in * those ancient times , and used to induct the gentiles into the church and religion of the Jews : but now comes John with a baptism of another •nd , namely , to enter the Jews into another church and religion than their own , and so by his baptism doth he begin the gospel . 

Secondly , and so also did he by his preaching : for whereas the law called for absolute and exact performance , and cried a curse on him that confirmed not all the words of the law to do them , deut. 27. 26.  John cometh in another tenor , like God in the still voice , and instead of challenging the strict performance of works , he preacheth the gentle doctrine of repentance ; that whereas they could not do what the law required , they should repent for that they had broke the law , and thus is the rigorous and terrible tenor of the law , changed into the sweet and comfortable doctrine of repentance , and thus both by baptising and preaching , doth John begin the gospel . 

And so by both also did he go before our saviour : by baptism to admit men into Christ against he should come , and by his preaching to let Christ into men when as he came : by his baptising to make way for Christ his coming among men , and by his preaching to make way for men their coming unto Christ : and so much is intimated by the words that next and immediately do follow the text , to make ready a persons prepared for the Lord . this Might be taken only for an elegancy such as the scripture useth , to quicken expressions , by repetitions , but it hath its proper vigour and significancy , and in the two several words denoteth the two distinct fruits of the ministry of the Baptist in her two parts : his baptism , to make men ready to look for Christ that was now in coming ; and his preaching , to have them prepared for his receiving when he came . 

The observation that we May take up from hence is this , that Christ when he came to show himself in the world had need of a powerful , and a spirited forerunner : he was the expectation of the gentiles . gen. 49. 10.  He was the expectation of the Samaritans . John 4. 25.  He was the expectation of the Jews . luk. 19 11.  He was the expectation of all nations . hag. 2. 7.  And yet when he came that was so expected , he had need of a harbinger to go before him , and a strong forerunner to make his way ; and all this too little too . For when he came amongst his own , his own received him not . joh. 1. 11.  

The Jews fancy concerning the cloud of glory , that conducted Israel through the wilderness , that it did not only show them the way , but also plane it , that it did not only lead them in the way in which they must go , but also fit them the way to go upon : that it leveled all the mountains and smoothed all the rocks , that it cleared all the bushes , and removed all the rubs . No less preparatives were required for our saviour's coming to make way for him , in the entertainment of men , or to make way for men to the entertaining of him : and so hath the scripture expressed it in terms not much different : every valley shall be filled , and every mountain and hill shall be brought low ; and the crooked shall be made straight , and the rough ways shall be made smooth : Esay 40. 4. luk. 4. 5.  

There were two main things that lay betwixt the Jews and Christ at his appearing , that were most likely to keep them asunder , and to hinder the access of each to other , and so they did . And those were their corruption in manners , and in behaviour , and their corruption in doctrine , and in religion ; the former like rough ways that must be smoothed , and the latter like crooked , that must be straightened ; and both being such as must be helped , or little hopes they can come to Christ . 

First . As for their corruption in manners , had we not evidence enough thereof in the scripture , that lays it open , we have sufficient in their own writers . They were a generation of vipers ; so John calls them , mat. 3. 7.  they were a wicked and adulterous generation ; so our saviour calls them , mat. 16. 4. seeming to allude to the phrase of Hosea , the children of fornications , hos. 1. 2.  they were a persons stiffnecked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears : so Stephen calls them act. 7. 51.  And to spare more , our saviour makes them as it were the common shore of all vengeance , and consequently the sink of all iniquity , mat. 23. 35.  That upon you May come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth from the blood of righteous Abel , unto the blood of Zacharias . 

To these characters of their manners given by scripture , we May add the confession of their own authors in their writings . The Talmud in Sanhedrim , in the eleventh chapter hath these words . r : Juda saith , in the generation in which the son of David shall come , the house of the assembly shall be a stews , the wisdom of the scribes shall fail , they that fear sin shall be despised , and the face of that generation shall be like dogs . saint Paul hits them with their own title , beware of dogs , beware of the concision , phil. 3. 2. and so doth John seem also to do , without are dogs . Rev. 22. 15.  Such another testimony doth David Kimchi give out of the rabbins on easy 59 16.  Rabbi Johanan saith , saith he , the son of David cometh not , but either in a generation all holy , as it is written , thy persons shall all be righteous , and inherit the land for ever : or in a generation all wicked , as it is written , he saw that there was no man , and wondered that there was no intercessor . too pregnant and woeful experience showed that the latter was only true , and their own behaviour at our saviour's coming , confirmeth the gloss to prophesy truly , that their manners then should be most corrupt . 

Secondly , and so was also their doctrine : and that withal in a twofold relation . 1.  In regard of the opinion that they held concerning the legal rites that were amongst them before : and 2. in regard of the opinion that they held concerning Christ , who was now in coming . 

1.  They were so glued to the ceremonies of Moses , and so bewitched with the traditions of the fathers , that it was an impossibility in human reason to thaw them asunder . 

Paul speaking of his own doting upon these , speaketh the affection of his whole nation in this particular , i was exceedingly zealous of the traditions of the fathers , gal. 1. 14.  Stephen in act. 6. 14. for but speaking of the abolishing of the customs of Moses , must lose his life , though he spoke but what Moses himself had spoken before , and what an angel had spoken after Moses , & though his face when he was to answer for these things , shone like the face of Moses , and was like the face of an angel . But what need i to insist upon particulars ? If you look throughout all the acts of the apostles , you shall find that almost in every place where the gospel came among the Jews , this was the main obstacle that ever lay in the way to hinder the freedom of its passage , the fixedness of that persons and nation to their ceremonies and traditions . Let one place suffice for many , act. 21. 28.  The Jews of Asia laid hands on Paul , crying out ; men of Israel help , this man teacheth all men everywhere against the persons , and the law , and this place . 

The preaching of the gospel goeth against their heart , because it goeth against their customs , and he that speaketh against that persons , law , and place , is sure to be spoken against himself , for they were so pinned unto the rites of those three , that there must be nothinking of their removal . And thus were they most corrupt in opinion concerning the ceremonies of the law which they had used of old . 

2.  And so also were they concerning Christ when he should come . They expected him to appear in the world as an earthly conqueror , like Naaman the Syrian by the prophet Elisha ; he thought he will surely come out and stand , and call upon the name of the Lord his God , and strike his hand over the place and recover the leper ; and he only sent him this plain and simple message , go wash in Jordan and be clean : so they by Christ , they conceited , surely he will come with great worldly pomp , and make his way with a conquering sword , he will destroy many persons even as earthly Princes do , and seat his persons in Canaan again in more prosperity and pomp then ever : and he on the contrary , came in the form of a servant , he had no form nor comeliness in the eyes of men that they could desire him : he appeared in a posture of humility and lowliness , riding upon an ass , and upon a colt , the foal of an ass . And how far were they from entertaining such a Christ as this , when they expected one of a quality so infinitely different ? Who could believe that the title over our saviour's head upon his cross , should be a stumbling block unto the Jews feet ? And yet was it so at that very time when they fixed it there , and so it hath been ever since , and so it is at this very day , Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews . they looked for the Messiah to come from Bethlehem , and they knew him but for Jesus of Nazareth . and they expected a pompous King of the Jews , and how far was he from such a King . And thus they knew not him , when he came from Galilee , nor the voices of the prophets what they meant by his kingdom , and thus were they very far unlikely to receive him when he came . 

These three things then being thus considered , and notice taken how far this persons of the Jews were gone away both in life and doctrine , what corruption they had contracted in their manners , what doting upon their ancient customs , and what misprision concerning Christ , it is no wonder if he that came to reform these things that were so far amiss , had need of a spirited and a powerful forerunner , to make some way for him against he came . 

And as it was at our saviour's coming in the flesh , so also is it at his coming in the spirit : whensoever Christ is to be brought in among a corrupt and irregular persons , in the power and purity of his word & gospel , great hindrances do ever offer themselves to stop the way , and they had need of great forerunners to clear them thence . a Jerusalem is never built street and wall , but those times are troublous : & a reformation in a corrupted state is never wrought but with these opposals . The very same things do make the ways rough and unpassable for Christ's coming now , in his work and power , that made it then when he came in the flesh . These three are as the net upon Mispah and the snare upon tabor , hos. 5. 1. as the ambushes that the idolatrous priests laid upon those mountains to catch up all the passengers that should go to Jerusalem to worship the true God , these catch up men that they come not at Christ . These are the Korah , Dathan , and Abiram , that are ever ready to oppose the Moses and Aaron that seek to work good in the congregation ; and the Jannes , Jambres and Egyptians , that affront them in the work of the Lord . And hence is it no wonder , that that work of the same nature , that you have had so long in hand , hath gone so slowly and so heavily on . For , 

1.  How truly is the moral of that story concerning Anomon in 2 sam. 12. come to pass in these days of ours ? First , he was sick for love of his sister Tamar , and having used her at his pleasure , he was then as sick for hate . So hath it been with us of this land : we were sick but a while ago for a parliament , and nothing would cure us if we had not that , like David we longed and longed again for this water of Bethlehem that is beside the gate , and could not rest till we had got it , and yet when we have obtained it , and that not without the hazard of your lives , we now cast it upon the ground , and care not for it : we are now as weary of this manna which God hath sent us , as we were desirous of it before it came . What should be the reason of men's such crossness and contrariety in their affections , as to will and to loath , to desire and to detest the same thing , with the same earnestness , in so short a time ? Why , that in the prophet , you would have healed Babel , and she will not be healed . men are affrighted i know not how at the rumor of a reformation , because they are afraid to be stripped off their carnalities and corruptions . Like a simple patient , that in an eating and corroding sore , if the surgeon can abate his pain , he likes it well , but to cut out any proud dangerous and corrupting flesh , that he will not endure : just so hath it been with us . Whilst you eased us of the pains of those pressures , that did pinch , and took off the yoke from off our neck that glad so sore , it pleased us well , and you had our liking ; but to be restrained any whit from our former & beloved sensualities , to be straitened any thing of the extravagancies of our former ways by the reins of a reformation , oh this goes to the quick , and we cannot endure it , durus sermo , a hard business , who can abide it ? Our saviour hath told us long ago , that parting with an old acquaintance bosom sin is as pinching to flesh and bloods , as to pluck out an eye and to cut off a hand , and we see it true by too woeful experience , by men's unseparableness from their delights , they carrying them , and they them , and will not be parted , to perdition . The vine , olive , and figtree in Jotham's parable , will not leave their wine , fatness , and sweetness , to gain a kingdom , Herod his Herodias to save his soul , nor men of corrupt manners , the corruption of their manners for a blessed reformation . 

This is the first adversary that you have in your way , that seeketh to cross the glorious work that you have in hand . And there is a second which is like to this , as a twin of the same womb , and as bad as it , and that is corruption in opinion concerning ancient customs , and a fixedness to what our forefathers have used before . 

2.  Custom , as it is commonly said , is a second nature , and men cannot easily leave that which they have long used themselves , and they will not easily leave that which they have seen and known to be used by their predecessors . The Ephraimites in the book of judges , that had been brought up to say sibboleth all their life , cannot say shibboleth to save their life , but they perish two and forty thousand . Famous and fearful is the story of rabodus [ some call him by another name ] who when he was so far persuaded from his heathenism into Christianity , that he had one foot in the water towards being baptised , and there asking whither his forefathers were gone that were not Christians nor baptised , whether to heaven or hell , and it being answered to hell , he pulls his foot back again out of the water , with words to this purpose , that he would go whither his ancestors were gone , and so he resolved to be what his ancestors had been . This , the more is the pity , is the ultima analysis of the religion of too many thousands in this land and time ; men and women are too commonly and generally pinned in opinion and in practice of religious things upon the customs and usage of ancient times , and they are loathe to be parted from them : the woman of Sychar was zealous for the temple upon mount Gerizim , but the best reason she can give for that her zeal , is but this , because her , fathers worshipped in that mountain , joh. 4. 20.  Laban in the marriage of his daughter Leah , will rather follow custom ▪ then either conscience , or his own promise and covenant : he had agreed with Jacob for Rachel , and for Rachel had Jacob served , but when it cometh to the point of performance he suborneth Leah , and deceives him with her , and what is his reason ? Why , it was not the custom of the country , to give the younger before the elder , gen. 29. 26.  How the predominancy of this humour in the diseased body of this church doth cause us to cast up again the wholesome physic of a reformation , it is known too well . The confession of the prophet May be taken up concerning us , and with addition , we have sinned with our forefathers , nay we are resolved so to do still . The errors that the ignorance and dulness of former times did admit into the worship of God and profession of religion , we are resolved to retain because they were the customs of former times . 

3.  And thirdly , a main obstacle in the way of Christ's powerful coming among a persons , and in the way of your work that seeks thus to bring him , is a corruption of opinion that men have concerning Christ or religion itself . Religion to carnal men must be a little gaudy , or else it cannot be a pleasing religion : as the virgin Mary must be a Lady , or she is not thought fit to be a saint . The simplicity and plainness of the gospel , spoils its entertainment with sensual minds . And Antichrist by putting his religion in so gorgeous clothes hath gained so much upon them , and stolen men's hearts through their eyes . God did once indeed comply with the gross dulness of the Jews , that he Might win them , and because they could not go further in religion than they were led by the eyes , he gave them such a one as suited to them , and because it was so with them once , carnal men would have it so still . 

These are the three sons of Anak with whom you have had so long to wrestle , and with whom you have to combat still , before you can bring our Israel to the desired Canaan . i May say again , that it is no wonder that this work in your hands goes so slowly on , when three such giants do seek to hinder it . You have to fight not with flesh and blood , but with principalities and powers , with the strong holds of Satan in the hearts of men . Oh that we could find out some such powerful forerunners to go before you , as Might clear the way for your readier passage ! Where Might we get so skilful a Mustian as could calm these evil spirits that thus disturb all ? It is far from my skill to advise you what to do in these respects : but to you others that sit by , and are spectators how these worthies labour under these opposals , this May show what need you have to drive on the great and weighty works that they have in hand with the earnestness of your prayers . Their hands , like those of Moses , it is no wonder if they be weary with holding up so long in so great employments , these must be the Aaron and her that must support them that they fall not quite . Me think we May even see written in the very things that they are in managing , they are so weighty , what Paul inserts to so many of his epistles , brethren pray for us ; and brethren pray for them . I will conclude all in the words of the psalmist , let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth : nay , let me change the number , for i know you will join with me in the saying , let our tongues cleave to the roofs of our mouths : if we forget the parliament in our best devotions . And so have i done with the first part that i named , the person and his function that must do the work ; now i come to the qualification of that person for that work and for his function , he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias . 

We meet in this part with two several parties , Elias and John , men exceedingly renowned in their generations , and exceeding great reformers in their times . Elias in the middle of the times of the law , and John in the beginning of the times of the gospel . We Might deal with them as the prophet Ezekiel doth with his two sticks with the names written upon them , Judah and Joseph : first , we Might take in either hand one , and treat of them severally , then Might we take them both into one hand , and in our handling they Might become one ; but we will take up such things concerning them only , as shall be most material to be considered , and most suitable to the present times . 

And first , we May lay this position , and the text will warrant it , that Elias shall never come to live and continue upon earth again . the prophet Malachi indeed delivereth it in such terms as if he should come once again . behold , i will send you Eliah the prophet : and the Septuagint have driven the nail to the head to make this sense the surer , for they have added , behold , i send you Elias the tishbite : yet the angel Gabriel in the text doth tell us , that Elias himself is not to come in his own soul , but another in his spirit , nor he in his own person , but it was John Baptist was to come in his power . And so our saviour , matth. 11. 14.  And if you will receive it , this is Elias which was to come : and matth. 17. 12.  Elias , saith he , is already come , which his disciple do truly understand of John the Baptist . the Jews , as they do erroneously hold that the Messiah is not yet come , so do they hold also that Elias shall personally come before his coming : and it is no wonder that they err that error mistaking the meaning of Malachi , when so many Christians do err the same error with them , though they have an exposition by an angel , and by our saviour upon that prophecy . Jansenius , maldonate , and others of the same nest , Jesuits and Papists , explaining these words that we have in hand , do resolve , that they are more fitly to be applied to Elias his second coming which is yet to be , then to his coming in the days of Ahab : and they gloss them thus , he shall go before Christ at his first coming , in the spirit and power that Elias shall go before him in at his second . a gloss much like that senseless one of the sect in Epiphanius , upon these words in gen. 1. 27.  God create man in his own image , whereon they seemed to hold , that the body of man was made after the image of God , and that Christ's human shape was the copy for the shape of Adam , whereas Adam was not made a man after the likeness of Christ , but Christ was made man after the likeness of Adam . even so is it with these expositors . They either make John Baptist his going before Christ , a pattern of Elias his doing the like , whereas Elias in the prophet and in the text is a pattern of John : or else they make Elias who is to come ( No one can tell when ) the copy or pattern of the Baptist already come , which is more than ridiculous . Nor is it so much to be wondered , that these men of corrupt judgements and minds , should err this same error with the Jews , when we find so many of the fathers to have erred in the same opinion also , and to Elias they have added Enoch , and both these , they say , must come before the coming of Christ , for these they hold to be the two witnesses in the 11. of the revelation . 

It is true indeed that some ones shall come in the spirit of Elias toward the end of the world , according to that description in the revelation , but no expectation of Elias himself , nor no description of Enoch at all . The two witnesses in that place are plainly charactered and deciphered forth by the emblems of Moses & Elias . They have power to shut up heaven that there be no rain , vers. 6.  Here is apregnant intimation of Elias : & , they have power over the waters to turn them into blood , there is as pregnant a one of Moses . these two men do meet more than once mentioned together in the scriptures . They are named together in the conclusion of the prophets , mal. 4. 4.  Remember the law of Moses my servant , and in v. 5.  Behold i send you Elias the prophet . they appeared together and attended our saviour at his transfiguration , matth. 17. 3.  They are thought on together in that description of the two witnesses , as they also agreed together in this , that the one was the giver of the law at the first , and the other the restorer of it when it was decaying : the one was the great prophet of the Jews , the other the great prophet of the gentiles , as shall be touched anon . When therefore the Jews and the gentiles shall be knit together into one church upon the fullness of the one and the conversion of the other , then shall God raise up a powerful ministry to them both united , as in the spirit of Moses and Elias , ( The time of their preaching is alluded to the time of our saviours , three years and a half ) and Antichrist shall rise up against them , and persecute some of them to the death . 

By the way as we go , it is not immaterial to be observed , how things signifying and things signified do often in scripture bear one and the same name : sometime the thing signifying is called by the same name of the thing signified . As at the making of the first covenant exod. 24. 8.  Moses sprinkled the blood of the covenant upon all the persons , heb. 9 19  That is , upon the twelve pillars , which he had set up to represent the persons , vers. 4. as he had set up an altar also to represent God : for to besprinkle so many hundred thousands severally , it was impossible in so short a time as he employed in that work . And so in the second covenant in the blood of Christ , the bread and wine that represent his body and blood , are called by the very names of his body and blood . 

Sometimes the thing signified is called by the name of the thing signifying , as hos. 3. 5.  Afterward shall the children of Israel return , and seek the Lord their god and David their King , that is , Christ their King , which was signified by David : and so in the matter that we have in hand , the prophet Malachi calls the Baptist Elias , because he was so nearly represented and typified by Elias . to them that hold that Elias shall personally come again indeed , we May justly propose these two or three queres . First , how shall a glorified body converse with bodies laden with corruption and mortality ? Observe at the transfiguration of our saviour , when the glorified bodies of Moses and Elias appeared to him , the disciple were so uncapable and unfit for conversing with them , that some of them spoke they knew not what . consider the disproportion that is between angels and men , if i May so call it , in regard of converse , the one spirits , the other bodies , how can these two be familiar together , if an angel take not on him a visible shape ? There is not so much distance indeed betwixt bodies glorified and bodies mortal , yet is there so much as is sufficient to spoil the converse of each with other . 

Secondly , what should Elias do in his person here ? If to preach : our saviour hath told us , that if men would not hearken to Moses and the prophets , they will not be persuaded though one rose from the dead : and May we not infer ? If men will not hearken to Moses , the prophets , the evangelists , and the apostles ; they will not believe though Elias came from heaven , to preach the gospel ? if another than what was preached by Christ and his apostles , then is he accursed though he be Elias . if the same : why , that treasure is carried in earthen vessels , and not in vessels already glorified . to destroy Antichrist ? this indeed is the common opinion : but Paul hath told us that the Lord shall do it with the spirit of his mouth , and the brightness of his coming . such questions as these Might be proposed to that opinion , that is indeed of much like nature with this , but of far more strangeness , namely that that would bring Christ from heaven again , to live personally on earth a thousand years . First , what should Christ that is in heaven , blessed for ever , do a thousand years upon earth that is cursed ? The very first lesson that God taught Adam after he had taught him the lesson of Christ , was this , that he should not expect Christ's kingdom upon earth , for that he cursed , gen. 3. 17.  Secondly , how strange and improbable is it to conceive , that Christ who in his human frailty had a kingdom , which was called and was the kingdom of heaven , should now in his immortal glory come and possess a kingdom on earth ? An opinion according to the censure of Eusebius , raised upon the misconstruction of a place in the last book of the new testament , as this about Elias was of a place in the last book of the old . for thus speaketh he concerning Papias , the first father of this conceit : the same author also , saith he , showeth that other things came to him by unwritten tradition which contain certain strange parables of our saviour and new doctrines of his , and some other things stuffed with legendary fables . Among which he averreth that the kingdom of Christ , after the resurrection of all flesh from the dead , shall continue and endure upon this earth , after a human and bodily manner , for a thousand years : which opinions i believe that he did entertain , because he misunderstood the apostolical interpretations , which were delivered by them under hidden figures , and obscure parables . For he was a man , as May be guessed by his writings of a very shallow wit . Yet was he the author of the like error to most ecclesiastical men , who cited this man's antiquity for the defence of their part : as Irenaeus , and whosoever else is of the same opinion with him . 

I will not censure nor condemn the opinion , but refer it to superior examination , only this i cannot but say of it , that i do not remember that ever i heard or read of an opinion of so extreme and monstrous strangeness , that in so short a time , hath gotten so great a belief and so large an entertainment , and neither tongue or pen hath stirred against it . It is our hope and prayer , that once you May have liberty and leisure from the great rent in the whole piece of the state to look upon the rippings in the seams of the church , that such opinions as this and others May be taken either by you or by your authority into examination , before , like Joab and Abishai the sons of Zerviah , they grow too strong , and defy a trial . 

the spirit and power of Elias is held by some to mean but one and the same thing , his powerful spirit . so indeed sometime runneth the sense of the Hebrew stile . As in that answer of our saviour , joh. 14. 6.  I am the way , the truth , and the life , the scope of the question that occasioned it seemeth to call it to such a sense , i am the true and the living way . 

Others distinguish the meaning with the words , and by the spirit of Elias understand patience and tolerancy of persecution , and by the power , the prevalent and efficacious virtue of his ministration . But we need not to go far for interpretations , when either the words are of no great difficulty , or what they be of , will easily be explained by the scripture itself . 

By Elias his spirit then are we to understand , not his own within him , but the spirit of the Lord or of prophecy upon him : and so his spirit is said to be upon John , as Moses his spirit was upon the elders , and the spirit of the same Elias upon Elisha . 

By the power of Elias upon the Baptist , is not meant the power of miracles , for John wrought none , whereas Elias did many , but his power of preaching for the conversion of many unto God . So that whereas the ancient prophets of the law , and among them Elias , had a double power of the spirit upon them , to foretell things to come , and to work miracles ; so had John the first prophet of the gospel , a double power , but of another nature and a better . He foretold not things to come , but he explained those that had him foretold ; and he wrought not miracles upon bodies , but he was miraculously powerful upon souls . 

Now , should we come to compare Elias & the Baptist there we should find them agree in many parallels : as that they both came in very corrupt times , that they both restored religion very much in that corruption , that they were both persecuted exceedingly for that restoring , Elias by Ahab and Jezabell , and John by Herod and Herodias ; and divers other agreements , upon which not to insist , because they be obvious to every eye , this collection May we take up from the words in hand , that Elias is a proper and pregnant pattern for reformers . 

As when Moses was making the sanctuary and the appurtenances , God often calls upon him to make all things according to the pattern which was showed him in the mount : so in this like work of yours which you have in hand can you platform out a reformation by a better pattern than by Elias , since you will not do it but by some pattern from the mount ? A man that in the text is a copy to John the Baptist in his reforming : and a man that in his own time restored all things , as our saviour saith of him , mat. 17. 11.  And fitly then May he be a pattern for these times of ours . 

He restored perishing religion , & the decaying law : he restored forgotten prophecy , and as the Jews hold , forsaken circumcision : for of circumcision do they understand those words of Elias himself , they have forsaken thy covenant , 1 king. 19 14.  And of Elias the restorer of circumcision they misunderstand those words of the prophet , the angel or messenger of the covenant , mal. 3. 1.  

But i stand not here as a surgeon over his anatomy , to read unto you a lecture of reforming , upon the skeleton of Elias , it were beyond good manners , as it is beyond my skill : let me address myself to you that sit by and are spectators of these worthies as they labour in their work , in a word or two of application , and that according to the two words that are before us , the spirit of Elias and his power . 

1.  By the spirit of Elias , i told you , is understood the spirit of God that was upon him : now as the apostle saith , x cor. 12. 4. the spirit was but one , but the gifts were diverse . for look in the fourth of the acts , and the thirty first , it is said of the apostles there , that when they had prayed the place was shaken and they were filled with the holy ghost . and so they had been some days before , namely on Pentecost day , act. 2. 4.  Now they having been filled then , how can they be said to be filled again ? Why ▪ then with the gift of tongues , and now with the gift of holy boldness , for , for that it was they prayed , ver. 29.  

Among the diverse gifts then of the holy spirit , that Elias had , this is not the last nor the least that made him renowned , his extraordinary zeal for the Lord of hosts . so much expresseth he concerning himself , 1 king. 19 10. 14.  And so much seemeth our saviour to aim at , in his answer to his two disciple that would have fire fetched from heaven , as Elias had done , ye know not , saith he , what manner of spirit ye are of , luk. 9 55. of a zeal beyond your warrant , and you would be forward you know not how . The thing that you May take notice of from hence is this , that no true reformation can be expected which is not carried on with a spirit of zeal . The works of God must be wrought with his spirit , & they that desire to forward his glory , must do it with a holy forwardness . It is the honour of Levi , deut. 33. 9 that when he was about the employment of the Lord , he was so zealous in it , that he forgot all civil relations , and said unto his father , and to his mother , i have not seen him , neither did he acknowledge his brethren , nor knew his own children . and so our saviour in the third of mark , when his mother and kindred would have taken him off from preaching , for they said he will faint , or he is beside himself , be it whether it will , for the original word will bear both , he was so zealous in the work in hand , that he would not own them that came to hinder it . For he answered , saying , who is my mother , and who are my brethren ? Mark 3. 33.  

2.  The power of Elias in reformation was exceeding much , and he did wondrous things in what he did , but yet he left exceeding much undone , which he could not help , and abundance of corruption , which he could not remove . He took away baalim , but he could not take away the golden calves , he destroyed the prophets of the one , but he could not destroy the prophets of the other . four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal perished by his means at Carmel , and yet are there four hundred false prophets left that seduce Ahab to go to Ramoth . thus impossible is an utter extirpation of all corruption out of a state and church that is corrupt . 

Lay these two now together in the two scales of an unprejudicate judgement , and they will help very well to balance and to poise a right your thoughts and censures concerning these worthies that are toiling in our work . Some think they have been too forward , others think they have been too slow ; some , that they have done too much , others that they have done too little ; some complain of too much zeal , and some of too little reformation . To the former May be answered , that Elias must be zealous if he will reform ; to the latter , that Elias cannot utterly purge out all corruption though he be Elias ; and to both together , that in stead of murmuring against them , it were far fit to be thankful to God for them , for that he hath put so much zeal into their hearts , and so much reformation already into their hands , as that we see more already than we expected ever to have seen : the same Lord continue the same spirit unto them , and increase the power , that their hearts and their hands May hold up and grow strong , that we May see the salvation of the Lord exerted by them ; for the reconciling of the disaffected , and the reducing of the disobedient . And so i pass to the third part of the text , the work of the Baptist , to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children , &c.  the case was woeful when father and son had need of a reconciler to make them friends , yet was it theirs then , and so is it ours now . 

It was a very hard task surely to John the Baptist , to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children , or to do this work , for i find it a very hard task and trouble to expositors to find out and to resolve , who these fathers and children were . 

Some by the fathers understand the Jews , and by the children , Christ and his apostles , as Luke 11. 19 and that John turned the hearts of the fathers to the children , when he brought the Jews to embrace their doctrine ; but how can the other part be made good with this gloss , that he turned the heart of Christ and his apostles to the Jews ? 

Some render it thus , he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children by the right understanding of the scriptures , and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous by the obedience of faith . An exposition that leaveth us as far to seek who were the fathers and who the children , as we were before . 

Others therefore come nearer the letter , and expound it from the difference that was at that time in opinions among the Jews , the father it May be a Pharisee , and one son a Sadducee , and another an Essaean , and John by bringing them all to the entertainment of the gospel , extinguished that division which opinions had set between them . It is true indeed that these three sects were among the Jews at the Baptist coming , the three shepherds which were to be destroyed in one month , zach. 11. 8. but for any such division in sect betwixt father and sons , it is but a conjecture , and it cannot be so certainly averred . 

But furthest off of all other glosses , and the most improper , is that of Jansenius and others of his feather , which yet they hold to be the nearest and the properest of all , and that is this . That John turned the hearts of the children to the fathers , when he brought the Jews to whom he preached , or those of his own time , to embrace the faith and doctrine of the patriarchs that had been before : and the hearts of the fathers to the children , when by reducing them thus to that faith , he occasioned that those holy men in limbo did begin to affect them , and take them to heart , which they had not done before . I will not stand to examine or convince this exposition , for it is not worth the labour , you yourselves have confuted it in thought i know as soon as heard it . the most genuine and real meaning of the words that we have in hand i conceive to be this . That by the fathers are to be understood the Jews , and by the children the gentiles ; and by John's turning each others heart unto others , his winning them both jointly and unanimously , to the knowledge and profession of Christ and of the gospel , and by the tie of that to the joint communion one with another . And i am made confident and emboldened to entertain this exposition as the very meaning of the place upon these reasons . 

1.  Because the church of the gentiles is styled by the name of the children of the Jews , commonly and constantly in the prophets : as Esay 54. 13.  All thy children shall be taught of the Lord , and 60. 4.  thy sons shall come from far , and thy daughters shall be turned at thy sight , and 62. 5.  as a young man marrieth a virgin , so shall thy sons marry thee . and in very many other places . 

2.  Because it was a special and peculiar work and office of the gospel to unite and tie the Jew and gentile into one : so saith the apostle , ephes. 2. 14.  Christ is our peace , who hath made both one , and the gospel the means . And then must it be the work and office of the Baptist who began the gospel . 

3.  Experience and the history itself confirmeth this our exposition ; for as the gospel in its own nature and promulgation belonged to the gentiles as well as the Jews , and as John came for a witness that all through him Might believe , the one nation as well as the other , so did he baptize and convert some of the one as well as the other , Roman soldiers , as well as Jewish Pharisees , and make them both according to the phrase which Josephus useth of him , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , to convent or knit together in his baptism . 

4.  This exposition maketh John the more fully to resemble Elias , who was a preacher and a prophet to the gentiles as well as to Israel , nay the first prophet of the gentiles . this our saviour toucheth , Luke 4. 25.  Many widows were in Israel , in the days of Elias , but to none was he sent , saving to one in Sarepta a city of Zidon : and the men of Nazareth though but plain and rustic simple men , yet did they quickly understand it of preaching to the gentiles , which put them into an anger , and our saviour into a danger . Nor can we think that the holy and zealous prophet , residing in that heathen city two or three years together , as appeareth by the text , would live there idly and doing nothing , but that he preached there as well as he had done to Israel whilst he was among them , for he was everywhere jealous for the Lord of hosts . I would this were but seriously thought on , in men's expounding the prophecy about the two witnesses in the revelation , which we touched before . For if they would but see Elias there which is so plainly emblemed and pictured out , and withal but consider that Elias was the first prophet of the gentiles , it would help to settle an interpretation to that place , which now hangs exceeding loose in diversity of opinions . 

This being then the proper and only meaning of the words in hand , that John by his preaching should turn the hearts of the Jews to the gentiles , and of the gentiles to the Jews ; and by his baptism should as it were tie them up together ; the observation or collection that we May take up from hence is this , that true religion is the truest reconciler : there is no peacemaker like the gospel , but it is among them that are true professors of the gospel . 

Nor is there any breed-bate like the gospel neither : and so saith our savioar , suppose you that i am come to give peace on earth ? I tell ye nay , but rather division , Luke 12. 51. which he speaketh out more plainly by another evangelist : i came not to send peace , but a sword , matth. 10. 34.  but this is between the two seeds , betwixt whom God hath set enmity , and there can be no reconciliation , the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent : but to the children of the same father , God , and of the same mother , the church , the gospel is the sweet messenger of peace , and the sweet peace maker . 

A deadlier hate could not be betwixt man and man , than was of the Jew toward the gentile . They reputed them as dogs , and so our saviour useth their common phrase , it is not good to take the children's bread and give it to dogs : they reputed them as swine , and accordingly they render that verse of the eighteenth psalm , the boar out of the wood doth waste it , and the wild beast of field doth devour it : they abhorred their society , nay they abhorred the very mention of their conversion , Luke 4. 28.  Act. 22. 22.  And yet when true religion cometh in , & seizeth both the Jew & gentile , the hate is forgotten , the feud is gone , and the deadly enemies are the nearest friends . Much like as it is reported concerning Cairo in Egypt , that if the plague rage never so much over night , that they die by thousands , yet if the river Nilus come flowing in the next day , the mortality is ceased , and there dieth not one : even so is it with religion : be there never so much bitterness and heartburning betwixt man and man , never so much contention and contestation betwixt neighbour and neighbour , if the power of religion do but once flow in and seize them both , the plague is ceased , the malignity gone . 

This is that that cries down the partition walls of all divisions : this is the great tie of men's affections , yea , it is the greatest ; this is the matrimony of souls , making two men to be of one spirit , as the other doth a man and a woman to be one flesh . It is Christ which is the truest cause of making men offended , to be reconciled in a good sense , as he was the occasion of Herod's and Pilate's being so in a bad . With what spleen and rancour did Saul set for Damascus against the professors there ? yet when Christ comes into him by the way , no greater friend than Paul to them when he comes near them . For , 

1.  Religion is a special and sovereign means to calm , tame , and cicurate those exorbitant affections and extravagant humours that breed division and maintain it . the prophet Esay describing the power of the gospel in the Christian church saith , that it shall bring the wolf to dwell with the lamb , the leopard to lie down with the kid , the calf and the young lion to feed together , and the cow and the bear to go in company . His allusion is to the carriage of the beasts in the ark of Noah : before they came in thither , the lion was ravenous , and the lamb his prey , the leopard and the bear devouring , and the kid and the calf afraid to come near them : but when they were come within the ark , there was no such thing , all bloodiness and rapine was laid aside , and the lamb and lion couch together , and the lion now as harmless as the lamb . So is it in the church , and so is it by the power of religion : those humours and passions of men which before have been bloody , cruel , proud , self-willed , dissentious , and rebellious , if once the powerful operation of religion get in among them , it quells these rebels , quenches these firebrands , reduces these extravagants , and like the dispossessed in the gospel , makes him to sit calmly and quietly , and in his right mind , whom none Might come within the compass of before without a danger . 

2.  Religion doth centre men's affections in the centre of unity God himself , and those things that concern God , that they cannot separate : it is an old saying , quae conveniunt in uno tertio conveniunt inter se ; those things that agree in a third thing agree among themselves : then how many third things are there in which true Christians meet as lines in a centre , that must needs hold them together and make them agree ? S. Paul hath reckoned them to our hands in the fourth to the Ephesians , the fourth , fifth , and sixth verses . They meet in one body , in one spirit , in one hope of their calling , in one Lord , one faith , one baptism , in one God and father of all . 

3.  Religion maketh conscience of living in division and giving offence ; it dares not offer its gift at the altar , till it and the offended be reconciled . It dares not suffer the sun to go down upon its wrath , nor will eat that meat that shall offend a weak brother : and as the father in another sense , accounts it as desperate to sleep in malice , as to go to bed in a den of lions . The use that we May make of this May be double , and briefly thus , because i know not your hours and occasions and i fear to offend . 

First , this May direct us very well in the choosing of a friend . Would we have one that shall be true to us ? let us look out such a one as is true to God : would we have one that shall be faithful in our little things , in our affairs ? let us seek out such a one as is faithful in the great thing , in religion . As his counsel was , to agree to Gregory's Austen if he were humble , so be it our holy policy to tie to that man in friendship that is religious : and as Jehu to Jonadab , 2 king. 10. 15.  If we light on a man whose heart is right towards the Lord as we desire a friends heart should be to us , let us fix on that friend , and give him the hand . 

Secondly , this also May show us who cannot be our friend : and with whom it is impossible to have unity and amity , namely with the church of Rome , which is clean antipodes to us in religion . 

is there peace , Jehu ? saith Joram to him . No , there is no peace , where whoredoms and witchcrafts are so many . no communion can be betwixt Christ and Belial , or betwixt religion and idolatry : for so i conceive the word Belial signifieth throughout the scripture . the enmity that God himself fixed at the very beginning betwixt the seed of the serpent and the seed of the woman , must continue unreconciled to the very end : and as quos deus conjunxit , whom God hath joined together , no man whatsoever must put asunder ; so what God hath parted and put asunder , no man must offer to join together : who are the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent , so plain to be seen , as Christ and Antichrist ? and he that will seek to make conjunction of Rome and us , will marry light and darkness , God and the devil , Christ and Antichrist together , and make a friendship betwixt those , betwixt whom God himself hath doomed an enmity while the world endureth . 

We bless God that hath brought us out of her familiarity and friendship to be now her haters and hated of her : and we bless the time when we first fell from the society and converse of Egypt , to be her enemies and at distance with her : and we bless you and your endeavours , that strive so much and so constantly to keep us clear of reingagements . And May the work prosper in your hands , and you in the work , to hold us still at our proper distance to the feed of the serpent , and to keep us at enmity where God hath set it ▪ but for turning the hearts of the fathers to the children , and the reducing of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just , it is our prayer still and still , as it was before , that you May have the power of Elias , or the Baptist , as you have the spirit : and so i come to the last part of the text , and the second part of John's work in his ministration , to turn the disobedient to the wisdom of the just . 

These words as they lie in our English translation do show no great difficulties , but being examined in the original , they are not so very easy . A man scruple that appears in both , is this ; that the angel undertaking to quote the prophet should so far now decline from his text : in the former part that we have newly handled , he followeth him punctually and verbatim , he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children , so saith the prophet , and so the angel ; but now that he should have taken up the other part in these words , and the hearts of the children to the fathers , he changeth them into this clause , and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just . but to this May be answered . 1.  That the angel is not so punctual to cite the very letter of the prophet as to give the sense . And so we May observe it to be usual in the new testament , in its allegations from the old . And that he giveth the same sense , or a true interpretation of the prophet , we shall see as we go . 2.  It was not very long after the baptising and preaching of John , that the Jews ceased to be a church and nation , nay even in the time of him himself , they showed themselves enemies to the gospel , and to the professors of the same , for the general or greatest part of them ; therefore he saith not that the hearts of the children the gentiles , should be turned to their fathers the Jews , which should cease to be fathers and to be a persons , but to the wisdom of the just . and thus in the first part of his speech about turning the hearts of the fathers to the children , he intimateth the Jews that should be reconciled and united to the gentiles in embracing the gospel : and in this latter , by omitting to call them fathers , he giveth a touch of the hostility and evil mind that the others of the Jews should bear both to it , and to the gentiles that embraced it . And now that we see the reason and difference in the allegation , let us take up the words that thus differ , every one single , and one after another as they lie in order ; and would the time permit , every word would afford us matter profitably to insist upon , but i will only hint it as we go along , for i fear to offend in transgressing the time . 

1.  As in this clause he refuseth to use the term of fathers , for the reason mentioned , so doth he also of the correlative children , because of his refusing of that . And yet he coucheth the sense of that title under the word disobedient , which in its most proper and natural signification reflecteth upon untowardly children disobedient to their parents . For though there be a disobedience to any superior whatsoever , as to Kings , magistrates , Masters , and the like , yet is the obedience of children to parents the original from whence it receiveth denomination , and that appeareth in that those superiors are called fathers . as therefore the angel omitting to call the Jews fathers , insinuateth their opposition against the gospel , so by terming the gentiles disobedient in stead of children , he showeth what they were before they embraced it . 

The vulgar Latin in stead of disobedient readeth incredulous or unbelieving : which though the Greek word doth sometime signify , as Might be evidenced in divers instances , yet that it doth not so in this place May be collected from these considerations . First , that the speech is concerning children and fathers , as is apparent in the clause preceding , and between them disobedience is a more proper term and notion than inoredulity . secondly , that he saith not , he shall turn them to the faith , which were the most proper if he spoke of the unbelieving , but to the wisdom of the righteous . And thirdly , that the preaching of the Baptist , was more especially the doctrine of repentance as his baptism was the baptism of repentance , but the preaching of Christ was the doctrine of faith . Therefore John saith only , repent , matth. 3. 2. but our saviour , repent and believe , mar. 1. 15.  

Now from this double signification of the original word , and indeed also from the proper cause of the heathens disobedience , we Might observe , that a chief and main cause of disobedience is unbelief . 

It is a saying of the Jews in their Talmud in the treatise Maccoth , that all those six hundred and thirteen commandments that God gave to Moses in mount Sinai , are reduced to this one in the prophet Habakkuk , the just by his faith shall live : we May say something the like concerning sins ; that those hundred and thousands of transgressions that are committed in the world , and all those various and numerous causes and occasions from whence they proceed , they May all in fine be traced and reduced to this one original , from unbelief . from whence is it that men do violate the commands of the law ? because they will not believe the threatenings upon the violation . And whence is it , that men refuse the promises of the gospel ? because they will not believe the certainty and excellency of those promises . 

2.  The word wisdom in this place doth signify religion , as it doth in divers other places of the scripture , as deut. 4. 6.  Keep therefore and do the statutes and commandments of the Lord , for this is your wisdom : that is , your religion . And so likewise , psal. 111. 10.  The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom : that is , the fear of the Lord is the entry into religion . And so May we find the word to signify in divers passages in the proverbs . and to this sense me thinks Eliphaz scoffeth religious Job in the fourth of that book and the sixth verse if it be looked into in the original . Halo jireatheca chislatheca , is not thy fear or thy religion become thy folly ? 

religion is the only wisdom , and to be truly wise , is to be truly religious : ( Which is the observation that we Might take up upon this word ) but , where or what , saith this miserable comforter , is this religious wisdom of thine become now ? Thou hast been thus and thus precise and devout , thus and thus pious and religious , and what is now become of all this great devotion , but a fearful affliction ? is not now thy religion become thy folly ? 

But there is yet a double scruple , and those no small ones neither , in this small clause or parcel of {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , to the wisdom . 

First , it is something harsh to translate the Greek word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , in this place to signify to : for though it do sometimes signify so , as commentaries quote certain other places , to justify that translation of it in this , yet 1.  That is but rarely and but somewhat improperly wheresoever it is so used ; and 2.  It cannot be imagined that if the angel intended that very sense of to in this place , as to say , to the wisdom , but that he would have used the word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which he used immediately before in the other clause , and say , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , as he had said , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , and not have betaken himself to a construction of the preposition {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , harsh , scrupulous , and unusual . I conceive therefore that that little particle is to be taken here , in its most proper , genuine and general sense , and as it is used million of times in Greek , authors to signify in : and to be interpreted in the wisdom . and the wisdom of the righteous is not here to be held the terminus ad quem , or the ultimate end to which these disobedient gentiles were to be converted ; but the medium per quod , the means or way through which they were to be converted to God . For let the two clauses of this speech of the angel , or the parts of the work of the Baptist be laid in antithesis or opposition against another , as naturally indeed they lie , the one aiming at the Jews as the proper subject , and the other at the gentiles , the subject as proper , and then will it appear very plainly , that two several acts were to be performed by the Baptist as concerning the Jews and their conversion . First , that he should turn their hearts or affections to God , as it is laid down in the verse preceding ; he shall turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord their god . and secondly , that he should turn their hearts and affections also to the gentiles , as it is in this , he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children . according therefore to this double work of John upon the Jews in that part of the angel's speech , must the like duplicity be looked for in this that concerneth the gentiles , and to be understood though it be not expressed . For the angel in this part purposely changeth his stile , and neither calleth the gentiles children , but disobedient , because they generally were so before the coming of Christ , nor the Jews fathers , because they ceased to be so shortly after , as was touched before , nor mentioneth he the gentiles turning to God , but includeth it , partly he had set that as the chiefest bent and work of the Baptist , to turn men to God , and partly he involveth it in this phrase , in the wisdom of the righteous . so that this being the meaning of the angel , as i doubt not but it is , it May afford us this observation , that there can be no true conversion unto God , but in the true religion , or in the wisdom of the just . 

Secondly , the word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which cometh next unto our handling , will afford a twofold consideration . 1.  That it is not without divine reason , that the hearts of the gentiles are not said to be turned to the Jews , as on the contrary it was said of the Jews to the gentiles , but that they should be turned in the wisdom of the righteous . for the enmity and feud , detestation and averseness that was betwixt Jew and gentile , and gentile and Jew , proceeded not from the same cause and original . The Jew abhorred the gentile not of ignorance , but of scorn and and jealousy , partly because they stood upon their own privilege of being the persons of God , which the other were not , and partly because they were provoked with suspicion , that the other Might be the persons of God when they should not be . And therefore when the reconciliation is to be wrought between them , it is said , that their hearts or affections should be turned to them , for they were pointblank and diametrically against them before . But the gentile abhorred a Jew out of ignorance , because of his religion , hating him as a man separate from , and contrary to all the men in the world , accounting that to be but singular and senseless superstition , which was indeed the divine command and wisdom , whereby he sequestered that persons for his own from all other persons on the earth . So that a gentile did not so much detest the person of a Jew for himself , as for his religion and profession , which , ignorant as the heathen were , they understood not what it meant . Therefore when the gentiles must be brought to knit and to unite to the Jews , it must be in the wisdom of the righteous , or in the embracing of that religion , which the righteous ones among the Jews professed , and which the gentiles , till they knew and understood what it meant , accounted but vanity , singularity and folly . 

2.  It is remarkable that the angel doth forsake the proper and common word used to signify wisdom , which is {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . and taketh up {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , which is of a something stricter and stranger use . And so doth the Syriack relinquish Hhechmetho its ordinary word that it useth for wisdom , and fixeth upon Jedhangro a word more singular , and of more peculiar importance . The original word then that we have in hand , doth not only import the wisdom or religion of the Jews , but also the gentiles attaining to the knowledge , and apprehension of that religion and wisdom with them . Not only the theory and practice of the Jewish nation in their religious profession , but the heathens reaching to the understanding of those mysteries in that religion and profession , which they had accounted such vanity and senselessness before . So that this word considerately looked into will afford us this collection : that it is not enough to embrace the true religion in outward profession , but we are to have understanding , and to be acquainted with the doctrine and principles of that religion . for the heathen to turn to the wisdom of the righteous Jews in an outside profession , and an ignorant religiousness , was a poor conversion , as good as none , a work unfit the pains of the Baptist ; but their true turning , and his powerful work is when they are brought to embrace that religion in the knowledge and understanding of the mysteries of it . Ignorance was never the mother of any devotion but of a Romish devotion , which is as good or as bad as none . 

And lastly , there is some doubtfulness also in the last word {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , for it May be indifferently translated of righteous things , or of righteous men : but it is the more undoubted that persons and persons are rather here compared together then persons and things : in the former part of this work of the Baptist , there are fathers and children , and in this part it is most like that they are answered with persons again , disobedient children and righteous fathers , and the meaning of the angel to be this , that as the Jews the fathers in the embracing of the gospel , shall be turned to God , & reconciled to the gentiles , so the gentiles the children , in the wisdom of the righteous , or in the embracing and understanding of the religion professed by the righteous ones that had been & were among the Jews , should be turned to God and in affection to the Jews . And hereupon Might we take up this observation , that the faith of the holy Jews under the law , and of the holy gentiles under the gospel , was one and the same : they that went before Christ in the one , and they that followed Christ in the other , did both cry hosanna to the son of David , did both obtain salvation , by the same saviour and by the same way . 

And so have i gone with the words as far as i dare be bold upon the time , your patience and occasions : i will but put this last clause together which i have thus taken piecemeal , and laid asunder , and so have i done . the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous ▪ the heathen to the knowledge of the true religion : me thinks in these words we May behold the condition of this land as it hath been in ancient times , and as it is in these of ours . We were once Loammi , no persons of the Lords , and utter aliens from his congregation : we sat , and that not very long ago , in darkness and in the shadow of death , and it is no wonder if we Might be called disobedient : but God who is good to all , and whose tender mercies are over all his works , hath come in unto us and shone upon us . He hath discharged us of the name of heathens , oh that we could discharge ourselves of the title of disobedient ! he hath brought us into the wisdom of the righteous , unto the knowledge of the gospel , and of salvation , oh that we could drive on through that to God he hath made us more Israel then Israel itself , and whereas we were once the furthest off of any nation from this wisdom , he hath brought this wisdom to us , to no nation nearer . Now what thankfulness doth so great a mercy call for , for its bestowing ? and what prayers for its continuance ? Blessed be the Lord God of Israel which thus hath visited his persons with his gospel , and redeemed them out of the darkness of superstition . And the blessing of the god of Israel be still upon his own gift , that it May continue and still flourish among us : let not the candle which he himself hath lighted be ever put out : nor let the candlestick which he himself hath placed , be ever moved out of its place : let scattered popery never cloud us again , nor superstition overwhelm us . Let religion and the gospel be in all our borders , and peace and truth in all our times . And to these our praises , and to these our prayers let all the persons say amen . 

amen and amen . 

Finis . 

Die mercurii 29.  Martii . 1643.  

It is this day ordered by the Commons house of parliament , that Sir Edward Littleton , a member of the said house , do return thanks to Mr. Lightfoot , for the great pains he took in the sermon he preached this day at saint Margaret's in the city of Westminster , at the entreaty of the said house , it being the day of public humiliation ; and that he entreat him to print his sermon : and it is ordered that no man shall print the said sermon but who shall be authorised under the handwriting of the said Mr. Lightfoot . 

H. Elsing cler.  Parl. d. com.  

I appoint Andrew Crook to print my sermon . 

John Lightfoot . 





r. sol. in ex. 21  Luke 2. 46.  talm. in Sanhed . cap. dine . mammonoth . 

mat. 10. 36.  Antonio di Guevarra in rel•x de los princip. lib. 1. cap. 2.  the apocrypha injurious to the two testaments . * 1 king. 6. 27.  how the apocrypha came into request . how it continue . vid. r. sol. & r. menal. in lo . 1 king. 7. 21.  luk. 10. 1.  the ministry of John the beginning of the gospel . the ministry of John , of two parts . baptism used under the law . ab. ezr. in gen. 35.  tom. 1. p. 317.  Azure blah . perek 13.  1 king. 5. 15. 16.  * 49 / 8 vid. r. sol. •arch in ex. 24.  observ. Jews corruption in manner . talm. sanh . pag. 97.  r. dav. kimek on Isay 59  Jews vehement addiction to their traditions and legal rites . 2 king. 5. 11.  Jew's misconceit concerning the Messiah . Esay 53. 2.  zech. 9 9  John 7. 42.  Acts 13. 27.  dan. 9 26.  jer. •1 . 9  matth. 5. 29. 30.  judg. 9 9  judg. 12. 6.  the second part . ezek. 37. 19  observ. de elia praeterito vid. r. lev. gersh in 1 reg. 27.  De vent . vid. r. dav. Kimeh . in mal. 4.  sic etiam bed• in l•o & amb. epiph. &c.  Haeres 70.  vid. cornel. à lapide in apoc. 11. 3.  Aleazer , ibid. the two witnesses , rev. 11 ▪ a ministry in the spirit and power of Moses and Elias at the Jews conversion . tropical phrases . Luke 9 33.  luk. 16. 12.  gal. 1. 8.  2 cor. 4. 7.  2 thes. 2. 8. vid. chald. paron Esay . 11. 4. in edit. Buxtorf . Easeb . hist. eccles. lib. 3. cap. 39  joh. 10. 41.  2 king. 2. 15.  num. 11. 25.  observ. exod. 26. 40.  & 26. 30.  & 27. 8.  Heb. 8. 4. 5.  vid. r. d. Rimchi in reg. & in Molach . Elias his zeal . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , he is besides himself , in the Syriack . Arab. vulg. . Lat. ital. of Deodate , the Spanish hath it , he goeth out of his calling & estate , in marg. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} in the lxx. gen. 45. 26.  1 king. 18. 19 40.  1 king. 22. 6.  vid. Carthis . Maldon . in Lec . Joseph . Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 2.  fathers and children , Jews and gentiles . John 1. 7.  Joseph ant. lib. 18. cap. 7.  gen. 3. 15.  matth. 15. 26.  Acts 11. 18.  reas. 1.  Esay 11. 6 , 7.  reas. 2.  reas. 3.  use 1.  acts and mon. old edit. pag. 10• . use 2.  2 king. 9 22.  Belial , i. e. an idol . the children of Belial , i. e. idolaters . difference of allegation . reason of it ▪  disobedient . {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , disobedient or unbelieving . matth. 1. 4.  observ. rab. Abhuhabh in ner. 1.  hab. 2 , 4.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} : folly ▪ psal. 85. 9  observ. {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . In the wisdom  observ. the cause of a Jews hatred of a gentile . 1 cor. 2. 2. 4 , 5 , 6 rev. 13. 16. &c.  observ. observ. psal. 145. 9  



























