The labouring saints dismission to rest . 

A sermon preached at the funeral of the right honourable Henry Ireton Lord deputy of Ireland : in the abbey church at Westminster , the 6th . day of February 1651.  

By John Owen , minister of the gospel . 

Licenced and entered according to order . 



London , printed by r. and w. Leybourn , for Philemon Stephens , at the gilded lion in Paul's churchyard . 1652.  

To the honourable , and my very worthy friend colonel Henry Cromwell . 

Sir , 

The ensuing sermon was preached upon as sad an occasion , as on any particular account hath been given to this nation in this our generation . It is now published , as at the desire of very many who love the savour of that perfume which is diffused with the memory of the noble person peculiarly mentioned therein : so also upon the requests of such others , as enables me justly to entitle the doing of it , obedience . being come abroad , it was in my thoughts to have directed it immediately in the first place to her , who of any individual person was most nearly concerned in him . But having observed how near she hath been to be swallowed up of sorrow , and what slow progress , he who took care to seal up instruction to her soul by all dispensations , hath given her hitherto toward a conquest thereof : i was not willing to offer directly a new occasion unto the multitude of her perplexed thoughts about this thing . No doubt , her loss being as great as it could be upon the account of one subject to the law of mortality , as many grains of grief and sorrow are to be allowed her in the balance of the sanctuary , as God doth permit to be laid out and dispended about any of the sons of men . He who is able to make sweet the bitterest , waters , & to give a gracious issue to the most grievous trial , will certainly , in due time , eminently bring forth that good upon her spirit , which he is causing all these things to work together for . In the mean time , Sir , these lines are to you : your near relation to that rare example of righteousness , faith , holiness , zeal , courage , self-denial , love to his country , wisdom and industry , mentioned in the ensuing sermon , the mutual tender affection between you whilst he was living ; your presence with him in his last trial and conflict , the deserved regard you bear to his worth and memory ; your design of looking into , and following after his steps and purpose in the work of God in his generation , as such an accomplished pattern , as few ages have produced the like ; with many other reasons of the like nature , did easily induce me hereunto . That which is here printed is but the notes i first took , not having had leisure since to give them a serious perusal , and upon that account , must beg a candid interpretation unto any thing that May appear not so well digested therein as Might be expected . I have not any thing to express concerning yourself , but only my desire 's that your heart May be fixed to the Lord God of your fathers , and that in the midst of all your temptations and oppositions wherewith your pilgrimage will be attended , you May be carried on and established in your inward subjection unto , and outward contending for the kingdom of the dearly beloved of our souls ; not fainting , or waxing weary until you receive your dismission to rest , for your lot in the end of the days . 

Sir , Your most humble and affectionate servant John Owen . ox. ch. ch.  April . 2d . 

The labouring saints dismission to rest : 

dan. 12. 13.  

but go thou thy way till the end be , for thou shalt rest , and stand in the lot at the end of the days . 

The words of my text having no dependence ( As to their sense & meaning , but only as to the occasion of them ) on the verses foregoing , i shall not at all look backward into the chapter , but fall immediately upon them , that i be not hindered from my principal intendment ; being unwilling to detain you long , though willing to speak a word from the Lord , to such a congregation gathered together by such an eminent act of the providence of God . 

The words are the Lord's dismission given to a most eminent servant , from a most eminent employment , wherein these four things are observable . 

1 the dismission itself in the first words , go thou thy ways . 
2 the term allotted for his continuance , under that dismission , until the end be . 
3 his state and condition under that dismission , for thou shalt rest . 
4 the utmost issue of all this dispensation , both as to his foregoing labour , his dismission and rest following , stand in thy lot at the end of the days . 
Go thou thy ways , &c.  

In the first , i shall consider two things . 

1 the person dismissed , ( thou ) go thou thy ways . 
2 the dismission itself , go thou thy ways . 
1 the person dismissed is Daniel , the writer of this prophecy , who received all the great visions of God mentioned therein , and i desire to observe concerning him as to our purpose in hand , two things . 

1 his qualifications . secondly , his employment . 

For the first , i shall only name some of them that were most eminent in him , and they are three . 

1 wisdom . 2 love to his persons . 3 uprightness and righteousness in the discharge of that high place whereunto he was advanced . 

for the first , the holy ghost beareth ample testimony thereunto , dan. 1. 17 , 20.  As for these four children , God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom , and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams . 

And in all matters of wisdom , and understanding that the King enquired of them , he found them ten times better than all the magicians and astrologers that were in all his realm . 

in all matters of wisdom , and understanding none in the whole Babylonian empire full of wisemen and artists , were to be compared unto Daniel and his companions , and Ezekiel , 28. 3. rebuking the pride and arrogancy of Tyrus with a bitter scorn , he says ; behold , thou art wiser than Daniel , or thou thinkest thyself so , intimating that none in wisdom was to be compared unto him . 

2 love to his persons . on this account was his most diligent enquiry into the time of their deliverance , and his earnest contending with God upon the discovery of the season , when it was to be accomplished , cha. 9 1 , 2 , 3 , 4.  Hence he is reckoned amongst them , who in their generation stood in the gap , in the behalf of others , Noah , Daniel and Job . hence God calls the persons of the Jews , his persons , ch. 9 24  Seventy weeks are determined on thy persons : the persons of thy affections and desires , the persons of whom thou art , and who are so dear unto thee , 

3 for his righteousness in discharging of his trust and office , you have the joint testimony of God and man : his high place and preferment you have ; chap. 6. 2. he was the first of the three precedents who were set over the hundred & twenty other Princes of the provinces ; & the holy ghost tells you that in the discharge of this high trust and great employment , he was faithful to the utmost , verse 4.  Then the precedents and Princes sought to find occasion against Daniel concerning the kingdom , but they could find none occasion nor fault : forasmuch as he was faithful , neither was there any error or fault found in him . which also his enemies confessed , verse 3.  Then said these men , we shall not find any occasion against this Daniel , except we find it against him concerning the law of his god . 

These qualifications i say amongst others were most eminent in this person , who here received his dismission from his employment . 

Secondly , there is his employment itself , from which he is dismissed , and herein i shall only observe these two things . 

1 the nature of the employment itself . 
2 some considerable circumstances of it . 
For the first , it consisted in receiving from God , and holding out to others clear and express visions concerning God's wonderful providential alterations in kingdoms , and nations , which were to be accomplished , from the days wherein he lived , to the end of the world . All the prophets together had not so many clear discoveries , as this one Daniel concerning these things . 

2 for the latter , this is observable , that all his visions still close with some eminent exaltation of the kingdom of Christ ; that is the centre where all the lines of his visions do meet , as is to be seen in the close almost of every chapter , and this was the great intendment of the spirit in all those glorious revelations unto Daniel , to manifest the subserviency of all civil revolutions unto the interest of the kingdom of the Lord Christ . 

This then is the person concerning whom these words were used , and this was his employment . 

2 there is his dismission itself , go thou thy ways , now this May be considered two ways , 

1 singly , relating to his employment only . 
2 in reference to his life also . 
In the first sense , the Lord dischargeth Daniel from his further attendance on him , in this way of receiving visions and revelations concerning things that were shortly to come to pass , although happily his portion Might yet be continue in the land of the living : as if the Lord should say . Thou art an enquiring man , thou art still seeking for further acquaintance with my mind in these things , but content thyself , thou shalt receive no more visions ; i will now employ Haggai , Zechariah , and others , thou shalt receive no more , but i cannot close with this sense , for ; 

1 this is not the manner of God to lay aside those whom he hath found faithful in his service , men indeed do so , but God chaneth nat : whom he hath begun to honour with any employment , he continueth them in it , whilst they are faithful to him . 

2 Daniel was now above an 100 years old , as May be easily demonstrated by comparing the time of his captivity , which was in the third year of the reign of Jehojakim , chap. 1. 1. with the time of his writing this prophecy , which is expressly said to be in the reign of Cyrus the King of Persia , chap. 10. 1. and therefore probably his end was very nigh ; and after this you hear of him no more ; who had he lived many days , it had been his sin , not to have gone up to Jerusalem , the decree of Cyrus giving liberty for a return being passed . 

It is not then gods laying him aside from his office simply , but also his intimation that he must shortly lay down his mortality , and so come into the condition wherein he was to rest until the end ; this then is his dismission , he died in his work , life and employment go together , go thou thy ways . 

Obs. 1.  there is an appointed season wherein the saints of the most eminent abilities , in the most useful employment , must receive their dismission , be their work of never so great importance , be their abilities never so choice and eminent , they must in their season receive their dismission . 

Before i handle this proposition , or proceed to open the following words , i shall crave leave to bring the work of God , and the word of God , a little close together , and lay the parallel between the persons dismissed , the one in our text , the other in a present providence , which is very near , only that the one lived not out half the days of the other . 

Three personal qualifications we observed in Daniel , all which were very eminent in the person of our desires . 

1 wisdom . there is a manifold wisdom , which God imparteth to the sons of men ; there is spiritual wisdom , that by the way of eminency is said to be from above , jam. 3. 17. which is nothing but the gracious acquaintance of the soul with the hidden wisdom of God in Christ , 1 cor. 2. 7. and there is a civil wisdom , or a sound ability of mind for the management of the affairs of men in subordination to the providence , and righteousness of God . Though both these were in Daniel , yet it is in respect of the latter that his wisdom is so peculiarly extolled . And though i am very far from assuming to myself the skill of judging of the abilities of men , and would be far from holding forth things of mere common report , yet , upon assured grounds i suppose this gift of God , ability of mind , and dextrous industry for the management of human affairs May be ascribed to our departed friend . 

There are sundry things that distinguish this wisdom from that policy which God abhors , which is carnal , sensual and devilish , jam. 3. 15. though it be the great darling of the men of the world ; i shall name one or two of them . 

1 a gracious discerning of the mind of God , according to his appearance in the affairs wherein men are employed , Micah 6. 9 the Lord's voice cryeth unto the city , the man of wisdom shall see thy name , hear the rod , and who hath appointed it . It is the wisdom of a man , to see the name of God , to be acquainted with his will , his mind , his aim in things , when his providential voice crieth to the city . all the works of God have their voice , have their instruction : those of signal providences speak aloud , they cry to the city ; here is the wisdom of a man , he is a man of substance , a substantial man , that can see his name in such dispensations . this carnal policy inquires not into , but is wholly swallowed up in the concatenation of things among themselves , applying secondary causes unto events , without once looking to the name of God , like swine following acorns under the tree , not at all looking up to the tree from whence they fall . 

2 such acquaintance with the seasons of providence , as to know the duty of the persons of God in them , 1 chron. 12. 32. the children of Issachar , men that had understanding of the times , to know what Israel ought to do : this it is indeed to be a man of understanding , to know in any season the duty of Israel , that they May walk up to acceptation with God in the performance thereof . A thing which is neither prescribed in the rules , nor followed in the practice of men , wise only with that cursed polity which God abhors : to have a mind suited unto all seasons and tempers , so as to compass their own selfish ends , is the utmost of their aim . 

Now in both these did this gift of God shine in this deceased saint . 

1 he ever Counted it his wisdom to look after the name of God , and the testification of his will , in every dispensation of providence , wherein he was called to serve : for this were his wakings , watchings , inquiries ; when that was made out , he Counted not his business half done , but even accomplished , and that the issue was ready at the door ; not what saith this man , or what saith that man , but what saith the Lord ? that being evident ; he consulted not with flesh and blood , and the wisdom of it , ( Whereof perhaps , would he have leaned to it , he was as little destitute as any in his generation , i mean the whole wisdom of a man . ) The name of God was as land in every storm , in the discovery whereof , he had as happy an eye at the greatest seeming distance when the clouds were blackest , and the waves highest , as any . 

2 neither did he rest here : what Israel ought to do , in every season , was also his enquiry ; some men have a wisdom to know things , but not seasons in any measure ; surely a thing in season , is no less beautiful than a word in season : as apples of gold in pictures of silver : there are few things which belong to civil affairs , but are alterable upon the incomprehensible variety of circumstances . These alter and change the very nature of them , and make them good or bad , that is useful or destructive . He that will have the garment that was made for him one year , serve him and fit him the next , must be sure that he neither increase nor wane . Importune insisting on the most useful things , without respect to alterations of seasons , is a sad sign of a narrow heart . He of whom we speak , was wise to discern the seasons , and performed things , when both themselves , and the ways of carrying them on were excellently suited unto all coincidences of their season . And indeed , what is most wisely proposed in one season , May be most foolishly pursued in another . It had been wisdom in Joshua not to have made any compact , but to have slain all the gibeonites ; but it was a folly sorely revenged in Saul , who attempted to do the same . He who thinks the most righteous and suitable proposals or principles , that ever were in the world ( Setting aside general rules of unchangeable righteousness , and equity compassing all times , places , ways and forms of government ) must be performed as desirable , because once they were so , is certainly a stranger to the affairs of human kind . 

Some things are universally unchangeable and indispensable amongst mem , supposing them to live answerable to the general principles of their kind : as that a government must be , without which , every one is the enemy of every one ; and all tend to mutual destruction , which are appointed of God for mutual preservation , that in government some do rule , and some be in subjection , that all rule be for the good of them that are ruled , and the like principles that flow necessarily from the very nature of political society . 

Some things again are alterable & dispensable , merely upon the account of preserving the former principles , or the like : if any of them are out of course , it is a vacuum in nature politic , for which all particular elements instantly dislodge and transpose themselves to supply , and such are all forms of government amongst men , which if either they so degenerate of themselves that they become directly opposite , or are so shattered by providential revolutions as to become useless to their proper end , May and aught to be changed , and not upon other accounts : but now for other things in government , as the particular way , whereby persons shall be designed unto it , the continuance of the same persons in it , for a less or a greater proportion of time , the exercise of more or less power by some sorts , or the whole body of them that are ruled , the uniting of men for some particular ends by bonds & engagements , and the like occasional emergencies , the universal disposal of them is rolled on prudence to act according to present circumstances . 

2 love to his persons : this was the second qualification , wherein Daniel was so eminent . And our deceased friend , not to enter into comparison with them that went before , had clearly such a proportion , as we May heartily desire that those who follow after , May drink but equal draughts of the same cup ; that as his pains , labour , travel , jeopards of his life , and all that was dear to him , relinquishment of relations and contentments , had sweetness and life from this motive , even intenseness of affection to his persons , the persons of whom he was , and whose prosperity he did desire , needs no further demonstration , than the great neglect of self and all self-concernments which dwelled upon him , in all his tremendous undertakings : vicit amor patriae , or certainly he who had upon his breast and all his undertakings self-contempt so eminently engraven , could not have persisted wrestling with so many difficulties , to the end of his days : it was Jerusalem , and the prosperity thereof , which was preferred to his chief joy . neither 

3 did he come short in righteousness in the administration of that high place whereto he was called ? nay , than this , there was not a more eminent stone in that diadem which he had in the earth . If he lay not at the bottom , yet at least he had a signal concurrence in such acts of justice , as antiquity hath not known , and posterity will admire . Neither was it this or that particular act that did in this bespeak his praise , but a constant will and purpose of rendering to every one his due . 

I shall not insist upon particulars , in these and sundry other personal qualifications , between the persons mentioned a parallel May lie . 

2 as to employment , that of Daniel was mentioned before : it was the receiving , and holding out from God , visions of signal providential alterations , disposing and transposing of states , nations , kingdoms , and dominions ; what he had in speculation , was this man's part to follow in action , he was an eminent instrument in the hand of God in as tremendous providential alteration , as such a spot of the world hath at any time received since Daniel , foresaw in general them all : and this , not as many have been carried along with the stream , or led by outward motives , and considerations far above their own principles and desires , but seeingly and knowingly , he closed with the mind of God , with full purpose of heart , to serve the will of the Lord in his generation . and on this account did he see every mountain made a plain beforehand , by the spirit of the Lord , and staggered not at the greatest difficulties , through unbelief , but being steadfast in faith , he gave glory to God . and to complete the parallel , as Daniel's visions were still terminated in the kingdom of Christ ; so all his actions had the same aim and intendment . This was that which gave life , and sweetness to all the most dismal and black engagements that at anytime he was called out unto . All made way to the coming in of the promised glory . It was all the vengeance of the Lord and his temple . a davidicall preparation of his paths in blood , that he Might for ever reign in righteousness and peace ; but be he so or so , the truth of our proposition is confirmed towards him . 

There is an appointed season when the saints of the most eminent abilities in the most useful employments shall receive their dismission , &c.  

I shall briefly open the rest of the words , and so take up the proposition again , which was first laid down . 

2 then , there is the term allotted to him in this state of his dismission , until the end be . 

Three things May be here intended in this word end , until the end be . 

1 the end of his life , go thou thy ways to the end of thy life , and days ; but this we before disallowed , not consenting that Daniel received a dismission from his employment , before the end of his life and pilgrimage . 

2 the end of the world , go thy ways to the end of the world : till than thou shalt rest in thy grave ; but neither yet doth this seem to be peculiarly intended in these words . The words in the close of the text do expressly mention that , calling it the end of the days ; and in so few words , the same thing is not needlessly repeated : besides , had this expression held out the whole time of his abode in the state of rest here signified , it must have been , go thou thy ways , for thou shalt rest until the end be ; so that , 

Thirdly , the end here is to be accommodated unto the things , whereof the holy ghost is peculiarly dealing with Daniel ; and that is the accomplishment of the great visions which he had received , in breaking the kingdoms of the world , and setting up the kingdom of the holy one of God : Daniel is dismissed from further attendance in this service , he shall not see the actual accomplishment of the things mentioned , but is dismissed and laid , aside unto the end of them . The word , until , in the scripture is not such a limitation of time , as to assert the contrary to what is excepted , upon its accomplishment : until the end , doth not signify , that he should not rest after the end of the things intimated , no more than it is affirmed that Michal had children after her death , because it is said , that until her death , she had none , 2 sam. 6. 23. this then is that end that he is dismissed unto ; the appointed season for the accomplishment of those glorious things which he had foreshown . 

obs. God oftentimes suffers not his choicest servants to see the issue and accomplishment of these glorious things wherein themselves have been most eminently engaged . 

3 the third thing ( That we May make haste ) is his state and condition , during the time which he lies under this dismission , in these words , for thou shalt rest . 

There is nothing of difficulty in these words , but what will naturally fall under consideration in the opening of the proposition which they hold out ; which is 

Obs. 3.  the condition of a dismissed saint is a condition of rest , thou shalt rest until the end be . what this rest is , and from what , with wherein it consists , shall be afterwards explained . 

4 the last thing in the text is ; the utmost issue of all these dispensations , both as to his foregoing labour , and his present dismission , and following rest . Thou shalt stand in thy lot , &c.  

Here are two things considerable in these words , the season of the accomplishment of what is here foretold , and promised unto Daniel , and that is in the end of the days , that is , when time shall be no no more , when a period shall be put to the days of the world : called the last day , the great day , the day of judgement ; that is the season of the accomplishment of this promise , the day wherein God will judge the world , by the man whom he hath ordained . 

obs. there is an appointed determinate season , wherein all things and persons according to the will of God will run into their utmost issue and everlasting condition . 

2 the thing foretold , and promised , that is , that he should stand in his lot . 

obs. there is an appointed lot for every one to stand in , and measured portion , which in the end they shall receive . 

2 there is an eminent lot hereafter , for men of eminent employment for God here . 

I shall not be able to handle all these several truths which lie in the words ; those only which are of most importance and most suitable , May briefly be handled unto you , and the first is , 

there is an appointed season wherein the saints of the most eminent abilities , in the most useful employments must receive their dismission , zach. 1. 5.  Your fathers where are they ? and the prophets do they live for ever ? fathers , and prophets have but their season , and they are not : they have their dismission ; so old Simeon professeth , nunc dimittis , Luke 2. 29.  Now thou givest me a dismission : they are placed of God in their station , as a centinel in his watchtower , and they have their appointed season , and are then dismissed from their watch . The great captain of their salvation comes , and saith , go thou thy ways , thou hast faithfully discharged thy duty ; go now unto thy rest . Some have harder service : some have harderduty than others : some keep guard in the winter , a time of storms and temptations , trials and great pressures : others in the sunshine , the summer of a more flourishing estate and condition ; yet duty they all do ; all attend in the service ; all endure some hardship , and have their appointed season for their dismission : and be they never so excellent at the discharging of their duty , they shall not abide one moment beyond the bounds which he hath set them , who saith to all his creatures , thus far shall you go and no further . oftentimes this dismission is in the midst of their work , for which they seem to be most eminently qualified . 

The three most eminent works of God , in and about his children , in days of old , were 1 his giving his persons the law , and settling them in the land of Canaan . 2 his recovering them from the Babylonish captivity , and 3 his promulgation of the gospel unto them . In these three works , he employed three most eminent persons ; Moses . in the first ; Daniel in the second , and John Baptist in the third , and neither of them saw the work accomplished , wherein they were so eminently employed : Moses died the year before the persons entered Canaan : Daniel , some few years before the foundation of the temple : and John Baptist in the first year of the baptism of our saviour , when the gospel which he began to preach , was to be published in its beauty and glory . They had all but their appointed seasons , though their abilities were eminent : who like unto them , and their employment excellent , what like it in the earth ? yet at their seasons , they must go their ways to rest , and lie down , till they stand in their lot at the end of the days . 

reas. 1.  The general condition of their mortality doth require that it should be so : it is appointed to all men once to die , heb. 9 27.  There is a stable law fixed concerning the sons of men , that is not upon the account of any usefulness here to be dispensed withal , the number of our months are with God ; he hath fixed our bounds , which we shall not pass : our days are as the days of an hireling , that have a certain prefixed and determinate end : their strength is not the strength of stones , neither is their flesh of brass , that they should endure for ever . See Job 14 , 10 , 11 , 12.  This ( I say ) requires that there should be an appointed season for their employment , for it is so for their lives : and yet there is more in it then this : for in the course of 5000 years , God hath exempted two persons by his sovereignty from the condition of mortality , who walked with him in their generations . So that the bounds fixed to them were not upon the account of their lives , but merely of the work they had in hand . 

2 God doth it , that he May be the more eminently seen in the carrying on his own works , which in their season he commits to them . Should he leave his work always on one hand it would seem at length to be the work of the instrument only . Though the persons opposed Moses at the first , yet it is thought they would have worshipped him at the last : and therefore God buried him where his body could not be found . Yet indeed he had but the lot of most , who faithfully serve God in their generations : despised whilst they are present , idolised when they are gone . I do not know of any great work , that the Lord carried out the same persons to be the beginners and enders of . He gave them all their seasons , that his power and wisdom Might the more evidently appear in carrying it from one hand to another . 

3 God makes room as it were in his vineyard , for the budding , flourishing and fruit-bearing of other plants which he hath planted . Great employments call for great exercise of graces . Even in employments in and about providential things , there is the exercise of spiritual grace : as much faith and prayer , as much communion with God , walking before him and wrestling with him , May be used in casting down of armies , as in setting up of churches : God exerciseth all the graces of his , in the work he calleth them out unto . He principles them , by faith and fellowship with himself , for their employment ; and therefore he gives each individual , but his appointed season , that others in whose hearts he hath lodged the same spirit wherewith they are endued , May come forth , and show the fruits thereof . Daniel lieth down in the dust , in rest and peace , and why so ? the spirit of prophecy is poured out on Haggai and Ze•hariah , &c. they must also carry on this work , and bear my name before my persons . Consider the use of this . 

use 1. of exhortation unto all that are employed in the work of God , especially such as with eminent abilities are engaged in eminent employments , you have but your allotted season for your work : your day hath its close , its evening : your night cometh , wherein none can work : the grave cannot praise the Lord , death cannot celebrate him , it 's the living , the living that are fitted for that work , isa. 38. 18 , 19  It is true , men May allot you your season , and all in vain , but your times are in the hand of God ; that which he hath appointed out unto you shall stand ; be you never so excellent , never so useful , yet the days of your service are as the days of an hireling , that will expire at the appointed season : be wise then to improve the time that is in your hands ; this is the praise of a man , the only praise whereof in this world he is partaker , that he doth the will of God , before he fall asleep : that he faithfully serves his generation , until he be no more . 

For a dying man to wrestle with the rebukes of God , and the complaints of his own conscience , for meeting with the end of his days , before he hath attained the midst of his duty , is a sad condition . 

You have your season , and you have but your season , neither can you lie down in peace , until you have some persuasion that your work as well as your life is at an end ; what ever then you find to do , do it with all your strength , for there is neither wisdom , nor power in the grave whither you are going , ecclesiast . 9 10.  

Some particular rules May direct you herein . 

1 compare your selves with the saints of God , who were faithful in their generations , and are now fallen asleep ; what a deal of work did Josiah do in a short season ? what a light did John set up in a few years ? with what unwearied pains and industry did our deceased friend serve his generation ? It is said of Caesar , that he was ashamed of his own sloth , when he found that Alexander had conquered the Eastern world , at the age wherein he had done nothing . Behold here , one receiving his dismission about the age of 40 years , and what a world of work for God , and the interest of the Lord Christ did he in that season ? and how well in the close , hath he parted with a temporal life for him , who by his death procured for him an eternal life , and now rest is sweet unto this labouring man . Provoke one another by examples . 

2 be diligent to pass through your work , & let it not too long hang upon your hands : your appointed season May come before you bring it to the close ; yea search out work for God . You that are entrusted in power , trifle not away your season . Is there no oppressed person that with diligence you Might relieve ? is there no poor distressed widow or orphan , whose righteous requests you Might expedite and dispatch ? are there no stout offenders against God and man that Might be chastized ? are there no slack and slow counties and cities in the execution of justice , that Might be quickened by your example ? No places destitute of the gospel that Might be furnished and supplied by your industry and wisdom ? can you not find out something of these or the like nature to be dispatched with vigour and diligence ? nay do not innumerable particulars in each kind lie upon your hands ? And is not your performance of them such a sacrifice as wherewith God is not well pleased ? your time is limited and appointed , you know not how soon you May be overtaken with it ; and would it not be desirable unto you , that you had done these things ? will it be bitterness in the end , that you so laid out your endeavours ? 

use 3.  All men have but their seasons in any work , only God abideth in it for ever : in every undertaking let your eye still be on him , with whom is the fullness and the residue of the spirit . Jeremiah's great bewailing of Josiah's death was doubtless made upon the account of his discerning that none would come after him to carry on the work which he had begun , but the wickedness of that persons was come to their height : else God can raise up yet more Josiah's : let him be eyed as the principal and only abiding agent in any great undertaking . 

In the residue of the observations i shall be very brief . The next is . 

obs. 2 God oftentimes suffers not the choicest of his servants to see the accomplishment of those glorious things wherein themselves have been most eminently engaged . 

The case of Moses is most eminently known , he had a large share in suffering the persecutions which were allotted to the persons : 40 years' banishment he endured in the wilderness , under the reproach of Christ 40 years more spent in wrestling with innumerable difficulties , dangerous perils , mutinies , wars and contentions . At the close when he comes to look upon the laud , when the end of all that dispensation was to be wound up , and the rest and reward of all his toil and labour to be had , which formerly he had undergone for twice 40 years ; go thou thy ways , saith the Lord , thou shalt rest , take thy dismission , thou shalt not enter into the good land , lie down here in the wilderness in peace . 

John Baptist goes and preaches the drawing nigh of the kingdom of God , but lived only to point out Christ with his finger , cries ; behold the lamb of God , i must decrease , and is cut off . David makes the great preparation for the temple , but he shall not see so much as the foundation laid . Men must take their appointed lot . God will send by the hand of him whom he will send . Daniel must rest until the end be . it is said of some they began to deliver Israel . the case of Zerobbabel was very rare , who saw the foundation , and also the top-stone of the temple laid , and yet the work of Jerusalem was not half finished in his days , as you May see , zach. chap. 1.  

reason 1.  God oftentimes receives secret provocations from the choicest of his servants , which moves him to take them short of their desires . Those of his own whom he employs in great works , have great and close communion with him . God usually exercises their spirits in near acts of fellowship with himself : they receive much from him , and are constrained to unburthen themselves frequently upon him ; now when men are brought into an intimacy with God , and have received great engagements from him , the Lord takes notice of every working and acting of their souls in an especial manner , and is oftentimes grieved and provoked with that in them which others can take no notice of : let a man read the story of that action of Moses , upon which the Lord told him directly he should not see the finishing of the work he had in hand , nor enter into Canaan , numb 20. 7 , 8 , 11.  It will be a hard matter , to find out wherein the failing was : he smote the rock with the rod , with some words of impatience , when he should only have spoken to it , and this with some secret unbelief , as to the thing he had in hand : God deals with others visibly , according to their outward actions , but in his own he takes notice of all their unbelief , fears , withdrawings , as proceeeding from a frame in no measure answering those gracious discoveries of himself , which he hath made unto them , and on this account it is , that some are taken off in the midst of their work . 

2 to manifest that he hath better things in store for his saints then the best and utmost of what they can desire or aim at here below . He had a heaven for Moses , and therefore Might in love and mercy deny him Canaan . he employeth some eminently , their work is great , their end glorious , at the very last step almost of their journey , he takes off one and another , let 's them not see the things aimed at : this May be thought hard measure , strict severity , exact justice , yea as Job complains , taking advantages against them ; see but what he calls them to , in calling them off from their greatest glories and excellencies on the earth , and all this will appear to be love , tenderness and favour in the highest . Whilst you are labouring for a handful of first fruits , he gives you the full harvest ; whilst you are labouring for the figure here below , he gives you the substance above . Should you see the greatest work , wherein any of you were ever engaged , brought to perfection , yet all were but as a few drops compared with that fullness which he hath prepared for you . The Lord then doth it to witness to the children of men , that the things which are seen the best of them , are not to be compared with the things that are not seen , yea the least of them , in as much as he takes them whom he will honour , from the very door of the one , to bear them into the other . The meanest enjoyment in heaven is to be preferred before the richest on earth , even than when the kingdom of Christ shall come in most beauty and glory . 

use 2.  You that are engaged in the work of God , seek for a reward of your service in the service itself . Few of you May live to see that beauty & glory which perhaps you aim at as the end of all your great undertakings for God , whereinto you have been engaged . God will proceed his own pace , and calls on us to go along with him , and in the mean time , until the determinate end come , to wait in faith , and not make haste . Those whose minds are so fixed on , and swallowed up with some end ( though good ) which they have proposed to themselves , do seldom see good days , and serene in their own souls , they have bitterness , wrath and trouble all their days : are still pressing to the end proposed , and commonly are dismissed from their station before it be attained . There is a sweetness , there is a wages to be found in the work of God itself : men who have learned to hold communion with God in every work he calls them out unto , though they never see the main harvest they aim at in general , yet such will rest satisfied and submit to the Lord's limitation of their time : they bear their owue sheaves in their bosoms . Seeing God oftentimes dismisses his choicest servants , before they see , or taste of the main fruits of their endeavours ; i see not upon what account consolation can be had in following the Lord in difficult dispensations , but only in that reward which every duty bringeth along with it , by communion with God in its performance . Make then this your aim , that in sincerity of heart , you do the work of God in your generation : find his presence with you , his spirit guiding you , his love accepting you , in the Lord Christ , and when ever you receive your dismission , it will be rest and peace , in the mean time , you will not make haste . 

2 see a bottom and ground of consolation , when such eminent instruments as this departed worthy , are called off from their station when ready to enter upon the harvest of all their labours , watchings , toilings , and expense of blood , God hath better things for them in store , abiding things , that they shall not enjoy for a day or two , which is the best of what they could hope for here , had they lived to see all their desires accomplished ; but such as in the fullness whereof , they May lie down in peace to eternity . Why do we complain ? for our own loss ? is not the residue , and fullness of the spirit with him , who gave him his dismission ? for his loss , he lived not to see Ireland in peace , but enjoys the glory of that eternal kingdom that was prepared for him before the foundation of the world , which is the condition held out in the third observation . 

Obs. the condition of a dismissed saint is a condition of rest , go thy way , until the end be ; for thou shalt rest . the apostle gives it in as the issue of a discourse from a passage in the psalms , there remaineth , therefore a rest unto the persons of God , heb. 4. 9 it remains , and is reserved for them , this the Lord hath solemnly proclaimed from heaven , revel. 14. 13.  Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord , from henceforth , yea , saith the spirit , that they May rest from their labours , and their works do follow them : they go into a blessed condition of rest ; there is not any notion under which the state of a dismissed saint , is so frequently described as this , of rest , which indeed is the proper end and tendency of all things ; their happiness is their rest ; their rest is all the happiness they can be partakers of : fecisti nos ad te domine , & inquietum est cor nostrum , donec veniat ad te . 

Now rest holds out two things unto us , 1 a freedom from what is opposite thereunto , wherein those that are at rest , have been exercised , in reference whereunto they are said to be at rest . 2 some thing which suits them , and satisfies their nature in the condition wherein they are ; and therefore they are at rest , which they could not be , were it not so with them , for nothing can rest , but in the full fruition , and enjoyment of that which satiates the whole nature of it in all its extent and capacity . We must then briefly inquire , 1 what it is that the saints are at rest from , and secondly , what it is that they are at rest in , which i shall do very speedily . 

1 the many particulars which they are at rest from , May be referred unto two general heads , 1 sin . 2 labour , and travel . 

1 sin ; this on all consideration , whatever , is the main disquietness of the soul ; temptations to it , actings in it , troubles for it , they are the very Egypt of the soul , its house and place of bondage , and vexation ; either the power of it indwelling , or the guilt of it pressing , are here still disquieting the soul . For the first , how doth Paul complain , lament , yea cry out concerning it , rom. 7. 24.  Oh wretched man that i am ! and what a sad , restless , and tumultuating condition upon this account doth he describe in the verses foregoing ? The best , the wisest , the holiest of the saints , on this account are in a restless condition . 

Suppose a man a conqueror in every battle , in every combat that he is engaged in , yet whilst he hath any fighting , though he be never foiled , yet he hath not peace . Though the saints should have success in every engagement against sin , yet because it will still be rebelling , still be fighting , it will disturb their peace . 

2 so also doth the guilt of it ; our saviour testifieth , that a sense of it will make a man to be weary and heavy-laden , mat. 11. 28.  This oftentimes makes the inhabitants of Zion , say they are sick , for though an end be made of sin as to the guilt of it in the blood of Christ , yet by reason of our darkness , folly , and unbelief , and the hiding of the countenance of God , the conscience is oftentimes pressed with it , no less than if it lay indeed under the whole weight and burden of it . 

I shall not instance in more particulars , concerning this cause of want of rest , and disquietness , the perplexity of temptations , buffetings & winnowings of Satan , allurements and affrightments of the world , darkness and sorrows of unbelief , and the like do all set in against us upon this account . 

This in general is the first thing , that the dismissed saints are at rest from : they , sin no more , they wound the Lord Jesus no more , they trouble their own souls no more , they grieve the spirit no more , they dishonour the gospel no more , they are troubled no more with Satan's temptations without , no more with their own corruption within , but lie down in a constant enjoyment of one everlasting victory over sin , with all its attendants : saith the spirit , they rest from their labours , revel. 14. those labours which make them faint , and weary , their contending with sin to the uttermost ; they are no more cold in communion , they have not one thought that wanders off from God to eternity : they lose him no more , but always lie down in his bosom without the least possibility of disturbance . Even the very remembrance of sin is sweet unto them , when they see God infinitely exalted , and admired in the pardon thereof . 

They are free from trouble , and that both as to doing , and suffering : few of the saints , but are called out in one kind or another to both these . Every one is either doing for God , or suffering for God , some both do and suffer great things for him : in either of them there is pain , weariness , travel , labour , trouble , sorrow-and anxiety of spirit ; neither is there any eminent doing or working for God , but is carried on with much suffering to the outward man . 

What a life of labour and trouble did our deceased friend lead for many years in the flesh ? how were his days consumed in travel ? God calling him to his foot , and exercising him to understand the sweetness of that promise , that they that die in him , shall have rest : many spend their days deliciously , with so much contentment to the flesh , that it is impossible they should have any foretaste and sweet relish of their rest that is to come . 

The apostle tells us that there remains a rest for the persons of God ; and yet withal , that they who believe are entered into that rest , those who in their labours , in their travels do take in the sweetness of that promise of rest , do even in their labour make an entrance thereinto . 

This then secondly , they rest from all trouble and anxiety that attend them in their pilgrimage , either in doing or suffering for God . heb. 4. 10 , 7.  They enter into rest , and cease from their work ▪ God wipes all tears from their eyes , there is no more watching , no more fasting , no more wrestling , no more fighting , no more blood , no more sorrow , the ransomed of the Lord do return with everlasting joy on their heads , and sorrow & sighing flyaway . There tyrants pretend no more title to their kingdom ; rebels lie not in wait for their blood ; they are no more awakened by the sound of the trumpet , nor the noise of the instruments of death : they fear not for their relations , they weep not for their friends , the lamb is their temple , and God is all in all unto them . 

2 this will not complete their rest , something further is required thereto : even something to satisfy , everlastingly content and fill them in the state and condition wherein they are . Free them in your thoughts from what you please , without this , they are not at rest . this than you have in the second place , God is the rest of their souls , psal. 116. return to thy rest , oh my sou . Dismissed saints rest in the bosom of God , because in the fruition and enjoyment of him they are everlastingly satisfied , as having attained the utmost end whereto they were create , all the blessedness whereof they are capable . I could almost beg for liberty a little to expatiate in this meditation of the sweet , gracious , glorious , satisfied condition , of a dismissed saint . 

But the time is spent , and therefore without holding out one drop of water to quench the feigned fire of purgatory , or drawing forth any thing to discover the vanity of their assertion , who affirm the soul to sleep , or to be nothing until the resurrection ; or there 's who assigning to them a state of subsistence and perception , do yet exclude them from the fruition of God , without which there is no rest , until the end of all , with such other by-perswasions , as would disquiet the condition , or abridge the glory of those blessed souls , which yet were a facile undertaking , i shall draw towards a close . 

There are 3 points yet remaining , i shall speak only to the first of them , and that as an use of the doctrine last proposed , and i have done . 

1 than you see there is an appointed determinate season , wherein all things and persons , according to the will of God will run into their utmost issue and everlasting condition . thou art going , who ever thou art , into an abiding condition , and there is a lot appointed for thee , wherein lies an estate everlastingly unchangeable . It is the utmost end whereunto thou art designed , and when once thou art entered into that lot , thou art everlastingly engaged : no more change , no more alteration , if it be well with thee , it will abide : if otherwise expect not any relief . In our few days we live for eternity , in our mutable estate we deal for an unchangeable condition . It is not thus only in respect of particulars , but God hath appointed a day , wherein he will judge all the world by the man whom he hath ordained . an end is coming unto all that whole dispensation under which we are . To you who by the riches of free grace have obtained union and communion with the Lord Jesus , rest and peace , when God shall everlastingly rain snares , fire and brimstone upon the workers of iniquity . Some mock indeed , and say , where is the promise of his coming ? but we know , the Lord is not slack , as some men Count slackness , but exerciseth patience until the appointed season , for the bringing about of his own glorious ends , which he hath determined concerning his creatures . Why should we then complain , when any one , perhaps before our expectation , but yet according to God's determination , makes an entrance into the end of all ? All things work , to that season . This state of things is not for continuance . That which is incumbent , is in this uncertain space of time allotted to us , to give all diligence to make our calling and election sure , as also to serve the Lord faithfully in our generations , wherein we cannot be surprised : we have an example in him who is gone before ; it is true , the Lord Jesus is our primitive pattern and example : but those also who have followed him , wherein they have followed him , are to be eyed and marked as provocations to the same labour of faith and love , wherein they were exercised . And that this use May be made by this assembly , i shall add one word concerning him from whom is the occasion thereof . 

Every man stands in a threefold capacity . 1 natural 2 civil . 3 religious . And there are distinct qualifications , that are suited unto these several capacities . to the first as the ornaments and perfections of nature , are suited some seeds of those heroical virtues , as courage , permanency in business , &c. which being in themselves morally indifferent , have their foundations eminently laid in the natures of some persons , which yet hinders not , but that their good improvement is of grace . 

2 to the second , or man's civil capacity , there are many eminencies relating as peculiar endowments , which May be referred unto the three heads of ability , faithfulness , and industry , that through them neither by weakness , treachery nor sloth the works and employments incumbent on men in their civil state and condition May suffer . 

3 men's peculiar ornament and improvement in their religious capacity , lies in those fruits of the spirit which we call Christian graces : of these in respect of usefulness there are three most eminent , viz. faith , love , and self-denial . i speak of them upon another account then the apostle doth , where he placeth hope amongst the first three of Christian graces . Now all these in their several kinds were as eminent in the person deceased in his several capacities , as perhaps is usually found in any one in a generation . My business is not to make a funeral oration . only i suppose that without offence i May desire , that in courage and permanency in business , ( Which i name in opposition to that unsettled pragmatical shuffling disposition which is in some men ) in ability for wisdom and counsel , in faithfulness to his trust and in his trust , in indefatigable industry in the pursuit of the work committed to him , in faith on the promises of God , and acquaintance with his mind in his mighty works of providence , in love to the Lord Jesus and all his saints , in a tender regard to their interest , delight in their society , contempt of himself and all his for the gospel's sake , with eminent self-denial in all his concernments , in impartiality and sincerity in the execution of justice , that in these and the like things we May have many raised up in the power and spirit wherein he walked before the Lord , and the inhabitants of his nation . This ( I say ) i hope i May speak without offence he upnn such an occasion as this ; my business being occasionally to preach the word , not to carry on a part of a funeral ceremony , i shall add no more , but commit you to him , who is able to prepare you for your eternal condition . 

Finis . 











