Light or darkness , displaying or hiding itself , as it pleaseth , and from or to whom it pleaseth : arraigning , judging , condemning , both the shame and glory of the creature , in all its several breakings forth from , and appearances in , the creature . Held forth to public view in a sermon , a letter , and several other inward openings . 

Through Isaac Penington , ( junior ) esq 

jer. 4. ver. 23 , 24 , 25 , 26.  

I beheld the earth , and lo , it was without form and void : and the heavens , and they had no light . 

I beheld the mountains , and lo , they trembled ; and all the hills moved lightly . 

I beheld , and lo , there was no man , and all the birds of the heavens were fled . 

I beheld , and lo , the fruitful place was a wilderness , and all the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the Lord , and by his fierce anger . 



London , printed by John Macock . m. dc . L.  

To the reader . 

Reader , 

Behold , ( If thou hast an eye to pierce into the inward state of things , ) look steadfastly , and thou shalt see a strange sight : one who hath been deeply affected with wisdom , true wisdom , heavenly wisdom , spiritual wisdom , inward wisdom , and vehemently pursuing it from the womb ; being still encouraged by some tastes of it , and certain lively hopes of further attaining and enjoying its sweetness ; at length wholly stripped of all his riches in this kind , and his desire after it again ( Though it remained strong a a good while after the loss ) quite taken from him also . 

Never was i perfectly at enmity with any thing but folly . it was not simply sin that i was at variance with , but the foolishness of sin . I knew well enough that God and the creature had an hand in the same act , even in every act of sin : i could bear with it in God , because he knew how to do it wisely ; but i could not bear with it in the creature , because it did it so foolishly . that which made God so lovely in my eye , was chiefly his wisdom , which to me was the crown of his love , power , goodness , and all his other excellencies , which , unless possessed by wisdom , and managed by wisdom , would , to my eye , have had no lustre in them , but deformity . That which made the creature so unlovely still to me , as it hath always been , was its folly , which hath made all the excellencies of the creature ( Wherewith it hath at any time been clothed , and whereby it shined in the eyes of others ) so fulsome to me , that my spirit hath still turned as much from them , and from it in them , as from its greatest pollutions . 

But now , i have been so tossed and tumbled , melted and new ▪ moulded , that i am changed into that which i thought it utterly impossible for me ever to be . I am grown at peace , if not in love , with folly . i begin to prefer folly at my very heart above wisdom . i am half persuaded , that there is a more sweet , quiet , and full enjoyment of ones self in a state of folly , then in a state of wisdom ; besides its being a nearer , readier , and easier passage to somewhat else . I confess , i am not yet so far subdued and changed , as to be content to take up a state of folly to perpetuity , but only for a season to lie down in it , to obtain a little ease and respite , and to have the visage and remembrance of that wisdom perfectly blotted out , which did formerly so ravish and enchant me . 

In this state of folly i find a new state of things springing up in me , and representing themselves to my view ; which i entertain like a fool , not wisely enquiring what bottom they have , or how they will endure the trial of the fire , but letting them in or out very carelessly , not regarding either what they are , whence they come , or whither they go . I see , i feel , i am a fool , i know not ( Nor can know in the state wherein i am ) to whom they belong , i know not how i come by them at any time ; they are strangely form in me : let them look to themselves if they are afraid of injury , either from me , or from any else because of me ; let him look to them to whom they belong , if he set any value upon them , or have any esteem of them . As for me , i have nothing to do with them , but to let them have their course in me , and through me , which i am now at length become very free unto ; nay , indeed in the present state wherein i am , i am altogether unable to stop them in it . I find myself powerfully forming into somewhat , which , what ere it be , it will be no thank to me , for i did not like it , nay , resisted as long as i could ; but now i am vanquished , and so broken all in pieces , that there is no more strength or wisdom left in me ; i begin to yield up myself somewhat freely into the hands of this unknown potter , to mould me into what he himself has a mind . I am weary of , and much weaned from , my own will and desires , even those which were most pure , most spiritual , and now i begin to lisp to this hidden power which i know not , yet feel working in me . thy will , thy unknown will , thy undesired will ( By any but thyself ) be done . what ever thy will be concerning any , let it take place in them , and upon them , to the utmost . Bend thy self no longer to please the desire of the creature in any thing , but henceforth apply thyself to please thyself in every thing . Let not me nor any else be what we would ; but what thy will pleaseth to have us ; and fulfil thy whole will and counsel upon us , without giving us the least account of it , until thou pleasest . If thou wilt lead us into folly , sin , death , hell , any thing , every thing , do what thou wilt , carry us whither thou wilt . Let our will wholly die in us , that it May never avoid any thing more , nor choose any thing more in any kind , but as thy will chooseth for us . 

Ye cannot but be offended at this kind of voice oh ye wise men , who know groundedly , and from principles of light and wisdom , how to frame your desires and requests ; yet , if ye be able , give liberty to him ( Who is made a fool by the forcible breaking of all these principles in him ) to speak according to what he hath ( Though very unwillingly ) been made . 

I have nothing to say to persuade or invite thee to cast thine eye , bestow any pains on , or give any regard to that which follows ▪ what thou Mayst find here , i hold out but as the words of a fool , yet i will not give thee leave to judge them so : for as i myself ( Feeling myself to be a fool ) do not , so i know thou canst not judge them . This is a kind of scripture which thou art not acquainted with , and though thou wouldst fain be approving or condemning , yet thou canst not , until thou comest to know and understand it . this light , this darkness ( Be it what it will ) is of a deeper kind than thine is , ( Thine must be blotted out before this can be written ) and thine eye cannot discern it . This is of a new stamp , of a new nature , of a new edition , and lies open only to the judgement of the new eye , which alone can discover what it is in its kind , whether true or false , unfeigned or counterfeit . The lowest in this region can see into the highest in thine : but the clearest eye of the highest in thy region , cannot discern the lowest here . 

Therefore look to thyself ; take heed what thou thinkest , or sayst , lest thy wisdom ( Which is now exalted , and can distinguish and judge things , to the satisfaction of itself and others ) whereby thou scornest folly and the fool , come under the just sentence and condemnation of the fool . He who made all things , and hath often prepared folly to bring wisdom down , May be about the same work again in a way as uncouth , strange , unexpected , yea , impossible to the present wise man , as those ways he formerly picked out still were to the wisest in those generations . 

This is an angry age , and men can hardly bear any thing , though they are thoroughly crossed in it , for the less they can bear , the more is laid upon them : yet methinks the wise man should be able to bear . he can gladly suffer a fool , who knows himself to be wise . and yet who is more offended than the wise man ? none is less careful of offending then the fool , and none more capable of offence than the wise man . So far as i have any tincture of what i formerly was , left upon me , i am very loathe to offend : but as i am a fool , i am no whit shy of it , but can delight to lay snares and stumbling blocks , and to see wisdom entangled in them , and breaking its shins upon them . Therefore have no regard to me , but use thine own freedom in thinking , speaking , judging : it is only in regard to thyself that i should advise thee to be sober and silent concerning that which thou canst not yet reach ; which counsel , if thou canst receive , it May be for thine ease and advantage , which , when thou comest to feel what belongs to true torment and loss , thou wilt then know how to prize . And when thou findest what changes they will make in thee , which all the strength of thy reason and religion shall not be able to withstand , ( Nay , they will break both reason and religion at their pleasure ; and the more they oppose them , the faster will they break them ; ) i say , when thou findest this by evident sense and experience past all denial or gainsaying , that enmity , rage , or zeal , which is now in thee so hot against others , will quickly abate ; and thou wilt grow silent concerning them , if not friends with them . 

A sermon to all sorts of persons : tending towards the allaying that bitterness & enmity of spirit , which abounds everywhere , among all sorts , towards such as differ in any eminent degree from themselves . 

matth. 6. 23.  

if the light that is in thee be darkness , how great is that darkness ? 

Joel 2. 31.  

the sun shall be turned into darkness , and the moon into blood , before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come . 

The preface . 

oh how thick hath misery enwrapped itself about the bulk of this creation ! Where is that eye that can see through it into happiness ? That happiness which most have dreamt of , is already to many swallowed up in misery : but where is that happiness , which can swallow up this unexpected inundation of misery , which drowns both heaven and earth ? There are waters above , as well as beneath , ( Though it is hard to conceive so ) and when both meet , they make a dreadful deluge . Oh how is truth drowned , light drowned , life drowned , purity drowned , in the great abyss of confusion ! Where is that that remains certain , after this sharp vehement shaking ? They perhaps May boast , who have not yet felt the violence of the wind ; but it would somewhat interrupt their exultation , if they could but consider , that their day is also coming ; yea , it Might wholly quash it , if they knew how near it were upon them . 

Oh what a brutish thing is man , that can never believe or be made sensible of any thing , until he come to feel it ! Though houses round about him be on fire , and he have that within which kindles the flame , yet he makes no question but he shall live secure . From the day that man has been upon the face of the earth , still has he been blessing himself , and pleasing himself with his own condition , magnifying it beyond others ( Whom he is very wise in accusing and condemning , ) in the mean while not truly knowing , either whence he came , what he is , or whither he goes . Oh foolish justifier of thyself , oh foolish condemner of others , being ignorant both of thyself , and others ! Thine eye is dark . The light whereby thou seest is darkness ; what meanest thou to be so forward & confident in judging either thyself or others ? Oh God , put out this eye of man , put out this light of man , cover it with an eternal night . Bring forth a true , a substantial state of things , with an eye that May behold it , an heart that May comprehend it , a life that May quicken and live in it . 

Awake , awake oh sons of men , how long will ye love vanity ? How long will ye seek after lies ? How long will ye love shadows , and please yourselves with them , as if they were the substance ? Your condemnation is written on your foreheads , and in the palms of your hands : ye accuse , condemn , prosecute , for calling darkness light , error truth ; and yet which of you doth otherwise ? Come forth oh God , and triumph in the condemnation of all : throw down the great justifier , and lay him flat with the lowest that he has condemned . Oh that my spirit Might be once satisfied , in beholding that thrown down which it abhors , and that exalted which it loves . And this is that which my soul in its inmost part desireth , that the tincture both of good and evil , in all its varieties and expatiations , Might be blotted out ; and things reduced into , and produced in their originality , which comprehends both good and evil in an absolute perfection . And then we shall see all things , no more with one kind of eye appearing to be evil , nor with another kind of eye appearing to be good , but as they are indeed in their inmost bottom , where alone is true knowledge , peace , rest , and content , eternally to be found and possessed . 

Perhaps , reader , thou Mayst expect an account of this ensuing discourse , which i must profess to thee i am driven to by a kind of inward impulsion , which i know not of what nature it is : and i am made so weak by continual different exercises upon my spirit ( Which i find powerfully destroying and blotting out in me , what ever i have been , or have desired to be , and moulding and forming me to somewhat else , which i neither expected , nor desired ; hereby i say i am brought to so much weakness ) that i am become altogether unable to resist it , otherwise it is likely at this time i should not have troubled thee . 

One word more . There was a passage in that book last set forth , which i hear hath administered offence to divers . The passage was about pure sporting with sin , which they think cannot be . I will not say that i spoke that upon a deeper ground than man usually speaks upon ; yet this i cannot but say , it is my interest , and i must stickle for it , though not with men , yet in mine own spirit . Some questioned with me , whether i meant the act of sin ? I confess my eye , or thoughts , was little upon the act , but upon the inward nature of it , which must not remain in perpetual enmity , but at last be owned as an excellent servant to him , by whom and for whom all things were made , out of whom they came , and into whom they return , according to his own will and guidance . And sin could never have done him that service that it has , if it had not had that nature that it has . And sin must have its due from the righteous judge , who will as well be glorified in being just unto sin , as in showing his wisdom and power in conquering of it . 

In a word ; to the creature , in the present state of the creature , under the present law of the creature , according to the judgement of the eye of the creature , every thing is unlovely ; and he that sees them not to be so , falls short of the perfection of the creaturely eye . But come deeper , beyond this state , beneath this law ; look with a true eye , and there you shall find all this unloveliness pass away , and an excellency appear , that the creature could never so much as imagine or dream of . And now come back with this eye into the present state of all things , and behold them through the true glass , and you shall see them all new here also , and very far differing from what you did or could take them to be in your creaturely apprehension . 

If this May tend to afford satisfaction to any concerning the further discovery of my mind in this respect , it will be pleasing to me , who delight not to have it hide , but would fain have it opened and presented to the view of all , not as desiring either their approbation or condemnation , but to satisfy the desire itself . This is all i have to express by way of preface . 

A sermon to all sorts of persons , from Job 9 22.  This is uniform , thereupon i speak : he destroyeth the perfect and the wicked . 

Job was a very excellent spirited man , and very exact in his practice ; so exact under that present administration wherein he was set , that his life , temper and motions were exceeding pleasing to him , who had so form and acted him ; in so much as he was not ashamed to boast of him , even to the face of the great opposer , disturber , and destroyer of such kind of buildings . 

This Job as he was perfect under that administration , so he was in a proportionable manner blessed with children , sheep , camels , oxen , asses , and a very great family . 

In a moment all these blessings are snatched away , rich Job made poor , by being stripped of all ; which he takes very patiently , retaining as sweet a temper of spirit under his affliction and misery , as had attended him in the time of his prosperity . 

After this , ( As if there had been a design to wear him out ) his whole body is smitten with disease and pain , and his mind wounded to purpose too : and yet at first he takes this kindly also , his spirit not at all deviating out of that path of perfection , wherein hitherto he had walked . 

But at length , anguish overcoming him , it opens the very depths , and causes that to come forth which had long lain hide in him , if not also from him . 

Certain friends of his ( In this state of his ) come to visit him , sit silent by him as astonished at him , not knowing what to think of him , nor what to say to him : but at length foolishly and weakly take occasion , from some distemper in his words , to nourish in themselves groundless jealousies concerning him , and with all the strength of arguments they can lay hold on , to impose them upon his belief . 

jobs state they know not , neither in the nature of things , nor in their own experience ; yet a great mind they have to say somewhat to him , with an intent to help and relieve him ; but for want of a true bottom of light , they fall to imagining and guessing , and feeding these their imaginations with reasonings that flow in upon them , and take it very ill , that these dark conceptions of theirs cannot overbear that more illuminated principle that was in Job . 

They take it for granted , that sin must be the cause , or God would never have dealt so with Job . 

They urge this from the justice of God , from the experience of all ages : and therefore wish Job to look to himself , to acknowledge his sin , and humble himself before God , and not to fly out into such extravagant self-justifications or accusations of God , as his present distemper Might dispose him to . 

Job here endeavours to take them off from these excursions , and draws the point between him and them to an head . He denies the bottom whereupon they go , and lays down his own bottom . this is uniform , this is every way true . That which ye speak is true ; it is true , that sinners are met with , oppressors must have a time to be themselves oppressed , hypocrites shall not always flourish , the righteous shall be blessed , &c.  but this will not hold so far as ye extend it , that every one that is thus dealt with must needs be such an one . But that which i lay down is uniform , has no such exception , is a deeper , a fuller truth , perfect and wicked he destroyeth . how exact soever a man be under his administration , yet it is in the power of him , who made him and form him into what he is in that administration , to bring him to destruction in it at his pleasure . He that bringeth both the perfect and the wicked upon the stage , May turn either of them off from the stage , when he will . There is no more to hinder him from destroying the perfect , than there is to hinder him from destroying the wicked . They are both equally his , they are both at his dispose , they are one and the same under several representations , and he has appointed them both to one and the same end , which is destruction . This is it i will stand to , overthrow it if ye can , he destroyeth the perfect and the wicked . 

perfect and wicked . perfect are such as are upright under that administration under which they are set , who in their state and motions suit with the law of it . God has a law for every thing he brings forth in this state of weakness : he that suits with the law of his administration ( That administration which he is set under ) is perfect ; he who deviates wholly from it , is wicked . Adam had his law of forbearing the forbidden fruit , the Jews theirs of circumcision , keeping the Passover , &c.  Christians theirs likewise , of faith , love , spiritual obedience , spiritual worship , a sweet , meek , humble , heavenly conversation , &c.  now so far as each of these did answer their peculiar law , they came towards that perfection , towards that righteousness , which they were appointed to , and which was to be measured thereby : so far as they deviated , they came towards and into a state of sin and wickedness ; both which are not absolute , but only under and by the force of the law of the present administration . 

he destroyeth . destruction is putting an end to the state . When the life and being of a person is put out , he is destroyed . When the plagues of God light on his outward man unto the death of the body , his body is destroyed : when the plagues of God light on his inner man , and put out the life of his spirit , his inner man is destroyed . We think , in every dispensation , 't is only the weak , the imperfect , the wicked , that wrath must light upon , but the righteous , the perfect , they shall escape , they shall meet with blessedness : but Job tells you , that they must be consumed too . 

doct. God hath stored up destruction both for the perfect and the wicked , and they shall both be sure to meet with it . God when he pleaseth falls either upon the wicked or the perfect even to destruction . 

this is uniform ( Saith Job . ) What ground soever ye speak on , i am certain of this . I dare lay this as a bottom to build upon , he destroyeth the perfect and the wicked . 

our god is a consuming fire , ( Saith the apostle . ) It May be used as an argument to draw men on to heighten holiness in their dispensation : and yet after it is heightened , the same spirit May speak to them in the very same dialect , and tell them yet further , that they must be consumed by this fire for all that . 

reas. 1. from God's sovereignty . he is Lord of all , he has the dispose of all , and his sovereignty delights to show itself . All the excellencies of God have their seasons of putting themselves forth to the utmost , his wisdom , mercy , power , love , &c.  so has his sovereignty . now nothing doth so much discover his sovereignty , as his falling upon the righteous , upon the perfect . ye think to secure yourselves by his faithfulness , his word , his promises , to which he must be faithful : and will ye not have him faithful to his sovereignty ? He is Lord of all , and has the dispose of all , and let him make never so many deeds of gift , he cannot give away any thing from himself ; but still he has the power of life and death in his own hands , and May let it out as he pleaseth . And this doth wonderfully set forth his sovereignty , his exercising it upon the perfect , that when he has tied it up , as fast as May be , by never so many promises , yet it should still have its scope , and be able to deal with whom it will , as it will . By this means he that is Lord indeed , truly Lord , originally Lord , vindicates and manifests his lordship , when he can subject that unto his will which seems most exempted from it , as well as that which lies most open to him in the way of clearest and most acknowledged justice . 

reas. 2.  Because all dispensations are but for a season , they are not everlasting ; therefore eternity delights to swallow them up ▪ perfect and wicked are both of the same lump , only differently clothed to act their several parts , which when they have done , their clothes must be taken off , and they turned back into the lump again . There is nothing durable but the eternal state of things . now therefore hath God treasured up destructions for all dispensations , because it is suitable to all dispensations . It is as fit for the King to be stripped of his gorgeous apparel when the play is done , as the begar of his rags . This is but a momentany righteousness or perfection , a momentany wickedness or imperfection , according to the law of the present dispensation : and the righteousness , the wickedness , the law of the dispensation , the dispensation itself , all must pass into the dust again : when they have lived out their transitory life , and acted their several parts , they must return to death . 

So that though there be righteousness , and wickedness ; righteous persons , and wicked persons ; blessings to the one , woes to the other : yet all this is but under the dispensation , for the season of the dispensation , which when it comes to an end , all this passes away . 

object . against this it will be easily and readily objected , that this will destroy all religion towards God , and righteousness amongst men . What need any man care , what he thinks or does ? How can any man desire to be righteous , to be perfect , if his end must be the same with him who is most imperfect and wicked ? 

answ. no , it will not , it cannot , if rightly understood . It will not destroy any true religion in any way of administration whatsoever ; but only that corrupt enmity , corrupt hope , corrupt desire , corrupt selfish-interest , which every administration inclines very much to breed and nourish , but perfect love cannot suffer always to stand : which if it were once eaten out , every administration would be sweet and pleasant . If we knew ourselves , and one another , our own parts , and the parts that others are to act , we should with more rest and satisfaction act ours ourselves , and with more peace and pleasure behold others acting theirs . 

Besides , the righteous have a double advantage : one in their present life , another in their ensuing death . 

In their present life , they both enjoy themselves and their God , in such a way as the wicked cannot , nor are in any wise capable of , in their state and practice of wickedness . 

And in their ensuing death they have another advantage , it being a more immediate step to somewhat further than the death of the wicked can be , ( I speak not of the shadow of death , but of that which is death indeed , the dying of the spirit in and to its present state . ) 

Therefore there is no ground , why the righteous should be discouraged in pursuing righteousness , nor why the wicked should please himself in abounding in wickedness , though ground sufficient for both to be weary of either , and to long after somewhat more perfect . 

use 1.  Not for any to magnify themselves much above others , nor to promise to themselves any such great blessedness beyond others , or to look upon others as objects of such great misery , because of some appearing-difference between them and others . Indeed there is a difference at present in this dispensation , but it is no thank to them that 't is so . Nor are the wicked so much to be blamed as they think : ( They have their parts to act , and they are fitted to their parts . ) This dispensation will have its end , and then you will find no such great difference between you and them , as you thought there was . Destruction will make an end of their wickedness , yea and it will make an end of your righteousness also , and then ye will become both one lump of clay , without either good or evil . 

use 2.  Not to grieve overmuch when you find destruction seizing upon you . If your body or spirit moulder away , if God consume your righteousness , your holiness , your perfection , by the blast of his spirit ; grieve not beyond measure at it : alas it must die , this must not last for ever . You thought to have been made happy by this , your happiness lies in being delivered from it . This is not the true treasure , or at least not in its true and lasting shape , and therefore must undergo death and destruction in this its present appearance . 

The apostle James raises it higher , bids you rejoice in it , chap. 1. 10. and he gives a strong reason , verse . 11.  for the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat , but it withereth the grass ; and the flower thereof falleth , and the grace of the fashion of it perisheth : so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways . Therefore be glad at the death of that that must die : ye have undergone that sorrow which there was no avoiding ; this is great matter of joy . The pain of having the sap and moisture of your spirits dried up by the scorching heat of the sun , if it be in any degree past , 't is great matter of joy . Better is the day of this death , than the day of this life . There is greater matter of joy in parting with , in putting off this excellency , then in putting it on . 

Now for a conclusion to all this , i intend to lay down the brief sum of the whole matter , even of the whole course of man under every administration , wherein he is either lifted up or thrown down , or both lifted up and thrown down , ( First lifted up , and then thrown down , ) and through which he passes to his lasting state . Take it thus . 

We were all made by him who is the great potter or former of all things , ( What e'er we are , whether righteous or wicked , under what administration soever : ) and this , not so much for any ends we can conceive or drive at , as for his own pleasure ; which will have its course upon us , and will toss and tumble us up and down into several sorts of deaths and lives , as great and as often as it pleaseth ; till it hath quite confounded and brought us to a perfect loss in all our own hopes , desires , and apprehensions , yea till at last it hath quite swallowed us up in itself : where when we are dead , buried , and cease to be , know , or desire any more ; that life May at length spring up in us , which till then we are uncapable of any distinct desiring or possessing . And the passage to this , though it be very dreadful to the flesh , being even through the gates of hell , death , and destruction ; yet it is in no small measure joyful to the eye of that spirit which discerns it to be but a passage , and a necessary passage too . And what brave royal heart would refuse to join issue with this request ? Oh let all shadowy perfections , all perfections that come in and by administrations , die and pass away , be swallowed up by a death , by a destruction , more powerful than themselves ; that so way May be made for the discovery of true and complete perfection , that it May come forth to swallow up , both destruction , and all that it hath destroyed , for ever ; and to bring forth itself and every thing again in its primitive glory , that they May return to that beauty wherein they were , before they were stained by that vanity , misery and vexation , whereunto all things are at present subjected . 

A letter impleading a conversion , ( Whether real or pretended is not material ; ) and all such kind of changes in the creature , ( Backward or forward ) by principles , either outward or inward . 

Dear Anne , 

I have seen your recantation in a letter of yours , which doth wonderfully please me . I like well to see the creature with its waxed wings mounting up towards heaven , and soaring aloft beyond the reach of the sight of its fellow creatures : but i like it much better to see the wax melted by the heat of the sun , and the poor foolish forward creature tumbling down into the sea , or unto the earth again . What should the creature do in heaven ? the light of God should not quit itself like itself , if it did not at least dazzle , if not wholly extinguish the fleshly eye , and turn it back into its fleshly principle again . so let all thine enemies perish , oh Lord , so let all the principles the creature either sucks in from others , or beats out itself by its own purest searchings and reasonings , come to naught , be so thoroughly and effectually thrown down , that the quite contrary May easily be reared up in their stead . 

But where are you now , sweet Anne ? you see the rottenness of your former foundation , are you sure you now build upon firm ground , upon the inmost rock ? you have seen a light , which clearly shakes that great light which did so transport you while it appeared light , but are you sure this light is so clear , so deep , of so inward perfect a nature , as it shall never be shaken ? What pretty sport doth original wisdom make with us ! He tosses & tumbles us , makes us be or not be , own or not own , what and when he pleases ; and well ▪ he May . While he hides from us the true and original colour of things , and that skill whereby he colours things , he May cozen us as often as he pleases ; he May put what colour he will upon things , and what eye he will into us . And we in beholding the present colour with the present eye , May be confident in what we see , yea in both judging it , and other things by it , not knowing either the root of it , or of that eye that judges it , nor considering what changes both the colour and the eye May undergo . 

Let me run over your letter a little . 

i who am unworthy of the esteem of a servant , 

Do you know yourself , that you call yourself unworthy ? I cannot bear , that the creature should either exalt or throw down itself , for i am sure it does it not from true knowledge , but from imagination . though by the light in them at present it is knowledge , and true knowledge , unto that eye that is in them ; yet to me ( Or , if you will , to somewhat in me , which searches , judges and condemns both that eye , and that light ) it is but imagination . yet again , beholding how the creature acts , i can bear with either or both , both the creatures lifting itself up , and throwing itself down , according to the different eye , state and principle which it has , and wherein it is and acts . So that though in one sense i am an utter enemy to all persons , principles , things and actions , yet in another sense i am perfectly reconciled to them all . I like none of them as such as they take themselves to be , but i like them all as they are , and as i know them to be . 

do make bold to declare unto you , what the Lord , through his great love , hath done for me , 

You speak here of the Lord , of his love , his great love , of the working of this love , and what it hath wrought for you . Do you know the Lord , or his love ? what if i should tell you , that both the Lord and his love , with all the workings of it , both upon you and others , shall pass away , and never again be acknowledged , or known , as now they are , by yours , or any others , creaturely apprehension ? What would you say to me ? You Might be drawn forth to judge me wonderful deeply and clearly by your present eye , but can you or any else thoroughly resolve this ? I tell you truly , when i can speak i will not be silent , for fear of man's judgement and condemnation . And i will venture to add thus much in the mean time . my god would not please me , if any creature could measure the least part of him with that eye which they call spiritual ; their heart must not know the least spark of his nature , nor their tongue be able to utter the least tittle of his name . they May have , and shall have , while the time lasts , a knowledge suitable to them , but not the least tittle of the true knowledge . 

in the discovering me the error of my principle . 

Do , condemn it , it must come under condemnation , so must the light that judges it . All principles have their course of springing up , growing , living flourishing , and at length of returning into death , into condemnation . That present principle , that present light , which lives now in the death , in the condemnation of this , shall feed another with its death . 

I made account to have gone on through your whole letter , but i find my flesh weary , and my spirit likewise shutting up . I shall therefore only glance at two or three things more , and so close . 

You say , that God is not all things . you speak as true as those that affirm him to be all things . when either of you come to see indeed , ye will acknowledge both the one and the other in a larger extent then as yet can be conceived . Then you will tell me the meaning of this riddle , which man cannot but account madness , there is every thing besides the Lord , and yet nothing but the Lord ; every thing so filled with creatureship , as if it were quite empty of the creator , and yet the creator everywhere so every thing in every thing , as quite to drown the whole creatureship in all its being and motions . 

You say , there is evil . so say i too , to all eyes but one : but if you will say there is evil to that eye , you speak beyond your bounds : you know not that eye , what it is , nor what it sees , and you venture too far if you say it sees either good or evil . These are the colours wherein things appear to your eyes , but the colour wherein that eye sees things is not yet known , nor can be seen by any eye but that which dies in perfection , and rises in perfection . 

This is the great quarrel that i have with you and all , that ye will be measuring all things by your own measure . And all shall lie under condemnation in this respect , for judging things so to be in themselves , as they appear to them . The painter shall be justified for putting several colours on one and the same substance , and for making several eyes and lights to see each of them by , but all shall be condemned who justify any sort of these colours in opposition to the rest , and so pass sentence both upon all the rest , and upon the substance itself . And this is the whole work of man , to be picking out the colour that suits with his eye , and to be exalting it , and laying all others flat . And as often as he changes his eye , his light , his colour , still he takes the same course , and therefore still in all his changes deserves to come under the same condemnation . 

You say , there is a hell , into which they shall be cast who violently break the law of God , but do you know what this hell is , what this law is , or who are the breakers of this law ? I know according to your present measure you do , and so do others according to theirs , but do you know by the true standing measure ? Man by several measures judges righteousness and unrighteousness , but when God comes to measure , that which man calls righteousness will be found unrighteousness too . That which is righteousness in the scale of God is very weighty , but that which man heaps up in treasures , thinking to be very rich , and of great value , when it comes to the true touchstone will prove but dross . Who shall scape hell , when all the unrighteous in the eye of man , when all the unrighteous in the eye of God , are cast into it ? He that can be content to please himself in escaping hell , where others must scorch in unutterable torment , is he righteous ? Oh how my soul loathes all that which all men call righteousness ! i see as much need of a proportionable fire to burn it up , as to burn up wickedness . And oh that the everlasting flames were once universally let loose upon the foundations of it , for it , and the misery by it , stands more in the way of true righteousness , and true happiness , than wickedness , and the misery by it , does . 

Coleman-street , London , April 21. 1650.  

Several inward openings . 

I.  

Hearken , oh man , and try if thine ear can let in knowledge . 

There is an inwardness of all that outwardness which thou beholdest , which is the spirit , strength , life , substance , of the outwardness . This is that which thou callest God , who is within all that appears , which are but his several garments , wherewith he clothes and covers himself from every eye , but that which pierceth through the inmost vail . 

This life , this strength , this spirit , this inward substance , doth please himself to contract himself in , and to thrust forth shadows , which he quickens with a shadowy life , and infuses into them an instinct of preserving that life , that he May make himself the better sport , in hunting it up and down , and catching it , in his snares of death and destruction . it is no sport to us ( No more than it is to the birds in the air , the beasts of the field , the fish in the waters ) to be hunted and caught : but it is pure sport to him , to see the feveral subtle workings of that life to save itself ineffectual , which was made to be taken and destroyed . 

And this is his manner of proceeding herein . 

First , this life , this original being , thrusts forth an outward being , which he endues with a life suitable to its outwardness . 

2.  He provides food for to maintain this life , and means to preserve it against the danger of death 

3.  He prepares a strong one to hunt , conquer , catch and kill this outward being in this outward state of life . 

Thus he does , and then lets the creature loose , and his engine of death loose , and pleases himself in beholding the several windings and turnings of the one and the other from first to last . 

The great thing that tends to preserve the life of man is the knowledge of God : ( The bestial part May feed on other things , but that is not the man ) But man cannot reach the inwardness of them ; he is shut out from the tree of life , that he cannot come to eat of it , and therefore he must die . The same power that quickens in him the desire of life , and chalks out unto him the way to life , hath so shut it up and fenced it , that there is no entering so much as into the paradise where the tree of life groweth . 

God hath took great pleasure in presenting himself to the view of man , in making discoveries of himself unto man ; and these in several gradations , that some go far beyond others , some even abound with the knowledge of God in respect of others . But he hath another greater pleasure , which is to strip the best of these naked , and make them see that theirs is not knowledge neither ; only comparative knowledge , not true knowledge ; it is not an understanding what God is , but a likening of God to somewhat . And this is the great difference between men , some set up idols of wood and stone , others of silver and gold : some have very carnal gross imaginations and resemblances of God , others have more refined , and more spiritual ones . 

Ii  

There is no true knowing of God by the understanding of the creature . Yet it is the pleasure of the Lord to present himself to the eye of the creature , and to quicken in that eye a desire to see and discern him . 

Every eye was made to see God with , but no eye can , therefore it sickens , languishes , pines and dyes under a curse , that through death and destruction it Might pass into a capacity of attaining that , without which it cannot enjoy itself . 

As God made all things to shadow out himself , the excellencies of the creature in every kind , to shadow out his excellencies in their several kinds : so particularly he made the eye of the creature to shadow out his own eye ; and it is his own eye in a shadow , has all the properties of his own eye in a shadow ; but being but a shadow , it can never in its utmost exaltation attain to the sight of that which is substance . 

no man can live and see God ; he must first die thoroughly , and rise up again in the substance , before he can apprehend or comprehend the substance at all in truth . He May have a taste , a glimpse , of the substance in the shadow , but yet it is but a shadowy glimpse , that which is seen ( Though by him that sees it , it be accounted very substantial ) is but shadow , just like the eye that sees it , which cannot possibly reach the view of any thing beyond its sphere . 

The create eye is fitted to see nothing but colours , as colours are suited to the create eye : and though fools think they see more than colours , they see things in their own apprehension , ( This thing , and that thing , and the other thing , ) yet those that are wiser know they are mistaken , and that they do and can see nothing but the colour . 

We see good and evil which colour the whole creation ; but do we see that substance which is coloured with these ? Or do we know whence these colours came , or what they are in their root ? they indeed put several glosses upon the substance , representing it variously to the eye of the creature ; but do they not hereby hide it from the creature ? Does not truth lie hide under the colour ? and is it not veiled by the colour from that eye which can pierce no further than the colour , and so must either view that or nothing , judge by that or by nothing ? 

oh God , how art thou miscoloured ! Man thinks he hugely pleaseth thee by putting the finest kind of paint upon thee , not understanding how it difigures thee , and how loathsome it is unto thee , because it makes thee lovely in his eye . But know , oh man , oh refinedest man , God loathes to be lovely in thine eye . true excellency can be justified by nothing but that which is the same with itself . God's excellencies were not deep enough , if man's eye could pierce into them , or approve them , if man could acknowledge them excellent . God likes nothing of man , and man likes nothing of God . Indeed man hugely likes the god that he frames in his own imagination ; the god that his eye sees and acknowledges , is very excellent ; he likes God as he paints him : but God as he is , God in substance , God throwing off all this paint , and not acknowledging himself to be any such thing , but somewhat else which the creature never thought , nor could imagine , nor could desire him to be , this is a dreadful God , and in no wise desirable . The creature May live , and see such a God as it frames , yea the more it lives the more it seeth him , and the more it seeth him the more it lives ; but the true substantial sight can never enter into any , till after perfect death . 

Oh how poor creatures cozen themselves ! They think they love God , would fain see God , know God , live in communion with God : and this is true in their sense , such a god as they have framed to themselves they love , and would fain see , know and enjoy . But he who is indeed God , they are not able to bear in the least in what he is . There is nothing that they so perfectly hate , there is nothing which they so study to avoid , nay , there cannot be a greater hell to them , than his true presence ; and how can it be otherwise ? for he carries in his countenance the death of all that is their life , joy , hope and happiness . 

Oh what an astonishing sight will it be at the opening of the heart of man , when he shall come to plead his love to God , his delight in God , his love to others for his sake , &c. that the contrary should be mani•ested to him ! And he shall plainly be made see and confess that he was only the lover of an idol , the lover of a God he had framed to himself in his own understanding , which is in truth nothing ; it is not God , but the creatures creature , a creature which the understanding of the creature hath made , whether by the help of nature or scriptures it comes all to one . 

Is it not time for you , oh sons of men , to look about you ? Ye little think how quick and piercing the approaching judgement will be . Ye think yourselves very able now to justify yourselves , and condemn others : but the light whereby ye shall be judged , will be far different from that light whereby ye now judge yourselves . 

Oh what a strange thing is it , and utterly incredible , that believers , lovers of God , performers of righteousness , in the highest and strictest strain , should have so much deep intense spiritual unbelief , hatred of God , and all manner of unrighteousness discovered in them , and in their purest actions and motions , as to lay them even with , if not below , the common sort of men , whom they themselves condemn from the glory of God's presence , because of their wickedness ! 

Woe be to thee , oh holy man ! Oh righteous man ! Oh strict exact man ! It is against thee that true righteousness and true holiness hath the greatest quarrel , because thou standest most in its way . It is thy wickedness and remoteness from righteousness and holiness , that is now to be discovered . Under thy skirt are found all the abominations that thou condemnest . It is not thy paint that will hide thee from the eye that now searches thee , though it doth hide thee from thine own eye . Thou must come to judgement ; the high court of justice is chiefly erected in reference to thee , to examine and find thee out . And woe unto thee , for thou shalt not stand in judgement , what ever thou thinkest of thyself ; nay , it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgement , then for thee . 

Iii  

And what if i should say , that this should be the course and progress of the judgement ? 

First , that unrighteousness should be set before the judgement seat in all the sorts and degrees of it , according to the several rules and administrations of it , and it condemned ; and righteousness in its several kinds and degrees justified . 

Then that righteousness should be brought upon the stage in its several kinds and degrees , and it condemned ; and unrighteousness justified . 

Then that both should be brought in again , and the justification of both be taken off , and both be utterly condemned for ever . 

( It is a seat , a throne of perfect judgement , and therefore righteous judgement must be passed on every thing according to every consideration and aspect that it hath ; and things must be thoroughly judged , they must be scanned and judged under every consideration . ) 

And lastly , after the condemnation of man , of all man , of man in all wherein he expects and desires to be justified , that then everlasting righteousness , righteousness which shall stand for ever , righteousness which can in no respect be impleaded , but is every way true , full , and perfect , should break forth in its lustre , and swallow up this condemnation , and the fear of it . 

It is but a weak righteousness that can justify only such as are under such or such a law , whether of external or spiritual faith and obedience : but that which hath the true vigour and strength of righteousness in it , can swallow up all unrighteousness under all laws and administrations for ever . That righteousness is universal which fills all , it is like God who leaves nothing empty of his own life and being . That righteousness is indeed everlasting , which will suffer no unrighteousness to last or appear after it is discovered . Where God appears , the creature must vanish , it cannot stand in his presence : and where the righteousness of God appears , both the righteousness and unrighteousness of the creature fly away . 

Oh how dreadful will the day of judgement be to the creature , to the whole creature , in one part of it or other ! dreadful to the unrighteous in one respect , dreadful to the righteous in another respect ; but how pleasant in every part to the creator ! To see all things fall before him , and all his own adjudged to him , and recovered by him . There is none shall be able in any wise to stand this trial , but the son , who hath learned this point of obedience , to give up his life , righteousness , and all his excellency ( Though by very painful suffering ) into that bosom from whence he received it , that it May never live more in him , or in itself , but in that fountain from whence it did flow , and whereunto it could not but return , where and where only will it suffer itself purely and perfectly to be embraced and enjoyed . 

Iv.  

be silent oh flesh : yet speak while thy time lasts ; speak until i silence thee . Open thy fleshly mouth , utter thy fleshly mind , till i stop the one , till i confound the other . Profess that thou knowest the Lord , till i convince thee that thou knowest him not . Say and think thou lovest me , and longest to be one with me , till i show thee that thou hatest nothing so much as me , and communion with me . Worship me according to thy present light and apprehensions of me , or thou shalt feel the smart of neglecting it : and though thou dost , yet will i not spare thee , but destroy both thee and thy worship . i am come to judge thee and thy light by my light , and thou shalt not stand but fall in judgement , thou thyself into nothing , and thy light into utter darkness . And by how much thou exaltest thyself above others , by so much will i lay thee beneath others . By how much the higher thou hast soared , by so much the lower shalt thou fall . The greater thy pleasure , hopes and confidence have been in thy foregoing life , the greater shall thy torment , amazement and distress be in thy approaching death . my glory shall chiefly spring out of the destruction and desolations of thine . i am now whetting my glittering sword to pierce into , and fetch out , thy very heart blood . I am about to say i live for ever , and when i speak it , thou shalt die for ever , in thy purest , in thy highest enjoyments of life . My life and thine cannot consist together , but while thou livest i die , and when i come to live thou shalt die . Thou hast hitherto sucked and enjoyed thy life out of my death ; and now is my turn and time come to gather and enjoy my life out of thy death . thou hast appeared , and i have not been ; now will i appear , and thou shalt be no longer . Thou hast been unrighteous in killing me , and detaining mine own from me ; but i will be righteous in killing thee , and recovering all into mine own possession again . 

live then bravely oh flesh , flourish as well as thou canst , come off bravely at last however . eat and drink , for to morrow thou shalt die . eat and drink lustily , that thou Mayst be fatted for the slaughter , and fitted for my table : for as i live , saith the Lord , i will feed on thee , and devour thee , and thou shalt never be any thing any more but what thou art in me , but what i by the power of my life , by the warmth of my stomach , convert thee into within myself . 

V.  

God who is one and the same , altogether unchangeable in his own nature ; yet is full of various changeable appearances to the eye of the creature , and can only be seen by the creature in some shape and appearance , but not at all as he is in his own nature . according to his design concerning the creature , so he fits the present state of the creature ; and according to the state of the creature , is his appearance to the creature , and the creatures sight of him . 

To the creature in its pure natural state he appears as a Lord , as a good kind bountiful Lord , and so Adam in his state of innocency looked upon him ; as one who did lay out his wisdom in the frame of the creatures , and his treasures of goodness and kindness in his tender provision and care for the creature ; as one who loved the being of the creature , desired to have it go well with the creature , and delighted himself to have communion with the creature . 

To the creature in its fall sunk estate , he appears as a severe dreadful judge , as an enemy to the life , being , and happiness of it ; as a tormentor to it , as a destroyer of it . 

To the creature in its servile state he appears as an harsh lawgiver , as one that propounds life and death , misery and happiness , upon very hard conditions , such as it is easy to miscarry upon , but very difficult ( If at all possible ) to attain the end ( The creature hath in its eye ) by . 

To the creature in its sonlike state he appears a tender father , one who communicates his own nature , life and blessedness freely to the son ; who as he hath begotten , so he taketh care of him , maketh him his heir , keepeth his inheritance safe for him , and him for it . And this is an excellent sight of God , a true , a substantial sight in compare with any of the former . This is his image wherein he is seen : his goodness , wisdom , power , love , justice , mercy , &c. which were very darkly held out in the rest , shine here in their lustre . 

Now all these appearances are written in the state and in the heart of every creature , the present kind of appearance being still suited to the present state : so that man finds them , not so much by the hearing of the ear , seeing of the eye , or by searching into any books , whether of creatures or scriptures , as by looking into his own heart . And man is much deceived in this , he doth not , he cannot learn so much either from men or books ( As he thinks to do ) further than they occasion the opening of his own heart in him : for let man strive never so much , he can learn no more than is written in his own heart , and in that state wherein he is . 

Let Adam look into his own heart in the state of innocency , he shall presently read there a sweet , a good , a kind , a bountiful God . 

Let fallen man look into his heart , he shall presently read there a severe accusing condemning iudg.  

Let the servant , the slave , look into his heart , and ( In plain terms ) he shall presently read God a tyrant . he May strain other thoughts of God into his understanding , but let him look into his heart , he shall find , he thinks and can think no otherwise of him , then as of an hard Master . 

Let the son look into his heart , and he shall read God a tender father , one who loves and takes care of him , as of himself . 

But what is all this ? All these are but several appearances of God in the creature , of God to the creature . This is not the first , and this shall not be the last . this is not God as he is in himself , but God as he appears to us . All this , as it hath a time to be sown , born , spring up , and live ; so it must have a time to die , and pass away . None of this is the true knowledge , if you speak properly . It is not the knowledge of God , but of the present appearance of God . It is not the knowledge of the substance as it is in itself , but as it lurks and makes resemblances of itself under a cloud . And as he often blots out one resemblance by another resemblance , so he will at last blot out all resemblances by discovering the substance . 

Oh poor man ! why art thou so puffed up with thy knowledge ? It is not the knowledge of the true God , at best it is but the knowledge of his likeness , ( And alas , how little is there of this kind too ? ) Nor is it true knowledge , but only the likeness of knowledge . Both this knowledge , and the thing as thus known , must pass away for ever . 

As certainly as there was a beginning shall there be an ending , ( All things that have a beginning must have an end , ) and nothing shall be last but that which was first . 

Vi . 

There is a double condemnation lying upon all men ; both upon the world , and upon the persons of God . 

One is , in that they do not seek to know and worship God according to that light of reason or religion that is sown in them , and would spring up and break forth through them , did it not receive checks and quenchings from them . 

The other is for idolising that which they do in any degree know or attain , which is or can be but a shadow , and yet is still set up by them , and magnified , as if it were the substance . 

Man falls short , in reaching after , and comprehending the shadow : but for all that , how short soever he fall , though he catch hardly the shadow of the shadow , yet he will not endure it should go for less than the substance . 

Search the course of man throughout the whole world , where is he who sees , knows , worships the true God ? Search all sorts of Christians , where is he that knows the true Christ , the true way to God through Christ ? Hath not every one set up the idols of his own heart , the stumbling block of his own iniquity before his eyes ? They think they behold God , worship God , &c. but alas , it is but their own idol . 

Search the course of man ( Vain man , or religious man ) throughout the scriptures , how find ye him there ? The Jews they can judge the heathen as idolaters , and God he judges the Jews as idolaters all along . And yet what a continual inveterate enmity is there between these ? the heathen still striving either to convert or root out the Jews , and the Jews still striving either to convert or root out the heathen . They were both so drunk in their own imagination , and so hide in their dark state one from another , that they sought to destroy that in one another ( Or one another because of it ) which was their own life . 

And what opposition is there at this day between Turks and Papists , Papists and Protestant's , Protestant's and Puritans , Episcopalians and Presbyterians , Presbyterians and independents , independents and Anabaptists , Anabaptiss and seekers ? &c. and yet the same sap runs through them all , the same principle lives in them all , and fighteth thus vehemently with itself , because it knoweth not itself in this darkness , which hath so long been spread over all . They none of them truly know God , but every one sets up his own idol , the imagination of his own brain , by virtue of this one and the same principle according to its present tincture in them ; and it is the variety of the tincture that produceth this variety , and by that means setteth them at such a wonderful distance , as if there were no similitude nor possibility of conjunction between them , who are already one and the same both in their principles , motions , and end . and though they judge one another very partially and unjustly , yet they shall find when true judgement is given , that they are indeed one , and justly come under the same justification or condemnation . How different soever their appearances are , yet their root , their life , their principle , is one and the same . And the best of these , in judging the worst of these , do but judge themselves , and in justifying themselves , they justify the worst of these , for they are the same in the main . 

Oh poor man , how art thou veiled from thyself ! How are all others veiled from thee ! How art thou befooled with the eye of thy wisdom ! thou canst not see any thing as it is . If thy heart could take scope to itself , and judge them quite contrary to what thine eye seeth them to be , thou wouldst come nearer to truth by such a mad thought of thine heart , then by the soberest sight of thine eye . Thou art thine own utter enemy ; all that thou desirest , tends to undo thee : all that thou judgest to be good , life , happiness , is far otherwise . all the knowledge thou hast of good and evil comes by thy fall , by thy darkness ; and the clearer and clearer revelations thou hast of both , are still but to this dark eye , to thee in this dark state , to thee fallen from , and uncapable of beholding , true light in any kind . When wilt thou know and acknowledge thy friend ! This is the character of him , it is he who plots thy destruction , who hunts after thy life , who follows close the scent of thy feet , and will not leave thee till he hath overtaken thee , torn thee in pieces , and quite devoured thee . 

Vii . 

Oh how livelily is death written upon all things ! But who can read it ? Who is so skilful as to understand the characters either of life or death ? Thou art weighed , oh man , in the balance , and art found too light ; thou art but as the dust thereof , which weigheth nothing , but is altogether unable to sway the scale either one way or other . why gaddest thou then to change thy way ? thou shalt be worried out of all the imaginations of thine heart . Thou canst be safe nowhere ; destruction will find thee out where thou art , or whithersoever thou thinkest to remove for greater security . thy time hath long been determined , and is now arriving at its period , and thou Mayst not enjoy life or pleasure any longer . give account of thy stewardship , for thou shalt be no longer steward . the earth is sinking under thee , thy elements melting in thee , thy whole life and being expiring ; what wilt thou do ? where wilt thou shelter thyself ? There is no escaping that death and judgement which is seizing on thee . Thy sun is setting , and that black night , which thou fearest , is hastening upon thee . I am stripping thee of all that is fweet and lovely to thee , and driving thee out of thy present paradise of present enjoyments and future hopes , into the land of oblivion . into the wilderness must thou go , where thou shalt be stripped of all thine ornaments , and die in ignominy and torment . how wilt thou bear the loss of all thy beauty , wisdom and excellency , wherewith thou hast flourished like a god above the rest of thy fellow-creatures ? In one moment , which thou lookedst not for , shall misery befall thee , and make an utter end of thee . Though thou expectest to sit on a throne for ever , to live with and enjoy God in perpetual embraces , yet thine own mouth shall give thee the lie : and when i cause the power and pangs of death to fasten upon thee , thou shalt know and feel , that thou neither wast , art , nor shalt be ; but i alone was , am , and will be , what thou by my disappearance hast foolishly imagined thyself to be : for i am resolved to gather back all that belongs to me , and leave thee no more than belongs to thee , which is neither life , being , sense , nor motion , but mere emptiness and vanity . And then live if thou canst in thine own imagination , when i have gathered all the reality of life into myself . 

Viii . 

tremble , oh earth , at the presence of the Lord , and quake , oh heavens , for ye shall be shaken also : your sun shall be darkened , your moon turned into blood , your stars shall lose their light ; the whole fabric of heaven shall fall into , and perish in , the bowels of the earth . And who ( Or what ) shall live when God doth this ? surely that alone which cannot die . He then shall live , who gave life to all , and hath prepared a death for , and suitable to , every life : yea , he shall live who can swallow up death , and drown it for ever in the power of his own life . oh live , live , live , thou only , for thou alone art worthy . thou art the land of the living ; thy life lives only in thine own land , and thou livest only in thine own life . this is the true inheritance , the true Canaan , the true happiness , the true enjoyment of God . This is life eternal , the rise and result of all . 

This is life indeed , which can quicken death itself , and make it as living as itself . 

This is power indeed , that can clothe the greatest weakness with its own immortal and eternal strength . 

This is light indeed , that can make darkness shine in its own brightness , where the darkness and the light are both alike , and where the night shineth as the day . 

This is purity indeed , which is everywhere , in every thing , and can purify every thing in itself ; a pure river , which gathers all waters into itself , purging and cleansing them , till it hath made them like itself . 

This is true happiness , that can swallow up all misery , and make it equally happy with itself . 

This is true spirit , which can devour all flesh , and by the strength of its quickening virtue , turn it into spirit . 

This is a philosophical stone worth having , which can turn any thing it toucheth into perfect gold . 

But where dwells this skill ? where dwells this life , this spirit , this power ? is it anywhere ? is there any such thing ? There is every one harping at it ; sure methinks there should be such a skill somewhere , and if there be , it cannot but delight to show itself , and will have its season so to do . Only it May first contrive to bring forth vanity , misery , weakness , emptiness , darkness , death , &c. in their perfection , that it May give a true taste of its own virtue . When it hath prepared all the eternals and everlastings that can be imagined to swallow up , then will appear the efficacy and vigour of its own eternity and everlastingness . 

These are the bowels out of which all things came , which are still rolling , and will never be at rest , till they receive them in again ; and nothing can truly rest , till it returns thither again . This was the first , and this must be the last ; and after all the toilsome compasses and circuits that are now a fetching , the circle will end where it began , and then will that saying be indeed verified , the first shall be last , and the last first . but every thing must be thoroughly tired out of its own motions , desires , ends , hopes , happinesses , before it come to rest in this centre , yet this irksome and wearisome circumference will make it more lovely , both in its beginning and in its end . 

Ix. . 

Before this world , this state and being of things ( As we call it ) was , man will confess there was nothing but the Lord . 

When ever this world shall cease to be , there will be nothing but the Lord again . It is his right to be the last , who was the first : and if he will be true to himself , he can no more suffer any thing to be after him , than it was before him . 

And yet must nothing be lost , but every thing found ; lost indeed in its own weak , fading , perishing state , but found in a standing , enduring , eternal state : where when things arrive , that vanity , death and mortality , which is now written upon them all , shall be swallowed up in perfect and immortal life and glory . 

And what are things at present ? Are they things that are , or things that are not ? have they a real , or an appearing existence ? To our eye they are real , but is there not an eye to which they are but-ciphers , which swallows them up in the sight of itself ; which acknowledgeth him that was , and him that shall be , only to be at present also ; who is so all , and so fills all , that he can leave no room for any thing else to be where he is ? There is no object his eye can behold , but himself . Where ever he looks , his eye dispels and scatters every thing that falls short of his own substance and perfection : yet is there nothing to be seen , but he must see it . Nothing can escape his eye , nor nothing can abide his eye . It is the shutting of his eye in us , that makes ours open : but when his eye opens , ours will be shut , and there will be no eye left to see , but the Lords , and nothing left to be seen , but the Lord himself : yea , it is only to us that it is otherwise at present , but not to him . 

oh foolish man ! when wilt thou cease boasting of thy knowledge , and come indeed to know the Lord ? if i should tell thee never so plainly , yet thou hast not an ear to hear it ; therefore i will forbear perplexing thee any further at this time , with over-straining thee to hear , see or comprehend , beyond the compass of thy present ear , eye or heart ; and leave thee to enjoy what thou hast ; which as yet thou Mayst , with some kind of quietness , for a short season , if thou canst be content so to do without over-exalting it : otherwise know , that the wind is too boisterous , to suffer any thing that is high and lifted up , to remain unshaken . 

Finis . 











