England's friend raised from the grave . 

Giving seasonable advice to the Lord general , 
Lieutenant-general , 
And the council of war . 


Being the true copies of three letters , written by Mr. John Saltmarsh , a little before his death . 

heb. 11. 4.  

He being dead yet speaketh . 



London , printed for Giles Calvert , at the black spread-eagle at the West end of Paul's . 1649.  

To the reader . 

These letters were written , and sent according to the superscriptions , by the author a little before his departure ; they Might have continue in silence , as they have done ever since , but providence hath otherwise disposed , through the desire of many friends ; and you have them truly printed according to the original copies . 

Marry Saltmarsh . 

For his excellency the Lord Fairfax . 

Noble Sir , 

God having raised me up from the power of the grave , though he hath not made known to me yet , what further use he hath of me , but i wait on him whom i have found to be my God , both in sickness and health . Sir , at present i am pressed in spirit to write to you , & i yet know no other but it is from the spirit of God . There is a mighty noise of unrighteousness and injustice in the proceedings at your counsels as to the kingdom : and truly Sir , this not in most counties only amongst the persons , but amongst the choicest , and the conscientious Christians : the hearts of good persons are departed from you very much , and from your army and counsels : and Sir , whatsoever you or others May think and persuade yourselves , yet i am thus free to speak , that God hath at present brought a dark cloud over you , and the Lord show you a way out of it , which is presented to me to be this only way , stop not the breathings of God in mean private Christians ; the counsels of God flow there , when the greater persons sometimes ( For his glory ) are left naked without a word of advice from him . I found this desolating evil beginning in your meetings . Be faithful to your engagements for justice to the kingdom : you have many , and you promised speedy redress of many things . Consider and compare in the light of God impartially , how your first principles , and public promises and proceedings answer each other : and where you have been unrighteous , delatory , or unfaithful , be not discouraged speedily to depart out of those tents , least God overtake you with a dispensation of more righteousness , and judge you . 

Sir , the cries , the tears , the prayers of the oppressed and afflicted , and the departing of many of God's persons in their hearts from you , are and will b• burdensome stones , and cups of trembling . The Lord direct you in this your day , that you May not depart from your first love , lest he who is the holy one , the just one , the God blessed for ever , come against you with the spirit of his mouth . Sir , i have little more to write , the Lord having discharged me of this burden , which was as fire in my bones : and truly the shadows that some counsels of the flesh have brought upon this army lately , hath reached to the darkening of all professing Christians in the kingdom , in the hearts of the persons of the kingdom : for , where should redress come ( Will they think ) if not from such as profess higher godliness than others ? 

Sir , Your servant , John Saltmarsh . from Laystreet in Essex , from m. Waddis house . 

For lieutenant-general Cromwell . 

Sir , 

I have found the Lord appearing of late in my weak estate , and i cannot but from these sweet shinings of his desire , to behold the like and more glorious in those who are called to greater actions . Sir , it is the voice of persons , but that which sounds loudest is the voice of choice , and spiritual desiring Christians , that your proceedings have much injustice , great delays , and the hearts of many good persons are turning from you , as you are in these ways , you are much accused of unfaithfulness to solemn engagements : Sir , i was moved long since , you May remember , to tell you what would follow in stopping the breathings of God in private and poor Christians , and i must tell you , and i know other , but it is the voice of the Lord in me , that i observe you and some others to begin an estrangement to such who were godly , honest and spiritual , and to avoid discourse and communion with them : me thinks i see in the light of God a black cloud over some of you in the army , and i am satisfied in spirit , that there are great transgressions amongst you against public justice and righteousness ; behold , and you shall see before ye the rock against which both King and parliament were dashed , and truly Sir , by what i see in your proceeding , and hear of your counsels by honest men , some of ye hasten in the flesh to the same distress . Sir , break off this sin by righteousness , return to your communion with Christians , let not the wisdom of the flesh entice you under the disguise of Christian prudence , for that wisdom is not from above which is not pure and easy to be entreated ; run not to the old shifts of the flesh in these your times of straight , lean not on Egypt , or any imaginary strength which is not of God , if the Lord in his goodness and wisdom will have some of your former glory which was his , and you Might through temptation think your own , to perish : be not ashamed of the fiery trial , but close in with that which hath most of God in it , do you not hear an oppressed and afflicted kingdom crying out to ye ? believe it Sir , all professing Christians in all places will suffer what evil is done by ye , the Lord show you wherein you have counselled in flesh , neglected Christians , delayed justice , failed in public engagements , neglected or grieved some afflicted Christians whom you should have comforted , and then peace , glory , and excellent power will appear in you , and Christians will bless God in you , whilst you walk in that more pure administration : and Sir know , that you in your person will enjoy most of the good or evil that shall follow ; Sir , God powers out fresh abilities freely and of mere grace , even rivers and streams of life in such weak vessels of his as we are , and at this fountain i desire you May now live . 

Sir , Your servant , John Saltmarsh . 

For the council of war . 

Honourable , 

Not to repeat to ye the sad outcries of a poor notion for justice and righteousness , the departure of the hearts of many Christians generally from you , the late testimonies of some in your own bowels , the withdrawing of that glory the Lord formerly clothed ye withal , but this i know ye have not discharged yourselves to the persons , in such things as they justly expected from ye , and for which ye had that spirit of righteousness first put upon ye , by an almighty power , and which carried you on upon a conquering wing : the wisdom of the flesh hath deceived and enticed , and that glorious principle of Christian liberty which we advanced in at first , ( I speak as to Christians ) hath been managed too much in the flesh . 

Now if the Lord hath opened to any of ye the unsoundness of any principles then , or in the management of them , i hope he will show ye a better course and path to walk in , and now ye are met in council , the Lord make ye to hearken to one another from the highest to the meanest , that the voice of God wheresoever it speaks , May not be despised ; and think it no shame to pass over into more righteous engagements : that wisdom which is from above is easy to be entreated , look over your first engagements , and compare them with your proceedings , that you May see what you have done , what you must do ; i know it is unsavoury to nature to be accused or taxed , but i hope there will be found that spirit in you , that will esteem the wounds of a friend better than the kisses of an enemy . I write i know to such who in their first love were a persons loving God , and his appearances in the meanest Christian , and such as pursued the good and happiness of the kingdom cordially : and if the Lord hath not thought to take off the spirit of righteousness from ye , and put it upon another persons , he will give you to discern this last temptation wherein Satan hath desired to winnow ye , and ye shall be a diadem once more in the hands of the Lord : for myself , as i am myself , there is neither wisdom nor counsel in me , but if the Lord hath breathed on my weakness for your sakes , i shall rejoice in that mercy and grace of his . I rest , 

Yours in all righteous engagements , John Saltmarsh . Laystreet octob. 28.  

Finis . 











