ELEGY On the Much to be Lamented Death of the Right Honourable , ALEXANDER Lord REATH , One of His Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council , and Exchequer , etc.  Departed this Life , March 21 1698.  

IT seems the Heavens begins to frown , the World draws near an end 
When Wisdom drops down to the Grave , that did this Land defend ; 
Great A'banie , go mourn a while , my Quill is drooping Tears , 
thou lost not such a Friend I trow , no not this Hundred years ; 
Now Wisdom , Charity and Love , put on your ragged Gown , 
There is a Jewel very rich , this day , fallen from your Crown ! 
The Voice of Poor , like Echo cries , making a doleful Sonnet , 
Until the Council find a Head , that well can fill his Bonnet . 
His Wisdom lay in Silence long , until it got a Vent , 
Like precious Ointment gave a Smell , the King than for him sent : 
And gave him places Honourable , he did Deserve them All , 
In future Ages for to come , will be Chrononical . 
Dame Nature has been very bold , that Framed him at first , 
The Motto of his Emblem was , GOD says , Be Good and Just ; 
And when he came into the World he was endued with Grace , 
Than Reason did take hold thereon , and sat in Nature's place : 
Virtue sent him to her Garden , to see what Flower he would pull , 
There he pulled Grace , like Aaron's Rod , that buded ever still : 
then Virtue fell in Love with him , ' cause he had chosen the best , 
She says to Honour , follow him , he is my Real Guest . 
When Virtue saw that Honour went , and followed at his back , 
Wisdom cries aloud , I will run with Truth , to be his Cloak : 
And that will serve him all his Life , what ever he can need , 
But I 'll defy the Universe to take from it one Thread : 
As Solomon did Wisdom choice , for to obey God's Will ; 
So I resolved to follow him , and will do ever still . 
The Ark was of a curious Bulk , but was not very much . 
Yet it contained the World great , yea and the Holy Church . 
King David was but a little Man , Sober , but not Machia , 
Yet Wisdom found him out a way , to kill the Great Golia . 
His Virtuous Person and its Worth , before Others to discrive , 
For Virtue , Wisdom , Parts , and Grace , there 's few like him alive : 
His Wisdom like the Jordan's Flood o'erflowed , refreshed the Land , 
His Council great as Oracles , but none could it withstand . 
He spoke in council like to Job , with out all kind of fear , 
Grey Hairs rose up , and gave him praise , his Wisdom did admire . 
His Worthy Noble Family , even from their very Youth , 
The whole Track of their Life has been to Suffer for the Truth : 
Till Phoebus' rose with mighty heat , in all his Radiant Beams , 
They Sailed the Goulf , against the Tide , came to the Crystal Streams . 
Now thy Successor Leven Great , he is a Man Beloved 
In Council , State , and Mighty War , the King has him approved ; 
He did behave himself so well abroad by Sea and Land , 
Which made the King put him in Trust , Hie Keeper of SCOTLAND . 
Though now L : Reath lies in this Tomb , according to GOD'S Will , 
His Name and Fame continue shall in future Ages still . 
You Seraphims and Cherabims , Salute him with a Bless , 
he 's gone from Earth to Heavens Glor , that truly Honoured was , 
Ten Thousand Ages yet to come , is but to him one day . 
That Beatiphick Vision great , he will enjoy for ay . 
As One of the Saints , all called in White , upon Mount Zion Hill , 
Through Ages of Eternity the Lamb will follow still . 
Thomas Friends should make the Rivers run with Tears that 's shed below , 
He will not rise for all their Cries , till the last Trumpet blow . 
