A discourse betwixt lieutenant colonel John Lilburn close prisoner in the tower of London , and mr Hugh Peter : upon May 25. 1649.  

Published by a friend , for the public benefit . 

mat. 7. 15 , 16.  

Beware of false prophets , which come to you in sheep's clothing , but inwardly they are ravening wolves . 

Ye shall know them by their fruits : do men gather grapes of thorns , or figs of thistles ? 



London , printed in the year 1649.  

A discourse betwixt lieut. col. John Lilburn , close prisoner in the tower of London , and mr Hugh Peter ; upon Friday May 25 , 1649.  

This present Friday Mr.  Peter's , with one doctor Maysey of Kingston , and a captain of m. Burton's congregation that i have known formerly in major general Craford's regiment of foot , with the lieutenant of the tower , and my keeper , came into my lodging , where they found my wife and myself at dinner ; and after salutes of each other , Mr. Peter told me to this effect , that he had at or near the custom house , received an affront , for which he came to the lieutenant of the tower for reparation , and so was resolved to see me , being here , and kill two birds with one stone ; and being newly come from sea , and hearing i was here , he merely came to give me a visit , out of no other design in the world , but merely a bare visit . I replied to this purpose ; Mr. Peter , i know you well enough , and you know that i know you to be one of the setting-dogs , or stalking-horses of the great men of the army , with fair and plausible pretences to insinuate into men when they have done them wrong , and to work out their designs when they are in a strait , and cover over their blots that they have made , when they grow so visible , that they cannot well be hide , but will appear to their shame . 

He wondering that i entertained him with such a guage for his friendly visiting me ( As he called it ) i told him in effect , it was no halting before a cripple , for i knew him well enough , and those to whom he belonged . 

But he sat him down and ate and drunk with me , and fell a-wondering at all the stirs here , and what should be the cause of the late blood that was shed . I told him in effect , his great Masters could better inform him of that than i . Said he , they say , your bustling hath occasioned it . truly Sir , i say , their injustice , oppression and tyranny hath done it : and i am sure , i fetched not them out of Whitehall , or any other of their lodgings ; but they fetched me out of winchester-house , out of my bed and habitation , from my wife and children , and carried me to their thing called a council of state , who ( Like a company of righteous judges , the clean contrary way ) committed me to prison in the nature of a traitor , before ever they let me see accuser , accusation , prosecutor , or witness , or any due process of law : and yet time was , when the King impeached Kimbolton and the five members , and preferred a charge of seven articles against them of high-treason in the highest nature , recorded 1.  Part book decl. pag. 35. and only failed in a single punctilio of due process of law , that they cried out , it was such an invasion of the people's liberty , that four or five peccavies and recantations from him , recorded in their own declarations , would never serve their turn : but yet forty times more illegality exercised by themselves upon me , must be legal , just , and right in your great , just and righteous Masters , that now have a prerogative and privilege , they can neither say , do , nor act evil , although they commit me to prison without any crime pretended , or without ever letting me see accuser , or accusation , prosecutor or charge ; and yet into the bargain , deal worse with me then ever the heathen and pagan Romans dealt with Paul , who had nothing but the depraved light of nature to guide them , and yet in all his imprisonment never forbade or hindered any of his friends to visit or relieve him , although he were accused for a pestilent fellow , and a turner of the world up side down : but they lock me up in a close room , with sentinels at my door , and will not so much as at a distance let me speak with my friends ; nay , and for several days would not so much as let me see my wife : and yet , Mr. Peter , these are your religious , godly , conscientious Masters . And if this be the fruits of their saint-ship and religion , i do assure you , the devil is as good , if not a better saint : for he believes and trembles , which is more than i think they do : and if the sun shining upon the dunghill , make it stink , whether is the fault in the sun or the dunghill ? 

So , being at dinner with a summer's diet , the lieut. of the tower told me , i fared suitable to my allowance . what ? saith Mr. Peter , do they give him allowance ? ay , saith the lieutenant , they would allow him twenty shillings a week , and he refuseth it . Sa•d i to this purpose , Sir , forty shillings a week ( As diet is now ) will not provide me such meat : and besides , Mr. Peter , do your great Masters think , that my captivity shall make me value myself at the rate of such a scoundrel fellow ( Having been a lieutenant colonel in their service ) as to accept of twenty shillings a week , when the King ( Whom they beheaded for a tyrant ) allowed to the meanest ordinary man that ever he sent hither , three pound a week . I am sure , they have five times the King's revenue , and things are twice as dear as they used to be : and if they will imitate him in all his baseness , nay , and far out strip him , i will hold them to it a little , to imitate him in some of his virtues ; and therefore , unless they will allow me the allowance that is the custom of the place , i will have none of it : and you May tell them from me , i scorn to be fed by them with a bit and a knock . 

a little after , mr Peter casting his eye upon my law-books , takes up one of Cook's institutes , and professed , i was merely gulled in reading or trusting to these books , for there was no laws in England . 

I answered to this effect , that i did believe what he said ; for they ( Meaning his great Masters , Cromwell , Fairfax , &c. ) had destroyed them all . 

Nay , saith he , i tell you , there never was any in England . 

No ( Said i ) ? and taking up my statute-book , i turned him to the petition of right , and asked him whether that be a law or no ? 

No , saith he , it is none : and i would fain have you to define what law is . 

Mr. Peter , said i , i will not take upon me to define what law is in your sense , or in my own ; but i will turn you to a definition in the parliaments sense in their own book of declarations ; which i read to him , as followeth : the law is that which puts a difference between good and evil , betwixt just and unjust : if you take away the law , all things will fall into confusion , every man will become a law unto himself ; which in the depraved condition of human nature , must needs produce many great enormities : lust will become a law , and envy will become a law , covetousness and ambition will become laws ; and what dictates , what decisions such laws will produce , May easily be discerned . 

so , mr Peter , here is a definition of law by the parliament in the days of their primitive purity , before they had corrupted themselves with the commonwealth's money . And elsewhere it is their language , that the law is the safeguard , the custody of all private interests ; your honours , your lives , your liberties and estates are all in the keeping of the law : 

without this every man hath a like right to any thing . And elsewhere the law is called that right line that discovereth that which is tort crooked , or wrong ; the law is that right line that measures itself and a crooked line : 

the law is the best birthright the subject hath ; for thereby his goods , lands , wife , children , his body , life , honour , and estimation are protected from injury and wrong , being the surest sanctuary that a man can take , and the strongest fortress to protect the weakest of all . to every one of us there comes a greater inheritance by right and the law , then by our parents . Yea , and it is further said by their oracle , it is a miserable servitude or bondage where the law is uncertain , or unknown . 

he answers to this effect , i tell you saith he , for all this , there is no law in this nation , but the sword , and what it gives ; neither was there any law or government in the world , but what the sword gave and set up . 



Unto which i replied to this purpose , mr Peter , i look upon you as one of the principal guides of the army , and a man that doth from time to time speak very much the sense of the leaders of the army , being you lie in their bosoms , and know their secrets , and is much used by them , to trumpet abroad their principles and tenants ; but Sir , let me tell you withal , if your reasoning be sound and good , then if six thieves meet three , or four honest men , and because they are stronger than they , rob them , that act is righteous , sound and good , because their swords are stronger than the others ; and if any power be a just power that is uppermost because it is up , i wonder how you of the army , and they of the parliament can acquit yourselves of being rebels and traitors before God and man , in resisting and fighting against a just power in the King , who was a power up , & fenced about with abundance of laws so reputed in the common acceptation of English men , by the express letter of which i am sure of it , all those who ever they be that shall rise in arms against him , are ipso facto traitors ; and i would fain know , if it were not for the preservation of the laws , that holds out the people's liberties & freedoms , that the parliament and army engaged in theirs , against the King a just power , because he was up upon your own grounds ; what can you or any other make rationally to be the ground of the the wars ? But Sir , in short and in plain English , let me tell you , that if there be now no law in England , nor never was , that then you and your great Masters , Cromwell , Fairfax , and the parliament , are a pack of arrant bloody rogues and villains , in setting the persons together by the ears , to fight for the preservation of their laws , in which their liberty is contained ( Which is the principal declared cause of the war from the beginning to the end of the war never ) if there were no such thing in being as law in England : at which mr Peter was much startled , and much condemned my harsh language , though it be far short of what Christ himself used to his ( viz. mr Peter ) brothers , the scribes and Pharisees , upon the like occasion , mat. 23. 14. where he saith , woe unto you scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ; for ye devour widow's houses , and for a pretence make long prayer ; therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation : and in verse , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 31 , 32 , he saith , woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ; for ye pay tithe of mint , and anise , and cumin , and have omitted the weighty matters of the law , judgement , mercy , and faith : these aught ye to have done , and not to leave the other undone . Ye blind guides , which strain at a gnat , and swallow a camel . Woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ; for ye make clean the outside of the cup , and of the platter , but within they are full of extortion and excess . Thou blind Pharisee , cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter , that the outside of them May be clean also . Woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ; for ye are like unto whited sepulchers , which indeed appear beautiful outward , but are within full of dead men's bones , and of all uncleanness . Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men , but within ye are full of hypocr•sie and iniquity . Woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ; because ye build the tombs of the prophets , and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous , and say . If we had been in the days of our fathers we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets . Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves , that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets . Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers . and in the 8th of John , when the Jews in their works and actions denied Abraham and God to be their father , and yet in words owned them both for their father , verse 39 41.  Christ in the 44 verse , tells them plainly , ye are of your father the devil , and the lusts of your father ye will do : he was a murderer from the beginning , and abode not in the truth , because there is no truth in him . Wh•n h• speaketh a lie , he speaketh of his own : for he is a liar , and the father of it . and the apostle Paul's exhortation to his followers , is to reprove such notorious hypocritical workers of iniquity sharply . 

But after he had sufficiently condemned my language in speaking plain English , which i say , is the whole current of the scripture to incorrigible dissembling men as they are : he again and again protested and desired the company to bear witness , that he in saying , there was no law in England , did not speak the sense of the army , but his own proper opinion , and also protested , he had no design in coming to me , but a bare visit ; and wondered i would be so hot at him for his love ; and he was far enough from any of their designs : i replied to this purpose , mr Peter , you know i know you well enough , and i tell you , in a play , every player hath his part , yea even the seeming fool , and many times they act with a seeming violence , and against one another ; but they all centre in this end to get the spectators money from them ; i leave you to make application : and i tell you moreover , the last year , when the stirs began , when Sir John Maynard , and the four aldermen were prisoners here at the tower , you came and took up your lodging at col. Whits , under pretence of reposing yourself , and being nigh your businesses , being bound in all haste to New-england as you said , although you never intended it , i am confident of it , in the least , but merely came hither upon a design finely coloured over , to work a compliance in Sir John Maynard , and the four aldermen to your great Masters , that so seeing the city baffled of their liberty , they Might come off with as little loss of reputation in their deliverance as Might be ; and i believe some such thing if not worse in the bottom of your visiting of me at this time : but he replied very bitterly and earnestly , again and again , calling God to witness , he had no design the last year upon Sir John Maynard , and the aldermen , in his coming to the tower , nor upon me in his coming to visit me ; and told me , i need not be so passionate , there was no fear of the loss of my life : to which i replied , to this effect ; Sir , i know you , and your Masters so well , and that you have so couzoned and cheated all parties and interests that ever you dealt with , so visibly and evidently , never keeping either faith , promise , or engagements with any of them , longer than it served your present turns ; it being beyond a maxim long since amongst some of you so to do , that i do protest unto you , both for you and them , i will not believe one word ye say , swear , or protest , but the more earnest you or they are in any of them , the more jealous i will be of you ; and therefore know this for hereafter , that where ever i meet your Masters , or any of their under depending tribe , i will be upon my guard , as though i were amongst a company of the arrentest cheaters and deceivers in the world ; by whom i hope i shall never be cozoned any more with credulity and honesty ; for i will never hereafter believe you , though i should be glad you would deceive me once again in doing good to the poor nation , for it is easily in you power ; but i believe you will never do it ; and for my life , if i were to lay it down to morrow , i would scorn to beg or entreat for it , from any of your Masters ; and if it be in no danger , it is no thanks to them , for i am confidently persuaded in my very heart , it is not mine an hour longer , than they dare take it away , either by hook or crook , but it May prove a choke pear to them , when ever they go about it . But Sir , said i , i thought i had been safe enough , when i squared my actions by the rules of those laws that they have often sworn , declared , and promised year after year , and month after month to maintain and defend ; and make as the standard or touchstone betwixt them and the persons , as they have done with the petition of right , &c.  

I but saith he , i will show you your great mistake in that particular , and that your safety ••es not therein : so i longed to hear that . well , saith he , their minds May change , and then where are you ? i but Sir , said i , i cannot take notice of what is in their minds to obey that ; but the constant declaration of their minds , ( Without ever so much as in any one declaration contradicting it ) as that they will maintain the petition of right , and the liberties therein contained , must be the rule of my obedience : and the petition of right , by reason of their constant declarations to preserve it , i make the rule of my obedience and actings amongst men , and think i shall be safe thereby : but when they shall publicly declare , they scorn the petition of right , and will neither maintain that nor any other laws or compacts amongst the men of this nation , but what flows daily from their wills and pleasures ; i shall alter my mind , and expect no benefit by the petition of right ; but when that is , let me tell you , i shall rather desire to live in Turkey under the great Turk , then in England under your religious Masters at Whitehall and Westminster , for there is no such tyrant or persecuter in the world , as an apostate , that one turns his back of justice , righteousness and truth : but Mr. Peter , as for things at present , tell your Masters from me , that if it were possible for me now to choose , i had rather choose to live seven years under old King Charles his government , ( Notwithstanding their beheading him as a tyrant for it ) when it was at the worst before this parliament , then live one year under their present government that now rule : nay , let me tell you , if they go on with that tyranny they are in , they will make Prince Charl• have friends enough , not only to cry him up , but also really to fight for him to bring him into his father's throne , that so they May have their just desires of perfidious cruel bloody tyrants , and the persons of the land some ease and rest from their insupportable burdens and oppressions : yea , and for my particular , i must aver unto you , i had rather by many degrees choose to live under a regulated and well-bounded King without tyranny , then under any government with tyranny . Here is the substance of my discourse with Mr. Peter , saving i pinched him a little particularly upon his great Masters large fingering of the commonwealth's money , which was no better than theft in them , and state-robbery in the highest , ( As i told him . ) i but , saith he , •reton hath got none : then , said i , former reports are false ; and besides , if he have not , what need he , when his father-in-law gets so much for them both , as 3 or 4000 l. per annum at one clap ; with well-nigh twenty thousand pounds worth of wood upon it , if parliament men's relations May be believed : besides , the persons that know them , know the father and son piss both in one gully ; though they seem sometime to go one against another , yet it is but that they May the more easily and thoroughly drive on the main design of them both : viz. to make the persons slaves . and so farewell Mr. Peter . 

Finis . 



















