The gallant rights , Christian privileges , solemn institutions of the Sea-green order ; or the martial colours of the three grand Machabean nobles , viz.  1.  Captain-honesty , of the lineage of David . 
Ii captain-justice , of the lineage of Solomon . 
Iii captain-freedom , of the lineage of Nehemiah . 
being all up now in arms contra gentes , for a good persons and a good parliament , according to this their present declaration . 

The first institution . 

To all true cordial English souls inhabitant or dispersed through Europe , Asia , Africa , and America ; to Jew and gentile , freeborn and slave : be it by these presents made known , published and declared , that we , the legitimate Princes of the earth , justice , freedom , and honesty , having for a time , times , and half a time , by the tyranny of unjust monarchs and arbitrary Lords , been forcibly exiled , and from our native rights debarred ; are now , at the time of the end , come down into the world to chastise injustice , to settle peace , and to reassume the sceptre in our own hands , as our proper due , against Emperors , Kings , armies , counsels , maugre men and devils ; commanding all other Princes to lay down their sceptres at our feet , and greatness to come under the command of goodness ; for this is the first fundamental right of the Sea-green order . 

Secondly , be it next declared , that we intend to advance our royal standard , first in England , this present year of King Jesus 1648. and this by commission from God our King , and the parliament of heaven , unalterably , uncontroulably ; and have for that purpose made choice of the deep seagreen for our flag and colours , and do hereby ordain and authorise it to be worn as the lively badge of constancy , sufferance and valour in grain , the cognizance of justice and the mark of freedom and deliverance . 

Thirdly , be it by us ordered , that whatsoever noble heart shall abhor the yoke of prerogative pleasure , the chains of slavery , and tyranny by Princes , the agents and cruel instruments of Princes : whosoever shall detest the arbitrary power and voice negative : whosoever shall abominate the self willed pomp and dominion of Lords temporal and spiritual , the juggling of bribed judges , the devilish inextriable snares of the law-courts , and their petty fogging sitting dogs , ( Pleaders , officers of court , attorneys , solicitors , perjured sergeants , bailiffs , undersheriffs , ) with all their quirks , demurs , and quillets : whosoever is seeing and sensible of the late bloody plots , and still raging designs , of Antichristian Christians : whosoever groans under the present extortions , unequal taxes , unjust levies , inevitable monopolies , new charters , plunders and avarice of committees , bondage of prison under inhuman gaolors , oppression of landlords , all wardships , all hardships ; let them , upon sight hereof , take up the cross , and follow Christ their King ; take up our colours ; and follow us their leaders ; and in so doing the Sea-green shall be the badge of their warrant and protection . 

Fourthly , be it hereby instituted , that every one so wearing our colours in hatband , cuff , garment , hilt , bridle , main , or sail , in relation to equity , freedom and honesty , shall from henceforth , according to our noble order , be entitled the free born assistant of justice , ( But according to the order of King Charles , levellers , ) his is new , ours is old . 

Fifthly , be it further instituted , that every champion of the Sea-green order shall vow a sacred vow , in all his prayers and endeavours , to level first the mountain of his own heart , pride , ambition , avarice , self hopes , self ends , self revenge , for this is the true level of the internal Antichrist . 

Sixthly , it is decreed , that every such assistant of justice shall fearlessly resolve , promise and assent to his utmost power , to level to the earth all the unequal knobbiness , — and uneven risings — of injustice pomp , tyranny and oppression , as the very causes of this war and things abominated in the eyes of an angry God , saints and angels ; be it in Prince , peer , prelate , judge , magistrate , and that without difference or exception of persons , parties , religions , relations , titles , dignities , indifferently and indistinctly ; for this is the level of the external Antichrist : so help him Christ , and the three Machabean Princes . 

Next , it is hereby concluded , that honesty among the levellers shall be Counted for the best policy , and simplicity shall bear up the buckler against a whole junto of Machavil , and politics Woodbee . 

Be it also hereby known to all the gallant common soldiers , serving under the excellent Fairfax , and faithful Crumwel , that however their grandee Masters have ill repaid their labours , yet we their captains have from time to time carefully enrolled their valour , sufferings , scorns , nakedness and losses in the register of equity , man by man ; and do by these presents engage our honours for a full requital , far above indemnity with money , bays , and thanks , according to the degrees of each man's desert in war ; provided that the said soldier go on as he hath begun , stand to our colours , and appear at our summons , according to the rights of the Sea-green order . 

Lastly , be it enacted and declared , that whosoever shall jeer , baffle , or vilify our colours , or reproach the wearer — shall be censured an anti-leveller , a malignant revolter , grandee creature , or dammee varlet , and to be registered by the Sea-green scout in the Roul of justice and revenge ; but whoever shall constantly and habitually affect us , and our colours , shall be admitted into our favour , whether gallant cavalier , or valiant reformadoe . 

Ordered that this be read in the two houses twice a week , as also once a week in the army , and every parish church for a month . Signed by captain Mordecay . Love right , secretary general to the three Machabean Princes , and the noble state of levellers 







