The immediate call to the ministry of the gospel , witnessed by the spirit : with a true declaration of the persecution and suffering of Richard Hubberthorne James Parnell , Ann blaying , by will Pickering , who is mayor of Cambridge . 

Also an answer to divers letters and mittimuses , against the said prisoners , answered ; 

By them , who are sufferers for the truth , and for the testimony of Jesus , Richard Hubberthorn , James Parnell . 

London , printed for Giles Calvert , at the black-spread-eagle at the West end of Paul's , 1654.  

The immediate call to the ministry of the gospel , witnessed by the spirit . 

With a true declaration of the persecution and suffering for the gospel , under the tyranny of the mayor of Cambridge ; which gospel of Jesus Christ , wherever it was made manifest , the testimony of it was ever sealed with blood , persecution and sufferings , and it is the same now , working the same effect , and bearing the same seal , as is witnessed . 

And also an answer to several false reproaches given forth in writing , in three letters under the hand of Will Pickering mayor of Cambridge : which herein is discovered and laid open , that so the truth May be cleared , and all magistrates , priests and persons May discern truth from scandals , and that all simple hearts and minds May be informed to receive the truth freely , without stumbling at reproaches , through which the prophets , and apostles , and servants of Jesus Christ did bear witness to the truth , isai. 51. 7.  Heb. 11. 26. esteeming the reproaches of Christ greater riches than the pleasures of the world , and the apostles were to go forth to him without the camp , bearing his reproach , heb. 13. 13.  If ye be reproached for the name of Christ , happy are ye , for the spirit of God , and of glory , resteth upon you , 1 pet. 4. 14.  

From one whom the Lord , by his eternal spirit , hath called to bear witness to his truth , and to his word , and gospel , made manifest in me by the revelation of Jesus Christ , whose life and conversation hath been blameless in the world , whom no outward law did ever take hold upon for evil doing , but was strict and zealous in an outward profession of God and Christ , exceeding many in wisdom and knowledge in the letter of the scripture , and had a form of godliness , but the power of it i was ignorant of , and was a stranger to the life of God , which the saints lived in , which spoke forth the scripture according to their measure , and the word of God , which the saints spoke from , i was ignorant of , though i knew the letter , and was a minister of the letter before i knew the power of the word of God ; but when the living powerful word of God was made manifest in me by his mighty power , than i was made silent from speaking any thing of God from that knowledge and wisdom , which was natural , and did arise out of the earth , in which stood my zeal , and profession , and form of godliness , which was all without , in words , and outward appearance , and outward righteousness , and outward holiness , & the earthly nature standing , which all outward profession and forms lodge in : but when the word of God by his mighty power was made manifest within me , spoken from his own mouth , which word was in my heart as a fire which did burn up corruption and uncleanness , and work out the defiled nature , and by it was all the powers of the earth brought down , and the earth itself shaken , by it the deviss were made to tremble , and were cast out , and in that day did the keepers of the house tremble , and the strong man cry bitterly , and the just judgements of God did fall upon that nature i lived in , and the terrors and wrath of the Lord took hold upon me , till the flesh was wasted off the bones , that i could number my bones day and night , the terrors of the Lord was upon me , revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness , against all my own righteousness , and all my familiars and acquaintance stood afar off me , for i was a wonder to all them who lived in that nature that i had lived in , for they knew not the judgements of God against sin , which then was upon me , because of disobedience to the light which did make manifest sin and evil ; but hearing the word of the Lord in power spoken within me , did confound all my wisdom and knowledge , and made me to be a fool to the wisdom of the world , and to deny the wisdom , and to deny myself , and my own will , and by this word was i called to come out of my own country , kindred , and father's house , to do the Lord's work , in obedience to his command , and to stand in his will out of my own will , for i knew the voice of God which called me ; and for this cause did i leave father and mother , lands and living , earthly honour , and earthly riches , which i had , and Might have lived in , if i had been disobedient to the command of God , but the Lord called me forth by his mighty power to bear witness to him in the world , and to declare and preach forth the gospel of the son of God , according to my measure , as it was made manifest within me , and by his word to declare against all sin , and iniquity , and unrighteousness of men , and in obedience to him who called me did i go , as i was moved by his eternal spirit , into several parts of this nation , towns , and cities , and countries , in the North and West part of England and Wales , bearing testimony to the truth , and in some parts sealing the testimony with my blood , and by imprisonments , in persecution , in perils , often under trials of cruel mockings , scourgings , and revilings , enduring the contradiction of sinners , and do not account my life dear unto myself , that i May render to the Lord a good account of my faithfulness , in obedience to him who hath called me into his work , and vineyard , and this is all the wages that the ministers of the gospel receive from the world , being accounted as deceivers , yet true , as having nothing , yet possessing all things , as poor , yet making many rich , the servant is not greater than his Lord , John 15. 20. who hath suffered the same things , and hath left a good example , and if it be the will of God that we suffer with him in the obedience to him , are we made willing , not only unto bonds , but unto death , who do now bear his reproach ; and by the spirit of the Lord was i moved , in obedience to him , to come to this town , where some did receive the testimony of the truth , where i stayed certain days , and we had certain meetings publicly from house to house , and the hands of the persecutors was then bound by the mighty power of God , and they limited from acting the persecution which was in their hearts , which now they have acted so far as their power doth reach , but the sea must keep its bounds , and cannot break them . Then i passed forth of the town , as i was moved of the Lord , to another persons , till again i was moved to come into the town , not knowing when i came in whether i should stay two days in the town , but waiting in the will of God , out of my own will , i came , as i was moved , and laboured in travel night and day in the Lord's work and service , to make the gospel of Christ without charge : and coming into the town upon the 21 day of the six month at night , and lay at a friend's house in the town , and in the morning , as i went into the street in the market place , two men followed me , and commanded me to go with them two before the mayor , who when i came before him , came unto me , & violently took off my hat & threw it upon the ground and asked me whence i came , and where i had lived , and of what calling i was , and what i came thither for ? unto which i gave an account , and said , that if i had broken any law , or if any man can lay any thing to my charge , let them prove it , and act the law upon me according to the offence , but none could prove any thing . Then the mayor asked me , if i would go out of the town , else i should be whipped out . Then i answered , when the Lord calls me out i shall go , for i stand in obedience to the will of God , not to the will of man , and if thou canst prove any thing against me worthy of stripes , prove it , and act it upon me , but i have wronged no man , nor am i guilty of the breach of any law . Then the mayor said , i have a law against thee , i will make thee a wandering person , and a rogue ; which i denied . Then the mayor wrote a paper to send me to prison , and then read it unto me , which was full of lies ; which i denied . Then he wrote another , which i denied like wise : then i said unto him , make not lies thy law , but write that which is true ; and then he threw by that , and wrote another . Then i was moved of the Lord to say these words unto him , thou that makes laws in thy own will , contrary to the law of God , the plagues of God is thy portion . Then the mayor answered , now i have a law against thee , thou curses me , and said to them that stood by , if any of you will but take your oath that he hath cursed , we have a law to punish him ; but none took their oath . Then i answered and said , look in the law what cursing is , if thou canst prove it to be a curse by the law , is the scripture language a curse ? Then he bid me hold my tongue , for he could not endure to hear me , and said , that i should either pay 3 s. 4 d or sit three hours in the stocks : i answered , first prove the law broken ; but he being in a rage , sent me to the stocks for three hours , and then sent me to the dungeon : and upon the next day , being the third day of the week , one friend coming out of the North , who came to see me , and had traveled 300 miles before he came to me , lying but one night in the town at that time , as he was coming in the morning to the prison to see me , one Constable took him in the street , and had him before the mayor , he giving no offence at all , the mayor fell a beating of him , calling him a wandering rogue , and presently made a mittimus and sent him to the dungeon , commanding that none should come at him , though no offence was proved against him , and there continue till the seventh day of the week ; then being set free by a warrant , according to law , we came into the town , and upon the first day of the week , being met together to wait upon the Lord , the mayor sent two constables with a warrant to bring us two before him , that we Might be sent out of the town , as was expressed in the warrant ; the constables having served the warrant , justice Blackley coming in at the same time , did show them an act which they had broken , and so had broken the law ; and the constables than went away , and did prosecute the warrant no further at that time : the next day in the morning one constable and the jailer came to the house where i lay , and commanded me to go with them to the mayor ; and when i came before him , having nothing against me , asked me , if i would go out of the town ? I answered , when the Lord calls me out i shall go , for i stand in the will of God , not in the will of man . The mayor said , thou dost not follow the examples of the apostles , for when they were persecuted in one city they fled into another , but we cannot get thee out by no means ; and so owned himself to be of the same generation that persecuted the apostles . I answer , i have done no wrong , no guile , nor violence to any man , nor broken any law , if thou hast any law against me , read the law unto me , and if i have wronged any man , i shall make restitution four fold , according to the law of God , but proving none . The mayor said , this is the law , thou shalt choose three things : first , whether thou wilt quietly depart out of the town : or secondly , go to prison , and be kept close , that none shall come at thee , nor have any thing but what thou earns to lie upon : or thirdly , to be whipped and sent out of the town . 

And here let all persons consider how contrary he acts to the law of the nation , for if by the law he could prove me to be a rogue , or guilty of any other breach of the law , than here he breaks the law himself , in giving me liberty to go away without any punishment according to the offence : and again , here he hath broken the law , & acts contrary to it , in imprisoning me , & putting me in the dungeon , having no law against me , but because i will not go away out of the town when he doth command me to go ; and here all persons May see , that he who pretends to be a minister of the law , hath imprisoned me contrary to the law . And again , there is no law in the nation that offereth these three conditions unto rogues ; as either to depart quietly out of the town , or be imprisoned , or whipped ; let all who know the law judge : and so contrary to the law of God , and the law of the nation , do i , and others of the servants of the Lord , suffer , under a law made in the will of man ; as one And blacklain hath been kept in prison above three months for declaring against the deceits of a priest publicly in the steeplehouse : and James Parnell hath been kept in prison almost three months , and is now put into the dungeon , for setting up of a paper publicly in the market place , that thereby both priest and persons Might see the truth cleared , and their deceits discovered , that so coming to own the truth of God , they Might keep the peace , which all the world hath broken by disobedience to the light of Christ , in the conscience , and so for declaring the truth , and publishing it forth in writing publicly , is imprisoned , and no breach of the law proved against him ; and so they both remain in prison under this pretence , of bringing in sureties for good behaviour , when as they are not guilty , nor no misbehaviour proved against them , but all who suffer as Christians , in the obedience to the will of God , need not be ashamed . 

And under the same tyranny and law , made in the will of man , do i now suffer , only because that at the command of will . Pickering mayor of Cambridge i did not go out of the town to fulfil his will , and so have disobeyed the command of the Lord , did he send me to the dungeon , and commanded the jailor that none should be suffered to come to me , nor bring any thing unto me , nor that i should have any thing but what i earned : and since i was first cast into this hole , there is several reproaches , and 〈◊〉 , and false accusations cast upon me and the rest of my brethren ; and i am not suffered to have my accusors face to face , that the law May take hold upon the guilty , and that the truth Might be cleared , and my accusors known , for since i was first put into this place , there are three several papers of lies and slanders published forth by will . Pickering mayor , under his own hand , the first dated August 23. the second aug. 28. the third aug. 29.  

1.  Accusation . that we are idle wandering persons , and rogues , living upon poor silly persons , which some of them are now kept by the parish themselves . 

I answer , this accusation is false , for from the Lord are we sent , to declare against all deceit and unrighteousness of men , and against all those who lay heavy burdens upon the poor by deceit and oppression , and against all who live in pride , and idleness and fullness of bread , by whom the creation is devoured , and many made poor by your means , and you who are rich , who live at ease , and in pleasure , you live upon the labours of the poor , and lay heavy burdens upon them , grievous to be born , and you May the poor complain of , but they who do receive our testimony there is the heavy burdens taken off , and the poor is cased , and whosoever do receive the truth in the love of it , which we freely declare from the Lord , and hath this world's good , he cannot see the poor in need , nor want , nor beg their bread , but the truth where it is received opens the bowels of compassion , and takes off oppression and the heavy burden which the poor groans under , but we are not chargeable , nor our gospel , not to the rich , nor to the poor , neither doth any who have received us complain , nor is chargeable to the parish , is neither kept nor maintained by it . Therefore in the presence of the living God i do charge thee to cease from falsely accusing the innocent , who can neither prove us to be rogues nor deceivers , as the fruit of our ministry shall bear witness in them who have received it , who can witness , that they are led out of much deceit and ungodliness which before they lived in , and we have not been burdensome nor chargeable unto them through idleness , God is our witness , we have coveted no man's gold , nor silver , nor meat , nor drink , nor apparel ; and here we are falsely accused for the name of Christ , and for the gospel sake , which we freely do declare as we have freely received it . 

2.  Accusation . The mayor saith , that the law makes idle wandering persons to be rogues , those that will not work if they have not any thing of their own to live upon , those that use deceit full ways to get maintenance by , these by the laws of the land are all rogues , and such are these in my judgement , and in my soul and conscience i am troubled that i have done no more to them then i have done , to rid the town of them . 

I answer , here thou hast showed thy judgement , and made it manifest , that this persecuting will is thy law , and hast acted contrary , which thou hast here declared to be the law of the land concerning rogues , who doth keep us here in prison , in the dungeon , under the pretence of rogues , and hath not proved any of these things against us , which thou sayest makes rogues , not to be idle wandering persons , nor hast not proved us to have nothing of our own to live upon , nor hast not proved that we have used any deceitful ways to get maintenance by , and here by the laws of the land we are cleared , who are not guilty of any of those things , •…d so the laws of the land will take hold upon thee and all our accusers , who hath imprisoned us for rogues , when there is no witness against us to prove the breach of any law of the land , for by the law of justice and equity we desire to be judged . 

And thou who sayest , in thy soul and conscience thou art troubled that thou hast done no more to us than thou hast done , that in thy conscience shall witness against thee for what thou hast already done , and will let thee see , that thou hast acted contrary to that in the conscience , the light of Christ , and that in thy conscience will condemn thee , and hast acted contrary to the law of the land , as by that in thy conscience thou shalt be judged , which will let thee see , that thou art not a doer of the law of God , nor a minister of the law of the nation , but a maker of laws according to thy judgements , and acting them upon the righteous , whom the law was not made for , that thou Mayest rid the town of those who come to witness the law of God to be fulfilled in them , and to establish righteousness in the earth , and to bring persons from under the transgression of all laws , to witness one law giver , Jesus Christ who is our law giver . 

3 accusation . The mayor saith , that one of us told him when he desired him to go out of the town , that he would not , for he was sent to destroy the town . 

I answer , this accusation is false , for there was not such a word spoken , neither can any such thing be proved , for we came not to destroy men lives , but to say them , and to preach Jesus Christ the saviour of the world , and do speak from the Lord to that in the conscience of every one , the light of Christ , which will let every one in particular see , that his destruction is of himself , and by the light of Christ , unto which we are made manifest in every man's conscience , are we cleared from all such slanders and reproaches , which are falsely cast upon us for the name of Christ , who was reproached as we are , and his reproaches we bear daily , and are not ashamed of , as the scripture saith , which by us is witnessed daily ; and the laws of the land , being executed in justice and equity , will take hold upon our accusers , and clear us . 

4.  Accusation . that we have left our honest callings , one being a husbandmanservant , and another a shoemaker , and now living upon the labours of other men . 

I answer , we are in our callings whereunto the Lord hath called us , and do abide in our calling , and he that doth abide in his calling abides with God , and this i witness , who am called from father and mother , lands and livings , and from the cutward employment which i lived honestly in , but was never servant to any man in that calling , that accusation is false ; and my call is to the work of the Lord , to labour in his vineyard , who once had a vineyard without to labour in , as you have , who live in your earthly possessions and habitations , and that calling was lawful in its place , and i did abide in it till the word of the Lord came and called me from it into his work , who now cares for me , and provides for me , without taking thought or care what to eat , or what to drink , or wherewith to be clothed , for after all these things do the heathens seek , who knows not God , and my call is from God immediately , not from man , and in the scripture i have a cloud of witnesses : who were all called by God , and left their callings : Elisha was called from the plough as he was following the plough , 1 Kings 9 10. and David was called from keeping the sheep , who was a shepherd , 1 sam. 16. 11 , 12. and by the word of the Lord was Jeremiah called to be a prophet , who said , he was a child , and could not speak , but the Lord said , that he would put his word in his mouth , and that he should go whithersoever the Lord commanded him , and that he should not fear the faces of men , for he would deliver him , and that he should speak whatsoever he commanded him , jer. 1. 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10.  And by the same word was Amos called , as he was following the flock , who was a herdsmand , and a gatherer of Sicamore fruit , Amos 7. 14 , 15 , 16 and the apostles were fishermen , and tradesmen , and Paul a tentmaker , & •hose all left their honest callings to do whatsoever the Lord commanded them , some to prophesy , and some to preach the gospel , and the same word of God , and the same call , and the same spiri• i do witness , by which i am called from my outward calling ; and by the same law , by which i am accused for leaving my honest calling , and commanded to it again , by the same would Elisha be accused , and commanded to go to the plough again ; and Amos for leaving the flock and vineyard , to go to prophesy in the King's chapel at Bethell ; but Amasiah the priest was offended at Amos , for leaving his calling , and for prophesying at Bethell , and commanded him to go away , that he should neither prophesy , nor eat bread there , though he was commanded of the Lord : and the same spirit doth appear in you , both priests and magistrates , in Cambridge , with them who are sent of the Lord , and commanded as Amos was : and you say this is the unversity , and you have teachers enough of your own , but none of them can witness , that the Lord ever called them , or commanded them : but they who are called and commanded by the Lord , and in obedience to him do come , them you command to go cut of the town to follow their callings again , and so by the same law command the prophets to their callings again , and the apostles to their nets again , and Paul to make tents again , and Matthew to the receipt of customs again , which they were all called from ; but Amos did not go to Bethell to be a herdsman , but to declare the word of the Lord ; nor the apostles did not go to fish , and to their nets again to get their living , but they were made fishers of men : and were persecuted from city to city , and threatened , and straitly charged to speak no more in that name , and to depart their coasts , as i am commanded to depart from Cambridge to teach in my own country ; but they obeyed god rather than man , and were not idle wandering rogues , though they had left their lawful callings , and had no certain dwelling place , but did go whithersoever the Lord commanded them , to preach the gospel to every creature , and to all nations , and took no thought what to eat , or what to drink , nor wherewith to be clothed , and did eat no man's bread for naught ; and the same i witness ; and the prophets , nor the apostles , when they were put into prisons and dungeons , you do not read , that they were forced to work to fulfil the will of their persecutors , nor that ever Paul , nor the rest of the apostles , nor servants of Jesus Christ , when they were cast into prison , or dungeons , that for the testimony of Jesus , that ever they were charged or commanded to beat hemp , or else not eat , as the taskmaster of Cambridge doth command , but their labour and work was to beget into the truth , and some were begotten in their bonds , as Paul witnessed in the epistle to Philemon , 10. vers. and the apostle Paul suffered trouble , as an evil doer , even unto bonds , but the word of God was not bound , 2 tim. 2. 9  This is a faithful saying , if we suffer with him we shall also reign with him , if we deny him , he also will deny us : and for his sake , who hath called me , do i suffer all things , and endure all things , and am not ashamed of his sufferings , but in obedience to the will of God , do i deny the will of man , and suffer by the will of man , God is my witness , and my conscience also bearing me witness in the presence of God . 

And this of the Lord i was moved to publish forth , that the truth May be cleared from scandals , and the persecution and tyranny of unreasonable men made manifest to all sorts of persons , who come to see , and to read with understanding ▪ and here have cleared my conscience , being free from the guilt of the blood of all men , and have laid thesin to the charge , and to the door of those who are guilty . 

From a servant and a prisoner of Jesus Christ in Cambridge , Richard Hubberthorne . 

A copy of a mittimus made in the will of the mayor of Cambridge . 

To the keepers of the touleboth in Cambridge . 

Whereas James Parnell hath been brought before me , and hath been examined , and hath confessed , that he was sent to this town to set dissension in this town , in many particulars , as by his examination May fully appear , and further , hath confessed that he set up a paper in the market , the last market day , in this town , which is a libel against the ministers and magistrates of the said town , and further misdemeanours is proved against him : these are therefore in the name of the Lord protector of England , that you receive him into your custody , and him safely keep , that he May be forth coming to answer the premises the next sessions : fail not at your peril . 

given under my hand , 3d July , 1654.  Will. Pickering mayor . 

A reply to the foresaid mittimus . 

As for my coming before thee , it was by thy authority , for i was in a friend's house , called justice Blackley , and there was a man , called a constable , in a shop over against the house , waiting for my coming forth , and as i was going over the way , with some writings in my hand which concerned the truth of God , the constable , so called , came and met me , and told me i must go with him , and i said , if he had authority i should go with him , and he said he had ; and so in obedience to the authority i went along , and he brought me before thee , and thou came violently and took off my hat , and cast it upon the earth , calling me rogue , and other such like terms , which was in thy will , and not in thy law , and therefore thou art not fit to be a magistrate , for he that is guided by his own will is not fit to be a magistrate , for he makes his will a law , and the law is not to be made by the will of man ; and then thou came and caused my pockets to be searched , and thou took my writings from me , and said , there Might be some treason in them , and i said , if there was any thing under the law , let me suffer by the law ; and thou came violently once or twice as if thou wouldst have smote me , calling me rogue , and witch , and the like ; and i said , if thou couldst prove me either a rogue , or a witch , let me suffer as a rogue or a witch ; but whether this be in thy law or no , i know not , so i shall leave it to those who knows the law to judge of it ; but i am sure it is contrary to the law of God , and so to that thou art a transgressor , and by him thou must be judged : and then thou asked me , why i came to the town to make division : and i said , Christ came for the same , to set at variance father against son , and son against father , as the scripture makes it appear , mat. 10. 35. and i witnessethe same fulfilled , and this thou sets as an article against me . Now let any one consider , if thou wouldst not imprisoned Christ if he was personally here , but in as much as thou dost it to one of his , thou dost it to him , mat. 25 , 45. and here thou hast manifested thyself to be a tyrant , who imprisons the servants of Jesus Christ for confessing him , who begins the war wheresoever he comes , his first appearance is with the sword to that which is for the sword , and bring peace and deliverance to the captives , and to lead captivity captive , Luke 4. 8. and this we witness fulfilled , and for this end are we come to the town of Cambridge , which is one of the devils strongest holds , from whence he sends forth his messengers into the world to deceive the nations , but the Lord is come to beat up his quarters , and now the war is begun , and the devil hath cast some of us into prison , but still the war goeth on , and the lamb will get the victory , and the beast , and the false prophet , and all that have the mark of the beast , must be cast into the lake that burneth , &c. rev. 20. 10 , to the end . rev. 19 20.  

And then thou examined me if i owned a paper , which thou showed me , and i said i did , and thou set that down as an article against me , for putting up a paper , which thou sayest is against the ministers and magistrates of Cambridge , and here thou accuseth the ministers and magistrates of Cambridge , to be corrupt and heathenish , for the paper only declared against corrupt magistrates , and heathenish priests , wheresoever they are , and so if there be any law transgressed here , it is thou that hast transgressed it ; and so for these things thou sent me to prison , and thou sayest , for other misdemeanours , and not one of the town of Cambridge can tax me for any misdemeanour , for i am redeemed out of the generation of misdemeanours , and was bound to good behaviour , by a stronger bond than man can make , before i came at the town of Cambridge ; but let any who hath understanding judge , whether thy behaviour or mine was the more like misdemeanour ; but for this cause thou sent me to prison , but i know not by what law , but thou sayest in the name of the Lord protector of England , but i believe him , whom thou callest Lord protector , would deny to own it , for if he should own it , he would own tyranny and oppression , and would show himself to be an oppressor of the truth of God , and a protector of tyranny and oppression , and the Lord protector of heaven and earth would cut him off , and if he wink at such tyrants as thou art , the Lord will smite him with his sword , and will cut him off from off the face of the earth , and set another in his room , as he hath had examples before him : and thou bragged to me of a tyranny done by thee , and said , thou caused two of my sisters to be whipped the third day , 1653. but i tell thee , the Lord God of all power will whip thee with a rod of vengeance , and him too , whom thou callest Lord protector of England , who hath the power of England in his hand , if he uphold or suffer such tyranny , or any punishment to be acted against or upon any tender consciences , contrary to the law of God ; and so i leave him without excuse in the presence of the Lord , and judgement at thy door , who callest thyself 

Will . Pickering . 

A reply to some speeches objected against Ann Blacklane , called Quaker , in touleboth , by one Philip Johnson , calling himself a minister of the world , and calls these sayings dangers , and damnable doctrines , errors and heresies . 

object . 1.  That she said , the scriptures written by the prophets and apostles are not the word of God , but Christ , and that the scriptures are not sufficient light and means to find Christ , and for us to rely upon , contrary to these places of scripture , mat. 1 24. 2  Pet , 1. 17.  

Thou enemy of all righteousness , how darest thou call thyself a minister of the word , and art ignorant of the letter which witnesseth with the word , and saith , the word became flesh , which is Christ , and in the beginning was the word , and the word was God , John 1. 1 , 14. and this the prophets and apostles witnessed ; and thou , who sets thyself to witness the contrary , art no minister of the word , nor of the letter , which witnesseth with the word ; but art shut out from both , and art for condemnation , by the word : and thou that callest this damnable doctrine , callest the doctrine of the apostles damnable , who preached Christ the word ; and here i openly declare against thee to be a blasphemer of the truth of God , and the scripture , which thou talks of relying upon , will witness against thee to thy condemnation , and all that takes thy part : and he who hath all the scripture in notion , and wants the life , is without , feeding upon the husk , with thee , who puts the shadow for the substance , who hath the form , but denies the power ; but the scripture is serviceable in its place , and is a true witness for the truth of God against such liars and blasphemers as thou art , who takes the letter to talk of , and would destroy the life ; and so these scriptures which thou hast set down , May stand and witness against thee , who art a sayer but not a doer . 

object . 2.  That she said , she hath attained to the light of Christ , without the help of scripture , by an immediate call from God , and thou sayest , contrary to these scriptures , rom. 10. 14.  John 5. 39  

reply . those scriptures which thou bringest to witness against the light , which was spoken from the light , shall stand and witness with the light , against thee , who art an enemy to the light , and who witness the light of Christ doth witness it by Christ , without the help of scripture , and the scripture doth witness the same , that Christ is the light of the world , and doth enlighten every one that cometh into the world , John 1. 9 without the help of scripture ; but thou that hates the light art for condemnation by the light , which is the life of the scripture , but the scripture is serviceable in its place , but thou who lives in darkness takes it out of its place , and so wrists to thy own destruction . 

object . 3.  That she said she is without sin , and that she cannot sin , nor break the commandments , but keep them all , and all other are in condemnation , that are not like her . 

reply . here thou art a false accuser , and a liar , for this she did not say , but thou that pleadest for sin livest in sin , and art in the fall under the curse , upholding the devil's kingdom , which is sin , and so art no minister of Christ , who comes to destroy sin , but a minister of the devil , who comes to uphold sin , and he , who was a minister of Christ witnessed , that he that is born of God sins not , neither can be sin , because his seed remaineth in him , 1 John 3. 9 and all the ministers of Christ witness the same ; and thou , who art a minister of the devil , pleads against the ministers of Christ , because thou art a drunkard , and live in sin , and so must have the wages of sin , which is destruction , and all who lives in this generation , pleading for sin , for he that cannot witness cleansing here , shall never be cleansed , for as the tree falls so it lies ; and thou that calls this damnable doctrine , art in the damnable estate of the devil , blaspheming the truth of God , and denies Christ come in the flesh , and so art Antichrist , and who have the image of God are like one another , and who are not like , they have the image of the devil , and so are in the state of condemnation . 

object 4.  That men ought not to acknowledge superiors , nor to give reverence . 

reply . before the fall there was no superiors , only man Lord over all creatures , gen. 7 , 28. but not man to be Lord over man : and amongst those who were redeemed there was no superiors , only Christ the head , and the rest fellow servants , and here who would be the greatest should be the least , and he that respects persons commits sin , jam. 2. 9 and here thou and thy superiors are in the fall , Lording over one another by your corrupt wills , and as for reverence , i say , reverence to whom reverence belongs , he that can receive it let him . 

object . 5.  That she said she is perfect in this life . 

reply that is false , but thou that pleadest against perfection in this life , wast never in this life which is perfect , nor art no minister of Christ , but of the devil , who pleads for imperfection ; whereas Christ said , be ye perfect , even as your heavenly father is perfect , Luke 5. 48. and the minister of Christ witnessed and said , as he is so are we in this present evil world , and he that hath this hope purifieth himself , even as he is pure , 1 John 2. 3. and here thou art found in the kingdom of the devil , which stands in imperfection , and all who witness with thee ; for the kingdom of God is pure , and nothing that is impure can come therein . 

object . 6.  That she knoweth and can judge of men's hearts , and that Christ in her judgeth others , and all others , that are not such as she , are carnal , heathens , vagabonds , children of the devil , enemies of God , and murderers , and in the gall of bitterness . 

reply here with thy serpentine wisdom thou hast mingled truth and falsehood together , that all Might go current for truth , but the day hath made thee manifest , and thy heart is known to be Judas heart , who professeth Christ in words , and in thy heart murders him ; and thou art discerned and judged by the spirit of the Lord in Ann Blacklane , i being of one spirit with her witness it , and this thou shalt witness to thy woe and misery , and here thou hast razed thyself out from being a minister of Christ who art a natural carnal man , and knows not the spirit of God , which searcheth the heart and trieth the reins , heb. 4. 12 , which the ministers of Jesus Christ witnessed , and said , the spiritual man discerneth and judgeth all things , 1 cor. 2. 15. and witnessed and said , it is no more i but Christ in me , and without are dogs , whoremongers , adulterers , carnal , h•athens , vagabonds , children of the devil , enemies of God , and in the gall of bitterness , and drunkards , and here art thou , and all that joins with thee to persecute the truth of God , and must be cast into the lake that burneth , for the new covenant is but one , and the way is but one , and the truth is but one , and they that are not with us are against us , and here art thou in the damnable estate of the devil , who calls this damnable doctrine . 

object . 7.  That she and such as she are only enlightened , and sent of God to reprove the world of sin . 

reply if thou wast a minister of Christ thou wouldst witness the same , for all who are sent from him are sent from one , and are guided by one , as they abide in one , and are all of one heart and one mind , act. 4. 32.  Epistles written in one another's hearts ; and thou that callest this damnable doctrine art of one mind with the devil . 

object . 8.  That she said there is no outward Christ according to his manhood , but that Christ is only within us . 

reply . this is false , and here thou art a liar of thy father the devil , but we witness Christ come in the flesh , but this thou canst not witness but art in the state of reprobation , who knows not Christ within ; and those who knows Christ no nearer than the heavens above the skies , hath no profit by him , but is in the state of reprobation , as the scripture witnesseth , 2 cor 12. 5 

object . 9  That she said , they that have the spirit cannot fall into sickness , diseases , distempers of the body . 

reply here again thou art taken with a lie in thy mouth , for what she said as concerning this , was concerning her own condition , since she witnessed the spirit of the Lord . 

object . 10.  That she doth not seek to lead men to the scripture but from them , 

reply this is false , for they who witness the life of the scripture cannot deny the scripture , for it is their own ; but thou , and such swinish natures as thou , must be shut out of the scripture , who takes to talk of , or to make a trade of , and are ignorant of the life , and would destroy the life , who have the form , but deny the power , 2 tim. 3. 5. such must be shut out of the scripture , for what should swine do with pearls , mat. 7. 6. whose life is in husks , and there thou feeds , and all who have the letter and wants the life . 

object . 11.  That she said , no man ought to swear before a magistrate , and that no magistrate ordained of God will cause men to swear ; and thou brings the old covenant to maintain swearing , gen. 24. 3.  

reply hear every way thou serpent pleads for thy life , which is sin , but Christ the new covenant , who is the end of the old covenant , said , that it had been said in the old time , thoushalt not forswear thyself , but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oath , mat. 5 ▪ 33 , 34. but i say , swear not at all ; yet the devil in thee runs into the old covenant to maintain swearing , and so would have scripture to maintain his kingdom ; but the day hath made him manifest , and those who puts any to swear , are still in the old covenant , for in the new covenant no swearer can come . 

object . 12.  That she said , men ought not to pray , and that i myself ought not to pray . 

reply . even now thou wast pleading for swearing , and now thou art pleading for praying but the prayer of the wicked are abominable , prov. 15. 8. and thou who art a drunkard art wicked , and hath nothing to pray , but Cains generation , murdering the righteous , whose sacrifices the Lord will not accept ; but he that can witness Christ risen can pray . 

object . 13.  That the scripture doth not try the spirit . 

reply . the spirit was before the letter was , and thou hast the letter , but canst not try the spirit , but those who have the spirit of the Lord , have tried thy spirit without the letter , and hath found it to be the spirit of the devil , who hath ever reviled and persecuted the truth of God , which calleth the doctrine of Christ damnable doctrine . 

And thou sayest thou wilt justify , that all these her sayings are false , and will be ready to maintain them by this power . 

reply i do testify and witness by the spirit of the Lord , that thou art a natural carnal man , and knows not the things of God , 1 cor. 2 : 14. therefore thou serpent be silent , and talk nor meddle not with the things , least he come with a bigger power than thine , and cut the asunder , and cast thee into the lake that burneth , then shalt thou know what thou hast done , and all who plot and lay their heads together , devising how to shed the innocent blood , it were better for them they had never been born , mat. 23 : 35 , for upon that generation shall come all the righteous Abel , even until now , and this i witness by the spirit of the Lord , who am chosen out of the world , to be a faithful witness for the truth of God against all who do oppose it . 

James Parnell a prisoner for the testimony of Jesus at Cambridge . 


















