To the supreme authority of this nation , the parliament of the commonwealth of England . 

the humble petition and appeal of Josiah primate of London , leatherseller 

Showeth , 

That your petitioner by his under tenants , George Lilburn , esq and George Gray the younger gentleman both of the county of Durham , being in the years 1647 , 1648. and 1649. in a just and quiet possession of the collieries , or seams of Cole in Harraton in the county aforesaid , called the 5 quarter and 9 quarter Cole , ( & having spent near 2000l . to win the same , ) which lay drowned & lost from 1642. to 1647.  Sir Arthur Haslerig in September 1649. procuring col. Francis Wren , one of the committee of that county , and col. George Fenwick to join with him , made an order ( Against which the rest of the said committee present protested ) to sequester the said collieries , under colour of an untrue suggestion that Sir William Armyn had sequestered the same in 1644. as belonging to one Thomas Wray , a Papist delinquent , and thereupon the said Sir Arthur violently dispossessed your petitioners tenants , and seized their goods , and let the said collieries to col. Francis Hacker , and several of the officers of his own regiment . 

That your petitioner hath petitioned to the commissioners for compounding , for relief ; but by the power and influence of the said Sir Arthur , upon most of the said commissioners , your petitioner hath been delayed and denied the ordinary course of proceedings in all courts of justice ; and at last coming to hearing , the said Sir Arthur appeared every day of the hearing , and took upon him , not only to plead against your petitioner ( Which is humbly conceived to be contrary to law , he being a member of the supreme authority ) but also authoritatively to prejudge your petitioners case , and to direct the said commissioners what to judge therein , and by his power and influence upon the said commissioners , he overawed most of them , and after full hearing , judgement being respited from day to day , the said Sir Arthur kept private correspondence with some of the said commissioners , about finding some new colour or pretences to detain your petitioners possession from him , whereupon he produced new pretended evidence after full hearing ; and thereupon the major part of the said commissioners , not daring ( As is humbly conceived ) to oppose the will and pleasure of the said Sir Arthur , have contrary to clear evidence before them for your petitioner , refused to relieve him , and have punctually pursued in their judgement , the directions publicly given by the said Sir Arthur . 

That the said commissioners being the only persons authorised by the parliament to hear and determine all cases about sequestered estates ; your petitioner cannot be relieved from the oppression and tyranny of the said Sir Arthur , save by the parliament or their special order and directions , and your petitioner hath been kept from his possession above two years , and the said Sir Arthur hath declared the said collieries to be worth at least 5000l . per annum . 

May it therefore please the parliament , in respect to the public justice of the commonwealth , to cause the truth of the premises to be speedily examined , and to provide for your petitioners relief from the oppression and tyranny of the said Sir Arthur Haslerig , and for the dispensation of justice without fear or favour , as to your wisdoms shall seem most just . 

And your petitioner shall pray , &c. Josiah Primatt . 







