Six important quaeres , propounded to the resitting rump of the long parliament , fit to be satisfactorily resolved by them upon the question , before they presume to act any further , or expect the least obedience f•om the freeborn English nation , after so many years' wars and contests for the privileges , rights , and freedom of parliaments , and their own liberties . 

1.  Whether their sudden stealing into the house by night , on Monday the 26. of December after their forced dissolution by Lambert , octob. 13. without any new summons or notice of their sitting given to any of their fellow-members , in the city , or persons of the nation ; was not a work of darkness , rather than of light , better beseeming thieves than freemen , a Guy Faux with his dark lantern to blow up a parliament , than the honour and dignity of members of a real English parliament , and a bad omen of some dark d•signss against their fellow-members , and liberties both of the city and English nation ? 

2.  Whether their placing armed guards that evening at the house , and all approaches to it and the next morning too , and giving colonel Okey , and colonel Alured ( The commanders of their guards ) their sergeant and doorkeepers , strict special commands and orders , not to suffer any of the old secluded members so much as to come into the outward lobby before the house , ( Whether footboys , apprentices , and other persons of all sorts had free access , ) much less to enter into the house ; and their forcible secluding of Sir Gilbert Gerard , Sir Anthony Irby , Sir William Waller , Sir John Evelin , Mr. Ansl•y , sergeant Maynard , Mr. Prynne , and 15. other members more on Tuesday morning , decemb. 27. out of the very lobby , in pursuance of their orders , till they crowded into the lobby by degrees against the doorkeepers , and guards wills , who at first oft shut the doors against them , though they admitted apprentices , and others to pass in and out : and their seclusion of them out of the house when in the lobby , by keeping the house door fast locked against them , and ordering the doorkeeper and sergeant not to open it , notwithstanding many demands to open it , and messages to them for that purpose , which they slighted ; not vouchsafing to take any notice of , after two full hours attendance by the members on them in the lobby ; nor so much as sending any member , nor their sergeant out to them ; as they usually do to every ordinary petitioner , or person attending them upon public or private occasions ; be not a just ground and provocation for these and all other secluded members , ( Being about 4. times more in number and interest to those then sitting , and the real house of Commons , ) with all the respective counties , cities , boroughs , ports for which they serve , with as high contempt and scorn to neglect them and their illegal conventicle , ( Not the tenth part of a Commons house , ) to protest against all their votes , proceedings as null and void to all intents , and not to yield the least obedience to any orders , votes , or commands of theirs , till all the members be freely admitted without any restrictions , to sit and act amongst them ; it being both their privile•e , birthright , and inheritance , and they obliged by their protestation , and solemn league and covenant , constantly , zealously and cheerfully to defend the same with their lives and estates against all violations , all the days of their lives ; and therefore now if ever , in this sad posture of public distractions ? 

3.  Whether this their disdainful , uncivil , unbrotherly treating of their fellow-members ( Desiring nothing else but a brotherly association with them , to compose the manifold distractions , and make up the wide breaches of our sinking , dying nations , by their united councils and endeavours , and to regulate all exorbitances , occasioned by their heady councils and miscarriages ) in not allowing them the privileges of porters and footboys to enter into their outward lobby , in taking no notice of them , and putting this fresh affront upon them , after so many former indignities , in the midst of their and our domestic confusions and fears from foreign parts , be not an evident demonstration ; that they intend neither the public peace , unity , nor settlement of our government , laws , liberties , or nations , but their unjust support of their own private interests , rapines , ambitious tyrannical usurpations and exercises of supreme parliamentary civil and military authority over our three nations ; to embroil them in new wars and confusions , to prey upon the small remainder of their real and personal estates , by the power of the sword , now gotten into their hands , out of the army-officers ; who abused it likewise to the oppressing and enslaving of the persons , and create them a parliament without the secluded members , and house of peers ? 

4.  Whether their disdainful , injurious forcible seclusion of the members , by their own special orders and commands to their guards and officers now , be not a shrewd evidence , that their former seclusions , decemb. 6. and 7. 1648. and May 7. and 9 1659.  ( Acted by , and fa•••red on the army-officers , and seemingly disowned by themselves ) were secretly procured & countenanced by them , thus openly owning their last seclusion , by their precedent orders and subsequent approbation of it ; and that at their very first re-assembling , after their own late forcible seclusion , by Lamberts and Hewsons' regiments , now entertained and employed in their service , to seclude , and keep out their old honest fellow members , of untainted integrity and merit ? Whether it be not a greater breach of privilege , trust , duty , tyranny , perjury , and treason in them , against all former declarations , the protestation , solemn league and covenant , taken and subscribed by them , with hands lifted up to the most high God , thus to seclude their fellow members ; than it was in Cromwell and Harrison , April 20. 1653. or for Lambert October 13. last to seclude and turn themselves out of doors , after their declaring and voting it treason , perjury and tyranny in them ? Whether this their secluding of the members by col. Okey himself , and others who appeared most active against their exclusion by Lambert , will not draw a self-condemnation on them , as acting by their commands , against their consciences ; and justify both Cromwel's and Lambert's seclusion of themselves ? And justly encourage all their newly reduced soldiers and others , to shut and turn themselves out of the house again upon any emergent occasion or discontent , with greater boldness and impunity than before , since they justified their last seclusion , by their former underhand encouragements of them to seclude the majority of the members , who over-voted them in decemb. 1648. and give them orders to seclude them now again upon the same account in the same month of December , for fear they should over-vote them if readmitted ? 

5.  Whether their printed vote , decem. 27.  to take the business of their absent members into debate on the 5. of January next ; instead of giving admittance , or any answer to the 22. secluded members waiting for an answer in the lobby above 2. hours , be not a mere dilatory cheat put upon the secluded members , the city of London , and whole nation ; to delay their admission till they have put new guards on , and drawn up all their forces to London , to over-awe the city , and hinder their long-delayed militia for their own security ; and settled the militia of every county under their own commands , to enslave the whole city and nation to their tyranny and usurped parliamentary power ; and then they will not only forcibly keep out all the members , but absolutely eject them , unless they will take their new oath and engagement : as is evident by their speakers prohibiting the Lord mayor and common council on Saturday last to set up their chains and settle their militia ; and their order and vote on Monday night against all forces raised without their order , to hinder the militia in the city , when they commanded the militia in the suburbs and Westminster to meet and act that day : and by some of their discourses 〈◊〉 secluded members ; that there was no hopes of their admission , unless they were for a commonwealth , would take the engagement , and confirm what they had done : and thereby become as guilty , treacherous , perfidious , disloyal , and hurtful to the public as themselves ) which those members assured them , they would never submit to , being against the privilege of parliament , their judgements , consciences , protestation , covenant , former oaths upon their first admission as members . 

6.  Whether the city , or English nation , can expect the least justice ease or redress of their insupportable burdens , taxes , and impositions from these new tax-masters , who ( Though they are not yet the tenth part of a full Commons house ) presumed to pass and print a new act of parliament , to continue their expired customs and excises on them , till March next ? whether their unpresidented presumption ▪ in arrogating to themselves the title , power and authority of a parliament ; when all laws , and lawbooks resolve , their own consciences and the whole nation infallibly know them to be no parliament , nor Commons house , hath not brought them within the compass and penalty of this clause in their own last act , before their dissolution by Lambert , October 11. entitled , an act against raising of money upon the persons without their consent in parliament : and be it further enacted , that no person or persons shall after the 11. of October , 1659.  assess , levy , collect , gather or receive , any customs , imposts , excise , assessment , contribution , tax , tallage , or any sum or sums of money , or other impositions whatsoever , upon the persons of this commonwealth , without their consent in parliament , or as by law Might have been done before the third of November , 1640.  and be it further enacted and declared , that every person offending against this act , ( Therefore every of themselves who passed this new act , decemb. 27. and those who shall put it in execution ) shall be and are hereby adjudged to be guilty of high treason , and shall forfeit and suffer as in case of high treason . whether the persons of this commonwealth ( The thousand part whereof knew not of their new sitting ) did ever consent to this sudden extemporary new act , made the first morning of their sitting in less than two hour's space , when there were but 42.  Members in the house ; 22. secluded members at the door , and near 250. more members yet living , ( Besides the whole house of Lords , who must stand for ciphers ) absent , and not privy to their session , or this act ? If not , ( As is unquestionable ) whether by this their own law and act , they be not adjudged to be guilty of high treason , and to forfeit and suffer as in case of high treason , for this their imposing and continuing of customs and excises on the persons ; as well as for their seclusion of their members ; which they voted to be treason in Lambert ? and whether the offices and common soldiers can upon this acccount expect any pay from the city or country , or indemnity for secluding those now sitting , if they offend again in secluding the greatest part of the members , which are in truth the only house , which can only really pay and indemaifie them ? 








