The path of the just cleared ; and cruelty and tyranny laid open . 

Or a few words to you priests , and magistrates of this nation , ( Who say we deny the scriptures , and that we are antichrists and deceivers , and that we deny the word of God , ) wherein your oppression and tyranny is laid open , which by you is unjustly acted against the servants of the living God , who by the world which hate the light of Christ , are in derision called Quakers . 

Wherein also is something declared both to judges and justices so called , concerning contempt of authority . 

Also the ground and cause of the imprisonment of George Whitehead and John Harwood , who are sufferers for the innocent truth's sake , in the goal of Bury in Suffolk . 

Also a copy of a paper , which a servant of the Lord called Richard Clayton , was moved to set upon a steeplehouse door at Bury in Suffolk , for which he was caused to be whipped by one Thomas Waldegrave , justice of peace in the said county . 

But though hand join in hand , the wicked shall not be unpunished ; but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered , 

prov. 11. 21.  



From the spirit of the living god in me , whose name in the flesh is George Whitehead , who for zions sake cannot hold my peace , but testify against her oppressors : who am a sufferer as aforesaid , the 4. day of the 7. month . 1655.  

Also , a paper against the sin of idleness , which we declare against , and live out of ; and are diligent serving the Lord , though that sin be cast upon us , yet it we deny , with all other sins and ungodliness , which is contrary to the gospel of Christ . 

London , printed for Giles Calvert , at the black-spread-eagle , near the West end of Paul's , 1655.  

The path of the just cleared : and cruelty and tyranny laid open . See what Christ we own , and who are antichrists . 

That Christ we own and witness , and are partakers of his sufferings , who was promised for a covenant unto the persons , for a light unto the gentiles , to open the blind eyes , this is he who was before Abraham was ; who said , before Abraham was , i am ; who was in the beginning which was the word , by which all things was made , which word became flesh , and dwelled among the disciple , and suffered at Jerusalem , and witnessed a good confession before Ponce Pilate ; whom Pilate delivered up to the Jews , and the chief priests and elders , whom they mocked and despitefully used , & put to death concerning the flesh ; but is raised up by the spirit , and ascended into glory , which glory he prayed for , even that glory whereby he was at first with his father glorified in , wherein he is glorified in his saints , and is God over all , God blessed for ever ; and he that hath him , hath the father also , and hath life ; and he that hath not the son , hath not life ; for he is the light of the world and in him is no darkness ; and he is the way the truth and the life ; and he that followeth him shall not abidein darkness , but shall receive the light of life . And this is the true light , which lighteth every man that cometh into the world , which John who was a man sent from God was a witness of , and we are witnesses of , and do not deny the word , nor the scriptures ; but they who persecuted him even the scribes and Pharises , and the chief priests and elders of the persons , who had a profession of the scriptures , of Moses words , and the prophet's words : they did deny the scriptures , even Moses who wrote of Christ , so did not believe Christ , and so denied him who was the word which became flesh . And so his word did not take place in them , because they did not believe that he was the Christ , but looked for another Christ to come in pomp like themselves , but against their pride he did cry , and said , woe unto the scribes and Pharises , who were called of men Masters , stood praying in the synagogues , had the chiefest places in the assemblies and greeting in the markets : and laid heavy burdens upon the persons . but he said to his disciple , be not ye called Masters : and when he sent them forth he forbade them to take money or bag or scrip : but freely ye have received , freely give : and many of them had no certain dwelling place , but suffered persecution and hunger and nakedness and prison and stripes and perils , and were chargeable to no man : but where they had sown spiritual things they said , if we sow to you spiritual things , it is a small thing if we reap of you carnal things . but these were not the world , for the world was persecutors and revilers , and haled them out of the synagogues ; and such as Christ sent we own , and the scriptures we own , and Christ come in the flesh we own and witness ; but you magistrates and you priests of this nation who are upholden by such as persecute and hale out of the synagogues , and imprison , and whip , & despitefully now use such as are sent freely to witness forth the truth , and for that Christ , and against Antichrist , and deceivers , such as Christ cried woe against : here , you priests of this nation , who are found in their steps which Christ cried woe against , even the steps of the scribes & Pharises , & you magistrates , justices , judges , & rulers , who uphold such , and persecute , imprison & cause to be whipped : and fine such as are sent to bear witness against them that are found in scribes and Pharises steps ; who lay heavy burdens upon the persons , and are called of men Masters , stands praying in the synagogues , and have the chiefest places in the assemblies : you are filling up the measure of their iniquities , who persecuted Christ , & upheld them which Christ cried woe unto , and them who persecuted the true prophets , who was sent to cry out against the false prophets , these cried against such as sought for their gain from their quarters , & such as were hirlings , & such as bare rule by their means , and taught lies , who said they were sent of God ; when God never sent them but man , before they were sent : and these were the prophets who cried against the false , who said ; thus said the Lord , and hear the word of the Lord . But God never spoke to them : but Jeremiah who cried against such was not a proud man , nor a covetous man , as the priests of England are now , who are in these steps before mentioned , which the false prophets were in . But Jeremiah was mocked , & they were stoned & some killed , and Jeremy was set in the stocks for witnessing forth the truth against the false prophets ; and put into adungeon and here we are witnessed by the true prophets , Christ , & his apostles , who ever witnessed against deceivers , and such as lived in pride and covetousness : and Amos who was a true witness for God , witnessed against the abomination of rulers , and persons ; he was not made a minister by the will of man , nor upheld by a carnal weapon , nor an outward law ▪ but when he prophesied against the house of Jeraboam , than Amaziah , the priest of Bethel complained to Jeroboam the King against Amos ; and said , the land was not able to bear his words , and bade him flee away into the land of Judah , and prophesy no more at Bethel ; for he said it was the King's chapel , and the King's court , as you May read , Amos 7 , 10 , and •o you priests of England complain : moreover many of you do swear to the magistrates against us , who are witnessed by Christ , the true prophets , and apostles : both in our sufferings , and testimony w•ich is against all deceit and deceivers ; •o you priests and magistrates cause us to suffer , because we are offended at the truth , which witnesses against all deceit , without respect of persons , whereof they that are sent of God were witnesses : and so by you some suffer imprisonment , some whipping , some stocking , and some you imprison and fine 10 , or 40 , or 50 , marks , and they that stone & hale out of the synagogues , their hands you strengthen against the innocent , and execute your law upon them , who are redeemed from that which the law takes hold upon , who do witness against transgression , where ever it is by the truth which respects no man's person . 

And here the end for which you are brought forth , is to witness for God & to the establishment of judgement , and mercy , & righteousness & peace , which takes away all occasion of outward punishment , and carnal weapons , where it comes to be established , and set up in the hearts of persons ; and this they who come to witness set up in them which they that own the light of Christ are witnesses of , dare not act in their own wills , in tyranny , and cruelty , against the innocent who are freely sent to witness forth the truth against all deceit & cruelty , & oppression which is acted in this generation , even among you priests & magistrates , both judges justices & rulers , whose ears are open to hear the complaints of these proud and co•ou•s priests , who make great petitioning and complaints against us , who suffer by the cruelty of you , who cause so to be sent to prison , when you can charge so with the breach of no known law , and cause some to be whipped , & some to be fined , as aforesaid , and the priests that complain for the help of magistrates , to have this persons , called Quakers , suppressed because they are afraid that their tithes and maintenance should fail them , and they come to lose their gifts , and rewards ; because we cry against such as Isaiah cried against , who seek for their gain from their quarters ; as you May read , isa. 56 , 11 , and against such as bear rule by their means , which Jeremiah cried against ; ier. 5. and such teach for hire , and divine for money ; which Micah cried against , Mica . 3. and against such as Christ cried woe against , as you May read , matt. 23. and we cry against such as go in Cains way and Balaam's , which Jude cried woe against iude. 11.  And here they are afraid that their riches and honour should fail them , whose riches is earthly , and honour is earthly : and here you magistrates uphold such as the prophets , Christ , and his apostles cried against , and causes the innocent to suffer by your wills , contrary to the law of justice ▪ and equity ; and so are filling up the measure of your iniquities , who persecuted the true prophets of Christ and his apostles ; and you May consider by the light in your consciences , what reformation and just government is established by you , who have long professed liberty , justice , and equity ; when now this is the end of your profession , and praying , and your fasting , and your days of thanksgiving , even persecution , and oppression , and strengthening the hands of evil doers against the innocent , and so neglect the fast which the Lord requires , read isa. 58. 6.  Is not this the fast that i have chosen , saith the Lord , to loose the bands of wickedness , to undo the heavy burdens , and to let the oppressed go free , and that ye break every yoke , but instead of this , ye strengthen the bands of wickedness , and goes on in your cruelty , and oppression . Ah woe , word , is the end of your profession , who are so acting in your cruelty , and tyranny ; against them who for conscience sake cannot bow to your wills , but witness against the deceit which is acted in this nation , both among the priests and persons : therefore among you ruand magistrates is this scripture fulfilled . 

the rulers take counsel together against the Lord , and his anointed ; and the blood of the saints shall be required , at your hands who persecute , even the blood of all the holy men of God , who suffered , from Abel until this generation . 

Oh , be ashamed of your profession , and you fair pretences of reformation , since the Bishops were cut off , who now are acting in the same cruelty that they acted in , and yet you can speak against them , and their tyranny , and you found in the same ; oh fear and dread the living god of heaven and earth , whose judgement and wrath and fiery indignation slumbers not , for these things : oh the blood of the righteous cries in the ears of the Lord of hosts , for vengeance against you persecutors ; your prayers and pretences , of serving the Lord , is abomination unto him , and your sacrifices is wearisome unto the Lord , and grievous unto him , as the sacrifices and oblations of the rulers , of Sodom , and persons of Gomorrah was , which the prophet isai cried against , who said unto them your new moons and your Sabbaths , and your calling assemblies i cannot away with : it is iniquity , even your solemn meetings saith the Lord ; your new moons and appointed feasts my soul hateth , they are a trouble to me , i am weary to bear them when you spread forth your hands , i will hide mine eyes from you , yea when you make many prayers , i will not hear , your hands are full of blood , isa. 1. 15.  Therefore all you that act in persecution , and cruelty , and oppression , read yourselves both priests and rulers , to be in that generation which isai and the rest of the prophets did cry against , and are partakers of their sins ; and now you live at ease in pride & fulness of bread , as Sodom & Gomorrah did , and the end of your profession liberty and freedom is oppression and tyranny , as was in the Bishop's time , to those that cannot stoop to your wills , when as you ought to have judged the cause of the oppressed , and to have undone the heavy burdens , and to have let the oppressed go free . Therefore hear the word of the Lord , ye rulers of this nation , who join with the priests , who go in the way of Cain to envy , and run greedily after the error of Balaam for gifts and rewards ; you join with them who go in the steps of the false prophets ; and of them which Christ cried woe against , who are called of men Masters , stand praying in the synagogues , have the chiefest places in the assemblies , and the greetings in the markets , and lay heavy burdens upon the persons , and devour widow's houses ; and so here the cause of the widows , and oppressed you do not judge : therefore the Lord May justly say of you as he said of that persons , which he had set in a fruitful place , when i looked for judgement behold oppression , therefore repetn of your cruelty , and undo the heavy burdens , and let the oppressed go free : for if you still refuse , and rebel against the Lord , which is a God of truth and equity , he will cut you off , and give you your portion among all the oppressors and persecutors , whom the Lord in his indignation cut off , the Lord of hosts hath spoken it , and what will ye do in the end of your persecution , when the Lord calls you to an account ; will not the Lord avenge his quarrel upon zions oppressors , and ease him of his enemies ? therefore , remember you are warned , lest you are partakers of the plagues , who go on in persecution and oppression , who pervert true judgement , and despise equity , and so have your portion with the workers of iniquity . So to the light in all your consciences i speak , which loves equity and true judgement , and is the condemnation of all the practices before mentioned , which are contrary to it . 

and the condemnation of all them , that live in them , by which light are witnessed who walk in the light , and to it we are manifest , whether you hear or forbear ▪ 

A few words to you both judges and justices so called , that say we contemn magistracy , and are not subject to authority , and government , because we cannot put off our hats , nor bow to you when we are called before you . 

The powers that are ordained of God , who are sent of him , for the punishment of transgressors , and for the encouragement of them that do well , these we own , and are subject to them for conscience sake ; knowing that such are not a terror to good works , but to evil ; for such execute the law in righteousness , upon them who are guilty of the transgression of it , for because of trangression the law is added & there the law is executed in its place , and in righteousness ; and so those that execute the law in its place , they are for the establishment of righteousness and peace ; and , contrary to the law of justice , & equity , dare not act in their own wills , nor for their own ends : and herein they seek not themselves , nor their own glory , nor honour , but the glory and honour of God , who is honoured and glorified among them who act in truth and righteousness , and love the Lord ; and to them our souls are subject . But you who act in cruelty and persecution as before mentioned , who execute your law upon the innocent , you do not encourage them that do well , but encourage them that do ill , and strengthen the hands of evil doers , and make strong the bands of wickedness , who indite , and fine , and imprison those who cannot for conscience sake bow to your wills , nor put off their hats , to satisfy your corrupt wills : wherein you are seeking your own honour , and not the honour of God : and because that many cannot for conscience sake , act these heathenish customs , to satisfy your vain minds , and your fleshly exaltations , wherein you act in pride and high-mindedness , therefore by you many are fined , and indicted , and imprisoned contrary to any just law , and contrary to the law of the nation : and no such vain custom can you prove that ever any of the saints did act , when they were brought from vanities to serve the living god ; but the world and the conformities and fashions of the world they were brought to deny , and by the same spirit are we brought to deny all these heathenish practices , and to witness against the world who live in them ; and because we witness against the world , that the deeds thereof are evil , therefore we are hated , and by the world suffer : and here ye magistrates who plead for these things , and cause the innocent to suffer , for denying them , you act in the costumes of the world contrary to the light of Christ , which condemns the world with its deeds and says that we contemn magistracy and authority because we cannot stoop to your wills , in these customs ; here you falsely accuse us , for authority we do not contemn , for by the spirit of the living God , whereby we are transformed , by the renewing of our minds , we do deny the conformities of the world as the apostle said ; be not ye conformed unto this world , and the same apostle did not contemn authority , but said , let every soul be subject to the higher powers , and , rulers are not a terror to good works but to evil , but he speaks not of pulling off the hat , nor bowing , neither gives he liberty to any of you to persecute and imprison them who cannot , for conscience sake , bow to your wills , nor put off their hats ; for he was imprisoned , and persecuted , and did suffer by that generation you are in , who suffered stripes , tumults and imprisonment , and many perils , & of his sufferings are we partakers : and the cloak that you have for these vanities , will not hide you : for you say that though you have no written law of the nation , for puling off hats , nor scripture to prove it , yet you say that it is the custom of the nation ; as bowing etc and that the very heathens do bow , and that the Egyptians bowed ; i answer , so is drunkenness , and lying , and swearing , persecution , and fighting , and quarrelling , accustomed in this nation , which many that act in , go unpunished , which the righteous law of God takes hold upon : but the righteous law of God speaks not of putting off a hat , therefore be ashamed of your actings , and be ashamed of your customs , who makes a custom a law , to act in envy and cruelty , against the servants of the Lord . And when you allege , that Jacob bowed to Esau , and called him Lord , and that Abraham bowed to Seth , who was a heathen . I answer , that which was acted by them , when they bowed , was not a command to you and that you Might seek honour one of another , who profess yourselves to be believers and Christians , to imitate these heathenish customs , though for a time Jacob and Abraham bowed , and Jacob called Esau Lord , who was the elder , but when the elder was made to serve the younger , he was not Lord , but servant : and so out of Esau's state , and the heathenish nature , we are redeemed , and the one Lord , who is the true God , we witness : so out of the many gods , and many Lords , which are in the world , we are redeemed , and how can ye believe and seek honour one of another , for the true God is no respecter of persons ; and he that respects persons , commits sin : and so by you that seek eye-service , and honour one another , is not the Lord honoured . But ye seek that to yourselves , which belongs to God ; and this is he , who reigns over the house of Jacob , and is greater than Abraham . let the heathens bow to him , who hath redeemed us out of the heathenish nature , for he will break the limits of the heathen , and dash them to pieces , and all your limits , who live in envy , and rage in the heathenish nature ; and plead for their customs , and would limit the righteous to walk in their steps , and to bow to your proud flesh , : for as i live , saith the Lord , every knee shall bow to me , and every tongue shall confess unto God ; as you May read , rom. 13. 11.  Isai. 45. 23.  Phil. 2. 10.  Therefore bow to the Lord of hosts , and let proud flesh stoop before him , who seeks honour to yourselves , which belongs to God , fear before the Lord , and tremble , at which name every knee shall bow , and every tongue confess to the glory of God . then examine what will be the end of your earthly glory , whose honour must be laid in the dust : who seeks your own glory , and not the glory of God : whose honour and glory we seek , and not the honour of man : and therefore we cannot stoop nor bow to your pride , nor conform to your vanities , which are acted in your wills , contrary to the pure law of God ; which respects no man's person : and here you act for your own ends , and punish the servants of the Lord , who for his sake cannot submit to your deceit , and heathenish vanities ; you act contrary to the law of God , and the law of the nation , and for the Lord's sake act not , neither were you sent of God to this end , therefore accuse us not for contempt of authority , neither say that we are not subject to every ordinance of man , for the Lord's sake : for to every ordinance of man , which are for the Lord's sake , we are subject : whether it be to supreme , or unto ▪ governors , as unto them that are sent by him , for the punishment of evil-doers , and for the praise of them that do well . But you who are sent to judge of causes , between man and man , according to the truth , and equity , by an outward law , which takes hold upon transgression , and now execute power upon them , who by the law of the spirit of life are made free from the law of sin , and death , and so would usurp authority over the consciences of the persons of the Lord , whose consciences is exercised by the light of Christ , which condemns the world with its deeds , and so you go beyond your limits , to judge in things pertaining to God , who is judge , and lawgiver : and so here you act in frowardness , contrary to the light of Christ in you , and so would Lord it over God's heritage : and here let the rulers among the heathen , which Christ spoke of , condemn your practices , who said , the Kings of the gentiles exercised authority over them , but ye would exercise lordship over us , who are not heathens , but Christians . 

Therefore , ye magistrates of this nation , see whom you are acting for , and what order is set up by you , and whose glory it is you seek , and who it is that you seek to exercise authority over : for when the judgements of God comes upon you for acting in your wills , and in your cruelty , against the innocent , you will witness them to be just by that of God in your consciences , and your just reward . And know that in as much as you persecute them , whom Christ hath sent , you persecute Christ : therefore now while the Lord doth not speedily execute his judgements upon you , consider your ways , and see what you act , and whom you act for , as you will it eternally answer . 

The ground of John Harwoods' & my imprisonment ; that innocency May be cleared , and the wicked bear their burdens . 

Upon the 30 day of the 5th month , being the 2d day of the week , i & my two brothers , Jo : Harwood , & Richard Clayton , , passing through a town called Bury , in Suffolk , about 5 miles from Halstead , in Essex , where we were at a meeting the firstday before , in the fear and service of the Lord , and passing by the steeple house , in the said Bury , Richard Clayton , was moved to set up a paper upon the steeple house door , and John Harwood ▪ & i passing on a little before , and seeing some persons of the said Bury , coming to Richard Clayton , where he was setting up the paper , and so we passed back to them , who stayed him , and were about him reading the paper ; who could find nothing contrary to scriprure in it : so John Harwood , and i , being to speak a few words to the persons there present in the name of the Lord , exhorted them to turn to the Lord from the vanities , & wickednesses they lived , in , which several of them was made to confess the truth of which was declared to them , and the mouths of many who were in rage , were stopped , and so we passing from the persons there present there came a constable ▪ called Richard hum , who stayed us , and said , he had a warrant to stay us : so we demanded to see his warrant , but he had none to show , but said he had order from the justice , & so carried us two before Harbert Pellam , called justice of peace , in the said Bury , whose office is for Essex : so first i was carried before him , and he examined me , & then John Harwood , of our names , and country , and abode , where we had been , and what money we had when we came out of our own countries : which we answered as we were moved , and had freedom ; and many other vain questions he asked in his b•sie vain light mind , which were not worth mentioning : and when i was moved to speak a few words , concerning his rage ▪ & filthiness , which he uttered forth , he said , he sent not for me to preach : but he could lay no transgression , nor the breach of any known law to our charge : but in his fury , & rage , sent us by the constable & some others with him , to one Thomas Walgrave , who is called justice of peace at Smalbridg in Suffolk , about half a mile from the said Bury , whose office is for Suffolk : so when we came before the said Walgrave , we were carried into the house , & they first examined Richard Clayton , of his name , and country , and where he had been , and what was the cause of his coming into that country , and who sent him , which he answered as he was moved ; and some other vain questions were asked him : & when he had examined him he then examined me of my name & country , and where i was born : and how long i had been acquainted with Richard Clayton ; and where i first met with him , which i answered according to my freedom , & some other vain needless questions were asked not worth mentioning ; so he could lay nothing to our charge , concerning the breach of any law : we being free born English men , and not chargeable to any ; so than John Harwood was brought before him : and Richard Clayton , & i , commanded to go out of doors with a keeper , so the said Waldegrave , asked John Harwood , if he would answer him all the questions that he should demand of him . But jo. denied to be limited to his will , but as he had moving : so the said Harbert Pellam , being there present , who before had examined us , and had our examination in writing : John Harwood told Walgrave , that Pellam had his examination in writing , and bade him , if he had any thing to accuse us of , to declare what he had against us : so than the said Waldegrave being in a great rage , would not suffer him to speak , but caused him to be haled out of doors : so he and the said Pellam , consulted a great while together : so after a time , Walgrave came forth , and spoke to John Harwood , and in a fury put off his hat , and cast it down , and asked him his name , and country , which questions John answered : so he came to me , and asked me if i would work at hay : so i denied to be bound to such taskmasters : for i was in that calling whereunto God hath called me , wherein i was chargeable to no man : for he had nothing to do , to lay any task upon any of us , who was brought out of Egypt , from under Pharaoh's taskmasters ; so he went in , and sent out a warrant to imprison John Harwood , and another : to have Richard Clayton whipped at Bury , and sent from constable to Constable , till he came at his outward being : so he charged the constable , to keep me that week , till another justice came from the assizes at Bury ; so we demanded of him what law we had transgressed . But he would show us none , neither declared unto us any transgression that we had acted . But called the paper that Richard Clayton set upon the steeplehouse door , a seditious paper , and nonsense , which he could not prove , nor show any thing in it , contrary to the scripture . But he would scarce suffer us to speak , but did stamp , and rage , and caused us to be haled out of doors , so we were had back again to the said Bury , and according to the warrant , Richard hum , the said constable , the same night in the open street , whipping Richard Clayton , he being stripped naked to the middle about the wast , so presently after he had whipped him , he sent him away that nighr , according to the warrant : and John Harwood , and i was kept at an inn in the same town that night , and early in the morning , John was sent with 2. men to the prison of Bury , St. Edmonds in Suffolk , about 16. miles from the said Bures , so until the next day , under the constable's custody i remained , so in the morning there came a warrant , from the said Waldegrave , to the constable , to send me to the said prison of Bury : so accordingly i was sent the same day , where we remain in bonds by the cruelty of these called justices , to wit , Harbert Pellam and Thomas Waldgrave , and are not convinced of the breach of any known law , of the nation . But in patience we suffer , and in our sufferings , have peace ; our bonds being unjustly laid upon us , by them who profess justice : but here they , and their profession is seen , and with the light of Christ condemned to be contrary to the law , justice , and equity . 

Therefore let the supreme , and governors , who are in authority , consider for all your professing liberty to tender consciences and religion , what liberty by you is brought forth : when as we , who are sent of the Lord , to bear witness unto pure religion , and to witness forth a good conscience , and our labour and travel is , that justice and equity Might be set up , and deceit confounded : and also we being free born English men , May not have freedom , to pass the highway about our lawful calling . But have such bonds , and snares , laid upon us both contrary to the law of God , and the law of the nation ; and contrary to that liberty which hath been promised to them professing godliness by the supreme of this nation . As in the act for the government of England , Scotland , and Ireland , in article , 36.  That to the public profession held forth none shall be compelled by penalties , or otherwise , but that endeavours be made to win them by sound doctrine , and the examples of a good conversation . 

Article . 37.  That such as profess faith in God by Jesus Christ , though differing in judgement , from the doctrine , worship or discipline publicly held forth , shall not be restrained from : but shall be protected in the profession of the faith , and exercise of their religion , so as they abuse not this liberty to the civil injury of others and to the actual disturbance of the public peace on their part ; provided that this liberty be not extended to popery or prelacy , nor to such who under the profession of Christ hold forth and practise licentiousness . 

Article 38 : that all laws , statutes , ordinances and clauses in any law , statute , and ordinance to the contrary of the aforesaid liberty , shall be esteemed nul and •oyde . 

Now let the supreme , and magistrates , see and examine what performance there is acted by you , of these solemn promises which hath been promised for the liberty of godliness in this nation , when such injustice is winked at , and acted by you who profess justice , and are set in authority to act according to the law of justice and to remove unjust causes : when now both contrary to the law of God , and contrary to your own law , you cause the servants of the Lord to suffer whipping and imprisoning , them which you cannot charge which the breach of any law : here be ashamed of your unjust actings , ye oppressors and persecutors of the innocent , and know that at your cruelty the Lord will not wink , but though you join hand in hand you shall not go unpunished , and the very heathens May condemn you that whip and act contrary to your own law , against them , whom the law condemns not : for when they were ready to whip Paul , he said to the centurion , is it lawful for you , to scourge a man that is a Roman and uncondemned , and said he was free born , and so both the centurion and the chief captain , who bound Paul were afraid , after they knew that he was a Roman , and caused him to be loosed : but though we be freeborn English men and uncondemned by the law , you are not ashamed to whip and act in cruelty against us , therefore see what equity is owned by you , and see whethe• you do as ye would be done by , yea or nay : and let al• persons who have any fear of God in them , see you• shame and envy , you utter forth and have acted again the innocent . For they who are authorised to bear this sword of justice , ought not to be a terror to good work-but to the evil , and saith the Lord by his prophet David he that ruleth over men must be just , ruling in the fear of God , and such who rule in the fear of God , are not persecutors of the innocent , but doth defend and preserve , such as these men before mentioned whip and persecute . For the law which because of transgression is added , doth not take hold upon the innocent , which no law hath transgressed . So ye who have acted your cruelty upon the innocent , who in the sight of God , are free from the breach of any known law , who according to your own law , by you ought to be protected ; here you are found transgressors of the law , which because of transgression is added , and with it are condemned , and with the light of Christ you are seen to be the magistrates , which bears the sword in vain , who turns the edge of the sword against the righteous seed , which you ought to turn against the wicked , that the land Might be emptied of transgressors and evil doers : for the law was not made for the righteous , but for the lawless and disobedient ; which law is witnessed by us , ( To be good in its place ▪ ) who suffer by the wills of unreasonable men , contrary to the law of God and the law of the nation : for we who profess faith in God , by Jesus Christ , and through faith hath victory obtained over that nature , which leads into the transgression of the law , aught according to your own law , to be protected in the exercising of our religion , but you instead of protecting us , whip and imprison us . And here let your own law be a witness against you , and be ashamed of your unjust actings , but the Lord of God of heaven and earth , ( Who is our protector ) who is righteous , who bears not the sword in vain , who will execute the judgement upon the transgressor , who will reward you according to your works , before him you shall not be able to stand in judgement , in the day of your account , therefore come down to the light in your consciences , which calls for justice and equity , and awake to righteousness , all ye that li•e in your pride and presumption , and therein act against the innocent , for the day hastens wherein you will be found out by the righteous judgments of God : for the cry of the innocent , which is oppressed by you , hath entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath , who will come quickly and reward every one of you according to your deeds . Therefore repent of your cruelty before the evil day come , least you be found guilty of the blood of the innocent , when the Lord calls you to an account : for know this that when the Lord comes to plead with you , that of God in all your consciences , will witness for God in his righteous judgments ; therefore by that light which is pure in your consciences learn your condemnation , and own it upon those things before mentioned , which are contrary to the light , that peradventure you May be hide in the day of the Lord's wrath . 

From us who are sufferers in outward bonds , for the testimony of a good conscience , for the innocent truth sake , which shall stand for ever a witness against all cruelty , and bloody persecutors , in which truth we have assurance and peace in our sufferings , who are Counted by the world deceivers yet true , persecuted but not destroyed . Our names according to the flesh are George Whitehead , John Harwood &c.  

From Bury gaol this 14 of the 9 month , 

A true copy of the paper which Richard Clayton was moved to set upon Bures steeplehouse door , for which he the said Thomas Waldgrave , called justice of peace caused him to be whipped which he the said Thomas Waldegrave called a seditious paper and nonsense . 

If you do set up such ministers as seek for their gain from their quarters , you do set up such as the prophet disapproves , isa. 56. 11  : and if you do set up such as do bear rule by their means , you do set up such as the prophet Jeremiah , and the Lord disapproves , jer. 5.  And you that set up such as seeks for the wool , and make a prey upon the persons , you set up such as the prophet Ezekiel disapproves , ezek. 34 : and you that set up hirelings , set up such as Micah disapproves , Mica . 3.  And you that set up such as are called of men Masters , stands praying in the synagogues , and have the chiefest places in the assemblies , you set up such as Christ disapproved math. 23 : and you that set up such as are given to filthy lucre , you set up such as the apostle disapproves 2 pet. 2. 14.  And you that set up such as persecute , and cause persons to be sent to prison for speaking the truth in the synagogues , you set up such as go in Cains way Jude . 11 , and you that set up such as receives gifts and rewards , the wages of unrighteousness , you set up such as mind earthly things , whose god is their belly , which the apostle disapproves ; phil. 3. 10.  And you that set up such as strives to keep out God's labourers out of his vineyard and keep up such which Christ and the apostles disapproves ; and you that set up such as would not suffer another to speak that stands by , when any thing is revealed , but sends him to prison if he do , you set up a persecuting spirit , full of disorder , and are judged by the apostles life and doctrine , ( Who was a minister of Christ ) both you that set up , and them you do set up , ( Who said they Might speak one by one ) and so you all by this spirit are judged to be in the spirit of error , and to be such as would quench the holy spirit , and would limit the spirit of God , and despise prophesying and dare not try all things , manifesting yourselves to be haters of the light , and disapproved , with the prophets and apostles , and their practices and life : and you that sets up such as gives persons , David's quakings , tremblings , cryings , roarings , and tears , and prophecies , and prayers and praises , in metre mixed together , you set up such as have not the spirit of understanding to sing with the spirit and with understanding , which spirit brings to know the time of praising , praying , groaning , and crying , and trembling , and quaking , and prophesying : the spirit of understanding witnesseth , these things in their places , but you give scoffers , and scorners , and drunkards , and swearers , and threatners , and persecutors , David's conditions to sing , for he was scoffed at when he was in such conditions , and these do so now at these that are in such conditions . 

And if you set up such as takes tithes , you set up such as the apostle denied , for the apostle said , the priesthood was changed , and the law was changed also , heb. 7. and if you set up such as is before mentioned , you set up such as are contrary to scriptures , and plants no vineyard , nor labours in the vineyard ; for first they must plant a vineyard , before they eat of it . 

To all you-rulers , gentry , priests , and persons in the nation , who accuse us , you call Quakers , for idleness ; take notice of your envy , you have against God's labourers . 

Whereas by many of the magistrates , priests , and persons of this nation , we are accused of idleness , who are sent by the Lord of the harvest into his vineyard to dress it ( As the disciple of Christ ever were ) and are faithful and diligent in his work , who hath called us , ( As the true ministers , sent forth by Christ , were in all ages ) and are not idle , but do ( As they did ) by the same spirit , bear witness against all such as live in idleness , and profaneness , as the most part of these persons do , who accuse us : such , as live in pride and wantonness , who work not at all with their hands , accuse us of idleness , who have a cloud of witnesses for our practice ; for the holy men of God traveled from place to place , ( As we do ) as they were moved of the Lord , and they were sent ( As we are ) by the Lord ; to testify against such ungodly practices , as the persons of the world live in ; and the same generation in nature , hated and persecuted them , as do hate and persecute us ; and by the same holy spirit , ye are tried and found to be the idle persons , who accuse the servants of the Lord of idleness , who are in the work of the Lord , labouring in his vineyard . You magistrates , gentry , priests and persons , who sport yourselves in the daytime , and wantonly lives upon the earth , feeding yourselves with dainty dishes , dives-like , wasting the creatures of God upon your lusts , devouring the creation , decking yourselves in gorgeous attire , that you May be set up and esteemed of , above your poor brethren , & so are found gentiles in nature , exercising lordship over your brethren persecuting & imprisoning them , who are redeemed out of that nature you live in , who cannot bow and worship you ( As the heathen do ; ) but know this , you gentiles , priests and persons , who lives in these practices , ( In envy , pride , idleness , and fullness of bread . ) The day draws nigh , wherein you an account must give to the creator , for your envy and cruelty , and for the creatures which you have wasted , and do waste and devour , upon your ungodly lusts ; and in the day of account , you will howl and lament , for the misery which will upon you come ; for , to the mighty God of heaven and earth , the creator of all things , you an account must give , for your pride and idleness , fullness and gluttony , which you have lived in , and do live in , and your reward you must receive , according to your deeds and practices , your outside formal profession will not at all avail you , in the day of the Lord : and you shall then know , who have lived in idleness , whether you who are found in the sins of Sodom alive , or we whom the Lord sends amongst you , to declare against such practices , and to forewarn you of the evil , which is to come upon you , who are found in these practices and doth in life and word bear true testimony against you , who live in , and practise such things daily , as is before mentioned . And many of you are grown so dainty , and so curious in your diet , and apparel , that you scarce know what to eat , what to drink , or what to put on ; and so causes the whole creation , to groan under the weight and burden of your corruptions : who lives in idleness , whose belly is your god , who glory in your shame : and here both priests and gentry , who accuses others of idleness , are caught in their own snares : you who accuse us for idleness , who are in the work of the Lord , or you yourselves , who are found in the work of the enemy of God , let the honest hearted judge , who live in idleness : you who are enemies to the servants of God , which labours to have such practices destroyed , as causes the wr••h of God to remain upon such as act in these things before mentioned . All your coverings which you can make , will not hide you ; for the righteous judge , who will plead the cause of the innocent , will find you out , in the day of his fierce wrath , which is coming upon you , which you cannot avoid , nor escape : your high thoughts , nor your greatness will not save you though you esteem never so highly of yourselves , and scorn and der•de your poor fellow-creatures , Counting them inferior to you . And many of you think us not worthy to live upon the earth : we seem so vile and base in your scornful eyes . But know this , you proud , high minded , self-conceited ones that God is no respecter of persons , who hath chosen the ( Despised ) poor of this world , to be heirs of eternal salvation and hath left you for utter destruction , except you speedily repent ; for woe will come upon all you that are covered , and not with the spirit of the Lord : therefore now be you warned , and while you have time , prize it ; for the mighty terrible day of the Lord draweth nigh : therefore repent , and forsake the evil of your doings , ( You sodomites ) before the evil which is determined against you , come upon you : the day of your calamity hastens , the Lord is righteous in his judgements , who a short work will make upon the earth , and he will reward you according to your works : you who are workers of iniquity , must depart from his presence , and into utter darkness must be cast ; for the living dreadful God of life and glory , is of purer eyes , then to behold iniquity : therefore cease , cease , from your pride and vain glory , ye high-minded self-conceited ones , and sit down in dust and ashes , lest the door of mercy be for ever shut against you , and you perish eternally . Remember you are warned in your life time , 

from Edmonds Bury goal , the 19 day of the 6th month , 1655.  by a servant of the Lord in outward bonds for the truthsake , in scorn by the profane world , called Quaker , whose name in the flesh is , John Harwood . 





isa. 42. 6.  & 49 ▪ 9  joh. 8. 58  John 1.  joh. 17.  joh. 5. 22.  joh. 10. •3 . 1 joh. 5. 12.  & 8. 12.  joh. 1. 9  joh. 7. 19  joh. 5 , 47.  & 8. 37.  mat. 23.  & 10. 8. 9  1 cor. 6. 4 , 5 , & 11. 24.  heb. 11. 36 , 37.  joh. 16. 2.  Mark . 12. 38.  math. 23.  isa. 6. 11.  Mica . 3. 11  •er . 5.  ezek. 34. 3.  je. 38. 6.  amos. 7. 10.  psalm . 2. 2.  rev. 6. 10.  isa. 1. 13.  ezek. 16. 49.  mat. 23.  isa. 5. 7.  is. ia 1. u2 . answer . rom. 13. 3 , 4.  ro• . 12. 2.  John . 5. 4.  jam. 2. 9  psal. 2. 2.  1 cor. 7. 20.  






























