The true and lively portraiture of the honourable and learned knight sr Walter Ralegh . 



The Prince , or maxims of state . 

written by Sir Walter Raleigh , and presented to Prince Henry . 

Sapere & silere . 

London , printed , mdcxlii . 

The contents . 

Of government . 
Of policy . 
Of monarchy . 
Of aristocraty , or senatory state . 
Of free state , or popular state . 
Of tyranny . 
Of oligarchy , or the government of a few . 
Of a commonwealth . 
Of causes of states , and commonwealths in general . 
Of founding a state . 
Of causes preserving a state or commonwealth . 
Of mysteries or sophisms . 
Of axioms or rules of preserving a state . 
Rules for preserving of a kingdom . Hereditary . 
Conquered . 

Kingdom's hereditary are preserved at home by the ordering of a Prince . 
Kingdom's new gotten , or purchased by force , are preserved by 10.  Rules . 
Rules politic of tyrants . 
Sophisms of a barbarous and professed tyranny . 
Sophisms of the sophistical , or subtle tyrant to hold up his state . 
Of preservation of an aristocraty . 
Of preservation of an oligarchy , by Sophisms . 
Rules . 

Of conversion of states in general . 
Causes of conversions of states are of two sorts : general and particular . 
Particular causes of conversion of state , are of two sorts . 
Of sedition . 
Causes of sedition are of two sorts . 
Of alteration without violence . 
A method , how to make use of the book before , in the reading of story . 
Old age is not ever unfit for public government . 
Example of the like practice in Charles the fif• . 
Of observation for the affirmative and the negative . 
Of defence for David in marrying Abishag . 
Political nobility . 

Of Adoniah aspiring to the kingdom . 
Observations . 

Of ways of such as aspire to the kingdom , and marke• to discern them . 
Of government . 

government is of two sorts . 1.  private of himself . sobriety . of his family ; called oec•nomy . 

2.  public of the commonwealth ; called policy . a man must first govern himself , ere he be fit to govern a family : and his family , ere he be fit to bear the government in the commonwealth . 

Of policy . 

policy is an art of government of a commonwealth , and some part of it according to that state , or form• of government wherein it is settled for the public good . 

state , is the frame or set order of a commonwealth , or of the governors that rule the same , specially of the chief and sovereign governor that commands the rest . 

The state or sovereignty consisteth in 5. points . 

1.  Making or annulling of laws . 2.  Creating and disposing of magistrates . 3.  Power over life and death . 4.  Making of war , or peace . 5.  Highest or last appeal . Where these 5. a•e , either in one or in more , there is the state . 

These 5. points of state rest either in ; 1.  One monarchy or kingdom . 2.  Some few chief of men for virtue and wisdom , called an aristocra•y . 3.  many , called a free state or a popular state . these three sorts of government have respect to the common good , and therefore are just and lawful states . 

These 3. degenerate into 3. other governments . 1.  Monarchy . 
2.  Aristocraty . 
3.  Popular estate . 
Into 1.  Tyranny . 
2.  oligarchy , or government of a few , rich or able . 
3.  commonwealth or government of all the common & base sort , and therefore called a common wealth , by an usurped nickname . 


These all respect there own , and not the public good , and therefore are called bastard governments . 

1.  Monarchy . 

A monarchy , or kingdom , is the government of a state by one head , or chief , tending to the common benefit of all . 

monarchies or kingdoms are of 3. sorts touching the right or possession of them ; viz.  

1.  hereditary , by descent , as the English , French , &c.  
2.  elective , by suffrage of the other orders , or some of them , as the P•l•nian . 
3.  mixed , or of both kinds ; viz , by descent yet not tied to the next of blood , as the ancient Jewish state . 
monarchies are of 2. sorts touching their power or •uthority : viz.  

1.  intier . where the whole power of ordering all state matters , both in peace and war , doth by law and custom appertain to the Prince , as in the English kingdom , where the Prince hath power to make laws , league and war , to create magistrates ; to pardon life : of appeal , &c.  Though to give a contentment to the other degrees , they have a suffrage in making laws ; yet ever subject to the Prince's pleasure , nor negative will . 

2.  limited , or restrained that hath no full power in all the points or matters of state , as the military King that hath not the sovereignty in time of peace , as the making of laws &c.  But in war only as the poloni•• Kings . 

2.  Aristocraty or senatory state . 

An aristocraty is the government of a commonwealth by some competent number of the better sort , preferred for wisdom and other virtues for the public good . 

aristocraties are of 3. sorts , viz , where the senators are chosen , for 1.  virtue , riches , and the common good , as the Venetian . 

2.  virtue and the public good without respect of wealth , as sometimes the Roman when some of the senators , were fetched from the plough , and some from the schools . 

3.  virtue and wealth , more respecting their private , than the public good which inclineth towards an oligarchy , or the government of the richer or nobler sort , as in Rome towards the end . 

3.  Free state or popular state . 

The popular state is the government of a state by the choicer sort of persons , tending to the public good of all sorts ; viz. with due respect of the better , nobler , and richer sort . 

In every just state , some part of the government is , or aught to be imparted to the persons ; as in a kingdom , a voice or suffrage in making laws ; and sometimes also , in levying of arms ( If the charge be great , and the Prince forced to borrow help of his subjects ) the matter rightly May be propounded to a parliament , that the tax May seem to have proceeded from themselves . So consultations , and some proceedings in judicial matters May in part be referred to them . The reason , least seeing themselves to be in no number , nor of reckoning , they mislike the state or kind of government : and where the multitude is discontented , there must needs be many enemies to the present state . For which cause , tyrants ( Which allow the persons , no manner of dealing in state matters ) are forced to bereave them of their wits and weapons , and all other means , whereby they May resist , or amend themselves , as in Rusheland , Turkey , &c.  

4.  Tyranny . 

A tyranny is the swarving , or distorting of a monarchy , or the government of one tending not to the public good , but the private benefit of himself , and his followers . As in the ruff and Turkish government , where the state and wealth of other orders are employed only to the uphoulding of the greatness of the King , or Emperor . This is the worst of all the bastard states , because it is the perverting of the best regiment , to wit , of a monarchy , which resembleth the sovereign government of God himself . 

5.  Obligarchy , or the government of a few . 

An oligarchy is the swarving , or the corruption of an aristocraty ; or the government of some few that are of the wealthier or nobler sort , without any respect of the public good . The chief end of these governors is their own greatness and enriching . And therefore there manner is to prepare fit means to uphold their estates . This state is not wholly so bad , as is the tyra•nny , and yet worse than the commonwealth , because it respecteth the good of a few . 

6.  Commonwealth . 

A commonwealth is the swarving or depravation of a free or popular state , or the government of the whole multitude of the base and poorer sort , without respect of the other orders . 

These two states , to wit ; the oligarchy and commonwealth , are very adverse the one to the other , and have many bickerings and dissensions between them . For that the richer or nober sort suppose a right of superiority to appertain unto them in every respect , because they are superior , but in some respects only , to wit , in riches , birth , parentage , &c.  On the other side , the common persons suppose , there ought to be an equality in all other things , and some state matters ; because they are equal with the rich or noble , touching their liberty , whereas indeed neither the one nor the other are simply equal or superior as touching government and fitness thereunto , because they are such , to wit , because they are rich• noble , free , &c.  But because they are wise , virtuous valiant &c. and so have fit parts to govern a state . 

These several states are sometimes mixed and interwrought one with the other , yet ever so , as that the one hath the preheminent predomination over the other , as in the humours and complexions of the body . So in the Roman state , the persons had their plaebiscita , and gave the suffrage in the election of magistrates : yet the senate ( As the state stood ) for the most part swayed the state , and bare the chief rule . So in the Venetian state , the Duke seemeth to represent a monarch , and , the senate to be his council : yet the Duke hath no power in state matters , but is like a head set on by art that beareth no brain . And so that state is senatoricall or , aristocratical . 

Causes of states and commonwealths in general . 

Causes of states or of commonwealths are of 3. sorts , viz.  1.  Founding or settling a state where to be considered . 
2.  Preserving a state . 
3.  Changing and alltering a state . 
1.  Measure . 
2.  Parts and their qualities . 


Founding a state . 

In founding a state are to be considered 2. things . 1.  Proportion . 
2.  Parts . 

proportion is a just measure or mediocrity of the state , whereby it is framed and kept in that order , as that neither it exceed nor be defective in his kind ; to wit , so that a monarch be not to monarchical , nor strict , or absolute , as the ruff Kings ; nor aristocratical , that is over-mated ; or eclipsed by the nobility , as the Scottish kingdom ; but ever respective to the other degrees . That an aristocraty be not to magnificent nor intier to itself , but communicate with the persons some commodities of state or government as the Venetian , and sometimes the Roman allowed the persons to elect certain magistrates out of themselves , to have a tribune , to make plaebiscita &c.  so a free state or commonwealth that it be not over popular , viz. that it depress not to much the richer , wiser , nor learneder sort ; but admit them to offices with a caution out of the rules and mysteries of that state . that they seek no alteration of the present state . the reason , because the moderate states in their several kinds ( As all other things that observe the mean ) are best framed for their continuance , because they give less cause of grudge , envy , and affecting the wealth , honour , and liberty which they see in others , that govern the state ; and so are less subject to stirs , and commotions , and easiest kept in their present state wherein they are set . 

Parts . 

The parts of the state , or those magistrates that bear place or sway in the public government . 

parts or partakers of public government , are 1.  counsel or senate , which consulteth of all matters pertaining to war and peace , magistrates , &c. in admitting of whom there ought to be a more special care that they be men expect in matter of policy , because it is their trade and vocation , as men use to choose pilots and Masters of ships such as know the art of navigation , and not husbandmen &c.  And so the contrary . 

2.  magistrates and officers which are to be executioners of that which is consulted and found to be expedient for the commonwealth , wherein are to be observed the kinds of magistrates , that they be such as fit that kind of government ; the time of their continuance , and the manner of their election or appointing , by whom , out of whom , and in what manner they be choosen . 

3.  judges ; to determine in civil and criminal matters , where are to be observed , out of whom they are to be chosen ; what kinds are necessary , and the manner of judgement and judicial proceeding . 

i• magistrates are to be observed , 1.  Kinds of magistrates , as 1.  Civil . 
2.  Ecclesiastical . 
1.  superior , which are to be such and of that kind as agree with the state ; as consuls for a year , and not perpetual dictators in a senatory state . Preators and censors that oversee manners and orders of the persons . 

For a kingdom lieutenants of shires , marshals , Masters of horse , admirals , &c.  

inferior , as conservators of peace , constables , &c.  

overseers of youth , that take care of their education for civil and warlike exercise . 

clerks of the market that provide for the quantity and prize of victual . 

aediles for buildings , streets , bounds . 

quaestors or treasurours to keep and dispense the public treasury . 

actuaries or recorders , which keep the public records . 

gaolers , to keep prisons , and prisoners . 

surveyors of woods and fields , &c.  

as Bishops , or pastors , elders , wardens . 


2.  time of magistrates , whereof some are perpetual , some for a time , viz. , for more years ; a year , half a year , according to the necessity of the commonwealth , and not perpetual ; or at least not hereditary in a kingdom . Yearly in an aristocracy , or half yearly in a free state . 
3.  manner of choice , by whom and how to be chosen , where especially they are to be chosen by suffrage , and not by lot . 


Causes preserving a state or commonwealth . 

In preserving of states , two things required . 1.  Mysteries or Sophis•eses . 1.  General to all states . 
2.  Particular for every several state . 

2.  Rules or actioms . 1.  General for all states . 
2.  particular for every state . 



Mysteries or sophisms . 

mysteries or sophisms of state , are certain• secret practices , either for the avoiding of danger ; or averting such effects as tend to the preservation of the present state , as it is set or founded . 

state mysteries are of 2. sorts . 1.  general : that pertain to all states ; as first , to provide by all means , that the same degree or part of the commonwealth do not exceed both in quantity and quality . In quantity as that the number of the nobility , or of great persons , be not more than the state or commonwealth can-bear . In quality , as that none grow in wealth , liberty , honours , &c. more than that is meet for that degree ; for as in weights , the heavier weights bear down the scale ; so in commonwealths , that part or degree that excelleth the rest in qu•lity and quantity , overswayeth the rest after it , whereof follow alterations and conversions of state . secondly , to provide by all means , that the middle sort of persons exceed both the extremes ( viz. ) of nobility and gentry , and the base , rascal and beggarly sort . For this maketh the state constant and firm , when both the extremes are tied together by a middle sort , as it were with a band , as for any conspiracy of the rich and beggarly sort together , it is not to be feared . To these two points , the particular rules or sophisms of every commonwealth are to be applied . 

2.  particular : that serve for preservation of every commonwealth in that form of state , wherein it is settled as in a kingdom . That the nobility May be accustomed to bear the government of the Prince , especially such as have their dwelling in remote places from the Prince's eye , it is expedient to call them up at certain times to the Prince's court under pretence of doing them honour , or being desirous to see and enjoy their presence ; and to have their children , especially their elder , to be attendant upon the Prince , as of special favour towards them and theirs , that so they May be trained up in duty and obedience towards the Prince , and be as hostages for the good behaviour and faithful dealing of their parents , especially if they be of any suspected note . To that end , serves the Persian practice in having a band or train of the Satrapa's children ; and other nobles to attend the court which was well imited by our train of henchm•n , if they were of the nobler sort . Again , sometimes to borrow small sums of his subjects , and to pay them again , that he May after borrow greater sums and never pay : so in an oligarchy , least it decline to a popular state , they deceive the persons with this and the like sophisms ( viz. ) They compel their own sort , to wit , the rich men by great penalties to frequent their assemblies for choosing of magistrates , for provision of armour , warlike exercise , making an execution of laws , &c.  By that means seeming to bear a hard hand over the richer ; but to suffer the poorer and meaner sort to be absent , and to neglect those assemblies under pretence , that they will no• draw them from their business and private earnings : yet withal to cite thither some few of them ( viz. ) so many as are easily over-matched by the richer sort , to make a show , that they would have the persons , or poorer sort partakers likewise of those matters , yet terrifying those that come to their assemblies with the tediousness of consultations , greatness of fines , if they should mi•doc . To the end to make them unwilling to come again , or to have to do with those consultations ; by which means the richer sort do still govern the state with the people• liking and good contentment . 

Axioms . 

axioms or rules of preserving the state , are 1.  general , that serve for all commonwealths . 
2.  particular , that serve for every several state . 

General rules . 

1.  The first and principal rule of policy to be observed in all states is to profess , and practice , and maintain the true worship and religion of almighty God , prescribed unto us in his word , which is the chief end of all government . The axiom , that God be obeyed simply without exception , though he command that which seemeth unreasonable , and absurd to human policy , as in the Jews commonwealth , that all the men should repair yearly to one place to worship God four times , leaving none to defend their coast ; though being beset with many enemies . Not to sow the seventh year , but to suffer the ground to rest untilled without respect or fear of famine , &c.  

2.  To avoid the causes of conversions , whereby states are overthrown that are set down in the title of conversions ; for that commonwealths ( As natural bodies ) are preserved by avoiding that which hurteth the health and state thereof , and are so cured by contrary medicines . 

3.  To take heed , that no magistrate be create or continue contrary to the laws and policy of that state . As that in a senate , there be not create a perpetual dictator , as Caesar in Room . in a kingdom , that there be no senate or convention of equal power with the Prince , in state matters ; as in Poland . 

4.  To create such magistrates as love the state as it is settled , and take heed of the contrary practice , as to advance popular persons in a kingdom , or aristocraty . And secondly , to advance such as have skill to discern what doth preserve , and what hurteth or altereth the present state . 

5.  To that end to have certain officers to pry abroad , and to observe such as do not live and behave •hemselvess in fit sort , agreeable to the present state ; but desire rather to be under some other form or kind of government . 

6.  To take heed that magistracies be not sold for money , nor bribe in their offices , which is specially to be observed in that commonwealth which is governed by a few of the richer sort : for if the magistrate gain nothing but his common fees , the common sort and such as want honour take in good part , that they be not preferred , and are glad rather that themselves are suffered to intend private business . But if the magistrate •uy and sell matters , the common persons are do•bly grieved , both because they are debarred of those preferments and of that gain which they see to grow by them , which is the cause that the German oligarchies continue •o firm , for both they suffer the poorer sort to grow into wealth , and the richer sort are by that means freed , and secured from being under the poor . 

7.  To take heed that the state as it is settled and maintained be not over strict , nor exceed in his kind ; ( viz. ) That a kingdom be not too monarchical ; nor a popular state be too popular : for which cause it is good , that the magistrates sometimes yield of his right touching honour , and behave themselves familiarly with those that are equal unto them in other parts , though inferior for place and office ; and sometimes popularly with the common persons , which is the cause that some commonwealths , though they be very simply and unskilfully set ; yet continue firm , because the magistrates behave themselves wisely , and with due respect towards the rest that are without honour ; and therefore , some kind of moderate popularity , is to be used in every commonwealth . 

8.  To take heed of small beginnings , and to meet with them even at the first , as well touching the breaking and altering of laws , as of other rules which concern the continuance of every several state . For the disease and alteration of a commonwealth doth not happen all at once but grows by degrees , which every common wit cannot discern , but men expert in policy . 

9  To provide , that that part be ever the greater in number and power which favours the state , as now it stands . This is to be observed as a very oracle in all commonwealths . 

10.  To observe a mean in all the degrees , and to suffer no part to exceed ; or decay overmuch . As first for pre•ermentss , to provide that they be rather small and short , then great and long ; and if any be grown to overmuch greatness , to withdraw or diminish some part of his honour . Where the sophisms are to be practised ( viz. ) to do it by parts and degrees ; to do it by occasion or colour of law , and not all at once . And if that way serve not , to advance some other , of whose virtue and faithfulness , we are fully assured , to as high a degree , or to greater honour : and to be the friends and followers of him that excelleth , above that which is meet . As touching wealth , to provide , that tho•e of the middle sort ( As before was said ) be more in number ; and if any grow high , and overcharged with wealth , to use the sophisms of a popular state ; ( viz. ) to send him on embans•ageses , and forram• negotiations , or employ him in some office that hath great charges and little honour , &c.  To which end the Edelishi• served in some commonwealths . 

11.  To suppress the factions and quarrels of the nobles , and to keep other that are yet free from joining with them in their partakings and factions . 

12.  To increase or remit the common taxes and contributions , according to the wealth , or want of the persons and commonwealth . If the persons be increased in wealth , the taxes and subsidies May be increased . If they be poor , and their wealth diminish , specially by dearth , want of traffic , &c. to forbear taxes and impositions , or to take little . Otherwise grudge and discontentments must needs follow . The sophisms that serve for impositions are these , and other of like sort , to pretend business of great charge , as war , building of ships , making of havens , castles , fortifications , &c. for the common defence ; sometimes by lotteries and like devises , wherein some part May be bestowed , the rest reserved for other expenses ; but princely dealing needs no pretences . 

13.  To provide that the discipline and training of youth of the better sort be such as agreeth with that commonwealth : as that in a kingdom , the sons of noblemen to be attendant at the court , that they May be accustomed to obedience towards the Prince : in the senatory state , that the sons of the senators be not idly , no• over daintily brought up , but well instructed and trained up in learning tongues and martial exercise ; that they May be able to bear that place in the commonwealth , which their father held , and contrary wise in a popular state . 

14.  To take heed , least their sophisms , or secret practices for the continuance and maintenance of that state be not discovered , least by that means they refuse and disappoint themselves , but wisely used and with great secreflie . 

Particular rules . 

rules and axioms for preserving of a kingdom ; Hereditary . 
Conquered . 

Kingdom's hereditary are preserved at home by the ordering . 

1.  himself ; ( viz. ) by the tempering and moderation of the Prince's power , and prerogative . For the less and more temperate , their power and state is ; the more firm , and stable is their kingdom and government , because they seem to be further off from a master-like and tyrannical empire ; and less unequal in condition to the next degree ; to wit , the nobility , and so less subject to grudge and envy . 

2.  nobility ; ( viz. ) by keeping that degree and due proportion , that neither they exceed not in number more than the realm or state can bear , as the Scottish kingdom , and sometime the English , when the realm was overcharged with the numbers of Dukes , Earls , and other nobles ; whereby the authority of the Prince was eclipsed , and the realm troubled with their factions and ambitions . Nor that any one excel in honour , power or wealth , as that he resemble another King within the kingdom ; as the house of Lancaster within this realm . To that end not to load any with too much honour or preferment , because it is hard even for the best and worthiest men to bear their greatness and high fortune temperately , as appeareth by infinite examples in all states . The sophisms for preventing or reforming this inconvenience , are to be used with great caution and wisdom . If any great person be to be abated , not to deal with him by calumniation , or forged matter , and so to cut him off without desert , especially if he be gracious among the persons after the machivilian policy , which besides the injustice , is an occasion many times of greater danger towards the Prince . Nor to withdraw their honour all at once , which maketh a desperate discontentment in the party , and a commiseration in the persons , and so greater love , if he be gracious for his virtue and public service . Nor to banish him into foreign countries , where he May have opportunity of practising with foreign states , whereof great danger May ensue , as in the examples of Coriolanus , Henry the fourth , and such like . But to use these , and the like sophisms : ( viz. ) to abate their greatness by degrees , as David , Joabs' , Justinian , bellisarius , &c.  to advance some other men to as great or greater honour , to shadow or over-mate the greatness of the other . To draw from him by degrees his friends and followers , by preferrements , rewards , and other good and lawful means ; especially , to be provided that these great men be not employed in great or powerful affairs of the commonwealth , whereby they May have more opportunity , to sway the state . 

3.  persons : ( viz. ) so to order and behave himself , that he be loved and reverenced of the persons . For that the Prince need not greatly fear home-conspiracies , or foreign invasion , if he be firmly loved of his own persons . The reason , for that the rebel can neither hope for any forces for so great enterprise ; no• any refuge being discovered and put to flight , if the multitude affect their Prince : but the common persons being once offended hath cause to fear every moving , both at home and abroad . This May be effected by the Prince , if he use means and art of getting the favour of the persons , and avoid those things that breed hatred and contempt : ( viz. ) if he s••me as a •utor , or a father to love the persons and to protect them , if he maintain the peace of his kingdom ; for that nothing is more popular , nor more pleasing to the persons than is peace . 

4.  If he show himself oftentimes graciously , yet with state , and majesty to his persons , and receive complaints of his suppliants , and such like . 

5.  If he sit himself sometimes in open courts and place of justice , that he May seem to have a 〈◊〉 of justice among his persons . If he bestow many benefits and graces upon that city which he maketh the seat of his empire , and so make it sure and faithful unto him , which is fit to be in the middle of his kingdom , as the heart in the middle of the body , or the sun in the middle of heaven , both to divide himself more easily into all the parts of his dominions ; and least the furthest parts at one end move , whilst the Prince is in the other . If he go in progress many times to see his provinces , especially those that are remote . 

6.  If he gratify his courtiers and attendants in that sort , and by such means as that he May seem not to pleasure them with the hurt and injury of his persons , as with monopolies , and such like . 

7.  If he commit the handling of such thing• as procure envy , or seem grievous to his ministers , but reserve those things which are grateful and well pleasing to himself , as the French Kings , who for that purpose• as May seem , have erected their court at Paris , which 〈◊〉 the Prince from grudge and envy , both with the nobles and the persons . 

8.  If he borrows sometimes sums of money of his persons , though he have no need , and pay the same 〈◊〉 without defalcation of any part by his exchequer or other officers . 

9  If he avoid all such things as May breed hatred or contempt of his person , which May be done , if he show himself not too light , inconstant , hard , cruel , e••eminate , fearful , and dastardly , &c.  But contrariwise , religious grave , just , valiant , &c.  Whereby appeareth the false doctrine of the machivilian policy ; with fear , the better means , to keep the persons in obedience , than love , and reverence of the persons towards the Prince . 

9  If the Prince be well furnished with warlike provision , which is to be rumoured and made known abroad : if it be known , that he is revereneed and obeyed by his persons at home . 

10.  If he provide so much as lieth in him , that his neighbour kingdoms grow not overmuch in power and dominion ; which if it happen , he is to join speedily with other Princes , which are in like danger to abare that greatness , and to strengthen himself and the rest against it . An overfight of the Christian Princes towards the King of Spain . 

11.  If he get him intelligencers by reward , or other means , to detect or hinder the de•igneses of that Prince , with whom he hath differences , if any thing be intent•ed against his state . Or at least have some of his own lodging abroad about that Prince's court , under colour of embassage , or some other pretence ; which must be men of skill and dexterity to serve for that turn . 

12.  To observe the laws of his country and not to encounter them with his prerogative , nor to use it at all where there is a law , for that it maketh a secret and just grudge in the people's hearts , especially if it tender to take from them their commodities , and to bestow them upon other of his courtiers and ministers . 

13.  To provide especially that that part which favoureth the state as it standeth• be more potent , than the other that favoureth it not , or desireth a change . 

14.  To make specially choice of good and sound men to bear the place of magistrates , especial of such as assist the Prince in his counsels , and policies , and not to lean overmuch to his own advise , contrary to the rule of Machiavel , who teacheth that a Prince can have no good council except it be in himself ; his reason , because if he use the council of some one ; he is in danger to be overwrought and supplanted by him : and if he council with more , than he shall be distracted with the differences in opinion . As if a Prince of great , or mean wisdom could not take the judgement of all his counselors in any point of policy , or of so many as himself thinketh good , and to take it either by word or in wr•ting ; and himself then in private peruse them all , and so after good 〈◊〉 mature deliberation make choice of the best , without any distraction or binding himself to the direction of one . For the proverb is true , that two eyes see more than one ; and therefore , the advices and consultations of a senatory state is compared by some to a feast , or dinner , where many contribute towards the shot , by which means they have more variety of dishes , and so better fare : and yet every man May make choice of that dish that serveth him best for his health and appetite . 

15.  The Prince himself is to sit sometimes in place of public justice , and to give an experiment of his wisdom and equity , whereby great reverence and estimation is gotten , as in the example of Solomen ; which May seem the reason , why our Kings of England had their King's bench in place of public justice , after the manner of the ancient Kings that sat in the gate ; where for better performing of this princely duty , some special causes May be selected , which May thoroughly be debated and considered upon by the Prince in private , with the help and advise of his learned counsel , and so be decided publicly , as before is said , by the Prince himself ; at least the Prince is to take account of every minister of public justice , that it May be known , that he hath a care of justice , and doing right to his persons , which makes the justicers also to be more careful in performing of their d•tieses . 

16.  To be moderate in his taxes , and impositions ; and when need doth require to use the subjects purse , to do it by parliaments , and with their consents , making the cause apparent unto them , and showing his unwillingness in charging them . Finally , •o to use it , that it May seem rather an offer from his subjects , than an exaction by him . 

17.  To stop small beginnings , unto this end to compound the dissentious that arise amongst the nobles , with caution that such as are free , be not drawn into parts , whereby many times the Prince is endangered , and the whole commonwealth set in a combustion ; as in the example of the Barons wars , and the late wars of France , which grew from a quarrel betwixt the Guisian faction and the other nobility . 

18.  To stir up the persons , if they grow secure and negligent of armour and other provision for the commonwealth , by some rumour or fear of danger at-home , to make them more ready when occasion requireth . But this seldom to be used least it be supposed a false alarm , when there is need indeed . 

19  To have special care , that his children , especially the heir apparent , have such bringing up as is meet for a King ( viz. ) in learning , specially of matters pertaining to state , and in martial exercise , contrary to the practice of many Princes , who suffer their children to be brought up in pleasure , and to spend their time in hunting &c. which by reason o• their defects afterwards is a cause of misgovernment and alteration of state . 

2.  Kingdom's new gotten , or purchased by force , are preserved by these means . 

1.  First , if they have been subjects before to his ancestors , or have the same tongue , manners , or fashions as have his own country , it is an easy matter to retain such countries within their obedience , in case the Prince's blood of the said country be wholly extinct . For men of the same quality , tongue , and condition , do easily shoal and combine themselves together , so much the rather if the persons of that country have served before and were not accustomed to their own liberty , wherein specially is to be observed , that the laws and customs of that purchased country be not altered nor innovated , or at least it be done by little and little . So the Burgundian and Acquitaines' were annexed to France . the rea•on• because partly they have been accustomed to serve ; and partly , for that they will not easily agree about any other to be their Prince , if the blo•d royal be once extinguished . As for the invasion of a foreign country , whereunto the Prince hath no right , or whereof the right heir is living ; it is not the part of a ju•t civil Prince , much less a Prince Christian to enforce such a country ; and therefore , the machivilian practices in this case to make sure work by extinguishing wholly the blood royal i• le•d , and impertinent : the like is to be said , of murdering the natives , or the greatest part of them , to the end he May hold the rest in sure possession . A thing not only against Christian religion : but inhuman justice , cruel , and barbarous . 

2.  The safest way is , ( Supposing a right ) that some good part of the natives be transplanted into some other place , and our colonies consisting of so many as shall be thought meet be planted there in some part of the province , castles , forts , and havens , seized upon , and more provided in fit places , as the manner was of the Babylonian monarch which transplanted 10. tribes of the Jews : and of the Romans in France , Germany , Britain , and other places . The reason : 1.  For that otherwise forces of horse and foot , are to be maintained within the province which cannot be done without great charge . 2.  For that the whole province is troubled and grieved , with removing and supplying the army with victuals , carriages , &c. 3.  For that colonies are more sure and faithful than the rest . As for the natives that are removed from their former seats , they have no means to hurt , and the rest of the natives being free from the inconvenience , and fearing that themselves May be so served , if they attempt any thing rashly , are content to be quiet . The Turks practice in Asia , where the chief grounds and dwellings are possessed by the soldiers , whom they call Timariotae . that the Prince have his seat and his residence in his new purchase , especially for a time , till things be well settled ; especially if the province be great and large , as the Turk in Greece . the reasons : 1.  Because the presence of the Prince availeth much to keep things in order , and get the good will of his new subjects . 2.  They conceive that they have ref•ge by the Prince's presence , if they be oppressed by the lieutenants and inferior governors : where it will be convenient for the winning the people's hearts , that some examples be made of punishing of such as have committed any violence or oppression . 3.  Because being present he seeth and heareth what is thought and attempted ; and so May quickly give remedy to it , which being absent , he cannot do , or not do in time . 

3.  If the Prince himself cannot be present to reside , then , to take heed that the charge of governing , on new purchases be committed to such as be sure men , and of other meet quality , that depend wholly upon the Prince's favour ; and not to natives , or other of their own subjects , that are gracious there for their nobility , or virtue ; especially if the province be great , and somewhat far distant , which May soon seduce the unsettled affections of those new subjects . As for such governors as depend wholly upon the Prince's favour being not bor•• , but create noble , they will not so easily suffer themselves to be won from their du•y ; and in case they would revolt , yet they are not able to make any great strength , for that the persons obey them but as instruments and ministers to keep them in subjection , and not for any good will . 

4.  To have the children of the chief noble men , and of greatest authority , hostages with them in safe keeping ; the more the better : for that no bound is stronger , then that of nature to contain the parents and allies in obedience , and they the rest . 

5.  To alter the laws , but by degrees one after another , and to make other that are more behooveful for the establishing of the present government . 

6.  To keep the persons quiet and peaceable and well affected so much as May be , that they May seem , by being conquered , to have gotten a protector , rather than a tyrant ; for the common-people if they enjoy peace , and be not distracted , nor drawn from their business , nor exacted upon beyond measure are easily contained under obedience• yet notwithstanding , they are to be disused from the practice of arms , and other exercises which increase conrage , and be weakened of armour , that they have neither spirit nor will to rebel . 

7.  If there be any faction in the country , to take to him the defence of the better , and stronger part , and to combine with it , as Caesar in France . 

8.  To look well to the borders and confining provinces , and if any rule there of great , or equal power to himself , to join league with some other borderers , though of less strength to hinder the attempts ( If any should be ) by such neighbour Prince . For it happeneth often , that a country insested by one neighbour Prince calleth in another of as great or greater power to assist , and rescue it from the other that invadeth it ; so the Romans were called into Greece by the Aet•lians ; the Saxons by the Britain's , the Danes by the Saxons . 

9  To leave their titles and dignities to the natives , but the command and authority wholly to his own . 

10.  Not to put much trust , nor to practise to often the sophisms of policy , especially those that appertain to a tyrannical state , which are soon detected by men of judgement , and so bring discredit to the Prince , and his policy among the wiser and better sort of his subjects , whereof must needs follow very evil effects . 

The sophisms of tyrants , are rather to be known , then practised , ( Which are for the supporting of their tyrannical states , ) by wise and good Princes , and are these , and such like as follow . 

Rules politic of tyrants . 

Rvles' practised by tyrants are of 2. sorts : viz. 1.  Barbarous and professed , which is proper to those that have got head , and have power sufficient of themselves without others helps , as in the Turkish and Russe government . 

2.  Sophistical and dissembled ; as in some s•teses , that are reputed for good and lawful monarchies , but inclining to tyrannies , proper to those which are not yet settled nor have power sufficient of themselves ; but must use the power and help of others , and so are forced to be politic sophisters . 

1.  Sophisms of a barbarous and professed tyranny . 

1.  To expel and banish out of his country all honest means , whereby his persons May attain to learning , wisdom , valour , and other virtues , that they Might be fit for that estate and servile condition . For that in these two , learning , and martial exer•ise , effect two things most dangerous to a tyranny : ( viz. ) Wisdom and valour . For that men of spirit and understanding can hardly endure a servile state . To this end to forbid learning of liberal arts , and martial exercise ; as in the ruff government , so Julian the apostata dealt with the Christians . Contrariwise , to use his persons to base occupations , and mechanical arts , to keep them from idleness , and to put away from them all high thoughts , and manly conceits , and to give them a liberty of drinking drunk , and of other base and lewd conditions that they May be sotted , and so made unfit for great erterprises . So the Egyptian Kings dealt with the Hebrews ; so the ruff Emperor with his ruff people• and Charles the fifth with the Netherlanders , when he purposed to enclose their privileges , and to bring them under his absolute government . 

2.  To make sure to him and his state , his military men by reward , liberty , and other means , especially his guard , or Praetorian band ; that being partakers of the spoil and benefit , they make like that state , and continue firm to it ; as the Turk his janissaries , the ruff his boyarent , &c.  

3.  To unarm his persons of weapons , money , and all means , whereby they May resist his power ; and to end , to have his set & ordinary exactions , viz. once in two , three , or four years ; and sometimes yearly , as the Turk , and ruff ; who is wont to say , that his persons must be used as his flock of sheep : viz. their fleece taken from them , least it overlade them , and grow too heavy ; that they are like to his beard , that the more it was shaved , the thicker it would grow . And if there be any of extraordinary-wealth to borrow of them in the mean while , till the tax come about , or upon some devised matter to con•iscate their goods , as the common practice is of the ruff and Turk . 

4.  To be still in wars , to the end , his persons May need a captain ; and that his forces May be kept in practice , as the ruff doth yearly against the tartar , Polonian , and Sweden , &c.  

5.  To cut off such as excel the rest in wealth , favour , or nobility , or be of a pregnant , or spiring wit , and so are fearful to a tyrant , and to suffer none to hold office , or any honour , but only of him ; as the Turk his bashas , and the ruff his r•ezzeses . 

6.  To forbid guilds , brotherhoods , feastings , and other assemblies among the persons , that they have no means or opportunity to conspire or confer together of public matters , or to maintain love amongst themselves , which is very dangerous to a tyrant , the russes practice . 

7.  To have their beagl•ss , or listeners in every corner , and parts of the realm , especially in places that are more suspect , to learn what every man saith , or thinketh , that they May prevent all attempts , and take away such as mislike their state . 

8.  To make schism and division among his subjects , ( viz. ) To set one noble man against another , and one rich man against another , that through faction and disagreement among themselves , they May be weakened , and attempt nothing against him ; and by this means entertaining whisperings and complaints , he May know the secrets of both parts , and have matter against them both , when need requireth . So the ruff made the faction of the zemsky and the oppress•ie . 

9  To have strangers for his guard , and to entertain parasites , and other base and servile fellows , not too wise , but yet subtle , that will be ready for reward to do and execute what he commandeth , though never so wicked and unjust . For that good men cannot flatter , and wise men cannot serve a tyrant . 

All these practices and such like , May be contracted into one or two , ( viz. ) To bereave his subjects of will and power to do him hurt , or to alter the present state . The use is caution , not imitation . 

2.  Sophisms of the sophistical , or subtle tyrant to h•ld up his state . 

1.  To make a show of a good King by observing a temper and mediocrity in his government , and whole course of life ; to which end it is necessary , that this subtle tyrant be a cunning politician , or a machivilian at the least , and that he be taken so to be , for that it maketh him more to be feared and regarded , and is thought thereby not not unworthy for to govern others . 

2.  To make show not of severity , but of gravity , by seeming reverent , and not terrible in his speech , and gesture , habit , and other demeanour . 

3.  To pretend care of the commonwealth ; and to that end to seem loath to exact tributes and other charges ; and yet to make necessity of it , where none is , to that end to procure such war as can bring no danger towards his state , and that Might easily be compounded , or some other chargeable business ; and to continue it on , that he May continue his exaction and contribution so long as he list . And thereof to employ some part in his public service , the rest to hoard up in his treasury , which is sometimes practised even by lawful Princes ; as Edward the fourth in his wars against . France , when having levied a great sum of money throughout his realm , especially of the Londoners , he went over seas , and returned without any thing doing . 

4.  Sometimes to give an account by open speech and public writing of the expense of such taxes and impositions as he hath received of his subjects , that he May so seem to be a good husband , and frugal , and not a robber of the commonwealth . 

5.  To that end , to bestow some cost upon public buildings ; or some other work for the common good , especially upon the ports , forts , and chief cities of his realm , that so he May seem a benefactor , and to have a delight in the adorning of his country , or doing some good for it . 

6.  To forbid feastings and other meetings , which increase love , and give opportunity to confer together of public matters , under pretence of sparing cost for better uses . To that end , the curfew bell was first ordained by William the conqueror to give men warning to repair home at a certain hour . 

7.  To take heed , that no one grow to be over great , but rather many-equal great , that they May envy and contend one with another ; and if he resolve to weaken any of this sort , to do it warily and by degrees , if quite to wrack him and to have his life , yet to give him a lawful trial after the manner of his country ; and if he proceed so far with any of great power and estimation as to do him contumely or disgrace , not to suffer him to escape , because contumely and disgrace are things contrary unto honour , which great spirits do most desire , and so are moved rather to a revenge for their disgrace , then to any thankfulness , or acknowledging the Prince's favour for their pardon or dismission ; true in atheists , but not in true Christian nobility . 

8.  To unarm his persons , and store up their weapons under pretence of keeping them safe , and having them ready when service requireth , and then to arm with them , such and so many as he shall think meet , and to commit them to such as are sure men . 

9  To make schism or division under hand among his nobility , and betwixt the nobility and the persons , and to set one rich man against another , that they combine not together , and that himself by hearing the griefs and complaints May know the secrets of both parts , and so have matter against them both , when it listeth him to call them to an account . 

10.  To offer no man any contumely or wrong , specially about woman's matters , by attempting the chastity of their wives or daughters , which hath been the •••e of many tyrants , and conversion of their states . As of Tarqvinius , by Brutus , Appius , by Virginius , Pisistratus , by Harmodius , Alexander Medici's Duke of Florence , aloisus of Placentia , Rode•icus King of Spain , &c.  

11.  To that end to be moderate in his pleasures , or to use them closely that he be not seen ; for that men sober or watchful , or such as seem so , are not lightly subject to contempt , or conspiracies• of their own . 

12.  To reward such as achieve some great or commendable enterprise , or do any special action for the commonwealth in that manner as it May seem , they could not be better regarded , in case they lived in a free state . 

13.  All rewards and things grateful to come from himself but all punishments , exaction• and  gs ; ungrateful to come from his officers and public ministers ; and when he hath effected what he would by them , if he see his persons discontented withal , to make them a sacrifice to pacify his subjects . 

14.  To pretend great cure of religion and of serving of God , ( Which hath been the manner of the wickedest tyrants ) for that persons do less fear any hurt from those , whom they think virtuous and religious , nor attempt lightely to do them hurt , for that they think that God protects them . 

15.  To have a strong and sure guard of foreign soldiers , and to bind them by good turns , that they having at least , profit , May depend upon him , and the present state ; as Caligula , the German guard , where the nobility are many and mighty . The like is practifed by lawfuls Kings , as by the French King . 

16.  To procure that other great persons be in the same fault , or case with them , that for that cause• they be forced to descend the tyrant , for their own safety . 

17.  To take part , and to join himself with the stronger part ; if the common persons , and mean degree be the stronger to join with them ; if the rich and noble , to join with them . For so that part with his own strength will be ever able to over match the other . 

18.  So to frame his manners and whole behaviour , as that he May seem , if not perfectly good , yet tolerably evil , or somewhat good , somewhat bad . 

These rules of hypocritical tyrants are to be known , that they May be avoided and meet withal , and no drawn into imitation . 

Preservation of an aristocraty . 

Rvles to preserve a se•atory state , are partly taken from the common axioms , and partly from those that 〈◊〉 a kingdom . 

Preservation of an oligarchy ; by Sophisms . 
Rules . 

1.  In consultations and assemblies abo•• public affairs so to order the matter , that all May have liberty to frequent their common assemblies and counsels : but to impose a fine upon the richer sort if they omit that duty . On the other side to pardon the persons , if they absent themselves , and to bear with them under pretence , that they May the better intend their occupations , and not be hindered in their trades and earnings . 

2.  In election of magistrates and officers : to suffer the po••er sort to vow and abjure the bearing of office under colour of sparing them ; or to enjoin some great charge as incident to the office , which the poor cannot bear . But to impose some great fine upon those that be rich , if they refuse to bear office , being elect unto it . 

3.  In judicial matters : in like manner to order that the persons May be absent from public trials , under pretence of following their , business . But the richer to be present , and to compel them by fines to frequent the court . 

4.  In warlike exercise and arms , that the poor be not forced to have armour , horse , &c. under pretence of sparing their cost , nor to be drawn from their trades by ma•tiall exercises ; but to compel the richer sort to ke•pe their proportion of armour , horse , &c.  By excessive fines , and to exercise themselves in warlike matters , &c.  

5.  To have special care of instructing their children in liberal arts , policy , and warlike exercise , and to observe good order and discipline . For as popular states are preserved by the frequency and liberty of the persons , so this government of the richer is preserved by discipline and good order of governors . 

6.  To provide good store of warlike furniture , especially of horse , and horsemen ; and of armed men , viz. ••ke , &c. which are proper to the gentry ; as shot and light furniture are for a popular company . 

6.  To put in practise some points of a popular state , viz. to lade no one man with too much preferment ; to make yearly or half years' magistrates , &c.  For that the persons are pleased with such things , and they are better secured by this means from the rule of one . And if any grow to too much greatness , to abate him by the sophis••• fit for this state . 

7.  To commit the offices and magistracies , to those that are best able to bear the greatest charges for public matters , which both tendeth to the conservation of this state , and pleaseth the persons , for that they ••ape some relief and benefit by it . 

8.  To the same end to contract marriages among themselves , the rich with the rich , &c.  

9  In some things which concern not the points and matters of state as electing magistrates making laws , &c. to give an equality , or sometimes a preferment to the common-people , and not to do , as in some oligarchies they were wont , viz. to swear against the persons , to su•presse and bridle them ; but rather contrary , to minister an oath at their admission , that they shall do no wrong to any of the persons ; and if any of the richer offer wrong to any of the Commons , to show some example of servere punishment . 

For other axioms that preserve this state , they are to be borrowed , from those other rules that tend to the preserving of a popular and tyrannical state ; for the strict kind of oligarchy is kin to a tyranny . 

Preservation of a popular state ; Sophisms . 
Rules or axioms . 

1.  In public assemblies and consultations , about matters of state , creating of magistrates , public justice , and exercise of arms , to practise the contrary to the former kind of government , to wit , an oligarchy . for in popular states , the Commons and meaner sort are to be drawn to those assemblies , magistracies , offices , warlike exercises , &c.  By mulcts and rewards , and the richer sort are to be spared , and not to be forced , by fine , or otherwise , to frequent these exercises . 

2.  To make show honouring and reverencing the richer men , and not to swear against them , as the manner hath been in some popular states ; but rather to prefer them in all other matters , that concern not the state and public government . 

3.  To elect magistrates from among the Commons , by lot , or ballading , and not to choose any for their wealth's sake . 

4.  To take heed , that no man bear office twice , except it be military , where the pay , and salery , &c. is to be reserved in their own hands , to be disposed of by a common council , &c.  And to see that do man be to highly preferred . 

5.  That no magistracy be perpetual , but as short , as May be , to wit , for a year , half year , &c.  

6.  To compel magistrates , when their time expireth to give an account of their behaviour and government , and that publicly before the Commons . 

7.  To have public salaries and allowance for their magistrates , judges , &c.  And yearly dividence for the common-people , and such as have most need among them . 

8.  To make judges of all matters , out of all sorts , so they have some aptness to perform that duty . 

9  To provide that public judgements and trials , be not frequent ; and to that end to inflict great fines and other punishments upon pettifoggers and dilators , as the law of requital ; &c.  Because for the most part the richer and nobler , and not the Commons are indicted and accused in this commonwealth , which causeth the rich to conspire against the state ; whereby , many times , the popular state is turned into an oligarchy , or some other government . Hereto tendeth that art of civil law , made against accusers and calumniators : ad senatos consultum turpilianu• , lib. 1. di calumniatoribus . 

10.  In such free states as are popular , and have no revenue , to provide that public assemblies be not after : because they want salery for pleaders and orators ; and if they be rich ; yet to be wa•y . that all the revenue be not divided amongst the Commons . For , that this distribution of the common revenue among the multitude is like a purse or barrel without a bottom . But to provide , that a sufficient part of the revenue be stored up for the public affairs . 

11.  If the number of the poor increase too much in this kind of state , to send some abroad out of the cities into the next country places , and to provide , above all , that none do live idly , but be set to their trades . To this end , to provide that the richer men place in their farms and copyholds , such decayed citizens . 

12.  To be well advised what is good for this state , and not to suppose that to be fit for a popular state , that seemeth most popular ; but that which is best for the continuance thereof . And to that end , not to lay into the exchequer , or common treasury , such goods as are confiscate , but to store them up as holy and consecrate things , which except it be practised , confiscations , and fines of the common persons would be frequent , and so this state would decay by weakening the persons . 

Conversion of states in general . 

Conversion of a state , is the declining of the commonwealth , either to some other form of government , or to his full and last period appointed by God . 

Causes of conversions of states , are of two sorts : general and particular . 

general , ( viz. ) 1.  Want of religion  . of the true knowledge , and worship of God , prescribed in his word ; and notable sins that proceed from thence in Prince and persons , as in the examples of Saul , Uzziah , the Jewish 〈◊〉 ; the four monarchies , and all other . 

2.  Want of wisdom , and good council , to keep the state , the Prince , nobles and persons in good temper , and d•• proportion , according to their several orders and degrees . 

3.  Want of justice , either in administration ( As ill laws , o• ill magistrates ) or in the execution , as rewards not given where they should be , or there bestowed where they should not be , or punishments not inflicted where they should be . 

4.  Want of power and sufficiency 〈◊〉 maintain and defend itself ; viz of provision , as armour , money , captains , soldiers , &c.  Execution when the Mea•eses or provision is not used , or ill used . 

2.  particular : to be noted and collected 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the contraries of those rules that are prescribed for the preservation of the commonwealths . 

Particular causes of conversion of state , are of two sorts . 

1.  foreign : by the overgreatness of invasion of some foreign kingdom , or other state of mean power , having a part within our own , which are to be prevented by the providence of the chief , and rules of policy for the preserving of every state . This falleth out very seldom for the great difficulty to overthrow a foreign state . 

2.  domestic : Sedition or open violence by the stronger part . 
Alteration without violence . 

Sedition . 

sedition is a power of inferiors opposing itself with , force of arms against the superior power , quasi diti• secedens . 

Causes of sedition are of two sorts . 

1.  General . Liberty .   Riches . When they , that are of equal quality in a commonwealth , or do take themselves so to be , are not regarded equally in all , or in any of these 3.  Or when they are so unequal in quality , or take themselves so to be , are regarded but equally , or with less respect , than those that be of less defect in these 3. things , or in any of them . Honour .   

1.  in the chief : covetousness or oppression , by the magistrate or higher power , ( viz. ) when the magistrates , especially the chief increaseth his substance and revenue beyond measure , either with the public or ( Private calamity , whereby the governors grow to quarrel among themselves as in oligarchies ) or the other degrees conspire together , and make quarrel against the chief , as in kingdoms : the examples of Wat Tyler , Jarke Straw , &c.  

2.  in the chief : injury , when great spirits , and of great power are greatly wronged and dishonoured , or take themselves so to be , as Coriolanus , Cyrus minor , Earl of Warwick . in which cases the best way is to decide the wrong . 

3.  Preferment , or want of preferment ; wherein some have overmuch , and so wax proud and aspire higher : or have more or less , they deserve as they suppose ; and so in envy , and disdain seek innovation by open faction , so Caesar ; &c.  

4.  Some great necessity or calamity ; so Xerxes after the foil of his great army . And Senacheris after the loss of 185. in one night . 2.  P•rticular . 1.  envy , when the chief exceed the medio••ity before mentioned , and so provoketh the nobility , and other degrees , to conspire against him ; as Brutus' Cassius' , &c. against Caesar . 2.  fear , viz. of danger , when one or more dispatch the Prince , by secret practice or force to prevent his own danger , as Artabanus did Xerxes . 3.  Lust or lec•ery , as Tarqvinius Superbus , by Brutus ; pisistratinde , by Armodius , Appius by Virginius . Chief . 4.  contempt ; for vile quality and base behaviour , as Sardanapalus , by Arbaces ; dionisiu• the younger by Dion . Other degrees . 5.  contumely ; when some great disgrace is done to some of great spirit who standeth upon his honour and reputation , as Caligula , by Chaereas . Other degrees . 6.  hope of advancement , or some great profit , as mithidrates , An•barsanes . 

Alteration without violence . 

Causes of alteration without violence are ; 1.  excess of the state ; when by degrees , the state groweth from that temper and mediocrity , wherein it was , or should have be settled , and exceedeth in power , riches and absolutnes in his kind , by the ambition & covetousness of the chiefs , immoderate taxes , and impositions , &c. applying all to his own benefit without respect of other degrees , and so in the end changeth itself into another state or form of government , as a kingdom into a tyranny , an oligarchy into an aristocraty . 

2.  excess , of some one or more in the commonwealth ; viz. when some one , or more , in a commonwealth grow to an excellency or excess above the rest , either in honour , wealth , or virtue ; and so by permission and popular favour , are advanced to the sovereignty : by which means , popular states grow into oligarchies ; and oligarchies , and aristocraties into monarchies . for which cause , the Athenians and some other free states made their laws of ostrocismos to banish any for a time that should excel , though it were in virtue , to prevent the alteration of their state ; which because it is an unjust law , 't is better to take heed at the beginning to prevent the means , that none should grow to that height and excellency , then to use so sharp and unjust a remedy . 

Finis . 

A method , how to make use of the book before , in the reading of story . 

David being seventy years of age , was of wisdom , memory , &c. sufficient to govern his kingdom ; 1. reg. chap. 1.  

Old age is not ever unfit for public government . 

Dauid being of great years , and so having  cold , dry , and impotent body , married with Abishag a fair maid of the best complexion through his whole realm , to revive his body and prolong his life• 1. reg. chap. 1.  verse 3.  

Example of the like practice in Charles the fifth . 

Dauid being old and impotent of body by the 〈◊〉 of his nobles and physicians , married a young maid called Abishag , to warm and preserve , his old body . 

Observation . 

Whether David did well in marrying a maid ; and whether it be lawful for an old decayed and impotent man to marry a young woman ; or on the other side , for an old-worn , and decrepit woman to marry a young and lusty man . 

For the affirmative . 

Arg. the end of marriage is society and mutual comfort ; but there May be society and mutual comfort in a marriage betwixt an old , and young party . ergo 't is lawful . 

answ. society and comfort is an use and effect of marriage ; but none of the principal end is of marriage , which are : 1.  Procreation of children , and so , the continuance of mankind . 
2.  The avoiding of •ornication . 


As for comfort and society , they May be betwixt man and man , women and women where no marriage is• and therefore no proper ends of marriage . 

The negative . 

Arg. 1.  That conjunction which hath no respect to the right and proper ends , for which marriage was ordained by God , is no lawful marriage . But the conjunction betwixt an old impotent , and young party hath no respect to the right end , for which marriage , was ordained by God . therefore it is no lawful marriage . 

2.  No contract , wherein the party contracting , bindeth himself to an impossible condition , or to do that which he cannot do , is good , or lawful . But the contract of marriage by an impotent person with a young party bindeth him to an impossible condition to do , that which he cannot do ( viz. ) to perform the duties of marriage ; therefore it is unlawful . 

For the same ca•se , the civil law determineth a nullity in these marriages , except the woman know before the infirmity of the man , in which case she can have no wrong , being a thing done with her own knowledge and consent , because volenti ne fit injuria : — in legem Julian . de adulteriis leg. si uxor &c.  

It provideth further for the more certainty of the infirmity , that three years be expired before the dissolution of the marriage , because that men , that have been infirm at the first , by reason of sickness , or some other accident , afterwards proved to be sufficient : de repudiis leg. in causis . 

Defence for David in marrying Abishag . 

1.  It was rather a medicine than a marriage , without any evil or disordered affection . 

2.  It was by the persuasion of his nobles and physicians . 

3.  It was for the public good to prolong the life of a worthy Prince . 

4.  It was with the knowledge and consent of the young maid , who was made acquainted with the King's infirmity , and to what end she was married unto him ; who if she did it for the common good , and for duties sake , having withal the gift of continency , she is to be commended ; if for ambition , or some vain respect , it is her own , and not David's fault . 

Political nobility . 

Adoniah aspiring to the kingdom . 

First , took the advantage of David's affection and kindness towards him , and made him secure of any ill dealing . 

Secondly , of his age and infirmities , disabling his father as unfit for government . 

Thirdly , blazed his title , and right to the crown . 

Fourthly , got him chariots , horsemen , and footmen , and a guard to make show of state . 

Fiftly , being a comely and goodly person , made a popular show of himself , and his qualities . 

Sixtly , joined to himself in faction Joab , the general of the army , who was in displeasure for murdering of Abner and Amasa , and feared that David would supply Benajah into his place , and so was discontented . And Abiather the high priest , that was likewise discontented with David , for the preferment of Zadoch . 

Seventhly , had meetings with them , and other his confederates , under a pretence of a vow and offering at the fountain of raguell , in the confines of Judaea . 

Eightly , made a show of religion by sacrificing ; &c.  

Ninthly , made himself familiar with the nobles and persons , and entertained them with feasting . 

Tenthly , drew into his part the chief officers of the court , and servants to the King , by rewards , familiarity , &c.  

Elevently , disgraced and abased the competitor , and such as he knew , would take part with him , and concealeth his ambition , and purpose from them . 

Twelftly , had Jonathan a favourite of the court , and near about the King to give him intelligence , if any thing were discovered , and moved at the court , whilst himself was in hand about his practice . 

Observations . 

Ways of such as aspire to the kingdom , and marks to discern them . 

First , they wind into the Prince's favour , by service , officiousness , flattery , &c. to plant him in a good opinion of their loyalty and faithfulness , thereby to make him secure of their practices . 

2.  They take advantage of the Prince's infirmities , age , impotency , negligence , sex , &c.  And work upon that by disabling the Prince , and secret detracting of his person and government . 

3.  They blaze their title , and claim to the crown , ( If they have any ) with their friends , and favourers . 

4.  They provide them in secret of extraordinary forces and furniture for the wars , make much of good soldiers , and have a pretence ( If it be espied ) of some other end , as for the King's honour , or service , and to be in readiness against foreign enemies , &c.  

5.  They make open show of their best qualities and comeliness of their person ( Which though it be vain as a dumb show , it is very effectual to win the liking of the popular sort , which according to the rule of the election of Kings , in the bees commonwealth ; think that fo•ma est digna imperare ) activity , nobility , ancestry ; &c.  

6.  To have their blazers abroad to set out their virtues , and to prepare their friends in every province . 

7.  To draw into their part , and make sure unto them , of the chief peers , & men of best quality , such as are mightiest , and most gracious with the soldiers , and the military men , and most subtle and politic , especially such as be ambitious , and discontent with the state . 

8.  To have meetings for conference under some pretence of some ordinary •a••er in some convenient place , not to• near , nor too far of , but where friends May best resort and assemble unto them without suspicion . 

9  To take up a show and pretence of religion more than before , and beyond the practice of their former life . 

10.  They use popular courtesy ( Which in a great person is very effectual ) feasting , liberality , gaming , &c.  

11.  To be over liberal , and win to them by gifts , familiarity , &c. the chief officers of the court , and governors of shires . 

12.  To have some near about the Prince , to keep them in credit , and remove suspicion , if any rise . 

13.  To disgrace such as they know to be sure and faithful to the Prince , and present state , or to the competitor , and to bring them into contempt by slander , detraction , and all means they can , and to conceal• the designs from them , least they be discovered before they be ripe . 

14.  To have some spy near about the Prince , to advertise them if any inkling of suspicion arise whilst themselves are practising . 

Note the practices of Absalon : 2. sam. chap. 16. and of Cyrus minor , in Xenophon : {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} cap. 1.  

Political Prince . 

David being a most worthy and excellent Prince for wisdom , valour , religion , and justice , and so highly deserving of the commonwealth , yet grown into age , grew withal into contempt , •nd had many , both of his nobles and common-people , that fell from him ; first with Absalon , then with Adoniah , who affected the kingdom and rebelled against him : for remedy whereof , he stirred up himself to public actions which Might show his vigour and sufficiency to manage the affairs of his kingdom . 

1.  After the victory against Absalon , he forced himself to forbear mourning , and showed himself to his discontented army , when all were like to fall from him , for his unreasonable sorrow and lamentation for his son . 

2.  After the victory , he caused a general convention to be assembled of the whole nation , to bring him home with honour to Jerusalem , which was a renewing and re-establishing of him ; 2. sam. 19 12.  

3.  He gave an experiment of his power and authority , by deposing a person of great authority and estimation , to wit , Joab , general captain of the army , and advancing Amasa to his place . 

4.  He sent kind messengers to Jerusalem , and to other chief and head towns , and special men of iude• , his contributes , putting them of their alliance with him , with these words , that they were of his own flesh and blood , with protestation of his special love and affection towards them , to provoke them with like kindness and affection towards him . 

5.  He assembled a parliament of his whole realm , and took occasion upon the designing of his successor , to commend unto them the succession of his house , and the continuance and maintenance of God's true worship and religion , then established , and gave a grave and public charge to his successor , now designed , touching the manner of his government , and maintaining o• religion , 1. chron. 12. 13.  

6.  He showed his bounty and magnificence in congesting matter for the building of the temple , as gold , silver , brass , &c.  And caused it to be published and made known to the parliament and whole nation , 1. chron. 22. 13.  

7.  He revived the church government , and set it in a right order , assigning to every church officers his place and function . 

8.  He suppressed the faction of Adoniah , and ordained Solomon his successor ; 1. reg. 1. 22.  By these means . he retained his majesty and authority in his old age , as appeareth by th' effect ; for that being bedrid , he suppressed the faction of Adoniah , ( Which was grown mighty , and was set on foot ) with his bare commandment , and signification of his pleasure , and so he died in peace . 

Finis . 




























































































































































































