To the parliament of the commonwealth of England : the humble petition of divers citizens and inhabitants in and about London , 

Showeth , 

That after a long contest in this poor island against tyranny and injustice , ( Wherein the treasure of the nation hath been exhausted , and the precious blood of many thousands spilt ; wherein the parliament were forced to spend their time for many years in maintaining the war , and providing for the defence of their lives , who engaged in that quarrel ) God hath pleased ( We hope in mercy to this nation ) to bring you together in a time of peace , to heal our breaches , to establish firmly the ancient rights and freedoms of England , which were the subject of this great quarrel ( Which God hath decided on our side ) and to settle such ways of dispensing impartial justice , that the name of God May be exalted in righteousness , and no man have cause to repent of the blood and treasure expended in the pursuance of the same . 

Your petitioners therefore humbly crave leave to present to your honours their sense of the principal things wherein that tyranny consisted , against which we did in judgement and conscience engage ; which were , 

1.  The late King's usurpation over parliaments , to prevent their meeting , and dissolve them when they were met , at pleasure , and especially under pretence of a negative voice ; his denial and opposition of their supreme trust to provide in all things for the safety and welfare of the persons . 

2.  His challenging of such an interest in the militia , as to command the same at his pleasure without the parliament ; and to place the subordinate commands of the same in whom he pleased : whereby he would have had power to enforce obedience to any of his illegal commands , whether in matters of religion , or matters civil , and to have razed out ( If he pleased ) the very name and root of parliaments , which have been the ancient preservers of English freedom . 

3.  His introducing of arbitrary power to be exercised by his council and others , over men's persons and estates , when they ought to have been tried by the laws of the land . 

4.  His challenge of a right ( Under pretence of necessity , whereof he would have been judge ) to levy monies upon the persons without their consent in parliament ; and that in all these things he was unaccountable for what he did , either to the parliament , or any earthly power whatsoever . 

And your petitioners do further humbly mind your honours of the many signal testimonies which God hath given of his displeasure against all that have endeavoured to support the aforesaid tyranny , or have espoused that as their quarrel , under any notion whatsoever ; and of the price now put into your hands , to secure the nation from future attempts and dangers of the like tyranny : and not only the armies declarations , and the agreement of the persons proposed by them , ( Remaining upon record in your house ) but the ruins and spoils of the land , and of many thousand families , the expense of many million of treasure , the wounds , and scars , and lost members of many thousands , and , above all , the precious blood of thousands of God's persons slain in the quarrel , cries aloud to you to call to God for wisdom , that you May be taught and enabled to establish such a sure foundation of right , freedom , and justice , that the persons of God Might not be put again upon such hazards and expenses of their estates and lives for the defence of the same . 

therefore your petitioners humbly pray , 

That together with the constant succession of parliaments ( Never being entrusted for perpetuity ) the supreme power and trust , which the persons commit unto them , to make laws , contitutions and offices for the government of the whole , and to call all officers of justice , and ministers of state whatsoever to account , May be so clearly declared and secured against all attempts to the contrary , that no question May henceforth arise concerning the same . 

That the militia May be ordered with such wisdom and security , that it May not be in the power of any single person , ( Who May , while he is man , be corrupted ) to make use thereof against the persons , or their successive parliaments , either to destroy their being or their freedom . 

That no monies May be levied upon the persons , but by their common consent in parliaments . 

That wars being now ended , the people's persons and estates May be only subject to be disposed of according to the law of the land , in the ancient way of trials by their equals ; that henceforth none May be reputed offenders , but such as shall be found transgressors of the law . 

And , that as the safety of our religion was concerned in the defence of our civil rights , so such provision May now be made for the encouragement of the sincere professors of the same , that no tender conscience May be oppressed . And in doing these things , you will be glorious instruments in the hand of God , and honourable in your country ; and the lives and estates of your petitioners will be freely exposed to hazard in your just defence . 

and your petitioners shall ever pray , &c.  







