THE Character OF A PAPIST in MASQUERADE ; Supported By Authority and Experience . 

In Answer to the CHARACTER OF A POPISH SUCCESSOR . 

By Roger L'estrange . 

LONDON , Printed for H. Brome at the Sign of the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard . 1681.  

The CHARACTER of a Papist in Masquerade . 

The Character of a Popish Successor were an excellent Piece in the kind , if it had not too much Sublimate in it ; For I have heard of some people , that , with only holding their Noses over it , but one quarter of an hour , have run stark mad upon 't : And when This Fume has once taken the Brain , there 's nothing in the world , but the Powder of Experience , ( the Remembrance of things past ) to set a man Right again . The Truth of it is , the Author has made the Figure of his Successor too Frightful , and enormous ; Sawcer-eyed and Cloven ●ooted ; and when he has painted the Monster as black on the One side , as Ink and Words can make him ; he finishes his Masterpiece with a Paradox , on the Other ; ( Fol. 4. ) by the Supposal of a most Excellent Person , and yet making him the greater Devil for his Virtues . 

His Fortitude ( he says ) makes him only the more Daring in the Cause of Rome ; his Justice makes it a Point of Conscience to deliver us up to the Pope ; his Temperance , in the Government of his Passions , makes him the more close and steady ; and his Prudence crowns the Work , by the assistance it gives him in the Menage of his Policies and Conduct : And so he goes on . Wbat booss it ( says he ) in a Popish Heir , to say , he 's the Truest Friend , the Greatest of Hero , s , the best of Masters , the Justest Judge , or the Honestest of Men ? All mere treacherous Quicksands for a people to repose the least glimpse of Safety in , or build the least hopes upon . 

This is fairly pushed , I must confess , but 't is only a cast of his Rhetoric : For every body knows , that all Christian Princes thus Qualified , and under Articles of Treaty and Agreement , keep touch , even with Infidels ; nay , and Infidels with Christians . 

Before I go any further , let me recommend to the Reader , one Remark , as a thing worthy of his Attention : He cuts all the way upon the Successor , as presupposing him to be a Papist , and consequently ` Dangerous , and Insufferable , by reason of That Persuasion . And very magisterialy he gives us his own bare word for the dangers of that Persuasion . Why does he not rather tell us in express and particular Terms , These and These are the Principles of the Church of Rome ? and then make his Inference , from those Principles to the Dangers that attend them ; and so leave the unbiased part of the world to judge of the Congruity and Proportion betwixt such Causes and such Effects ? For His dilating himself thus at random upon his Character , and striking so point-blank at the Rescinding of the Succession , makes men apt to imagine , that his Pique may be rather to the Person , than the Religion . 

It will behoove me , in this place , to inform the Reader , that I do not charge him for not producing the dangerous Principles of the Papists ; as if I thought there were no Instances of that Quality to be given : ( For I am better acquainted with their Ecclesiastical Politics , than so . ) But the true Intent of my Quaere upon that Objection , was to show the Authors Prudence in reserving himself upon those Particulars : For if he had said , Behold ! Th●se are the Positions of the Church of Rome , and they are not to be endured in any Government ; I should have asked him presently , How comes it then that you yourself , under the Colour of Rooting out Popery One way , are Planting it Another ; and Erecting the very same Pestilent Positions that you condemn ▪ Insomuch , that while you would be thought zealous to Abolish the Name of Popery , you are no less zealous ▪ to Establish the Doctrine of it ; Whereof , at leisure . 

The sudden bolting out of this Phantôme from behind the Hanging , may so far serve a present turn , as to startle , and surprise the undiscerning Vulgar : Yet , when , upon Second ▪ and Recollected thoughts , this Mormo shall come to be examined , and taken to pieces ; the very multitude themselves , that were affrighted at the Apparition , will be ashamed of the Imposture . The thing that I would say , is this ; that the Truth is somewhat too much Hyperbolised , in a Declamatory Torrent of Words , and Exuberance of Fancy , without any one Concluding and Convincing Period . If Apollo had been of Counsel with the Author , he would have advised him to the Moderating of his Character , as he does Olaus Magnus , in Boccalini , to moderate the Greatness of his Northern Eagles , that preyed upon Elephants ; as being a very Extraordinary thing for a Bird to truss an Elephant , and fly away with him . ( which is , perhaps , the more Venial Excess of the two . ) It is one of the greatest Indignities that can be put upon the simplicity of a Just Truth , the daubing of it with Embroidery and Flourish , and the overdoing of it . If Little Epictetus had been at his Elbow , he would have minded him , that some things are in our our own Power , and others are not so ; and that the subject matter of his Discourse being wholly out of His Cognizance , he might have done well to have left the business of the Succession to the Ordering of God's Providence . 

This is a Subject ( I know ) that whoever touches upon it , treads upon Burning Coals ; and there must be great Caution , as well as Innocence , to carry a man through this Ordeal : For who shall dare to Dispute the danger of a Popish Successor ? But so far am I from undertaking that Province , that I 'll compound the matter with him beforehand ; and take all his suppositions of Difficulties and Hazards in the Case , for Granted . But then I must distinguish betwixt the unhappy circumstance of being under the Allegiance of a Prince of that Persuasion , who is actually in the Possession and Exercise of his Power , and the remote Possibility only of that Danger ; and a Possibility too of such a condition , as a thousand things may intervene , to prevent it : As the Contingences of Issue , Survivorship , etc. and at the Worst , this dismal apprehension amounts , at last , but to the Contemplation of a Prince of That Communion , in a Parenthesis , betwixt a Predecessor , and a Successor , of the Reform Religion . 

Not but that I am as much against the Principles , and Practices of the Church of Rome , wherein the Church of England hath dep●rted from that Communion , as any man living , that keeps himself within the compass of Christian Charity , Humanity , and good Manners . And so far , I shall heartily join with the Compiler of the Character , by a previous Concession of the Inconveniences ( as I have said already ) that may arrive , by reason of that Religion . But then I must take this Consideration along with me . 

That First ; there are many Dreadful Dangers , which we cannot avoid , but by incurring Greater . As the Leaping of a Garret-window , when the Fire has taken the Staircase ; which is only a prudent Election ( under a Calamitous Necessity ) of the lesle evil of the Two. Now the same Action , which would have been a madness Without that necessity , becomes an Act of Prudence , With it ; the great danger of the Leap being warranted by the greater danger of the Fire : And there must likewise precede a Deliberation upon the difficulties Both ways , to justify the Resolution : For otherwise at the best , a man does well but by chance . Now it would have been fair play , in the Character-writer , if he had candidly Balanced the matter , and told us , This is the danger One way , and That Another . 

Secondly , It happens , many times , that we have no other Choice before us , but either to suffer the Highest Degree of Misery , that can befall us in this world ; or else , to Prostitute our Souls , for the saving of our Skins , and Fortunes . Now under such an Exigent as This , let the Prospect of things be never so Terrible , we are to oppose , the Duties of Christians , of Subjects , and of Honest men , to all hazards whatsoever ; and patiently to endure whatever we cannot , with Conscience , and Honour , either Resist , or Decline : according to the Practice of the Primitive Martyrs , who witnessed their Profession with their Blood , as Christians ; and Submitted , as Loyal Subjects , without Resistance . So that we are not to govern ourselves by a Naked Speculation of the Perils that we are to encounter , and the Means of avoiding them ; without enquiring into the Consistency of those means with the Measures of Conscience and Duty . But there is one Main point yet behind ; which is in effect the very Hinge of the Controversy . And this is it . If there shall be any thing sound in this Character of a Popish Successor , that shall either operate upon the Legal Constitution of the English Monarchy , or Reflect Personally upon the Honour , or Justice of his Majesty now in Being ; the Pretext of the Succession will be looked upon only as a Stalking-horse to Countenance an approach to some further Design : In which Case , the Question will not be any longer the Religion of a Successor , but the very Right itself of Kingly-power . And here I must expound myself once again ; that I Speak only to the Anonymus Character of a Popish Successor , without the least Reference to any Public , and Authoritative Debates , or Counsels . And so I shall proceed , ( in the First place ) to the Character of a Papist in Masquerade . 

The Church of England , and the Members of it , are beset with two Sorts of Papists ; the One , barefaced , the Other dressed up in several shapes of Disguise : And we pass for Heretics , on the One hand ; and Papists in Masquerade , on the Other . By this Opposite Conjunction of two Interests , ( which , ( however Divided in Name , and Pretence ) are yet United against us in a Common Principle of Contradiction and Aversion : ) The Church of England is both Weakened , and Defamed ; the Glory of the Reformation blasted ; and the great Support of the truly Apostolical Cause , Undermined . Betwixt These Two Enemies , our Persecuted Church is crushed almost to Pieces ; and well-nigh brought to the Agony of her Last Convulsions . And this Calamity is not wrought so much by the Barefaced Papists , that march Publicly under the Pope's Banner , owning their Cause , and making their Attacks in View ; not so much by Th●se , ( I say ) as by the Papists in Masquerade , that work underground , like Moles ; and , fall in upon our Quarters , under the Semblance of Friends , with our own Word and Colours . It has been a great part of the business of the Press , to set forth the Barefaced Papist to the Life , and to affect us with a Just Indignation for the Principles of the Jesuits : So that I shall not cloy the Reader with Redun●anceses ; especially since the Composer of the Character has been pleased to Harangue so copiously upon that Subject : But rather apply myself to the Counterpart of these Jesuits ; and to obviate the Practices of our False Friends , as well as of our Professed Enemies . 

The King's Witnesses have abundantly manifested to the World , the Restless Endeavours of Rome , and its Emissaryes , for the Subversion of our Religion , and Government ; and how far they contributed to the Rebellion of Forty One ; and to the carrying of it forward through all the Succeeding changes , and Revolutions , even to the bringing of his Sacred Majesty to the Scaffold . They have further also Deposed to the Contrivances of the same Party , for the prosecuting of the same Design upon the Person of his Sacred Majesty that now is ; and upon our Government and Religion , as by Law established : And laid open to the world , both the Method of their proceedings , by masking themselves under the Appearance of Presbyterians , Independents , Quakers , Millenaryes , and the like ; as also the very Names of several of their Missionaryes , that have been expressly employed upon the disposing of the People to Tumult and Sedition . 

This is so certain a Truth , that it will not bear a Dispute ; beside that it stands with Reason too ; for they do all cover themselves under an Alias ; and a Presbyterian , an Independent , etc. alias a Papist , Sounds every jot as well , as Captain William's , alias Captain Bedloe . I am not willing to charge my Paper , in a Case so Clear , and Confessed , with unnecessary Instances : wherefore I shall content myself with only Two out of many . ( the Former out of Ravillac Redivivus ( Pag. 41. ) If Father Brown the Jesuit , ( says the Author ) that Preached so many years among the Field-conven●iclers in Scotland , had Penned Mitchel's Justification of himself , upon his Execution , for an Attempt upon the Person of the Archbishop of St. Andrews , it could not have savoured stronger of the Society of Jesus , or become such an Author better than it doth . This same Brown●oasted ●oasted upon his Deathbed , at Ingeston briggs , that he had Preached as Downright Popery in the Field Conventicles , as ever he had Preached in Rome itself . The Other Instance is , of one Faithful Commin , a Dominican Friar in the 9th . of Queen Elizabeth ; who was a Person generally reputed a Zealous Protestant , and much admired and followed by the People , for his seeming Piety ; but more particularly , for inveighing in his Pulpit against Pius Quintus then Pope . He was accused upon Oath ; before the Queen and Council for an Impostor , and a Sour of Sedition ; and Arch Bishop Parker took his Examination , ( Foxes and Firebrands , Pa. 7. ) Commin insisting much upon his Bitterness expressed against the Pope , for his Justification . He got out of England afterwards by a Trick ; and , with one Farewell Sermon , 130 l. for a Viaticum . Not long after , he was clapped up at Rome for Reviling the Pope , and the Catholic Church . But he Pleaded for himself , that he had done his Holiness , and the Church considerable Service ; for , by Preaching against Set-forms of Prayer , and calling the English Prayers , English Mass , he put them upon the Humour of Extemporary Prayer ; which took so much with the People , that they were come to hate the Church of England as much as the Church itself hated the Mass. Whereupon , the Pope gave him a Reward of Two Thousand Ducats for his Pains . 

The matter of Fact is sufficiently cleared , and the Practice too Notorious to be denied ; As to the Influence that these Papists have ( under the notion of Dissenting protestants ) upon the Unity of the Church , and the Peace of the State. But the Craft ( as they say ) lies in the Catching of them : For the Test of Oaths will never do the Business , as we have found by their Swearing to so many Contrary , and Inconsistent Purposes , and Interests , throughout the whole Course of our Late Troubles . 

So that we have no other way left that I can Imagine , of knowing a Disguised Jesuit from one that calls himself a Dissenting Protestant , but by comparing their Principles ; which would infinitely conduce to the Credit , and Advantage of the Conscientious sort of the Divided Party . And without such a Test of Discrimination the Project of Uniting Dissenters seems to be utterly Impracticable ; unless to the Extreme Hazzard of Authorising the most pernicious sort of Popery , and Incorporating a Jesuitical Leaven into our very Constitution ; according to the Method which Mr. Coleman himself had projected , as the most probable Expedient for the Introducing of Popery into this Kingdom . The Removal of this Difficulty will open a way to a General Accommodation ; to the Common Security both of our Religion , and Government . And this is only to be done by applying the Maxims of those that we suspect here for Jesuits , to the Standard of those Detestable Principles which we so much abominate in the Church of Rome . And where ever we find any Party , of what Denomination soever , that pretends either to Erect an Interest , or to support a Claim , upon the same Foundation ; it is but matter of Common Equity , to presume , and to conclude that Party to be acted and directed by a Jesuitical Spirit . These Positions I shall Confront with a Counterpart ; of which further in its proper place . But in my way to 't , I shall now pass to the Character itself . 

The CHARACTER , etc.  

IT has been my Fortune to be a Subject and a Native of that part of the World , where almost three year's last passed I have scarce heard any thing , but the continual Noise of Popery and Plots ; with all the clamorous Fears of a Jealous Kingdom about my ●arss : And truly , I must plainly confess , I am not so Ill a Commonwealths-man ▪ but that I am glad to see my Countrymen disturbed in a Cause , where Religion , Liberty , and Property , are at Stake . Fol. 1.  

Here●s the very Bourdon already of that Fatal Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom , Dec. 15. 42. and only a short Paraphrase of the Preface to it . God bless us from the Omen . The malicious Designs of the Popish Party , the hazard of Religion and great prejudice and Oppression of the Laws of the Kingdom , and just Liberty of the People . Exact Collections Pag. 2.  That which followed upon this Popular Introduction did sufficiently evidence the Design . You shall see now how Pat this Prologue runs Another way ; Mutatis Mutandis . 

It has been my Fortune ( let Me say too ) to be a Subject , and a Native where the Noise of Popery and Plots ; Jealousies and Fears ; and Affrights about Religion , Liberty and Property , as if All lay at Stake ; brought a pious and a Protestant Prince to the Block ; prostituted the Honour , Dignity , and Revenue of the Government , Ecclesiastical and Civil , to a Band of Seditious and Sacrilegious Usurpers . Our Temples were Demolished ; our Altar's Profaned ; the Priestly Office Invaded by Mechaniques ; Swarms of Heresies , , and a Scandalous Schism , in Exchange for Purity and Unity of Religion . Of a Freeborn People we became worse than Turkish Slaves ; Our Common-wealths-men were glad also to see us Disturbed ; and who but our Pretended Advocates , and Patriots , to be our Tyrants , and Tormentors ? 

Char. But if their Jealousies are Just and their Fears Prophetic , in God's name let them talk . Every man ought to be so far from silencing any Reasonable Murmurs , that 't is rather his Duty to bear a Part in a Choir so Universal . And if we s●e the Great and Wisemen of our Nation , like True English Patriots , struggling , and toiling to prevent our Threatening Calamities , let us take delight to behold them Restless , and Uneasy ; Rolling about our Troubled Sea like Porpoises against a Tempest , to forewarn us of an Approaching Destruction . Ibid.  

Let them talk on ; ( says he ) just to the Tune of Forty Two again . God forbid ( says Mr. Pym ) that We should dishearten our Friends , who come to assist us . And this was , when Venus and Manwaring forced the Passing of the Bill of Attainder in the Lord's House , by Tumults , against the Earl of Strafford ; and his Sacred Majesty little better than Besieged in his own Palace , by the Rabble . What a blessed Harmony was there then among the Porters , Carmen , and Well affected brethren in the Lobbies , crying out with one Voice , no Bishops ; no Rotten Peers ; no Common-prayer ; while the great and wise men , in their Generation were Struggling , and Toiling , to Pack Parties , Contrive Invectives against Authority ; perplexing the Multitude with Scruples , enflaming of Passions , and rolling about like State Porpoises , not as a Forewarning , but the Foreboding of a Tempest . 

Char. But amids our Evident Danger , we see another sort of People daily flattering and deluding us into a False and Fatal Security . And sure none are so little our Friends , or indeed so void even of Humanity itself , as those who would lull us asleep when Ruin is in View . Ibid.  

There are some indeed , that after Open Rebellions in Scotland , horrid Assassinates , Anathema's Denounced against his Majesty , Declarations point blank against his Person and Government ; with an Indissoluble Confederacy of Brotherly Union in our own Bowels too , by virtue of that Magical Seal of Reprobation , the Diabolical Covenant ; there are some I sa● , that after all these Acts and Demonstrations of Violence , and Conspiracy , will yet bear the World down that the believing of our eyes is the shamming of the Plot ; and that there 's no Fear at all of a Storm from that Quarter . As if a Jesuitical Practice or Principle , were Consecrated in the Heart , or Shape of a Presbyterian . 

But ( says he ) since Zeal and Hypocrisy , Naked Truth , and Artificial Falsehood , have oftentimes alike Faces ; I cannot but think it the Duty both of a Christian , and an Englishman , to unravel the Treachery of those Arguments which they raise to destroy us . 

But since Zeal , and Hypocrisy , etc. are so alike , that we have seen Sacrilege , and Heresy pass upon the People for Reformation ; Rebellion for Loyalty ; Perjury , Blasphemy , and Murder , for Religion ; Regicide for the way to make a Glorious King , Bondage for Freedom , Rapine for propriety ; the king 's , the Churches , and the People's Enemies , for their Friends : what can a man do better than to Unmask this white Devil , and expose the Cloven-foot of this Angel of Light to the View of the Nation ? 

Char. As First , ( Says my Author ) why should we stand in fear of Popery , when in the present Temper of England 't is impossible for any Successor whatever to introduce it . 

And First , ( say I too ) what fear of Phanaticism , and a Commonwealth , under the present Settlement of Episcopacy and Kingly Government ? 

Char. And next , amids our groundless Fears , ( says the Anthor of the Character , by way of supposal ) let us consider what that Prince is that appears so dreadful a Gorgon to England . A Prince that upon all Accounts has so Signally ventured his Life for his King and Country ; a Hero of that faithful , and matchless Courage , and Loyalty : A Prince of that Unshaken Honour and Resolution , that his Word has ever been known to be his Oracle , and his Friendship a Bulwark wherever he vouchsafes ●o place it ; with such an infinite Mass of all the Bravery and Gallantry that can adorn a Prince . Why must the Change of his Religion destroy his Humanity ; or the advance to a Crown , tender his Word or Honour less Sacred ; or make him a Tyrant to that very people whom he hath so often , and so cheerfully Defended ? Why may there not be a Popish King with all these Accomplishments , that whatever his own Private Devotions shall be , yet shall Publicly maintain the Protestant Worship , with all the Present Constitution of Government , Vnaltered ? 

And next , ( say I ) let us consider those Covenanting , and Republican Spirits that appear so dreadful to us ; a Party that so signally ventured their Lives ●or the King's Authority in the Two Houses against his Person in the Field ; nay of that matchless Courage and Loyalty , that they hazarded their Souls , as well as their Bodies , to make him a Glorious Prince , by sending him to Heaven before his time : A Party of that unshaken Honour , and Resolution , that their words were Oracles , their Protestations , Oaths , and Covenants ever bearing a double and an equivocal meaning ; their Friendship a Bulwark , only the Guns were turned upon all that ever Trusted them : And of so great Bravery , that they charged through Heaven and Hell ▪ without Fear either of God or Devil ; and trampled under foot all Laws both Divine and Human , for the Accomplishing of their Ends. 't is true , that of Papal , they are become Fanatical Jesuits , and why should the Change of their Profession , now , destroy their Nature ? Or their word and Honour be less Sacred , if they get the Power into their Hands once again , than we have formerly found it ? They eased us of our Laws , Lives , Liberties , and Estates ; and why should they become Tyrants Now , that were so Merciful to us before ? Why may they not be such Covenanters and Commonwealths-men , as , whatever they be in Private , will yet in Public maintain the Monarchy , and Episcopacy , unaltered ? Especially after that famous Instance of their Indulgence to his Majesty at Holdenby , when they kept him a Prisoner , without Allowing him the Benefit so much as of a Chaplain or a Common-prayer-book . And now he proceeds . 

Char. But alas ! what signify all the great past Actions of a Prince's Life , when Popery has at last got the Ascendent ? All Virtues must truckle to Religion ; and how little an Impression will all his Recorded glories leave behind them , when Rome has once Stamped him Her Proselyte ? But since unlikely things may come to pass , let us seriously examine how far the Notion of such a Popish Successor consists with Reason . ( Fol. 2. ) 

Alas , Alas ! What are the Good-old-cause-men the better for their Crown and Church-lands , Sequestrations , Plunders , Decimations , Directories , Classical & Congregational Presbyteries , when Monarchy and Episcopacy have at last got the Ascendent ? All Virtues must Truckle to Religion ; as they did , when Rebellion , Sacrilege , Oppression , and Murder , were hallowed and Authorised in the Pulpit , for the Propagation of the Gospel . But since unlikely things may come to pass , ●●t us see how far the Notion of a Fanatical Popery consists with the Discipline and Government by Law established . 

Char. ( Fol. 2. ) If to maintain , and defend our Religion 〈◊〉 any more than a Name ; it is in possible for any man to act the true Defensive Part , without the Offensive too : And he that would effectually uphold the Protestant Worship , Peace and Interest , is bound to suppress all those potent and dangerous Enemies that would destroy them ; for all other Defense is but Disguise , and Counterfeit . 

The Statesmen of Forty One that defended the Protestant Religion with Sword and Cannon ; and our Liberties , Properties , and persons , at the same rate ; were extremely well read in this Offensive way of Defence . And our Author is much in the Right , that the way to uphold it , is to suppress those that would destroy it . That is to say , to suppress those that enter into Protestations , Oaths , and Covenants , against Episcopacy , Root and Branch . All other Defence ( as he says ) is but Disguise and Counterfeit . The Remonstrants of Forty Two declared it to be far from Their purpose to let loose the golden Reinss of Discipline , and Government in the Church ; which was only a Political Cheat ; ( as it is here expounded ) for our Churches were turned into Stables , our Clergy hunted like Partridges in the Mountains , our Pulpits Stuffed with Blasphemy , and Blew Aprons ; and in the Conclusion , a hundred Heresyes let loose among us , for one Orthodox Religion . 

Char. Fol. 2.  If then the Wisdom of several Successive Monarches , with the whole Nations Vnanimous Prudence , and indefatigable Care for the Protestant Preservation , has determined that those Papist Priests who have sworn Fealty to the See of Rome , and taken Orders in Foreign Seminaries , are the greatest Seducers of the King's liege People , and the most notorious . Incendiaries , and subverters of the Protestant Christianity and Loyalty ; and for that Cause their several Laws declare them Traitors ; by Consequence , these are the Potent and dangerous Enemies , which in defence of the Protestant Cause , this Popish King is obliged to suppress and Punish ; and these the very Laws he is bound to Execute . Fol. 2.  

As the Wisdom of Successive Monarches has provided for the Protestant Preservation , by necessary Severitys against known Priests and Jesuits , on the One hand ; so have they likewise on the Other hand , against Separatists of another Denomination , where we find the same Principles couched under other Names . And these are a kind of Protestant Jesuit . The Pope Deposes Heretical Princes ; the Fanatique Deposes Popish ; And as Ill manners produce Good Laws ; the Lewd Practices on Both hands put the State upon Provisions that look both Ways . The Schism here among us broke lose but once since the Reformation . And what a Deluge of Hypocrisy , Bloodshed , Oppression , Athiesm , and Profaneness flowed in upon it ? But that we may not Cavil upon the Word Protestant ; let the Law expound it ; which does expressly provide for the securing of Conforming protestants against the danger of Dissenters . So that we have Potent Enemies ( it seems ) on both sides . Now if a Phanatique Interest should get Head , it is as improbable on this side , as it is on the Other ; that they should agree to Suppress Phanaticism , in Favour of Episcopacy , and put the Laws in Execution against themselves . Or would they not rather 〈◊〉 us over again with Plunders , Imprisonments , Vows , Negative Oaths , Abjurations , as they did before ? 

Char. And though perhaps , till the Discovery of the late Plot , for several Ages , we have not seen that Severity inflicted on Popish Priests , as the Laws against them require : And why ? Because the flourishing Tranquillity of the English Church under this King , and his Father's Reign , rendered them so inconsiderable an Adversary , that the natural Tenderness of the Protestant People of England not delighting in Blood , did not think it worth their while , either to detect , or prosecute them ; and therefore has not made them the Common mark of Justice . Fol. 2.  

't is True , that , till the Discovery of the Late Plot , the Laws against Priests and Jesuits have not been put in Execution to the Utmost Rigour . But he is much mistaken certainly in the Reasons he gives for that Lenity , and Moderation . Does he call it the Tranquillity of the English Church , etc. when for eighteen years together the very Form , Discipline , and members of it Suffered a more than Pagan Persecution ? And then , does he make the Popish Party so Inconsiderable , that was able to move such Broils and Confusions ; ( which the Kings Witness declare with one mouth to have been the work of the Jesuits . ) and Finally , to accomplish their Devilish End in the Blood of the best of Kings , and the most Faithful of Subjects ; the ensnaring of the ●reest and the Happiest of People ; and the total Subversion of a most glorious Church and State ? And we are now again at this Instant upon the very Steps of the Preface to our Late Troubles , and in a fair way to that blessed Condition of Tranquillity , whereupon the Penner of the Character passes so notable a Remark . This was the Tenderness ; and the Protestant People he speaks of , were the Instruments of our Desolation . Which ; ( as the Oracles of our Age , do abundantly inform us ) were only Jesuits of another Colour . It is worth a note , that still as the barefaced Papist has attaqued us one way , the Papist in Disguise falls to Sapping and undermining of us Another ; and both of them equally contributing to our Destruction . 

Char. But under the Reign of an English Papist , when the Fraternity of Religion shall encourage the Pope to make his working Emissaryes ten times more Numerous ; when , if not the hope of public Patronage , yet at least their Confidence of Private Indulgence , Connivance , and Mercy , emboldens the Missive Obedience of his Jesuitical Instruments , whilst the very name of a Popish Monarch has the Influence of the Sun in Egypt , and daily warms our Mud into Monsters ; till they are become our most threatening and most formidable Enemies . And if ever the Protestant Religion wanted a Defender , 't is then . If the Word , Honour , or Coronation Oath of a King be more than a Name , 't is then , or never , he is obliged to uphold the Protestant Interest , and actually suppress its most apparent and most notorious Enemies . Ibid.  

I do here make this public Profession to the world , that I have as little mind to be under the Reign of an English Papist , as any mortal ; and I would do all that I could justify , as a Christian , and an Honest man , to avoid it . But since so it is , that I can no more choose my Governor then my Father , and that I may as well renounce the One , upon the score of Religion , as the Other ; I am resolved to pay the Duty of a Subject to what Prince soever Almighty God , in his Overruling Providence , shall be pleased to set over me ; and , at the worst , patiently to suffer , where I cannot conscientiously Obey . It is a remarkable Chapter , that of the Prophet Jeremy , where God doth not only stile Nabuchadnezzar ( the King of Babylon ) his Servant , but over and over inculcates Obedience to him . Harken not you ( says the Text , v. 9  & 10. ) to your Prophets , nor to your Diviners , nor to your Dreamers , nor to your Enchanters , nor to your Sorcerers , which speak unto you , saying , you shall not serve the King of Babylon ; For they Prophesy a Lie unto you : to remove you from your Land , and that I should drive you out , and you should perist . And then , v. 15.  I have not sent them , saith the Lord , yet they Prophesy a Lie in my Name , etc.  

Now to proceed . I shall not dispute the Consequences of his Supposition , the One way , if he will but allow the same Consequences to lie as fair for my purpose , the Other . Will not a Scottish Fraternity of Papists endanger England , as well as a Romish ? Have they not already given proof of their Conspiracy by their Actions ? ( But I hope God will preserve his Majesty from an Axe , on the One hand , as well as from a Dagger , on the Other . ) And have not the Kirk-iesuits their Emissaries , as well as the Society ? See The Spirit of Popery ( a Book written with great Judgement , Sobriety , and Caution ; and Addressed to the English Dissenters ) Fol. 7.  

There was a Project of a Jesuitical Nature , attempted by some of your Principals , about four or five years ago , when some of your Ministers , and Others , Caballed together a●out reducing the Presbyterians ( whether over England only , or over all the Three Nations , I do not well remember ) into the same sort of Policy by which the Jesuits are governed over all the World. The Nation was to be Divided into Districts or Provinces ; every District was to have its Provincial ; and over all the Provinces was to be appointed one General , to reside constantly ( as I remember ) in London ; and the First who was to have the Honour of that Office ( like the Founder of the Jesuits ) had been a Soldier , and a great Malefactor , and is also fit to be a General of an Army , and presided in that Consult . He is a Gentleman whom you all know , and makes a great part of a late Narrative , wherein the Impudent Narrator Implicitly calls you the most sober and considerable protestants of the land The Provincials , in their several Districts , were to take an account of the Growth or Decay of the Party ; to note their Friends and Enemies ; to receive their Contributions , and give an Account of all to the General ; who was to supervise for the good of the whole . This account , with which I am confident I do not surprise some of you , was told me upon condition of Secrecy , by a very honest and peaceable , but rigid Presbyterian Minister , our Countryman , who having got notice of the Consult , broke it in the beginning , by telling the Projectors how he abhorred it , and threatening to discover it , if they did not desist ; [ observe here , that this Presbyterian Minister , though a Rigid one , refused to join in so Jesuitical a Project . ] He told me also , that he believed the Project came first from the Designed General , who intended by that means to raise his broken Fortunes ; which , if he had accomplished ▪ he might easily have done . And to do his Memory Justice , he told me this Story with very great In●●ignation ; the Substance of which , as I shall answer for it to God at the day of Judgement ) I have faithfully related ( to the best of my memory ) upon the Faith of a Christian man  

Now to 〈◊〉 his Point ; will not the very Name of a Republican Reformation , which is at Present become the Theme of every Pamphlet , warm Our Mud into Monsters again ; and raise Cobblers and Tinkers to Colonels ; Draymen , and Thimble-makers to be King's Judges ? wherefore Now or Never is his Majesty obliged , if his Word , Honour , or Coronation-oath be more than a Name , ( if I may be pardoned for speaking my Authors words after him ) to uphold the Protestant Interest , which now lies a bleeding in this Cause of the Church ; One Branch of the Coronation Oath being as follows . 

I will preserve and maintain to You ( the Bishops ) and the Churches committed to your charge , all Canonical Privileges , and due Law and Justice ; and I will be your Protector and Defender , to my Power , by the Assistance of God , as every good King in his Kingdom , ●n right aught to protect and defend the Bishops and Churches under the●r Government . 



then the King ariseth and is led to the Communion Table , where he makes a Solemn Oath , in sight of all the People , to observe the Premises ; and laying his hand upon the Book , saith , 

The Oath . 

The things which I have before promised , I shall perform and keep : So help me God , and the Contents of this Book . 



Char. But let us suppose we may have such a Roman Catholic King , as shall discountenance Pope , and Popery ; Cherish Protestantism , and effectually deter and punish all those that shall endeavour to undermine and supplant it : And then let us examine what This King thus qualified must do . Fol. 2.  

Here is a Supposition fairly propounded , in appearance ; but yet , without Expounding himself upon the World Protestantism , there 's no coming to an Issue upon 't . If he means by Protestantism the Opinions of the Outlyers that have leapt the pale , and which are rather Fancies , than Persuasions ; the Law itself animadverts upon those people , as the Underminers of our Ecclesiastical Establishment ; And his Discountenancing of Separatists will amount to no more than a Legal Discharge of his Office. But if by Protestantism he intends a practical Conformity to the Orders of the Church , the Law provides as well for the upholding of the One , as the suppressing of the Other . And it would be a strange Oversight for any Prince that should mount the English Throne under the disadvantages of that Persuasion , to put his Prerogative upon the stretch of Enacting , or Abrogating Laws , without the Consent of his Parliament . 

Char. First then , In continuing the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction , Honours and Preferments , in the hands of the Protestant Clergy ; he must confer his Favours and Smiles , on those very men , whom ( by the Fundamentals of his own Uncharitable Persuasion , which doom's all that die out of the Bosom of the Romish Church , to a certain State of Damnation ) he cordially believes , do preach and teach , and lead his Subjects in the direct way to Hell. And next , at the same time he must not only punish and persecute , but perhaps emprison and hang , those very only Righteous men , whom from the bottom of his Soul he believes can only open them the Gates of Paradise : whilst in so doing he cannot but accuse himself of coppying the Old Jewish Cruelty . Nay in One respect , he outgoes their Crime ; for he acts that Knowingly , which they committed Ignorantly . For by the Dictates of Religion he must be Convinced , that in effect he does little less than save a Barrabas , and Crucify a Jesus . Fol. 3.  

Here is First , presented a dismal Prospect of a Popish Successor , in the Life of a Protestant Prince ; and the present Government of that Protestant Prince troubled and distracted with Clamours and Jealousies , for fear of a Popish one to come . If Religion were really the business , they would rather bless God for the Peace and Happiness they enjoy ; and wait his further Pleasure with Thankfulness , and Resignation , then with Murmuring , and Distrust , to anticipate Future Evils , and Prejudge Providences to come . Or if Religion were All ; what 's the meaning of their hammering so much of late upon the Subject of Arbitrary Power , and so many Models and Projects of a Common Wealth ; which were the very Method of our late Usurpers ? as to matter of Arbitrary Power ; the King has passed away so many Concessions already for the gratifying of his Subjects , that if he had it in his Will , his Majesty has not left it in his Power to be guilty of that which is so ungratefully Charged upon him . Which makes it look liker a mockery , than an Accusation . 

And then for the New-fangled Device of a Free Common Wealth , our Republican Agitators should do well to mind the People of England , of the blessed condition they were in under the pretended Keepers of an Liberties . The Sound of Freedom , and Liberty brings the Multitude like Larks to the Glass , but not a word of the Net. They say nothing of the Standing Army that must be kept afoot to support it ; nor of the bloody Taxes that must be raised to maintain those Troops , and Martial Law to make good all those Violences . Why do they not tell them of their Charters , Franchises , Privileges , and Tenors , which are all swallowed up in that Gulf of Popular Tyranny ? And so are all other advantageous Dependences upon the Crown . The Body of the Law must be new garbled , and a Civil War , with all the Miseries and Contingences of it , must be the Prologue to the Opening of this Tragical Scene . And if the Sedition fails of success , they bring themselves into the state again of a Conquered Nation . And upon these Terms it is at best , that they are to exchange a Condition of Peace , Freedom and plenty , for beggary , Bondage , and Confusion . It was very well said of Grotius upon the Netherlanders delivering themselves from the 〈◊〉 of Spain . We Fought ( says he ) to save the Tenth part of our Estates ; and now that we have got the day , we have Compounded 〈◊〉 th' other Nine . 

Here is a Criminal , and a Dangerous , but ( I hope ) an Impracticable Proposal set afoot ; But brought in , God knows , by Head and shoulders , under the Countenance of Religion , and Succession . It is possible there may be no more in it then a Well-meaning mistake . But there must be an Infinite . Tenderness of Conscience , and a most untainted Loyalty to justify the Author . But to return to my Character . 

As to the Influence which a Popish Successor may have upon Ecclesiastical matters , ( as in the Character ) there needs no more to be said in 't then this ; that the King hath been graciously pleased to offer the Passing of any Bill for securing the Protestant Religion ▪ without barring , or diverting the Succession . And such Expedients have been also framed to that effect , as have been by great Authority judged Competent for the Obviating of that Difficulty . 

As to the Rest , I will not deny but that it is a hard thing for a Prince to ●eize and persecute a People of his own Religion , purely eo nomine for their being so : And it is very Probable too that he will connive at men of that Persuasion , in many Cases , where the Law directs a Punishment . And what is there more in this the● what has been done already more or lesle from the Date of the Statutes themselves to This very day : and what is done by the Government itself toward the Nonconformists , at this Instant ? where is the great hurt now ( upon this Admittance ) in not punishing the Papists ; so long as the protestants are not Persecuted ? Whereas the Fanatical Papists did not only in defiance both of Law , and Gospel , engross all Offices , Benefits and Privileges to themselves , but without Mercy or Distinction destroyed the rest of their brethren . 

Char. A very pretty Chimaera ! Which is as much as to make this Popish King the greatest Barbarian in the Creation ; a Barbarian that shall cherish and maintain the Dissenters from Truth , and punish and condemn the Pillars of Christianity , and Proselytes of Heaven : Which is no other than to speak him the basest of Men , and little less than a Monster . Beside , at the same time that we suppose that King , that dares not uphold nor encourage his own Religion , we tender him the most deplorable of Cowards ; a Coward so abject , that he dares not be a Champion even for his God. And how consistent this is with the Glory of a Crowned Head , and what hope England has of such a Successor , I leave all men of sense to judge . Fol. 3.  

Behold here 's the upshot of this highflown Paragraph . [ A Popish Prince that puts the Laws in Execution for the punishing of Papists , and for the protecting and countenancing of protestants , is little lesle than the basest of Monsters . ] How comes it then that the Crown of France has not treated the Protestant Subjects there , as this Picture-drawer pronounces , that a Popish Successor would treat his Protestant Subjects here ? The protestants have now and then been severely handled I know in France ; as the Papists , upon some Junctures have been in England ; And now of late worse than usual . All which has been Influenced well by Reasons of State , as by Impulse of Religion . But shall we Pronounce the most Christian King the greater Monster , for his better usage of us ? If a potent Aversion to us in matter of Religion had transported the French king 's into so mortal a Detestation of us to all other purposes , they would never have committed so many Eminent Charges both in Counsels and in Arms , to the Honour and Trust of Protestant Officers and Commanders . But the Convenience and Utility of the State preponderated against Disagreements in Religion . The Barbarisms of the Holy League were the Results of a Sanguinary Faction as well in Civil Government , as Religion . And one Egg is not Liker another than the League of these Dissenting Papists to the Covenant of our Jesuitical and Dissenting Pseudo-protestants . 

To come now to the Reason and Conscience of this Elaborate Padox . Taking His Position for granted , that a Popish Prince is bound by his Religion , contrary to Oaths and Promises , Honour and Justice , the Dictates of Nature , the Laws of Nations , and the Bonds of Human Society ; contrary to all This ( I say ) and to his Interest also ; to break Faith with protestants ; and those protestants , his Subjects too . He must be unmanned , as well as Unchristianed ; an Excomunicate to Human Nature , and excluded from all the Benefits and Offices of Mankind . And yet , we are not without many Instances , in the French League , and the Scottish Covenant , of an abandoned Perfidy even to this degree . It must be a strange Digestion sure , that can put over all other Impieties , and turn the violation of all that is Sacred in Nature into a meritorious Virtue . 

Char. Besides what mismatched incongruous Ingredients must go to make up this Composition a King ! His Hand and Heart must be of no Kin to one another : He must be so Inhuman to those very darling Jesuits , that , like Mahomet's Pigeon , infused and whispered all his Heavenly Dreams into his Ears , that he must not only clip their wings , but fairly Cage 'em too , even for the Charming Oracles they breathed him : And at the same Minute he must leave the wide and open Air to those very Ravens that daily croak Abhorrence , and Confusion to them , and all their Holy Dreams , and their false Oracles . Thus , whilst he acts quite contrary to all his Inclinations , against the whole Bend of his Soul , what does he but publicly put in force those Laws for the Protestant Service ; till in fine , for his Nation's Peace he ruins his own , and is a whole Scene of War within himself ? Whilst his Conscience accusing his sloth on one side , the Pope on the other , Rome's continual Bulls bellowing against him as an undutiful Son of Holy Mother-church , a Scandal to her Glory , a Traitor to her Interest ; and a Deserter of her Cause ; one day accusing the Lukewarmnesse of his Religion ; another , the Pusillanimity of his Nature ; all Roman-catholick Princes deriding the Feebleness of his Spirit , and the Tameness of his Arm ; till , at long run , to spare a Faggot in Smithfield , he does little less than walk on hot Irons himself . Thus all the pleasure he relishes on a Throne is but a kind of Good-fryday-entertainment : Instead of Royal Festival , his Rioting in all the Luxury of his Heart , to see Rome's Dagon worshipped ; Rome's Altars smoke ; Rome's Standard set up ; Rome's Enemies defeated , and his victorious Mother-church Triumphant ; his abject , and poor-spirited Submission denies himself the only thing he thirsts for : and whilst the Principles he suck from Rome do in effect , in the Prophets . Words , bid him Rise , Slay , and Eat ; his fear , his unkingly , nay , unmanly fear makes him fast and starve . Fol. 3.  

This Passage is only the same thing over again , in a diversity of Words and Phrase . But it is well enough to answer the Ends it was intended for ; the tickling of the Fancy , and the moving of a Popular Passion , without one syllable of weight to strike the Judgement . My Reply upon the Last Paragraph shall serve for This too ; which I have not here Recited , as requiring any Answer ; but to show what pains he has taken with the Ornaments of his Rhetoric , to supply the Defect of Argument . I cannot liken it to any thing better than the Gaudy Glittering Vapour that Children are used to Fancy in a Cloud . they 'll Fancy Lions , Peacocks , in it , or what other Figures they Please ; but the first Breath of Air scatters the Fantastic Images , and resolves the whole into its original Nothing . And just so it is with this Character . There are many things in it finely enough said , to work upon a partial and an Easy Imagination ; and to misled a body at first fight into an Opinion that there may be something of weight and Substance in it ; but upon a second Thought it seems to be only a plausible Strain of Words , which the Author has as well Coloured yet , as the matter will bear . 

It serves however in English well enough for an Incentive and Appeal to the Multitude : But if it should happen to be turned into French or Latin , it would become as ill as Office to the protestants abroad , as it is here to the Government . For what could be of a more pernicious Consequence , from an unknown and private Pen , then for one of the Reformed Communion to tell the French King , that if he suffers one Protestant Subject to live in his Dominions , he is all those Vile , Impious , and Abject things that the Author has here bundled up in the Character of his Popish Successor . 

But for this Popish Successor of his , which is a Figure that has no Being in Nature , but in his own Brain ; what if I should match it now , in Flesh and Blood ? But it must be then among the Jesuite● Successor of Knox , and Buchanan ; and the Spawn of that King-killing Race . There are mismatched Ingredients in abundance , Christ upon his Tribunal , ( as they profanely ascribe to their General Assembly ) authorising Bloodshed , Schism , and Disobedience ; a Treaty with the King at Breda , and the Murder of the Brave M●ntrosse , both in a breath . Were ever hand and heart less Akin , then when they subscribed Loyalty and Obedience with the One , and at the same time meditated and Resolved Treason with the Other ? then when they Extirpated what they swore they would only Reform ; and utterly destroyed that Freedom and Property , which they Pretended to preserve ? then when instead of advancing Purtity of Doctrine , and the Kingdom of Christ , they filled the Pulpits with Jugglers , that imposed upon the People the directions of their Standing Tables , or the Close Committee , as the Dictates of the Holy Ghost ; and in place of the Prophet's words , Rise , Slay and Eat , cried out , Cursed be They that keep back their Sword in this Cause . You know the Story of God's Message unto Ahab for letting Benhadad go upon Composition , Stricklands Thanksgiving Sermon . Nou. 5. 1643.  De Justice to the Greatest , says Herle before the Commons , Nou. 5. 1644.  Saul's Sons are not spared ; no nor may Agag , or Benhaded , though themselves Kings . Zimri and Cozbi ( through Princes of the People , ) must be pursued into their Tents . This is the way to consecrate yourselves to God. And what was the Ground of all this Fierceness ; but a Popish King , ( though the Glory of the Reformation ) for want of a Popish Successor ? 

The King's Counsels and Resolutions are so engaged to the Popish Party ( they say ) for the Suppression and Extirpation of the True Religion , that all Hopes of Peace and Protection are Excluded ; and it is fully intended to give satisfaction to the Papists , by alteration of Religion ; and to the Cavaliers and other Soldiers , by exposing the Wealth of the Good Subjects , especially of This City of London , to be Sacked , Plundered , and Spoilt by them . And then again , His Majesty endeavoured to keep off all Jealousies and Suspicions , by many fearful Oaths and Imprecations , concerning his purpose of maintaining the Protestant Religion , etc. Ib. pa. 665.  

This is enough to convince the world that the very Sound of Popery will do the business , as well Without a Ground , as With it : And whoever goes about to alarm the People upon This Desperate point , had need give very good Security for his Allegiance . But if it should prove to be the work of some Good-old-gaus●●●n , the very fact itself is not Clearer than the Design . But however it is , the Author has endeavoured to prevent any such Conjeeture , by a Compliment upon the Memory of the Father , to make the better way to the venting of his spleen against the Successor here in question . 

If there can be a Son of that Royal Martyr Charles the First ( says he ) a Prince so truly pious , that his very Enemies dare not asperse his Memory or Life , with the least Blemish of Irreligion ; A Prince that Sealed the Protestant Faith with his Blood ; who in his deplorable Fate , and Ignominious Death , bore so near a resemblance to That of the Saviour's of the world , that his Sufferings can do no less than Seat him at the Right hand of Heaven . If ( I say ) there can be a Son of that Royal Protestant of that Uncharitable Faith , who by the very Tenets of his Religion doom's ( for deems I suppose ) all that die without the Bosom of their Church irreparably damned : then Consequently he must barbarously tear up his Father's Sacred Monument , brand his Blessed Memory with the Name of Heretic ; and to complete the horrid Anathema , he most impiously execrates the very Majesty that gave him Being . Fol. 11.  

The Author has wrought up This Fancy to a high Pitch , as well in respect of the Father , as of the Son ; and he has showed his skill in 't too , for the more he advances the Reputation of the One , the more scope he has , upon the Opposition , to depress the Esteem of the Other . I would charitably believe that he means good Faith in the Honourable Mention he makes of that Venerable Martyr : But yet there are some passages in this Discourse that would make a man half suspect This Flourish upon the Last King to be intended as a Blind , to give him Opportunity of getting a fairer Marque at This. For he●ss here upon a subject where 't is a Common thing to have the Heart and the Hand as far as Heaven and Earth asunder . Witness the Close of the Declaration beforementioned , Pag. 666.  We do here Protest before the Everliving God , that the Chief End of all our Counsels and Resolutions , is to secure the persons , Estates , and Liberties of all that join with us , and to procure and establish the Safety of Religion , and Fruition of our Laws and Libertyes , in This and all Other his Majesty's Dominions , without any Intention or desire to hurt or injure his Majesty , either in his Person , or JUST Power . 

Let any man consider , that at This very time , they were destroying the Church ; In Arms against the King ; Plundering and Imprisoning those that would not join with them ; and lastly , that they ordered this Declaration to be forthwith Printed , and Read in all Churches and Chapels in England and Wales : calling Heaven and Earth to Witness the Integrity of their Souls , under all these Gross , and Scandalous Contradictions . 

Now to the Latter part of his Paragraph , First , he lays down a false Supposition , and then he raises out of it a most uncharitable Consequence . For the very Position that there is no Salvation out of the Church ; is qualifyed yet with an Exception , in case of an Invincible Persuasion ; But if this be so lewd a Principle , in One Religion , why is it not so in Another ? There is not a fouler Character in Hell , than he has drawn here of a Popish Successor . and he found'st it upon the Irresistible Impulses and Dictates of the Religion . which being admitted , involves every Individual member of the Church of Rome , in the same Condemnation . So that he himself damns all the Papists , as well as he makes Them Damn all the protestants . 

So much for the Son of that Royal Protestant , as he expresses it . But he says nothing all this while of the undutiful Subjects of that blessed Martyr : Those that actually divided his Sacred Head from his Body , and then gloried in it as an Acceptable Sacrifice unto the Lord  

But was This Prince so pious , does he say , that his very Enemies dare not asperse his Memory ? etc. What if I should show him now ( to convince him of his Mistake ) three or four of the Fiercest Sticklers we have for the Fanatical Interest , that have passed their Approbation upon that Execrable Murder ? 

Char. However ( says he ) if there be such a King in Nature , as will not Defend his Own Religion , because he dares not ; but Sneaks upon a Throne , and in Obedience to his Fear shrinks from the Dictates of his Conscience : If like Jupiter's Log , Such a King can be ; and Fate has ordained us for a Popish Prince ; Pray Heaven shrowded the Imperial Lion in this Innocent Lambskin . ( Fol. 3 ) 

He does well enough to pray for Jupiter's Log , considering what Havoc the Republican Storks have made with us Already . But is it so Base a things ( says he ) for a Prince to shrink from the Dictates of his Conscience ? What if his Majesty himself should make it a point of Conscience not to entertein any Project for the Uniting , as they call it , of Protestant Dissenters ; in regard both of the Public Peace , and the Heretical Opinions that must be indulged under that Denomination ? Would not the King's concessions in that point bring him within the Equity of this Successors Character ? 

Char. But I have heard ( says he ) a great many say , it cannot enter into their Thoughts that a Popish Successor will ever take such an Inhuman , and so unnatural a Course to Establish Popery , it being so absolutely against the English Constitution , that it can never be introduced with less than a Deluge of Blood . Surely his very Glory should withhold him from so much Cruelty , etc. Fol. 5.  

The Glory of a Papist ! ( says he , in Reply upon himself , ) a pretty Airy Notion . How shall we ever expect that Glory shall steer the Action , of a Popish Successor , when there is not that thing so Abject , that he shall refuse to do , or That Shape or Hypocrisy so Scandalous , he shall not assume , when Rome or Rome's Interest shall Command ; nay , when his own petulant Stubbornness shall but sway him ? As for Example ; for One Fit he shall come to the Protestant Church , and be a member of their Communion , notwithstanding at the same time his Face belies his Heart , and in his Soul he is a Romanist . Nay , he shall vary his Disguises as often as an Algerine his Colours , and change his Flag to conceal the Pirate . As for Instance , Another fit , for whole years together , he shall come neither to One Church nor th' other , and participate of neither Communion , till ignoble he plays the Unprincely , nay the unmanly Hypocrite , so long , that he shelters himself under the Face of an Atheist to shrowded a Papist ; a Visor more fit for a Bandito then a Prince . And This methinks is so Wretched and despicable a Disguise , that it looks like being ashamed of his God. Fol. 5.  

If a Popish Successor will do any thing , though never so Abject , he will comply then , and make his Religion Truckle to his Interest : But how comes he to be so Abject , and Yielding in One Line , and so Stubborn in the Next : If it be True that he will so Scandalously play the Hypocrite as to Change his Shape , and Act any part for his Advantage , which Rome , or Rome's Interest shall Impose upon him ; what should hinder him from making himself a Protestant to the Law , though he continue a Papist still in his Heart ? And where 's the Outcry then , against the Popish Successor ? If he will do This , the Exception is Removed ; For he 's no longer , in Construction of Law , a Papist : And if he will not do it , he has great Wrong done him in the Character . The Policy , or in Truth the Probability of his running from One Communion to Another , I must Confess I do not understand . For if he can dispense with shuffling and shifting ; his way would be to shifted once for all into the shape of a Protestant ; ( For that 's a Turn would gain him his Point ) and not to wander thus from One Church to Another , to no manner of Purpose . Upon the whole Matter , the Author methinks might have treated the Brother of his Sovereign with a little more regard to the Terms of Decency , and Respect , and kept himself to the Cause , without betraying so great an Animosity to the Person . But having to do with a Prince of his own Creating , he thinks he may deal with him at what rate he pleases . 

Char. Besides , If Glory could have any Ascendant over a Popish Successor , one would think the word of a King , and the Solemn Protestations of Majesty ought to be Sacred and Inviolable . But how many Precedents have we in Popish Princes to convince us that their strongest Engagements and Promises , are lighter than the very Breath that Utters them . As for Examples sake , How did their Saint Mary of England promise the Norfok and Suffolk Inhabitants the unmolested Continuation of the Protestant Worship ; calling her God ( that God that saw the Falseness of her Heart ) to witness , That though her own Persuasion was of the Romish Faith , yet she would content herself with the Private Exercise of her own Devotion , and preserve the than Protestant Government , with all her Subjects Rights and Privileges , uninjured . Upon which , those poor , credulous , honest , deluded Believers , on the Security of such Prevalent Conjurations , led by the mistaken Reverence they paid to a Protesting Majesty , laid their Lives at her Feet , and were the very men that in That Contest of the Succession placed her on a Throne : But immediately when her Sovereign Power was securely established , and his pious Holiness had bid her safely pull the Vizor off , no sooner did Smithfield glow i' th' Piles of Blazing Heretics ; But Chronicles more particularly observe , that no people in her whole Kingdom felt so signal marks of her Vengeance , as those very Men that raised her to the Throne . Her Princely Gratitude for their Crowning her with a Diadem , Crowned Them with their Martyrdoms . 

But since we have mentioned her Princely Gratitude , 't will not be amiss to recollect one Instance more of so Exemplary a Virtue . In the Dispute betwixt here 's an the Lady Jane Grey's Title to the Crown , it was remarkable , that all the Judges of England gave their Vnanimous Opinions for the Lady Jane's Succession , except one of them only , that asserted the Right of Mary : But it so fell out , that This man proving a Protestant ( notwithstanding of all the whole Scarlet-robe he had been her only Champion ) was so barbarously persecuted by her , that being first degraded , then imprisoned and tortured for his Religion , the Cruelty of his Torments was so savage , that with his own hand he made himself a way to escape ' 'em . And well might the violence of his Despair testify his Sufferings were Intolerable , when he fled to so sad a Refuge as Self-murder , for Deliverance . Fol. 5.  & 6.  

See how he Confounds himself here in his way of Reasoning : Because Q. Mary was not so good as her Word ; therefore no Popish Prince values himself upon his Honour . 't is true , she broke her Promise with Norfolk , and Suffolk ( as he Reports it ) that gave her the First Lift toward the Crown : But it is more than he can justify to make it a premeditate Perfidy ; as he renders it . For it is the Opinion of our best Writers , that she was rather wrought upon , ex post facto , to that Violation ; But a Violation it was however ; and there 's no Excuse for 't . And it was a mean Ingratitude to the Generous Loyalty of those People , whom ( under favour ) she did not treat worse than Others , but she did ill in not using them better . 

As to what concerns the matter of Title , the Lady Mary , claiming to the Crown upon a Statute of 35.  Hen. 8. and Edward the Sixth , being prevailed upon afterwards in his Death-sicknesse , contrary to the Intent and direction of that Statute , to transfer the Succession , by Will , to the Lady Jane Grey , in favour of a Faction that laboured the Disinheriting of the Ladies Mary and Elizabeth ; all the Judges subscribed to the Disinherison of the Sisters , save only Sr. James Hales ; ( Justice of the Common Pleas ) who refused , upon a Conscience of the Right , without any regard to the Person of the Lady Mary . This same Sr. James Hales , for giving a Charge afterwards , Derogatory to the Supremacy of the Pope , was committed to Prison ; but received Good Words and fair usage , some time after . He fell however into a deep melancholy , and in the Conclusion Drowned himself . But I see no warrantable Authority for the Report of his being put to the Torture ; only the Author of the Character finds it convenient to have it so , for the better grace of his Story . But we need not trouble ourselves to look so far back for Instances of Breach of Faith ; this Last Age having made us Famous for Perjurious Practices , beyond all that ever went before it . Witness the whole Tract of our Late Troubles . But now comes Another Objection of his own , with His Reply upon it . 

Char. Suppose ( says he ) that the Conservation of a Nations Peace , the Dictates of a Prince's Glory , and all the Bonds of Morality , cannot have any Influence upon a Popish Successor ; yet why may there not be that Prince , who in veneration of his Coronation-oath , shall defend the Protestant Religion , notwithstanding all his Private regret and inclinations to the Contrary ? When , rather than incur the infamous Brand of Perjury , he shall tie himself to the Performance of That which not the force of Religion itself shall violate . And then , how can there be That Infidel of a Subject , after so Solemn an Oath , that shall not believe him ? 

Why , truly , I am afraid there are a great many of those Infidels , ( says he ) and some that will give smart Reasons for their Infidelity : For , if he keeps his Oath , we must allow , that the only Motive that Prompts him to keep it , is some Obligation that he believes is in an Oath . But considering he is of a Religion that can absolve Subjects from their Allegiance , to an Heretical , Excommunicated Prince , nay Depose him , and take his very Crown away : Why may it not much more release a King from his Faith to an Excommunicated , Heretical People ; by so much as the Ties of Vassals to Monarches are greater than those of Monarches to Vassals . 

By the Obligation of an Oath , I presume he means the Religious Obligation of it ; because he speaks of That Obligation from which the Pope pretends a power to absolve him . Now if this be his Mind ; That Obligation is not ( as he says ) the only Motive to the keeping of his Oath ; but there is a Super-additional Reason of State , and Political Contemplations , over and above . Take that for granted once , that there 's no Trusting to the Oath of a Roman Catholic Prince ; and ye cut the very Ligaments of Society , and Commerce . there 's an End of All Treatyes , and Alliances ; amicable and mutual Offices betwixt Christian Princes , and States : Nay , in One word , erect but This Maxim ; you turn Europe into a shambles , and put Christendom , without any more ado , into a State of War. For where there 's no Trust , there can be no Security : And then we know upon Experience , that the Outrages of Jealousy , for the Preventing of Imaginary Evils , are actually the most dreadful of Real ones themselves . This Opinion makes us a Scorn and a Prey to Infidels , and Strips us of all that is Divine , and Reasonable in us , together . 

I am nor ignorant yet , either of the Doctrine , or of the Practice of several Profligate Wretches of the Roman Communion , in This Impious Particular . But they are such then as are wholly lost in Brutality and Blindness , and I neither do , nor can believe all Papists to be equally susceptible of That Unchristian Impression . It is a Position that may be made use of at a Dead Lift , to serve a Political Turn . And the Trick will not pass neither , but upon some Enthusiastic Sick-headed Zealot , that takes all his Dreams for Visions , and the Vapours of his Distemper for Revelations . We have had of these Romish Dispensations and Absolutions in abundance , among our Own Fanatical Jesuits , and not only the Doctrie asserted , but the Duty also of abjuring our Oaths of Allegiance and Canonical Obedience inculcated , and pressed upon the pain of Imprisonment , Plunder and Damnation . Yet God forbid that the Acts of the Conclave of a Close Committee , and the Determinations of an Ignatian Assembly of Divines ( the True Counterpart of the Holy Society ; ) the Lord forbid ( I say ) that This Cabal of audacious Extravagants , that took upon them to Discharge us from the Obligations of the Ten Commandments , as well as of the Laws of the Land , should reflect a Scandal upon the whole Body of our Communion , as if Their Warrant were a Legitimation of Perjury and Rebellion , and the Doctrine of King-killing , and Violence , were the Dictate of our Profession . 

He touches a little lower upon the French Kings breaking in upon Flanders , contrary to his Oath . [ All the Motives ( says he ) that could provoke him to the Breach of his Oath , were only his Ambition , a Lust of being Great , etc. Fol. 6. ] So that he has now found out a Popish Prince , it seems , that sacrifices his Conscience to his Glory , though but a little before he made it the Character of a Popish Successor to sacrifice his Glory to his Religion . Now by the way , I look upon Majesty as a Sacred Character , and not to be handled but with Veneration : wherefore whether his Assumption be True of False , I shall speak to it only as a Supposition . He proceeds now to the balancing of the matter . 

If ( says he ) a Roman Catholic can break an Oath only for the Pleasure of Conquering , which he knows is doing Ill ; Shall not a Popish Prince in England have ten times more Inclination to break an Oath for the Propagation of his own Faith , which his Conscience tells him is meritorious ? 

I Answer , that the breaking of an Oath , out of a Lust of being Great , is the Crime properly of an Ambitious Prince , not of a Popish : For he does not consult his Religion , but only his Glory , in the Committing of it . And the same Thirst of Dominion , with the same degree of Indifference , as to the Business of Right or wrong , in concurrence with the same Advantages of Power and Opportunity , would have produced the very same essects in a Prince of any other Judgement . Well , but he does an Ill thing knowingly ; and so are most of the Ill things that are done in the World , without any regard to the difference of Protestant or Papist . But then his Application of This Ill thing done to another Prince of the same Persuasion is only the cutting of One Diamond with another ; and nothing at all to our Case . 

But much more will a Popish Prince in England ( says he ) etc. — Does it follow Here that because a man would rather forswear himself to bring a Good thing to pass , than a Bad one , ( though we are to do no evil at all that Good may come of it ) that therefore for the compassing of a good end a man will forswear himself ? Neither have I ever as year heard of the Merit of propagating any Religion , by Perjury : Or that the Consciences of any sort of Christians could justify them in a Crime which even Infidels themselves by the mere instinct of Nature have in extreme abhorrence . And he follows the point yet further . 

Char. He has Religion ( says he ) to drive the Royal Jehu on ; Religion that from the beginning of the world , through all Ags , has set all Nations in a Flame ; yet never confessed itself in the Wrong . 

These are strange words to come from the mouth of a pretender to Scruples , and a Protestant Advocate . His Quarrel is not now so much to a Popish , as to a Religious Successor . Nor is it any longer Popery , but Religion itself , that he strikes at , as the dangerous and Obstinate Incendiary . Nay and since Religion was in the world , it was never otherwise he says . So that here is a very fair expedient hinted , for the good of Christendom , to exterminate this Spirit of Discord ( RELIGION ) from off the face of the Earth . If he had said only the Pretext of Religion , he might have Appealed , either to the Clamour of his brethren , or to his own Papers . For it is the Pretext that both Furnishes the Fuel , and blows the Coal : while Religion lies burning in the Furnace . 

Char. Beside ( says he ) how can a Popish Prince , in attempting to Establish his own Religion , believe he does his Subjects an Injustice , in that very thing in which he does God Justice ; or think he Injures Them , when he does their Souls Right ? Fol. 6.  

This Pretence of doing God Justice , and the Souls of men Right ; will entitle a Prince , with a much more plausible Colour , and a better Grace , to the breaking in upon the Territories and Subjects of other Princes and States , under Countenance of the same Design : For in that case , there 's no Bar of an Oath upon him ; whereas the same Violence upon his own Subjects renders him Guilty of a manifest Perjury . 

But what does he mean by an Attempt to establish his own Religion ? If it be by way of Argument ; 't is well . But if he makes use of any compulsive act of Authority , contrary to his Oath , he stands accountable to God for breach of Faith ; and does no Justice to God in it neither , nor Right to the Souls of his People . For where 's the justice to God , in making use of his Name to an Imposture ? and in rendering him not only a Witness , but in some sort , a Party to a Cheat ? And where 's the Right to his People's Souls , in forcing them to the Profession of a Religion with their Lips , which they abhor in their Hearts ? Or , in fine , how can a Popish Prince so much as pretend , either to the one , or the other , against so clear a Light , both of Scripture and Nature ? In short , either he is indispensably bound to do the thing , or at liberty whether he will do it or no : If the former , his Oath must be either a Nullity or a Fraud ; and if the other , his antecedent Obligation has determined that liberty . [ Butt Religious Frenzy ( says he , Fol. 7. ) leaves that eternal intoxication behind it , that where it commits all the Cruelties in the World , 't is never sober after to be sorry for 't . ] How truly , and how severely is this said ? Witness the impenitent Ends and Courses of all the King's Murderers , both Dead and Living . And now again [ Thus ( says he ) Whilst a Popish King sets his whole Kingdom in a Combustion ; how little does he think he plays a Second Nero ? Good Conscienti-man , not he ; Alas ! He does not Tune his Joys to the Tyrannic Nero's Harp , but to David's milder and more sacred Lyre ; whilst , in the height of his pious Ecstasy , he sings Te Deum , at the Conflagration . ib. ] Turn but Popish King here , into Popish , Fanatical Faction , and what an admirable illustration is this of the brethren's Exultations and Thanksgiving , for the Ruin of their Sovereign , the Holy Church , and Three Kingdoms ? Nay , and the florid humour goes on with him still . [ Thus ( says he ) with an Arbitrary , unbounded Power , what does his Licentious holy Thirst of blood do lesle , than make his Kingdoms a larger Slaughter-house , and his Smithfield an Original shambles ? Thus the Old Moloch , once again revives , to feast and riot on his dear , human Sacrifice : And whilst his fiery Iron hands , crush the poor Victim dead , the PROPAGATION of RELIGION , and the GLORY of GOD ( as he calls it ) are the very Trumpets that deafen all the feeble Cries of blood , and drown the dying Groans of what he Murders . Ibid. ] Can any Man read this Pathetical Figure of Tyranny and Desolation , without turning the OLD MOLOCH into the GOOD-OLD-CAUSE ; and calling to mind the Glorious Sacrifices that were offered at White-hall-gate ; upon Tower-hill ; Cheapside ; Charing-cross ; and in a word , in all the Quarters of His Majesty's Dominions , to that Mercyless and Insatiable Idol ? To say nothing of those Wholesale Carnages , at Edge-hill , Newbury , Marston-moor , Navesby , etc. where the blood of loyal Subjects , and true protestants , was spilt like Water , and the Priests of Baal , all this while , with the PROPAGATION of RELIGION , and the GLORY of GOD in their Mouths , celebrating , in their Pulpits and Festivals , these Barbarous Triumphs . And yet again ; 

Char. Thus ( says he ) whilst the bonds of Faith , Vows , Oaths and Sacraments cannot hold a Popish Successor ; what is that in an Imperial Head , but what in a private Man we punish with a Jail and Pillory ? whilst the Perjured Wretch stands the Universal Marque of Infamy , and then is driven from all Conversation , and like a Monster hooted from Light and Day . ] Pray correct the Errata ' s of this passage , thus : For Popish Successor read Jesuitical Covenanter ; and for an Imperial Head read a Committee of Safety : And then ye have the Mystery unciphered . [ But the Pope ( he says ) and a Royal Hand , may do any thing ; there 's a Crown in the case , to gild the deeds his Royal Engines act . ] This Pope and Royal Hand should have been their General Assembly ; and their ( Pretended ) Christ upon his Throne ; and than God's Cause , and according to the Covenant hallows the Sedition — Et quod . 
Turpe est Cerdoni , Volesos , Brutosque decebit . 
One Verse more would have expounded the whole business . 
Ille Crucem sceleris Pretium , tulit , Hic , Diadema . 




Char. They are still ( says he ) that adorable Sovereign Greatness we must kneel to , and obey . What if a little Perjured Villain has sworn a poor Neighbour out of a Cow or a Cottage ! hang him , inconsiderable Rogue ! His Ears deserve a Pillory . But to VOW and COVENANT and FORSWEAR THREE KINGDOMS OUT OF THEIR LIBERTIES AND LIVES ; that 's Illustrious and Heroic . there 's Glory in great Achievements , and Virtue in Success . Alas ! a vast Imperial Nimro● hunt's for Nobler Spoils ; flies at a whole Nations Property and Inheritance . A Game worthy a Son of Rome , and Heir of Paradise . And to lay the mighty scene of ruin secure , he makes his Coronation-oath , and all his Royal Protestations ( those splendid Baits of premeditated Perjury ) the Cover and Skreen to the hidden fatal Toil , laid to ensnare a Nation . folio 7.  

Never were those Illustrious and Heroic Vowers and Covenanters , that for swore three Kingdoms out of their Liberties and Lives , drawn so to the Life ; and five hundred Nimrods' too upon the chase of our Property and Inheritance . And it was a Game worthy of the Sons of Buchanan ; and ( if they may be their own Godfathers ) the Children of the Lord too , under the Cover of their ambiguous Protestations ; and their Holy League-bands of Confederacy ; they concealed the Snare of that premeditated Perjnry , which was followed with so many dreadful judgements upon the Nation . 

He prosecutes his Subject with a Reply to the Objection , that ' its impossible for a Popish Successor to introduce Popery into England . That the Jesuits , had such a design ; & that the whole Party believed it practicable , he evinces from the Plot ; and the prospect of a presumptive Popish Heir , rendered them more confident of succeeding in it , folio 7. and 8.  And yet four or five Lines further , he represents the difficulties of restoring Popery into England to be almost insuperable : and so with just reflections upon the Paris , and Irish Massacres ; Villainies of Gunpowder Treasons , Conflagratiens , and Plots against Kings and Kingdoms . He finishes that Paragraph . 

I shall easily agree here to all the Ill that he says of the Seditious and pragmatical Papists , without disputing one syllable of it . And yet I think it very well worth our care , to distinguish betwixt zeal and clamour ; and not over-hastily to give credit to That Sort of People , whose method it is ; first , to make Papists odious ; and then to make the Church of England Popish . And this is not said neither to divert any man from a reasonable apprehension of the other danger . There never was a greater noise of Popery , than in the Prologue to the misfortunes of the late King. And what was the Ground , or what the Issue of it ? There was a Conspiracy to undermine the Government , and no way but that to put the People out of their Wits , and out of their Duties together ; and the Project succeeded , to the actual subversion of the Government . And when the Zelots' had possessed themselves of the Quarry , they shared both public and private Revenues among themselves , and fell afterwards to the cutting of one another's Throats , for the Booty ; without one word more of Popery . In Brief , to join in an Outcry against Papists , with those that Reckon Episcopacy to be Popery , is to assist our Enemies toward the putting on of our own Shackles . And it is gone so far too , that the Libelers , and their Dictator's range them hand in hand already ; and you shall seldom see a Blow made at the Pope , without a Lick at the Bishops . But the Project begins now to open . 

Char. Let us now rightly consider how far the first Foundations of Popery ( vix . Arbitrary Power ) may be laid in England . First , then , if a Papist Reign ; the Judges , Sheriffs , Justices of the Peace , and all the Judiciary Officers are of the King's Creation : and as such , how far may the influence of Preferment ; on base Constitutions , culled out for his purpose , prevail even to deprave the very Throne of Justice herself ; and make our Judges use even our Protestant Laws themselves to open the first Gate to Slavery . 

We are just now upon a Preliminary to the Nineteen Old Propositions over again . For fear of an Arbitrary Power , the King was not to be trusted with the Choice of his own Officers . But no though taken for the securing of the Government from Popular Tumults and Insurrections ; in case of lodging that trust in any other hand . Beside the putting of the King into an incapacity of providing for the justice , and security of the Government . But he is so far however in the right ; that the perverting of that power may endanger the State. And for that consideration , it is a Trust not to be parted with , lest it should once more be re-applyed to the destruction of the King and People , as it was before . It is a certain Truth , that a Prince , by the abuse of his Power may prove a Tyrant . But it is as certain again , that there is not any form , or temperament of Sovereignty imaginable , that is not liable to the same possibility . For Tyranny itself , is only the straining of the Essential and necessary powers of Government beyond their pitch . We have experimented the worst effects of Usurpation , and Corruption ; and of turning the Equity of the Law against the Letter of it ; nay of setting up the Laws themselves against the very authority that made them . And all this would never have done the work neither , if the faction had not supplied the want of Laws for their purpose in some cases , and superseded others that were against them , by an Arbitrary Device of Votes , and Ordinances . So that the hazard is nothing so great as he represents it , in the hand of a Prince , for want of that power of Enacting and Repealing , which the Faction possessed themselves of by an Usurpation . But alas ! ( says he , Pag. 8. ) The Laws in corrupted judges hands have been too often used as barbarously as the Guests of Procrustes , who had a Bed for all Travellers ; but then he either cut them shorter , or stretched them longer , to fit them to it , 

And is not this very charitably done now ; to imagine the worst things that either ever were or can be done ; Of a Prince , ( admitting my Author's supposition ) whose Empire , Safety ; Donions ; and the welfare of whose People , are all dependant upon his good behaviour , and justice ? So that he ventures his All on the one side , to get nothing on the other , Here is the fancy of remote and uncertain difficulties , oppo'sd to our present security and well-being ! and after a Capital Sentence , pronounced with a formality of Law , upon an Imperial Prince , as a Traitor to the Sovereignty of the People ; We are now opening the way to bring another Prince to the Scaffold . For that 's the Scope of several Virulent Libels , both printed and written , that have at present , their free course without control ? These are the Incendiaries I speak of , and no other . [ Well ( says he again ) but if the public Ministers of Justice betray the Liberty of the Subject ; The Subject may Petition for a Parliament to punish 'em for 't . But what if he will neither hear one , nor call the other ? who shall compel him ? ] This is a very artificial way of getting a shoot at the King through the Duke ; and to intimate the Exercise of an Arbitrary Power , by this manner of supposing it . It was by these very steps of accusing evil Counsellors ; crying out for justice against them ; and for a Parliament to punish them ; that the Faction mounted the Government , and stripped his Majesty ; first of his Friends ; then of his Revenue ; next of his Liberty ; and lastly of his Life , and all this was actually done , for fear of no body knew what . there 's no doubt ( says the Character ) but he 'll find sufficient assistance from the Pope , English Papists , and Foreign Princes ; beside the Revenues of the Crown . And then having but a prudent eye , and a tenacious hand to manage his Exchequer ; we shall find he 'll never call that People he shall never have need of , folio 8. ] He supposes here an assistance for a Prince in possession of his Crown . But an assistance for what , unless in case of a Rebellion ? Or is it an assistance to enable him to live without Parliaments ? As if Foreign Princes would be at that charge , to be never the better sored . Or if he means a Military Assistance toward the settling of him in the Possession of an Absolute Power ; his Interest undoubtedly will be much greater in the supporting of him as an Heir , than in advancing him as a Tyrant ; beside , that for one English Man to serve him in such an unwarrantable design , he will have an hundred , in case of any unjust delusion , to stand by him in the defence or recovery of an nndoubted Right . This is only the quitting of one Pamphlet with another ; and to make use of that liberty myself which is allowed to others . [ But all this while ( says he ) the Pope is not Absolute . There wants a Standing Army to Crown the Work : And he shall have it , for who shall hinder him ? Nay , all his Commanders shall be present qualified , even by our Protestant Test , for the employment . ] We have not forgot the Time when one standing Army was Raised for fear of another ; and between Thirty and Forty Thousand Men kept in Pay for a matter of thirteen or fourteen years together , when the War was over , and not one Enemy left in the Field ; one King imprisoned , and another in Banishment ; Taxes multiplied ; The People peeled to the very Bones ; and the persons and Estates of Freeborn English Men subjected to the most Scandalous Tyranny that ever was inflicted upon reasonable Creatures . And what was the Ground and Foundation of this Calamity ? The Multitude were Buzzed in the Head , that the King was Popishly inclined , and governed by Jesuitical Counsels ; nothing but Papists about him , and two or three Antichristian Bishops ( a Pack of Tories , and Tantvies ) and a mighty noise there was of Germane Horse , and the bringing of an Army up to Town to awe the City , and the Parliament : and the very fear alone of these shadows Transported them into the uttermost extremities of rage and confusion . 't is true , there was no Plot afoot then , as there is now ; but they made sufficient shift , without it , to do their own , and the Kingdom's business . You shall now see the Composition of his Popish Successor's Standing-army . He shall have enough Men of the Blade out of one half of the Gaming Houses in Town , to Officer twice as many Forces as he shall want : 't is true , they shall be men of no Estates , nor Princples , etc. ] He should even have gone on , when his hands were in , and quartered his new Leveys in Lambeth House , or Paul's , as in the days of his Forefathers . But is not this better yet , than Spiriting away of Apprentices from their Masters ; decoying the poor Wenches out of their Bodkins and Thimbles , and squeezing a Rebellion out of the Gospel ? We have seen an Army of pretended Saints , to the value of Twenty or Thirty Thousand in a Body ; and as many Religions , as Men : every Article of the Creed called in question ; and the Lord's Prayer exploded as a stinting of the Spirit . This and a great deal more , and worse , is true , to the very Letter . But forward [ And that this Army may be more quietly raised ; how many honourable pretences may be found , folio 9 ] Very right . As the fetching of the King home to his Parliament ; the delivering of him out of the hands of Papists . The defence of his person , and just rights , in the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion ; and all this , in the Style of his Majesty's most humble , and obedient Subjects . [ Perhaps ( says he ) the greatest and most importunate preservation of the Kingdom shall call for 't and then upon second thoughts , instead of defeating some Foreign Enemy , they are opportunuely ready to cut our Throats at home ; if we do not submit , and give all that this King shall ask , bid . ] This ingenuous Author has directly Translated the true History of the Rise and Advance of the late Rebellion , into a Prophetical Computation of the Methods and proceedings which the World is to expect from a Popish King. Did not they seize those very Arms that the King had provided for the Relief of Ireland ? and employ them against his Majesty's very Person at Edg-hil ? And were not those very Troops that were Raised , as they swore , for the defence of the City of London , Quartered upon the Citizens , to Ruin , and Enslave them . 

Char. Thus far ( says he ) we have given the Pourtraicture of a Popish King : And now , let us take a draught of his Features in his Minority ; that is , while he is only a Popish Heir Apparent , I.d.  

After the Preamble of an Imaginary Prince , elevated to the height of a Generous and a glorious Character ; with a Supposal of a People too not unworthy of the blessing of such a Sovereign ; and a smooth Reproach in the end of it , to intimate how much he is beholden to them ; he advances as follows . 

Char. Now ( says he ) let suppose , after a long Tranquillity of this matchless Monarch's R●ign , that the immediate Heir to his Crown , and a part of his Blood , by the Sorceries of Rome is cankered into a Papist . ] His meaning is easily supposed , by stabbing of the very Paper , whenever he comes near him . [ Andrea to pursue this Land●hape , suppose we see this once happy Flourishing Kingdom ( so far as in all Duty and Reason bound ) concerned for themselves , their Heirs and their whole Country's Safety ; till with an honest , cautious , prudent Fear they begin to inspect a Kingdoms Universal Health ; till weighing all the Symptoms of its State , they plainly descry those Pestilential Vapours fermenting , that may one day infect their Air , and sicken their World , and see that rising Eastern Storm engendering , that will once bring in those more than Egyptian Locusts , that will not only fill their Houses , and their Temples , but devour their Labours their Harvests , and their Vintages ] here 's a Period for an Apothecary . The Inspectors ( I suppose ) of our Body politic may be Three or Four of our Anabaptistical Protestant Intelligencing Water Casters of the State. And these are the men that so plainly descry the pestilential vapours , he speaks of , which in effect are no other than the Breath of their own Lungs . But is it an Eastern Storm that they see engendering ? why then the wind is turned , I perceive , for the Locusts of 40 and 43 came out of the North ; and did us all the mischiefs too , of his Egyptian Locusts . And now he has given us the State of our Disorder ; he is so kind as to pr●scribe toward our Relief , which is in a few words , That the Nation [ like true Patriots do anticipate their woes , with a present sense of the future miseries they foresee , folio 9 ] which is as much as to say : Vp. and be dring , Now again 

Char. What is This Popish Heir in the Eye of England , but perhaps the greatest , and only Grievance of the Nation ; the Universal Object of their Hate and Fear , and the Subject of their Clamours and Curses ? ( methinks he might afford the King's Brother a little better Language ) at whose door , ly●their Discontents and Murmurs ; but 't is murmurs so violent , that they thrust in amongst their very Prayers ( So did Curse ye Meroz ) and become almost a part of their Devotions . 

( The Prophet David's Curse is fallen upon them , Their Prayer is turned into Sin ) Murmurs so bold , that they dare approach the very Palace , nay Throne and Ear of Majesty , folio 10. ] here 's a large step advanced upon the King himself ; but you shall see him come closer by and by , [ Whenever ( says he ▪ ) the People of England reflect on this Heir as their King in reversion , they have reason to look upon him as no better than Jupiter ' s Stork amongst the Frogs . Yes , notwithstanding all his former Glories and Conquests , his whole Stock of Fame is so lost , and buried in his Apostasy from the Religion ; and conseqnently , the Interest of these Protestant Kingdoms , that all his Services are Cancelled , and his whole Mass of Glory corrupted , ibid. ] I find some People of Opinion , that this King in reversion is of the same Persuasion at this day ; that he was , when he acquired all those Glories : But let that pass , and see now what 's the sum of all this Flourish , but a laboured Piece of spiteful Art , to render the Brother of his Sacred Majesty as odious as the soulest Character , and Calumny can make him You shall fee presently that This Venom against the Duke will terminate in the King ; and that instead of a Christian , and pious Zeal for Religion , the end of it is to inflame a desperate Distemper in the State. It is , in short , a Character of the worst of men , adapted to a suitable Religion : And exposed to the World , in an uncharitable account of things , which he cannot possibly foreknow . His next supposal is a Rhetorical Speculation ; and not without Reflections bold enough , upon the unchangeable affection of his Majesty to his Royal Brother . 

What ( saith he ) can the consequence of this unhappy Friendship be ; but that the very Souls and Loyalties of almost a whole Kingdom are staggered at this fatal Conjunction ; till I am afraid there are too many , who in detestation of that one Gangrened Branch of Royalty can scarce forbear ( how undutifully soever ) to murmur and revile even at that Imperial Root that cherishes it ? Ibid. ] 

What a strange Usurpation is this , not only upon Majesty , but Human Nature ; not to allow a Prince the freedom of those affections which he can no more put off than his Reasonable Being ? But this is the Loyalty of the Old Stamp , that still gives the Sign with a Hail Master , and a Kiss . But how comes this Pamphlet to undertake for the sense of the whole Kingdom ? It is not that he finds them so much dis-affected , but he endeavours to make them so ; by teaching and animating the Sedition that he would be thought to fear . Nay , so far is he from being afraid of the undutiful murmurs he seems to apprehend ; that it is scarce possible to do more toward the creating of them . And look now how he grows upon His Majesty . [ Those very Knees ( says he ) that but now , would have bowed into their very Graves to serve him , grow daily and hourly so far from bending ( as they ought ) to a Crowned Head , till they are almost as stubborn as their Petitions and Prayers have been ineffectual . 

] What is this to say , but in his way of intimation to insinuate — what the Reader will easily understand , though more than I am willing to express . 

Char. Thus ( says he ) whilst a Popish Heirs extravagant Zeal for Rome , makes him shake the very Throne that upholds him , by working and encroaching on the affections of His Majesty , for that Protection and Indulgence that gives birth and life to the Heartburning of a Nation ; what does he otherwise than in a manner stab his King , his Patron , and his Friend , in his tenderest part , his Loyal Subjects hearts ? which certainly is little lesle than to play the more lingering sort of Parricide ; a part so strangely unnatural , that even Savages would blush at , yet this Religion , ncorrigible remorseless Religion never shrinks at . 

Folio 10.  

It is worth observing , that throughout this whole Character of a Popish Successor , the Author of it lays more load upon the Heir than upon the Religion ; for he treats the Latter still in the terms of a fair and generous enemy ; but when he comes to the Other , he shoots Poisoned Arrows , Parricide , Gangrened , and the like , without any respect either to Modesty or Honour . And what is the whole Tract indeed , but an artificial Declamation , without so much as one ill thing in 't , bating the Persuasion , that is either liable to a proof , or possible for him to know : And yet he does as boldly pronounce upon things to come , as if he had the Book of Fate in his Pocket . He charges the Successor here , with encroaching upon the King's Affections . 

It was a little while ago , only the invincible tenderness of His Majesty ; but it is now turned into the working and insinuation of his Brother : who stabs the King ( says the Character-writer ) in the Hearts of his Loyal Subjects . But what if it should happen that the King should be here stabbed through the Duke ? It was at this rate , that Laud and Strafford stabbed the late King too . And what was the end on 't ; but that when the King's Friends were removed , under the Character of his Enemies ; his Sacred Majesty left naked and defenceless , those Hypocrites that had nothing in their Mouths , but Loyalty and Religion ; those were the very Men that stabbed him themselves . This is the plain Historical Fact , without either amplifications or colours . 

But if you 'll see a figure upon the Stretches ; observe his next fancy ; where he makes the Duke a Parricide for kill the King in the hearts of his People , by his applications and respects to His Majesty . And a Parricide ( as he phrases it ) so strangely unnatural too , that even Pagans' would blush at it . Is this Jest or Earnest now ? is it a pang of Duty and Conscience ? Or is it not rather the Luxuriancy of a highflown thought ? How comes it to be so flagitious a crime , for one brother to love another , that Human Nature must be startled at it ? Or that a Prince may not presume to venture upon the Duties of Christianity , Natural Affection , Friendship , Honour and Humanity , for fear of being called to accounted for 't in a Pamphlet ? Well! but he tells us of the Heartburning of the Nation at this conjunction ; and for that reason , he expects , it seems , that His Majesty shall relinquish his Brother . But what if a Man should ask him , First , How he knows this to be the sense of the Nation ? Secondly , What Commission he has to tell the World so ? And Thirdly , How he comes so positively to assert that it is so ; when it is clear , on the contrary that it is not so ? For the People's quarrel is to the Religion only , whereas the Authors is principally to the Duke . But let us give him these Heartburning for granted ; and see how far a concession upon that point will carry us at last . First , The Duke Marches off ; and then the King's Ministers back after him ; and then goes the Militia : and so in course , the bishop , the Revenue , etc.  To the end of the Chapter of Forty Eight : and all this , to gratify one longing after another , till , in the conclusion , another Government turns up Trump . Plato Redivivus has the whole Scheme of the Project ready cut and dried . This was the very Method of our Ruin ; and the name of Religion led the way to 't . A Covenanted , and , in his own Words , an incorrigible , remorseless Religion . But why these Heartburning , now the Duke is out of the Kingdom ? unless they would him out of the World too ? And that would not serve neither ; for so long as there is a Service-book , a Surplice , or a Canonical Habit in the Kingdom , and this Humour kept a foot , there shall never want Popery to work upon . The next clause speaks the plainest English we have had yet . 

Char.  The Nation in studying to prevent Tyranny grew jealous of Monarchy , and for fear of their Monies going the wrong way they will give none at all , but rather triumph in His Majesty's greatest wants , even when his glory , nay possibly when his nearest safety calls for their assistance . 

Fol. 11.  This way of saying that they will not give Money , ( which is more yet than he knows ) carries the force of an Advice that they should not ; which is the thing that this passage manifestly intends and designs . So that is the rest of the Nation were of his mind , the French King might have this Kingdom for the ask ; for both King and People upon these terms are manifestly abandoned as a sacrifice to this jealousy . 

Toward the bottom of the same page he brings in a Deliberation to this effect : This Popish Prince cannot either help his Persuaasion or relinquish it ; nor is it a thing to be exacted from him that he should . The Grievances of the Kingdom may be his unhappiness and not his fault ; for he is only passive , and lives to himself , without meddling to encourage or favour Popery in the least . But how does it follow ( says he Fol. 12. ) that if we do not plainly see him act , that he does not act . But how does it follow on the other side , say I , that he does act if no body can prove it ? It is the rule of Christian Charity in doubtful cases ever to judge the best , but the Author of this Character does not think fit to walk by this rule ; for first he casts with himself what is the worst that can happen , and then he improves the far-fetched possibility of that worst of Events into a Prediction , that certainly that thing shall come to pass . And then he considers how mean and wicked it is possible for Flesh and Blood to be , and those Vices and Imperfections jumbled together are the Ingredients that make up his Character . 

Char.  But to the Objection ( says he ) the Grievance of a Nation may be his unhappiness , and not his Fault , etc.  That is in short ; He cannot help it . Very right . And so when This Popish Heir comes to the Crown , and promotes the Romish Interest with all the severity , Injustice and Tyranny that Religious Cruelty can invent . His Answer will be , He cannot help it ; or at lest cannot withstand those irresistible Motives that prompt him to their Execution ; which is the same thing . 



Will he have it then that our Actions and our Thoughts are bound up alike , under a determinate , and insuparable necessity , of our doing this or that , as well as of thinking so or so ? Or will he call those motives , irresistible , that do only prompt , and invite us to the doing of any thing ? He has screwed up Tyranny and injustice here , to the highest degree of cruelty and terror . And now if this barbarous rigour be so inseparable from the Genius of the Religion ; how comes it that a French Popish King should be better natured to his Subjects of the Reformed Religion , than he will allow an English Popish King capable of being toward his Protestant Subjects . [ The same impulse of Conscience ( he says ) that makes a man a Roman Catholic , will make him Act like one , when opportunity serves . Ibid. that 's very Right ; but I cannot yet think that any Party of men will pretend explicitly to authorise the putting of Christians to death , purely upon a Consideration of Religion , and Conscience , in order to the propagation of the Gospel . And yet I know , the Jesuits , of both Churches have gone a great way towards it . Cursed be he ( says Case , in the late Rebellion ) that witholdeth his Sword from Blo●d ; that spares when God saith strike , etc.  [ The Papist ( he says ) is of a Religion that makes human merit the Path of Salvation : ] and so he passes into a very florid descant upon the Abuses , in the Church of Rome , of this wonder-working merit . And our dissenting Papists , in the late times , came not one jote behind them , in making it the daily Theme of the Pulpit , to Preach Salvation to all that died in the Cause . 

Char.  And then again , Popery is a Religion that does not go altogether in the Old Fashion Apostolical way of Preaching and Praying , and teaching all Nations , etc.  But scourging , and racking , and broiling 'em into the fear of God. A Religion that for its own propagation , will at any time authorise its Champions to divest themselves of their Humanity , and act worse than Devils to be Saints . 



These are dreadful Cruelties ; but if this fierceness arise from any principle of rigour in the System of their Faith , methinks they should treat all alike ; for if it be upon an Impulse of Conscience , it becomes a Duty . The Jesuits here in our Covenant Persecution were pretty good at this way of Discipline too . There was no scourging , racking , and broiling , 't is true ; but there was plundering , sequestering , starving , imprisoning , poisoning in Gaols , and refusing the Holy Communion to Anti-covenanters upon their Death bed . There was a general Massacre propounded of all the Cavaliers that had been in arms , which I am well assured was carried but by one voice in the negative . There were upward of a hundred sequestered Ministers crowded into a prison , where they knew there was a raging Plague ; and , as I am credibly informed , there was not a thirtieth part of them came off alive . And for these Diabolical Actions the Persecutors were enrolled into the number of the Saints . 

Char.  Nay ( says he ) the very outrage of Thefts , Murders , Adulteries , and Rebellions are nothing to the pious Barbarities of a Popish King. The Murderer and Adulterer , may in time be reclaimed by the Precepts of Morality , and the Terrors of Conscience . The Thief , by the dread of a Gallows , may become honest . Nay , the greatest Traitor , either by the fear of Death or the Apprehensions of Hell may at last Repent : But a Papist on a Throne has an unconsutable Vindication for all his proceedings , Challenges his Commission , even from Heaven , for all his Cruelty he dares Act ; and when all the Enchantments of Rome have touched his Tongue with a Coal from Her Altars , what do his Enthusiasms make him believe , but that the most savage , and most hellish Dooms his blinded Zeal can pronounce , are the Immediate Oracles of God : 

folio 13. ] 

If it had not been for Popish King , Papist , and Rome , I should have taken this last Paragraph for the Picture of a Kirk-conclave . For first , though there was Theft , Murder , and Rebellion , abundantly in their proceedings ; yet so Transcendent was the wickedness of their blasphemous Bands and Associations ; so horrid the Forms of their Calling the Searcher of all hearts ; with hands lifted up to the most high God , etc. to witness the joining of themselves in a holy Covenant unto the Lord ; ( which holy Covenant was yet in the very first conception and intent of it , a premeditate Complottery to destroy That in Effect , which in Terms they swore to defend ) All other sins ( I say ) were as nothing , in the Balance against this Catilinary , and bloody Sacrament . And so remarkable was the Reprobated Impenitence that followed upon it , as if the Devil himself had come in , to the Signing and Sealing of that Religious Mockery , both upon God and Man ; and turned the Hypocritical Covenant into a Magical Contract . 

As for those that took it with good meaning , or perhaps out of weakness , and surprise ; ( though I myself was none of the number ) I make no doubt , but that God hath given to many of them a true sense of their mistake ; but for those that designingly , and frankly leagued themselves in that Combination ; I am at a loss , even according to the largest allowances of Christian Charity , where to find three Converts ; the Living persisting still in the obligation of that Oath ; and those that were taken off by the hand of justice , asserting it to the Death . I bear my Testimony , ( says Kid , that was Executed in Scotland , as a Rebel ; Spirit of Popery , folio 7. to the Solemn League and Covenant , as it was professed and sworn in Scotland , England and Ireland , in 1643. etc.  And again , Ibid ) Prelacy , as it is now Established by a pretended Law , is destructive downrightly to the sworn Covenants ; yea , not only Prelacy , Popery , Malignancy , and Heresy , but Supremacy ; and every thing Originally upon , and derivate from it . And further ( folio 17. ) The Three Kingdoms are Married Lands ; so I die in the faith of it , that there will be a Resurrection of Christ's Name , Cause , and Covenant . And so likewse King , that was Executed in Scotland too , ( Id. folio 42. ) I bear my witness & Testimony to our Covenants National , and Solemn League betwixt the Three Kingdoms ; which Sacred and Solemn Oath I believe cannot be dispensed with , nor loosed by any Person , or party upon Earth ; ( And folio 43. ) I bear witness against the Ancient Christian Prelacy , etc. and against all Oaths and Bonds contrary to our Covenant , and Engagement , especially that Oath of Supremacy , etc. And so Mitchel , Weir , etc. See Ravillac Redivivus . 

They do all of them sing the same Note . 

Now take all together ; the deliberate wickedness of their first Resolve upon the Covenant ; their profane and daring Hypocrisy in the very Frame , and wording of it ; the counterfeiting of God's Authority for Sacrilege , and Rebellion in pursuance of it : and lastly , the maintaining and defending of all their impieties , to the last Gasp. A man may defy all the Story of the world , sacred and profane , to show any other Party of Men that we●e ever lost under so dreadful a dereliction . But yet there is something of a perverse Bravery in renouncing it at last , and after all their indignities put upon the G●d of Truth , in making some conscience yet of keeping Touch with the Spirit of Delusion . And now to finish the Parallel betwixt our Dissenting Papists , and his Jesuitcal : We have our Enthusiasts too , that vent their Dreams and Vapours for Oracles . But to shorten the matter ; Bayli'es Dissuasive will abundantly satisfy the Reader upon this Subject . 

He passes from hence to a reply upon a supposition , [ that such Laws may be made beforehand , as will make it impossible for a Popish King to set up Popery in England ] But that ( says he ) would be like hedging in the Cuckoo , etc. for who shall call this King to question for breaking these Laws , if he has the power and will to do it ? This Question ( folio 13. ) might serve for a piece of an Answer to a Contradiction he puts upon himself , folio 20. which we shall handle in course . 

If the Law has put it out of his power ; there is no longer any place for the supposal of a power ; unless by Foreign Force , which would presently improve a private Jealousy of Religion into the public Rupture of a National Quarrel , to the almost inevitable , and irreparable Loss of his Reputation , his Friends , and his Dominions together ▪ Now the other way , in case of his being injuriously excluded , it would be forty times more easy for Him to recover his Pretensions from abroad , by a Foreign Assistance , in concurrence with such an English Interest , as a generons Compassion to his Wrong , a Respect for his Person , and the Justice of his Title would certainly create him , than to erect an absolute Power against the Wills and Hearts of his People : and contrary to all the measures of Equity and Prudence . And to do all this too , while he might live and reign easily and comfortably to himself and his Subjects , within the limits of a Legal Administration . 

And if he can never expect to gain this point , by calling in Auxillaries from beyond the Seas : much lesle will he be able to do it , upon the bottom of his own Interest , and within himself : For there must go a great many more hands than his own to such a work . And to say that he may do it , by his Officers or Ministers , by the force of Gratifications , Pensions , or the Promises and Hopes of Preferment and Advantage : That Objection may be easily obviated : For it is a thing of clear and easy prospect : the Forming of such a Scheme of Laws for securing the Bounds of the Government , as no man that has either a Neck , or a Fortune to lose , will dare to violate . 

But the bare Power , if he had it , would signify nothing neither : unless the Will as he says goes along with it . Now if he may WILL he may NILL too : So that he is left at Liberty to make his Election either of the One , or of the Other , which has , in a great measure , discharged him of the pretended Impulse of Religion , and translated the Exception from the Papist to the Person : Founding the apprehension upon a pretended Foresight of Tyranny and double Dealing , in That Prince's Character ? which being a thing that is only to be seen with His Spectacles , and a Prognostic Peculiar to His way of Calculation , we 'll go to the next . 

I will not deny ( says he ibid. ) but a Popish King may be totally restrained from all Power of Introducing Popery , by the Force of such Laws as may be made to tie up his hands : but then they must be such as must ruin his Prerogative , and put the Executive Power of the Laws into the hands of the People . ] 

This shift does not at all either weaken , or avoid my Assertion , for the King's hands are sufficiently tied , in holding the hands of his Ministers : And This may be done ( so far as is necessary for This purpose ) without any Diminution to his Royal Dignity . If the transferring of the Executive Power to the People , that is to say Deposing of him , would do the Job , the Character will show us by and by , how That may be done , without need of New Laws , and in spite of Old ones . 

But what Monarch ( says he ) will be so unnatural to his blood : So ill a Defender , and so weak a Champion for the Royal Dignity he wears , as to sign and ratify such Laws as shall entail That Effeminancy , and that Servility on a Crown as shall render the Imperial Majesty of England but a Pageant , a mere Puppet upon a wire ? ] 

He does well to presume that a Prince will not Unking himself : but he would do better yet to keep himself clear from such Propositions and Principles as lead to that Deposing End. For whatsoever strikes at the Crown , in a Papist , falls , upon the Rebound , on the Royal Authority in a Protestant . ( But ( says he , ib. ) If no King will assent to make Laws to do it this way , and no Laws can do it tother , all Laws against Popery , in case of a Popish Successor , are as I told you before , but building the Hedge , etc ] 

This Author seems to scrupulize more than needs upon the fear 〈◊〉 Cramping the Prerogative : For he himself will show us by and by how to do that without a Law , which he despairs of ever seeing done by one . If he had thought of what the King has lately parted with out of his Prerogative , for the begeting of a Plenary Trust and Confidence in his People , he would not have despaired of any Condescension from his Majesty , for the securing of his Subjects in their Properties and Religion , after so much more done for them already than that , which is here propounded , amounts to . He tells us ( folio 14. ) of the danger of the Pope's Supremacy ; and I must tell him , that within the King's Dominions , the Supremacy of the kirk is every jote as dangerous . wherefore let us look to ourselves both ways ; as well against those Papists that did murder the Last King , as those other Papists that are in the Plot to destroy This. no doubt ( Says he ) but the Fire that burns the Heretic Lawmakers , shall give their Laws the same Martyrdom . ] If they have power , 't is probable enough that they will : But there 's a great difference in the case , betwixt a Prince and his own Subjects , and the Pope , and Stranger Hetiques : The one destroys his Enemies , the other , his Friends : The Pope is in One Bark , the Heaetiques in ●onother , and the one may Sink , and the other Swim ; now the King being in the same bottom with his People , if he runs the Vessel upon a Rock , they are all cast away together . 

Ch●r . With this certain prospect , both of the ruin of their Estates , Lives and Liberties , where lies the Sin in the Commons of England , to stand upon their Guard against a Popish Successor ? Ay , a God's name let them stand upon their Guards , and use all expedients to keep out Popery and Tyranny ; provided still that we preserve the sacred Succession in its right line , for that we are told , both King and People a●e obliged in conscience to defe●d and uphold . 

This clause has both more and lesle in it , than a body would imagine ; and a man hardly knows either how to meddle with it , or how to let it alone . He begins with the assumption of a thing certainly proved ; though without any colour , that I can find , of making it out to be so much as probable ; and barely possible , is the mos● that I can make on 't . Nay , and it is not that neither , without imputing more of Rancour and Implacable Virulency of Nature to his Popish Successor , than ever any Man yet discovered , either before , ●r beside the Author of this Character . But however , upon that substratum , he takes up the Quarrel ( as he would have it understood ) of the Commons of England . Where lies the sin ( says he ) in the Commons of England , to stand upon their Guard against a Popish Successor ] This is only a Gin set for a Woodcock , under the Equivoque of the Commons of England ; so that if a Man speaks only to the Multitude , and he applies it to the Representative , there may be matter picked out of it for an Enformation ; Why , who says there 's any sin in 't ? And then there 's Guard and Guard. People are said one way to be upon their Guard with their Swords in their hands ; and another way , with their eyes in their heads . But I presume he speaks to the multitude ; and he speaks too in the Style of Authority . Let them stand upon their Guard ( says he ) as if he were giving Orders . He might as well have said , Let them stand to their Arms : and his expression ( of all expedients ) expounds it so , even allowing him to be his own Interpreter ; for the business is to keep out Popery and Tyranny . And he makes it one expedient , ( folio 2. ) and an essential one too , to act the Offensive part as well as the Defensive ; Provided still ( says he ) that we preserve the Sacred Succession in its right Line ; for that we are TOLD , both King and People are obliged in Conscience to defend and uphold . ] 

That same little word TOLD , is a most Emphatical Mockery : and then , provided that the Succession be secured , all other expedients are pronounced lawful . Methinks he might have thought of a Proviso too for the securing of the King's Honour , Dignity , Person , Government , and the Peace of his Dominions : which are , at the rate of his latitude of allowance , all of them equally concerned in the danger with the Succession . 

He proceeds now to debate the matter of Conscience : And if we find him as Tender as he is Zealous ; as good a Christian on the Subjects side , as on the Patriots ; as careful to uphold the Sacred Character of Majesty , as to prevent the Excesses of Tyranny ; and finally , as clear a Casuist , as he is a powerful Orator , there will be no contesting any further with him . 

Char.  First then ( saith he ) let us fancy we see this Popish Heir on his Throne , and by all the most illegal and Arbitrary Means contrary to the whole Frame and Hinges of the English Government , introducing Popery with that Zeal and Vigour till his in●atuated● Conscience has perverted the King into a Tyrant . 



What a fancy of a fancy is here ! that for want of fact and argument is fain to have recourse to Imaginations and Dreams . And to what end is all this , but by disgusting of the People at the ways of Providence , set them a hankering after State-wizzards again , and Strange-gods , for the knowledge of things to come ? wherefore let me once again inculcate that of 27 Jer. Harken not ye to your Prophets , nor to your Diviners , nor to your Dreamers , ( which is the same with phansiers' ) nor to your Enchanters , nor to your Sorcerers , which speak to you saying , you shall not serve the King of Babylon . Fo● they Prophesy a Lie unto you ; to remove you far from your land Let us , for the Honour of our kind , either live and act and reason like Men , or else down upon all four , and away into the Woods and Rocks , and hunt and growled and tear one another to pieces like Beasts . But we 'll discourse the matter a little . 

Well! The English are certainly the Freest and the Happiest People upon the Face of the Earth . Aye ; but we shall be all Slaves ever 't be long . when 's that ? When the Popish Heir comes to the Crown . Aye ; but when 's that again ? When the King is dead . Well , but when is the King to Die ? Nay , I cannot tell that . How long has the Popish Heir to live ? I cannot tell that neither . Will the Queen have any Children ? Nor that neither . How long will the Queen live ? How should I know that ? Will the King survive her or not ? I cannot tell . Will he Mary again if he does ? I cannot tell that neither . Will he have any Children if he Marrys again ? Who knows ? But what if the Heir should not live to come to the Crown ? but it may be he may though . And it may be he may not . Aye , but I FANCY that he william  

Well! But suppose he should come to the Crown . What then ? Why then he will set up Popery and Tyranny . Not whether he can or no. Why , how did Queen Mary ? She had the odds on her side ; for the Papists were then , in a manner , as the protestants are now . And yet , coming in betwixt two protestants , Popery , ye see , went off as it came on . But still there was a Persecution . 't is true , there was ; but all Princes are not alike . Q. Marry Persecuted the protestants ; Henry the Fourth of France did not so . And it is as good an inference from the instance of Henry IU. that the Popish Heir will not be a Persecutor , as from that of Queen Mary that he william But where the Pope's Authority intervenes , both King and People are bound to obey . And yet you see that for all the Power of the Pope , and the Covenant of the Holy League to boot , the People of France , though Roman Catholics , would not submit to the Dis-possessing of a Protestant Successor ; neither did that generous Prince , upon the Reconciling of himself afterwards to the Church of Rome , exercise any one act of Tyranny over his Protestant Subjects ; which is enough said upon this point . Well , but I FANCY it will be Popery and Tyranny yet , for all this . 

Well! but to go a little further with you , now suppose it should come to a down right Persecution ? Ay , but we must stand upon our Guards to prevent it . That would be more than ever the Primitive Christians did under the Ten Persecutions : And we have not only their Example , but their Express Doctrine against it . And we are never the better protestants for being the worse Christians : So that here 's only Fancy set up in opposition to Religion , Reason and Experience . And that 's enough in all Conscience too : For there needs no more than the Flames of a distempered Spleen to cause an Earthquake in the Government : What are Fears but Fancies ? What are Jealousies but Fancies ? What Original had they ? Fancies again . And what was the Consequence of them ? Sum up the Sins and the Calamities of the worst of People , and of Times ; Those Crimes and Those Miseries , were the effect of Those Fancies . They were Hag-ridden and Night-mared with Goblins and Apparitions ; and haunted in their Beds with the Images of those Visions and illusions which they had taken down from the Press and Pulpit waking . The brave Strafford was a Sacrifice to the Fancy of Arbitrary Power , and the Venerable Laud ; a Victim to the Fancy of Popery . They Phansyed Antichrist in the Hierarchy ; the Rags of the Whore of Babylon in a Surplice ; Popery in the Common-prayer ; the Sacrament of Baptism they phansyed little better than an Exorcism ; the Lords Prayer well enough for a Christian Primer , a Schoolboy Form that might do so so , till People came to be better gifted . When they had Phansyed the Heads of these great men off their Shoulders ; the Bishops out of the House of Peers ; they went on Phansying still ; They Phansyed Episcopacy out of the Nation , and their Scotish Presbytery into it ; the Clergy out of their Living ▪ the King himself and his Loyal Subjects out of their Lives , Liberties and Estates ; the Crowns , Churches , and the People's Monies into their own pocket's ; the House of Peers into a Cypher or Nullity ; the House of Commons into a Secret Committee ; the Monarchy into a Republic ; the Laws into Votes and Ordinances ; their Commit into a Rump-assembly ; That Rump into a Protector , and that Protector again into a Committee of Safety . And all this was done by the Power of Imagination , and a strong fancy of Tyranny and Popery . And why may not all this he phansyed over again ? But pray let me Fancy a little on the other side . 

Let us Fancy his Majesty to Survive his Brother ; Let us Fancy an Heir Apparent either by her Majesty in being , or by the providence of a Second Marriage ; or the Successor to be a person of Honour , Conscience or Prudence , whatever his Religion be : And that in Honour and Conscience he will govern himself by the Ties of his Word and his Duty ; and that in Prudence he will not venture upon a Project so impracticable as an attempt of Subverting the Religion and Government , when every man's Neck shall lie at stake , that shall but dare to assist him in 't ; which might be sufficiently provided for by some previous Act that ( saving the King's Prerogative in the Case ) might secure their not being pardoned in That particular . We shall now Counterpoise Dangers to Dangers . 

Here is a present opposed to a future ; a Certainty to a Possibility ; a Greater to a Lesle ; and a Protestant King to a Papist . 

The Present danger is the probable Effect of these Intoxicating Methods to the People . If Fancy was Poison to the Multitude , under the late King ; the same Fancy in a larger Doses , and with lesle Corrective to it , will be at least as strong a Poison to the People under This. If the Fact on the one side be true ; the Reason , on the other side is not to be denied . The dismal Calamities that ensued upon it I have ●et forth already . 

Now what is there in the future , to weight against the Life of the King , the Safety of the Church , the Law and the Government , the Peace of the Kingdom ? There may possibly be a Popish King ; and there may probably not . And that King may Possibly have a Will to change the Government ; but probably not ; in respect of the very Immorality of Inclining to such a Violation of his Trust and Word : But all most certainly not , in regard of so manifest an Inability to bring it to pass . 

When I say a Certainty , I mean only a Natural Train of Events in the Application of Actives to Passives ; which , in a high degree has taken place already : For the People are almost Raving mad at the apprehensions of these Stories ; the Fever increases upon them ; and they grow every day Hotter and Lighter-headed than other . So that we are in Forty times a greater danger of a Sedition at hand , than of a Popish Successor at a Distance . As to the Balance of a greater danger , and a Lesle , we 'll even take the matter as they suppose it . A King upon the Throne , that 's Principled for Arbitrary Government and Popery ; But so clogged and shackled with Popular and Protestant Laws , that if he had never so great a mind to 't , there is not a Subject in his Dominions that would dare to serve him in his Design . But , on the other hand , there 's no King at all , no Church , no Law , no Government , no Magna Charta , no Petition of Right , no Property , no Liberty , etc. PROBATUM . Beside that the Fancy comes to no more in Effect , than if the sky fall we shall catch Larks . 

But once again yet . here 's a Protestant Prince exposed for fear of a Popish one . Is the Chimaera of a future danger of more value to us then the Conscience of an incumbant and indispensable Duty ? shall we take pet at God Almighty's providence ; and not go to Heaven at all , unless we may go our own way . Shall we Levelly a shot at the Duke , at a distance ; if there be no coming at him but through the Heart of our Sovereign ? shall we actually break in upon the Protestant profession , which stands or falls with the Church of England , because the Author of the Character fancies the hazard of a Popish Religion in the Moon ; and by the unavoidable Consequence of a Misgovernment under this apprehension , draws the very plague upon us that we pretend to fear : While we thus go on , exposing both our Temporal and Eternal peace for shadows , . 

The Writer of the Character had most Rhetorically amplified , in his Calculations upon his Popish Successor ; but so Oversized the figure that when ever the people come to their wits again , they will look upon the story of Garagantua , as not much the lesle Credible of the Two : For his dangers are all out of Ken ; his Thunder●s in the Clouds ; and the Multitude are all turned Stargazers , and gaping after illboding Conjunctions , and malevolent influences , while with him in the Fable , They are tumbling into a Precipice as deep as Hell , and take no notice of it . Here is a danger suggested ; and such a means intimated for the prevention of it , as makes the Remedy worse than the Disease ; for the very Expedient undermines the Government . But first , a word of the dangers on the other side . 

There are several ways started for the disappointing of this inconvenience One by Attainder , upon 23.  & 13. of Eliz. Another , by a Bill in Parliament for diverting the Succession . And some of the Libelers fall down right upon a Third Proposal of the people's preventing the Succession , though without or against Law. And Fourthly , either to expel the Successor , or to keep him out , in case of Survivorship . 

To the first , of these ways I shall speak , when the point comes on . As to the second , which is matter of Parliamentary Cognizance , I reckon it my duty to acquiesce in the Legal Issue of their Debates ; as an Authority to which I have ever paid a Duty , and a Veneration . This only I shall take the freedom to say , that there is a vast difference betwixt their Deliberations that purely regard the prospect and interest of both Church and State , in what concerns the Popish and Protestant Religion ; and the passionate excursions of private men on the wrong side of the Parliament Door● , that thrust themselves into the Controversy rather out of envy to the Person and fame of the Successor , than to promote the more important cause of Religion ; ( like men that crowed into a Church for company to pick a pocket ) and this to , without any respect to the King himself , in the person of his Brother ; or to the measures of duty to the Government . Now as to the two last ways of proposal , which are eiher for prevention or exclusion ; I have this to say ; 

If there be danger from a popish Successor , during his expectance , within the Kingdom ; the danger is infinitely greater , if he be driven out of it . For , first , ( as supposing it to be the people's Act ) There must be an illegal and popular violence to accomplish it ; and there 's the peace of the Government broken already . Beside , that the Authors of that Violence can never be secure , but by following it with more and greater . And this comes presently to be a natural transition from a murmur against the Successor , to a Tumult in the State : In which Case , the King has only this Choice before him , either to part with every thing for the ask , or to stand the shock or a Rebellion . Now take it either way ; here 's much a greater mischief incurred , than that we feared ; beside , a Sanding-army , Taxes , and Oaths that follow in course ; and a new Set of Liberty-keepers , and Major-generals to preserve the peace . I speak this in the contemplation of a violence without a lawful Authority to back it ; which is the thing that some people have in prospect . 

This is the Scene of things at home and abroad , we shall undoubtedly see the Successors Interest and Reputation , increasing daily , in regard of his Sufferings , his Title , and his Religion : having Scotland to friend , over and above : and probably , ( as it is at present ) the place of his Residence . But these are , as yet , all dormant Interests , and not to be employed , till either his duty to his Majesty , or Justice to his own pretensions shall require their Aid . 

Take it the other way now : In the case of a Popish King , who is either kept out ( as I said before ) or driven out from the exercise of his right , by the tumultuary licence of the Rabble ; an Oath of Abjuration in case of any fair opportunity for him to assert his Claim with his Sword in his hand , will be so far from engaging any man against him , that yielded contrary to his conscience to swallow it for the saving of his stake , that he will find no firmer Friends to his Cause and Interest , than those men that are stimulated both by Honour and Revenge to the execution of their Duties . For there is no hatred so fell and deadly , as that which has for the object of it the Authors or Contrivers of our damnation ; and the hazard is so much the greater , in regard of the difficulty to discover either the persons or the strength of their Enemies . And whether that King makes any attempt or no , the Nation must be at the charge , at least of a defensive war , and of Impositions to maintain it . And this will be the inconvenience even in the bare prospect of the state of the Nation without a blow striking . But from Scotland at least , if not from Ireland too , they must expect to be plied with continual Alarms , till the insupportable expense of guarding the Borders and the Coasts ; shall make them as sick of their new Patriots as ever they were of their old ones ; and force them at last ( or perhaps sooner than they are aware ) to render themselves and their Spoil to their irresistible conjunction of so many Powers , as will be then Confederate to their destruction . 

And then comes in the Popery in earnest , that was dreaded but in fancy before . When this new King shall by the proper act and forfeiture of a seduced and unforeseeing people , be delivered from the Fetters of both Honour and Laws ; who brings in Popery then , but they that discharged him from those sacred Bonds by the solly and contumacy of their own inconsiderate Undertake ? Compare now the dangers of a Popish King bounded by Protestant Laws , and ruling over a Protestant People , where he may be as happy as an Imperial Crown , and the Affections of his Subjects , can make him . Compare ( I say ) a Popish King under these gracious and obliging Circumstances , in the quiet administration of his Government , with a Prince that is forced to make his way with his Sword for the recovery of his own , and is not only pricked on by the impulses of justice and vengeance , but animated by the Pope himself , and provoked by indignation to take the utmost advantage of that foolish forfeiture , ( the people themselves having cancelled the Bonds of Authority and Obedience . ) Let any man compare these two cases , and then speak his opinion . 

There is one p●int yet behind , that goes further ( I think ) than any of the rest . If it be reasonable to believe ( as we are often told , and no Mortal can deny it ) that our Religion is an Eye sore to the Church of Rome , and that this Island would make a considerable addition to our victorious Neighbours late Conquests ; what way in the world could be propounded more to the advantage , both of the Crown of France and the Court of Rome , than the bringing of matters to the issue here in question , when in the powerful and liberal Assistances to this supposed King for the regaining of his own , the one and the other are but doing of their own business ? This Prince in the mean while being led to the one by inclination , and overborne upon the other by Necessity . 

here 's enough said to lay open the miserable effects of popular motions in matters of this high importance ; and so I shall pass forward , submitting what I have said upon this occasion to the judgement and determination of my Superiors . The remainder of the last Paragraph above cited is fully answered already , bate only the Clause that I am now about to proceed upon . 

Char. Whilst we are thus enslaved ( says he ) by a medley Government , betwixt Tyranny and Usurpation , by establishing a Papist on a Throne , we are so far from preserving the Crown , that is , the Imperial Dignity in a right Line of Succession , that we do not preserve it at all ; but on the contrary , extirpate and destroy it , whilst by Enthroning a Papist , we totally Subvert and Depose the very Monarchy itself . And can it be the Duty of either Englishmen or Christians , to have that Zeal for a Corrupted , Leprous Branch of Royalty , that we must ruin both Religion , Government and Majesty itself to support him ? 



It is a strange way this of showing a Man's Honour for his Prince , by blasting the very Blood of his Brother ; or of expressing his love to Monarchy , by treating Majesty , though but in reversion , at so course a rate . But it is upon a Principle that may be supported by Imperiousness and Heat ; in regard that it will not bear the Test of a modest Debate ; and a corrupted , Leprous Branch of Royalty is the dint of the Argument . But what does he mean to confound Civil Power and Religion thus , and impose upon the World a Paradox , that for want of rightly dividing , endangers both ? 

Government is matter of Public and External Order ; and a Divine Provision for the Peace , Comfort and Security of Mankind : wherein all the several parts are bound up in one Community , to attend the Interest and Conservation of the whole . Whereas Religion is the business of every individual apart , and only so far cognizable in a State , as it affects the Civil Power . What can be more gross than to talk of fight for Religion ? or to pretend to the maintaining of that by Arms , that is not liable to Violence ? Did ever any Man hear of a Religion that was either shot or cut ? Nor can there be any Confederacy or Association purely upon the score of Religion , for how shall People agree to defend they know not what ? which is the very case when one Man undertakes for the Religion of another . If our Religion be assaulted by Argument , we may assert it by Redargution : But when the Opposition advances into any over act , the case is no longer Religion , but Political Safety . Beside that Government is God's Ordinance for the common benefit of Human Society , and of Pagans' , as well as of Christians , without any regard to this or that Religion : for Bedies Politic have no Consciences ; but every particular indeed , stands or falls to his own Master . 

I cannot but observe through what degrees the Character has advanced the Popish Successor . First , From the possibility of a good Man , and then from bad to worse ; till he has made him ( folio 14. ) a Corrupted , Leprous Branch of Royalty ; and , at next word , a downright Traitor , upon the Statutes of 23 and 13 of Queen Eliz. and another of Hen. 8.  ( Fol. 15. ) 

This matter being , ( as I am informed ) at present coram Judice , I shall say no more to it than this , that there are two Prouisoes in the 5th of the Queen , that make the Case somewhat different from what he has stated it : As for Instance : 

Provided always , that forasmuch as the Queen's Majesty is otherwise sufficiently assured of the Faith and Loyalty of the Temporal Lords of Her High Court of Parliament ; Therefore this Act , nor any thing therein contained , shall not extend to compel any Temporal Person , of or above the degree of a Baron of this Realm , to take or pronounce the Oath abovesaid , ( viz. of Supremacy ) nor to incur any Penalty , limited by this Act for not taking or refusing the same , etc.  

II Provided also , that if any Peer of this Realm shall hereafter offend contrary to this Act , or any Branch or Article thereof , that , in that and all such Case and Cases , they shall be tried by their Péers , in such manner and form as in other Cases of Treasons they have used to be Tried , and by no other means . 

It would be well if every Man that presses , with this un-precedented rigour , upon the Person here in question , would lay his hand upon his heart , and say , if the King has pardoned me Te● Thousand times more than this comes to , with what Reason or Conscience can I importune His Majesty thus bitterly against His Brother ? 

After all these Clamours about a Popish Successor , I would fain know how it is possible for any Man to be other than a Papist , in our present condition of Affairs . A Churchof England-man is a Papist to the Dissenters ; a Presbyterian and an Independent so one to another ; a Quaker to both ; and among the Eight Score several Sects of Heretics and Schismatics that Paget and others , have reckoned up since Liberty of Conscience came in Fashion ; there are just so many sorts of Papists among them , in the Opinion of one Sect or another . 

He has a Paragraph ( folio 15. ) where , under the People of England , he expounds himself to mean their Representatives ; which is a point I am not to touch upon : Only , I must confess , he has drawn the Arrow to the Head , in one expression in it . Why should not they ( saith he ) the House of Commons ) be as active and vigorous for their own Royal Inheritance , and Sacred Succession of Power , as a King for His.  

What he means by this Royal inheritance , and Sacred Succession of Power , I shall remit to the Consideration of the Learned . ( Bradshaw indeed passed a Sentence upon the Late King , as a Traitor to the ROYALTY of the People . ) But the strongest Argument for himself that I find in the whole Book , is five or six Lines lower . If ever a Papist mounts this Throne ( says he ) than all their Murmurs , their Petitions , Protesting and Associating-votes will be remembered to the purpose . 

Now what can be a greater indignity to the Justice and Resolution of that Illustrious Body , than to imagine that so narrow a thought could any way influence the Candour and Solemnity of their Debates ? 

He spends his sixteenth Page upon Instances out of Hen. VIII . to prove the Succession of the English Crown to be wholly subjected to the Disposal , Determinations and Limitations of Parliament . How far his Assertion is right or wrong , I shall not concern myself . But however , as he has ordered the matter , it makes nothing at all for his purpose . 

The Parliament ( he says ) 25 Hen. 8. ) settled the Crown upon the Heirs of that King's body by Queen Ann ; and in the 28th . Repealed that Act , and Entailed the Succession upon the Heirs of his body by Queen Jane ; Mary and Elizabeth being declared Illegitimate . And in Case he Died without Issue , than the Parliament empowered him by the same Act , to dispose of the Succession by his own Letters Patents , or his Last William In the 35th Year of his Reign the Parliament granted the Succession to Edward ; and for want of Heirs of his Body , to the Lady Mary , and the Heirs of her body ; and for want of such Heirs , to the Lady Elizabeth , under certain Limitations and Conditions contained in that Act.  



From hence he infers , that a Parliament may order and dispose of the Succession . But whether they may , or not ; here 's little or nothing proved from these Citations . First , under the ambiguity of the Word Parliament , he would have this thought to be the single Act of the Lords and Commons , when the Enacting Authority of it was solely in the King. And yet he says expressly that Henry 8. was so far from submitting to Parliaments , that he would never have complemented them with a power that was not their due . If that power did belong to the Parliament , what needed they the King's authority for the making of it good ; or to divest themselves of that power , by transferring it to the King , to dispose of the Reversion , or Remainder of the Crown , by his Will , or Letters , Patents , to such person as he pleased ? 

Secondly , These Statutes do not so properly transfer a Right as declare and notify the persons ; for the prevention of disputes , and competitions ; as appears by the Preamble to that of the 28th . 

wherefore , We your most humble and obedient Subjects , in this present Parliament Assembled , calling to Our Remembrance the great Divisions which in Times past have been in this Realm ; by reason of several Titles pretended to the Imperial Crown of this Realm , which some times , and for the most part ensued , by occasion of ambiguity and doubts , than not so perfectly declared , but that men might upon froward intents expound them to every man's sinister appetite and affection , and posterity of the Lawful kings and Emperors of this Realm ; whereof hath ensued great effusion and destruction of Man's Blood , as well of a great number of the Nobles , as of other the Subjects , and especially Inheritors in the same . And the greatest occasion thereof hath been , because no perfect and substantial provision by Law hath been made within this Realm of itself ; when doubts and questions have been moved and proponed of the certainty and legallty of the Succession , and Posterity of the Crown , etc.  



Now , so far is the intent of this Act from diverting the Succession , that the express end of it was the setting of it right , by the avoidance of a former Settlement upon the nullity of the Marriage . And afterwards , 26th of the same King , cap. 2. the Act here before mentioned is called , The Act for the Establishment of the Succession of the Heirs of the King's Highness in the Imperial Crown of this Realm . Now there 's a great deal of difference betwixt translating the Succession from the wrong to the right , and the diverting of it from the right to the wrong . 

Thirdly , this change and disposition of Settlement , though it passed all the formalities of Bill and Debate , yet the first spring of it was from the certain knowledge of the King's pleasure to have it so , without which they durst never have ventured upon such a Proposition . 

Fourthly , Matter of Fact in this case is no proof of Right , and especially a Fact accompanied with so many circumstances of Cross-capers and Contradictions , as the pronouncing of the same persons to be both illegitimate and legitimate , etc.  And a man cannot imagine , without a scandal to that grave and wise Assembly , that the levity of those Counsels , and that humour of Swearing and Counterswearing , could be any other than the caprice of their new Head and Governor . 

Fifthly , with reverence to the Utility and Constitution of good and wholesome Laws , it is not presently to cite a Statute and say , there 's a Precedent ; for those Laws that are repugnant to the light of Nature and common Right , are Nullities in themselves . 

Lastly , he brings instances here to prove , that a Parliament may divert the Succession ; but he shows withal , that there can be no security even in that exclusion , in showing that what one Parliament does , another may undo . So that we are now upon equal terms of security or hazard , either in the exclusion of the Successor , or in the restraining of him . For if he be tied up by one Parliament , another may set him at liberty ; and if he be excluded by one Parliament , another may take him in again . But he that shape's his own Premises , may cut out what Conclusions he pleases . 

Char.  If then ( says he , which no man in his right wits can deny ) our Religion , Lives . and Liberties , are only held by a Protestant Tenure ; and the Majesty of Englfnd not only by the force of his Coronation Oath , but by all the Ties whatever , aught to be the Pillars and Bulwark of the Protestant Faith ; and at the same time granting , that we have a Popish Prince to inherit the Imperial Crown of England ; he ought certainly in all justice as little to ascend this Throne , as Nabuchadnezzar ought to have kept his , when the immediate Blast of Heaven had made him so uncapable of Ruling as a King , that he was only a Companion fit for Brutes and Savages . folio 17.  



It is true , that we hold the exercise of our Religion by a Protestant Tenure , with a respect to a political union : but every man holds the Religion itself that he ventures his Soul upon ; not on the Tenure of Laws and Constitutions Human , but on the Tenure of the divine will and pleasure : Providence having dealt so graciously with Mankind , that , albeit in our Bodies and Estates , which are only corruptible , and temporary , we lie exposed to Torments , Persecutions , Violence , and the Iniquities of Times and Seasons ; Our Nobler Part is yet exempt from the Outrages , either of Men or Beasts ; and our faith , hope and charity , treasured up , where neither Rust nor Moth doth corrupt , and where Thiefs do not break through and steal . 

As for our Lives and Liberties ; we hold them by the Common Tenure of Government ; the Common Right of men bound up in a Civil Society ; and under the Protection of such and such Laws and Provisions , for the Common Benefit and Security of the Whole , and Every part : And all this , clearly abstracted from this or that Religion . In the cases of Treasons , Felonies , Riots , false Oaths , Forgeries , Scandals , and other Misdemeanours , that endanger the Public peace ; I do not find that the Law puts any Difference betwixt Criminals , because they are of several Religions ; The Protestant Tenure of the King's Judges signified no more in the eye of the Law , than if they had been Powder-plot Jesuits . 

But to come now to his Protestant Tenure ; and to close with him upon it too . ( But as a Supposal not to be supposed . ) If he means by this Protestant Tenure , the Protestant Religion of the Church of England as Established by Law ; and that it is by this Tenure , that we hold our Religion , Lives and Libertiers ; it will concern us to support this Tenure ; but in such manner yet , as the Law directs : For to set up a Tenure without a Law , or to assert a Tenure against a Law , will not be for the credit of our Author's Pretensions . If he means the Dissenting Protestant Tenure ; He removes the Very Basis of all our Laws and sets up the Title of the Multitude against that of the Government . 

And further ; this Protestant Tenure of his , cannot be understood barely of the Doctrine of the Church of England ; ( as in Our Nine and Thirty Articles ) for first , there are several points of them that are opposed and rejected by the Men that value themselves upon this Character ; And Secondly , Our Laws fall not shorter in any thing perhaps , of so great Importance , than in the point of Competent Provisions for the Suppressing and Punishing of Heretical , and Blasphemous Doctrines . So that this Protestant Tenure must of Necessity have a Regard to the Uniformity of worship , according to the Forms , Rights , and Ceremonies by the Law in that case provided : And in this sense I must confess that our Lives , Liberties , and the Religion of the Government ( though not directly , yet in a most Rational Consecution of dangerous Probabilities ) lie all at stake . wherefore again and again I say ▪ let us join with our Author in the maintaining of this Protestant Tenure . For though the intent of it be only to intimate a Jealousy of Popery to the multitude ; we shall yet find it , upon Examination , to have a Loyal Aspect toward the Government . 

Here is an Uniformity prescribed ; which is neither a New thing to us , nor an Unnecessary . Not a New one ; for it has descended to us from the time of Edward the Sixth ; and it was the only Expedient that Queen Elizabeth could find out , for the safety of her Person , and Dominions : That Excellent Queen Elizabeth , ( as our Author says , folio 17 ) Under whose long and gracious Reign , England was so highly blessed . Nay , and so sacred is the Providence of Order , that Notwithstanding all the fulminations of the Pope , and the Numbers , as well as the dangerous Practices , of the Papists , on the one hand ; and the Impetuous Clamours and Importunities of dissenting protestants on the other , Charging both herself and her Ministers with Popish practices and designs . This steady Queen did yet ( I say ) preserve her Princely dignity , and the Reputation of her People , both at home and abroad ▪ and at the same time , maintain her ground against two potent Factions ; by standing firm to the Rules , and Methods of her Ecclesiastical Discipline , And it is Remarkable , that the state has still been more or lesle at ease in measure , as That Discipline has been either upheld , or Relaxed . 

In Forty and Forty one this fence was thrown down ; and I need not say , after the overturning of that Bank , what Monsters were bred out of the Mud , upon that Innuundation . In the 14th . of his Majesty's Reign , and after his blessed Restauration , This Uniformity was reinforced ; and in the 16th . followed an Act for suppressing Seditious Conventicles . And now you shall see how much it behoves us to stand by our Protestant Tenure , and how far our Religion , Lives , and Liberties are concerned in so doing . 

The Reform , or Protestant Religion , both in Doctrine and Discipline , as it is settled by Law ; is the Protestant Tenure here in question : And what Party soever enterprises upon the worship here Established , usui●ps upon this Protestant Tenure . It has been the wisdom of the Government , from time to time to require an Uniformity , in the manner and circumstances of our Worship ; and upon what motives and apprehensions they were induced to observe those measures , will best appear from the Acts themselves . 

To begin with the Act of 1 Ed. 6. it was intended for the gaining of an Vniform , godly and quiet Order . 35.  Eliz. There was a Provision made for the preventing and avoiding such great inconveniences and perils as might happen , and grow by the wicked and dangerous practices of Seditious Sectaries , and Disloyal persons , etc.  Where it was made penal so much as to be present at a Conventicle . In the same year of the Queen , there was an Act against wicked and seditious persons , who termed themselves Catholics , and being indeed Spies and Intelligencers , not only for her Majesty's foreign Enemies , but also for Rebellious and Traitorous Subjects born within her Highness' Realms and Dominions ; and hiding their most detestable , and devilish purposes , under a fair pretext of Liberty of Conscience , do secretly wander and shifted from place to place within this Realm , to corrupt and s●ouce her Sajesties' Subjects , and to stir them to Sedition and Rebellion , etc.  3 Jac. An Act for discovering and repressing Popish Recusants , 14 Car. 2.  The intent of this Act was the settling the Peace of the Church and allaying the present distempers which the indisposition of time had contracted . Many People in the late Troubles having been led into Factions and Schisms , to the great decay and scandal of the Reform Religion of the Church of England , and to the hazard of many Souls . And lastly , 16 Car. 2.  An Act for suppressing Conventicles , providing for further and more speedy Remedies against the growing and dangerous Practices of seditious Sectaries , and other disloyal persons , who under pretence of tender Consciences , do at their Meeting contrive Insurrections , as late Experience hath showed , & c  

From these Citations we may collect both the intent and the necessity of an Vniform Worship , and upon what Considerations these Acts were made ; and it appears undeniably from those Outrages that followed upon the People's breaking loose from this restraint , that the Lawmakers were not deceived in their foresight . Nor could any other be expected , but a liberty of practice after a licence of profession , and that after a dissolution of the Law there should be no longer any regard had to Religion or Manners . 

But what do we talk of Religion in a Tune ? The sounds of things and empty words , when they come once to be followed with flagitious actions and execrable effects ? Was the Venom of the Covenant ever the lesle Diabolical for the holy Style of it ? Will [ Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Subjects ] atone for the robbing and the murdering of their Sovereign ? Christ and his Truths is every jot as good a Claim as a Protestant Tenure . And yet I 'll show you here the Contumacy of Lucifer himself under that Mask , and the very Soul of their Hands-up-lifting Covenant ; which though under the name of Cargils' Covenant , is the Old Covenant still , only a little rank with keeping . 

The last Speech and Testimony of WILLIAM GOGOR , one of the three desperate and incorrigible Traitors executed at the Grass Market in Edinburgh , March 11. 1681 , for disowning His Sacred Majesty's Authority , and owning and adhering to these bloody and murdering Principles , contained in that execrable Declaration at Sanquhat , Cargils' Traitorous Covenant , and Sacrilegious Excommunicating of the KING , by that Arch Traitor Cargil , and avowing of themselves to be bound in Conscience , and by their Covenant , to murder the KING , and all that serve under him ; being Armed ( the time they were apprehended ) for that purpose . 

Men and brethren , 

These are to show you , that I am come here this day to lay down my Life for owning Christ and his Truths ; and in so much as we are caluminiated and reproached by lying upon our Names , and dreadful upbraiding of us , with saying , That we are not led by the Scriptures ; and say , We have taken other Rules to walk by : I take the Great God to be witness against all and every one of them , that I take the Word of God to be my Rule , and I never designed any thing but honesty and faithfulness to Christ ; and for owning of Christ and the Scriptures this day I am murdered , for adhering to the born-down Truths I am condemned to die ; and I also leave my Testimony , and bear witness against all the Apostate Ministers this day , that have taken favour at the Enemy's hands , The only thing they take away my Life for is , because I disowned all those bloody Traitors not to be Magistrates , which the Word of God casts off , and we are bound in Conscience and Covenant to God , to disown all such as are Enemies to God , and which they are avowed and open Enemies to Christ ; And they have made void my word , saith the Lord Say what ye will Devils , say Wretches , say Enemies , say what ye will , we are owning the Truth of Christ and his written Word ; and condemn me in my Judgement who will , I leave my Blood on one and all that say we are not led by the Scripture ; I leave my Blood upon you again to be a Witness against you , and a Condemnation in the great day of Judgement . I have no more to say , I think this may mitigate all your rage ; and so forth . I leave his Enemies to his Curse , to be unished into everlasting wrath for now and ever . Amen . 

Sic subscribitur William Gogor . 



Methinks this Specimen of an Enthusiastic Zeal should make men wary how they deal with these guilded Pills after so damned an operation . And it is not to say , that this is the transport of a mad man ; but it is the effort of the very Principle , and the whole strain of them that has been taken off by the hand of Justice , ( not for treasonous words neither , but actual rebellions ) have so behaved themselves at the last cast , as if the whole Schism were upon a vie who should damn bravest . These stories are no Meal●tub Shams ; Death and Damnation are past woolling . 

But how comes it that we that wear Christ in our Foreheads should carry Antichrist in our Hearts ? and under the name of Christians walk so contrary both to the Doctrine , and to the Example of our suffering Saviour ? As if the mere Profession of the Gospel did not only make void the Scope and Precepts of it , but extinguish in us the very Dictates of right nature ; and then as protestants under the pretended abomination of Popery to set it up ; that is to say , upon impulse of Religion to do in any sort whatsoever a manifest wrong . Let the end be never so good , it must yet upon the score of Conscience be warranted by lawful means , and with such a regard to Prudence too , that the means we make use of toward a good end , may not be employed to a bad one . One man wishes' a Reformation in the Government , another screws himself in under the same Pretence , but to destroy it . 

It would be endless and nauseous to farce up a Pamphlet with Citations , in a case where the whole Story of the World is so full of Precedents . How came it that Hen. 8 when he was suspected to be more than half a Protestant , proceeded so quietly and without Opposition , in Declaring and Limiting the Succession ? and than that the Lady Elizabeth ( his Daughter ) being a professed Protestant and the Mayor Party of the People Papists , came to the Crown , without any considerable Objection to her Religion ? We do not find , notwithstanding the Branded Apostasy of Jeroboam , that made Israel to Sin , that his People yet laid hold of any pretence to Rebel against him . We do not read in the Story of Ethelbert King of Kent , upon his being Converted to Christianity by Angustin the Monk , that his Subjects , though Pagans' , ever took up Arms against him for 't . Nor that the Pagan Subjects of any of the Other Saxon Kings in their Heptarchy , opposed their Sovereign's , for Change of Religion ; neither was there any Persecution on the King's Side , for matter of Religion . Bonos principes ( says Tacit. Hist. Lib. 4. ) Voto expetere debemus , etc. We are to pray to God for Good Kings , but to submit to them whatever they are . Tertullian ( Apolog. 30. ) Christianus nullius est hostis , etc. The Christian ( says he ) is no Man's Enemy , much lesle the Emperors : for knowing that he Governs by God's Appointment , he cannot but Love , Reverence , Honour and Wish him well , with all that belong to him , and therefore we pay that Veneration to him that belongs to him , as being next immediately under God ; what he has is from God , and God is only his Superior , etc.  And so far were the Primitive Christians from opposing their Superiors , that they would not allow so much as a dis-respectful word to be given them . There was no turning of Princes in those days , a grazing with Nabuchadnezzar among the Beasts ; no calling of them Gangrened , and Corrupted , Leprous Branches of Royalty . But the very Apostles Canons provided against those rude indecencies that reflect not only upon his Popish Successor , but upon all the Crowned Heads of Christendom of that Persuasion . Quisquis Imperatorem , etc. ( says the Canon ) Whosoever shall speak ill of the Emperor , or of the Magistrate , let him be punshed . If a Clergyman , Deposed ; if a Layman , Excommunicated . 

But what needs this recourse to the Examples and Judgements of Antiquity for the clearing of Christianity in a case where the common Principles of Human Nature are sufficient to set us right ? 

First , There is the violation of a Gospel-precept , in doing evil that good may come of it , As certainly the divesting of a Prince of his right , in an unwarrantable way of doing it , is a very ill thing . I speak all this while to the Character of a Popish Successor ; which bushes on the People , hand over head , to the end , without that regard to the Means , which the Cause , I think , does require : But after this , when a lawful Authority intervenes , the state of the Question is quite another thing ; for it is no longer Religion , but Policy that will be the Subject then in consideration . 

Secondly , The admittance of this Position does in a Compliment to Christianity , overthrew all Religion , and puts all Christians into a state of Hostility : for there are some particulars , undoubtedly , of all Persuasions that do firmly believe themselves to be in the Right . And then consequently , every divided Party is that to the other which a Popish Successor is to the Author of the Character . And at this rate Christians are in the worst condition of all Mortals , by making it a point of Conscience to Enter worry one another . To say nothing of the Scandal they bring upon the Gospel , by erecting this Rigorous and Sanguinary Doctrine upon the Foundations of Meekness , Charity and Peace . 

And this Position does not only confound the Harmony that ought to be among the Disciples of Jesus Christ ; but superinduces an utter Subversion of the Fundamentals of Government and Obedience . For to say that a Prince of another Faith may be Deposed , or Secluded for his Religion , does not only Authorise , but provoke a Prince of another Persuasion to render the same measure to his People ; and it absolves both the One and the Other from the obligation of that mutual Correspondence which is necessary betwixt them for the conservation of the Community . 

Nor is it all , that the Maxim itself is pernicious , ( which many times is the ill hap of a fair intention ; ) but there is so gross a Partiality in the Conduct of this Character , that a Man must have a great deal more Charity than appears in the Author of it , to allow it so much as the possibility of a good meaning . 

here 's a Clamour advanced in the Name of the English protestants , against a Popish Successor . But upon what ground ? Because it is a Persecuting Religion . Well! and what Religion is it in a Successor that would please them ? The Protestant Religion . But the Religion of the Church protestants will not please the DISSENTING protestants ; and then , 't is impossible for the Dissenting protestants to please one another ; and as impossible for a Successor of any one Religion to please them all . But now which of these Protestant Religions must he be of ? for there are a matter of Two Hundred Divided Sects that list themselves under that denomination . Well! but if they be True protestants they 'll Unite against Popery . Yes , As the Fellow united his Rats , he put them all into a Tub together , and then they eat up one another . View them well , and you shall not find above three of four of them that have any consistence one with another . And which are they ? nay , that 's a Secret. But if Popery be so dreadful , because it is a Persecuting Religion ; why is not the Writer of this Character as sensible of 150 Persecuting Religions on the one side , as of One Persecuting Religion on the other ? God preserve the Church of England , I say , from both . Or if that bitter Cup be our Lot , the Lord in his Mercy grant that we may not add Sedition to Persecution . It were no Ill Emblem of the Original of our Late Troubles , to fancy a Man in a Fright , and leaping from a painted Lion upon a Wall into a Bed of Vipers . And no better are the pragmatical part of the Revolters from our Communion , while in the mean time , thousands and thousands of the Credulous and Well meaning Multitude are by them inveigled to their destruction . 

About the middle of the 17th Page , the Character-man is either laid down to take a Nap , while some other lesle skilful hand supplies his place ; or else he writes on in his Sleep . And it would have been well , if all the rest too had been no more than a Dream . There is a Finical Marchpane Spark here about the Town , that takes a huge deal of pains to get himself suspected for the Author of this Book ; he makes me think of a little Gentleman in a Yellow Coat , that would still be talking how rarely he played o' th' Organ ; and this poor Wretch phancied that he made all the Music , when it was his part only to draw the Bellowss . He has done some very pretty things , they say , upon Touzer . But for this Character , I dare venture to be his Compurgator ; at least to the middle of the 17th Page . But further I dare not undertake ; for the next two rages and a half , a Man may trace them upon the Hoof to the very Ink-pot . His Story of Paris' Mother , ( some body should have told him that it was Hecuba ) that dreamed she was delivered of a Firebrand . His Debate upon the Parallel betwixt the disinheriting a Private Popish Heir , and a Popish Successor . His Proposal of the Successors following Curtius into the Gulf ; the Third-bare Story of Damocles' Sword. And then his Argumentum à fortiori : These fragments might possibly be the Fruit of his own Minerva . But now , toward the bottom of the 19th Page we have the First Hand again . 

Char.  But to Sum up all ; ( says he ) if no reason must or shall prevail ; and that right or wrong a Papist must succeed : when all the inseparable Cruelties of Pope and Popery shall surround us ; suppose the worst that may be , that the dreadful approach of certain Slavery , so opposite to the Freeborn Genius of England , has exasperated them into a Spirit of Rebellion : What is it but the Pestilential Air of Reigning Popery , that bloats and swells them into that Contagion ? And if this Popish King Summons all his Thunder to punish them for 't , what can the greatest Favourer of Rome make more on 't , than that he warps them crooked , and then breaks them to pieces because they are not straight . 

[ Just as he serves his Popish Successor ; he draws ye the Picture of a Tyrant , and then Deposes him ] And what 's the whole Sum of a Revolting Nation under a Popish Tyrant ? but using a violent Cure to expel an Universal Poison . 

Fol. 19  

This Clause is only Buchanan , Janius . Brutus , etc. Translated into English , and for brevity sake , a fair hint toward a Rebellion , and an Apology for it , both in one . As who should say , If it must come to a Popish Successor the English Genius would never brook it , and there 's no remedy but one , that is to say , a Revolt ; which they may even thank themselves for . And then , up goes Forty One again ● the Factions dismount the Government , set up for themselves , and so go on , plucking down him still that is uppermost till they come from Reforming to Levelling ; and there is an end on 't . I would he had not been so positive upon the Free born Genius of England ; for we have been inveigled actually into a slavery under Cobblers , and Tinkers . We that with so much Indignation at present , oppose ourselves to the bare Possibility of a Royal Successor . And that have Sacrificed three Kingdoms already to those degenerate fears . 

Char. But here ( says he ) will some pretended , Pious , Objector say ; How shall we dare to Revolt ? Remember we are Christians , and we must Obey ; or at least yield a Passive Obedience to our King ; be his Religion , Principles , or Government , never so Tyrannique , He is still the Lords Anointed , and our Native Sovereign . 

I would ask ( says he ) what this Lords Anointed is . And who 't is is our Native Sovereign . When instead of being free-subjects , Pope and Tyranny shall rule Over us ; and we are made slaves , and Papists ? 



That Person is the Lords Anointed who by God's Providence , and a Legal Succession of right to the Crown , is the Supreme Magistrate ; whom , if we may cast off for Popery and Tyranny , we may depose at any time , by saying that 's the Case : For 't is but saying so , to make it so . Nay , and he goes further yet . For here 's a Prince Deposed , for fear he should be so ; without any allowance for intervening Contingences . Or any Limits to the Extent of the Prospect . So that 't is but the carrying on of our Jealousies to future times , and without any more to do , dissolve the Monarchy upon the selfsame Contemplation . It would be as pertinent a question now , what are those Free Subjects , as what is This Lords anointed ? If by this Freedom he would intimate an Exemption from the Law ; His Free-subject is a palpable contradiction ▪ For in This Case he makes the Lords Anointed the Subject ; and his Free Subject the Lords Anointed . 

Char.  We are bound indeed ( says he ) by our Oaths of Allegiance to a constant Loyalty to the King and his lawful Successors . Very Right . By that Oath we are bound to be his lawful Successors Loyal Subjects ; but why his Loyal Slaves ? Or how is an Arbitrary , Absolute Popish Tyrant any longer a Lawful Successor to a Protestant Established , and bounded Government ? When lawfuly Succeeding to this limited Monarchy , he afterwards violently , unlawfully , and Tyrannically overruns the due bounds of Power , dissolves the whole Royal Constitution of the Three Free-states of England , and the Subjects Petition of Right ? whilst wholly abandoning those Reinss of Government , which were his Lawful Birthright , and making New ones of his own Illegal Creation , he makes us neither those Freeborn Subjects we were , when we took that Oath , nor himself That King we swore to be Loyal to . 



What have we here but a Jesuitical Dispensation for the breaking of an Oath , and slipping our Necks out of the Collar of our Allegiance by a Mental Reservation ? First , We swear in this Oath ( as in all others ) to the Sense of the Authority that imposes it . And can any body imagine that the Government imposed this Test of Allegiance upon the People , to leave them still at Liberty to play fast and loose with Reserves and Qualifications of their own : And so to frustrate the main intent of the Oath , by accommodating the Exposition of it for the serving of a Turn , or a Faction ? The Oath binds them to Subjection ; and they absolve themselves of That Subjection by giving it the Name of Slavery . And so every man is left at pleasure to take off his own Shackles . But what if it were Slavery itself ? The Prince were to blame for straining his Authority , but the Subjects nevertheless Criminal , on the other side for withdrawing their Duty . 

He has found a Loophole to evade This Oath , by turning SUBJECTS into SLAVES . But That will not do his business , without turning a Lawful Successor to a Protestant Established and bounded Government into an arbitrary , absolute , Popish Tyrant . In which supposition he holds forth This Doctrine to the People ; that in This Case , there is a Forfeiture of the Government ; and that this is the very Case which we have now before us ; wherein , contrary to Law , Reason and the Fundamental Essentials of all Government , he does , as much as in him lies , authorise and incite the Multitude to a Sedition . 

I answer , that the Law is clearly against him ; for though the Prerogative is bounded , the Duty of the Subject is yet left unconditional , there being no Law , nor so much as the colour of any , incase of the Kings passing his legal Limits , to absolve the People of their Allegiance . And it is not the Plea of Provocation , or the exercise of a Tyrannical Power , that will save the Subject from the Sentence o● the Law , in case of any disloyal act of Assault or Resistance . 

It is against Reason likewise , that the Inferior shall overrule the Superior , and invert the last Resort of Decision and Judgement from the Prince to the Subject . 

It is , lastly , destructive of Government itself , to suppose such a Reserve in a Political Constitution , as carries the last Appreal to the People , which is the case in this Proposition . The King as a Trustee that abuses his power incurs a Forfeiture , ( as our Author will have it ) of that Trust ; and so all subordinate Trustees may incur the like Forfeiture , till all Communities are melted down again into the ridiculous conceit of the Original Sovereignty of the Multitude , which is only a Chaos of Anarchy and Confusion . 

He is over again here with the Royal Constitution of the three free States of England ; which must be understood either of the Lords Spiritual , Temporal , and Commons ; or of the King , Lord's , and Commons , reckoning His Majesty to be one of the three Estates . Take it the former way , and instead of Your Majesty's Loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons in Parliament , ( which was the style even of the last Rebellion itself ) the Petition should run tother way , and say , The humble Petition of Charles the second , to your Majesties the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and the Commons assembled in Parliament . Now take it as accounting the King to be one of the three Estates , that Imaginary Coordination leaves him at the mercy of the other two whensoever they please . The Learned and the Right Reverened Bishop of Lincoln , in his Discourse of Popery , pag. 4.  England ( says he ) is a Monarchy , the Crown Imperial , and our Kings Supreme Governors , and sole Supreme Governors of this Realm , and all other their Dominions , etc.  In our Oath of Supremacy we swea● , That the King is the Only Supreme Governor , Supreme , so none ( not the Pope ) above him ▪ and Only Supreme , so none Coordinate or equal to him . 

The Character brings in the Subjects Petition of Right for a further countenance to his pretention ; but what noise soever it makes in the cars of the people , there is not one syllable in it that appears in his favour . And yet once again upon the presumptions ascresaid he grounds this Assertion , That in such a case neither is he the same King that we swore to , nor we the same Subjects that took the Oath . If this be not Rome against Rome , and Popery against Popery , I know not what is . But at the worst it is but paraphrazing upon the Oath of Allegiance as they did upon the Covenant . Give me leave now to retort the Argument . His Popish Successor will be a Tyrant , ( he says ) for it is a Tyrannical Religion . But after all the stress of irreverent Language upon his R. H. he cannot charge any thing in the worldupon him , that looks that way , in his inclination . But yet here 's enough ( says he ) to conclude the Reason and the Necessity of his Seclusion . The Compiler of this Character would take it ill now , on the other side , if a man should say that his very argument against the Duke , holds as true against the Author of the Character . For that Dominion is founded in Grace , is the Principle both for which , and by which he pretends to Supplant the Successor . Now why may we not apprehend Sedition from the one , as well as Tyranny from the other ? Nay and with more Justice too ; considering that there is but a bare Contemplation the One way , and the Practice of an enflaming Discourse over and above that Contemplation , the other . 

Char.  But alas ! ( says he ) that Bugbear , Passive obedeience , is a Notion crept into the world , and most Zealously , and perhaps as ignorantly defended . Fol. 20.  



This Period brings him well nigh to his Journeys end : For , till now , he contented himself with only opposing the primitive Practices , and the Common Principles of Christianity , in justifying a Violence , upon an Impulse of Religion : But the making of Passive Obedience only a Bugbear , and the Defence of it an effect of Ignorance , brings it home to the very person of our Saviour , and to the Doctrine that was delivered by those Holy Lips.  So far ( says the Learned Prelate above mentioned , Pag. 55. ) was Saint Paul from believing those Popish Rebellious Principles , ( Denying the Superiority of the Civil power ) and from Dissoyalty or Disobedience to that Imperial ( though Pagan ) Power under which he Lived ; that he publicly acknowledged , and humbly submitted to it . Nor was he only in his own Person Obedient , and a Loyal Subject to the Emperor , but ( writing to the Romans ) he did , as an Apostle of Jesus Chr●st , command them also to be Loyal and Obedient . Let every Soul ( every man ) be Subject to the Higher ( the Supreme ) Powers , etc.  And then he adds , that they should render to them Tribute , Custom , Fear , Honour , and all their Duties . By Supreme Power there , he means men possessing Supreme power , and the Supreme power , under which He and the Romans than were , was Nero , a most Impious Pagan , and Persecutor of Christ , and Christians ; and yet every Soulq within his Empire , ( even Peter as well as Paul ) was ( by the Law of God , and the Gospel ) to be Subject to Him , to Fear , Honour , pay him Tribute , and Legally obey him . Nay the same reverend Prelate , ( Pag. 54 ) in confirmation of this Doctrine , cites the Precept of our blessed Saviour himself , as well as St. Paul Our blessed Saviour ( Says he , whose Vicar the Pope pretends to be ) does himself pay Tribute to Caesar , ( Thou a Pagan , and Idolat●r ) leaving us an Admirable , and most Pious Example of that obedience , and Loyalty due , even to Impious and Pagan Princes : N●r is this all ; for he further gives express Command , that all should render to Cesar the things which are Caesar's . He acknowledgeth the Imperial rights of C●sar , of which his Impiety and Idolatry did not deprive him . 



Our Author said but just now , that Passive Obedience was no more than a Bugbear , and a Doctrine groundless , and only slipped into the world as by the By. But he tells us now ( Fol. 20. toward the bottom ) that in case of a Vowed Allegiance to an Absolute and Arbitrary King , a Passive Obedience was due : But what 's this ( says he ) to a King of England ? With his leave I take it to be the same thing as to the People's Obedience or Submission ; though in respect of the assuming , and Exercising that Power , the Case , on the King's side , is greatly differing , for the question is not whether the King does Well or Ill in forcing his Authority beyond the due hounds , but whether the Tyranny , on the one side , will justify an undutiful behaviour , on the other ? And the Law itself will easily determine . This Controversy . If the Subject be tied up by the Law to an Allegiance unconditional , ( as aforesaid ) and without any Exception , or qualification , to discharge him of that Duty , in any Case whatsoever , the Cause is clear against him . And this is enough said to show , that under the Masque of a zeal to crush one Sort of Popery , there is a design Carried on for the introducing of another . See now what he says of Monarchy . 

Monarchy ( says he folio 21. ) can be acquired but by two ways . First , By the Choice of the People , who frequently , in the beginning of the World , out of a natural desire of Safety , for the securing of a Peaceful Community and Conversation , choose a Single Person to be their Head , as a Proper , Supreme Moderator in all Differences that might arise to disquiet that Community : Thus were Kings made for the People , and not the People for Kings 



This Principle of Popular Liberty , and placing the Original of Government in the People , is highly derogatory to the Providence of God ; contrary to the express Letter of the Text , and destructive of the very Being of Human Society , First , By implying Mankind to be cast into the World unprovided for . Secondly , It makes Magistracy , which the Apostle tells us ; ( Rom. 13. 2.  ) is the Ordinance of God , to be of Human Institution , or at best , Nature's second Thought ; but in truth , an effect either of Tumult or Chance , according as Men were led to 't either by Choice or Necessity . Thirdly , in supposing Power to be radically in the People , and the grant of it to be only an act of conveyance by common Consent , and with a power of Revocation , upon certain equitable Conditions , either expressed or employed ; there goes no more than the People's recalling of their Power , to the dissolving of all Communities ; and Human Society , at this rate , lies at the Mercy of the Multitude . But how this Revocation shall be notified , unless by way of Advertisement in one of the True Protestant-anabaptist-mercuries , I cannot imagine . 

But then consider again , That this Grant and Revocation must Pass with a Nemine Contradicente ; nay , and a Nemine Absente too : for one single Diss●●● , or the want of one single Vote , spoils all ; and makes , voided both the Original Grant , and all that was done subsequent upon it : for by reason of that defect , it is no longer the act of the People . 

It may put a Man in admiration , to see what Credit this Fantastic and Impracticable Conceit has got in the World , if he does not observe the Address in the Application of it , and the use that is made of it . All violent Motions of State ( we see ) are wrought and brought about by the Favour and Assistance of the People . And there can be no readier way in the World to make them sure , then either to calumniate , or otherwise to lay open the Nakedness of the Government , and to tell them that Princes are only Trustees for the People's good ; the Sovereignty in themselves ; and that if Governors break their Trust , the People may resume their Power . When the Multitude has once imbibed this Doctrine , the next work will be to set up for the recovery of their inheritance : and when it comes to that once , we need but look behind us to see the end on 't . 

Our Author has already admitted , ( upon this mistake of the Fountain of Power ) that the People may yet pass away their Original Right , without power of Revocation . Here indeed , ( says he , speaking of a Concession of Absolute Power ) a passive Obedience was due ; but what 's this to a King of England ? Now though the Doctrine of this Passage ( folio 20. ) seems to clash with an Equity of Resumption , reserved to the People in the last Paragraph above-recited , ( folio 21. ) I shall yet lay no hold of that implication , but turn the force of his own allowance against himself . If the People's alienation of their Power to a Prince , without conditions , shall stand good against them ; so shall the alienation of their Power also to a Prince , under conditions , stand every jote as good , within the limits of those conditions . And where shall we find those conditions , but in the Established Law , which marks out the bounds , both of King and People ? Now if the Law Pronounces the King to be Supreme in all Causes , and over all persons , etc. and yet with some Limitations and Restraints upon his Prerogative : Suppose he passes those Terms , who shall judge him , but God if he be Supreme , and has no other Power above him ? Or if the People have reserved , in such a case , any controlling Power to themselves , how comes it that the Law takes no notice of it ; but on the contrary , makes the Subjects accountable for any act of Disobedience or Violence to , or upon the Person , or Authority of the King , upon what pretence soever ? So that under the colour of opposing or preventing an Arbitrary Power ; the Law is subverted ( here ) at a b●ow ; and a Foundation laid of the most pernicious and shameful sort of Tyranny . 

He says that Kings were made for the People , and not People for the Kings , which is well enough , if he means that Kings were made for the Government of the People , which is the great Blessing of Mankind ; and not People for the Government of the King ; which turns Society into Confusion . 

But after all these words , to show that Government Originally was not Popular ; I shall add a few more , to prove the Institution of it to be purely Divine : which opinion , in truth , needs not any other Support , than the Authority of the Holy Scriptures . By me Kings Reign , etc.  I have made the Earth , the Man , and the Beasts that are upon the Ground by my great Power , and my Outstretched arm , and have given it to whom it seemed meet unto me , Jer. 27. 5.  

That which we now call Kingly Government was at first called Paternel , and after that Patriarchal , etc.  And we find , by the Powers they exercised ( as Life and Death , War and Peace , etc. ) that their Paternal Power did then extend to all the Acts of our Regal Power ; The Objection is , could there be a King without a People ? Which is all one with the Supposal of a Father without a Son. But This does not at all conclude that Adam had not both a Regal and a Paternal Power , before he had either People or Children , actually to govern , and exercise it upon : It being a thing so consonant also , to the Methods of the Divine Wisdom , to supply him previously with all needful Abilities and Authorities for the Discharge of his Fatherly and Governing Office : The whole Race of his Posterity , lying open , even before they had any Existency in Nature , to the Omniscience of God , with whom there is no PAST or FUTURE , but all things , always PRESENT . 

Again , if Adam did not bring his Authority into the World with him , when did he receive his Commission ? Or , if he had none at all , how could he justify the Arbitrary Rule he exercised over those People that were only his Fellow Subjects , under the same God , and without any Subordinate Ruler over them ? Or if Adam was vested with a Right of exerting the Power he exercised ; how came our Authors Imaginary Multitude to choose a Governor of their own , in opposition to the appointment of Providence ? Or who absolved them from the Bonds of their filial and primary Duty and Obedience ? 

What he says afterwards of Conquest , ( which he calls his Other Acquisition of Monarchy ) serves only for an occasion to tell us , that our Last Norman Conquest was little more than a Composition : which is an error and nothing at all to the point here in hand , which refers only to the constitution , and Settlement of the Government , as now it stands , without any respect to the manner of acquiring it . But he is now drawing to a conclusion . 

Char.  If now at last , ( says he ) Popery must and shall come in , ( as by law it cannot ) and consequently must be restored by Arbitrary Power . If a new Monarchy , than a new Conquest , and if a Conquest , Heaven forbid we should be subdued like lesle than Englishmen ; or be debarred the Common Right of all Nations , which is , to Resist , and Repel an Invader , if we can , folio 21.  



This is spoken upon the supposition of a Popish Successors coming to the Crown , whom he calls an Invader ; ( though qualifyed with a Legal Title ) and he incourages Violence against him , though in this case the Law pronounces him a King : and this Resistance to be made like Englishmen too , that is to say Englishmen of the late stamp . So that there goes no more ( I perceive ) to the destruction of a Lawful Prince , but to say that he either is or will be this or tha● : And the King himself stands in as much danger , upon the admittance of this Principle , as his Royal Brother . 

But before Subjects proceed to these terms , which without a legal Authority are criminal in any case whatsoever , Malice it sel● will not deny , but that there ought to be an infallible certainty of the Inconvenience : whereas ( as I have said before ) this is a case liable to many disappointments ; the prospect of it remote , the expedient unwarrantable , and the danger itself at last not so mortal as it is represented . He supports his presumption upon this ground for granted , that a Popish King must do whatsoever the Pope will have him do , and subject his people to the Tyranny as well as the Religion of the Church of Rome . What does he say to the French Kings Pyramid then , and the vindication of himself and his people in diverse other cases , from the Insults of Rome ; and to several other instances already given in this particular ? 

Char.  But to sum up all this ( says he ) I must say , the most vehement Disputants against the People's right of defending themselves , must at length acknowledge thus much , that whenever a Papist King shall by Tyranny establish the Pope's Jurisdiction in England , undoubtedly in the eye of God he is guilty of a greater sin than that People can be , that with open Arms oppose that Tyranny . 

; Fol. 22.  

This is a clause of double consolation : First , to the Author , that this Popish King shall be damned the deeper of the two . And , Secondly , to the People , that they shall go to the Devil in good company . 

Char.  The very Essence ( he says ) of a Popish Successor is the greatest Plot upon England since the Creation ; a Plot of God himself to scourge a Nation , and make three Kingdoms miserable . 



This must be a very great Plot , if it be the greatest Plot that we have seen even in our days : a Plot upon our Laws , and it subverted them ; upon the Church , and it destroyed it root and branch ; upon our Estates , and it took them away by violence ; upon our Liberties , and it enslaved us ; upon our Lives , and it was made death to do our Duties . It was a Plot that left us no other choice in many cases but Death or Damnation . 

If I had asked my revenues ( says the late King , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪ sect . 24. ) my power of the Militia , or any one of my Kingdoms , it had been no wonder to have been denied in those things , where the evil policy of men forbids all Restitution , lest they should confess an injurious Usurpation . But to deny me the Ghostly comfort of Chaplains , seems a greater rigour and barbarity than is ever used by Christians to the meanest Prisoners , and greatest Malefactors , whom , though the Justice of the Law , deprives of worldly Comforts , yet the Mercy of Religion allows them the benefit of their Clergy : as not aiming at once to destroy their Body● , and to Damn their Souls . But My Agony must not be Relieved with the Presence of any one Good Angel ; ( for such ●account a Learned , Godly and Discreet Divine● & such I would have all Mine to be ; ) They that envy my being a King , are loath I should be a Christian , while they Seck to deprive Me of all things else ; they are a●●a●d I should save my soul.  

Has the Author of the Character heard of this Un-christian Barbarity toward a Prince of the most Exemplary Goodness and Piety ( one of them ) that ever lived : And how he was yet , after all this , Murdered on a Scaffold , in the Name , and under the pretended Sovereignty of the People of England ? How has he then the hardness of Heart to set up that Regicidal Principle afresh ; and to pronounce the Government of a Popish Successor to be a greater Plot upon England , than the Execrable Bloodshed of that Protestant Prince ? And yet he carries it one step higher . A Plot of God ( he calls it ) and at the same time lays the Foundation of it in Hell , and most Heroically opposes it . From hence to the end both of the Page and Book , there 's only more variety of flourish to the same purpose . 

MY pretending to Answer this Discourse , looks methink , as if a Man should Reply upon an Almanac ( for several Years to come ) it runs altogether upon Phansys , Suppositions , Predictions , etc.  And there 's no dis-proving of a Prognostication ; nor hardly any reasoning against it ; but so far as it is Calculated according to Rules of Art : And wheresoever I have found any thing that looks like a Logical Connexion , I have spoken to those Passages what I thought convenient . But for the rest ; my business has been to encounter the drift of it , and to expound the danger of these present jealousies , by referring People to the miserable effects of the same Jealousy in the Late Times . It is an easy thing for People to foretell Calamities and Judgements of their own Contriving . 

There is not any Man Living that more passionately desire's the Ripping up of this Dam●ed , Hellish Plot to the bottom , than myself ; but I must confess withal , that I am for Suppressing the Malice of Pope●y , as well as the Name ; and utterly against the Damning of any Position in a Papist , that I practise myself . The best way to discover a Jesuit , is by his Principle ; for it is the Doctrine , and not the Order , or Denomination , that creates the Danger . So that we are never the nearer for rocting out the One , unless we purge ourselves also from the Leagen of the Other . Which will be the o●ly safe way of facilitating a Comprehensive Union of those Conscientious Dissenters that wish well to the King and his Government . And in Order to this Discrimination , I shall give the Reader here a Taste of the Harmony and Agreement betwixt the Jesuits of the Society , and those of the Covenant . That is to say , such other Jesuits , as , under the Cover of Dissenting protestants take advantage of the Credulity and Weakness of the Common People , toward the working of Distempers in the Nation . 

Popish and Jesuitical PRINCIPLES . 

Dominion is founded in Grace ; ( says the Romish Jesuit ) and upon That Principle , Deposes Protestant Princes . But the Covenanting Jesuit is even with him , and upon the same Principle deposes Popish Princes : as Knox and those of the Congregation in Scotland deposed the Queen Regent ( Cambden ' s Eliz. An. 1559 ) Penry told the Lord Precedent of Wales , That without advancing the Presbyterian Discipline he could have no Commission to Rule there ; for having rejected Christ , he was but the Lieutenant of Satan . And our Character does pretty well too , in ranking a Popish Prince with Nabuchadnezzar , folio 17.  

The Pope may deprive a King of his Royal Dignity for Heresy , Schism , etc.  ( B. of Lincoln's Popish Principles , pag. 20. ) and after Excommunication ( says Mariana ) in case of Obstinacy , the People may take away his Life . Now says the Covenanting Jesuit ; All men as well Magistrates , as Inferiors , aught to be Subject to the Judgement of General Assemblies ( See Bishop Bramhal pag. 501. ) Ministers ( says Buchanan de Jur. Reg. page 70. ) may excommunicate Princes ; and when they have cast them into Hell , they are not worthy to live any longer upon Earth . 

Pius Quintus absolved the Subjects of Q. Eliz. from all their Oaths of Allegiance to her for ever . And now ( says Knox to England and Scotland ) If Princes be Tyrants against God and his Truth , their Subjects are Free from their Oath of Obedience . And our Jesuitical Covenanters did the same thing too , with a Penalty , in abolishing the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance , and setting up their Covenant . 

We command ( says the same Pius Quintus ) all the Peers , People and Subjects of England not to pay any Obedieuce to the Queen , her Commands , or Laws . And was not this the same thing that our Covenanting Jesuits did , in commanding upon pain of Imprisonment , and Sequestration , not to obey the King's Proclamations , and in making it Death without mercy for any man that had taken the Covenant to go , without a Pass into the King's Quarters ? 

Pope PAUL 3d. Interdicted all public Prayers for Henry 8. or his Adherents , after his Denial of the Pope's Supremacy , to the whole Nation . And did not our Scottish Jesuits there same thing in refusing to to pray for the Mother of King James , when she was in her Distress though the King desired it ? and did not our English Covenanting Jesuits make it Malignancy and Sequestration , to pray for the King in their Churches ? 

If a Clergyman Rebel against the King , it is no Treason ▪ ( says Em●nuel Savil ) because Clergymen art not the King's Subjects . The Jesuits of the kirk told King James , That He was an incompetont judge of Matters in the Pulpit , which ought to be exempted from the judgement and Correction of Princes . And the Assembly brought off Gibson and Blake , for Cursing and Railing at the King in the Pulpit , upon the same Plea. And the Late King had as little Remedy for Treason delivered in the Pulpits here . 

The Papal Power ( says Sciopptus ) is Supreme , and the Pope has a Right to Direct and C●mpel , and a Power of Life and Death . And did not Our Jesuits in the Assembly , and the Two Houses Practise the same Usurpations in 1642 ? Does not the kirk , in the Cases of Blood , Adultery , Blasphemy , etc. take the Pardoning-power out of the King's Hand ? Did not the Scottish Jesuits in 1638.  Prote●t against Proclamations , make void Acts of Parliament , Levy M●n , Monies and Arms , for the Glory of God , and preservation of Religion ? King's Declaration . Pag. 415.  Do they not claim Power to Abrogate and Abolish what Statutes and Ordinances they please , concerning Ecclesiastical Matters ? See Bishop Brambal , Fol. 497. etc.  And in short , in ordine ad Spiritualia , take into their Cognizance all matters whatsoever . 

Snarez , approves of a Subjects kill his Prince in his own defence ; and much more , if it be in defence of the Public . Buchanad Seconds him , and would have him rewarded for it , as if he had killed a Wolf or a Bear. For ( says he , in his de jure Regni ) the People are as much above the King , as he is above any one Person . Which Our Jesuits have Translated into Singulis Major , Vniversis Minor. Does not our Assembly set up for Infallible , as well as the Pope . And have not Our Jesuits their pious Frauds as well as those of the Church of Rome ; their Dreams , Visions and Revelations ? Where was there ever more Equivocation , or mental Reservation , then in their swearing to preserve the King , with a Design to destroy him ? Where did the Pope himself ever take more upon him , as to the Indicting of Assemblies , abrogating Acts of Parliament , and in the Exercise of all other the Ensigns of Royalty ? Does not our Assembly expect to be submitted to with as implicit a Faith , and as blind an Obedience as the Pope himself ? We must ●●sign up our Judgements ( says the Church of Rome ) our Will , and our Understanding in a deferencé to our Superiors . To which purpose ( as I find it in Lysimachus N●canor page 48. ) Andrew Cant when he found he could give no reasons for subscribing the Covenant , told his Congregation at Glascow , that they must deny Learning and Reason , and help Christ at a Lift : and told them further , upon the same occasion , that he was sent to them with a Commission from Christ to bid them subscribe the Covenant , which was Christ's Contract , and that he himself was come at a Wooer to them for the Bridegroom ; and called upon them to come to be Hand-fasted by Subscribing That Contract : and told them plainly , that he would not leave the Town till he had all their Names that refused to Subscribe ; and that he would complain on 't to his Master . 

It would be endless to run out the Parallel at length , so far as This Argument would carry a man But this will suffice , I hope , in some measure for a Caution , that while we are running down of One Sort of Jesuits we do not Incorporate our Religion with Another . 

The End.  





Character . Declarat . & Prot. of Lords and Commons , to the Kingdom , and the whole world . Octob. 22. 1642.  Exact Coll. pag. 664.  