A short supply or amendment to the propositions for the new representative , for the perpetual peace and quiet of this nation , and other parts ( Which be or shall be incorporated with the same ) in the enjoyment of their just rights and liberties . 

Which were lately published by Will : Leach of the middle temple , gent.  

And now published at the request of divers well-affected and eminent Christians of the congregated churches of this nation . 

Written and proposed by Edmund Leach of new England , merchant . 

London , printed by John Macock , and are to be sold by Lodowick Lloyd in Popes-head alley near Lombard-street . 1651.  

A short supply or amendment to the propositions for the new representative . 

For as much as the members of this present parliament of England have undergone great danger of their lives and estates , and many of them taken excessive pains and care , and divers of their fellow-members lost their lives for the preservation of the honest persons of this nation from utter ruin and destruction , and gaining their just rights and liberties , and settling the persons of this nation in a government of a republic , for the enjoyment of the same for ever , for the quiet not only of those who May fear , but which shall hope of much more bloodshed , combustions , or alterations , but that all parties May acquiesce in this peaceable government in all future times , without doubting , or expectance of any other by any monarch whatsoever ; but that all tyranny shall be for ever hereafter turned and kept out of doors , and that all parties May praise our great god for this our miraculous deliverance from tyranny and oppression , and pray for the prosperity of those by whom he out of his good will and pleasure hath wrought this our great and wonderful freedom . 

And for that , upon or by a new representative , if the most just members ( Which have brought to pass this most peaceable government , which is most easy to be continue , for the keeping of the persons from tyranny & oppression ) should be neglected , ( Though some of the plebeians May think amiss of divers of them for concealing several things from them , which they have thought to be for their weal , the sudden revealing of which Might have been to their woe ) danger Might happen . 

For remedy in this behalf , these propositions following be proposed and tendered , to the same consideration and intent as the said recited propositions are . 

I.  

That every member of this present parliament , now sitting or acting for the benefit and support of this commonwealth of England ( Other than such who by this present parliament shall not be thought fit to continue without a new election ) May sit , vote and act for and in the next parliament or representative . 

Ii  

And that ( For every county , city , burrow , town corporate , or other place , having , or which shall have , power or authority of electing members of parliament or representers , and no member or representer being now so sitting , or in action for the same ) this now present parliament May send to the sheriffs , bailiffs , Barons , or other head officers of the same respectively , the names of four persons for every such place which have power so to elect or choose two such members or representers . 

Iii  

And that every such sheriff and officer before mentioned respectively shall or May publish the same openly in his county , or other such place , whereof such respective sheriff , or other such officer , be or shall be chief head officer or officers . 

Iv.  

And that the inhabitants of every such county , city , burrow , or other place before mentioned , shall or May so write or print one of such four for one , and that he with another of such member or representer as such inhabitants shall in like manner choose , write or print , as is mentioned in the propositions before recited , shall and May be members of the next parliament or representative . 

V.  

And that some of the chief commanders of this present army of this nation May nominate eight such persons by the parliament , so to be sent , out of which the same May so send the names of the before mentioned four persons . 

Vi . 

And that according to the same number and proportion for every respective county , city , or other place before mentioned ( Which have or shall have power or authority to elect or choose more or less for such members or representers ) the same course May be taken , as before is mentioned . 

Vii . 

And that in all parliaments or representatives hereafter , the fourth or fifth part , or some other number by this parliament to be thought convenient , shall and May remain and continue as members or representers for the then next parliament or representative , unless they be or shall be voted out by any parliament or representative sitting , or to be sitting , and that then the inhabitants of such place for which they were or shall be chosen , May ( As is mentioned in the said recited proposals ) new elect and choose , and send in such manner and form as is mentioned in those propositions . 

In the propositions before recited , in pag. 6. l. 9 is the word [ after ] where the word [ before ] should be ; and in pag 10. li. 30. is omitted the word [ not , ] and in pag. 13. li. 14. is also omitted the word [ be , ] and divers other literal faults , which is easily imagined what they should be ; all which are the neglect of the printer , and therefore it 's not necessary to write further against or concerning the same . 

Edmund Leach . 

These present proposals are to be sold by Lodowick Lloyd , and the before-recited proposals by him , William Lee , Lawrence Blaiklock , and Gabriel Bedel in Fleetstreet , and Lawrence Chapman near the Savoy . 

Finis . 







