Come , come all you that are with Rome offended , 
Come now and hear from whence the Pope descended ▪ 


The lineage of locusts or the Pope's pedegre beginning with his prime ancestor the devil , plainly set forth to be noted of all good Christians and true Catholics , for the avoiding of those subtle snares continually laid for them by his insinuating agents . 

The pedigree . 

1.  The devil begat darkness . 
2.  And darkness begat ignorance . 
3.  And ignorance begat error and his brethren . 
4.  And error and his brethren begat freewill and self love . 
5.  And self-love begat merits . 
6.  And merits begat forgetfulness of God's grace . 
7.  And forgetfulness of God's grace begat mistrust . 
8.  And mistrust begat satisfaction . 
9  And satisfaction begat facrifice of the mass . 
10.  And sacrifice of the mass begat popish priesthood . 
11.  And popish priesthood begat prayer for the dead . 
12.  And prayer for the dead begat sacrilege of souls . 
13.  And sacrilege of souls begat superstition . 
14.  And superstition begat hypocrisy the King . 
And these are fourteen generations . 

1.  And hypocrisy the King begat lucre . 
2.  And lucre begat purgatory . 
3.  And purgatory begat foundation of irreligious houses . 
4.  And foundation of irreligious houses begat patrimony of the church . 
5.  And patrimony of the church begat mammon of iniquity . 
6.  And mammon of iniquity begat abundance . 
7.  And abundance begat cruelty . 
8.  And cruelty begat domination . 
9  And domination begat pomp . 
10.  And pomp begat ambition . 
11.  And ambition begat intrusion into the church right . 
12.  And intrusion into the church right begat simony . 
13.  And simony begat universal superintendency . 
14.  And universal superintendency begat the Pope , the Cardinals and all his brethren . 
And these are fourteen generations , in the transmigration of abomination . 

1.  And the Pope begat the mystery of iniquity . 
2.  And the mystery of iniquity begat divine sophistry . 
3.  And divine sophistry begat rejection of the scripture . 
4.  And rejection of the scripture begat tyranny . 
5.  And tyranny begat murder of the saints . 
6.  And murder of the saints begat the despising of God . 
7.  And the despising of God begat dispensation . 
8.  And dispensation begat licence to sin . 
9  And licence to sin begat abomination . 
10.  And abomination begat confusion . 
11.  And confusion begat travel in the spirit . 
12.  And travel in the spirit begat disputation . 
13.  And disputation begat matter to write of : 
By which writing the son of perdition Antichrist specified in so many places of scripture was revealed . 

The Protestant's conclusion . 

The Pope , himself ( The simple to beguile ) 
servum servorum dei doth instill , 
The servant of God's servants , who ( We find ) 
To seem his Masters better is inclined , 
Christ humble was , humility requiring , 
The Pope is proud to honour still aspiring , 
Christ was content to wear a crown of thorns , 
But the Pope's head a crown of gold adorns , 
A triple crown which hardly him sufficeth 
But of his foul ambition what ariseth ? 
hunc capit infernus , quem deserit ordo supernus . 
Forsaken by the choir supernal , 
he 's taken by the fiends infernal , 
For let false Catholics say what they can 
he 's neither God nor angel , nor a man , 
But a prodigious beast or monster fell 
With all his brood hatched or begot in hell , 
And so i leave him . 







