THE Political Mischiefs OF POPERY : OR , Arguments Demonstrating , I That the Romish Religion Ruins all those Countries where 't is Established . 
II That it occasions the loss of above 200 Million of Liures or 16 Million Sterling , per An. to France in particular . 
III That if Popery were Abolished in France , that Kingdom would become incomparably more Rich and Populous ; and the King's Revenues would Advance above 100 Million of Liures , or 8 Million Sterling per Annum . 
iv. That it is impossible that France should ever be Reestablished , whilst Popery is their National Religion . 


By a Person of Quality , a Native of France ; Author of The Desolation of France demonstrated . 

LONDON : Sold by J. Harris , at the Harrow in Little Britain . 1698.  

TO The Honourable THE House of Commons . 

THIS Treatise which I take the Liberty to dedicate to your Honours , with all imaginable Respect , was published sometime ago in French , and by several persons of Great Judgement , thought not Unworthy to be presented to your view in English , because of the Importance of the Matter , and the Profit which they thought might from thence redound to Church and State.  

The design of it is , to prove by Political Arguments , ( a Method New and Extraordinary ) that the Romish Religion is the Falsest of any that hath hitherto appeared in the World , because it is the destruction and plague of all Countries where it is Established , and Ruins Nations more ▪ than any other False Religion that we have yet heard of . 

This I demonstrate by the Instance of France , and make it evident , that Popery occasions the loss of above 200 Million of Liures per Annum to that Kingdom ; whence it follows , that even as to Temporals , the Kingdom of England reaps unspeakable Advantages by the Reformation , which hath delivered her from that Cruel and Unsupportable Yoke . 

I have so much the greater Reason to hope that this Book will not be unacceptable to your Honours , because it tends more and more to confirm the Protestant Religion in this Kingdom , for the defence of which , against the Tyranny of Popery , you have on all occasions testified an ardent Zeal . 

The tender Care and great Charity which you have manifested towards the poor Refugees , who suffer for the said Religion ; but above all , the Courage and Zeal you have discovered in this last War , by sparing nothing that was necessary for the preservation of the Protestant Interest , have made it gloriously appear to all the Nations of the Earth , that you value neither your Treasures nor your Blood , when there 's a necessity of spending them in defence of your Religion ; And in effect , there was no lesle at Stake , than the losing or preserving it , for yourselves and your Posterity ; nay , I may say for the whole Protestant World , and together with that you must have lost your precious Liberties , and all that is dear to you as Men and Christians ; That it would please God that by your Genenerous Example and Sage Resolves , you may transmit to all succeeding Parliaments , that same Prudence , Magnanimity and Zeal , for the Mainte●…ance of the Protestant Religion and your Public Liberties , against all Attempts of Popery , is and shall be the constant Prayer of him , who is with all possible Submission and profound Respect , 

Your Honour's Most humble and most Obedient Servant , De Soulignê Grandson to M. Du Plessis Mornay . 

THE PREFACE TO THE READER . 

About a Year ago , I published a Treatise , for the Service of this Nation , upon the present State of France , Entitled , The Desolation of France Demonstrated : And there , in short , I made it evident , That Popery was the principal Cause of all the Misery and Ruin that hath befallen that Kingdom . The Book was pleasing to this Nation in general ; but some were apt to think I had aggravated Matters , and that the Condition of France was not so bad as I had represented it . amongst others , a certain Gentleman of great Parts , was pleased to write a Manuscript upon that Subject , full of Wit , and diametrically opposite to what I had advanced , but did not think fit to publish it . The Events that happened since , have confirmed , in part , what I then said ; whereupon that Ingenious Person hath acknowledged , in a curious piece lately published , That I had Reason on my side , for what I had written in general , as to the Condition of France . But divers other persons of Worth , having wished that I would justify the Proposition which I had advanced , in the same Book , viz. That Popery occasions the loss of 200 Million per An. to France ; which to them seemed a Paradox , I thought myself obliged to sa●…isfie their desire . 

To this end I published what I had written upon that Subject sometime ago in French , that by the judgement which others gave upon it , I might be the better enabled to conjecture what was proper to be Added or Corrected in the English Edition , which I n●…w present to the Public , with several Additions ; and had done it sooner , but for some Reasons not fit to be here related . But I supposed besides , that People will have more Inclination to Read such Pieces now the War is over , during which they loved to hear of nothing but bloody Battles , and Princes Dethroned , according to the humour of the Romans in Horace his time , as he expresseth it in the following Lines , — Pugnas & exactos Tyrannos 
Densum humeris bibit aure vulgus . 


I doubt not but some people will say , That I write with too much heat against Popery : To which I reply , 

1.  That those persons don't know Popery well enough , nor have they ever examined it thoroughly . They are misled by some common Prejudices , and judge of that Religion not according to its essential Principles , and constant Practice , but only by the external Behaviour of some that profess it , as Laics who are s●…metimes as well Polished , Civilised , Learned and Honest in outward appearance , as protestants , and here those People stop with●…ut consulting the Scripture , or considering that the D●…ctrine , Morals and Tyranny of the Romish Clergy , are more becoming Devils than Mendoza I confess , that they are Men and Women , as well as others , and that there are People morally Honest among them , as there are among Pagans' , jews and mahometans ; and even among the Romish Clergy , there are sun who are honester as to the matter of Society , than their Religi●…n obliges them to be . But those Gentlemen I speak of , think there 's no hurt in their Idolatry , nor don 't consider the Mischiefs their Religion does to all Mankind in general , because they think it never did them any ; so that according to this Maxim of theirs , all Religions should be alike , for there are Rational and Moral People of all Persuasions . 

2.  I may Reply , That there was never any Protestant that had more Reason than myself , to write sharply against Popery , there having been no Man hitherto , who hath studied that Point so thoroughly as I have done , in Regard of the infinite Mischiefs , which it occasions to States ; as wi●…l appear by the following Treatise . 

3.  no Man can exceed bounds in expressing his Abhorrence of Popery , provided he forbear reflecting upon innocent persons , as I have carefully done , for certainly the Malignity of t●…e Romish Religion and Clergy , goes beyond all Expression or Idea ; and if I have Reason on my side , as it appears I have , all honest Papists will think the●…selveses obliged to me ▪ fo●… disabusing them , and if they can convict me of a Mistake , I am wi●…ling to bear the reproach of it . 

The Wits of this Age will perhaps find fault with my Style and manner of Expression , and complain that it is dull and not genteel , for most People now a days look for a fine Style in Books . But besides , that my Matter will not admit of a fl●…urishing Style nor sallies of Fancy , I freely own , that I am none of those who are fond , of the Title of a fine Wit , an Orator or Polite Writer : I am consent if I can discover , in my rude Method , such things as are of the highest Importance , and Use to Men and Christians , which no body else hath taken notice of . And I hope that those who love Solid and Important Discoveries , and the Order and Good of the Commonwealth , will do me justice. Those that have finer Pens t●…an I , may perhaps Handle this Subject better after me , Correct my Faults , Supply my Defects , and Add to my Discoveries , it being a Maxim as true ●…ss common , Facile est inventis addere . 

For my own part , I must confess that I expect more from Works of this na●…ure , towards the Destruction of Popery , than from all the Books of Controversies that shall be written henceforward . Great Men never Read them , and for the most part , they govern themselves merely by sensible Reasons and Visible Interest . Those that I propose here are Uncontrovertible , beyond all Exception , and Intelligible to People of the meanest Capacities , if they have but patience to hear them ; so that all that remains to be Controverted , is the degree of the Mischief occasioned by Popery , and whether it be so great , as Ihave represented it or not . 

I have chosen to insist on the Instance of France , to prove the infinite Malignity of the Romish Religion , rather than on that of any other Popish State , because that Country is best known to me , and that last year I undertaken to make it appear that the Ruin of France proceeded mostly from Popery ; so that ●…is Treatise is an Appendix of that . 

I am forced contrary to my inclination , to represent the Mischiefs of the Government of France , but what I say is the Truth , and with no design to offend any Man , my intention being only to display the desperate Malignity of Popery . I own that those who Govern in France , are endowed with many grea●… and rare Qualities , but Popery striveth continually either to Stiste them , or to Employ t●…em to base and pernitions Ends. There is nothing more certain than that all would do well there , were it not for the Popish Clergy , and especially the Jesuits , wh●… carry the chief Sway in that Nation . 

I propose ●…o other end to myself in this , but to serve the Church of God , and my present Country the Kingdom of England , in which I have hitherto found some Bread , and where I hope I shall not be suffered to starve in time to come : Whereas on the contrary , I have been robbed of all in France , for serving Go●… according to my own Conscience ; and it 's probable that if I and others ●…ad slaid there till now , we should not only have been d●…rieved of our Lives , but had the same endeavours used to ruin our Souls , that have been made use of to ruin those of others . 

And moreover , it may be easily evinced , that all I say might be of infinite advantage to France , if she knew how to make use of it , seeing she might thereby become ab●…ndantly mo●… Rich , Po●…ent and Happy , than ever she was ; So that in t●… respect I discover a thousand times more Love for France , than those do who Govern her , or than ind●…d she discovers for herself . 

THE Translator's Letter TO THE Bookseller . 

SIR , 

THE following Book being now Tra●…slated , must take its Fa●…e in the World. The Worthy Author hath performed his part to Admiration , and as it became a Grandson of the Gre●…t du Plesfis Mornay , though under a much greater Disadvantage than he : Th●… Grandfather when he wrote his Books , which have eternised his Fame , was one of the chief of the protestants of France , ( than a flourishing and formidable ●…ody , ) and abounded in all things necessary for his Undertaking ; but the Grandson , on the contrary , hath had much ado to escape with his Life , and is cast upon our Island as part of the valuable Wreck of that once renowned Protestant Church : Yet in that forlorn Condition , with little encouragement from Men , and as little help of Books , he hath given us many proofs of his Zeal and Abilities to serve the Protestant Interest . His Book Entitled , The Desolation of France demonstrated , etc. met with deseru●…d Applaufe ; and if the dignity of the Subject , depth of Thought , and strength of Argument , have any influence upon Mankind , there 's no Reason to think that this he now offers to the Public , can meet with lesle . 

As for the Translation , which is my own part , you know I have performed it du●…ing a hurry of other business ; so that if it be passable English it is as much as you can expect . 

The Author will bear me witness , that I have kept to his Sense , and indeed , as there is something uncommon in his Thought , there is the same in his manner of Expression , which is more adap●…ed to inform the Judgement , than to please the Fancy , and therefore to have attempted to set off or rather to disguise by flourishes of Style , what the Author designed should be intelligible to every one , would have been an injury to the pattern he hath set me . 

I have nothing to add , but that as in the last Century God raised up many great Men ●…o discover the False Doctrines of the R●…mish Church , which made such People as had any due regard to their Salvation , to come out of her . Who knows ●…ut that he same Providence , by raising up others to dis●…over the P●…li ical Mischiefs of that Religion to Kingdoms and States , m●…y thereby stir up the Kings and Princes of th●… Earth to hate the Whore , and burn her flesh with fire . That this m●…y be one of the effects of this Book ( the best , if n●…t the only Trea●…ise that ever was written upon the Subject ) and that it ma●… A●…swer your Expect●…tion , and Procure the Author that Re●…pect and Esteem , which he deserves ●…rom all good Men , is the unfeigned wish and hearty desire of 

Your humble Servant , G. Ridpath . 

ERRATA . 

Pag. 2. line . 27. lesle read more . p. 56. l. 34. r. Flesh-meat . p. 59 l. 27. r. bought in Lent. p. 60. l. 7.  VIOLENC r. Violence . p. 113. l. 5. r. But when shall they be able to do it ? p. 119. l. 6. as r. an . 

Political Arguments , proving that the Popish Religion ruins all those States where it is the Public Religion . 

TO justify my Proposition , I will make it appear in Eighteen Articles , that the Popish Religion occasions the Loss of above 200 Million of Livers per annum to France . 

The I Article which concerns this affair , is the Cheats of the Clergy , by which they pillaged the People to the Value of 40 or 50 Million per Annum , Thirty years ago , when the Kingdom was in a good condition . Part of the Methods they took to do this were as follows . 

The Chief are their Masses , which they say for the Living , and the Dead , viz. to deliver the Souls of the Deceased , not from Hell , but from a place ( unknown to Scripture , nay to God himself ) which they call Purgatory ; and to expiate the Sins of the Living , who either pay for those Masses , or assist at saying them . This is the Clergies Greatest Traffic , and that which contributes most of any thing to retain all Popish States and Kingdoms under the Pope's Tyrannical Yoke , by the multitudes of Priests and Monks that it entertains , who are as so many Armies to support that Usurper , and who tender him Master of all those Kingdoms . There are Churches where above 50 or 100 such Masses are said every day upon a great number of Altars , as they call them , which raises Subfistance for a great number of Priests & Monks , and did formerly maintain a greater number . 

It is here proper to be observed , that to the end they may entertain the greater number of 'em , at the same time they recommend the Mass as the principal part of Divine Worship and Religion , and oblige the people to frequent it every day ; the Priests are strictly forbid to say above two per diem , except in some privileged places , as in Picardy , and the Country of Arras , because the Parishes there are poor and small . Which makes it plain that they have no essential Reason why a Priest may not say diverse Maises in one day , but that the Court of Rome was resolved to maintain as many of her Pensioners or Lifeguard men , at the Charge of others , as she could . The Parliament of Paris hath regulated their pay at 12 d. per Mass , and in diverse Provinces they have not above 5 d. or 6 d. apiece , which is as good , at least , as the pay of Horse and Foot , though they be more useful , and their Calling lesle dangerous . 

Abundance of Masses are said for the Cure of Diseases , both in Men and Women , Children , Beasts and Birds ; as Hogs , Dogs , Geese , etc. as also for a happy Journey , safe return of a Ship , a happy Marriage ; as also for mere trifles ; as for the finding again of a lost Ring , Fork , Spoon , etc.  Nay even for success in an Assassination or Plot against a Prince , or a Robbery , etc.  That is to say , they do really sacrifice ( as they themselves pretend ) the Body of Jesus Christ in all those cases , and many others of the same nature . Being herein more blind than the very Pagans' , who thought it enough to offer some Cakes , or to sacrifice some low-prized Animal to their Gods and Goddesses , when they prayed them to succeed their designs , according to that of the Poet : 

— OH pulchra Laverna 
Da mihi fallere , da justum sanctumque videri 
Noctem peccatis & fraudibus objice Nubem , 
— & tibi far litabo . 


Which may be Englished ad sensum thus . 

OH fair Laverna , prithee never fail 
o'er all my Villainies to spread a Veil , 
And thou shalt have thy fill of Cakes & Ale.  


I am also well assured , that in order to bring Money into the Priest's Pocket , they have in some places introduced a Custom of playing at dice and Cards for Masses , as well as for Prayers , and he that loses pays the Priest , who does really next morning , as he pretends , sacrifi●…e Jesus Christ , ( but in an unbloody Sacrifice however ) for the Expiation of the Winner's Sins and Crimes , how heinous soever they may be . I own that I never saw them play for Masses , but have diverse times seen them play for Prayers , and know no reason why they may not as well play for the other : In the time of Pope Leo the Xth. the Preachers of Indulgence played for the pardon of the Sins of Towns and Cities in Germany . They get also Money by those Masses another way , which is , that those who assist at them do many times put Money into the Box , which falls all to the share of the Priests . 

Sometimes it happens that a dying person orders 100 , 1000 , 6000 nay 10000 Masses to be said for the repose of his soul after his death for which his Heirs pay through the Nose . There are very few Roman Catholics who are not guilty of this Weakness at their death , but if some of those who understand better , despise those fooleries upon their Deathbed , their Friends who are not so well informed , are sure to order Masses for them , and pay the Priests for their pains ; nay , the very poorest of them always take care to have some Masses said . 

Besides this , there 's every year an Anniversary , as they call it , for most people which have left any Estate behind them , or whose Friends are well to pass , that is to say a Mass Sung for the Soul of the deceased , by a great number of Priests , sometimes 50 or 100 together ; who must all of them be splendidly treated afterwards , where they usually fuddle themselves , and each of them must have a piece of Money besides . 

It is then upon the account of the great Profit which the Mass brings to the Clergy , that they have made it one of the most essential parts of their Worship . 

The Invention of their Fraternities or Brotherhoods , is another grand Method , by which they pillage the people , who being as Ignorant as Pagans' , the Monks take advantage of it , and persuade them that whoever enters into the Order , shall have a share in the Merits of the same , nor do they admit them without a considerable Present at first , which they oblige them to repeat from time to time . Sometimes there are people of Quality of both Sexes , nay , even Generals of Armies , that have been much esteemed in the World , who do so far forget themselves , and become so weak , as to desire to die in the Habit of these rascally Monks , who impose upon them so far as to make them to believe that they cannot fail of being saved and of going directly to Paradise , without touching at Purgatory , provided they die in the habit of their Order ; and that the habit of their St. Francis , is as much worth as the Baptism of Jesus Christ. Many considerable persons in the Courts of Justice , and abundance of others are guilty of this Weakness as well as silly Women ; Whence it comes to pass that they serve the Order , into which they have entered , with all their might ; and it may be justly said that they divide the Kingdom into divers Factions , who are in a continual C●…nspiracy against God , and the King , and their Neighbours ; for as those different Orders subsist and enrich themselves merely by the Idolatry , Superstition and Ignorance of the People , they foment it as much as they can , and engage in the Interests and Designs of the Court of Rome , to favour the same against the King and the State , and every one of those Orders hate and despise one another , both out of a principle of Envy , and because they know one another at bottom ; and then their Devotionists , who are joined to their Fraternities espouse all their Passions , Quarrels and Interests . 

Those Monks do likewise persuade abundance of Silly Women of Quality and others , to enter their very Sucking Infants into their Fraternities , persuading them that there 's no better method to make them to Live ; insomuch that sometimes we shall see those poor little Creatures muffled up in a Monk's Hood and Cassock , by which the Order loose nothing . 

Another method made use of by the Ecclesiastics , to catch the Wealth and Substance of the People is their Indulgences , which they obtain of the Pope from time to time , for some Churches or Monasteries , which whosoever Visits , during such a number of days , which serve as a Fair , or so many Market Days to the place , shall infallibly receive a Pardon of all their Sins , provided they give bountifully also to the said Church or Monastery ; for that is always to be understood , and there are very few but what give more or lesle in such cases . 

Another of their Baits to fish for the People's Money , is the Holy Relics as they call them , in their Churches , Monasteries , and Convents . And when the People's Devotion grows cold for the Old Relics , they never fail of bringing New Shrines or Boxes full of New and Fresh . And ordinarily they say they come from Holy Rome . It is well enough known , that oftentimes those Relics are pieces of Pasteboard fashioned like Bones , sometimes they are the real Bones of an Human Creature , and sometimes of Beasts , as it hath been often proved ; the Priests and Monks making it the Matter of their Diversion to insult over the foolish Credulity of th●… People in this Impudent manner , and yet at the same time make them pay for Seeing and Touching those Relics . 

There are also Miracles to be performed from time to time , when the Priests and Monks please , by the Statues , Images , or Bones of some dead Man or Woman , under the Name of Relics or Shrines of some Saints , as they call the Bones and Boxes in which they keep them . Those Miracles are of great Advantage to the Clergy , for by this means they bring abundance of Offerings to their Churches ●…nd Chapels . 

There are moreou●…r Legacies , Dirges and Donatives , whether they be Voluntary by persons whom they have Seduced , or Suborned , or altogether false , which the Priests or Monks forge , in order to dispoil Families , whereof the World has had Million of Examples , and some such happen every day . 

Auricular Confession is also one of their most Gainful Inventions , by which they Shear their Flock four times a Year . There are few People who don 't at such times give them a Piece of Money , especially those who are guilty of Great Crimes , and thereupon the●… receive Absolution , provided that together with this they do some little troublesome thing , which the Priests impose upon them under the Notion of Penance , the better to colour that Infamous Traffic , and to make the People believe that 't is not for the Money they Absolve them , for that would appear odious even to the most dissolute Wretch in the World. I take no notice here of the great Advantage the Pope and his Clergy make of this Confession , to dive into the Secrets of Princes and Grandees , and of all People in General , that so they may make their own use of it , and take their Measures thereupon to pry into the greatest Secrets of Men and Women , which gives the Ecclesiastics an opportunity to Debauch all the Sex , or to squeeze Money out of them ; for by this means they lead Captive silly Women , laden with Sins , and carried away with diverse Lusts , according to the Words of the Text.  

there 's another thing very Gainful to the Romish Clergy , and that is Burials , not only in that they sell the Ground at dear rate in their Churches and Convents , and that they make a great deal of Profit as I have said already by Masses for the Dead , but they get also a great deal of Money for the singing of a multitude of the Priestly-herd at ordinary Interments , where there is commonly a great number , who have each of them a piece of Money and a good Treat , at which they use to fuddle themselves , as well as at the Aniversaries' abovementioned . 

I don't here condemn a reasonable Allowance for one or two Ministers or Priests who go before the Corpse , and cannot subsist without those little Profits , or who are there to comfort the Friends of the deceased , or to instruct the Company , by putting them in mind of their Latter End ; or to Preach the Funeral Sermons of persons of great Merit ; but I condemn only the great Excess of that pretended Church , in employing such a great number of Priests at Funerals without necessity , who sing in the Streets like so many Priests of Bacchus , things which neither the People , nor the greatest part of themselves understand , and which occasions a great Charge to the Friends of the deceased , who frequently have not one bit of Bread left after they have paid for the Funeral , and the Masses , that are to be said afterwards for the deceased . In my time it was a Complaint at Paris , that the meanest person , such as a Footman , could not be Buried for lesle than four Pistoles . Perhaps the Court has moderated the Charge , since they have erected so many Offices of Buriers of the dead , and Criers of Burials , and that there 's a Tax as I am informed of eight Crowns laid on every Burial for the King ; for it would be very hard that the Priests and the King should squeeze so great a sum from the Poor People all at once upon this Account . 

The Gain which the Priests have by Marriages and Baptisms , is also very Excessive . Let them in God's Name have some Profit thence as the Ministers have in England , who cannot subsist without it , but this matter ought to be moderated , and there should be a distinction made betwixt Poor and Rich. At present I confess , that those profits of the Popish Priests in France are much di●…inished , because as times are now , there are but few Marriages or Baptisms in that Kingdom . 

These are the most General and Common Methods that the Idolatrous Clergy of France make use of to cheat the poor Ignorant people of their Money and Substance . 

I take no notice here , of what they gain by their Schools and Boarders , because it may be said in some sense , that what they gain that way is honestly got : Yet herein also they occasion a loss to the State to which they are commonly E●…emieses . And hereby they do likewise take the Bread out of the Mouths of abundance of Schoolmasters , who are Honester Men than themselves , have nothing else to Live on , have Families to Maintain , and pay Taxes to the King proportionably to their Income . Whereas those Ecclesiastics have enough to Live on without teaching School , being for the most part too Rich already , and on the other hand , they pay almost nothing to the King , ruin the Kingdom , and have no Families to Maintain . Nay that which is worse , they acknowledge a Foreign Authority , viz. that of the Pope , to be Superior to His Majesty's Authority , and they are accustomed to inspire their Scholars with those injust and pernicious Sentiments , as also a False and Bastard Devotion , which inclines them to shake off all Subjection to their Parents , to make themselves Jesuits , or Priests of the Oratory , and to give their Estates to the Order into which they enter themselves , or at least to make their Relations pay them a good Pension , of which the Convent reaps the Profit . They do likewise corrupt those Children in another manner , at least the Jesuits labour under the Scandal of it , and indeed there 's no wickedness of which they are not capable . 

The other Monks who neither keep Schools nor Boarders , do nevertheless seduce abundance of Young People , under pre●…ence of Confessing them , and by Virtue of the Credit which they have to creep into Houses , they ensnare and seduce also the Parents to become Monks and Nuns , and to give them their Estates , especially in the time of Widowhood , nay sometimes they persuade them to be Unmarried on that account , and so create Divisions betwixt Man and Wife , and their Children . They do likewise Debauch their Wives and Daughters , know all the Secrets of Old and Young , and make their own Advantage of the Weakness of every one . 

In many places the Nuns do likewise take young Boarders , who oftentimes learn somewhat else than Virtue among them , and by degrees they persuade them also to turn Nuns , especially if there be any profit to be had by it to the Convent , for the Relations of the Girls give them either a considerable sum of Money for ever , or a good Annual Pension , which is so much loss to the Capital Stock of the Kingdom , seeing it falls into Mainmort or becomes Dead . 

There are also many of those Convents , both of Monks and Nuns , who for Money take in the young Bastards of persons of Quality , that would not have the thing known , and many times they make away with 'em ▪ there have been found in Ponds , Cisterns and Houses of Office , several Corpse and Bones of those poor Infants . 

They plunder the people also by their Tapers , Wax-candles and Torches , which they use in Grand Processions ; for they oblige the people to furnish those things , and all that is not spent belongs , as they allege , to the Church , that is to say , to the Priests or Monks . It is well enough known , that on certain days , which they look upon as great Festivals , they oblige every Corporation or Company , in great Towns , to furnish huge Torches , each of which does sometimes represent an History of the Old and New Testament , or fabulous Legend ; or sometimes they will have the Images of 5 or 6 persons , or as many Beasts , in Wax at large , so weighty that they must have 10 or 12 Men to carry one of these Torches . Twenty such they carry in Procession , which costs more sometimes than 10 or 20000 Liures ; and the profit of this is to be reaped by their Clergy , at the Expense of the poor Idolatrous People . This is chiefly to be seen on that ●…day , which they call the Feast of God , for the Popes , good Men , have thought fit that God should have a Festival , as well as Dominic , Loyola , & Xavier , etc.  

And if the Inquisition were established in France , as many people imagine it may be done in this Reign , which however , I believe not , it would still pillage the Nation more , as it hath done Spain and Portugal . 

there 's yet another secret way , that the Monks are charged with using , to levy a great Sum of Money upon the People and their own Devotionists , all at once , which is thus , When their Convent and its Dependencies , or their Church , is old and does not please them , they set it on fire themselves , and then make heavy Lamentations for that sad Accident which it hath pleased God to permit , and then they go a begging for Money to Rebuild what is burned . If it require 30000 Liures , more or lesle , to Rebuild it as it was , they will raise at least 100000 upon the people , leaving always the work unfinished , and give out , that the Sums raised were but very small , and not enough to carry on the Work ; for none but themselves know perfectly what is given , or what the building hath cost , because they take care that no body shall be acquainted with their Affairs , and so this furnishes them with a pretence to beg constantly , and to procure Legacies from some silly people when a dying , on pretence of finishing that Work.  

There are many Orders who sell little Relics , that they say have been Consecrated by the Pope , and Beads that have touched some Miraculous Images . The Carmelites have what they call the Apparel of the Virgin , etc.  

The Holy Days are moreover very gainful to the Ecclesiastics of all sorts , because the people go to Church on those Days , with more Devotion than on Sundays , cause abundance of Masses to be said , and besides paying for them , give Money also to the Box. Those Festival Days are like so many Fairs ▪ wherein the Clergy make Money of their Merchandise ; They are likewise very advantageous to the Pope , not only in that they contribute to the Enriching of his Ecclesiastical Troops , which he entertains , as I have already said , at the Expense of those whom he has brought under his Yoke , and of whom , he assures himself more and more by that Method , both by weakening them , and keeping in their Kingdoms Armies and Garrisons , of Priests and Monks , who have Sworn to him , as being in their Opinion , Superior to the King ▪ and having a Right to claim Obedience from him in every thing ; so that they are constantly ready , either to revolt or to kill Kings , when the Pope desire's it , or when Princes would have them contribute to the Charge of the State. But those Festivals we now Treat of , are above all advantageous to the Popes in this , that they raise him above all human Authority ▪ nay , above that of God himself ; for 't is they who have Institured or Authorised all those pretended Holy Days , by which they give Laws to the Consciences of Men , and oblige them to Adore and Invoke whom they please , and for the most part Villains , that is to say , the Popes themselves and the Ministers of their Tyranny ; and by this means the Popes don't content themselves to be Adored while they live , but they hope to be Invoked and Adored after their death . They have also this Satisfaction thereby , that they see the Holy Days of their own Appointment , more devoutly observed than those of God's Appointment , which is the Sabbath . Thence also they reap another grand Advantage , viz. the Money which they squeeze from the people for Canonising such and such Saints . 

I must not forget here , the profit which they make by Means of their Father Titrier , or Title maker , as they call him , especially in the Religious Communities , for whom he forges Titles , that they may bereave the Laics of their Estates . 

The Pope's having erected Marriage into a Sacrament , is also a gainful Contrivance for the Clergy ; besides by this means they render themselves Judges of the Birth and Legitimacy of the Children of Princes and Great Men , which keep them in a dependence upon the Popes ; for under pretext that Marriage is a Sacrament according to them , and that the Pope is the Sovereign Judge of Sacraments , he can Bastardise or Legitimate whom he pleases . 

They often attempt to draw within their own Cognisance , all Testaments , Treaties , Acts and Contracts betwixt Man and Man , under the pretext that the Oaths , by which they are confirmed , are Matters whereof the Violation concerns the Conscience . In this manner they would render themselves absolute Masters of all the Estates , as well as of the Quiet and Honour of Mankind . 

The Exemption which the Ecclesiastics pled from the Ordinary Courts of Justice , occasions a great disorder in Society , of which the Popish Clergy make their Advantage . 

They get Money also by granting dispensations , for eating Meat in Lent , and at other times . 

They also squeeze Money from sick persons , or their Friends , for carrying their pretended Sacrament and Holy Oils to them . 

Their Mischievous Clergy have a great number of other Methods , to plunder the people of their Substance , and they invent new ones from time to time , or extend and enlarge the old ones . 

I confess , that all the riches of which the Clergy do thus cunningly bereave the people , is not absolutely lost to the Kingdom , because they either spend it themselves , and so it circulates again among the people , or else they hoard it up , by which they do great prejudice to the State ; but however , soon or late the Money comes out of their hands , at least after their death , and has its ordinary Co●…se among the People : But it is certain that this Money would have been much more profitable to the State , had it been in the hands of those addicted to Trade , Husbandry or Handicrafts , and who have Children to breed up . All Men agree , that Money robbed or taken upon the Highway by Villains , and spent lavishly , as it always happens in that case , or that Money got at Game by professed Cheats , would do much more good to the State , if it were in the hands of industrious Citizens , and those that are useful to the Commonwealth , than in the hands of such Profligates . And hence it comes to pass that in all Countries , where there 's good Discipline , these disorders are punished , though the Money that they rob and cheat people of , does not go out of the Kingdom . It signifies nothing to tell me , that the Money which the Priests catch by these Methods , is given ●…hems freely ; for grant it be so , the State being so much damaged by it , ought not to suffer it . The Master of a Family , who wants management , does often times waste his Estate to little purpose , though he does it willingly , yet he is nothing the lesle injurious to his Family and Creditors , and therefore the Magistrates in some well-governed Countries ▪ appoint a Guardian over such , and that many times too at the request of their Children . But moreover , 't is not true that the ignorant Papists give their Estates willingly to the Priests , for they are the poor people whom they have made drunk with the Wine of their Fornications , according to the Scripturephrase , that is to say , with their Idolatries and Superstitions , threatening them with Hell and Purgatory , if they don't give them , and promising them Heaven if they give . Therefore those who believe their Follies , are under a Moral Necessity of giving them . 

It may be truly said , they rob the people of all they get in that manner , seeing the more they give that way , the lesle they have to maintain their Families , carry on their Trade and to breed up and give portions to their Children . 

If they employed that which they rob the people of in Trade , Handicrafts , Manufactures , Husbandry or Fishing , it would still remain a great piece of Injustice and Disorder , 〈◊〉 the State would not suffer so much by it . 〈◊〉 they employed it in Buildings , profitable to the Society , or purchasing Jewels , or lasting Mo●…oleses , the State would not lose so much by it , but many times they spend it in excess of Eating and Drinking , and other lewd Debauches ; or otherwise hoard it up in their Coffers , or turn Usurers . 

If those Ecclesiastics had not enough to subsist on , without all those cheating Tricks above ▪ mentioned , it were much better for the people , how useless soever they may be , to make a public Fund , for their maintenance , than to suffer them to follow the Trade of Cheating ; as all Men agree , it were better for them to provide thus for other Robbers and Cheats , if it were found to be an effectual Method to divert them from that wicked way of Living . But it hath always been thought , that it would be ineffectual as to Highwaymen by Profession , and we may say the same , as to the Popish Clergy , who for the most part have enough to subsist on without cheats ; yet they find what they catch that way , sweeter than all the rest , and look upon it as the Fruit of their Cunning and Parts . The shortest way then , would be to suppress six parts in seven of all those Ecclesiastics , which would be a good thing , even for themselves , because by that sort of Robbery , they not only destroy their own Souls , but also those of the people , whom they have bewitched and besotted , ruining besides a vast number of Families ; and thus by their pernicious Example , instruct and bring up all the World to Imposture , Cheating and Hyp●…crisie , and make people to conceive Monstrous Opinions of the Deity , by transforming the same either into a Brutish Idol that hath no understanding , or into a Daemon as wicked as possible . 

So that all being considered , I do verily believe , that without reckoning the Scandal occasioned by these disorders , there was no lesle than one third of loss to the Kingdom , by those 40 or 50 Million which all those Cheats brought to the Popish Clergy of France before this War.  

If it be said , that there are many other useless lewd Fellows , that plunder the State as well as the Clergy , that does not one whit excuse them , nor those who suffer such disorders , and might easily prevent them . But on the contrary , the more there are of others , the ●…ewer there ought to be suffered of these who are doubly hurtful , as being contrary to the Salvation of the people's Souls , and the Welfare of the Government . 

The II Article relates to the excessive multitude of Ecclesiastics in France , which are six to one in England , their respective proportions and extents being considered , ( and yet it is known there are more in England than in any other Protestant Country ) whence it appears , that there are proportionably so many more people in France that don't work , being idle Fellows for the most part , altogether useless , nay , do a great deal of mischief . They are computed at 300000 altogether Males and Females , whereof I am sure 40000 Males would be sufficient for the Service of their pretended Church , such as it is ; so that there remain 260000 useless Ecclesiastics . 

then it is to be observed , that 300000 Adult persons , such as they , are worth double the number of others taken out of the common Mass of People , especially if we consider that the greatest part of those Ecclesiastics are Males . le 's reckon the Work then to which those 260000 useless persons ought to apply themselves , if the World were not turned upside down , only at 3 d. per Day one with another ▪ without Victuals ; and let us suppose also , that they work 300 days in a year , the unprofitable Holy Days being abolished , that amounts to above 11 Million 500000 Liures per Annum pure loss . I am willing to abate a Million and a half for the Lace , Points , etc. made by some Nuns , and for what some poor Priests and Monks work in their Gardens , yet there remains still above 10 Million of pure lo●…ss , without taking notice of the Contagion of their bad example of Idleness , which corrupts the people , and besides 't is certain that they spend their time in doing mischief . 

I take no notice neither of their Maintenance , which is ill bestowed , and another Robbery that they commit on the Nation , seeing it ought to be employed in maintaining others , who are more useful , and have so much the lesle , as those Ecclesiastics have too much , who are as Drones that eat up the Honey of the industrious Bee. This Article amounts to as much as the other ; for these people , as I have said , own , that by their Professions , they are not to Work nor to Mary , and so devour the rest of the laborious people that have Families . This , I say , is a Robbery upon the Commonwealth , according to that Axiom , Non Nobis nati sumus sed Patriae & Liberis . We are not born for ourselves , but for our Country and Children . 

Some ignorant people will perhaps say , that they pray to God for others : I Answer , That others either do pray , or aught to pray for them ; So that , as to that matter , they are even with them . But I can tell them besides , that God doth not regard the Prayers of the Wicked , and their Clergy are every whit as Idolatrous and incomparably more Vicious than the People , and that which is worse , do make them Idolaters and Seduce them a thousand ways . 

God also hate's the Worship and Prayers of Idolaters and Hypocrites , especially Seducers , and chiefly when they call themselves Christians , because than they make Jesus Christ the Author of their Idolatry and strange Worship , which is the greatest of all Impieties . 

Article III Mendicant-fr●…ars in particular , are a very great charge to the Kingdom , all of them being absolutely needless , whereas amongst the Secular Clergy the Bishops with a few Canons , Curates , and Priests , are necessary and fit enough for the ordinary Service of their Church , such as it is ; and those Begging Friars are so much more intolerable than the Endowed Monasteries , as by their voluntary Begging and Laziness , they are very chargeable to the People , who maintain them richly one way or other . For ordinarily they Eat the best , and Drink abundance of Wine , whilst many Honest people who are useful Subjects in the Kingdom , have much ado to get Bread by their Labour . Those wretched Monks are also highly injurious to the real Poor , who are robbed of so much Alms as those Idle Bellies receive . They are moreover greater Hypocrites , and more Ignorant than the rest of the Clergy , and abundance of handsome Young Women choose them for their Confessors , because of their seeming Devotion and Mortification , under which pretext the●… commit a deal of Uncleanness . it 's supposed that there are above 60000 of those Monks in the Kingdom ; let us reckon then that they cost the Kingdom but 6 d. a piece per day one with another , that will exceed six Million of Liures per annum . This is the least they spend , for most part of them live in Good Cities or Towns , where they fare deliciously , but take care as much as they can to conceal their good Cheer , because that would prevent the People's giving them so much . I have several times seen diverse Spits full of choice P●…lletss , Venison and Wildfowl roasting for them in by Houses , ( at a little distance from their Convents ) where the People followed that way of living , and they wo●…ld tell me that those things were sent out of Charity to the Good Fathers . 

Article IU. All those several sorts of Ecclesiastics live Unmarried , whereas Protestant Churchmen Mary for the most part , and contribute to the Peopling of the Kingdom . The Popish Ecclesiastics in France are comp●…ted as I said , at 300000 , who being all of 'em Unmarried they tender 300000 other Adult persons which Nature had designed 'em for Wives or Husbands useless for Propagation . If the rest of the Nation , should do thus , it would be entirely extinguished in 50 or 60 years . It is observed from the Registers of Births an●… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Kingdoms , that there is near the matter equal proportion betwixt the Birth and Death of both Sexes ; which is a proof that they are born one for another . Now if according to the observation of 〈◊〉 , 600000 persons , double in 〈◊〉 years time , and produce 1200000 , these 1200000 in 800 year's time ought to be Nine Millio●…ss according to the ordinary progress of Generation . But because the number of Ecclesiastics was not ne●…r so great at that time as at present , fo●…●…e nearer we approach to the dregss of Time , the more that Vermin multiplies ; especially since the Reformation , by which the Empire of Antichrist was shaken , and he endeavours to support it by an extraordinary multitude of Guards and Pensioners , who are in the same Interest with himself ; and moreover because France was nothing near so well Peopled in those days , as it hath been since , we shall content ourselves with a fourth part of those Nine Million which we supposed might have been born in 800 year's time , if the Popish Clergy had Married . Let 's see then to how much that loss might have amounted per annum , according to the valuation which we might have made of the People of France 30 years ago . 

I have made it plain elsewhere , that without People a Country is worth nothing , and that about 30 years ago , the people of France might have been valued at 1500 Liures a piece one with another , so that the loss of Two Million and 250000 souls , which is the fourth part of the Nine Million abovementioned , that might have been born in 800 year's time of the Romish Clergy , had they been Married , amounts to 3350 Million , which being divided by 800 , is above Four Million loss each year , and this is so much the more palpable , that those Two Million and a Half of people , being added to those that were already in the Kingdom , would have increased in Value , and have augmented the Value of the Kingdom , and of all the People ; for the better Peopled a Country is , the more Valuable it is , as is also every individual in the Kingdom , so that this occasions an annual loss of Four Million at least , one year with another . 

Article v. The Popish Clergy possesses one half of the Estates Real and Personal in the Kingdom of France , which half about 30 years ago , we have computed elsewhere at 200 Million per annum ; then it is to be noted that those Estates are in Mainmort , that is to say , lie dead , because they can neither engage nor alie●…ate 'em , nor employ them in Trade , so that they are lesle advantageous to the Country than if they were in the hands of Men fit for Commerce , Handicrafts ▪ Husbandry or Manufactures , or that those Estates passed by Inheritance from Father to Son , so that by necessary consequence , their being in the hands of the Clergy , is very much against the Good of the Kingdom . Hence also it follows , that the Ecclesiastics may well increase their own riches at the Expense of the People , whose Estates they are able to acquire , whereas the People can never make any advantage of them . They are moreover as so many Usurers , and make profit from the Industry and Labour of the People , by lending them Money at a great Interest , which is very pernicious to a State. They are in this respect abundantly worse than the jews , who ordinarily are very Covetous , spend little , and are great Usurers , nor are there any Land-estates to be purchased from them , because they ordinarily have none . Yet they are abundantly more profitable to a State than the Popish Clergy , because diverse of 'em Traffic by Sea , employ Vessels , Mariners and other People of business , and do moreover maintain and breed up Families . 

For our better understanding how prejudicial it is to a State to have a great part of their Fund or Stock in Mainmort , we must consider , that if all the riches of a State w●…re so , it could not subsist , as the World is managed at present . Trade , Arts , Ma●…factureses , Sciences and Industry , etc. must necessarily f●…ll , all hope of advancing one's self , or of acquiring Estates by Labour and Industry , or of distinguishing ourselves from others would vanish , all people would by this means be alike Wealth , there would be neither Poor nor Rich , Knowing nor Ignorant ; there could be no subordination in any thing , and all should be in confusion . Such a Nation would be uncapable of making War , or defending itself : for a Neighbouring Nation whose Funds should not be in Mainmort , must immediately become Master of that Nation that were so , for by dividing their Funds amongst their Soldiers , they would encourage all their Soldiers to take Arms against the other Nation , and to dispoil them of all . For suppose those two Nations are equal in number of Men , and extent of Dominions , That Nation whose Wealth is not in Mainmort , and has more poor people than Rich , according to the usual course of the World , might make an Effort twenty times greater than the other , seeing their stock is ordinarily of 20 times more value than their Revenue at the 20th Penny. So that one very inconsiderable Nation might by this Method , easily Conquer the whole World , if the Wealth of all other Nations besides itself were in Mainmort , for as soon as ever they should have subdued another , they would dispose of their Stock in favour of their Soldiers , and of all others that should follow their Party . 

If that should take place , there would be no such thing as getting of riches , nor would there be any need of Money , but people would only Barter one Commodity against another with their Neighbours for a few days , and in very small quantities , for the use only of a few persons . Credit must either be totally abolished , or extend only to a small part of each one's Revenue , and only for a few Days or Weeks , and there would likewise be a necessity of assurance , that he who borrowed was not already indebted to another in some part of his Revenue . Who then would take upon him the trouble of administering Justice , if there were no Estate to be acquired by his Labour ? Or who is it would be Physician or Divine , or serve the Public in any Station for nothing ? 

Suppose that in such a Country I have an Estate in Land , which I cannot Engage , and I have a desire to take up my abode in a Neighbouring Nation , where their Estates are not so disposed in Mainmort , and that I have occasion for Two , Ten , or 20000 l. in Money , for something that may be Advantageous to the State , or my own Family , as carrying on a Trade , opening Shop , etc.  Who will lend me that Money , if I can●…ot Mortgage my Estate ? Or suppose I have Money to Lend , to whom shall I Lend it ? Where are my Sureties , seeing no person can alienate his Estate ? Whereas when a Man may Mortgage his Estate for ready Money , all those Funds enter into Commerce , every Industrious and Diligent Person employs himself in hopes that sometime or other he may get some share of it , and thus all is in Motion , and Circulates as it ought to do in a Body Politic , without which it should not be able to make use of its Members , but labour under a Civil or Political Palsy . The Soldier hope's to purchase some Estate one time or other ; Men of Ingenuity and Parts , if Poor , entertain the like hopes , and therefore set themselves to Business ; ●… good Mechanic or Mariner does the like , and so the rest , for which there would be no room , if Estates were inalienable ; for in this case Prodigality , Liberality , Covetousness , Industry or Idleness , could neither profit or hurt us ; if there were no riches , and by Consequence no Honours to be acquired amongst men . 

Hence than it is clear , that the Kingdom of France is deprived of the use of one half of its Members , because one half of its Substance is in Mainmort , for the more of a Country's Wealth that there is so , the lesle they have of Activity , Motion , Commerce or Credit one among another , or with Strangers . Hence it comes to pass , that Popish Countries , who have a great part of their Wealth in Mainmort , cannot drive any considerable Trade , even though their mischievous Religion should not have unpeopled them , as it in●…allibly does , unless they have abundance more of ready circulating Money than other Nations , which have more Credit and Hopes for Trade , because they have more Funds proper to be engaged in the same . Thou there be some Popish Countries in Italy , that have still a considerable Trade , as Genoa , Venice and Leghorn : This is occasioned partly b●…cause the Clerg●… is not so Numerous and Rich there , and partly that private persons are forbid the putting out of Money to Use , and that for the most part in times of Peace , Interest of Money does not exceed 3 per Cent in those places , which obliges the people to be frugal , and to improve their Money in a way of Trade , without which Popery would reduce them low enough in a little time . And yet notwithstanding ●…his , if all Protestant Nations would fix the Interest of Money among themselves at the same rate , they should quickly Engross all the Commerce into their hands , and in a little time those Popish people would come to nothing , for naturally Popery is good for nothing else but to ruin Kingdoms , and to render the Pope and the Ecclesiastics Masters of all . 

The Banks and Lombard's in those Towns of Italy are also very useful to them , but after all , these are but two or three Cities in that Country , which is no great matter , and which with all those helps would be much lesle considerable , if it were not that they have extended their Dominion in a manner over all the rest of Italy , of whose Land Estates they possess a great part by the purchases they have made , whereas on the other hand Fr●…nce and England are generally fitter for Trade , and without doubt the Italians would be four times more proper for it than they are , and their Country abundantly better peopled , were it not for their Religion , and Italy by remaining Papist , would be much more unpeopled than 't is , were it not the Seat of the Papacy , but it is in some manner compensated for its losses by the Popish Religion , with the Booty which the Court of Rome draws thither from all other Nations , as those who live in the Neighbourhood of Algiers are advantaged by the Robberies of that Nest of Pirates . 

It must be considered that in a great State or Country , let it be what it will , and let them drive what Trade they please , except it be in the Provinces of Holland and Zealand , the Real Estates are abundantly more valuable for the Capital Fund than Personal Estates , though the latter do very near afford as much Revenue . But if all those Real Estates were in Mainmort , and could not be alienated , the Personal Estate would be abundantly more valuable , because any Man who is possessed of such . might therewith purchase an Estate in a Neighbouring Country which should not be in Mainmort , and whereof he might dispose at pleasure . 

It is also certain , that how much land Estate soever any person may have , if his Estate were in Mainmort , he could not be said to be worth so much as the real value of his Land , because a Man cannot be accounted rich , but in proportion to that Estate which he has power to dispose of . it 's true , that in a plentiful year , he should be able to maintain abundance of people , but then all of them would run the risk of being starved in a year of dearth and scarcity , because not being able to alienate his Estate , he should not have credit to buy Provisions ; and besides , those people that serve him must needs be slaves , for none else would serve him , but in hopes to gain something ; and what is it they could gain , when there is no Stock to be acquired , nor no Money , and if there were , it would be of no use to them . 

Some may perhaps imagine , that if there were great Public Storehouses of Metals . Clotheses , Linen , Hides , and such things which might be alienated , and purchased by Industry , either in whole or in part , that they might serve instead of real Estates , as to that matter . But it is easily perceived , that this could satisfy none at best , but the poorer sort , who live from Hand to Mouth , and not aspiring persons , or those of a refined Spirit . Moreover , except it were Steel and Iron , which are indispensably necessary for the use of Life , Gold , Silver and other Metals , would be of little worth ; for there being no Commerce , Money would be out of use , for that very reason : And as for those other Commodity's abovementioned , viz. Linen , Hides , Cloth , etc. they are so very apt to spoil , that they could not be kept any long time ; and besides with what should they be exchanged , there being little or no Money , because it would not be necessary , there being no Trade nor Estate to be alienated . 

Further , if all those Real Estates were in Mainmort , and unalienable , there would be no room for Industry , and by Consequence not the 10th part of the Personal Estates , that there are at present . For , as I have already said , Money would be useless , Navigation , Ships , Merchandise , and all Movables , superfluous ; all Arts would decay ; no Man would work but for his own use , and that of his Family and pressing occasions ; persons of Dignity and Honour , if there were any such , could not make any Figure or Pomp , to distinguish them from others ; and in a word , the whole face of the Universe would be changed , or rather turned upside down . 

Of all riches , those which are most generally desired , and without which there could be no other , are Real Estates , to wit , Lands and Houses , because they are most profitable , durable and visible , and cannot be stolen ; and besides , they occasion their Possessors to be most taken notice of in the World. These are things which cannot be wanted , whereas we may well enough be without most of the other things , and it 's the natural and general desire of all Mankind ▪ to attain to such Estates , which cause t●…e subsistence of Society , Arts , Sciences , and Commerce . If it be objected that in our time , there are abundance that love Money better , and prefer it to real Estates : I Answer , That it 's because they know that therewith they can purchase Houses and Lands , when they have a mind to them . But if they had never so much Money in a Country , where such Estates could not be alienated , they would find themselves very uneasy , and be perfect Beggars , for where there 's no Commerce , they would not know what to do with their Money , nor would they any way be taken Notice of . 

According to the present Posture of Affairs , a Man may Buy or Farm an House and Land for his Money , without being obliged to any Body , because such things are always to be had , either for a longer or shorter time , and that there is a flourishing Trade amongst Men , for which there could be no place , if all those Estates were in Mainmort . 

At present we may reckon Kingdoms and States , as to the Capital Stock , and as to the Revenue of this Stock , we may reckon all the real and personal Estates of a People , and of every particular Person apart ; We can now fix the Value of an entire Nation , at a certain rate , but all these would be worth nothing , if Real Estates were in Mainmort ▪ because there could be neither Industry , Commerce , Revenue , nor Money , etc.  

As for Example , I have valued elsewhere , the Revenues of all the Estates , Real and Personal , of France , and the Fruits of the People's Industry altogether at 1000 Million of Liures per Annum ; and the whole Stock therein , comprehending the people at 20000 Million , at 20 year's purchase ; And likewise in England , I have valued the same Stock and product at 550 Million of Liures per Annum , and the whole Stock therein , comprehending the people at 11000 Million , at 20 year's purchase . But if all those Estates were in Mainmort , they would not be worth the 10th , nay , the 20th part so much , nor indeed worth any thing , but the present enjoyment of the people , who would be very few in number , as I have already said , and like so many Savages , having neither Commerce , Arts , Manufactures , Sciences nor Money , as has been often said ; for no Man would work but for himself and his Family , and that too but from hand to mouth . These and many more are the Inconveniences , that would follow upon having all Estates in Mainmort . 

Lands and Houses are in a State , when they can pass from one hand to another , like Bills of Assurance or good Security , which are worth as much or more than Gold and Silver , when those things can pass by way of Commerce , there 's lesle need of Gold and Silver , and other personal Effects ; and if this were not so , there would be an immediate Obstruction of Commerce , and the State must fall into a Consumption . Herein it is that the want of Public Registers in England , is very prejudicial to the Trade of the Nation , because for want of this , those who would Traffic with divers persons that have Estates , which might be purchased , dare not venture ●…pon it , for fear that those Estates are already engaged to others , which for a time , has the same effect to those particular persons , as if their Estates were in Mainmort ; so that the Public and the Proprietors loose abundantly by this means , besides the numerous Suits , which are thereby occasioned ; so that 't is neither easy to sell them , nor to borrow Money upon them . And hence it is observed , that in the Town of Taunton , where there are Public Registers for Lands and Houses thereon depending , and for such Estates as are Mortgaged or not Mortgaged , that that Town is in a flourishing Condition , for that very Reason . 

But though the want of Public Registers be a very great disorder in England , yet it comes far short of that which is occasioned by Estates being in Mainmort in Popish Countries . For in the first place , this may be remedied when the Nation pleases , whereas in Popish Countries the Pope and the Clergy , who tyrannize there , and make their own advantage of those disorders , would rather over-turn a Country , than suf●…er any Reformation , as to that Head , unless Princes of great Power and Authority , such as the present King of France , undertakes it . In the next place , those dubious Funds in England , are not perhaps the 20th part of those in the Kingdom , neither are they constantly left out of Commerce , as are those of the Popish Ecclesiastics . And last of all , it 's well known , that this is no effect of the Protestant Religion , as the disorder whereof we now speak , is certainly an effect of the Romish Religion in France . 

But some perhaps may say , that Entails are allowed in all Countries , which hinders those that enjoy such Estates from alienating them ; so that they cannot enter into Commerce , so long as the Entail lasts , and that by the same reason the Popish Clergy , may also enjoy Estates that are inalienable without any great inconvenience . 

I Answer , That those Entails don't take place , but where Men can't do better , that it is an inconvenience and not an indifferent thing ; but besides it is not usual for the Entail to be perpetual , only for a little time , for assoon as the Children , in whose favour it is made , become Masters of the Estate , it returns again into the Public Commerce , and may be Mortgaged and Alienated , and pass from one hand to another , either in whole or in part . 2.  There is not perhaps the 200th part of any Country so entailed all at once , and there 's no reason to doubt , but in a well-governed State , where the Governors have sufficient Authority , they would find a Remedy for those Entails , if there were too many of them , and that they would find out some other Method for ensuring the Estate to Infants or Heirs , without having the Estate cut off from the public Commerce . 3.  But besides that this is not so common ; it must be agreed , that there 's much more reason to have regard to poor innocent Children , whom a Father that 's an ill Husband , might ruin , and who may one time or other be very useful to the Public , who are moreover recommendable for the sake of their Grandfathers , Grandmothers , or other Ancestors , whose Memory is dear to the Public . I say there 's more regard to be had to those Infants , to whom that Estate ought Naturally and Lawfully to be transmitted by Hereditary Right , than to Ecclesiastics who have no Natural nor Acquired Right to those Estates ; and who are besides unprofitable , for the most part , to a State , scandalous persons ▪ and i●… whose hands , and those of their Successors , the half or more of the Wealth of a Nation , is always to remain cut off from Public Commerce . 

But perhaps some Opinionative persons may say , that to carry on the Trade of a Nation , 't is enough that the half of the Wealth of a Country is not in Mainmort , which is just as much as if he should say , that it is as good to have half the Body Paralytic , and deprived of the use of half of its Members , as not to be so at all , because they still live in that condition . But who is it that does not perceive that it is a distempered and a languishing condition , and that in such a case , a Man cannot do half the business that he might do , if he were in perfect health . 

It cannot be reasonably denied , that the more vigorous a Body is , the better it does work ; so that the more Credit there is in a Nation , the more all its effects are in Motion ; the more Arts , Industry , Agriculture and Commerce flourish there , and the Country becomes Populous in proportion . What a mighty disorder than does it occasion that all those Monks and Priests ( who are the Subjects of a Foreign Prince , seeing they have taken the Oaths to him , and who is moreover of necessity the Hereditary Enemy of the State ) should be thus with all their Wealth , sequestered from the State , in respect of all those things , wherein they might be useful to it , viz. in regard of Imposts , and the Charges of the State , and Trade ; as also in regard of Propagation , and Obedience to their Sovereign , as other Subjects ; that they , I say , should be no otherwise united to a State , but so as to ruin it , and enrich themselves by its Spoils . 

Let us suppose the Estates that are in Mainmort among the Ecclesiastics , possessed by Merchants or Tradesmen , the Commerce would have been much greater in FRANCE , and by Consequence the Kingdom should have been more rich and potent . 

Let us suppose , that they had been in the hands of the Generals of Armies , Colonels , and other Military Officers , who like the Turkish Timariot should entertain upon those Estates so many thousands of Married Men as might Cultivate them . What an incredible ease would that give to the poor people , who should thereby be relieved from the Burden of Maintaining so many Troops ; what increases of People , and w●…at riches would not that produce ? Or let us suppose , that those Estates were in possession of people of Quality , or others who either had served , or might serve the King in his Camp , though not in the manner of Timariot , they would spend those Estates in the service of the King , by doing him Honour at Court , or Generously in fine Buildings , Sculptures , Paintings , Graving , or other Magnificent Curiosities and Ornaments , which would Embellish and Set off the Provinces and Towns , make Arts to flourish , employ a vast number of people , and cause Money to circulate incessantly from one hand to another . Or suppose they were possessed by Laics of all ranks indifferently , as the other half of the Estates of the Kingdom are at present , and that as to other things the Government should remain on the same footing as it is at present , ( which however is not much to be desired : ) The King in that case should mightily increase his Revenue ; the Officers of Justice , of the Police or Discipline of Cities , and those of the Treasury , as also those of the Imposts , and all their Train , would get twice as much riches as they do , except their number should be Augmented in proportion : In which case the King would be enriched by the sale of great number of Places . it 's true , the people should always continue miserable if they were as much Taxed in proportion , but the King's Revenues would be doubled . 

Nay the very name of Mainmort imports , that those Estates in such hands are unprofitable to the Society . 

I have enlarged a little upon this Article , beyond what I intended , because it is of the highest concern in Politics , and that I have met with several Men of Parts , who did not ●…ightly apprehend the Mischief of having so much wealth in Mainmort . 

Article VI relates to the great Quantity of Plate which they have in their Churches and Convents , and in those places they call their Treasuries , as St. Denis near Paris , Notre Dame de Liesse , and des Ardillieres , and other places of that nature . This one Superstitious and Foolish Custom , must needs have robbed the Public Commerce of diverse Million , at such time as the Clergy had amassed a great quanti●…y of it as before this War , which was the true cause that a great part of it was melted down by the King's Order . Suppose that in the whole it had not exceeded 20 Million , that would have at least amounted to several Million amongst the people per Annum . However I will not take upon me to determine how far this loss extended , because I dont know what quantity of Plate they had , for the Popish Clergy never tell the truth in these cases , and very seldom in any others . 

Article VII . Relates to the constant practice of their Clergy in hoarding up Money , which is of more importance than the preceding Article , for seeing many of them possesses great Revenues , and are neither allowed to Trade nor to Mary , and by consequence have no lawful Offspring , they do ordinarily betake themselves to the amassing of vast sums of Money , under the pretext of providing for their Nephews and Nieces as the Popes do , and they don't provide for them neither , for the most part , till after their death , which is doubly prejudicial to Commerce . It hath moreover been the constant Observation of such persons that they are very Covetous and don't love to give Alms to the Poor , altho' they be thereunto obliged by the intention of their Founders ; so that taking of their Avarice for granted , which is in●…eparably annexed and natural to that sort of people , together with their sordid Principles of Parsimony , at least in all their Communities , where they spend little in comparison of their vast Incomes , though at the same time they eat and drink a great deal ; These things , I say , being taken for granted , as they are certainly true , there 's ground to believe , that all their Clergy together , Secular and Regular of both Sexes , might have constantly , before this War , at least 50 Million of useless Money to the Public , in their Coffers , or the hands of the Public Notaries . Whence 't is easy ●…o perceive , that the Public lost considerably by this Money , which in Commerce , would have brought abundance of profit to the Kingdom , helped to pay Taxes , employed abundance of people , and contributed to Propagation . 

This Article must certainly amount to seu●…ral Million ; I will not determine how many , but without doubt this , and the preceding Article , are to be reckoned at 8 or 10 Million loss per Annum at least . 

Article VIII . relates to the Ridiculous Festivals that they observe ; wherein the poor Idolatrous People lose their time , besides the Debaucheries which this abuse occasions indispensibly in Popish Countries , which together can't be reckoned at lesle than ●…50 Million of Liur●…s' loss per An. For supposing that the Industry of the Nation might have been formerly valued at above 600 Million per Annum , as I have made it appear elsewhere , if it were not for the abuses of Popery , whereof this is one of the most prejudicial : Supposing , I say , there are above 50 working days lost in a Year , by Festivals in general , without reckoning Sundays and some remarkable Festivals , that would be the 6th part of the people's Industry lost , which amounts to 100 Million per Annum . We must also take notice , that besides those general Festivals and Holy days , there are many particular Festivals , viz. those of every Parish , who have their particular Saint , whose Image they adore according to the Doctrine of their Councils , the Festivals of Saints for every Profession , Trade and Distemper , when they practise the like , the Festivals of Beasts or Saints that are Patrons of Beasts ; so that there 's much above the 6th part of the people's time lost . I confess that the time of those Holy-days , is not absolutely lost , for than they mind Housekeeping , dress Victuals , and take care of their dattle on Sunday , etc. and some other profitable things are done , as Travelling by Land and Sea , and Mariners are employed on those days as well as others ; which to observe by the by , is still a great advantage , that protestants and Trading Nations have above others , who have not so much Trade by Sea. But then if we consider that those Holy days debauch the People , teach them bad Habits of Idleness , Drunkenness and Immodesty , which hinders them from working on other days , ruins their Families ▪ occasions abundance of Disorders , Quarrels , Diseases , Fires , and the Death of many People ; one may easily perceive , that the Damage occasioned by these Festivals , amounts to above 100 Million per An. and in effect , as Men do generally ●…e those days , they look more like as if they were consecrated to the Devil than to God. Master●… suffer ve●…y much by this Libertinism of their Servants and Apprentices ; and the poor Wives at home are grieved , to consider that their Husbands are at the Public Houses , where they spend all that they had gained in several days , and will come home drunk , and perhaps beaten them into the bargain . 

If it be pretended , that Men work the better , and are the more vigorous the days after the Festival , because they have had some rest ; that may be true , as to some of the honest people , but as for the greatest part , it hath a contrary effect ; their Idlenefs and Debauchery makes them lose those days and many others , and if all of them don't debauch themselves on those days , they spend them at least in Races and unprofitable Walks , which fatigues them more than their ordinary Work , and to tho●…e who are of a regular ▪ Temper , those Holy-days are perfectly irksome . God who is wiser than Man , hath appointed but one day in seven as a day of Rest ; not that I would reproach those Christian Nations , who have but a small number of Holy-days , that I think tolerable , provided there be no excess in their number , as there is an horrible excess in the Popish Church . I am really of opinion , that the disorders abovementioned , which are the result of , or inseparably annexed to those Festivals , do almost as much mischief as the Holy-days themselves , and experience shows us daily , that there 's more Insolence and Disorder committed on one Holiday than on three others , and that by an ill habit they contract on those days ; they do likewise break out in profanity on the Lord's day ; and most Masters of Shops in Towns , complain that they cannot find Journeymen to work the day after Holy-days , nay , nor on Mondays , because of the Sunday preceding , the Rabble usually disordering themselves so much on those Holy-days , that they cannot work the day after . I take no notice here of the Disorders and Debaucheries that are committed at their Midnight-masses . 

To this I may join their loss of time in their Scandalous Pilgrimages , it being known that sometimes they go as far as Rome , and Loretto , and St. James de Compostella in Spain , etc. and now and then as far as Jerusalem . Besides , they loose abundance of time in Shrieving or Confessing themselves , and at their Anniversary Days , Ash-wednesday , etc. and by carrying their pretended Sacrament or God about e●…ery day , by 4 persons at a time , besides the Priest who holds it in his hands ; and this is perhaps in 50 places at once in some great Cities . They loose also abundance of time in their daily Masses , which are said without any shadow of necessity , but merely to subsist the Pope's Troops in the Country at the charge of the people . They have moreover their private Masses for the cure of their dattle , at which every one who is interested is obliged to assist . They loose abundance of time at all those Follies , of which I might make an Article apart , as also their Ambarvalia and Rogation Weeks ( which they have borrowed from the Pagans' , as they have done most of the rest of their Religion ) by which they think to procure Rain , or divert boisterous Seasons , when they threaten their Corn. And this loss of time is so much the more ruinous to France , that there are abundance of more people in it unfit for work proportionably , than in England , viz. Lawyers and other Civil Officers , Clergymen , & c.  

Article XI . relates to the Sum ▪ which the Pope draws from France every year , under different denominations as Annates , Bulls , Dispensations , Indulgences , Relics , Provisions , Agnus Dei , and Consecrated Grains , all sorts of Expedition , Consecrations of Prelates , Dedications of Churches , Jubilès now and then , both at France and at Rome , etc. which is so much the more ridiculous for France to endure , that the Nation since many Ages , has not had greater Enemies than the Popes , and yet the Money drained out of the Kingdom by this means , amounts to divers Million Annually . Mr. dè Sully Surintendant of the Finances , under Henry the iv. having well examined the matter , found that in that time the Pope got every year one with another , above 4 Million of Liures from France ; and since that time it has doubled at least ; suppose it were but 6 Million of Liures per Annum , 't is 120 Million in 20 year's time . 

Article X. is concerning the great Sums which the Cardinal's Protectors of France , and diverse other Romish Prelates , who are Pensioners of France , besides the Knights of Maltha , etc. draw yearly out of the Kingdom by Benefices which they possess in it . This amounts also to several Million yearly . 

Article XI . relates to the Tapers , Wax-candles , and Oil that is spent in their foolish Superstitions , as burning them before Images , Statues , Hosties , and at Funerals , etc. which did formerly cost the Kingdom of France , perhaps 8 or 10 Million per Annum , the greatest part of the Wax being imported from other Countries , and for that which is the product of France , it must be also reckoned , because it is as unprofitably spent , as if they should take the Wine and Brandy , which is their prod●…ct too , and that they sell to Strangers , and pour it out upon the Ground . I don't reckon here the Incense which they burn to little purpose , because that is no great matter , and is grateful to the smell ; neither do I take notice of the Ornaments and Raiment of their Statues , Images , and other Idols , because they last long , nor of their Mysterious Vestments , adorned with fine Lace , of Linen , Silver or Gold , or Gold-fringes or Embroidery , with which their Priests are decked , when they perform what they call Divine Service . Nor do I take notice of the great Quantity of Wine , which is spent in their multitude of Masses daily , because it nourishes those that drink it ; nor yet of their Wafers or Consecrated Hosties , that they keep , though it be so much flower lost : So that I content myself here , only to reckon the loss of their Tapers and Oil , which I do verily believe , including their loss of time , in making or lighting their Candles , and cleaning and lighting their Lamps amounted to 8 or 10 Million per Annum . 

The Expense of the Wax is more perceptible to abundance of people than that of their Oil , and especially to protestants who don 't go often into the Popish Churches , because they have seen 1000 times in the Streets and at the Gates of the Churches , prodigious Quantities of great long Tapers , Flambeaus and Torches , burning all at once , whereas they don't so much see the Consumption of the Oil. But on the contrary , the Papists will Judge that the Expense of the Oil is much greater , because they see in many Churches , 10 , 15 , or 20 Lamps burning all at once , night and day , and in truth I am of opinion , that the expense of the Oil is the greater . To convince any Man that it was great , let 's suppose there were only 200000 Lamps burning continually in the Churches , Monasteries , Convents and Chapels of the Kingdom , before their pretended Sacrament , their Images and Statues in the middle of the Churches to enlighten the Night , whether they be fed with Oil of Oli●…e , Oil of Rape or other Fat ; yet it 's known that for the most part they spend the best Oil , which in many places is brought a great way by Land , is very dear ; and oftentimes the principal Trade of the Grocers , and Wax-chandlers' in Cities , is to furnish Oil and Wax for the Churches , Funerals and Processions . 

I am of the mind , that the least we can reckon for every Lamp in 24 hours is 2 d. which at the rate of 200000 Lamps , amounts to 20000 Liures per day , which is almost 7 Million per Annum for Oil alone . There are many Lamps which spend above 6 d. per day in Oil where it is dear , or the Lamps great , and have a large wick and cast a great light . It is to be considered , that there are 27000 Parishes in the Kingdom , besides what is in the new Conquests ; and that there are few Churches , nay , even in the Country , but what have two Lamps ; and that in Cities there are Churches that have 10 , 15 , 20 or above , continually burning , besides what are in Monasteries , Convents and Chapels both in Town and Country . There are many places in France , as well as in Spain , Portugal , Italy and other Countries where those that light the Lamps in the Churches maintain their Families perfectly , by robbing the Lamps of their Oil , and giving out that it is drunk by Night-owls . 

As to the Wax , after having considered it well , I believe that formerly it amounted to no lesle ●…han 3 Million of Liures per Annum ; which would in whole amount to 10 Million ; but this I submit to the Judgement of such who are more thoroughly acquainted with those things than I ; but if it should not amount to above 5 Million , it is still a considerable loss to the Kingdom . 

Article XII . concerns their Lent , Ember-weeks , and other Fast-days , as they call them , viz. the Friday and Saturday of every Week , with the Orders of Monks and Nuns , who are never allowed to eat Flesh , Eggs nor Butter . All those things occasion abundance of Mischiefs , which I shall here present to view , that we may be better able to Judge of the great prejudice done to the State by this one Head , which is of the greatest consequence . 

1.  By this means , great Sums of Money are exported out of the Kingdom for dry a●…d fresh Cod ▪ Stockfish , White and Red-hering . Salmon , Pilchards , Sardines , etc. it 's certain ▪ that formerly there were several Million , above 6 at least , went out of the Kingdom every year for Fish. It it be said , that the French for a considerable time , have Fished Cod enough in New-●…ound-land . It is however certain , that 't is not many years since they bought that sor●… of Fish from Foreigners , and as for the other sorts of Saltfish , they buy them almost wholly still from Foreigners and protestants . 

2.  These Superstitions prevent the breeding of many Cattles of all sorts , and likewise of Fowl in the Kingdom , as there would be otherwise , because for almost one half of the year they dare not eat any Flesh , which by necessary consequence diminishes the Revenues of land  

3.  For this very reason of the want of Flesh ▪ it is impossible that a Country can maintain and breed up so many people , because next to Bread , there 's nothing does so much Nourish a Man as Flesh , nor any thing that renders him so proper for Labour and Generation . They must not pretend to tell me , that that Land which is fi●… for Feeding dattle , is fit for other things , and that what they loose on the on●… hand , they gain it on the other , for 't is very well known , that there are many Grounds proper for dattle , Pasturage , and Hay , that are fit for nothing else ; and on the other hand , suppose that those Grounds were equally fit for Corn , Wine or Wood , as for breeding of dattle , 't is known that the profit of dattle is the greatest . I have known several Quarters of France that abounded with Meadows along the Rivers , where a Load of Hay weighing 2000l . weight , and drawn by six great Oxen , and sometimes two or three Horses joined to them besides , was not worth above three Liures , and sometimes not above two and an half , which would not have been so , but for their Lent and other Fast-days ▪ 

4.  It is known that the profit of Cattles comes with lesle Expense and Labour , for the Cattles go of themselves to the places where one would have them , and so save Carriage . 

5.  It is also known that dattle when they feed , are at Work for their Owner , without any need of his being present with them , so that he may apply himself to some other thing . 

6.  A little Meat with B●…ead , nourishes better than three times as much B●…ead alone . 

7.  Cattles give rise to abundance of important Manufactures , that employ and afford Subsistance to great numbers of people , such as Wools , Hides , Horns , Suet , Butter , Cheese , etc.  

8.  This want of Cattles makes Meat dear to those employed in Manufactures , and other Handicrafts , as also to Merchants whom i●… costs a great deal dearer to Victual their Ships . 

9 It likewise occasions the dearness of Candle , Butter , Cheese , Hides , and Wool , etc. in a Country , which is an hindrance to Mechanics , Trade , and Propagation , and makes other Provisions dearer in general than in those Countries where that Superstition is unknown . It particularly occasions the dearness of Bread , because the people for want of Flesh-meat are obliged to eat abundance of Bread. This want of Cattles occasions also the laying out of great sums in Foreign Rice , Hide●… , Suet , Butter , Cheese , and Fat or Grease for Coaches , and other Carriages . 

10.  Those Extravagant Superstitions are the cause of Maladies and Distempers , Languish , and of the death of an infinite number of poor people , and of Infirm , Aged , and Scrupulous persons ▪ to whom Meat would be more proper than any thing else , and yet they cannot have that Relief , because ●…hey either cannot or will not give it them , or that they dare not eat it , because of the Scruples that the Idolatrous Priests have formed in their Minds , so that they suffer extremely during that time , and abundance more people die in that season than in others . This Superstitious Lent falls likewise precisely out at a time when the Husbandman , and other Country people labour very hard , about digging their Vines , Dunging their Ground , Sowing their March Corn , and Manuring their Gardens ; so that the Peasants are in much the worse condition to work , that they are ill fed , not being allowed to eat Flesh-meat , and their Garden Stuff being many times spoiled by the hard Frosts in the Winter . 

11.  Besides this the Lent falls just at the end of Winter , when the Poor , Sickly and Ancient people have suffered more than they do ordinarily at other Seasons , and instead of recovering strength as they would , or might do , were they allowed to eat such good Meat as the Season affords , as fresh Eggs , Lamb , Veal , Kids , Pigs , etc. instead of that , the Lent completes their ruin and kills them . 

12.  Lent , and their other pretended Fast-days , and their Monks and Nuns that never eat Flesh , destroy all the Fish in the Rivers , without a possibility of being stocked again , nay they hinder those of the very Ponds from coming to maturity or a competent growth . 

13.  It occasions abundance of people to lose their time by Fishing i●… those Rivers , without almost catching any thing , because they wil●… have Fish , and can have no other but such . 

14.  Lent occasions the loss of the Advantage and Income of Eggs ▪ which are good a●… that time , and they don't know what use to put them too , and after Lent they are either too Old or of no Value . 

15.  it 's a shame to human nature , to see those Excesses which the poor Idolatrous Papists are guilty of , during the time of the Carnaval , when they conceive they have a privilege to dishonour , violate , and degrade their nature , by all sorts of Infamy , Excess and Disorders , and by their Masquerades and changing the habit of their Sex , to make themselves amends for being condemned by their Priests to eat no Flesh during Lent , and when that is over , they believe themselves authorised again to commit the like Riots at Easter , which is so much the more dangerous to the health of many people , that they ●…ed slenderly before , in hopes of being sooner delivered from the Fire of Purgatory after their Death . 

16.  Lent and other Fast-days which the Priests command them to observe on pain of Eternal Damnation , makes them disrelish and loathe all Sea and Shellfish , and are the cause that there are fewer Mariners and Fishers than otherwise there would be , because people do without Comparison eat abundance lesle of Sea-fish than otherwise they would do , and by this means the Kingdom loses a great advantage , and an inestimable Revenue , which Nature presents to them without Trouble and Charge . 

17.  The Country people throughout the whole Kingdom lose abundance in the time of Lent , of what they might reap from their Calves , Lambs , Kids , Pigs , and other young Animals that are bred during that time , and have for the most part need of the Milk of their Dams ; for either the Peasants must dispense with the want of that Milk which does highly incommode them , or else they must throw part of those Creatures to the Dogs . They loose also by their Poultry , which they can neither Eat nor sell , and yet must keep them , though many times they have not Corn to feed ' 'em . 

18.  The Country People do many times loose part of their great and small Cattles by the Lent , for if the Winter be long , and the Spring backward , and they have not gathered together abundance of Forage the year foregoing , their Cattles die of Hunger , which would not be if they were either allowed to sell them to the Butcher , or to Eat them themselves . 

19  The Peasant not daring to eat neither Flesh nor Eggs , because they are forbid to eat them under the Notion of a great Sin , and having no Fish to eat , because it is scarce and dear , nor Roots , nor Herbs , because the Winter has destroyed them , they are obliged to maintain themselves by the Milk of their Cows , which occasions their Calves bei●…g starved , and is partly the cau●…e why the Cattles are so Poor in France , and this occasions an incredible prejudice to the Kingdom . 

20.  there 's more sergeant Devotion at that time than at others , which exhausts the Purses , and wastes the time of those poor Ignorant people . I say nothing of those Monstrous Opinions unworthy of God and Man , which these base and foolish Superstitions do nourish and maintain , as if it were more pleasing to God , to see people eat Fish or Pulse than to eat Flesh , and at one time rather than another , I say I want speak of those things here , for that belongs more to Divines than to me ; For all these Reason's abovementioned and others , I make no scruple to say , that the keeping of Lent does above 50 Million of Liures prejudice to the Kingdom of France per Annum . 

And being upon this Subject , it may not perhaps be unseasonable to confute the Errors of those who fancy that Lent , and other Fast-days are advantageous to a Nation , because say they , it saves abundance of Cattles , puts people upon Fishing , and consequently to the getting of more profit by Sea , than they would otherwise do , and by that same means also more Seamen are bred . I confess that Lent and Feast-days are useful to some Nations , not by observing them themselves , but by selling Fish to those who do so , as the English , Scotch , Dutch , etc. who furnish the French and others . 

In England the Nation was quickly sensible , that the keeping of Lent was a mistake in Politics , for after Lent had been observed there , a while , since the Reformation , on pretence of ●…ome such Political Reasons , as the encouragement of Fishing , etc. they soon left it off , because they ●…ound it did more hurt than good . They saw it did not increase the number of Seamen , but rather diminished them , and that there was not more Fish taken and spent , but rather lesle , by reason that people being under that Servit●…de , were disgusted with it , and did eat it against their will upon the very Fish days , and could not at all endure it at other times ; whereas they eat it at all times indifferently now , and there 's constantly good store of all sorts to be found at the Fishmongers , as well Sea as Fresh-water-fish , and all sorts of Shellfish ; so that now those who love Fish better than Meat , may please themselves , which they could not do , if they were tyrannically commanded to do it . Besides , Fishermen could not then make their constant Trade of Fishing but only in Lent , and about Fridays , and Saturdays , whereas they both can and do fish actually every day . 't is true , France does not afford such plenty of Fish ▪ meat as England , but this must also be granted , that the people in France who have Means , do not feed so much upon Meat , even on Flesh-days , as they call them , as the English comm●…nly do ; and be●…ides most part of the French have not wherewith to do it . But I say further , that France is in greater want of Fish than of Flesh , and that there would have been Flesh enough in the Nation , if Lent , the four Ember-weeks , and other Fast-days , and the Orders of Monks and Nuns had not been set up by Superstition , for this occasioned a neglect in breeding of dattle ; and even at present , though most of the Kingdom lies desolate , there would be dattle enough , if Lent were abolished and Lands not abandoned ; and though France is at lesle expense now , as to the buying of Foreign Fish , than it was before the War , yet it still expends very great Sums that way , though the poorest sort of people in the remotest Provinces from the Sea , seldom taste Fish of any sort , and even very rarely of Flesh-meat . 

But lest any Body should imagine that I contradict myself , in saying that the people of England don't eat lesle Fish since the Observation of Lent , but rather more , and that I pretend nevertheless , that the notice of such a Superstition does prejudice to the Revenues of Land in France , and hinders the Breeding and Consumption of Cattles ; I shall answer that specious objection ; I call it specious , because it seems that if so be the abolishing of Lent , and other Fish-days in England produce that effect , that more Fish is eaten in it since , it would seem to follow , that lesle Flesh-meat should be consumed , and so consequently if Lent , and other pretended Fast-days were abolished in France , more Fish would be eaten , and lesle Flesh destroyed . I answer , that there is no real contradiction in what I have asserted , but only a seeming one , and that also to those who do not weigh things rightly ; my reason is this , that in England the people have always and at all seasons , plenty both of Meat and Fish ; no place in the Kingdom being very remote from Sea , and there being many Rivers full of Freshwater Fish , and the Tide coming up a great way in many of those Rivers , the Sea-fish is conveyed into the Country at a very small charge . They have also plenty of good Cattles , so that they may at all times eat that they like best , or find cheapest , without that aversion which the Tyranny of Imposition occasions , when they are commanded upon Eternal Damnation to eat , or not to eat such and such things , at such and such times , whereas France is generally much more remote from the Sea , and Fish there very scarce or dear . Now in those places at a great distance from the Sea , if it were not for the Superstition of Lent and other Fast-days , as they call them , in those places they would eat much more Meat than they do , and more also than is eaten on the Seacoasts , where Fish is more plentiful and cheaper , and consequently they should breed more dattle . more Fish would also be eaten in the Sea ▪ Ports and other places near the Sea , than is eaten at present , if it were not for the tyrannous Impositions upon their Consciences , which forbids them to eat Meat at such times , and creates , in most part of them , a kind of abhorrency of Fish , which they are forced to eat ; and hence it comes to pass that lesle Fish is taken in the Seaports , than there would be were it not for this Superstition ; and lesle dattle is also bred in the Country than would be , were it not for the same Abuse , which forbids the eating of Meat above five Months in the Year , and so puts all things out of order ; for by this Means , those that live near the Sea are disgusted at Fish , which Nature and Providence affords them very cheap , nay , almost for nothing ; which would be a great Treasure to them , if it were not for the tyranny imposed upon them , and those who live in remote places of the Country , and have an opportunity to breed abundance of dattle and eat Meat very cheap , are forced to abstain from it , and lose that great advantage , though they cannot have Fish but at a very dear rate . 

It deserves likewise our Observation , that France has lost considerably in respect of the profits they made of their dattle , by the expulsion of the protestants , because they bought those young dattle , Poultry , etc. in the Towns and Countries where they lived , which otherwise had been lost or very chargeable to the Owners . 

Article XIII . relates to the Injustice , Violence and Spiritual Tyranny of the Popish Clergy , which cause's an unestimable damage to the Kingdom of France . This Spirit of Injustice and Inhumanity , which is essential to Popery , was the cause of the last War , which they kindled secretly , and of the last Persecution , and of all the Massacres and Civil Wars , that have been in France . That same Spirit of VIOLENC sets them , whenever they meet with Princes obnoxious to them , to persecute all those with the utmost fury , that differ from them in their Opinions , though they have no other Foundation sor them , but their own Ambition , Pride and Covetousness , that Spirit , I say , of Injustice has been one of the great causes of the Ruin of France ; I leave it to the World to Judge whether they did not take advantage of the Ambition of that Potent Prince , who was perhaps possessed with the design of an U●…iversal Monarchy , to make him believe that it was convenient for him , in order to a●…tain his end , to destroy the Reformation in England , Holland , France and all other parts , and under that pretence to bring King James , who was known to be a Bigoted Prince , into the same design , and to oblige him to do all what we know he did . 't is by such Methods as these , that the Court of Rome Ruins all the Princes and States of Christendom ; when she is in any way afraid that they will grow too Potent , then to be sure she inspires them by her Emissaries and Confessors , with such designs , as will lay them desolate , and unpeople their Country , when at the same time they have no mistrust of any such thing●… I shall not offer to compute the damage done by this Article , at any certain Sum●… of Money , for every one may easily perceive , that this is a Fountain of innumerable Mischiefs . 

Article FOURTEEN . shows plainly how ruinous the Popish ●…lergy is to the State of France , in this that the●… contribute little to the great Charge of ●…e ●…tion , though they enjoy the half of all Estates Real and Personal of the Kingdom , and ●…ught consequently to pay as much proportio●…ably to the King , as those do who possess the other half of the Kingdom . For the Clergy , even at present scarcely , pay 10 Million o●…●…ureses towards the 200 Million , which the King hath exacted every year from the Nation , one way or other , since the War ; that is to say , that the Clergy and Religious Orders , as they call them , of France , who make up per●…aps 300000 Souls , enjoy as much Reven●… as 8 or 9 Million of other People , that may ●…ill be reckoned to be in the Kingdom o●… ●…rance , or as much as was enjoyed by 13 or 〈◊〉 Millio●…ss , that might have been in it 30 ye●…rss ago , ●…nd that ▪ though every one of the Clergy and ●…uch like Religious persons , have one with a●…other , as much to spend now , in relation to the Reven●…e of the Real and Personal Esta●…eses , as 40 or 50 other persons of the promiscuous multitude , taken one with another , that yet for all that the Clergy and those Religious Orders taken in bulk , don't bear above the 20th part of the Charges of the Government . To this may be added , that before the War , when the King did raise by the ordinary Impositions , 132 Million yearly , besides the Casualties , as they term them , that did amount some years to 50 , 60 , and 70 Million , the Clergy did not pay above 5 or 6 Million yearly ; for the Poll-tax , by which they were obliged to pay 4 Million per Annum during 5 years , was establi●…hed since . 

But that we may the better comprehend how much the Clergy is eased above all other Subject's o●… the Kingdom , it must be known that the Officers of Judicature , and other Civil Officers in the Nation , as those of the Finances , Civil Government and others , who all purchased their Of●…iceses at a very dear rate , the Farmers of the Imposts with all their dependants , and the Clergy themselves did cost the people altogether , above 200 Million of Liures yearly , about 20 or 30 years ago , besides the other vexations and losses of time , which they suffered by continual Wranglings at Law , Oppressions and Depredations of their Goods by the said Officers , or by the Superstition of the Clergy ; of all which Vexations , Losses of Time , and other Calamities , as the Marches , Counter-marches and Quartering of Soldiers , if they had been free , they might have probably saved or earned 100 Million per Annum more , but those I don't reckon , because they turned to no bodies Account . Now the Clergy is not only ●…ree from all those Mischiefs and losses of Money and Time , to which the other Subjects are obnoxious , but they likewise get Money from the people and plunder them ●…y their false Devotions , and a thousand new ways suggested by their Covetousness , abusing the people's Credulity , endeavouring continually to involve them in greater Ignorance , that they might domineer over them more easily , and so dispoil them . 't is very well known , that the Officers of Judicature indulge the Clergy much more than they do the other Subjects , and that the Farmers of the Impositions have little or nothing to do with them . The Clergy are moreover respected and feared by the Lawyers , and maintani some Judges , Advocates and Attorneys , who are their Pensioners . There is not one Community of Religious persons , but what have Pensioners in all the Notable Tribunals ▪ where their business lies , who order it so that they gain almost all their Suits at Law , how unjust soever they be against the Laity , who have neither so much Money nor so great Protection as they . then by the help of a Father Titler , which they have in every Community , they forge false Titles every day ; and this they accounted a pious Fraud , as well as the false Donatives and Legacies , which they often pretend to have been bestowed upon them . In this manner they bereave the poor Laity of their Estates by the Favour and Protection they find one from another ; for they stand by one another as Thiefs do , and are all of them supported by the Pope , who has a secret Influence upon their Affairs : And many times they are also supported by Courtiers . then as to the Farmer's general and particular of Impositions , and their Servants , the Romish Clergy is not exposed to their Robberies , because they are not obnoxious to the Public Taxes ; but on the contrary that sort of Men are obnoxious to the Clergy , for they flatter them with the hopes of a pardon for all their Extortions and Robberies , if they will but employ 'em to say Masses , make them Presents , or enter into their Fraternities and pay them for it . Nor do they suffer by the Cheating Tricks of other Ecclesiastics as the rest of the Subjects do , for one Raven never picks out the Eyes of another . 

The Estates , Farms and Tenants of the Clergy , are moreover in a better condition than those of others , because their Landlords are better able to support them ; so that their Houses and Lands are always in better order , and stocked with the best dattle of the land  

The Clergy moreover are not liable to be forced to buy new Offices , nor to lose the old ones , as other Subjects are , or to buy Letters of Nobility ; nor are they crushed with ordinary or extraordinary Taxes , nor with forced Loans to the King , nor with Quartering of Soldiers , whereby so many thousands of other People have been every day plagued ; nor are they obliged to go to War , nor to the Arrier-ban ; By which means it comes to pass that the Clergy , who are for the most part burdensome and unprofitable to the Nation , nay , even to their own pretended Church , are free from all the Calamities under which the useful Subjects groan . I grant the Curates and Country Priests are so laden with Taxes that they can hardly subsist , yet they fare a great deal better than the greatest part of the Laity who formerly had Estates , which now they have lost by the Taxes ▪ and are charged with Debts and Children besides . Whereas though the Priests be never so poor , yet still they have some Bread left them without any toil for it , for they neither Labour nor Preach , nor are bound to do any Work but what the dullest Peasant might do , if he could but read and had memory enough to learn by long practice , how to handle the Musket ; for the Mass-trade can be learned as easily . They enjoy a Church-living gratis , which they neither merit for their Capacity nor Services , neither had they it left them by Inheritance from their Ancestors , nor can they be seized upon for Debts . I grant 't is but reason they should live by their Trade , since they do that which the people would have them to do , but as for the great numbers of rich Monastries , Convents , & ●… . which contribute little or nothing to the Government ; is it not ridiculous they should enjoy the half of all the Estates in that Kingdom , and not pay the 20th part towards the support of the Government of what the rest of the Nation pays ? for , as I have said before , those wealth Clergymen pay almost nothing of what the Clergy pays in general , all the burden falls upon the little Curates and Priests , who are left without Protection . What 〈◊〉 then is it that the diligent and laborious for●… of people in a Nation should perish , and be destroyed like Victims , merely to fatten the lazy and idle sort of people , and that so many Million of useful Subjects should be sacrificed to such sluggish Belly-gods . We can never enough bewail such Blindness as this , nor express all the Mischiefs which such Injustice brings along with it . 

This very thing alone is capable of ruining the Kingdom by degrees : If it be objected that the Ecclesiastics , who possess one half of it , are not ruined ; I Answer , they are properly no more a part of the Kingdom , than a Cancer is which devours the Body that it seizes on , or tha●… a Palsy which renders divers of the Members of the Body useless , can be a part of the same ; and this is so much the truer that the Clergy , as I have already said , acknowledge the Authority of , and have sworn Obedience to another Sovereign Prince , who must of necessity be a natural Enemy to France , because of the Usurpations that he hath made , and designs to make o●… that Kingdom , in which he cannot maintain his old , nor make new Usurpations , without e●…feebling the Kingdom from time to time proportionably , as he sees its power , and the Authority of the King's Increase , and to this end he serves himself of his Ecclesiastics , who , under a Cloak of Religion , have attained a mighty Credit , and are maintained on the Fat of the Land , at the Expense of others , and that which is a wonderful thing , have their Generals in great number , and Garrisons in all Ci●…ieses , consisting of divers Regiments of di●…erent Liveries , that is to say , the different Orders of Ecclesiastics , who under Spiritual Pretences , enjoy the Temporal Estates of the Kingdom , keep Princes and Subjects under the Pope's Yoke , and so Constitute one formidable Empire within another , Imperium in Imperio . 

It is certain , though it can't be denied that the Taxes in France are excessive , that if the Clergy had contributed proportionably to their Revenues , with the rest of the People , the Kingdom had been worth one half more than 't is , except the King had augmented the Taxes in proportion , and in that case he would have almost doubled his Revenues . If the Clergy had paid the share they ought to have paid of the Impositions , the Kingdom would have been much lesle harrassed and ruined than it is ; so that this Article reaches a great way throughout the Kingdom . 

That we may the better understand it , suppose that any Man has two Slaves or two Carriage-horses of equal stre●…gth in his possession , capable of working or carrying considerable burdens , it is certain if he work them equally and load neither of them above their ability , that both of them may hold out a long time ; but if he overcharge the one excessively , to ease the other , that which is overloaded cannot hold out , but must languish by degrees and become unable either for Work or Carriage , except it be little or nothing , and does quickly die . Suppose then that it does not hold out above half the time that it might have done , had it been treated as the other , or that it does not work half so much as it might have done otherwise , there is one half lost , or if it hold not out , or work not above a 4th part , that is three fourth's loss . Thus it is with the people of France , they are much lesle profitable to the King and State , than they would be if the Clergy bore one h●…lf of the charge of the Kingdom , as they ought to do . I believe this Article may amount to forty or fifty Million per Annum ; for besides the Taxes from whence they are exempted , they are not subject , as I have already said , to any of the Vexations which are committed in the Levying 'em , nor to quartering of Soldiers , nor are they pillaged by Civil Officers & Farmers general and their Underlings , but on the contrary they pillage them . 

Article XV ▪ relates to their Practice and Morals , I mean those of the Clergy ; this occasions an infinite number of Crimes which are committed without Scruple ; nay , they think they merit Heaven by the Commission of them , for they Act them by a Principle of Conscience . 

The Mischiefs which they have committed on the Account of their pretended Religion are to be ascribed to their Morals : They have Consecrated and Canonised Perfidiousness , Cruelty , Murder , the Ravishing of Matrons and Virgins , and the Stealing of Children and Estates . It is not easy to compute this loss in Money , but all people of Sense must needs perceive that this does ruin or very much incommode Trade , Arts , Manufactures , Navigation , and all sort of Handy-labour , for the Persecutors as well as the Persecuted suffer incredibly thereby ; without mentioning the value of the Men and Women , whom they Massacre and Kill in a hundr'd manners , either all at once or gradually . This doth moreover occasion a general and incredible Corruption in the whole Nation , for people perceiving that the Crimes committed on the account of Religion , which of all things in the World ought to be the most Sacred , are not punished , but applauded and rewarded by the Clergy , or at their Suggestion , by those who govern them , they readily conclude , that if it be lawful to Commit such things for the good of the Church , it is more lawful to Commit them for other ends . 

By this means the people become desperately wicked at the heart , and if they were not afraid of Secular Justice , would become a mere Society of Thiefs and Robbers . That we may the better understand this , let us suppose that the Civil Magistrate should approve Crimes in the same manner , promise Heaven to the Criminals , and reward them also in this life , as the Clergy have compensated those who were the most Zealous in committing all sorts of Cruelties and Indignities against the protestants ; I say , if the Civil Government should thus countenance the Destruction of Honest and Substantial Men , all human Society must be forthwith dissolved and unable to subsist . Or otherwise , let us suppose that a multitude of Villains should prevail over Mankind , and commit all imaginable crimes out of a principle of Conscience , in order to oblige Men to say that they believe an Onion , a Tree , a Stone or an Horse are adorable , and deserve the Worship , which the Papists call Dulia and Latria , as well as God , and force them in effect to Invoke and Adore those Creatures ; and that this numerous multitude of Villains should call themselves Infallible at the same time , and by all sorts of Cruelty and Torture , force people to acknowledge them as such , and that none durst oppose them on pain of losing their Liberty , Estate , Honour and Life , what unspeakable disorders would this occasion in a State ? For honest Men who would not be guilty of such unbecoming & unmanly practices should be outrageously persecuted , put to death by their Orders , and the multitude would think themselves obliged to take party with those Villains , to avoid their own Ruin , and for fear of becoming suspected to those Wretches , become as wicked themselves . 

But the Divine Providence hath not permitted human Justice to be depraved to that height ; as is the Religion of the Church of Rome , which is abundantly more wicked than the most wicked of Men ; and herein it is directly opposite to other Religions , which though they be wicked in themselves , do nevertheless teach better Morals than those of the people that profess them ; whereas on the contrary , the Laics of ●…he Church of Rome are more honest and lesle Villainous than their Religion . 

I think it proper also to observe in this place , that setting aside the Interest of that which they call their Religion and their Church , which relates wholly and finally to the Profit or Ambition of the Ecclesiastics ; the Clergy of the Church of Rome considered , as to their Civil Life , are not much wickeder than their Laymen , as I have already said , which proves that the Devil Reigns principally in that Church , in regard of the Legislative Authority of Popery , as it relates to the Affairs and Interest of their Religion and Church , that is to say of the Pope and his Guard of Pensioners or Catchpoles . This excepted , I have known many honest enough Men of their Clergy , nay , even of the Jesuits , whose conduct as to Civil Life , was near the matter as good externally as those of their honest Laics . And there are divers persons who assure me , that how abominable soever the Court of Rome may be in general , as their Principles and Maxims have been for several Ages , yet there are Prelates , nay , even Cardinals among them , who have very good Moral Qualities , and are persons of Merit . 

Article XVI . relates to that Spirit of Despotical Government , with which the Church of Rome inspires Princes in regard of their Subjects . This is it that hath produced the Severity of the Government of France , which hath so much contributed to the Desolation of that fine Kingdom . The Jesuits especially do infuse it in Princes , who are ruled by them not only in matters of Religion , but likewise in Affairs of Political Government , by advising them to make use of the most Absolute Authority , because that how much the more the Princes whom they govern , are Authorised and Feared of their Subjects , so much the more are the Jesuits their Tutors Authorised and Dreaded also . France smarts at present under the Effects of this ; and England has but lately escaped the like danger . That Spirit of Tyranny which makes up a great part of the Essence of Popery , is yet more peculiar to the Society of the Jesuits , than to any other in Popery , and it is known that the Principles of their Order , as they call it , do give their General an Absolute and Unlimited Power , to Command and to do what he list's , wherein they are to render him a Blindfold Obedience . it 's also known that they look on the Pope's pretended Monarchy , over the Universal Church and World , to be the most perfect Pattern of Government , in assuming to himself the Authority to destroy all Nations and persons in Soul and Body , that oppose his temporal Interest . 

The Church of Rome reaps great advantage from this Despotical Power of the Princes of her Communion , for those Princes being governed by their Confessors , who are governed by Rome , the more Authority those Princes have the more the Pope hath over all the Kingdom , and then this great Authority of the Princes is employed to oppress those they call Heretics , both within and without their Dominions , and to purchase more Slaves to the Pope ; or otherwise , they engage them in War for humbling some Popish State , that the Court of Rome would have brought low , and many times with a design to ruin that very Prince , whom they so engage in War. For it is highly the Interest of the Court of Rome , that their Neighbouring Nations be kept poor , because that Spirit of Bondage , Slavery and Ignorance , which is so useful and agreeable to the Religion which they impose , is not consistent with the Liberty of a rich people , and the Popes are constantly afraid that if the Dominions of those States and Princes that are subject to him , be very populous and rich , they will at sometime or other shake off their Yoke . 

This is it they had in view by inspiring the French King with a design to ruin his Protestant Subjects , so manifestly contrary to the true Interests of France and the King's Honour . That same was the reason of their engaging him in a War against so many Potentates all at once , to the end they might weaken him , and prevent his setting his thoughts upon Erterprises a thousand times more great , glorious , and profitable , such as that of delivering his own Kingdom from the Slavery of the Pope , and so many foolish Superstitions of Popery , of which the honest Papists themselves are ashamed , and also that they might prevent his pushing on his Conquests on the side of Italy , where he might have made War with much more success and advantage , than against so many powerful States , and strong Towns as he had to rencontre elsewhere . 

Article XVII . relates to the Incontinence and Whordom of the Romish Clergy , which is a large Field , and much might be said upon it , but many Authors have enlarged on this Head already . it 's known to every Body by Experience , that the Celibacy of that wretched Clergy is the source of an Universal and Loathsome Impurity among them , and that the least Crimes committed by those of that Order , are Fornications and Adulteries . it 's well enough known that their Divines teach , that Sins against Nature of every sort , don't render an Ecclesiastic Irregular , but Marriage does , and that their Casuists do continually cram their Books with Extenuations of those Crimes , and add more and more Fuel to the impure Flames , by their obscene Questions , and the Niceties and Subtleties they have found out to advance and increase those impure pleasures . 

It is also known that the Pope Authorises Public Stews , and Protects them in order to draw a considerable Revenue from them ; but it is not so universally known , that to advance the Reputation of that Crime , which indeed is not accounted any by the Court of Rome , the Popes will not suffer any Women to prostitute themselves , unless they be Christians , and therefore by order of his Holiness , Jewish , Pagan and Mahometan Women , who have a mind to set up that Trade at Rome , must first be Baptised . This makes it the more relishing to Anti-christ to think that Jesus Christ is thereby the more offended . But seeing the Church o●… Rome is already branded in the Holy Scriptures , with the Name of Sodom and the Mother of Harlots and of the Abominations of the Earth ; both upon the account of her Corru●…tion , and because of her Idolatries , Here●…ieses and Blasphemies , we have no reason to doubt that she is so , and therefore I shall not insist upon this as a Vice which is so much favoured and nourished by that Church , but only in relation to the infinite number of Mischiefs which it occasions in human Society . 

It many times happens that the Popish Princes are no better in this respect than the Clergy that hath corrupted them , or don 't teach 'em their duty in this matter ; so that being wholly given up to Unchastity themselves , the Subordinate Magistrates and Officers are corrupted by their Example , and consequently take no care to suppress that Vice , which ruins and lays waste Nations , and fills them with all sorts of Crimes , for experience teaches us that this one Crime draws all others after it ; and Mankind perceiving that Princes and Magistrates neglect to punish this Vice ( which they ought to do with all manner of rigour , for the good of Society , though there were neither an Heaven nor an Hell ) come insensibly to be of opinion that it is only a Peccadillo . 

But if they considered the Consequences of it only with reference to the good of Society , and to the innumerable Mischiefs which it occasions , they ought to look upon it as a very great Crime , and by consequence that it must provoke God highly , who is the preserver of Society , though it were not so expressly forbid in his Word , which excludes such persons from the Kingdom of Heaven . 

For it occasions an infinite number of Murders of Men and Children , Miscarriages and Poison ; it destroys a great number by nasty distempers , as well among Adult persons as among Infants , of which a great number die or are lame during their lives , by the infection of their Fathers , Mothers or Nurses , or else live in misery and are uncapable of serving the Public ; it shortens the Lives of one and tother , enfeebles the Wit , destroys Courage , makes People renounce Honour and Probity , and renders those who are addicted thereunto uncapable of undertaking or performing any thing glorious or profitable for the Public Welfare : It ruins Families ; and Fathers and Mothers who are addicted to this Crime , neglect the Education of their Children , who for the most part too , are born feeble and infirm , and generally become prof●…igate like their Parents ; It generally debauches all sorts of people from their Work and Employments ; is always accompanied with Idleness , Laziness , great loss of Time , Luxury , Drunkenness , Gluttony , Perjury , False Evidence , Pilfering , Robbery , Tricking , Cheating , Cozening , Breaking , Blasphemy , Impiety and Irreligion ; and by consequence occasions the abandoning of True Religion and the embracing of a False One. And to support themselves in this Vice , Men become Coiners and Clippers , Highwaymen , Pirates , Forgers and Knights of the Post. This practice brings many to the Gallows , occasions some to make away themselves , their Conscience and the bad Condition of their Affairs , throwing them into despair ; Children , that they may have wherewith to maintain themselves in this Vice , rob their Parents , as do Servants and Apprentices their Masters . It wholly corrupts the Minds of those that belong to the Courts of Justice , Whordom bereaves them of all Probity , makes them Unjust and Trickish , or at least occasions them to suck the Blood of their Clients by prolonging their Suits . This Vice occasions the Superior Officers of an Army to rob their Subalterns and Soldiers , and many times the Government . It has the like influence upon those that are employed in any other Public Post ; so that those who are addicted to this Vice do always abundance of Mischief , and but little good . 

It hinders Marriage , because for want of Discipline , Men can with impunity find debauched Women and Girls in great numbers for their purpose , whom they quit at pleasure and take others , without any Trouble , Servitude or Dependence , and this begets in them a general Contempt of the Sex ; so that they think them all alike and worth nothing , judging none of them worthy to be their Wives but only their Concubines . On the other hand those loose Women are afraid of being subject to or depending on an Husband , because either he would be jealous if they kept Company with others , or should not be able to satisfy their brutish Appetites ; So that this Vice is altogether destructive to Mankind , it ruins those that are addicted unto it , and prevents the Birth of others in their stead . 

This Vice does moreover make Men and Women Liars and Dissemblers , Children Disobedient to their Fathers and Mothers , and without any Natural Affection to them , because having naught else in their eye , but their impure pleasures , they conceive no other ways of their Parents , and think that they brought them into the World , just as a brutish Animal doth its Young , in a manner 〈◊〉 their will , having no other design bu●…●…o assuage their brutish Lusts , and beget them , as it were , only by accident , and that they are no otherwise obliged to them ●…or their being then so . 

This Vice doth likewise render Men Cruel and Unnatural to on●… another , as also to Beasts , which they look upon 〈◊〉 as a little matter formed by chance . I●… a ●…rd , I don't believe there is any Vice wh●…ch corrupts the Heart to the same d●…gree that this doth , both in regard of their Duty towards God 〈◊〉 ●…wardss Men , yea , and towards themselves , 〈◊〉 they accustom themselves by the ●…requent ●…deass of Vice and by a Judicial Blindn●…ss , which always attends it , to regard every thing in a Carnal and Corrupt manner . 

It is true , that those desires are many times violent in Youth , both because of the boiling of the Blood at that Age , and because their Experience and Reason are but feeble . But it must also be owned , that it is not so much the temper of the Body and the Heat of Youth , which occasions that disorder , as bad Example , ill Education , and the filthy Discourse of Mankind , who are for the most part infected with this Vice ; so that we see in some Nations even the Public Stages , and all the Public Shows poisoned and pestered with all sorts of Obscenity , without any censure by the Magistrates . 

The very Pagans' were sensible of the danger of bad Example to Children , when they said , Maxima debetur puero Reverentia : i e. We ought to have a very great respect for young ones , and neither do nor say unhandsome things before them ; and the Public Stage amongst them was not poisoned with Impurity as 't is now a days . But in this Age few Fathers or Mothers or Magistrates take care of that , they act and speak themselves before their young ones and all people , all that their wicked Habits suggest to them . Servants are also drowned in those Vices , and remain Ignorant , and without Instruction , either from the Church or Magistrate ; so that they act and speak a thousand profane things with one another , b●…re Children , which makes a deep Impression upon the Mind of young ones , which is so much the more dangerous , that na●…urally all Mankind is too much addicted to this Vice ; so that now a days we many times see young Girls of 8 or 10 years of Age , and sometimes those of Quality too , that know a thousand filthy things , and by that time they arrive to the Age of 14 or 15 , they renounce all Subjection to their Fathers and Mothers , and Prostitute and Mary themselves to Servingmen or Idle Fellows , who at last despise and abuse them ; the Consequence of which is many times Despair , and this occasions their making away with themselves , after one sort or other , and thus their Families are every way dishonoured . 

This Vice doth also beget a general Contempt among Men for one another , because it renders Marriage Vile and Dishonourable in their Eyes , though it be the source of Mankind , Hallowed and Instituted by God himself , and therefore aught to be accounted Sacred by all Men , for that very reason . It does as much as can be to frustrate the End which God proposed by the Formation and distinction of two Sexes , viz. the Propagation and Multiplication of Mankind by means of Marriage , and therefore he did not give two Wives to Adam nor two Husbands to Eve.  

Those who are addicted to this Vice have no regard for one another , but only with respect to their impure Inclinations , and if they don't think them as bad as themselves , they do all they can to make them so , and to corrupt them by all Methods , either directly by themselves or indirectly by others ; hence it comes to pass , that we see every day so many handsome Women of good natural parts , and many times of good Families , thus seduced and drawn away , which is a horrid Mischief , for which those who have any remainder of Conscience left , cannot but grieve . In the esteem of those Debauchees , I say , ( who assoon as they immerse ' emselves in those Villainies , loose all Sense of Religion , and of the Excellency of Man and the Nobility of his Extraction ) Mankind is valued but little above Dogs and Swine , which they see Engender much in the same manner as they do themselves , that is to say indifferently , with all of their Species that they meet , according to their brutal Appetites , without reason or consideration , without any regard to God , the Good of Society , or the Honour and Dignity of Man ; so that they corrupt themselves in what they know naturally , as Bruit Beasts , as the Holy Scriptures express it . 

Hence it is , that in Society there is so little Charity , Friendship and Respect for one another , a debauched Man looks upon all Women to be tained with this Vice. Women commonly show lesle disrespect for debauched Men , than Men show for Lewd Women ; yet at the same time , they would have more esteem for those that they believe to be free from that Vice , which renders those that are tainted with it Contemptible , even to persons that are most Vicious themselves , though they make use of them for asswaging their brutish Lust ; and hence it comes that they do readily call all Women Whores and Bitch's , and Children Sons of Whores or Young Dogs , which occasions many Quarrels , Law-suits , and Insolences , yea , sometimes Murders . 

It is not to be expressed what prejudice this Vice does to Commerce , in those Countries which lie Commodiously for Traffic by Sea , and therefore are obliged to take more care therein than others , because Plenty produces , nourishes and entertains this Vice ; if the Magistrates be not persons of Honour , love the Public Welfare , and keep good Discipline ; and the Consequences of it are more mischievous in such Countries than elsewhere ; from this it was that Plato said , Mare improbitatis Magister , the Sea teaches Wickedness ; and hence also it was that the Poets feigned that Venus was bred of the Froth of the Sea ; and that a Latin Poet expressed it thus , Hispanae Navis Magister , dedecorum pretiosus Empt●…r , implying , that Masters of Ships spare no cost to debauch Women . There is nothing more contrary to the growth of a State , either in number of Men or riches , than to suffer Whordom to go unpunished . 

It trouble's me to think that amongst so many able Men who have treated of Commerce , and of what is contrary to it , none of them have observed that this Vice is one of the chief Obstacles to the Prosperity of a Nation . I know a State , to which I wish well from the bottom of my heart , to which it occasions the loss of divers Million per Annum , which I could ea●…ily demonstrate , and am very certain that if they would give necessary Orders in good earnest , for preventing it , which would not be so difficult to do neither , as is generally believed , at least for the greatest part , there would be abundance of more people than there are , and Trade , Arts , Manufacture and Agriculture would thrive there a great deal better than they do ; Men , Women and Children would be abundantly more healthsul , and fewer of them would in comparison die of Consumptions . 

This Vice must be abundantly greater in Popish than Protestant Countries , because the Popish Clergy favour it by their Principles , Auricular Confession , their own Example , and that of the Court of Rom●… , as also by the easiness of Absolution in Confessing themselves to a Priest , who is himself immersed in such Impurities , or by giving him Money , a good Dinner , or hireing him to say Masses , etc.  The Unchastity of all their Clergy , Male and Female , caused by their Celibacy and Execrable Morals , as well as by the Example of the chiefest Prelates at Rome , is a very great prejudice to Popish Kingdoms , which it fills with Adulteries , Fornication , Incests and Crimes yet more Execrable , yea with Million of open and hidden Crimes , as Abortions , Murders and such like , for the Clergy who are guilty of those Vices , make no scruple so they can but conceal them , to murder both the Mothers and Children . 

As to Protestant States , it 's well enough known , that they are infected with this Vice by the Neighbourhood of the Popish ones , and it 's confidently asserted , & not without ground , that in the two last Reigns , all those sorts of Disorders were favoured in England , for the better and more easy Establishment of Popery . 

Article XVIII . relates to the Drunkenness of the Popish Clergy , which as well as their Incontinence is chargeable upon the Morals of their Church ; for the greatest part of the Clergymen except some Bishops and Curates in the biggest Towns , and some particular Men in Monastries , are Drunkards , and by their Example the Common People do mostly become so . 

This Vice does likewise occasion abundance of Mischief , though much lesle than the other , as I could here demonstrate , contrary to the opinion of some Men , if it were proper . The truth of this appears by this one thing , viz. that the Popish Clergy are unchaste by Principle , and in a manner of necessity , because Marriage is forbid to them , that so they may have lesle dependence upon the State , and may be more profitable , and apply themselves with the greater Application to the Interests of the Pope , which they call the Church . And besides , this Libertinage which pleases them infinitely , makes them love the Pope and his Religion , which grants them so great Privileges , whereof others are deprived , viz. that they may enjoy Women without any trouble , as it 's said to be practised by the Republic of Venice , who to assure themselves of the Fidelity of their Clergy , grant them a greater Liberty in this matter , than is allowed in other parts of Italy . 

Now one may easily Judge what disorders this Example of the Libertinage of the Clergy must necessarily produce in Society , and what Ravage they make of the Woman's Chastity , by their Auricular Confession and Absolution , and what influence those things have upon the Women and Maids , who are by this means delivered into their hands as a prey . Another Reason which proves that Fornication is incomparably more mischievous in a Country , than Drunkenness ; is this , that it is a Crime common to both Sexes ; So that it is hard to say , which of the two is most addicted to it , whereas Drunkenness is more particularly the Vice of Men. Another reason is this , that Whordom being contrary to Propagation , as I have said already , and corrupting all the Sources of Generation in a particular manner , and ruining the Bodies of Men , Women and Children , as much and more than Drunkenness ruins those of Men , It is certain that it is abundantly more pernicious than the other . I could bring 30 more reasons to prove this , if the place were proper . 

This last Article concerning their Drunkenness , makes it evident that this Crime does great prejudi●…e to a Country , if it were no more but by the loss of the Wine , Brandy , Cider , etc. which they consume without necessity . But besides , this Vice ruins abundance of Families , shortens the Days of abundance of Men as well as the other , though in lesser number , occasions the loss of a great deal of time , with many Quarrels and Murders , and makes people brutish and dull as well as Fornication . 

But we will lay aside those two last Articles , if the Reader pleases , and count them as nothing ( though the prejudice they do , goes farther than can be imagined ) for its clear enough that the others which I have proposed already , occasion above two hundred Million loss per Annum , throughout the Kingdom of France , and they can be ascribed to nothing else but Popery , whereas they may perhaps cavil at the two last , and say that the protestants are incontinent and likewise drunken as well as the Papists . 

If it be well adverted to , it will be found that four of the 18 Articles , that I have proposed , do alone amount to above 200 Million of Liures per Annum , viz. those of their Holy-days , the Estates of the Church that are in Mainmort , Lent and other Fast-days , and the few Taxes that the French Clergy pays in comparison of the rest of the people . 

Popery occasions the same Mischiefs proportionably in all other Popish Countries , and in some more , as Spain and Portugal , which it hath greatly dispeopled , by the Incontinence , and Celibacy of their Clergy , and the Consequences of these Disorders , by the great number of their Ecclesiastics , the Spirit of Persecution and the Perfidiousness of Popery , in the Expulsion of the Moors and Jews , and by their Inquisition , etc.  

But as Italy is nearest to the Court of Rome , she hath thereby contracted greater Vices also than other Nations . All Sins against Nature are in Vogue there , and Poisoning , Cozenage , Imposture , and a certain Effeminacy and Cowardliness which the Priests and Monks have introduced there , with all Vices imaginable ; Whence it comes to pass that there is not the least spark of the Courage , Greatness of Soul , and Generosity of the Ancient Romans , to be seen , and that there is no Country more easy to be conquered by a powerful Neighbour than that . 

France is also owing to Popery and the Court of Rome , for their having infected her in some measure , with the Habits of divers of those unnatural Crimes , which are so common in Italy , that the Spaniards say of the Italians that are infected therewith , In Italia todos ; and of those Crimes the Religious Convents and Monastries , the Monks , Jesuits and their Scholars , with some great Men in France , are accused . 

It is also well enough known , that the Art of poisoning was brought into France , from Italy by the Ecclesiastics . 

The Maltotes , or the great Impositions , is another Calamity introduced upon France by its Communion with the Court of Rome . The Popes that are the greatest Tyrants of the World , furnished Examples of it upon their own Subjects in Italy , and the Romish Religion and the Confessors of Princes , and of their Ministers have furnished them with Lessons of the same . 

Equivocations , Perfidiousness in all Treaties , Ambig●…ous Expressions in all Transactions and Public Acts , have been Consecrated by the Example of Popish Councils , especially that of Trent , which formed a great number of Decrees , capable of divers contrary Senses , which have occasioned Divisions among divers Sects of their Monks , and many of their Divines ; whereof that Infallible Tribunal , as they call it , of the Pope and his Cardinals , would never determine the Sense , for fear of disobliging some one of the Parties , though they do it every day in the most Insolent and Impudent manner , in regard to the Word of God , to which they attribute the most absurd and extravagant Sense imaginable , with a surprising Impiety . 

All Europe in general is obliged to the Court of Rome , for the false and cursed Politics that Reigns almost in all its Courts , and hath banished thence , Probi●…y , Sincerity , upright Intentions , Fidelity , Justice , Truth , Generosity ; so that they are n●…w filled with Cozenage , Deceit and E●…eminacy . 

The Court of Rome is moreover become a grand Pattern and Teacher of Irreligion and Profanity , now for several Ages . 

It is from the Popes that Roman Catholic Princes have learned to profane the Christian Religion , and to corrupt People daily , by offers of temporal Rewards , to abjure the Religion of Jesus Christ to follow theirs , of which we see sad Examples every day , as to the Church of Rome , and even of some Sovereign Princes . 

We have reason to say when we consider all those things well , that the Papacy or the Pope , deserves abundantly better the Title of Infidel , or Hereditary Enemy of Christendom than the Turk , though ●…e assumes to himself the Name of the Common Father of Christendom . 

If any Opiniater will still take upon him to deny that Popery does not occasion the loss of 200 Million per Annum , through the Kingdom of France , I am satisfied that he want be accounted any great Master of Reason , by such Judicious persons as have read my Arguments . But I say however , that though it should not amount to above one half or one third of that Sum , it would be an Argument cogent enough for the abolishing it , and sufficient proof ▪ of the Falsehood of that Pretended Religion . 

amongst those direful Effects which Popery occasions perpetually and necessarily in the Dominions that are thereunto Subject , I have not taken any notice of those which may be called Passing and Accidental , though they have also a determinate Cause , and proceed from the same Original , viz. the first Principles of Popery , which we may call the Soul of it , and constitute the essential Form of the Church of Rome , viz. Ambition , Pride and Avarice ; which have made , and do make from time to time , an horrible Ravage in Christian Countries , nay , through the whole World. I am certain , that if we should reckon up those accidental Mischiefs , which Popery occasions from time to time in France , the Sum would be much ●…bove 200 Million per Annum . How many Unjust Wars hath it kindled in France , both Intestine and Foreign ? History tells us , that the Ambition of the Popes was the cause of the Mahometans subduing part of Europe , and that the Empire of the East , of Christian became Mahometan ; The Ambition of the Pope's hath also torn in pieces the Empire of the West , and spoiled its Emperors of part of their Dominions , even of Rome itself , and made them their Vassals and Slaves in a manner , so as to tread upon them in person sometimes with Impunity ; so that by the Ambition of the Roman Clergy and their Popes , the Empire is no other than a mere Shadow of what it formerly was . 

It is very well known that by the perfidiousness of the Pope , the Turks rendered themselves Masters of Hungary , the Court of Rome having obliged the unhappy King Uladislaus to violate his Faith and break the Treaty he had made with them , which Violation was followed by a Total Defeat of that King , at the Battle of Varn●… and the loss of the Kingdom , which the Infidels seized upon , as may be seen by the following Distich , wherein that ●…nfortunate King is made to complain that the Pope and his Clergy had ruined him by their perfidious Counsel ▪ 

Mendoza nisi Pontifices jussissent rumpere faedus , 
Non ferret Scythicum Pannonis or a jugum . 


May be thus Englished , 

By Pope's command had I my League ne'er broke , 
Pannonia ne'er had felt the Scythian Yoke . 


For above 1000 years the Popes and their Clergy , have been constantly aspiring to the Universal Monarchy , and have made it their constant business to sow Divisions betwixt Christian Princes and their Subjects , and to kindle War amongst those Princes , to weaken them by one another , that so they might bring them all under their Yoke . 

By this method they make themselves Arbitrators and Masters of their differences , and always cast the Balance on the side of their own Interest , without any regard to Honour or Justice , and that not by Armies or open Force , but by the Intriqus of Confessors , Monks and Prostitutes , or as the Scripture represents it by their Cups , Draughts and Witchcrasts , as becometh the great Prostitute that hath made the Kings and the Princes of the Earth drunk with the Wine of her Fornication . 

They still foment now as formerly , and without ceasing , Divisions and Factions in all the Countries of Europe , yea , even amongst protestants , by their secret Emissaries whom they employ in great numbers in order to bring them gradually under their Yoke , one way or other , by a Million of Crimes . A famous Spanish Politician who knew their Game well enough , said that there is not so much as a Sword drawn , no●… a Pike carried in Christendom , that hath not been sharpened in the Forge of Rome . no see Saca espada , non se arbola pica , cuyo el hierro no estuviere aguzado en la fraga de Roma . They had the greatest share in the War newly concluded , and made their profit on 't , though the simple Vulgar are apt to think they have no hand in it . 

no Body is Ignorant of the cunning Invention , made use of by the Popes formerly , to bring part of Asia under their Yoke , without putting themselves to any charge , and at the same time to increase their own Authority and Conquests in Europe , at the expense of the Christian Princes , whom they despoiled . Their way was to persuade those poor innocent Princes to go in Person to Asia , with great Fleets and Navies , to chase the Mahometans from that Country , for which end the Popes called it the Holy Land ; as if that Land had been holier than another , after having put the Lord Jesus Christ to death . And while those Princes were in that Country , with numerous Armies of their Subjects , by which they dispeopled their own Dominions , the Popes endeavoured to make themselves Masters of t●…e same , or at least sucked their Subjects to the bone , and drained out all the riches of their Countries by means of their Clergy . France and England suffered very much by this means , and we have no reason to doubt but they would have been much more rich and populous , had it not been for that . 

All the World knows that the Romish Clergy or Church , hath destroyed or caused to be destroyed by their Orders , more people ●…nder pretence of Religion , than all the Heathen Emperors , and more than all the Nations of the habitable World , have done upon that account since the Creation of the World. France and England can testify this from sad Experience . 

it 's well enough known , that their Councils , that is to say the Luminaries of Popery , the most enlightened , and sincere part of the Church of Rome ( a mark of the Absolute Reprobation of that Church , for several Ages . ) it 's well enough known , I say , that those Councils have established it as a Maxim or Rule for several Ages passed , that they are not obliged to keep Faith with Heretics , and that Princes are obliged on pain of eternal Damnation and the loss of their Dominions to destroy them . Whence it comes to pass , that not only all the Murders , Robberies , Perjuries , Rapes , and all Crimes in general are permitted , but commanded against all those Christians who oppose themselves never so little , to the Interests , Tyranny , or Ambition of the Pope and Clergy ; which Sentence doth à fortiori , include also Jews , Pagans' and Mahometans , when the Church of Rome shall think meet , seeing it is clear that they ought not to have any more favour showed them than those they call Heretics . From those Principles have proceeded so many Massacres , Persecutions , Violations of Faith , Religious Wars , Croisades and Leagues to extirpate those who were called Heretics . Hence also proceeded many Assassinations of Princes , and Attempts upon their Lives , which France hath often had experience of ; hence came the Civil Wars in England and Ireland , the burning of Towns , and Conspiracies against the State. One of the Kings of France was formerly whipped at Rome , in the Person of his Ambassador , by the Pope's Order , which is the highest Ignominy that can be done to a Nation or Prince . And if we have not fresh and daily Instances from their Church , of such decrees as those of the Councils of Constance and Lat●…ran , or such remarkable demonstrations of their Pride and Cruelty ; it 's not because they have changed their Principles , but because there is no opportunity offers to do it with safety , and for the advantage of the Pope . It is not want of good will ; The Habit remains still , though the Acts are not continually exerted . A Shoemaker , says Horace , though he lays aside all the Tools of his Art , and shuts up his Shop , is a Shoemaker still . 

— Alfenus vafer , omni 
Abjecto instrumento Artis , clausâque tabern●… 
Suitor erat , etc.  


We see what that Church hath occasioned to be done lately , and does yet at present in France against the protestants , and what they would have done in England ; and for their Inquisition , it continues still the same . 

It may be clearly seen , by all those proofs which we have produced of the Natural and Necessary Opposition there is betwixt the Church and Religion of Rome , and the Happiness and Prosperity of Princes , States and People , that the said Church and its Religion is false to the highest degree , there never having been any Religion in the World so contrary to the good of Mankind . It hath no remainders of old Christianity , but just so much as is necessary to constitute the Form of Antichristianism , by way of Excellence , that is to say the most perfect Enmity against Jesus Christ , by ascribing to him all sorts of Idolatry and Impiety , making him the Author of their Tyranny and Cruelty , and feigning an adherence to him , like Judas , in order to betray him , and to dishonour him the more , as an Adulterous Woman dishonours her Husband , while at the same time they persecute his Followers with the height of Rage , and fill the Universe with Blood and Confusion , and trample under foot , ruin and devour Princes and their Subjects , and all in the name of Jesus Christ.  

The True Religion being come from God , who is the Creator and Preserver of Men and Society , cannot tend to the Ruin and Destruction of States , except we establish with the Manichees two eternal Principles , one good and the other evil , which is so gross that it deserves no Con●…utation . 

If the Romish Religion be good , with all those Mischiefs and Disorders which we have seen , it produces naturally and necessarily in all Countries where it obtains , God who is all Just , all Holy and Holiness itself , the Preserver of Nations , and Mankind , and the Author of the Old and New Testament , can neither be Just , Holy , Good , Wise , True , nor the Author and Preserver of Human Society , and the Old and New Testament cannot have proceeded from any other but the wicked Spirit . Absit Blasphemia . 

God must likewise , if the Religion of the Church of Rome be True , be contrary to the Propagation of Mankind , which it appears to be one of the favourite Designs of Providence . He must also , according to them , approve of Deceit and Imposture , and Cozenage in the Ministers of his Religion , and in his Worship , he must likewise love Injustice , Impiety , Perfidiousness , Tyranny , Laziness , Idleness , Cruelty , Incontinence , Robbery , Profanity , Perjury , Hypocrisy , Murder and Calumny , which are so essential to the Popish Religion and the Roman Clergy . 

I leave it to Divines to treat of the Idolatry , Heresy , Superstitions , etc. of this pretended Church , which agree so well , and are so very becoming to all the rest which we have seen , and which cannot indeed be otherwise , and are the natural Effects of the Ambition of those Mischievous Creatures , as well as the rest ; for as Saint Chrysostome says well ▪ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 i e. that Ambition or a desire of Dominion , is the Mother of Heresies ; and therefore St. Paul reckons Heresy amongst the Works of the Flesh. For the Popes not being able to establish their Authority in the World , but by introducing those Practices into the Church , and the Disorders , of which we have spoken before , that ruin all the Popish Nations , have been obliged entirely to corrupt the Morals and Doctrine thereof ▪ and to suppress the Light of the Gospel ▪ which would have discovered their Exorbitanci●…ss and Iniquity to Mankind , and have inclined them to oppose their Ambition . For this reason they favoured all manner of Ignorance and Vice , that they might the better extinguish amongst Men , all Fear and Knowledge of God , and all Generosity . And seeing Men could not live without Religion good or bad , they afterwards hurried them headlong into all sorts of Idolatry and Impiety . 

If they had not entirely corrupted and falsified the Christian Religion , and People had known the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament , they would never have submitted to Practices and Customs so contrary to the Public Good ; Princes and their Ministers would never have suffered a Religion to be Established among them , which is so much contrary to their Rights , Arts , Husbandry , Manufacture , Commerce , Propagation , good Morals , and the ●…ublick Peace of Nations . 

Let us but read and consider the Old an●… New Testament , or only the Ten Commandments of God's Law , we shall find nothing commanded therein , but what is Excellent and Worthy of God , and wonderfully suited not only to the Temporal good and advantage of every Man in particular , but also to that of People and Countries , and the whole World in general ; So that if the great Wits of this Age , who pretend to be Men of Parts , though they be indeed mere Fools , would consider this sedately , they would be obliged to own , whether they would or not , by comparing this with the Conduct of all the Politicians in the World , and their Pretended Skill in the Government of their People , that there are no o●…her Rules of True Policy , for regulating of Morals and making every particular Man as profitable as can be to Society , but those that the Law of God and the Gospel furnish us with , and that every thing which does not agree with that , and is not conformable thereunto , is nothing else but Error and Destruction . I don't mean only the Political Laws of Moses , as they are called to distinguish them from the Moral Law , under which the Commonwealth of Israel became so flourishing , and was Peopled in such a manner , as seems Incredible to those that read their History ; but I mean also and chiefly the Moral Law , which certainly contributed still more than the Political Laws of that People , though but very ill observed , to make them so rich and powerful . I join also thereunto at present , the Gospel which not only regulates our Actions , but also our Thoughts and Words , and hath given us a Model of Incomparable Charity , and furnished us with new and powerful Motives to this Virtue , by revealing to us clearly the saving Grace of God , that we may live all in general , Princes and People , and every one in particular , Soberly , Justly and Religiously , which comprehends all our Duty to God , our Neighbours and ourselves , wherein if we did acquit ourselves , Men would not only be happy in the Life to come , but also in this , and Nations would become incomparably more powerful , populous and rich than they are ; For Godliness hath the promises of this Life , and that which is to come : Which of itself might be enough to convince our Deists ( many of whom value themselves highly on the account of their sense and ability , and think they are able to Govern Kingdoms ) of the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures , if there were no other proofs of it . 

In that Divine Book alone are the true Rules of Policy to be found . 

All the World agrees in this without thinking on it , when they say that Honesty is the best Policy , that is to say , to observe the Law of God , and cause it to be observed by others , which is no lesle essentially Necessary for the good of the State than for Salvation . But ●…he Church of Rome hath confounded all those Notions , as I have already said , and having governed the World for a long time , hath introduced a cursed sort of Politics into the same , quite contrary to that which the Law of God prescribes , but suited indeed to her ow●… Doctrine and Morals , by which after she hath blinded the Eyes of Princes and People , she leads them whither she pleases . 

It is certain , that if Princes and Magistrates applied themselves , as they ought , if it were no more but for their own Temporal Interest , and the good of the State , to make the Laws of God to be observed ▪ by punishing Delinquents severely , and if the Church concurring with the Magistrates , did her best by Doctrine , Example and Discipline , and if every particular Person would also do their Du●…y , they would see their Dominions , Provinces , Cities and Families flourish otherwise than ever they did hitherto . If it were thus , no Body would do to another what they would not have done to themselves : Every one would have his own ; Industry and Diligence would be much more in Vogue than 't is ; Injustice which Reigns so much at present in Courts of Judicature and elsewhere ; Rapine , Robbery , Idleness ; Imposture , Cozenage , and Deceit in Matters of Religion , which have rendered the Popish Clergy so powerful by the Ruin of the People ; Bankrupts , Coiners , Murders , Knights of the Post , Lying , Unfaithfulness , all of them so contrary to the Repose and Prosperity of Countries , would be banished in a great measure ; Cruelty and Perfidiousness so essential to the Church of Rome , Incontinence which at this day makes such a Ravage amongst Men , and is looked on as a mere trifle without Punishment or Public Censure , though ▪ I make bold to say , it is the root of all other Crimes ▪ and occasions more Disorders at present than Murder and Robbery both , because those are in some measure punished ; Drunkenness , Unfaithfulness in Treaties , and public and private Contracts ; the Spirit of Tyranny in Princes towards their Subjects , the Rebellion of Subjects against their Princes , the Disobedience of Children to their Parents , etc. all of them so contrary to Commerce , Propagation , and the Repose of People , should be exterminated for the most part . 

In a word , Vice being either banished or repressed by the method of this true Policy , Virtue would take place , by which Nations should prospero at another rate than they do , and Princes would be incomparably more Potent . In this case also Men would be abundance more long-lived , healthful , and vigorous , Marriages would become more numerous ; by which together with the mildness of the Government , the Industry and Diligence of all sorts of People , Countries would become infinitely more populous . 

Once more still , I will adventure to say that it is in the Holy Scriptures alone , that those wise Politics are to be found , which are capable of enriching a Nation and making it potent ; So that the false Politicians of the World have sought for it in vain elsewhere for so many Ages , and all of them complain that they could never hitherto find it . 

This does not hinder , but the Wisdom of God out of his profound and just Judgement , suffers Tyrants sometimes to prospero in their wicked Designs , by contrary Maxims , as may be seen by the example of the Popes , who making use of the Credit that they had acquird in the Quality of Bishops of Rome , to domineer over Sovereign's and their People , under pretence of Religion , have subjected both the one and the other , by Million of Crimes of all sorts . This is so far from destroying what I have said , that it confirms the same , for if they ▪ have raised themselves by those wicked methods , they have done incredible Mischiefs to Mankind ; which is just the same as in every Country and City , there are Villains who succeed in Robberies and Injustice , though they be looked upon with horror , as the plagues of Society , who violate the Laws of God and the State , and deserve to be totally rooted ●…ut ▪ 

This is it which hath obliged the Popes , in order to cover their Injustice , as I have already said , to corrupt and change the Law of God , and to conceal the Scriptures from the People , and after having established Morals contrary thereunto , to over-turn the Doctrine of the Faith , that so there might be a proportion betwixt the Maxims of their Government and their Opinions , and that their Tyranny might not be discovered by the inequality betwixt them . This is it that brought forth the Fine Doctrine of Transubstantiation , of the Sacrifice of the Mass , the In●…allibility of the Church , and many others . 

For if they had not overturned the Rights of God and Man in their Doctrine and Worship , as well as in the Government and Discipline of the Church ; and if they had not extinguished all the Light of Revelation , as well as that of Reason , the Light that should have remained in the Doctrine , would have discovered their Tyranny and Injustice , and the intention they had to make themselves Masters of the World , and bring the same under their subjection . So likewise if their Ecclesiastical Government , their Maxims and Practice had been conformable to the Scriptures and good Sense , and had contained nothing contrary to good Order , and the Prosperity of People and Nations , and that together with this , the Doctrine and Worship of their Church had been extravagant and senseless , as they are at present , Men would have still preserved one of their Eyes , and not have been altogether so blind , but must have perceived the falsehood and injustice of the one or the other , that is to say either of the Doctrine which the Popes had imposed upon them , or of their Conduct in the Government of their Church , and so would either have demanded a Reformation , or shaken off their Yoke ; so that it 's visible that it was absolutely necessary for the Interest of the Church of Rome , that their Morals and also the External Government of their Church , and in one word , their whole Tyrannical Economy and their Doctrines , should answer one another . 

It is nothing but Ambition at the bottom w ch hath occasioned all these Disorders , and that also by degrees , for no one Man could form the project thereof all at once , but during the many Ages that this Mystery of Iniquity has been at work , the Court of Rome has improved all Occasions , and the Circumstances of Time , Place and persons . 

All this is apparently come to pass very naturally , and by the little that we know of the Corruption of men's Hearts , we may perceive that those who are very Ambitious are able to commit insensibly and by degrees , proportionably to the Opposition they meet with , whether it be by the Established Laws or by Men , million of Crimes , and trample under Foot all Laws Human and Divine . 

We have all of us those Seeds of Injustice and Pride , and if God did not restrain us by his Providence , but presented such opportunities unto us as he hath done to the Popes , to become Masters of the World , we should by degrees become as wicked as they . Nemo repent fit turpissimus , no Man arrives to the height of Wickedness but by degrees ; and in this case Ambitious persons would reason with themselves , much after the same manner as he did formerly , who said , Si violandum est jus , regnandi causa violandum est ; If it be lawful to break through Law in any case , it is lawful to do it for a Crown and a Sceptre . 

The Heart of Man is universally and at all times the same . 

Let us suppose , that some Ambitious Prelate had Authority enough among the Pro●…estants to Form such Designs , as were those of the Bishops of Rome , to raise themselves in the first place above other Bishops and Priests , and afterwards over Princes and People , they would go near to make use of the same methods as the Popes and their Clergy did ; and as they should receive opposition from time to time from those that would endeavour to restrain and tie them up to the Laws of God and Men if they and their Successors should overcome those Oppositions , they would by degrees suppress the Holy Scripture , over●…throw all Morality , and introduce an Universal dissoluteness of Manners ; so that the Protestant or Christian Religion , without changing its Name , for that to be sure they would not do , should become in the first place like that of the Church of Rome , in Government and Discipline , and next in Doctrine and Worship , that is to say , a perfect Brigandage or Robbery , and that Protes●…ant Pope should become a Tyrant over Protestant Princes and People , by calling himself their Common Father , and should likewise become Master of the States , Honour and Repose of their Subjects , without any hopes of Reformation , but by a Miracle wrought by the Almighty . 

They would also Establish an Inquisition , and infinitely multiply the number of their Ecclesiastics , that is to say their Guard-men , and would neither spare Perfidiousness nor Cruelty to accomplish their Designs , and to maintain and augment their Authority . They would pretend to Infallibility as well as the Pope , and claim as much Right as he to change the Law of God , and to make that sin , which is no sin , and sin to be accounted Duty . They would pretend to all power in Heaven and Earth , and would labour incessantly to divide Protestant Princes amongst themselves , and with their Subjects , weaken them by all means , that they might keep a curb in their Jaws , and hold them in dependence upon themselves . They would raise wars for them without number , massacre those that should oppose their Impieties and Ambition from time to time ; nor would they be wanting if they found it necessary to have Orders of Clergymen , resembling the Monks and Jesuits , or worse than those if they could , under other Names , and would likewise Assemble Councils , wherein they would Establish and Make Decrees , like those of Constance , Lateran and Trent : Et totus Orbis Protestantium miraretur se esse Antichristianum ; so that the whole Protestant World should wonder at its being become Anti-christian . 

So that while the Pope and the Romish Clergy , are possessed of a power of Dominion and Rule , and that they will always be , unless God stir up some great and poten●… Prince to bring that rascally Crew to themselves , as I hope he will ; but until that time they must always of necessity be cruel and perfidious by their Principles and Maxims , and pretend to Infallibility in their Doctrine , Worship and Moral●… , because they have neither Titles nor Foundation for their Usurpations , which are palpable and gross ; for if they had , they could no more be charged with Usurpations and Injustice , and if they were not Usurpers , they would not maintain their own Rights nor Gods , as they impiously pretend , by committing so many Crimes , and pretending to Infallibility , with so much Impudence as they do , when they find no other way to colour their Impieties ▪ there 's none but unjust and barbarous Usurpers , who can make use of those pretences as they do . 

The most clear sighted protestants ordinarily look upon the Church of Rome , in regard of its Doctrine , as a Medley of Idolatries , Heresies , Superstitions ▪ Errors and Blasphemous Doctrines ; and in regard of their Morals , as a Composition of Perfidiousness and Infideliy , Cruelty , Impurity and Pride ; and they Judge that all those together constitute , and make up the es●…ential Form of that Church , and they are not deceived . But at the bottom it is Ambition alone , as I have said , which hath produced and maintains all those things , and is the Soul of their Church . One proof of this is , that there 's no Men who do lesle believe their Doct●…ineses than the Men of Parts amongst themselves , who govern all , but chiefly the Court of Rome . In their Civil Conversation among other Men , they don't appear much worse than they , as has been said already ; and there 's no room to doubt , but if the Pope and his Clergy could be assured by the Orthodox Church , that in case they would embrace the pure Christian Religion of the protestants , they should have the same Dominion and Power over the Kings , Princes and People of the Earth , and the same Revenues , Dignities and Means to advance all those who adhere to them ; there 's no doubt , I say , but they would prefer it , how wicked so ever they may be , because it is more conformable to Scripture , Reason and the Natural Light of Conscience , which oft pinches them , notwithstanding their profound and inveterate Habits of Error and Crimes . 

I confess that it were impossible for their Tyranny and Authority to subsist with that Religion , which is pure Christianity , and the only Religion becoming the Excellence of Man , and therefore they were obliged to root it out of the Church of Rome , that so they might reign in it . But they have at least so much Equity , that Men of Sense among them who would persuade others to embrace their Communion , don't demand that they should believe their Doctrines , which they have no esteem of themselves , but only that they should go to their Church , and for other things , permit them to believe as they please . 

It must then be purely and simply Ambition , and a desire of Dominion , which hath ruined the Church of Rome or the Clergy , and which continues to ruin them still ; take but that Vice away from them ▪ their Tyranny will cease , Christian Morality would reassume its place , they would neither be Idolatrous , Superstitious nor Heritical , Cruel nor Perfidious . Transubstantiation , and the Infallibility of their Church , and all other monstrous Opinions would fall , their Discipline , Observations , Customs and Usages so pernicious to the Wel●…are of People and Countries , should be abolished , and we s●…ould see Industry , Arts , Manufactures , Commerce , Agriculture , Sciences flourish every where , and their Clergy themselves would become Christians upon the matter , and honest Men.  

Though there never was any Religion in the World more contrary to the Gospel and Reason , than that of the Pope , in regard of Doctrine and Worship ; yet I will adventure to say , that it is still more detestable , in regard of the Tyranny which is exercised therein by the Pope and his Clergy . 

For the better understanding of this , I maintain that if it were possible there were but two Religions in the World , one whose Doctrine , was well Founded on Scripture and Reason , but the Morals Impious , and the Maxims of Ecclesiastical Government Tyrannical , and tending to the Oppression and Ruin of Princes and their Dominions . And that on the contrary , the Doctrines of the other were Abominable , contrary to Scripture and good Sense , but its Moral Practice Good , and its Ecclesiastical Government tending to the advantage of Sovereign's and their People , to make Country's Flourishing , Rich and Populous , and maintaining Peace and Tranquillity in them . there 's no Man of Sense , but would confess the second Religion would deserve the Protection of the State better than the first ▪ So that if the protestants should become Idolaters and Heretics , & teach Transubstantiation , Purgatory , the Invocation of Saints , Adoration of the half of one of the two Sacraments , and that of Statues and Images , or such like Doctrines ; their Morals and Maxims of Ecclesiastical Government , remaining the same as they are at present , that is to say , allowing to God , Princes and People all their Rights , as to what relates to Morals and the Government of Church and State , their Religion should better deserve the Protection of the State , than that of a Church , which should detest Transubstantiation , Purgatory , etc. and at the same time by their Maxims , Observations and Tyranny fill the World with Desolation and Vice , and ruin Princes and People , as the Roman Religion does . 

So that it appears hence , that the Church and Religion of Rome , are yet more abominable by their Tyranny and Morals , than by their Idolatries and Errors . The Pope and his Clergy are more Antichristian by the Tyranny that they Exercise over the Souls and Bodies , the Estates , Honour , Life and Repose of Princes and People , than in regard of their Speculative Impieties and Worship . But I confess , that the one cannot be without the other . Where there is such an horrible Tyranny , Religion cannot long remain pure in Doctrine , and where the Opinions are so monstrous , their Morality and Church-government must needs become detestable and tend to the ruin of States . 

I confess that in relation to God , it is equally impossible , according to Scripture , for private Idolaters , and those that practise a Morality destructive to Society , to be saved ; So that in that respect the matter is equal , but it is not so with reference to the State.  

Experience teaches us that there are Idolaters who are Morally Honest , as to dealings betwixt Man and Man , and good Countrymen , who deserve the Protection of Magistrates , and that there are ill Men amongst the Orthodox , who deserve to be cut off , or chastised severely , as Murderers , Fornicators , Robbers , etc.  

As to Sovereign's and all Magistrates , the good of the State is always preferred to that of the Church , as Nature in order precedes Grace , and the Light of Reason that of Faith. For the Church cannot subsist without the State , but the State can subsist well enough without the Church ; hence it follows that Disturbers of the Public Peace , and those that plunder and ruin People , deserve better to be cut off or banished out of a Country than Idolaters or Heretics , that don't trouble the State. And that the Church of Rome who is guilty of both , that is to say , ruins States and is Idolatrous , deserves more to be destroyed upon the former account than the latter . 

History informs us , that the Spirit of Domineering and Tyranny began first in the Church of Rome , after which Vice and Ignorance , and next Idolatries and heresies infected her in Crowds , and destroyed all her Doctrine and Worship . For the Popes did first attack the Temporal Rights of Sovereign's and People , before they made any attempt upon the Public Worship . 

Had they been chastised for their Ambition , and kept und●… as they ought , the Christian Religion had not been destroyed utterly among 'em , and People and Princes would have preserved their Rights . It is the Natural Order of the Ambition of the Popes and their Clergy ▪ that in order to promote their Designs upon the Temporal Rights of Sovereign's and People , they make use of what they call Spiritual Methods , to attain their end . Whence it follows , that Sovereign's ought to abhor them more for their Ambition and Tyranny , than for their Doctrine , though the one cannot subsist without the other , and they ought not to delay one moment the exterminating of such a Religion out of their Dominions , when it is so clearly demonstrated to 'em , as I have done that it lays them desolate in such a terrible and amazing manner . 

After so great a number of Political Reasons ▪ which so manifestly prove the falsehood of the Romish Religion , the Papists , who hence●…orth continue obstinate , must find out other Metho●…ss to palliate it , and not apply themselves to refu●…e all our Arguments from Scripture , Reason and Sense against their Opinions and pretended Mysteries , but to prove , if they can , that all the re●…sonss I have bro●…ght ag●…inst them are false , and that the XVIII Articles , by which I ●…ave made it appear ▪ that they lay Countries desolate , are supposititious or of ●…o 〈◊〉 . But though they should be able to do it : They will not find it easy to 〈◊〉 themselves from the Argumen●…s 〈◊〉 ●…aid dow●… ▪ which are so 〈◊〉 and obviou●… to Sense . 

It will ●…e to no purpose for them to allege the I●…fallibility of their Church , as they have successfully done to maintain Transubstantiation , for here their Sophisms c●…nnot so much as impose upon a Servant-maid , who of herself may Judge of my Arguments , which relate to matters of Fact that they themselves touch and manage , are visible , and plain , and proportioned to the Capacities of the most Ignorant , and which may all be examined to the bottom in a very little time . 

there 's no need of understanding Hebrew , Greek or Latin for this , nor Divinity and Philosophy , nor so much as to read the Old and New Testament , or those they call the Fathers : The discussion of this Point is not ●…edious , and it will be to no purpose for the Papists to allege Prescription in this , no more than it would be for a Troop of Highwaymen , Pickpockets or False Coiners , who had been acc●…stomed to the cutting of Purses without being taken Notice of , or had for a long time cheated and ruined a senseless People , who did not observe that their Money was Cou●…terfeited . The Mischiefs are too great and mani●…est ▪ not to have a remedy attempted assoon as possible , when ever ▪ they are discovered , otherwise Princes and People , who are so much concerned therein , must have lost their Senses . 

It appears plain by what I have said , that so many Pe●…sonss , who for divers Ages , have passed ●…or grea●… Ministers of State and Politicians , in Popis●… States and Kingdoms , were in reality nothing ; but on the contrary mean spirited Men , that either did not perceive those Disorders of opery , which are obvious to every Man's view , nay , as I may say , leap on his Face , or suffered a Religion so ridiculous and ruinous to Sovereign's and their People , and so contrary to good Manners , to take place , and be the Religion of the State.  

This Treatise which proves so evidently , and in a Method suited to the Capacity of the most Ignorant and Unlearned persons , the Falsehood and Transcendent Malignity of the Church of Rome and her Religion , and which I defy all or any of them ever to answer , will henceforward take off the Mask from all the Hypocritical Clergy of that Church , who though they believe nothing of their Religion themselves , yet they pretend to be sincerely of her Communion , under a Counterfeit Allegation , that the Holy Scripture is Obscure , and that the said Church is Infallible ▪ whereas they are in good earnest retained in her ▪ Communion merely by their Love of Ease , and the World , and a Spirit of Profanity , that they may enjoy the Sensual Plea●…ureses , and Carnal Delights , which are the Lot or Inheritance of the Romish Clergy . 

So that henceforward the Popish Clergy can't but be understood , even in Popish Country's them●…elveses , to be the greatest Enemies of the State and of Mankind . 

And henceforward we shall have reason also to look upon all the other Papists , who can read or have heard those Reasons Dis●…oursed of ▪ as Impious Profane People without Religion , and that Love nothing but the World ; if they still continue in the unhappy Communion of that great Harlot , seeing her Shame and Uncleanness cannot in any wise be concealed . 

We shall moreover have more Reason now than ever to look upon all protestants , Great or Small , Princes or Subjects , that renounce the Reformation or rather Christianity , to embrace Popery , as declared Enemies of the State , seeing Popery is so evidently proved to be the Bane of all Countries , where it is the obtaining Religion : Nor can we in particular , entertain any more favourable Opinion of those English ●…rotestantss who continue Jacobites , though they do not change their Religion . 

This should also make such protestants blush who entertain , or rather would bring others to entertain a good Opinion of the Church of Rome , as if it were still a True Church , and comparable in any degree to the Church of England , or other Reform Churches ; whereas there 's no more comparison to be made between them , than between Christ and Belial , the Temple of God and that of Idols . 

I hope also by this way of writing , to deliver the World from abundance of Disputes and Vain Questions , about the Pope's Supremacy , whether he be the Centre of Unity , the Source and Fountain of Ecclesiastical Ministry , that is , of the Mission of all Bishops and Ministers , to which Pretensions , he has no more Right than the Muphti ; as also about the Infallibility of the Pope and his Church , Transubstantiation , Invocation and Adoration of Saints and Angels , and a thousand Inanimate Creatures ; in which Vain and Foolish Disputes , the protestants lost abundance of Time , in endeavouring to convince the Popish Clergy , of the Folly and Falsehood of those Opinions , which they themselves know to be False , as well as we , and without Foundation , and laugh at us in their sleeve , that we should think them so simple , as to believe those nonsensical and ridiculous Opinions . 

If they believed their own Doctrines and pretended Mysteries , they would not prosa●…e them as they do , forcing People by a thousand torments to go to their Mass , and to swallow down their pretended God of Bread , which the protestants profess publicly to abominate , as they do their other Mysteries . 

By this means I hope I have also delivered our Divines from a sort of Necessity they lay under , by reason of their Controversies with the Papists , to read again and again those Books called the Fathers , Ecclesiastical History , the History of Councils , the School-divines , Canonists and Decretals of the Popes , etc. which are all of 'em Vain Studies , for the most part ; yet they were obliged to spend a great deal of time in following them ▪ which might have been better improved in applying themselves only to Meditating and searching out the Meaning of the Holy Scriptures , which ha●… been much better understood since the Reformation than in all the Ages preceding , and is the only Study in which a Man's whole Life can be profitably spent . 

Hence we may also perceive of how little consequence it is to us , in regard of our Controversies with the Church of Rome ▪ to know which of the two Histories of the Council of Trent is the Truest and most Faithful , viz. that of the Incomparable Fra. Paolo , or that of the Profane Candinal Pallavicini , called of a long time his New Gospel , which does not deserve to be read , seeing we have a thousand other stronger Proofs of the Impiety of the Court of Rome , and their pretended Religion , than that History of Father Paolo , though excellent in itself , as to the Matter of Fact.  

We may very well say , that the Council of Constance and Lateran , did Evidence and Establish as great Impieties as the Council of Trent divers Ages before it . That which was most fatal to Christianity in that Impious last Council , was , that all the Idolatries and Heresies of the Church of Rome , as also her Tyranny , were therein Consecrated and Established in Form of Laws , with Anathemas ; so that if there were any remainder of Christianity in that pretended Church before the Council of Trent , which is indeed very much to be doubted , it was absolutely destroyed thereby ; especially if we consider , that by Virtue of the Decisions of that pretended Council , where the protestants could not assist , because it was not free , and all was done therein by Bribes , Violence and Treachery , against the Protestations of almost all the Princes of Europe even Papists , who had demanded a Free Council : By Virtue I say , of the Decisions of that Profane and Impious Assembly , the Pope and his Clergy did afterwards put in practise all the Cruelties and Barbarities imaginable , in order to quench the Light of the Gospel in the Blood of the Reformers , and did also highly raise the fury of their Inquisition , which Tribunal alone proves the absolute Reprobation of the Romish Church , better than any thing that was done in the Council of Trent . 

The Church of Rome has retained nothing of Christianity but the Name , and some small Appearances of it , in order to enrich herself by them , just as the Rovers of Algiers , who put out a Christian Flag when they design to enslave and swallow up the Christians ; for at the bottom there 's nothing in the Church of Rome but Idolatry , Perfidiousness , Cruelty and Tyranny . 

It would seem reasonable also , that after so many and so evident prooss , that the Pope is the greatest Enemy of all the Christian States , and of Christianity itself , that Protestant Travellers should be more scrupulous to kiss the Pope's Foot , when they are at Rome ; For 't is not as a Temporal Prince that the Pope imposes upon them such as Ignominious and Abject Submission , but as the Antichrist or Vicar of Christ , for the word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 signifies that , as 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 signifies a Viceroy , and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 a Proconsul . The Pope , I say , and all his Court take it to be a Religious Worship , and an acknowledgement of his Almighty Power , both in Heaven and Earth , as being the Vicar of Christ , or the Antichrist not as Enemy of Christ , which the word signifies also by the special Providence of God , though he be such a one 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 I know Travellers commonly have but a mean Idea of Religion ▪ and do this merely out of a base Covetousness to get the Pope's Golden Medal , and fancy that 't is only a civil aspect which they pay to him as to a Temporal Prince , and not a Religious one . But it 's a horrid mistake : For the Pope pretends it is due to him , by Virtue of a Prophecy in the Old Testament , by which it 's said of the messias , That all Nations shall bow down and submit to him , and lick the dust of his Feet . Otherwise the Pope has no ground to pretend to that excessive and shameful Submission , above so many Princes in the World , who have a greater Temporal Power and Revenue , are of a far nobler Pedigree , and are infinitely better in all respects than he is ; So that all those Travellers who are guilty of that , commit besides the sin against God , a horrid baseness against ' emselves and Christianity , and in truth , I should think that those who will be so base hereafter , as to stoop to that Villainy for the Golden Medal , would make no great scruple to prostitute themselves also for Money to the other Roman Prelates at Rome & Muliebria pati . 

There is nothing in my Opinion more capable of inspiring one with low and abased Thoughts of Mankind , than to see Kings and Princes , and their Counsels , who ought to be the most clearsighted and prudent of all Men , as to what concerns the Welfare of their Dominions and People , to suffer themselves to be led by the Nose , by the most Vile and Abject Rascals in the World , who have imposed such a Foolish and Shameful Religion upon them , under pretext of which they pillage , ruin , and lay waste their Countries , without their perceiving it , or at least endeavouring to deliver themselves from that Yoke of Slavery . 

The Church of Rome is not contented thus to treat those that she hath already brought under , but would also swallow up all others , and yet if you 'll believe her , she is , as I have said , Infallible , and there 's no Salvation to be hoped for , but in her Communion , and by submitting to her Yoke ; which is all one as if the most dissolute Prostitute in a City , should allege that all the honest Women are debauched , and cannot learn how to behave themselves except they come to her School : Or just as if a multitude of Profligate , Impious Debauchees , Thief's , False Coiners and Murderers , pretended to impose a new Religion upon Men , to Administer Justice to all the World , under pretence that some of their Ancestors , from whom they claim a Direct and Legal Succession , were honest Men , and acted in those Stations a thousand years ago . For it is just the same : the Popes pretend to be Successors to the Bishops of Rome ; who were , as they pretend , the Successors of Saint Peter ▪ but what consequence can they draw from it , if it were true ; seeing they are now all Idolaters , Heretics and the greatest Tyra●…ss in the World , and have been such for several Ages ▪ Is it not certain that Judas , though he was an Apostle himself , forfeited his Right to his Office , by betraying his Master ? how much more have the Popes and the Popish Church forfeited it , who outdo him as much as the Prototype use●… to outdo its Type . 

Let 's suppose that the Mahometan 〈◊〉 who are a kind of Christians , as well as the Popes , since they acknowledge Christ for a great Prophet , did pretend that they are the Successors of those Bishops of Asia to whom St. john in his Revelation , directs some Admonitions , who had at least as much Right to pretend to be the Successors of the Apostles , as the now Bishops of Rome . Let us suppose , I say , that those muphtis did pretend now , not only to have their Mission from Christ , but to be the Centre of Unity amongst Christians , and under that pretence oblige us to 〈◊〉 Mahometans , would the Popish Church think their Arguments good ; and yet they have as much Right to such Pretensions as the Pope and his Clergy , who are more Antichristian than they . 

The Pope then and his Clergy being without Controversy , as I have demonstrated , the greatest Enemies to Jesus Christ , and to the Christian Church ; is it not a horrid piece of Impudence ▪ and Folly , to pretend that they are or may still be the Fountain of the Ecclesiastical Mission and Ministry ? It is against God's Holiness ▪ Truth and Wisdom to think so ▪ and Blasphemy to speak so ? For did ever any wise Prince trust his Authority , his Person and Family to Rebels and his greatest Enemies , does not he on the contrary , deprive them of all their Offices , and of all his Favours ▪ for otherwise he should countenance their Rebellion and Crimes ; but when they have submitted and sworn Fidelity afresh , then if he thinks fit to pardon them , and give them their Offices again , there must be new Patents and a new Commission ▪ on else he would be guilty of Folly against his own Crown and Dignity ; just the same as if our Lawful Sovereign King William , did trust his Authority , Person , and People to the Irish , who are in the late King's Service in France , and his own greatest Enemies , and that they should exercise that Authority without renouncing Popery , Idolatry , and the late King. This might justly be called a trusting the Sheep to the Wolves . Unless Peter after the abjuring of his Master , had repeated of that great sin , and been also restored by his Master to the Apostleship , by a thrice repeated Commission to feed his Sheep , as he had three times abjured him ; Unless , I say ▪ Christ had so sealed his Pardon and renewed his Commission , he had forfeited his Apostleship : How much more than hath the Popish Church forfeited all her pretended Privileges , by the multitude of her Idolatries , Heresies , Execrable Morals , and by her Tyranny over Princes and Nations ? 

it 's a Folly in protestants to dispute seriously with the Roman Clergy , and quote Scripture , or bring Reason against them ; for they know very well that the Scripture is against them , otherwise they would not prohibit the Reading of it , nor speak with that disrespect of the same , as they do ▪ it is just the same as if you would endeavour to dispute Highwaymen or Prostitutes out of their way of Living , which they have chosen before all others , with a Resolution never to abandon the same . 

it 's a Maxim in Logic , that one ought not to dispute with those who deny Principles , nor with those who impudently Controvert certain Truths . And can any Society be more guilty of this , than the Church of Rome , who order those of her Communion to violate all the Commandments of God , all the Maxims of Christianity , and all the Laws of Nature and Society , to Convert Men , as she calls it , to her Religion ? Can there be any thing more effronted and impudent than that pretended Church , when in her Debates with us , she asserts also , as I have said already , her own Infallibility , in Pillaging , Ruining and laying Desolate those Nations that submit to her Yoke ▪ and likewise by denying that there was any Persecution in France , or that their pretended Sacrament is Real Bread , etc.  

To what purpose is it to Dispute of Religion with such a Church , which for several Ages hath impudently Anathematised those who Communicate in both kinds , though she owned at the same time , that Jesus Christ commanded we should do so , when he instituted that Sacrament , and that the Apostles and Primitive Church did the like . 

It exceedingly delights the Popish Clergy , so find the protestants seriously Disputing against their Ridiculous Doctrines , for they value themselves upon it as having Wit enough to make all their Extravagancies seem Problematical at least . For it requires as much ingenuity to put a fair colour on their Follies , as if a Man should undertake to prove that the Devil love's Truth , Justice and Holiness , or that that which is called Truth and Holiness , is False and Sinful . What delight would not the Devil take to hear Men Disputing , whether he is to be Worshipped and Religiously Served as well as God. This comparison is not too harsh , for in many places of the Scripture , the Adoration of Creatures , both Animated and Inanimated , such as the Papists are guilty of , is called The Adoration of Devils ; to drink the Cup of Idols , is called a drinking the Cup of Devils ; to Sacrifice to Idols ( as the Papists do when they Invoke and Adore so many Creatures in Heaven or Earth , and when they offer the Sacrifice of their Mass to pretended Saints , who are dead , and mere Idols ) that 's called in Scripture , a Sacrisice to Devils , the Adoration of Images of Gold and Silver , is joined with the Adoration of Devils . And several Doctrines which seem to be none of the most Impious of the Romish Church , are called the Doctrines of Devils , such as is their prohibiting their Ecclesiastics to Marry , and eating such and such sorts of Meat , etc.  

I mention all this by the by , without quoting the places of Scripture , because ▪ I am no Divine , but those who read the Scriptures know what I say is true . They know also that the Romish Church is called in Scripture by the Names of Sodom , Egypt and Babylon , as if the Spirit of God had fought for the harshest Terms , to denote to us in some degree , the infinite Malignity of the Romish Church , which is beyond all Expression and Idea . Their Clergy , I say , take a great delight to see our Divines busied in confuting their Opinions , as those who undertake the Apology of Folly , do when they see others seriously confuting their foolish Arguments . 

If it were not for the riches of Popery , and the Princes and the numbers of People , who follow that Beast and false Prophet , according to the Prophecies of the New Testament , it would appear to the Judgement of the Papists themselves , the most Execrable Religion that ever was , and I hope there will come a time , when all the World will be amazed , to understand by History that there hath ever been in the World such a Portentous and Monstrous Religion as that is ▪ 

I promised at the beginning of this Work , to demonstrate the great Advantages which the King and Kingdom of France might reap by abolishing Popery ; in order to show by that single example , what Advantage other Popish Nations might reap by the same , and the great ones that England and other Protestant Countries enjoy by the Reformation : I shall therefore now say , that should it please God to put it into the heart of the K. of France , who Reigns at present , and who of a long time seems to a great many people , to be destined to do great things , to deliver his Kingdom from the Tyranny of the Pope , he would reap abundance of more true glory from it before God and Man , than he would have done , had he been able to conquer the whole World. That would be an Action truly Heroic , infinitely greater than ▪ any thing he hath done hitherto , and would be a clearer demonstration to the World , that he ●…ath a Great and Noble Soul. This return to God , to Himself and to his People , would compensate for all the past Miscarriages of his Reign , and preserve those great Titles , which have either been given him by others , or assumed by himself , as also the Glory of all the great things that he may have done . then indeed he would deserve the Title of Most Christian King , which can never be properly given to a Popish Prince , because Popery and Christianity are Antipodes to one another , at least as much as darkness is to lig●…t . 

It is well known that ever since he ascended the Throne , the honester sort of Papists in that Kingdom , have entertained hopes that this great and glorious Prince would deliver it from the Pope's disgraceful Yoke ▪ by creating a Patriarch . But the Court of Rome by the pernicious Counsels of her Clergy , who have sold themselves to Iniquity , diverted him from that design , by inspiring him with false Ideas of the Glory and Grandeur he would acquire by extirpating the Protestant Religion , which they call Heresy , out of his Kingdom , that is to say ▪ to persecute such True Christians as were in the same , with all manner of Fury , in order to subject them to the Pope , instead of making War upon that Grand Enemy of Jesus Christ , the greatest that ever he had or can have . 

It must be confessed that the design of establishing a Patriarch in France , was very considerable , seeing by that means they had designed to deliver the Kingdom from a Foreign Yoke , as ruinous as possible , but it must be acknowledged on the other hand , that it would be abundantly and more assuredly Glorious and Advantageous to Reform the National ▪ Religion entirely from so many frightful Errors in Doctrine , and so great a number of Customs and Superstitions , that are pernicious to the State , and were introduced into the same under the favour of that profound darkness , which the Tyranny of the Pope hath spread therein , and which in their turn maintain and support that Tyranny ▪ 

For if we consider things duly , that horrid Darkness and Ignorance could not have been dissipated by the mere Creation of a Patriarch , for notwithstanding that , most of those ruinous Disorders , represented in the forementioned 18 Articles , would still have continued , because they are the natural Dependences and Necessary Consequences of the other Principles of the Romish Religion , which would have remained entire notwithstanding the Creation of a Patriarch , the Abolition of the Papal Authority only being excepted . 

Besides such an Inconsiderable Change as this , the rest of the Popish Religion being continued , would neither have been Advantageous for the Salvation of Men , Glorious to the King , nor Profitable to the State. For Idolatry and the other Heresies remaining , there would have always been an Impossibility of being saved in that Religion , and the greatest part of the Oppression attending it , being also continued , the people would have had but little relief by it , nor would the King of France have reaped the fourth part of the Advantage , which he might expect from a through Reformation . 

Neither is it to be thought that so small a change , could be solid and durable ; for at the bottom , it 's certain that it 's the Popes who have made the Religion of the Church of Rome to be what it is , either by corrupting the Doctrine of the Apostles ▪ or Adopting the Idolatry and Worship of the Pagans' , or by Forging now and then new Articles of Faith , for their own private Interest , and that of their Clergy : And it is certain that their Religion is founded on no other Authority but that of the Pope , and therefore Cardinal Pallavicini had reason to say in his History of the Council of Trent , called by some , his New Gospel ▪ Tutti gli Articoli della Religione unitament considerati non hanno altra certezza prossima ed immediata che l'autorita del summo Pontefice ; i e. that all the Articles of their Religion , considered together , have no other certain and immediate foundation , but the Authority of the Pope . So that if we reason consequentially from this Principle , the Popish Religion cannot be preserved but by the preservation of the Papal Authority , from which it derives all the Authority , that gives it any value in the eyes of the World.  

It is also probable , that if a greater Reformation were not made immediately upon the Creation of a Patriarch , the Pope's Authority would be again Reestablished ; ●…or he should without doubt have always a great Party in the Kingdom , under the ●…avour of that horrid Darkness which must have continued therein , if it had been no other but for the Jesuits and Monks , who would be constantly Jealous that the Patriarch would pair their Nails . One Party of the Nation would always have entertained a Correspondence with the Pope's Friends , being united by their Communion in the same Religion , excepting the Opinion of the Authority of the Pope , tho'some would have made semblance of rejecting that too , for fear of their King , yet they would effectually endeavour the Re-establishment of the Papal Authority . And so much the more , that the Court of Rome would have been prodigal of their Treasures , and have spared nothing on this occasion to maintain their Tyranny : And moreover , i●… the King who had created a Patriarch , should come to have died before the Reformation should have been completed , and a Prince of lesle Authority had Succeeded , there would have been an end of the Patriarchat . 

This erecting of a Patriarch would not have pleased the Popish Princes neither ; so that they would have joined with the Pope and the Party that adhered to him in France , and would either have stirred up Civil Wars there , or have made War upon it themselves . 

Nor could this imperfect Change have satisfied the Protestant Princes , who would always have looked upon France as Idolatrous and Heretical , and ready to return again to wallow in that mire , whence she had made some Effort to get out , and begun to lift up her head ; so that they would never put any confidence in her . It should happen to France in this case , as it always happens to Neutral Princes in the quarrels of Neighbouring Potentates , their Neutrality does not reconcile them with their Enemies , nor yet procure ●…hem any Friends . Neutralitas ne●… Amicos pari●… neque Inimicos tollit , saith Tacitus : In such cases we must be either one or tother , and avoid that which is called Consilia Media . Such a faint Reformation would have served for naught , but to awake all the Malice of the Pope , and the Mischievous Ecclesiastics of the Kingdom , who would have reaped the same Advantage from this , that a strong Man does from the Impotent Menaces of his Enemy , which serve only to put him on his Guard and set him at Work , to prevent the threatened Mischief , according to the Italian Proverb , Le Minaccie sono l'armi del Minaccia●…o . Threats sound an alarm to the threatened Man , to take Arms , either to de●…end himself or offend his Enemy , as occasion requires . 

Whereas if the King of France did not do things by halves , but should , together with his Subjects , renounce all at once the false Doctrines , Worship , Superstition and Abuses of the Church of Rome , and Free his Kingdom from that Tyranny , by Establishing the light of the Gospel , to enlighten his People , amongst whom it is hid under a Candlestick , he might assure himself that such an Evangelical Reformation would be followed by unexpressible Advantages to himself and his People , both in regard of Temporal and Eternal Life . 

Some may perhaps object that such a comple●…t and sudden Reformation , must needs shake the Kingdom of France , and that there 's no passing so suddenly from one Extreme to another without danger , that is to say , from the thick darkness of Popery , to the bright shining light of Christianity , and therefore it mu●…t be done gradually , as our Saviour did when he restored sight to the Blind , they did not at first see all Objects dis●…inctly ; but Men walking like Trees , and that God does not make us pass from the dark night to the bright day , but by the dawning of the Morning , and therefore according to that Wisdom , it were proper first to Establish a Patriarchat in France , before they endeavour a Gospel-reformation . 

To this I answer , That as to the Authority of the Pope , which the Creation of a Patriarch would have overturned , all the Parliaments of France , and amongst others that of Paris , all persons of Learning , Sense and Honesty , even amongst the Clergy themselves , do not acknowledge that Authority in their heart ; nay , they despise all other Doctrines contrary to those of the protestants , as being evidently false or unprofitable . The King's Authority and the Respect or Fear that they have for him , are the only Ties which retain them , lest he should destroy or ruin them , if they did ●…urn protestants . They have had many Doctors of a long time , who have opened their Eyes in regard of the Pope's Authority , and divers other such Doctrines , as the Chancellor Gerson , and the Drs. Richer , the Launoy , the Author of the Book called , Les Moyens Seurs & Honnetes , Sure and Honest Methods , Elias Du Pinnacia , and many other , without mentioning the Books of protestants ; and besides , the Jansenists , the New Philosophy and the present Quietists , do something of that Nature ; And there 's ground of hope that all the Nation will be moved at the infinite number of Mischiess , which Popery occasions in the State when they are set before their Eyes . 

We must also consider , that the Rigour and Length of the last Persecution of France , nay which continues still , and hath been one of the longest and most cruel that ever the Christians endured since the Establishment of Christianity ; that grand Rigour , I say , and the continuance of the Persecution , have given occasion to all persons of the Romish Communion , who had not absolutely divested themselves of all Conscience and Humanity , and become perfect Bruits , to inquire into those Opinions , ●…or which the protestants have suffered , and suffer still so many evils , and have found them Reasonable and Christian , contrary to what the Monks represented them to be , and divers of the honestest of their Clergymen who were formerly very Ignorant , have instructed themselves in them . All of them have been terrified to find so much Courage , Firmness , Humility and surprising Patience amongst an infinite number of persons of all Sexes , Ages and Conditions , which made them to think , that in all this , there was something Divine , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; they are also surprised to find , by the Zeal which those poor People , discover at present when persecuted in divers places with the utmost rage , that they are lesle Papists than ever , which occasions many thoughts of heart amongst those who have any Judgement . 

Besides the bad success of that Persecution which hath been accompanied with this long and bloody War , a violent Famine , and the dethroning of the late King James , with whom it was concerted , and which , in fine , hath issued in the ruin of the Kingdom of France , hath made it evident that it was not a Woŕk which God approved , and that he did without all doubt avenge himself on the Nation for their perfidiousness and cruelty committed against his People , at the Instigation of the Court of Rome and the Clergy of France ; and those who are not judicially blinded , or have any Sense of God upon them , understand and perceive clearly that God concerned himself in the Cause of the protestants , and the Evils they Suffered . Which ought to be another strong Argument , to incline the Papists to embrace the Protestant Religion . So that there 's no cause to doubt but the People of France , have a mighty disposition to shake off the Pope's Yoke , and to embrace the Doctrine of the Gospel ▪ if the King of France would declare himself for it , above half the business would be done . 

Never Prince had nor can have so fair an occasion to acquire Immortal Glory , and to render his People happy , as the King of France has at present in putting that great Work in Execution , for besides all the Dispositions thereunto abovementioned , he hath the most Authority in his Dominions of any Prince in the World , and hath the finest and most numerous Army that ever was seen in France , and if he should s●…and in need of any assistance to carry on a Work so Glorious , so Magnificent and Advantageous to Mankind , there 's no doubt but the Incomparable William , and other Protestant Powers , would lend him their helpi●…g ha●…d . 

It seems that the present State of the Kingdom of France , doth moreover indispensibly require this general Reformation , and the abolition of the Papacy , to the end the King may appropriate to himself all or at least the greatest part of the riches of the Church , which belong to no Body , and whereof he might dispose for the ●…afety of the State , without any Injustice , by which means he would be enabled to pay his Debts to every one , and to prevent a Civil War , which seems to threaten France avoidable , if there come a k ▪ of lesser Authority than Lewis the FOURTEEN . by reason of the desperate Condition into which People of all ranks are upon the brink of being reduced , because of the ill condition of their Affairs . 

All his Troops seem to require it also , to prevent their being cashiered , for they must either perish in Foreign Countries , or starve , or be hanged at home ; the great numbers of brave Officers and Noblemen , ruined by the King's Service do also require it ; and 't is a thousand times more just that they should be compensated by the riches of the Church which belong to no Body but the King and State , than that they should be enjoyed by such an Herd of Scandalous and Unprofitable Ecclesiastics . The great numbers of others who have been forced by several ways to lend Money to the King , or to buy Places , or Letters of Nobility , and must avoidable be cashiered and ruined , or who have lost all they had by the Taxes , do also require such a general Reformation , that the King may be enabled ●…o pay or give them some Compensation , and to furnish them Bread , of which they have none left . And besides those abovementioned ▪ all ranks of People through the Kingdom in general require it , that they may be delivered from those prodigious Losses , that they suffer continually by Popery , which amount , as has been said , to above 200 Million per Annum , that so they may be Reestablished and Repeopled a little ; for which end the Monks , Nuns and other Ecclesiastics might be very useful , if their Monasteries were dissolved . 

The general Desolation of the Cities and Countries do also demand it , that so that King may be in a condition to moderate the Impositions and Taxes , with which they are overwhelmed at present , and will continue so to be . Without this all Arts , Manufactures and Husbandry , will infallibly decay more and more , and the Art Military will come to nothing in France , where it hath flourished so much in this Reign . 

The Interest of the Church of France , as they call it , and all the honest Ecclesiastics among them , seem also to require it ; because if after the present King and Dauphin , there should happen to come a weak Prince , the Kingdom also being so much weakened as 't is at present , and as it will continue to be still , may be for ever ruined unless this general Reformation be set about speedily : If , I say , a weak Prince should happen to come to the Crown at such a time , the Popes will treat France in a more Tyrannical and Cruel manner than ever , because of the fears they have laboured under , that France would shake off their Yoke , and of the attempts which they will pretend have been made upon their Authority in this Reign , which they will never pardon . then the Pope will Establish the Inquisition in France , deprive the Gallican Church of that she calls her Liberties , rob the King of his Regale , oblige him to restore the Secularised Estates to the Church , and certainly despoil the Bishops of their Lawful Jurisdiction over the Regular Clergy . then they must believe the Infallibility of the Pope , or at least pretend to do so , both in Matters of Fact and Right , his Almighty Power in Heaven and Earth , his Superiority over Councils , his Absolute Power over the Temporal Rights of Kings , and their Lives , as well as in the matters of their Salvation , and the like over their Subjects : The Pope , the Monks and the Jesuits will render themselves Masters of all under a weak Prince , and the Kingdom will be more exposed to the Cheats , Impostures and Scandalous Vices of the Clergy than ever . 

The King of France should hereby gain the Affection of all Protestant Princes and States entirely , which would be much more useful to him than that of the Popish Princes , because they are honester in their Treaties , and at present much more powerful especially by Sea , and more able to hurt or help him . And moreover , France cannot subsist without Commerce with them , and the King knows very well that they have no thoughts of regaining any thing from France , as the Popish Princes have , because she hath never taken any thing from them ; nor have they any thoughts of making Conquests upon him , as being more Sage and Judicious than that comes to : Neither has he any reason to fear that the Court of Rome will employ them to do Mischief to France , as they have employed , and may still employ Popish Princes to do . 

But if France neglect such a fair opportunity as this is , to shake off the Yoke of Popery , ( when there is such an Indispensible Necessity ●…o do it for the safety of the Kingdom , which must otherwise perish ) after having seen so evidently , that Popery is the ruin of States , and by consequence a false Religion , all the World will have reason to believe , that His Majesty does not only hate the Protestant Religion , but the very persons of all protestants , especially if he does not Re-establish his Subjects of the Reform Religion in the free Exercise of the same , and in a full and entire Liberty in all Respects , as his other Subjects , and with all possible Assurance for time to come , seeing no Man can reproach them with Disloyalty towards the King , nor on the account of their Doctrine , which the most Learned of the Papists themselves acknowledge to be very Sound , and Conformable to the Scripture , and make their boasts that they believe the same things as they do , having nothing else to reproach them with , but only that they don't believe enough , because they don't believe Transubstantiation , nor fifty other Fooleries of the like Nature ; nor adore the half of one of the two Sacraments , which has not so much as the Honour to be Bread , but is only an Elil Elilim , a Nothing , an Idol , which according to St. Paul is a mere Nothing ; of this number of Learned Men is the Bp. of Meaux , as appears by his Exposition of the Catholic Doctrine . Without ●…his Reformation , France will become as desolate in 30 year's time , as Spain and Portugal is at present , though there should be a continued Peace all that while . For the Women and Girls who are at present three thirds of the People of France , will for the most part be dead without Children , because there are not Men enough at present to Mary them ; so that this want of People will be much more apparent then , than now . 

It may very well be said that the Kingdom of France hath for 30 or 40 years had a great Ascendant over all the other Nations of Europe , by means of the King's Vigour and Absolute Power . But the Kingdom will lose that Ascendant , come to nothing , and be despicable to all the World , and especially to the Court of Rome , without hopes of being ever able to recover itself , if such a Reformation be not made ; And I dare venture to say , that without this the Kingdom is in danger to be torn into pieces by Civil Wars ere it be long , or involved in short in another new War , on the account of Religion , by the Jesuits at the secret Suggestion of the Pope , who are still afraid of that King's great Authority , though his Kingdom is ruined . 

there 's no other Method left , as I have intimated already , to put the King in a condition to pay his numerous Debts , but this Evangelical Reformation ; and because divers persons of great Merit have desired of me to give some Account of the Ways and Means they take , to find Money to borrow , and Places to sell in a Kingdom so much ruined as France ; I could not refuse to obey them in imparting what is publicly known of that Matter in France , therefore I shall here make a little digression . 

We must observe then that the Court entertains a great number of People in Provinces and Towns , who make it their business to discover those who have yet any Money left ' 'em . Whereupon the Intendant , Governor or other Chief Men of the Place , have orders either to call for such persons , or to go to their Houses , and tell them that the King has a mind to sell such and such new Places , or Augmentations of Salaries to all Civil Officers who are already in Place , or Letters of Nobility to Commoners , or some other Privileges , or to create Rents upon the Town-house of Paris , or to alienate the Revenues of the Post-office , or some part of his Demain , etc.  then they are acquainted Civilly that they will oblige the Court to lay out their Money on such thing●… , and do a piece of good Service to the State , that their Principal and Interest will both be sure , and their gain considerable . If they answer that they have no Money , after being desired thus to lay it out , than they find it to be , as Tacitus says , Preceserant , sed quibus resisti non poterat . They were Prayers indeed , but such as they could not resist . 

Those Officers inform themselves more partic●…larly of the Sta●…e of their Affairs , from Scriveners and Notaries , who are obliged to tell all they know of it ; After this they proceed to threaten the persons , that so they may squeeze Money out of them . But there are few who let it come to this extremity , because they see so many Examples before them of People ruined by such Refusals , for either they are taxed extraordinarily as rich persons , or are accused that either they themselves or their Friends , whose Estates they Inherit , robbed the Public when they were in Office , and thereupon despoil them of their Estates . Otherwise all the Actions of their whole Life are Canvased , or if that fail , the Conversations of their Children and other Relations , are enquired into , on purpose to vex them , and their Tenants are overwhelmed with ▪ Impositions , or Quartering of Soldiers . 

There are a hundred other such Methods ; and their Children and Relations are never advanced neither in the Church , in the Army , nor otherwise . And they are besi●…es accounted at Court Enemies to the Government , sometimes imprisoned , and if they have any Suit at Law , the adverse Party is sure to find favour , etc.  it 's true , there are some who are known to be extremely Rich , or in great business , ●…hat prevent ●…he Court on purpose ●…o gain Favour , and lend their Money upon the Townhouse of Paris , nor do they know how to dispose of their Money otherwise , Trade being quite ruined , Houses and Land being of no value , and all people almost being broke ; so that there 's no safety in lending it to private Hands ; besides they are afraid of the Species being cried down , the same having been augmented one 6th part during the War. Th●…n the Interest is upon the foot of twelve , fourteen , eighteen or twenty year's purchase more or lesle , and most of those persons live at Paris on those Revenues : Here I shall take notice by the way , that above two thirds of all the Kingdoms Money , Plate and Jewels are at Paris ; and that there was plenty of Money in France 15 years ago , as 't is necessary for Trade , in a Country where the half of all Estates are in Mainmort . 

We must suppose that Court was persuaded that the last War was just and necessary , and that the Kingdom was in great danger , had it not been for the help of such Methods , and they reasoned as that Man , who said formerly ; Praestat aliquam habere Rempublicam quam nullam , that is , 't is better to have some Republic than none : And we must think also , that they thought the Kingdom was able soon or late to pay and reimburse all those Loans , both Principal and Interest , and that the Money was useless during the War , in the hands of private Men who had it , or might even be prejudicial to the Kingdom , if the Owners had applied themselves to Usury , as 't is in such Circumstances in some Countries . So that 't is no wonder , that the Court having such an Authority , made use o●… such Ways and Means . 

How then can all those Public Debts , old and new , be paid without abolishing Popery ? How can those who have bought their Places , of whom three fourth's at least must be Cashiered , be otherwise reimbursed ? and this last alone may amount perhaps to a thousand Million , besides what is due to those who have purchased Augmentations of Salaries , and Titles of Nobility , which together with other Privileges sold also , must be abolished ; or how can the Interests of all those Debts be paid , seeing the Kingdom is every day more and more dispeopled ? for there 's at least three Women for one Man , and by consequence there are but few Marriages , and more People die than are born . What hope's then can that Ki●…gdom entertain from Trade and Husbandry , when they have no Men to manage them ? 

And besides , the continuance of the Persecution will more and more alienate the Hearts of all True Protestant Strangers , who either will not Travel , or at least not stay any long time in France , where so much Perfidiousness and Cruelty abounds , against their brethren , and where they cannot promise safety to them●…elveses , for ei●…her ●…hey are in hazard of being knocked on the head , by the Furious and Idolatrous People , if they don't kneel before their breaden God in the Streets , or are always at the Mercy of their Landlords , Masters of Exercises , or Idolatrous and Bigoted Physicians , etc. for it is now the mode in France to be mad Bigots , and if they fall sick there , they will be persecuted to the death , in order to make them abjure their Religion . Nor can they have leave to eat Meat for six Months almost in the Year , without buying Permission of the Priests , for they are now more ridiculous in France , in those matters than at Rome itself : Because the Pope is well satisfied to draw Strangers thither , and to have their Money , and that France should lose so much by it . So that the great pro●…it which the Kingdom of France did ordinarily reap from Protestant Strangers , must reasonably be supposed to diminish considerably . 

There will happen also another Inconvenience by the abating of the Value of Money , which must yet of necessity be done , and will occasion abundance of disorder in the Kingdom . I confess that the abolishing of Popery , which we have demonstrated to be so necessary , cannot prevent that diminution of the Value of the Coin which is so just , but it would occasion that that loss and all the rest would be nothing so sensibly felt by the Kingdom , because the Affairs of the King and the Subject both would be abundantly bettered by it . 

I think it necessary to observe here , that the Rents of the Townhouse of Paris , beforementioned , consist in Taxes laid upon all sorts of things , that are exported or imported into that City , for the use of Man and Beast , as Provisions , dattle , Corn , Wine , Clotheses , Firing , Hay , Straw , etc.  Nor is there any thing but what is liable to this Impost , whether it be the product of the Kingdom or of Foreign Countries , and it is the same as to all manner of Goods Exported from Paris , as Manufactures , all sorts of things ●… lafoy mode for Dresses , either of Men or Women , and whether it be to the Provinces of France , or to Foreign Countries ; so that there 's nothing but what pays , the very Herbs and Flowers not being excepted . About 20 years ago the King had at least 20 Million of Liures , or above a Million and a half Sterling yearly by this Impost , but it is without all doubt much diminished at present . The Salt alone which is sold at 14 and 15 d. per Pound , did formerly yield 1800000 Liures per Annum , which was appropriated for the Use of the King's Table , and those of the Officers of his Household , though Paris be nothing near so Big , Rich and well Peopled as London ; and by consequence spends much lesle . 

then besides the Tax on all things Imported into that City , for the use of Man and Beast , which pay by the Gross , either at the Ga●…ss , the entrance of the Suburbs , or to the Pataches on the River , ( which are Boats with Officers of the Custom-house , and Guards to levy the said Tax on all things Imported or Exported by Water ) there is moreover a Tax laid upon every thing that is retailed within the City and Surburbs ; and because that this Revenue must necessarily fall in proportion to the Decrease and Poverty of the People , the Court who are unwilling that it should do so , augment the Tax on every thing , to make up what they loose by this fall of the Revenue , which occasions abundance lesle to be consumed , and this Branch of the Revenue to fall more and more , and People to suffer Extremely by it . Those Taxes are so many that there are several Books written for ascertaining them . It is the same in several of the biggest Towns of the Kingdom and 't is at present the best par●… of the K●…ngss Revenues , bec●…use the great Cities are not so Depopulated as the Country . But let 's return to our Subject : 

I shall suppose here the Popish Religion to be Good as to its Doctrine and Wo●…ship , and the Protestant Religion False ; yet the King of France , by embracing the latter , should be ●…ssoon saved if he paid his Debts , relieved his People from their Pressures , and his Kingdom from a Foreign Yoke which ruins it ▪ if he laboured incess●…ntly to Re-establish and Repeople his Kingdom , doing Justice to all , rewarding such as have been undone by his Service in one manner or other , making reparation to his Reform Subjects for the damage he hath done them , making Ver●…ue and Learning to Flourish , and Ba●…ishing Vice , Ignorance and Imposture ; all which he may do by abolishing Popery , and which can't be done without it . I say , that he would assoon be saved in a Religion that is fal●…e , as to Doctrine and Worship by doing those things , as he could be in the Popish Religion , supposing it to be Orthodox in Worship and Doctrine , and that he did not perform his Du●…y in all those respects , as it is certain he cannot do whilst his Kingdom continues Popish . 

Vengeance in 〈◊〉 cases displeases God ▪ but that which the French K. should hereby take of the Court of R●…me might well be called an Holy Vengeance ; seeing the Popes have ruined France by their Religion , secret Intriqus , and by the Spirit of Pecsecution , with which they have inspired her Princes , etc.  The King on the other hand , would Re-establish Fr●…nce by the Ruin of the Popes ; which were no more but thebruising of the Scorpion upon the wound that it makes . 

By this means the King of France would ob●…ain a mighty Ascendant over the House of Austria , by the Augmentation of his Power and riches , and the Favour which he should find among protestants ; and the Pope would not be any thing formidable to the French King.  

it 's time now to draw to a conclusion , and therefore I sháll only say , that it is clear as the Sun shine , that the Court of Fr●…nce by saving that damage which Popery occasions to the Ki●…gdom , might easily upon the 200 Million which the Kingdom would at least gain by it , increase its Revenue 100 Million , without reckoning the Revenues of the Church , the Plate in their Churches and Treasuries , and their Gro●…ing-timber , which the King might dispose of as he should think fit , and at the same time the blessing of God would attend the King and the Nation , whereas they have great reason to dread the contrary , if they don't follow this Me●…hod . But whereas , it continues too evident that the Romish Clergy influences the King to persecute and murder still his Protestant Subjects with all manner of Outrage , it it a certain proof that the Pope is a●…raid of his Power still , and does not think him reduced low ●…nough , and therefore if he can , he will certainly prompt him to undertake new Enterpri●…eses against some Nation and perhaps a Protestant State , and the truth is while the French Court continues to treat their own Reform Subjects at that rate , there 's very good reason for protestants to be Jealous of them . 

By this Persecution we may perceive that the Morals of the Church of Rome are far worse ●…han those of the civilised Pagans' , as appears by that Saying of Tacitus , Apud optimum quemque ●…am miserum est occidere quam perire : That is to say , all honest Men accounted it as u●…grateful to nature to kill others as to be killed themselves ; but on the contrary , that which is called the Church of Rome , accounts it a thing meri●…orious to be drunk with the Blood of the Saints , & esteems it more advantageous to those that shed it , or occasion it to be shed than the Blood of the Cross ; so that I cannot forbear to say , that it would seem that Persecuting Clergy are certain of their own Reprobation , for if they were in any doubt concerning it , or had the least hope of Salvation , or that their Church were not wholly abandoned by God , they would not so defile and pollute it , by such a desperate Conduct , and by the Commission of so many Cruelties , Perjuries , Profanities and Sacrileges to advance its Interest . 

FINIS . 

Consult the Errata . 





 'Las Empres●… Politicas de Savedra . 