Truth's rightside turned upwards . Or , the army's vindication against an aspersion of rebellion and tyranny cast upon them . 

In several books , whereof one subscribed by divers ministers in the province of London ; another by mr Geree , &c.  

Not only clearing the case of the army to be just ; but retorting the force of the arguments of their opposers upon themselves . 

By William Potter . 

Romans 2. 3.  

and thinkest thou this , oh man , that judgest them which do such things , and dost the same ; that thou shalt escape the judgement of God ? 

London , printed by James and Joseph Moxon , for William Larnar , and are to be sold at his shop , at the sign of the black-moor , near Bishopsgate . Mdcxlix . 

To his excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax , and his general council of officers . 

Right honourable , and honoured gentlemen , 

Having amongst many others , observed your constant proceedings ; and being no less convinced of the justness , than of the public safety that your successes tend unto ; it was a great burden to my spirit , that your actions should be so publicly and so foully misrepresented , as by many they have been , especially of late : now fearing lest through the subtlety of our common enemy , the devil , who fails not to endeavour by strong delusions to deceive , if it were possible , the very elect : ( Though i was informed and assured you undertook not so great a work without strong prayers , hearts pliable to the light you should receive , and sufficient premeditation ) yet i say , fearing least any one of you ( Through the strong assaults of so many temptations on every side , both spiritual and temporal ) should be in the least measure discouraged : and perceiving what a flood of weighty affairs are at once fallen upon your shoulders : i did humbly beseech God ( Who for the most part makes use of weakest means ) at this time to enlarge my small talon beyond its ordinary capacity , in the vindication of you , against such more than ordinary aspersions ( Which nothing but the meekness of true Christians would enable men of your power and trust patiently to bear ) the justness of your proceedings being grounded upon principles as clear , as the faculty of human understanding can evince . Yet being much pressed for want of time , i could only touch upon such general heads , as necessarily tend to the true state of that act for which you are so highly and with such strong presumption condemned : whereby ( Although finding that much more Might have been said to your vindication therein ; i was necessitated to cut my way shorter than otherwise i should have been willing . Thus humbly taking leave of your excellency , and your honourable council , i rest . 

Happy if i May be in the least measure serviceable to Christ in his servants , w. p.  

To the reader . 

Christian reader , 

I have observed , and found by much experience , how dangerous a thing it is to judge of our fellow-professors by the outside and colour of their actions , whose most sincere intentions God for the most part hides from the world , under circumstances of very foul appearances ; as if he meant to make the world believe , that he hath no true servants in the world ; but that such as pretend most to godliness amongst us . are the veriest hypocrites , and are not ashamed to own the vilest of actions , under the notion of religion : as to instance , Abraham must do that out of conscience , which the world no doubt looked upon as the attempting to murder his son . The Israelites take their farewell of the Egyptians , carrying their treasure with them by a command from God , under a pretence of borrowing it : a thing , though ( All circumstances considered ) justifiable , yet of a foul appearance . And afterwards they seem to overthrow their own doctrine against images , by setting up a brazen serpent : and at last , ( As if God were at odds with himself , and angry that men should reverence his own ordinances ) it must be broken to pieces . Jeremiah is put upon such a message from God , for which he is accused of sedition . And when the Jewish religion began to be noted by the world , as the orthodox worship , Christ ( As if he affected nothing but novelty ) seems in their eyes to cut it up by the roots : and ( As if he liked not to be served long after one fashion ) when once men built upon his own principles that which they called Catholic ; he sends his own servants to protest against it , ( As in Luther and others : ) and when his doctrine also became a little popular , you shall scarce find a Christian , but under the new name of Puritan ; and now it begins to be a credit to be an old Puritan , you shall scarce find any heat of true spiritual life , but amongst them who are railed against for the broaching of heresy . By all which seeming mutability , God testifies his constant prosecution of the same design , viz. to make Christ , who to the Greeks is foolishness , and to the Jews a stumbling block ; to his own servants , the power and wisdom of God to salvation ; which being fitly applicable to the times where in we live , and the act of the army which i have undertaken to vindicate ; i thought it not amiss to make the observation thereof one part of my discourse in preface thereunto . And so i rest 

Thy fellow-servant in Christ w. Potter . 

Truth's rightside turned upwards . Or , the army's vindication against an aspersion of rebellion and tyranny cast upon them . 

I having read some books inveighing against the armies late removing some members of parliament from sitting in the house ; wherein they utterly mistake the state of the present condition of affairs in the kingdom in all their arguments ; could do no less in duty , than humbly to propose my thoughts , in vindication of them therein . 

Those who dispute against them , do affirm these six things , viz.  

first , that they have resisted authority . 

secondly , broken their trust and vows to God and men . 

thirdly , dissolved the parliament . 

fourthly , justified the King in that former something parallel attempt of his . 

fiftly , opened a gap to all rebellion . 

sixtly , acted without any warrant from holy writ . 

All which i conceive are grounded upon this one mistake , viz. by giving that authority to governors which is the right of a freeborn persons , and only justifies our taking up of arms in vindication thereof . That is , that the people's trustees , and not their governors , should be judges of their own laws , and consequently to remove their rulers , if they will not keep themselves within the bounds of their trust : which how it May be applied to justify the present act of the army , in regard this parliament was chosen to be the sole judges thereof in the behalf of the persons ; and consequently the King who attempted to offer them violence in the performance of this their duty was so justly condemned . How this army in this particular can be justified , is the scope i aim at . 

In order to which , we May observe that before the King deserted his trust ; the parliament ( Being the persons ) were in such a capacity , that they were the sole judges of what concerned the people's freedoms , and therefore could not be said to tyrannize over the persons . But since the King deserted the parliament , they became governors themselves ; and all governors of a free persons , aught to have their wills regulated by the people's trustees over whom they rule : which as the case now stands , the army having authority to do , did not in restraining these members , act out of their places and callings : and to clear these particulars , we shall handle them in this order : namely , to prove 

1.  What it is to be in a capacity to act tyrannically , and what not . 

2.  That before the Kings deserting the parliament , they were not in a capacity so to act . 

3.  That since the Kings deserting the parliament , they are in a capacity so to act . 

4.  That the army have a lawful authority to judge of , and restrain them from so acting . 

Which 4. being soundly proved , i doubt not but our adversaries , such as are ingenuous , will yield and confess , that God hath overcome them , not only by swords , but words ; by strength , but truth ; by might , but right . 

And first , to be in a capacity to act tyrannically , is for rulers to be the sole judges of what they do or order , in reference to the government of the persons : because in this case , whatsoever they ordain , the persons are in no capacity to show their dislike : and consequently , if for their own private advantage , or some other by-respect they take away the just due or interest of some other man or men , there is no power on earth to check or restrain them . On the other side , when rulers can make no orders or proceedings that are binding . but those which the persons ( By their lawful deputies ) are in a capacity to disavow and restrain , than rulers are not in a capacity to act tyrannically . 

2.  Before the Kings deserting the parliament , they were not in a capacity to act tyrannically . For the parliament were the persons met together , to demand of their rulers what they thought meet for their own safety , and therefore were not in a capacity to tyrannize over the persons , because themselves were the persons , and not the rulers , but were to return to their dwellings , and themselves to be ruled by those laws they demanded . 

3.  Since the Kings deserting the parliament , they are in a capacity to act tyrannically . For in his absence , they were by approbation of the persons , to take upon them to be rulers : that is , to make orders and ordinances to govern the persons by . Now it is already proved , that for rulers to be the sole judges of what they do or order in reference to the government of the persons , is to be in a capacity to act tyrannically . Therefore since the Kings deserting the parliament , they are in a capacity so to act . 

Or secondly , by giving commission to armies , they become the governors of those armies ; and by governing them , they govern the kingdom : now to govern a kingdom , especially by force of arms , and to be the sole judges of what they do or order in reference to the government thereof , is to be in a high capacity to act tyrannically . 

4.  That the armies which they raise , have a lawful authority to judge of and restrain them from so acting . For first , the persons in parliament are not governors , but as some of us are willing to acknowledge them so : for it is the unquestionable right of a free persons , not to be subject to any whether they will or no . Indeed the Jews had sometime governors appointed them by divine authority ; but we ( As far as we enjoy our freedom ) not without our own choice , and therefore as we were free in choosing them to represent us as the persons of England , so we were as free in choosing whether we would allow them to be our governors ; except we grant that the Kings deserting the parliament , and their undertaking to free us from tyranny , could entitle them to be our governors , though none of the persons of the land had at all believed that they intended it . Therefore the persons in parliament were not our governors , but as some of us were willing to own them so . 

And that this is a truth , appeareth secondly , by the parliaments declaring the case , and therein appealing to the persons to be their own judges , whether they would receive commissions , and take up arms under their authority or no . 

2.  We never owned their authority in giving commissions to us or any of us , but as it gave them who received the commissions for us , a lawful authority to judge of and by the sword , or otherwise to restrain them in acting tyrannically . For if they gave us or our deputies ( Whom we and they entrusted to receive the sword to defend us ) a commission to oppose the arbitrary and tyrannical power of governors , than they gave us in our said deputies , a commission to oppose it in themselves ; because in receiving their commission , we allow of them as governors . Which although it Might not be expressly mentioned in their said commissions , yet it is to be understood , because we had no other reason to take up arms against our former governors , but to oppose tyranny . 

And secondly ( As i have already showed ) if those who in the capacity of rulers do make ordinances , should also in the capacity of persons have sole power to judge of the justness of them , than they are invested with power both to make ordinances whereby to dispose of the public monies for their own private use , or otherwise dispose of our lives and estates , and also be the sole judges of the justness of so doing : and it is not tolerable that our taking up arms against tyranny , was to maintain such a tyrannical power . Wherefore it must necessarily be allowed , that we never had owned their authority in giving commissions to us , or any of us , but as it gave them authority , who received the commissions for us , again to judge of , and restrain them in acting tyrannically . 

3.  That thus to oppose , is the proper work of the armies raised by them ; they being those who are entrusted with the sword . First , because none but they are lawfully entrusted to use their endeavours for this end : and therefore if those who have no commission to assert our liberties , should ( Being of another judgement ) endeavour to oppose the army in what they do according to their commission , they should oppose them acting according to their places and callings to preserve the persons , without any commission or authority : for to oppose those that act by a lawful commission , is to rebel against authority . 

2.  If both we as the persons in parliament , were willing to give them a commission to defend us the persons of the land against the tyranny of governors ; and also they ( As willing to venture their lives in such our defence ) were willing to accept of this our deputation , as sufficient authority to bear them out in so doing : then though ( Now we see their acting ) we do not approve of their acting therein , yet if we resist them , we act as private men against the authority given them by all the persons in parliament ; and after we have engaged ourselves to allow them liberty in so acting , howsoever they should act therein , we also break our trust and engagement if we deny it unto them : therefore to use the sword to oppose tyranny is their proper work , and not ours . So that you see here are three reasons why we May not oppose them herein . 

First , none can show a commission to oppose tyranny but the army . 

Secondly , we all entrusted them to use their best skill herein . Which one is divided into two arguments . 

1.  That they who oppose them , oppose their private opinions against their own authority in parliament . and 

2.  Break their public engagement to the parliament and kingdom : which David saith we May not do , though the keeping thereof should be to our prejudice . now then , you see it proved , that it is not only the work to which they are called lawfully : but so theirs , as none else May oppose , without opposing the authority of the whole kingdom . Therefore the armies raised by the authority of parliament , have a lawful authority to judge of , and restrain the same parliament ( As they are not ourselves or persons , but our governors ) from acting tyrannically . 

And now i come to answer the six things before mentioned , alleged against their proceedings herein . 

Object . 1.  that they have resisted authority . 

To which i answer , that i have proved they were so far from acting against authority , that they have acted herein according to their places and callings : and it is impossible that men's very doing their duty should be the committing of sin , or acting rebelliously . 2.  I answer , that if the members in parliament , as they are our governors , have no authority to act and persever in acting things contrary to our liking , declared by our lawful deputies ; then in so acting , they act that which they have no authority to do : in which to oppose them , is to oppose their wills only , not their authority . 3.  It Might by the same reason be proved that the parliaments war is unlawful , because therein they opposed the will of him that was their governor . Therefore the a•my have not resisted authority . 

Object . 2.  That they having vowed , and being entrusted to maintain the privileges of parliament ) have broken their vow and trust herein . 

answ. the privilege of parliament is the privilege of the persons , whereby through their lawful deputies they are authorised to oppose that which they judge to be tyranny in their governors . But the army ( Seeing they , and none else have commission to oppose tyranny ) are therefore the lawful deputies entrusted to oppose that which they judge tyranny in their governors : therefore they have performed ( Not broken ) their trust and vows to God and men in thus doing . 

object 3.  They have dissolved the parliament . 

answ. if the parliament be now not in the capacity of a formal parliament or persons , met to demand our liberties of our governors , but as it were , a council of state , authorised ( By means of them our lawful deputies , taking up arms under their command ) to be our governors ; then to remove such evil governors as by our lawful deputies we judge tyrannical , is not to dissolve a parliament , nor yet to destroy , but regulate such a council of governors , who must needs ( In this case ) without such a removal , be in a capacity to destroy , but not to save us ; and by such a removal , are restored unto a capacity to rule us safely . Now i say , if this be true , ( All which is either clear of itself , or already proved ) than the army have not by this act dissolved the parliament , nor yet the government , but have done that , which if they had not done , this council would have been not only useless , but destructive to us , and being done , is restored unto a capacity to preserve us : whose preservation is the only end of our fighting , and of their government . 

object . 4.  That they justified the King in that former something parallel attempt of his . 

answ. they are parallel in nothing but this , that the King's act was in as high a degree of breaking of trust , as the armies was a keeping of trust ; that the army without so acting , could not have performed their trust , i have already proved ; because they being in place of us the persons , cannot be faithful to us , but in removing such governors they judge tyrannical . And that the King without resisting the free parliament or persons of England , could not lightly have broken his trust , is as clear ; but sure i am , that by his attempt to remove some of them out of the house , he did endeavour to overawe the rest , and so to make us all his creatures and slaves , by our own consent in parliament , is so evident , as it need not be proved : which is manifestly against his oath and trust . 

object . 5.  That they have opened a gap to all rebellion . 

answ. for the lawful deputies of the persons not to be satisfied without a timely removal of such as they judge tyrannical governors ; is so far from opening a gap unto , that it shuts the door against rebellion , which otherwise they judge would ensue ▪ for that is properly rebellion , which is acted against the authority of the persons in their lawful deputies , upon any pretence whatsoever . 

object 6.  That they have acted without any warrant from holy writ . 

answ. he that turns the truth with the wrong side upwards , and in that posture lays it to the rule of God word , must needs give a judgement quite contrary to truth : for we have proved that instead of resisting our authority , they have maintained our authority : instead of breaking their trust , they have performed their trust : instead of justifying the King's act , they have condemned it : instead of opening a gap to rebellion , they have shut the door against it : and consequently it follows , that instead of acting without warrant from holy writ , they have acted by authority from such warrant . And now , not doubting all honest Christians will see their error , and ( As David ) take their own sentence to themselves unto whom it belongs , which they have urged with as much zeal as we can press upon them ; we are assured they will yield obedience unto lawful authority , which if others amongst them refuse to do , shall not God ( To use his own expression ) laugh to see them taking such pains , thus to sentence themselves , whilst they rejoice in conceit , that they have beaten his cause and servants down to the ground ? And shall not all the saints say amen ? even so be it Lord Jesus . 

Finis . 











