Plain dealing : or , the countreymans' doleful complaint and faithful watchword , to the statesmen of the times , whether in the parliament or army . Wherein is set down , the rise , nature , and species of right government , with the corruption thereof in former , and this our generation , to this present time . 

By Edward Harrison of Keensworth in Hertfordshire , sometimes preacher to col : harrison's regiment . 

Micah 6.8 . 

He hath showed , oh man , what is good : and what doth the Lord require of thee , but to do justly , and to love mercy , and to walk humbly with thy God . 



London , printed for j. Harris , and are to be sold at addle-hill , 1649.  

The preface to the reader . 

Reader , 

i shall not much court thee for thy candid constructions , or favourable interpretation of the ensuing lines , there being nothing declared therein , but what all rational and unbiased men will readily subscribe to ; and for others , i never intended to please , but reclaim them hereby ( If it be the will of God . ) I have been a very serious observer of the parliaments and armies pretences and actings of late ; and ( Notwithstanding many clear demonstrations of their crooked proceedings ) yet have ever declined either speaking , writing , or acting any thing that Might evidence the least jealousy of their integrity and true zeal to the freedom of the persons , and liberty of the nation ; suffering my judgement to be guided and overpowered by my strong affection towards them so long , till i have been by many honest men thought to have either lost my understanding , or departed from my principles : wherefore i was at last enforced in my spirit to bear this my witness against some present actings , beseeching the Lord to make it as profitable to others , as it is satisfactory to myself : however , my record is on high , and ( However men rescent it ) the answer of a good conscience towards God and man , will be unto me a continual feast . 

Edward Harrison . 

Plain dealing . 

The great god of heaven and earth , create all things for the use and service of man , whom he made after his own image , as the Master piece of the whole workmanship of his hands ; and being careful of all things , comprehending in himself the beginning , midst and end of all , according to his good pleasure , out of respect to the common good and preservation of human society , hath from time to time distributed to sundry persons distinct and different gifts , that in the exercising of divers estates , charges , administrations , offices and occupations , they Might by consent , through mutual succour and interchangeable help , preserve and maintain themselves and one another : in which assertion is clearly discovered , the several causes of all right government . 

1.  The efficient cause is , God the creator , out of his care to man's weal and tranquillity , communicating his common gifts severally for the benefit of all , both governors and governed . 

2.  The material cause is , the increase and multiplying of mankind , the original of all societies , as , families , towns , cities and kingdoms , or commonwealths . 

3.  The formal cause is , the mutual consent of both parties , the one to govern , the other to be governed , according to such laws , articles and covenants as are agreed upon between them . 

4.  The final cause is , the mutual succour , help , commodity , freedom , peace , security and preservation one of another . 

From all which , these profitable propositions May be deducted , 

First , that magistracy and government is of divine institution , and an ordinance of God , and the calling of a magistrate a lawful and honourable calling . 

Secondly , that men cannot live together , without a government of one kind or other . 

Thirdly , all right government is by consent of parties . 

Fourthly , that both parties are equally bound to conform and stand to the laws and articles agreed upon , as well the governor as the governed . 

Fifthly , where common commodity , peace and freedom is swallowed up by particular interests , there is nothing but tyranny , slavery and confusion to be expected . 

Which truths , when they shall be cordially assented to , and conscientiously practised by magistrates and persons ( Then , and not till then ) shall that prophecy be fulfilled , laid down in isa. 3.4 . they shall break their swords into ploughshares , and their spears into pruning-hooks ; nation shall not lift up sword against nation , neither shall they learn war any more . 

But can the Ethiopian change his skin , or the leopard his spots ? then May the generality of magistrates ( Who are accustomed per fas & nefas , to uphold and advance the interest of their will and power ) and the major part of the persons ( Who account it their glory to be vassals and slaves to great titles and gay clothes ) own righteousness as the only pillar of lawful authority , and prize that liberty , wherewith God by nature hath made them free . 

Now that i May not be thought to proceed upon false grounds , i shall revive the aforementioned propositions , and briefly examine their consistency with the ordinance of God and right reason . 

To the first and second , wherein the divine right and necessity of government are asserted , all men of all parties are ready to subscribe . 

Unto the last , wherein the end of government is declared , most men agree . 

The third and fourth , viz. ( that right government is by the consent of parties , and that both parties are equally bound to stand to the agreement ) are ( By the Luciferian pride and covetousness of great men in authority , and slavish pusillanimity of the persons under them ) become disputable . 

Nay , the contrary ( Till of late ) accounted fundamental truths , without believing whereof , the clergy of those ages would allow no man to be saved , viz. that absolute monarchy was of divine right : ( What then meant by absolute monarchy , appears by the other king-clawing doctrines of those Trenchard chaplains , ) viz. that the King was accountable to none on earth . 

That he had right to all his persons enjoyed , and that they held it but as mere grace from him ; that what ever he did , or caused to be done to them , they ought in no case to resist him . 

With much more such goodly stuff , which they put in to fill up their court sermons , which i pass by , as being unwilling to rake further in this Augean stable . 

All which recited state heresies , so desperately destructive to human society , i shall very briefly confute , and then pass to the confirmation of the truths proposed . 

The iniquity of those court maxims is thus discovered : 

There are two essentials in magistracy . 

First , power and authority to protect the good , and to correct and punish evil doers : and this is immediately from God , and God's ordinance in all society of men whatever . 

Secondly , the designation of persons to administer , and the rules and laws by which that administration is to be guided ; and this is left to men , God not using now immediately to impose particular governors or magistrates upon societies of men ; or limit them to his judicial laws , as was his dealing with the Jews , whose government Josephus and other authors acknowledge to be a Theocratia , or a government immediately from God : they had their magistrates , judges , and Kings , by God's immediate appointment ; they could neither enact laws , appoint governors , nor make war or peace , but by express and immediate command from God : Paul calls magistracy an ordinance of God ; Peter styles it an ordinance of man ; which seeming discrepancy is thus reconciled : all power and authority to do justice and judgement , is the ordinance of God , and is not left to the will and pleasure of men , to alter , vitiate , or contemn , without the incurring the displeasure of God for the same : but the choosing or appointing officers , and the making of laws , is left to men , and is the ordinance of man , and can only be called the ordinance of God , in that ( When men proceed righteously therein ) it is owned and approved of by him . 

If this distinction be not admitted , but that every superior power in both senses is of divine institution , and so properly the ordinance of God , these absurdities will follow , viz.  

That Paul and Peter were not guided by the same spirit , they writing things irreconcilable : that the supreme authority exercised by the Pope , is the ordinance of God ; read dr. Willet's exposition upon rom. 13.1 . who there concludes , that monarchical , aristocratical and democratical governments , are all of them the ordinance of God ; and that the state May for their preservation resist a tyrant , and quotes Pareus pleading for the same , which without the aforesaid distinction , were false to affirm . In the parliaments declarations , and other rational discourses , you May find enough to discover the foppery of the forenamed tenets ; i shall therefore go on to confirm the truth held forth in my third and fourth propositions , viz. that all right government is from consent of parties ; and that both parties are bound to the laws and articles agreed upon between them ; the first whereof is proved by the authority of Demosthenes , Aristotle and Cicero , who unanimously affirm , that true sovereignty was instated upon the good will and liking of the persons , who chose out of themselves , and submitted to such as excelled most in virtue in those times . 

By the formal and ceremonial election and oath made and taken at the late Kings of England admission to their government , and by the many declarations of this parliament , especially the last against monarchy , wherein it is acknowledged , that they were elected , trusted and authorised by the persons for the common good , page 5.  And by the pressing for an agreement of the persons as a foundation of future government , in the remonstrance of the army , page 67. where it is propounded , that none May be capable of being admitted to the crown , or any office or place of public trust , without express accord and subscription to the same . 

The second , by that saying of Seneca , that the magistrate , together with the persons , have one God to serve , one law to keep , and one death to fear : by the reason alleged in the remonstrance of the army , for the bringing of Charles Stuart to justice . 

By the parliaments last declaration , page 13.  And by the practice of the Roman state , of Swetheland and Scotland , who have brought their supreme magistrates to account for breach of laws . 

The ordinance for a city or nation , and order among magistrates , especially among them that had the sovereign rule over all , was called by the ancients , commonwealth , or weal public ; and those commonwealths that tended to common benefit , were said to be right ; those that respected the profit of superiors only , were accounted corrupt . 

I read of three kinds of right government , and three of corrupt . 

1.  The first of right is monarchy : when the sovereignty is in one alone , who seeketh public profit only , and preferreth common benefit before his own private will and particular commodity ; and when he endeavoreth to advance his own interest , and to govern by his absolute will , than he becomes a tyrant , and the government tyranny , which is the first kind of corrupt government . 

2.  The second of right is aristocracy , the power of the best men , viz. when a few approved and tried men for righteousness , have the sovereignty jointly together , and make laws for the rest of the persons , directing their thoughts at no other marks then public peace , freedom , vtillity and profit , as among the Lacedæmonians of old : but when these reject the poorer sort , aim at nothing but their own advantage , without any care of public commodity , take part with their equals in riches and greatness , to the oppression of their inferiors , than the government degenerates into oligarchy ; the second sort of corrupt government . 

3.  The third of right is democracy , the power of the persons , when mean and indifferent men are by them chosen ; neither of the richest , to avoid tyranny , nor of the poorest , to avoid confusion . 

Of which Aristotle saith , that those societies which consist of mean persons in power , is very good , and those cities and commonwealths are well governed , wherein there are many of the middle sort , who have more power then both the other parties , or at least than any one of them ; for where , saith he , many are very great , or many very mean , there followeth either an extreme oligarchy or anarchy , a confused multitudinous hodge podge ; which is the third sort of corrupt government . 

Thus having spoken of several sorts of right and corrupt governments , and given you the description of them , that you May know them one from another when you meet them : i shall proceed to particularize how and by whom right government came to be corrupted in former , and in this our generation . 

the first breach upon right government that i read of , was made by Nimrod , Cham's nephew , of whom we read , gen. 10.10 . whom historians report was the first that brought men into subjection by force and violence , establishing his principality in the kingdom of Assyria ; which tyranny of his was successively exercised upon the persons , and submitted unto for a long time in the days of succeeding tyrants , during the continuance of the Assyrian , Mede , Persian , Grecian and Roman monarchies , till the persons of Rome coming to the knowledge of their own power and liberty , threw the tyrant Kings out of their saddles ; then succeeded the government by consuls , decem viri , and tribunes , all which lasted 1084 years , till at last Cesar taking advantage by their manifold divisions , first got the office of perpetual dictator , and afterwards the title and power of an absolute Emperor , et nunquam postea nisi deprincipitatu quaesitum , saith Tacitus , that is , then came no other question to be debated , but who should be the sovereign Prince of the state ; which was the condition of the generality of the world , especially since the civil and ecclesiastical states were by Antichrist jumbled together , for then Kings and priests conspired together to enslave both souls and bodies of the persons ; which mystery of iniquity hath been fully discovered in these times of light , wherein God hath begun to stain the pride of glory , especially in England . 

how far and wherein tyranny and slavery was brought in upon the English nation by the King and his clergy , under the specious pretences of legal prerogative in civil , and decent uniformity in spiritual , is so fresh in all men's memories , that it were needless to trouble the reader with the story of it , whereto though the generality of the persons , Issachar like , were willing to subject themselves , yet the iniquity and unrighteousness of our tyrants being full , the Lord hearing and granting the prayers and tears of his persons ( As sometimes the Israelites ) stirred up some heroic spirits to withstand the usurpation of those in power , and to give a check to their furious proceedings , which opposition meeting with a resolved and hard-hearted Pharaoh , was the cause of England's misery and desolation , as to its outward glory , riches and plenty , ( Though through the Lord's goodness ) his persons have had their sufferings abundantly made up by the accession of light , liberty , and spiritual acquaintance with themselves , wars , confusions , and shaking earthly foundations , being the forerunners of God's design of doing his work , his strange work , even destroying his enemies , and delivering his persons in England ; which design of his , that the mercy when enjoyed Might be the more prized , his name the more advanced , his persons the better prepared for it , and that the less of man Might appear in it , he was pleased to carry on ( As to human apprehensions ) foully , abscurely , by contrary instruments , principles , means and ways , through many obstructions , intermissions , hopes and fears , as by sad experience we have found , the wisdom and special providence of our God , being very admirable in his constant counterworkings of our statesmen in their Linsey-woolsey reformations , as May be thus briefly demonstrated . 

When this parliament was by necessity in the tyrant's part summoned and called , the members thereof came with resolution to free themselves and the persons of those notorious burdens wherewith they had been formerly sorely crushed ; viz. ship-money , high commission court , Star-chamber , to bring those whom they Counted evil counsellors to justice , to abolish episcopacy , to revive the constant succession of parliaments ; and in order thereto , to obtain the militia into their own hands , which in those times of the dawning of the day , was all the liberty they pretended to aim at : which particulars all gained ( The King continuing his negative voice , power of adding whom and as many as he would to the house of Lords , and of bestowing places of honour and profit upon whom he pleased , and thereby an opportunity of gaining the major part of both houses to his party : and lastly , setting up a proud formal and bloody presbytery in the room of episcopacy ) had not amounted to the least dram of true liberty ; yet even some of those things were vigorously opposed , which caused a bloody war , and after that , all the forenamed particulars were by conquest given in to the parliaments possession . wise men quickly saw how little all the glorious liberty so vigorously contended for availed them , the parliament making their little fingers heavier than the King's loins , introducing more oppressions upon the consciences , estates , and liberties of the persons , than they had formerly taken away ; the houses contending against the King's unlimited prerogative , exercise as destructive a power themselves ; that of the Lords being as bad as the Star-chamber or council table , and that of the Commons in conjunction with their synod , not much better than the high commission court , persecuting the faithful of the land under the notion of sectaries , as formerly they had been in the other court under the name of Puritans : and in order to the completing of their intended reformation ( Not according to the word of God , but in compliance with the Scotish tradition ) right or wrong a covenant was imposed for the finding out and crushing of all such conscientious and discerning men out of the army of the Earl of Essex , and all other public employments , as could not dance after the Scotish pipes . 

these designs the Lord ordered for good : thus , 

First , he provided an asylum , a place of refuge for the conscientious dissenters in the army under Manchester and Cromwell . 

Secondly , he suffered the remainder , the dross and scum of essex's army to moulder away , and notwithstanding many great and chargeable recruits , to lose ground , not performing any memorable service , & at last gave them up as a prey to the enemy in Cornwall . 

Thirdly , he honoured the despised dissenters , made them victorious in the North , and gave them favour in the sight of the persons . 

Lastly , he caused the wheel to turn upon his people's enemies , by the new model , wherein the formal profane and loose Covenanters were left out , and the religious and faithful worthies put into their rooms whom he quickly made instrumental in subduing the royalists , to the great terror of their enemies , open and secret , at Oxford and Zion college . 

The next plot was , the disbanding of that schismatical army , the only block in their way to the setting up their presbytery with fire and sword , under the pretence of the relief of Ireland , which occasioned the disbanding of eleven of the chief contrivers out of the house of Commons , and the imprisoning the major and divers aldermen of the city . 

This design thus failing , they court the Riff-raff in the city and country to petition the house in behalf of the King and presbytery ( A goodly pair ) and against the army , and invited all the cavaliers in Scotland to set up church government in England according to the covenant , whence proceeded our last dangerous and bloody war : but through the Lord's wonderful goodness to his persons , who worketh all things for good to them , their designs produced no other effects , save only the Kings and the Lord's righteous execution , the extirpation of the house of Lords , the purgation of the house of Commons , and a glorious opportunity for freeing of this nation from all its oppressors and oppressions , by the laying of a foundation of liberty , peace and satisfaction to all serious men of all parties . 

how happy were England , were men's designs of inflaving it here at an end ? how gladly should i here break off , and praise the Lord for his goodness to England ? but alas ! the countryman's heart is as full of grief , and his eyes as full of tears , as ever ; he cries out he is deceived , his expectation frustrated , and his liberty betrayed ; he takes up David's complaint , it is not an open enemy that enslaves him , not damn cavaliers , not rigid envious and surly presbyters , but religious and godly friends , that have prayed , declared , remonstrated and fought together for freedom with them ; that with their swords have cut in sunder the chains of other tyrants , and yet now are become the greatest tyrants over their brethren themselves , which when he can refrain from sighing and sobbing , he in his broken and rustic language thus expatiates : all the forms of government being corrupted and abused , the laws and administration perverted , and the people's liberties betrayed ; it was promised that a new foundation should be laid by an agreement of the persons , to such righteous principles of justice and common right , that ( As to human reason ) it should be impossible for any tyrants in this or future generations to introduce bondage upon the persons , that justice upon all offenders should be impartially executed . 

That all public officers should be called to an account . 

That the public debts of the nation should be paid . 

That this parliament should have a period set for its dissolution , and a succession of future equal representatives ascertained . 

And that the petition from many about London , dated September 11th . should be considered , and the grievances and pressures therein complained of removed : witness the demand of the army in the large remonstrance , from page 62. to page 68 who in the prosecution thereof purging the house , seizing upon the city , and thereby gaining into their hands the whole power of the kingdom , who would expect , but that which was by them demanded ( And because not granted , so ill rescented and severely punished by imprisonment , as to some , and expulsion of the house as to others ) would have been by themselves ( Now enabled to effect them ) speedily given to the persons as their due and right : and he therefore much rejoiced in the extraordinary action of sifting the house of Commons , wholly taking away the house of Lords , erecting an high court of justice , trying and executing the King and Lords ( As the pulling down an old house ready to fall upon and ruin the nation , and the burning of rotten post• only fit for the fire ) in order to the setting up a new frame , consisting of sound and well seasoned timber , under which the English nation Might find shelter from future storms and tempests ; but his hope makes him ashamed , his joy is turned into sorrow , and his mirth into mourning ; and that upon these grounds . 

First , the agreement of the persons is waved , in order to which the other actings were only justifiable either before God or man , the old government in force according to law , was by King , Lords and Commons , and there was yet never any reason alleged to vindicate the manner of the altering , and the high proceeding in order thereto ; but that all power was originally in the persons , and that all former must give place to the end of forms , the common good of the persons ; and therefore till there be a foundation laid by an agreement of the persons , it is no state blasphemy to affirm that there can be no true form of government in the nation . 

As for the present house of Commons , he would be glad to have cause to bless God for it , as being instrumental in keeping ill minded men in awe by their title , until a more full and formal power , in a just and equal representative to be speedily endeavoured , can be introduced . 

Secondly , no justice is executed upon any members of parliament that betrayed their trust , which hath been and is by the cavaliers thus interpreted , that the parliament and army executed the King and Lords , not out of zeal to justice , but for sinister ends , else , say they , why should not Waller , Clotworthy , Brown , and the rest , accused of so great crimes , be all this while brought to their trial . 

Thirdly , no account is taken of the treasury of the kingdom , how it hath been disbursed , which makes many of the enemy's report , that Mulus mulum scabit , that the parliament , army , and country committees , connive at each other , while they share the riches of the nation among them . 

Fourthly , though King , Queen , Prince's revenue , delinquents estates , Dean and chapters lands , are wholly at their disposing , yet there is no burden removed , neither excise nor tithes ( A burden so contrary to any profession , the gospel , and the very covenant itself , repugnant to the gospel . Read the story of Walter Brute in Fox's martirology , pag. 446 , 447. and you will find it clearly proved , that tithes are not in any sense due by any law of God in the times of the gospel : read also that learned exhortation of the Bohemians to the King and Princes , pag. 602. and the examination of William Thorp , pag. 494 , 495. where it is quoted out of cisterciensis , that Pope Gregory the tenth , in the year of our Lord 1211. first ordained tithes to be given to his priests . Augustine in his juchyridion , 76 chap. and Chrisostome upon the 11 of Luke , affirms , tithes to be pure alms ; and it is recorded , that they were not paid in the primitives times at all ; and that the priests wresting scriptures to their profit at the first , obtained them as beggars do alms , pag 426.  By all which it appears , that tithes , or any enforced maintenance , are contrary to the mind of Christ in the gospel , and to the very letter of the covenant , wherein all Covenanters engaged to take away all popery and popish innovations , root and branch : and over and above the aforesaid burdens , the tax for the army swells from 60000 l to 90000 l a month . 

Fifthly , there is a new council of state erected , which much amuseth poor ignorant souls in the country , who fear , that instead of succession of equal representatives , they shall be popped off with a perpetual parliament , or everlasting council of state , and omnipotent council of war , that can make it justifiable to break all forms themselves one day , and yet vote it mutinous in others , to act any thing that displeaseth them , though neither against any true form or order , as lately they have done : i love and honour many of their persons , and should rejoice if the Lord by me would reclaim them from the evil of their present way . 

I shall lay down some considerations , which May be useful for them , and trust God with the success . 

First , that honesty is the best policy : the deep plots and witty contrivances of men in power , when inconsistent with the will of God , requiting them to do judgement and justice , and to take off the ••kess from the oppressed , have always been abortive , for God will not be mocked ; and experience tells us , that self-seekers , though otherwise godly and gallant men , yet are and shall be saved as by fire ; witness many worthy members of parliament , who endeavouring by a treaty to secure themselves , are by the Lord with disgrace laid aside ; he thereby , no doubt , intending much good to their souls , foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cantum , he is a happy man that takes warning by other men's harms . 

secondly , carnal mixtures with corrupt interests , are destructive to them that make them . 

Mixtures are carnal , when made upon fleshly and sinful considerations ; and interests are corrupt , when encroaching upon Christ's kingdom in spiritual administrations ; or when found repugnant to righteous government in civil . hence it follows : 

first , that under pretence of taking in the generality of the persons into their party , or pleasing these or these great and potent men , or ( Which is the best ) the bearing with the weakness of godly men , for any to encroach upon the kingly office of Christ , & take upon them to judge of blasphemies and heresies , & to restrain men from acting in things of supernatural cognizance ; yea , to enforce a maintenance for a ministry ( Out of which should they pick out all the drunkards , swearers , cavaliers , noted time-servers , and idle drones , they would scarce have enough left to make up a synod ) when as Christ himself is engaged to take care of those , whom he employs in the work of the ministry , and hath nowhere required the magistrate to do it , ( It being out of his sphere , as a magistrate ) is a carnal mixture with corrupt interest , and will destroy those that join in it ; for Christ will not endure that any should be so saucy , as to intermeddle with that which is his own proper work , it implying , that they judge him either weak or unfaithful , and so not able , or not faithful , in doing his duty , which hath been the bane of many , otherwise useful men in this kingdom , as Hollis , Stapleton , Brown , Massey , Pryn , &c. and will be yours to , if in time you lay it not to heart ; and what comfort will it be , if when God shall lay you aside for these things , your consciences shall tell you , that you suffer for doing , or attempting that which he never required at your hands ? 

As for satisfying weak consciences , do you think that any evil is to be done , or good left undone , simply upon that account ; if you do , why then did you not forbear trying and executing the King , taking away the house of Lords , and purging the house of Commons , which i am sure that party whom in these things you seek to please , were and are very much dissatisfied : besides , religion and reason will teach you , that you ought to prefer the satisfaction of those that joined with you , and have hazarded all for you in things agreeable to the will of God , before the complying with your opponents , and professed adversaries ( Though otherwise godly ) in things contrary to the will of God . 

Secondy , that under pretence of bearing with the persons that the nation is not fit for it , that many kinsmen , friends , and honest men are guilty , and will be undone , to continue and encourage a multitude of unnecessary lawyers , to forbear the calling public officers to account , and to increase the people's burdens , is a carnal mixture with corrupt interests ; therefore take heed betime , the Lord is righteous . 

Thirdly , the greater measure of light God hath given you , the greater is your sin , and the heavier will be your punishment in the day of account , if your actions be not proportionable to it : glorious things have been delivered by you in your declaration and remonstrance ; let not the world have just cause to say , that they were put in to draw persons to your party in your straits , but when you are arrived at your haven of power , you alter your principle with your condition . 

Fourthly , when God's persons cry and complain to him of oppression , he will regard them and revenge their wrongs : many poor souls bewail their conditions to God thus , oh Lord we have been long vexed and oppressed by such a party , and such a party , from whom we expected no better usage ; but now we suffer under those that are our brethren , that have formerly suffered with us : we could pluck out our eyes to do these men good ; we have always loved them , prayed for them , joined with them in their greatest dangers , owned them with the hazard of our lives , when they have been the by word of the persons , and we for their sakes , and yet they deliver us not now it is in their power ; they seek to please their enemies , and go on with the multitude to do evil : but us they regard not : oh Lord , hear and regard ; Lord help , for the faithful fail from among the children of men . and do you think that God will not answer them ? and say to you , as he did once to the Israelites , you have i known above all the persons of the earth , therefore i will punish you for your iniquity : i have honoured you above such and such , i have exalted you , carried you as upon eagles' wings , and is this the requital ? is this the return you make to me of all your kindnesses ? certainly , the Lord will in rich mercy heal your backslidings , and make you glorious 〈◊〉 of repentance , or else he will harden you , and make you fearful examples of justice and wrath , as apostates and hypocrites , i mean , as to your outward estates . 

Fifthly , consider the desperate precedents you have made , if your present power ( Through the Lords withdrawing from you ) should be crushed ; there being no foundation by the people's agreement settled , if ever any more parliaments should be , there is a precedent to take out as many , and whom the prevailing party pleaseth , to establish an extraordinary court to try , and take away any man's life , his judges being picked by those that accuse him ; to place and displace sheriffs , justices of the peace , or any other public officers ; to lay what taxes they please upon the persons ; and to imprison the authors , and suppress the writings which any way displease them . 

These things laid together , are sad presages of farther trouble to this poor nation . 

The Lord knoweth , i could willingly sacrifice my life for the peace and liberty of the nation , and the honour of the parliament and army , but in these things i am at a loss ; yet this i know , the counsel of the Lord shall stand , and he will do all his pleasures and herein my soul , as in a sanctuary , finds rest , that all things shall work together for good to them that love God . 

Postscript . 

I intended these lines should have only visited a friend or two , but providence hath ordered them a farther journey , and more public view ; they complain sadly , but had they been now to write , the paper would have blushed to have contained such relations as Might have been inserted : omissions of good , are seconded by commissions of evil , yea , the shedding of innocent blood , slighting and rejecting honest petitions , which i tremble to consider of , in reference to the lamentable consequences thereof to this poor nation , if the Lord prevent not . 

The only visible and rational expedient is , for all honest men , in a meek and peaceable way , to join in an agreement to some righteous foundations , and principles of government ( Thereby at least to acquit themselves before God and the world , of designing , abetting or partaking with the tyranny introduced , and endeavoured to be fastened upon the persons of this nation , a most complete and exquisite model whereof , is newly set forth by the four worthy asserters of England's liberties , now prisoners in the tower . 

May the first , 1649.  Edward Harrison . 

2 maii , 1649.  

imprimatur Gilbert Mabbot . 





the rise and causes of right government . the several kinds of government . how and by 〈◊〉 •ight government hath been corrupted . g•u•rnment 〈◊〉 wherein 〈◊〉 in  . God's design of removing corruption in government , how obstructed by half reformations , during our late troubles . the Lords blasting the corrupt designs of our state petitions . England's sad complaints by reason of the present corruptions in government . read the declaration of army , of November 30. 1648. page 4.  the several corruptions in present government . vi• declaration of the army p. 6 , 7.  considerations presented to the council of the Amry . 2 c••••d•tion . inferences from the second consideration . the synod consists of one hundred or thereabouts . 










