The totall and final demands already made by , and to be expected from , the agitators and army : upon the concession whereof they will rest fully satisfied ; and disband when they shall think seasonable , but not before in all probability . 

eccles. 2. 14.  

the wise man's eyes are in his head ; but the fool walketh in darkness . 

London , printed in the year . 1647.  

The totall and final demands of the agitators and army : upon concession whereof they will rest fully satisfied , and disband when they shall think seasonable ; but not before , in all probability . 

1.  That all the * forces and militia of England , Ireland , Wales , and the islands thereunto belonging ; the city and tower of London , with all the towns , forts , and garrisons within England , Ireland , Wales , and the isles ; and the navy of the kingdom , May be immediately put into their hands and power ; not to enthrall the parliament and persons to their wills and tyranny , but to maintain the subjects freedom and liberties ; the King's prerogative and parliaments privileges , in such sort , and for so long time , as they in their just discretions shall think meet : ( A demand already concluded , and in substance already propounded and granted ; ) that so the general ( Only in name ) and lieutenant general , in truth , May become absolute Emperors of all King Charles his realms and dominions ( Now captive under their sovereign power , ) till the agitators and army shall think fit to dethrone him , to set up either a new John of L•yden of their own creation , or introduce a popular tyranny , & anarchy , which suits best with their * principles , and the people's freedom , the supreme power and authority , to whom all other powers are subordinate de jure , and must be so de facto ; before this army disband ; as their papers intimate . 

2.  That not only the x-i. accused members , but all Presbyterians and other members in both houses , opposite to the armies proceedings or designs in any particular , May be cast out of both [ as well as all such officers cashiered the army ; ] predicted in England's birthright , and now actually demanded in many of their printed papers , but most clearly expressed in that of 7o julii , at Reading , wherein the commissioners of the army render this as a reason why they refuse to proceed in the treaty ; that notwithstanding the votes of the house of the tenth of June , and those since of the fifth of July , for the present purging of the house , yet divers persons comprised in these votes continue still to sit there ; and what comfortable effect May we expect of a treaty so long as the parliament ( the supreme judicatory of the kingdom ) is constituted ☞ of some that are men of interests , contrary to the common good thereof , from whom we can expect nothing but banding and designing to obstruct and frustrate all proceedings ( contrary to their interest . ) And if a seasonable remedy be not given herein , we despair of any good to the kingdom by way of treaty . and when both houses are thus fully purged , that then King Charles , their prisoner ( Whom now they flatter only for the easier accomplishment of their own ends , & to take off the envy and opposition of his party , as some of them acknowledge in plain terms ) be forthwith articled against , * impeached , arraigned , deposed , executed , and his posterity disinherited by the parliament , as the grand delinquent , and author of all the late wars , mischiefs and bloodshed in his three kingdoms ; and after that the members of both houses , who have been opposite to them , arraigned and condemned as breakers of trust and invaders of the people's liberties ; and than the domineering house of peers perpetually abolished , and a new-modeled parliament consisting merely of commoners ( Elected by the army ) constituted , to execute only what the generality of the agitators and persons shall prescribe them . 

3.  that the * assembly of divines be immediately dissolved and impeached of high treason ; presbyteries suppressed , the directory , national league and covenant , parishes , parish churches , chapels , tithes , oblations , ministers made by ordination , universities , and all schools of learning ( except only such as teach to read English , write and cypher ) all set forms of prayer , the Lord's prayer , creed , and ten commandments , baptising of infants , and singing of psalms utterly abolished as Antichristian , and an act of eternal oblivion passed against them ; that a full and free liberty be granted to all persons whatsoever to preach , baptize , dip , set up what new congregations and religions they please , and broach any heresy , error , blasphemy , or new opinion without the least inhibition , as they do now within the armies precincts . 

4.  that all * inns of court and chancery , all courts of justice now erected , as well civil as ecclesiastical , with the common , civil , canon and statute laws formerly in force ; and all corporations , tenors , copyholds , rents and services , with all titles and degrees of honour , nobility and gentry , elevating one free-subject above another May be totally abolished , as clo•gss snares , and grievances to a freeborn persons , and inconsistent with that universal parity and equality of condition which ought to be among freemen , & opposite to the communion of saints 

5.  that all the * lands and estates of Deans , chapters , prebends , universities , colleges , halls , free-schools , cities , corporations , ministers gleablands ; and so much of the lands of the nobility , gentry , and rich citizens and yeomen , as exceeds the sum of 300 l. per annum ▪ and all the revenues of the crown belonging to the King or his children , be equally divided between the officers and soldiers in the army to satisfy their arrears , and recompense their good services ( all the wealth of London being too little to reward them , as their friends have published in print ) that so the prophecy of Daniel 7. 22. May be fulfilled , judgement is given to the saints of the most high , and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom ; much descanted upon in the army both by the soldiers and their * chaplains , as now or never to be accomplished . 

6.  that all * reformado officers , soldiers , and forces in or about London , or elsewhere not actually under the army's power May be immediately dispersed ; all listings of men , but only by the generals and armies order , prohibited under pain of high treason ; the old city and parliaments guards removed ; and a new strong guard of horse and foot presently sent from the army to secure the city and tower of London , and the * Commons house ( under pretence of preventing a new war ; ) that so the lives , liberties and estates both of Lords , Commons , citizens , gentlemen , reformadoes , soldiers , and persons of all sorts , May be at the absolute mercy and free disposal of the army , without the least hopes of resistance , or opposition , till all the precedent demands be granted and accomplished ; and then we shall be as free a persons as the slaves in Turkey or Algiere . 

When all this is effected , and the kingdom utterly exhausted with taxes and freequarter to keep up this unmercinary and most meritorious army , who have such glorious designs in hand for the kingdom's ease , and people's liberties and enfranchisement from their ancient vassalage to the King , parliament , laws , magistrates , ministers , &c. our supreme Lords and Masters ( The agitators and army ) will be satisfied , and contentedly disband to divide the spoils in the fifth demand , but not willingly before , if their principles or printed papers ; their private free ingenuous discourses ; the pamphlets and petitions of their confederates , the practices of their predecessors in Germany , and the series of their late high proceedings and multiplied demands ( Growing every day higher , and more than formerly ) May pass either for demonstrations , or more than probable presages . let all wise , honest , and wealthy men then , both in parliament , city and country be no longer gulled or blinded with specious pretences , but look about them in time ; and provide for the public safety and the liberty of the King , parliament , kingdom , and their own preservation , before it be over late : and take the poet's advice to heart . 

Principiis obsta ; sero medicina paratur 
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras . 
in fine ; in bello non licet bis errare ; hic nec semel . 


reader , consider these passages among others in Lilburns new printed regal tyranny discovered , ( Whose brothers are chief sticklers in the armies treasonable proceedings ) p. 14.  we May evidently perceive , that this office of a King is not , in the least , of God's institution ; neither is it to be given to any man upon earth . And p. 56 , 57  Charles Stewart , hath committed treason against the kingdom of England , &c.  to sum up all , he is guilty of all the innocent bloodshed in England , Scotland , and Ireland , since the wars , which is the blood of thousands of thousands . For which if all the sons of men should be so base and wicked as not to do their duty , in executing justice upon him ( In deposing and beheading him ) which legally May and ought to be done , by those especially who have power , and authority in their hands ; yet undoubtedly the righteous God will , and that i am confident in an exemplary manner , in despite of all his bloody and wicked protectors and defenders . and then judge in what condition the King , kingdom , and parliament now are in , under the power of men of Lilburns spirit and principles . 

Finis . 





* Sir thoma• Fairfax last letters to the house , and the apprentices petition to him , sent to the agitators , ( newly printed ) their own speeches , and papers , and 14 article against the impeached members and the agitators massage to trinity house , evidence this . * laid down in regal tyranny discovered ; a clear and full vindication of the late proceedings of the army ; a declaration from the army June 14. 1647  England's birthright , and oth•r pamphlets . * this Lilburns regal tyranny discovered , the title pa. and p. 14. 62 , 53 , 54 , 55 , 57 , &c. England's birthright . Overtons , and other sectaries printed pamphlets clearly demonstrate and advise , which have a great influence on the agitators and army . * the arraignment of persecution , the bloody tenet . Sir Simon presbyter , and many other late pamphlets of sectaries , clear all this , with Hartfordshire petition against tithes and other petitions of like nature . * regal tyranny discovered . p. 15 , 16 etc England's birthright , lilburn• apology to judge Reeve , the harfordsh . and other late petitions to the general and army manifest this design . * this divers of the army and their friends have propounded in print and discourse . * m. Sedwicks' sermon at s. Albans . * this is positively demanded in the armies remonstrances & printed papers to disengage & mutiny the reformadoes and leave the parliament and city naked of all defence . * this was moved in the house , and that by an alderman , and desired , in the young man's petition to the general . 










