The woman's petition , to the right honourable , his excellency , the most noble and victorious Lord general Cromwell . 

The humble petition of many thousands of the poor enslaved , oppressed and distressed men and women in this land , who by these their subscribed representators , most humbly complaining , 

Show , 

That the Norman yoke of bondage and oppression is still continue upon this nation , by the impious , oppressive , delatory , and most chargeable practice of the law , and destructive imprisonment of men and women for debt , in the several prisons , goals , counters , holes and dungeons of cruelty in this land . 

That prisons are none other than sanctuaries and places of freedom to all unconscionable , rich , obstinate , and wilful debtors ; and most cruel slaughter-houses to all poor debtors , that have nothing left to pay their creditors , or to fee lawyers and gaolers . 

That the two acts set forth for release of poor debtors not worth five pounds , are of little or no benefit to any hitherto ; but rather are become a snare to all that have reaped any benefit by them . 

That the present intricate , delatory , chargeable , oppressive , endless practice of the law , is become an abettor , encouragement and prop to all oppressors and defrauders , and an Egyptian reed and discouragement to most men ; but in especial to all the poor : who thereby are utterly disabled and disheartened from suing for their debts , rights , and inheritances , violently held from them by the rich and mighty : and if at any time ( By the law ) their debts and rights are seemingly recovered , yet than their able debtors have freedom ( By the law , and strength of their purses ) to vacate judgements , to arrest and imprison their poor creditors upon false and feigned actions ( For many years ) thereby enforcing some of them to compound with them at their own rates ; others of them to perish miserably in goals , and so to lose both their-debts and lives ; whereby their wives and children are exposed to unexpressible misery ; besides the many other unexpressible oppressions daily practised by the rich and mighty , on poor and simple hearted men and women in this land , by sons of Belial . 

What shall we say ? Our hope is even departed , and our expectation of freedom ( The fruits of our blood shed , and expense of our estates ) is removed far away ; yea , the hope of our liberty is cut off like a weaver's thrum . We have for many years ( But in especial since 1647. ) chattered like cranes , and mourned like doves ; yea , with many sighs and tears have we presented our several complaints against God's and our enemies ; but are hitherto so far from gaining redress , as that our eyes behold them still exalted to bear rule over us ; and thus for felicity , we reap bitter grief ; for freedom , slavery ; for true judgement , justice and mercy , injustice tyranny and oppression ; because the head of tyranny being cut off in 1648 ( Was expected to die , and be dead ) still liveth in and by his ordained members of injustice and oppression ; and the Norman laws of the oppressors still bear dominion over us . 

Thus are we covered with wrath , and persecuted , oppressed and destroyed by cruelty : these our enemies have opened their mouths wide against us ; fear and the snare of slavery hath taken hold of us ; unless your excellency ( Into whose hand the sword is put for that very end and purpose ) as a faithful Joshua in the zeal of Nehemiah , stand up for us in the gap , and make up the breach ; by ca••••g do•n the strong holds of injustice , tyranny , and oppression ; and building up the righteous lovers of true judgem•n• , •u•••ce and mercy . 

so 〈◊〉 , then shall this great nation have cause to 〈◊〉 God in you , and praise God for you their great and faithful captain , and deliverer from oppression and slavery ; and shall esteem your name and memory ( As already bound for the manifold deliverances the Lord hath wrought by you for us , in especial that at Worcester , never to be forgotten as a most precious balsam pou•ed forth on all the land ; whose odoriferous perfume and blessed operation extends itself to the expelling of the poisonous maladies of injustice ▪ tyranny , and oppression ; and to the advance of God's glory in true judgement , justice , and mercy , and restoration of this nations fundamental laws , rights and liberties . 

The premises piously considered , and for that the other weighty affairs of this land will not permit the speedy accomplishment of these particulars ( By your excellency ) as your petitioners humbly conceive , in gaining a new representative ; from which lawyers , and all ill affected persons to be excluded . 

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray , that in the mean time there May be such a course established , as that the poor May by some easy and speedy way reap the fruit of justice , and that their persons May be acquitted from continual vexatious and destructive arrests and imprisonment ; by such a way as your excellency ( in that portion of wisdom assigned you ) shall think meet . 

In expectation whereof , your petitioners and subscribers do in all humility remain , and for the accomplishment whereof , 

Your excellency's most humbly and faithfully devoted servants and handmaids shall ever pray . &c.  E. Bassfield , 
E. Cole . 
this petition was presented on Monday the 27th of October , 1651.  by K. Frese , 
D. Trinhale , 









