To the supreme authority , the parliament of the commonwealth of England : the humble petition of John Poyntz , alics morris . 

Showeth , 

That your petitioner having suffered the loss of that estate , unto which he conceiveth he hath a good right , and three years false imprisonment , by the usurped power and tyranny of the late house of Lords , and mr Browne their late clerk , is now by the subtlety of his adversaries made defendant in the same case in the court of the upper bench , which is to be heard on Thursday next , the 21. of this instant November . 

That your petitioner having found by sad experience , that the professed lawyers have slighted and neglected his case upon all occasions , and , that the most eminent of them have been always retained by his adversaries to the number of 20. or 30. who have overawed those few that your petitioner hath been able to retain , and now being admitted to sue in forma pauperis ( As they style it ) he finds the lawyers to slight his case more than before , and that many who have been of his counsel formerly , are now for his adversaries ; and thereupon your petitioner hath petitioned the court of the upper bench , to admit such friends to be heard speak for him , or plead his case , as he should be able to procure , as by the petition hereunto annexed May appear . 

But the said court have denied your petitioner that common justice , and your petitioners case is like to be lost , through want of that common justice which he hoped he should have enjoyed without petitioning , seeing that the law of God , of nature , of common reason , and the statute law affords it . 

he therefore humbly prays , that such friends as he shall procure to speak for him , May have as free and full audience in his case , as any professed lawyers at the barr.  

And he shall pray , &c. John Poyntz , alias Morris . 

To the honourable Henry rolls Lord chief justice of the upper bench : the humble petition of John Poyntz , alias Morris . 

Showeth , 

That your petitioner having been under great oppression by the tyranny of the late house of Lords , and having been a prisoner and in a famishing condition several years ( As he is at this instant ) in the upper bench only by their power ; and having a great cause depending before your lordship , hath found by sad experience , that though he hath spent all that he hath upon the professed lawyers and pleaders , yet upon all occasions they have neglected or slighted his cause , and that his adversaries being able to give many and great fees , do retain commonly most of the counsel at your lordship's bar , and do over-awe your petitioners counsel . 

That your petitioner being now very poor , and admitted to Sue in forma pauperis , finds that all professed lawyers are now more unwilling to take any pains in his cause then they were formerly . 

That although it be the known right of every Englishman , and suitable to the law of God and nature , that he should either speak or plead before any court of justice in the defence of his own cause : and that any friends of his should speak or plead for him ; yet the professed lawyers assume to themselves the sole privilege of pleading at your lordship's barr.  

That your petitioner could procure some honest gentlemen that in charity to your petitioner would faithfully plead his case before your honour ; if your petitioner May have that right and justice afforded him , that they May have favourable audience as any of the professed lawyers at your barr.  

Your petitioner therefore humbly prayeth , 

that such gentlemen as he shall nominate May by your lordship's order be admitted to have free and full audience in his case before your honour : he doth humbly propose the gentlemen under-named to be assigned to plead for him , in case he can procure them ; and that any others , whose assistance he can procure , May have the same liberty . 

And he shall pray , &c.  Lievt. col. John Lilburne 
Major John Wildman 
Mr. Robert Wakeman 
Mr. Fontleroy 
John Poyntz , alias Morris . 








