Conformities deformjty . 

In a dialogue between conformity , and conscience . 

Wherein the main head of all the controversies in these times , concerning church-government , is asserted and maintained ; as without which , all reformation is headless , and all reconciliation hopeless . 

Dedicated by Henry Burton , to the honour of Jesus Christ , as the first-fruits of his late recovery from death to life ; as a testimony of his humble and thankful acknowledgement of so great a mercy : and published for the service of all those , that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity . 

scripture-warnings for England , if not too late . 

esa. 1. 5.  

why should you be strike any more ? Ye will revolt more and more : the whole head is sick , and the whole heart faint . 

esa. 29. 9 , 10.  

stay yourselves , and wonder : cry ye out , and cry , they are drunken , but not with wine ; they stagger , but not with strong drink : for the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep , and hath closed your eyes : the prophets , and your rulers , the seers hath he covered . 

ezich . 22. 23 , 

&c. son of man , say unto her , thou art the land that is not cleansed , nor rained upon in the day of indignation : there is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst thereof , like a roaring lion , ravening the prey . Her priests have violated my law , and put no difference between the holy and profane . Her Princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey , to shed blood , and to destroy souls , to get dishonest gain . And her prophets have daubed them with untempered mortar , seeing vanity , and divining lies , saying , thus saith the Lord , when the Lord hath not spoken . The persons of the land have used oppression , and exercised robbery . And i sought for a man to stand in the gap , that i should not destroy the land , but i found none . 

hos. 7. 11.  

Ephraim ( so England , London ) is like a silly dove without heart : they call to Egypt , they go to Assyria . 

esa. 1. 21.  

how is the faithful city become an harlot ? It was full of judgement , righteousness lodged therein , but now •••••ererss . Thy silver is become dross , thy wine mixed with water : thy Princes are rebellious , and companions of thieves . 

oh homines , ad servitutem parati ! 

Tacitus . 

oh men , fitted for slavery ! said Tiberius of the Roman senate ; so yielding he found their degenerate spirits to become slaves to his tyranny . As Rome was in Livy's time , of which he said , that neither the maladies , nor remedies could be endured : so is England now . 

London , printed for Giles Calvert , at the black spread-eagle near the West end of Paul's . 1646.  

To the right honourable , the Lord mayor of the city of London . 

Right honourable : 

This title salutes you as Lord Major , in relation to your place & office ; which being honourable , then much more , when true worth and virtue makes the person right honourable , as in title , so in reality : otherwise such usual titles are but empty sounds , being but civil compliments , and not of any moral notion . As it was the custom of the heathen to style those their benefactors , who were their oppressors . Christians should not use such flattery . For my part , i have taken this boldness to salute your new lordship , without giving flattering titles , lest ( As Elih• said ) my maker should soon take me away . and in truth , such places and titles of honour as these , being well weighed , do somewhat resemble the crown , which Henry the 7. of this realm , finding at Bosworth field to be flung in a thorn-bush , said , he that knew the weight and cares of a crown , would not stoop to take it up . and though your cap of maintenance come short of a crown ; yet into such times are we fallen , as May make your cap , to yourself at least , being truly sensible of it , as heavy as a crown . And if i May speak plainly my apprehensions , the well-being and safety , not only of this city , but even of our fair England , claimeth and loudly calls for of you , an honourable , wise , and faithful execution of your majoralty this very year : all men's expectations being erect , some with hope , and some with fear , according to their several interests . But with what minds soever , and for what ends , men made choice of you at this time ; this we are sure of , that Jesus Christ the Lord of heaven and earth , who hath all power in his hands , as King of Kings , and Lord of Lords , who raiseth up , and throweth down again , hath in his wisdom called you to this place at this time , to do his will , and not your own . And therefore , in this high and important office , and this juncture of time , what need have you of another heart , and another spirit then your own , ( It being dangerous , especially in steep and slippery places , to be led by men's spirits ) and of new principles from heaven to be put into you ( As we read of Saul , who had another heart given unto him , so as he was turned into another man , so soon as he was anointed King ) and all to furnish you with such qualifications of wisdom , understanding , and the fear of God , as May in the due execution and faithful discharge of your office , declare to all the world , that your main aims and ends are more for God's glory then your own , and more for the public good , then for your own private ; and more to gratify good men , than others , though never so high or great , and whose designs drive at nothing more than ruin & confusion . For we are not ignorant what diabolical plots are on foot , and how ripe for execution , and what kind of counsellors and active spirits , your chair , and table , yea and bedchamber too will be haunted withal , if experience deceive us not . And you shall find their ordinary counsels to drive at two main things ( Yet both reduced under one head , to wit , tyranny ) the one , tyranny over our bodies , estates , freeholds , liberties , laws and birthrights of all English freeborn subjects ; the other , tyranny over our souls and consciences , which are Christ's peculiar freeholds and purchase , and subject to no other law , lordship or kingdom , but Christ's alone . 

And in truth ( My Lord ) in this respect , you are in a hard condition , in case you should by any importunity be persuaded to interpose as a judge in the matter of religion , and especially in the point of church-government , the main controversy of these times , as wherein you have been little versed , considering how few there be that come to preach before you , who set themselves to open unto you this great mystery of Christ's kingly office , and government , over consciences and churches : but on the contrary , such as ignorants most admire and adore as gods upon earth , do withhold this truth of God concerning his sons kingly government from you ; nay ( Though under other terms ) do publicly in your solemn assemblies exclaim against it , shut it out of their churches , will not suffer others to preach , or print it , with their good wills , but do exasperate and incense you against all those that hold forth this truth in the glory and excellency of it : this being that very kingdom , of which Christ said , woe be to you soribes and Pharisees , hypocrites , for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men , for ye neither go in yourselves , nor suffer ye them that are entering , to go in . 

But , my Lord , you are a lover of peace ; as that part of your speech upon your election , in the hall , declared , and we all believe it : when you said , that you would endeavour to have unity ; for which you propounded two ways , either by entreaty , or by force . Indeed , in such a case , and for your place , entreaty is very commendable : but if you think by force to compose the differences , that will prove none of God's ways , nor to lie within your sphere ; as i dare say , you abhor to be a persecutor of those that are the promoters of Christ's honour . And being a thing not pertaining to the office , especially of a Christian magistrate ; i need not tell you what befell Uzzah , for stretching out his hand to stay the trembling ark . 

And now that i have been thus far bold with your lordship , ( Which hath proceeded merely from a hearty desire , that you May not be carried with the strong tide of the times by any malignant spirit filling your sails , through many under-water rocks and shelves , endangering not only the splitting of your own vessel , but the total ship wrack of this floating state : ) give me leave further to beseech you , that ( As you love your own self , and soul , and family , and posterity , your native country , the honour of this city and nation you would improve the whole power of your office ( Among other evils ) for the not only suppressing , but utter obliterating out of all records of memory , or mention , that late remonstrance of London , which like the Trojan horse is stuffed with such matter , as , if the importunity of some Might have its desire , would unavoidably hale in ruin both to city and country . 

Nor doth any thing more clearly demonstrate that spiritual judgement of blindness , and hardness of heart to be upon all those who have their heads and hands in that remonstrance , and wilfully still persist in the prosecution of it now in cold blood : than the unnatural hating , and hunting after the destruction of those very men , as our mortal enemies , who have with the extreme hazard of their lives , been honoured of God to be the preservers both of them , our city and country , and on the other side , the high esteem and honouring of those , as our faithfullest friends , who are partakers with murderers , with rebels , with traitors , incendiaries , underminers of our parliaments , and consequently of the state of the kingdom , dividers between the parliament and city , that themselves May reign , whose violent and fraudulent practices proclaim them to be not friends , but such , as in whom to put the least confidence , is to trust in the reed of Egypt , whereon if a man lean , it will pierce him through . And therefore , for these many and weighty considerations , both in a due respect to your lordship , and hearty zeal for the honour and safety both of parliament , city , kingdom ; fuller of dangers and enemies at this day , than ( By reason of that spirit of blindness , and deep sleep , wherein our city hath of late been sweetly lulled by the strong charms of fair false friends flatteries ) we are aware of : i have in the name of Jesus Christ humbly commended this small book to your lordship , that therein i Might discharge the duty of a poor watchman , to awaken you in the first place , and consequently all of that court and counsel with you , to look out , and inward too , for the speedy preventing of all those imminent dangers , which otherwise will suddenly surprise us , and take us napping in the deep of our too credulous security . For the spirit of that ten-horned beast is now making war with the lamb , ( Which is likely to be his last war , Babylon's fall following in the next chap. ) & this spirit warreth under new colours , not red , but white , whose word is , reformation , and this under a fair colour of a covenant , by virtue whereof pretending a just title to the war , he hopes , by the help of the remonstrance , and the prime authors thereof , and their adherents , to erect a new bestial tyranny over souls , bodies & estates , under new names and notions . But the issue is , the lamb shall overcome them ( For he is Lord of Lords , and King of Kings ) and they that are with him are called chosen and faithful . and , my Lord , you shall find in this book , conformity to be the mystery of iniquity , the mother of all mischief , the cause of all our present calamities , and the forerunner and hastener of our ruin , if we repent not , & if our Lord Jesus Christ prevent not , which certainly he will , because himself is the great and almighty general , whose cause and name is mainly engaged in this war . Now the Lord Jesus Christ give you the spirit of wisdom , well to consider and lay to heart these things : which that you May do , is , and shall be the hearty prayer of 

Your lordship's most humble servant , Henry Burton . 

A dialouge between conformity and conscience . 

Conformities soliloquy . 

Conformity .  who is this that comes along ? Surely by his habit and gate , it should be one , that , according as i have often heard him described by many , is called , conscience . and to be sure , i will be so bold , as to salute him , and ask his name . And if it be indeed that conscience i mean , and that he will afford me so much patience , i will enter into further discourse with him . 



Conformity .  You are well met , Sir . 



Conscience .  And you also . 



Conf.   Sir , i pray you pardon my boldness to crave your name . For as i came along , i conceived from what i had heard , that you should be the man called conscience . 



Consc .  My name is conscience . 



Conf.   Now i am glad of this happy opportunity to meet you , of whom i have heard so much talk abroad in the world . 



Consc .  Why , what talk hath the world of me ? 



Conf.   Sir , i pray you be not offended , and i will tell you . The world generally saith of you , that you are the only troubler of the state . 



Consc .  Is it therefore true , because the world saith it ? So Ahab called the prophet Eliah , the troubler of Israel : so the Jews said of Christ , that he was a perverter , and stirrer up of the persons . so when this lamb of God , the King of the Jews was born , Herod , and all jerussilem were troubled at it . Why so ? Was it this King that troubled them , or their own guilty consciences in usurping this kingdom ? Alas ! Sir this is no news , that where ever the fame of this King and of his kingdom cometh , in the powerful preaching of the gospel of the kingdom , it brings with it trouble and terrom to the world , or to any state . And as it was with Herod and the priests at Jerusalem at the birth of this King , so at his death : they could not endure to hear of this King of the Jews . So the heathen Emperor Domitian , out of jealousy of his empire , sought to root out the whole race of Christ's kindred , until two of them were brought before him that got their living hardly in the husbanding of a few acres of land , and understanding of Christ's kingdom , that it was altogether spiritual and not of this world , he dismissed them , and ceased his persecution . An example sufficient to shame thousands that glory in the name of Christians , and contrary to this heathen , cannot endure to hear of Christ's kingdom to be spiritual ; but under some fair colourable pretences of spiritualty , and clergy , and i know not what , endeavour nothing more than to set up a worldly kingdom , which yet they must ( Forsooth ) call Christ's kingdom , when in nothing it is spiritual , but as it is a tyranny set over men's consciences , souls , and spirits . But Sir , before i proceed any further with you , let me also crave your name . 



Conf.   Sir , my name is conformity . 



Consc .  conformity . Sir , if you be the man , i know none more ready to raise slanders upon me than yourself ; and May i not say truly of thee , that thou art one of the greatest troublers of Israel ? For what can more trouble the world , than when thou ( conformity ) wouldst force all men's consciences to dance after thy pipe . 



Conf.   Why , Mr. conscience , do not ye think that i have a conscience as well as you ? should i therefore be an enemy to conscience ? But indeed , i confess my conscience is not so strict , or straitlaced , or self-willed , as obstinately to stand upon mine own singular opinion , in opposition to the general judgement of most meh , and those not only learned , but pious too , so far as i can judge . 



Consc .  It seems then that every conscience by your verdict , must be straitlaced , and self-willed , that will not follow the multitude , seeing you ground your conscience upon men for their number , learning , piety , making them the rule of your conscience , and not God's word alone . 



Conf.   Sir i hold this the safest way : for i May misunderstand the scripture , which many learned cannot so easily do . 



Consc .  This indeed is a good plea for popery , who boast of their universality , learning , counsels , & synods , and therefore ( Besides the Pope's infallible oracle ) not easily subject to misunderstand the scriptures . Or you are like those Jews , who would not believe in Christ , unless the rulers did know indeed that he was the very Christ . or as the Pharisees said , have any of the rulers , or of the Pharisees believed on him ? thus , do you not pin your faith , and so your souls upon men's sleeves , when you will believe as most believe , or as the church or nation believes ? 



Conf.   But Sir , i put a great difference between a council of learned Papists , or a synedrion of Jewish priests , and a synod of learned Protestant's . 



Consc .  Indeed the very names of Papist and Protestant import no small difference ; although a Papist and a Protestant at large are at no great odds in matter of faith , conscience , religion ; only such a Protestant is apt to turn Papist , than a Papist , Protestant . And take your Protestant's at the best , call a synod of the learned est , and highest esteem in the world , yet even such a synod May in some things and those fundamental too , possibly run into , and wrap themselves in foul errors . 



Conf.   How Sir ? show me any one instance hereof , that ever any learned Protestant counsel or synod hath erred in any fundamental of faith , or much less hath maintained such an error or heresy , and i will not henceforth be so confident in depending and resting upon men's judgements , be they never so learned , godly , or many . 



Consc .  Seeing you thus put me to it , what think ye of Jesus Christ ? Is not he a prime fundamental ? 



Conf.   No doubt , for he is the only foundation : for other foundation can no man lay . 



Consc .  Is not Christ then as well in his three offices ( As he is King , priest and prophet ) as in his two natures united in one person of the eternal son of God , a fundamental of faith , so as , as well he that denieth any one of his three offices , as * he that denieth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh , is an Antichrist and grand heretic , as overthrowing a principal foundation of faith ? 



Conf.   I conceive this cannot well be denied . 



Consc .  Nay , of necessity it must be believed . For the Papists in joining their traditions with the scripture , deny Christ's prophetical office ; and in equalling their satisfactions with Christ's merits , they deny his priestly office ; and in exalting their hierarchy ( Call it papal , or prelatical , or sacerdotal ) * over the temple of God , men's consciences , they deny Christ's kingly office : all which offices together , or any one of them being denied ; is , * with Antichrist , to deny , that Jesus is the Christ ; seeing the Christ is he , that is anointed King , priest , and prophet , of which to deny any one , is to deny that Jesus is the Christ . do ye not believe this , Mr. Conformity ? 



Conf.   I confess there appears to me a truth to be in all this . But yet , Mr. conscience , i hope you do not go about to ensnare me with mine own confessions . 



Consc .  Why Master conformity , are you conscious to yourself , that while you confess the truth , the truth should ensnare you ? Certainly the bonds of * truth willingly taken upon us , become the robes and livery of our true freedom . 



Conf.   Sir , take me not at the worst ; i would not willingly utter words to my prejudice . 



Consc .  Speak the words of truth then , and fear nothing . 



Conf.   Well Sir , proceed then to what you have more to say . 



Consc .  I say then , that to deny any one of Christ's offices ( As afore ) is to overthrow a foundation of faith . 



Conf.   I grant it . 



Consc .  Hereupon i infer , that it is possible for a learned synod of Protestant divines to deny one of these three offices , and so to overthrow a foundation of faith . 



Conf.   Though it be possible , yet it is not probable . But Sir , remember what ye undertook , namely , to prove by instance , that a Protestant synod of orthodox divines hath thus erred . 



Consc .  Nay stay , Mr.  conformity , remember yourself well : did i say , a Protestant synod of orthodox divines ? For how orthodox , if they overthrow a foundation of faith ? then they cease to be orthodox . 



Conf.   Well , however , yet they Might in other fundamentals be orthodox . 



Consc .  But in any one fundamental to be heterodox , is to cease to be orthodox , and , obstinately persisting , is heretical . 



Conf.   I confess , that any one heresy maintained , makes a man a heretic , hold he otherwise never so many truths , and so he overthrows the faith , as those did who * denied the resurrection , though all other truths they held . But Sir , all this while i expect your proof or instance , that a synod of Protestant divines should fall into any such foul error , or heresy , as should overthrow the foundation . 



Consc .  Mr. Conformity , for instance we need not go beyond the seas , or over our English bounds to fetch it . What if the generality of the ministers and persons in England be found to be wrapped in such a destructive heresy ? I call it destructive , using the * apostles word , where he saith . that there shall be false teachers among God's persons , who shall cunningly bring in destr•ying heresies . and what are these ? even denying the Lord that bought them , bringing upon themselves * swift destruction . And many shall follow their destructive ways , or their destructions , by whom the way of truth shall be * evil spoken of , or blas•hemed . a prophecy ( By the way ) which if well weighed , and rightly applied , May be found to be in a great measure fulfilled in these our times . For here is first a destructive , or ( As our common translation ) damnable heresy . Secondly , this heresy * is , in deaying the Lord Jesus Christ . Thirdly , here is a many followers . Fourthly , among this many there be some at least , who have their mouths open in pulpits , streets , tables , and their quills in presses , in pamphlets , blaspheming , speaking all manner of evil against the way of truth ; even that way of truth , which holdeth forth , confesseth , professeth , maintaineth ( Against all the world's reproaches ) Jesus Christ in that very particular , wherein he is at this day so mightily decried , and denied by false teachers and their followers . Nor can any age , as touching this one particular , be paralleled with this of ours for pens and tongues of blasphemy ; lashing out , and running over all the bounds and banks , not only of Christianity , but even of common modesty and humanity ( As men bereft of their wits ) and all this against the assertors and maintainers of the kingly office of Jesus Christ . And lastly , a destructive heresy , in that not only it destroys souls , but is in a precipice to destroy kingdoms , to such a height of rage it is now grown . 



Conf.   But Mr. conscience , what means all this ? What ? In that your generality , do you charge as all , synod , Zion , city , country , as lying under the guilt of such an heresy ? What ? All denying the Lord Jesus Christ ? 



Consc .  Mr. Conformity , cannot a man speak of a generality , but he must needs name particulars ? And you know that generals have their exceptions . And when a generality is mentioned , let all particulars look to it . But what if there be a generality , and that of Protestant's ( So called ) in the land , which will be found to overthrow Christ's kingly office ? 



Conf.   What if , say you ? what if the sky fall ? Nay i dare say , yea , and swear too , that not any one of this generality you mean , doth , or dare deny Christ's kingly office and prerogative . I have often heard them in public to give Christ the title of King , and to speak of his kingdom ; and they everywhere confess and profess him to be King of his church . So as such a charge would argue as much malice , as untruth . 



Consc .  And i have heard them say as much as you say . But is saying sufficient ? Yea , i have heard them say , that all church-members must be saints : that all churches be equal , & none have jurisdiction over other : that God's word is the only rule of reformation : and many such principles about churches they confess in words so , Christ to be King . but if this be all , it May prove little better , than the Jews putting a purple robe upon Christ with a crown of thorns on his head , and a reed for a sceptre in his hand , with hail King of the Jews ; but for all this , crucified him : so that you confess Christ to be King , and crucify his true subjects again , you know the Pharisees said many things well , but they did them not . And doth not the scripture speak of such as * profess they know God , but in works deny him ? whence we observe a twofold denial of God : one in words , & another in deeds . now i do not say , that the generality doth in words deny Christ's kingly office : but this i affirm , that in works they deny him . 



Conf.   Sir , how do you prove that ? or how doth that scripture reach to those you speak of ? 



Consc .  A question opportunely put . And therefore if you turn to the 14 & 15 verses immediately foregoing , you May observe what manner of persons those were , whom the apostle there speaks of , and upon what occasion . For that chapter being to set forth the office of a Bishop or pastor of a particular church or congregation , and how he should be qualified and gifted , and the church governed ; the apostle willeth Titus to warn the Christians , not to give heed to Jewish fables and commandments of men , that turn from the truth . where he ranks the commandments of men in church-matters , manners , and government , with Jewish fables , as which do turn men away from the truth , and so from Christ , as he also showeth at large , col. 2 , 8. 20. 22. and throughout the whole chapter . So as to set up the commandments of men in forms of worship , or of church-government , being Christ's spiritual kingdom , is to separate men from Christ , ( col. 2. 19  ) and to make them unbelieving , ( tit. 1. 14.  ) and impure in mind and conscience , v. 15. yea , abominable and disobedient , and unto every good work reprobate , verse . 16.  All which i commend to your more sad and serious consideration , Master conformity . 



Conf.   I confess this is a terrible scripture to those that lie under the condemnation of it . But i hope those whom you mean , are no such men : for first , you confess they deny not in words Christ's kingly office : and for any denial in works , you have not yet proved , nor i hope can . 



Consc .  I have nothing to do with your hope . But whereas you would make it my confession , that they deny not in words Christ's kingly office , neither do i absolutely confess so much . For though i confess i have heard them upon occasion ( Being put to it ) in words to confess Christ to be King of his church : yet i have heard them again say , and have read it in their books , and they maintain it tooth and nail , that Christ hath left the forms of worship and church government unto men , to be so framed as is most suitable to the conditions of the persons , or the laws of each state , binding all the subjects thereof ( And that under severe penalties ) to an universal conformity , or uniformity . 



Conf.   Why Sir , hath not Christ left that power and liberty to those that are in authority ; as synods , to frame and compose forms of worship and church-government , such as they judge fittest , having an eye to the scripture , and the civil magistrate to confirm the same by law ? 



Consc .  The Pope indeed arrogating to himself all power in heaven and earth over churches and kingdoms , makes his claim from scripture . As * thou art Peter , &c.  therefore his successor , the Pope , is the rock , whereon the church is built . So , here are two swords : therefore the Pope hath power of both the swords . so , * the holy ghost shall lead you into all truth : therefore the Apostolic chair at Rome cannot err . Here Mr.  conformity , cast your eye a little upon the scripture , and see there what one place you can find to serve your turn , that hath any more likeness or probability in it , for what you claim , than those places which the Papists are not ashamed to build their babel-tower upon . You have talked much of jure divino , but are not able to crane it up higher than to jure humano : and therefore , i suppose it is , that of late days , since the house put their nine queres to the synod , the mention of jure divino is quite hush . And now conscience challengeth you to produce but one testimony from scripture for you , which will not make you as ridiculous , as the forenamed scriptures do the Pope . and for synods , they have no such authority as you speak of . Give us one scripture . That in acts 15. will not serve your turn . And the apostles sought not to human authority , and laws , to confirm the gospel , or to give power to the exercise of their ministry . 



Conf.   Why Mr. conscience , you yourself cannot show us from scripture a model of your way , though promised , and long expected ; and therefore why should you require one of us ? 



Consc .  We do not require so much of you , but to show us one only place of scripture for you , which you cannot do . And for us , though we do not give you such a model , as you desire , or rather dream of ( For no such model is left in the new testament , as was given to Moses and David in the old ; which consisted altogether of external things , being shadows of the spiritual now under the gospel , the pattern whereof was Christ . But this we both have done , and yet further are able to do , to prove our way , with all our practices in every particular , out of God's word , which you are not able to do for any one of your practices , much less for the whole way of your classical presbytery , as which hath no footing in scripture . For ( Because you thus urge me ) show us , if you can , in all the new testament , any one national Christian church . Or show us any one ground for either national or parochial Christian churches , or yet any church fixed to a place , so that all persons successively coming to dwell there , be they what they will , godly or profane , Protestant's or Papists , because inhabitants there , must therefore make up the church there , whether national or parochial . Or show us that churches should come by natural propagation , or local habitation and succession , and not by spiritual generation only . Or show us in scripture either rule or example for a classical presbytery . Or show us in the whole scripture a state church government allowed of God . Or show us out of the word , that the apostles constituted no churches without leave obtained from the civil state . Or whether those Christian Jews that constrained the Galatians to be circumcised , for the avoiding of persecution , did well or no , so to constrain , and that only to avoid persecution : or whether this example will warrant you to constrain all to conform to you ; either because conformity is free from persecution , or because all must be persecuted , that conform not . Or lastly , show us , what better rule or example the scripture affords , for wresting from the magistrate through the force of importunity by men both many and mighty , stirred up and egged on by a college of priests , to reject Christ and his government , and deliver him up to their wills to be crucified , than that college of priests in Jerusalem , who so incensed the persons against Christ , that nothing would satisfy them , but he must be crucified ; so as the magistrate is necessitated even against his conscience , what through fear of Caesar on the one side , and what for favour of the persons on the other , to gratify them with a Barabbas in stead of Christ . Now to all , or any of these , we desire your answer . 



Conf.   Sir , i only urge this for the present , that though the scripture hath not expressed a power given to men by Christ , yet we find examples of it in the old testament , as Jehosaphat , Ezekiah , Josiah , Asa , Kings of Judah , who reform religion , and are commended for it as good Kings for their labour . 



Consc .  They did not set up any new forms of religion of their own head , but they commanded the priests and Levites to restore and repair religion in all things according to the prescript , and precise pattern given by God himself . And note withal , that the kingdom of Judah or of David , was a type of Christ's spiritual kingdom , and all the Kings of Judah were types of Christ . So as no other Kings or states are to be paralleled with them . But yet ( I say ) for all that , they went not beyond the precise rule of God's law , as you May see by all those examples you allege . For Christ gave those Kings , though types of himself , no such power , as you pretend . Yea , the scripture everywhere , in both the testaments , hath punctually preserved inviolate and entire , that kingly prerogative of Christ , as being as incapable of being communicable to any human power , as his omnipotency is , or his other offices , as high priest and prophet . For proof hereof : Moses for all his wisdom , and learning , and piety , though he were a great prophet , and a type of Christ , yet had not this power granted unto him , to frame the tabernacle , with all things pertaining thereunto , as himself pleased ; but a strict charge God gave unto him , saying , see thou do all * things according to the pattern showed thee in the mount . so David , though a King , and a man after God's own heart , yet was not entrusted for the framing of the pattern of the temple for his son Solomon , but * God gave him the pattern thereof both by the spirit , and in writing ( So careful was God , lest David should forget any thing ) which he delivers to his son Solomon to do in all things accordingly . So in Ezekial we read , where the reformation of the church under the gospel is typed , there is a pattern to be measured , as ezek. 40. 5. to which , answereth that in rev. 11. 1.  A place worthy our best observation , as pertinent to these times of reformation , which must be measured by the golden reed of the word of God . And for any the least dominion over the conscience by any human binding law in matters of faith , Christ would no more entrust the apostles themselves , than he did Moses and David . and therefore * Paul disclaimed it . And * Peter dissuaded it to the presbyters or elders , being himself an elder . And herein even servants must not be servants to men , as being bought with a price , and so Christ's freemen . and remarkable is that * scripture , where Christ , speaking to the multitude , and to his disciple , he tells them of the scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses chair , and so to be heard : but when among other their practices they bind heavy burdens , then and there he saith , call no man father upon earth ; that is , therein obey them not , that 's for the multitude : and for the disciple , re ye not called rabbi , for one is your Master , even Christ . and that no man hath power over another's conscience , the apostle showeth , speaking to the very same purpose ; who art thou that judgest another man's servant ? how much more than Christ's servant ? And this in things indifferent : how much less in things forbidden in the scripture , must we force our brother's conscience , or labour to persuade him ? The chapter is full of arguments to this purpose . 



Conf.   But Sir , if the scripture be so clear for that which you affirm , than hath the whole church of God for many ages , even almost from the very apostles , continue in a foul error . 



Consc .  Nay more than almost . For this mystery of iniquity had its first rise even in the apostles times , it began then to work . And what was this mystery of iniquity , but an exaltation of man's power above all that is called God , or that is worshipped , so as to sit upon , or over , or in the temple of God , over the consciences of God's persons , and over the church , as God himself ? And note there also , it is called an apostasy , or ( As tit. 1. 14.  ) a turning away from , or of the truth ( As afore ) and such are adversaries too , and all Antichristian . Such an one was * Diotrephes ; that {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , who loved the preeminence ( The very spawn of this mystery ) which sets him a work to raise himself : 1.  In not receiving the apostle John . 2 in prating against him with malicious words . 3.  In not receiving the brethren . 4.  In forbidding those that would . and 5.  In casting them out of the church . thus also did this mystery begin to work , as the apostle intimates both in tit. 1. 14. and in col. 2. 8. 17. 18. 28. 22 , 23.  But then this mystery was but in the swaddling clouts , which afterward growing by degrees to the full stature , was so bedecked with infinite varieties of ceremonies , and daily new fashions in religion ( As the crow with every birds feather ) that getting an unlimited , usurped power , and that under the colour of jure divino , all men's consciences , churches must conform to the present fashion of worship and church-government . Thus by degrees this mystery of iniquity mounted to its height , and hath now obtained such a prescription of antiquity , as is equivalent to a law . And not only the Pope claimeth and exerciseth this power over his whole popedom , and hierarchy , but from him our late prelates . And whence , or from whom you derive this very power , unless immediately either from the Pope , or from our late prelates , whose personal prelacy you have abandoned , saving their prelatical spirit and usurped power : or else from the antiquity of this mystery ; you May do well to inform us . And in truth , this was that very sluice , which when first opened , did let in that inundation and deluge not only of will-worship , in all kind of ceremonies and superstitions , but also of human forms and frames of church-government , and in all of them such a tyrannical power over all consciences and churches , as hath wholly drowned all ; so as Christ's dove can nowhere find , where to set her foot . and therefore in this time of pretended reformation , to erect this great idol , to wit , a power in man to prescribe laws , and to legitimate commandments for worship and church government ; and to press them upon every man's conscience : what is it , but with Nabuchadnezzar to erect his golden image , and with an immortal law of the Medes and Persians' , to bind all men to fall down and worship it ? Or what is it , but with Jeroboam and his counsel ( And so in every alteration of the state ) to set up the golden calves , with a strict commandment of universal conformity ; none daring among all those ten tribes * openly to profess the pure worship of God , saving the prophet Eliah , to whom those seven thousand were not known . And therefore God rooted out jeroboam's house ; and did the tribes escape scotfree , for their yielding willing obedience to the commandment of the * King his counsel , though it were a public act of state ? Was not * Ephraim oppressed , and broken in judgement , because he willingly walked after the commandment ? for God set wicked Kings over them , who oppressed and broke them in judgement , tyrannising at their pleasure . As always where a persons is brought under the spiritual yoke of bondage , they are never free from the temporal . Nor only this , but they were carried into perpetual captivity , and never returned unto this day . An example to be laid to heart both of rulers and persons . Remember Ephraim therefore , the horribleness of whose sin appeareth by the horribleness of the punishment . And like to this is that of Jerusalem , and of the Jews . They said indeed , * if we thus let him alone , all men will believe in him , and the Romans will come and take away both our place and nation . no , blind Jews , because ye did renounce your King Christ , and so envy the people's salvation , therefore the Romans came and took away both your place and nation . and how did the Jews reject this their King ? Christ tells us in a parable of a noble man , Luke 19 saying , ( V. 14. ) But his citizens hated him , and sent a message after him , saying , we will not have this man to reign over us . where note , first , they were such as professed to be the persons of God , his citizens . secondly , the ground of their refusal of him to be their King , was hatred of him , and so to refuse him , is to hate him . Thirdly , the manner of their refusal . 1.  they sent a message after him ( As the vulgar translation renders it ) but the original is , they sent {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , an ambassage after him , which is more than a message . It must be done by a public act of state , to make all cock sure . And 2. the matter of the ambassage , we will not have this man , or this follow ( * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} ) this , noting their contempt of him . And the reason hereof was their will , we will not . but what was the issue ? read and mark it , v. 27.  Where Christ not long after returns in judgement against them , which he executes by those very Romans , whom they so feared , to whom he gives this commission : but those mine enemies that would not that i should reign over them , bring hither , and slay them , &c.  which was done accordingly . 



Conf.   But good Sir , neither are we as those ten tribes under an idolatrous government ; nor as those Jews , under a Roman governor , with a synedrion , or counsel of priests , scribes and Pharisees : but we live in a happy time , under a Protestant government , a Protestant parliament , a Protestant synod : and therefore there is no such danger by allowing such a power to men , as you pretend . 



Consc .  Although the present state be Protestant , yet you are not sure it will be always so . What if a Marian reign come about again with a popish parliament , and convocation ? and if it be true , that Christ hath left such a power to any state ( As afore ) without limitation , than it is left as well to a popish state , as to a Protestant . in this respect there is no difference . And then it must follow , that a popish power , making a law for the setting up of the mass ( As qu.  Marry with her parliament and clergy did ) and for which they want not pretext of scripture , and jure divino ( If bold words , and false glosses will do it ) than all the subjects of England must either conform , or else to the stake . So as the very admitting and crying up of such a power left to men , as it is most false and groundless ; and ( As before ) a grandmother Horesic , and introducer of the most direful tyranny over soul and all , ( So far is it from ever proving to be jure divino , as being ludibrium Synodorum ) so it is the next way ( And much more in this present juncture of time , as things now stand ) to make us as miserable a nation , as both the ten tribes , and the Jews . And ( As we touched before ) if the wisdom of God would not entrust his servant Moses , nor David , nor the apostles , with a power in setting up what forms of worship & frames of government they pleased , though they were both wise and faithful , and free from all private interests , in seeking themselves , to become Lords paramount : Car we find in any age of the world , trow you , either a parliament or synod , whereof all the members , yea , or the greater part , are such as Moses , David , and the apostles were , so as to be entrusted with such a power ? And in case this state should assume to itself such a power ( As we speak of ) so as to enact a law to bind all to conformity ; either you must produce some scripture authority for it , that the parliament May be satisfied quo jure , and that it is jure divino as they require of you , and which you have promised , but have not performed it : or in the mean time give me leave to put it unto you , or to the soundest judgements , how you can clear yourself from falling under that marvellous judgement of God , which we find in Esay 29.  The matter was v. 13.  that their fear towards God was taught by the precept of men . they had set up a worship of God according to the precept of men . this was all . And is this , in your judgement , nothing ? But what they , were they , that did this ? Surely , the prophets , rulers , and seers . what ? the guides and leaders of the persons ? How came it to pass ? The Lord saith there ( As a matter of wonder , and to be proclaimed by a loud cry ) that they were drunken , but not with wine , and staggered , but not with strong drink ; and that the Lord had closed their eyes , and poured upon them the spirit of deep sleep . v. 9 , 10.  So as , neither the learned nor unlearned , could understand the vision , v. 11 , 12.  And all their religion is turned into hypocrisy , v. 23.  Forasmuch , as their fear towards God was taught by the precept of men . for a religion of human institution is hypocrisy ; while pretending to worship and fear God , they fear and worship men , which is both hypocrisy and idolatry . And what 's the issue of all this ? v. 14.  therefore behold , saith the Lord , i will proceed to do a marvellous work among this persons , even a marvellous work and a wonder : for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish , and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hide . 



Conf.   And what of all this ? 



Consc .  What think you of it , Mr. Conformity ? is here nothing that concerns you ? 



Conf.   Nothing that i see . 



Consc .  See ye nothing of all this ? And are you not then in the number of those , whose eyes are closed , and on whom the Lord hath poured the spirit of deep sleep ? 



Conf.   But do ye not know , that this was a prophecy fulfilled many hundred years ago , even in Esay's time by those of Jerusalem ? How then can you apply it to these times ? 



Consc .  Though it was then fulfilled , yet it is written for our learning , and to admonish us , upon whom the ends of the world are come . And the same prophecies May have sundry fulfillings upon the like occasions . And for application of it , i only made it a quere , how you could acquit yourself from having it verified of you in these times . 



Conf.   But the prophecy making mention of the prophets , rulers , seers of Jerusalem , as drunken and blind ; all that i can apprehend hereof is , that you thereby mean the prophits , rulers , seers of this famous city , and perhaps also ( To speak more plainly ) the parliament , synod , zion-college , the common-council , &c.  For who are the prophets , or rulers , or seers , or who are the learned and wise men , but these ? Therefore Mr. conscience , deal ingenuously with us , and speak no more in the clouds . 



Consc .  What Mr. Conformity , would you have me to do here , as you do with your parish persons , when you mingle all together at your sacrament ? What ? good and bad ; those of the militant , and others of the malignant ( Hurch together ? I would have you to know , that i put a difference between the parliament on the one side , and the synod , zion-college , common-council , on the other . And secondly , among all these i put no small odds , between the truly wise and prudent that truly fear God , and those that are self-wise , or worldly-wise . And thirdly , i put a difference between zion-college , and common counsel , as between seers and not seers , between the leaders , and the led . Nor fourthly , do i apply the foresaid scripture to any one in particular ; but my desire is , that every one in all these companies , would by due examination of himself make the application . For it is a mater of high concernment . And for their better direction herein . First , let all those that by letters , petitions , remonstrances , compliances , confederacies , counsels , secret and open , nocturnal , and diurnal , do wring blood out of the late covenant ; by pressing , importuning , and plotting , the setting up and establishing by a law , such a form of church-government , worship , discipline , as not only is the highest affront , and dishonour to Christ , but necessarily tends not only to the enslaving of the people's consciences , but to the undoing of this whole English nation , by vassallizing it to vilest of men , apply it . Secondly , let all those who would have our victorious army in all the haste disbanded , before our peace be well settled , and our land cleared from the one end to the other of all those dangers which do threaten it , by the treacheries of so many malignant enemies , who carry two faces under one hood , and do but watch for such an opportunity to wreck their envy and malice upon us , which the only terror of our army hindereth , holding them at a bay ; apply it . Thirdly , let all those who with such violent and potent importunity do press the parliament for an ordinance , to bring themselves and the whole land under the greatest sin of unnatural , inhuman , and more than heathenish ingratitude , impiety , injustice , cruelty , by not only dishonouring , discountenancing , abasing , as the vilest our-casts , those men , who have not only , freely laid out their estates , but even prodigally , if not prodigiously , to wonderment , hazarded , yea poured out their dearest life-blood : but also ( As if they would despite God ) by trampling upon those whom he hath highly honoured , and not suffering them to breathe in their native air , by whom we yet breathe ; and by making them underlings and off-scourings of the land , who have been the preservers of it , and that they should be despicable in their own mother country , whom so many glorious victories have made admirable to the neighbour nations , yea , to the whole world ; and terrible to their professed enemies , and ours ; yea , and to pretended friends too , who would Master us at home , were not these Masters of the field : so as God having thus made them the great instruments of the preservation and deliverance of our country and city from the most desperate , bloody , and bestial enemies that ever the earth bred , or hell hatched ; enough to have for ever ever obliged a persons of any ingenuity , & not wholly given up to testify their approbation at least , and congratulation of that great favour & honour God hath vouchsafed to cast upon them : and that as he hath crowned them with so much glory , and they have cast their crowns at the feet of the lamb that sits upon the throne : so these should come , and first , giving all the glory to God , gather up those crowns , and set them upon the heads of those their preservers and deliverers , and put chains of gold about their necks ; so far off should they be from trampling such pearls under feet , or casting them out of our gates and ports ; that they Might solum vertere , spend the remainder of their life in some inglorious exile , to the eternal infamy of our English nation ; let these apply it . Fourthly , let all those , who endeavour by their strong factions to make wide breaches , between parliament and city , between house and house , yea , between God's blessing and this land , which was wont of old to be called God's kingdom ; and so by these breaches would let in again our bainfull enemies . Let all these , these ( I say ) make the application to themselves ; while as they have wrested out of the magistrates hand a form of worship and government , and so , as it is established by the precept of men : so God hath deprived them of wlsdom and understanding , while they would pull upon their own heads , and upon the land , the guilt of so much innocent blood of so many hundred thousands both in Ireland and England , to be made the footstooll of a bloody tyranny ; and while their eyes are so closed up , as no charm , be it never so wise , can make them either to hear , or see , or understand , or their brains , or bowels , to be sensible of all those notorious and palpable outrages , rapes and robberies , violence and oppression , extortion and exaction in the land , even at noon day , unworthy affronts done to our parliament by seditious spirits ; or of all those cries and complaints of sundry countries and counties , and no redress , no justice , as if God had now forsaken us & left us as a silly dove without heart , full of slavish and degenerous fear of shadows , forgetting the mighty God that hath done so great things for us , and will do more , if we by faith still depend upon him : and although the faction is still working , and machinating the ruin of this nation ( If our god miraculously prevent not ) yet the god of this world hath so blinded the eyes of these men , through the just judgement of God , that they see nothing at all hereof , but are themselves the main fomenters , abettors , countenancers , promoters , advancers , encouragers , and helpers on of those , that hope to be the instruments of our ruin . So strong is the poison of this one sin , hypocrisy , and idolatry , in teaching and setting up a fear or worship towards God by the precept of men ; which , as it is a removing of the heart from God , so it causeth him to remove his spirit from us , and to give us up to such a fearful * dementation , as is the forerunner of destruction . And , conformity , if thou hast any of thy right senses left , consider seriously with thyself , what that religion is , which turns men out of their very naturals , to become brutish , and worse than heathens ; and which the holy ghost brands for hypocrisy , than which , nothing is more abominable in the sight of God . Certainly , the true religion and doctrine of Christ produceth no such fruits as those forementioned are : as treason against the state , unnaturalness towards our native country , unthankfulness towards our best deserving friends , our benefactors , our preservers : yea , injustice and cruelty towards them , factious plottings and underminings , hatred of those that be good , enmity against those that are the friends of Christ , and so persecution of the way of Christ , destroying of Christ's kingdom , by setting up a worldly kingdom of men , * having a form of godliness , but denying the power thereof ; yea , and seeking to overtop the supreme power . Are we not then ( As the apostle admonisheth and commandeth ) to turn away from such ? 



Conf.   Nay here , conscience , i have you upon the hip . For , first , how do we seek to overtop the supreme power . And secondly , who doth more go about to overtop the civil power , than you , while you set up a religion without it , and above it ? 



Consc .  First , for you : do you not seek to overtop the supreme power , whilst you would have your church-government to be framed after the pattern of that , which sets up a power ( Called a general assembly ) above the power of parliaments ? now the supreme power in England , is the parliament ; so as to set up a superior power over this , is to overturn the very fundamental laws of the kingdom . And this you labour tooth and nail to do , while nothing will serve you , but the Scotish church-government . I wish you would all consider well of it , and beware of falling into a praemunire , if you be not deep in it already . And i could wish it were well weighed by the wisest , and those in highest place of authority ; whether the importunate pressing of the covenant , for uniformity , in the Scotish sense , tend not to undermine and overthrow the liberty and privileges of the subjects of England , when once a superior power therein , consisting of more clergy men , then of lay , is predominant over the parliament of England ? And so much the rather , when we read and consider their own public and authentic books of their kirk government , orders , discipline , confession of faith , &c. wherein they give to their general or national assembly supreme power , not only over their parochial , classical , and provincial assemblies , but even over the parliament itself . For not only they take the power to appoint both time and place for the convening of their ecclesiastical assemblies ( As 2.  book of discipline , chap. 7. ) But they say moreover in the same chap.  for this orders cause , they May make certain rules and constitutions , appertaining to the good behaviour of all the members of the kirk in their vocation . 

and this they do without the civil magistrate . Nay more , chap. ibid. they have power also to abrogate and abolish all statutes and ordinances concerning ecclesiastical matters , that are found noisome and unprofitable , and agree not with the time , or are abused by the persons . And again in the same book , chap. 12.  The national assemblies of this country , called commonly the general assemblies , ought always to be retained in their own liberty , and have their own place ; with power to the kirk to appoint times and places convenient for the same : and all men , as well magistrates , as inferiors , to be subject to the judgement of the same in ecclesiastical causes , without any reclamation , or appellation to any judge civil or ecclesiastical within the realm . 

thus in reference to the spiritualty , or the church , they make no bones to set up in their national assembly the same papal power , which the Pope himself claimeth , over Kings , Princes , states , kingdoms , commonweals . And Mr. Rutherford , in his * government of the church of Scotland , chap. 20. p. 312. tells us , that though none in this grand assembly have decisive voices , save only commissioners : yet the acts of the assembly oblige all the absents , not present in all their members ; and that because , whatsoever is by those commissioners determined and concluded , is matter necessary , and agreeable to God's word ; as being no less infallible , than those decisions of the apostles , act. 15.  

all which ( conformity ) i commend to thee , when in thy best senses . And because thou art apt to be overtaken with a supine drowsiness , pleasing thyself with thy dreams of becoming a King , when once thou art gotten up into the saddle or throne of a kirk national-assembly : let me awaken thee by pricking thy dull sides , that thou Mayest be at least convinced of that spirit of Antichristian pride and tyranny , of rebellion and treason , in lifting up a papal throne above the Kings and Kesars , above kingdoms and commonweals , to the enslaving of the whole nation in their souls , bodies , and estates . For whosoever shall not in all things conform to the constitutions of that general kirk assembly , when once the horn is blown , then , ipso facto , imprisonment , confiscation of goods , banishment , and what not ? Now , conformity , doth God's word hold forth any such kirk fashions ? What ? To overrule civil states and kingdoms ? What ? That all kirk laws and constitutions mustneeds be such , as are both necessary , and agreeable to the word of God ? What ? To set up in the kirk an oracle of infallibility , and a Pontifician supremacy , and Antichristian tyranny ? and all under the name of a Christian Presbyterian kirk-government ? But because this perhaps moves thee not ; i will remit thee to the supreme bar of this kingdom , there to receive thy doom , in case thou dost obstinately and madly persist in thy importunate clamours to have that Presbyterian government set up , and thereby our fundamental laws , privileges , and power of parliaments , liberties and freedom of all true bred English subjects brought under perpetual bondage , worse than that either of Egypt or Babylon . But i pass on : 

2.  For us ▪ you May know , conformity , that we are not the setters up of that religion you charge us with ; but it is that , which we find to be set up by Christ and his apostles : which they did , without leave from the civil power , or from the ecclesiastical , or mixed Synedrion ; as before . Secondly , though the kingdom of Christ be indeed over all the kingdoms of the world ; yet all the subjects of this kingdom , as they are the subjects of this or that civil state , so they owe civil obedience thereunto : but as they belong to Christ's kingdom , they are free from the civil power in point of religion , owing subjection only to Christ : and if the civil power usurp over any of them , they yield themselves to suffer , with patience , without resistance . 



Conf.   Conscience , i like thee well for this , yet . But you tell us strange things of church-assemblies . 



Consc .  Not more strange , then true : read their books , and be wise . And for our suffering , which thou likest so well , it is no more than what Christ and his apostles both taught & practised , and wherein all the martyrs followed them . 



Conf.   I will better consider of what you say . But do you not condemn the magistrate , when you say he usurps over you ? 



Consc .  No , i condemn him not ; that is for God to do , who is the supreme judge of the world . 



Conf.   Why , what limits hath God set to the magistrate ? 



Consc .  Read deut. 17. 18 , 19 and that from v. 13. to the end of the chap. to wit , the whole law of God . So also what bonds and bounds their own conscience , and the terror of the great judge , and their sacred oath and solemn covenant and stipulation with the persons , and not only God's law , but the civil laws of the kingdom , do put upon them , you cannot be ignorant . 



Conf.   But what if the civil state hath made a-law , to inhibi• and restrain all men , and that under severe penalty , from the observation of any other form of religion , and church government , then that which it hath established by law , with a necessity of uniformity and conformity thereunto , imposed upon all the subjects of the kingdom : doth the magistrate sin , in seeing this law executed ? And without such a government , what order will you have in your churches , or what coercive power in the case either of heresy , or schism ? 



Consc .  Do you question the magistrates sin , when his law is against the law of God , and the liberty of a Christian , who is the subject of Christ's kingdom ? For here we are to distinguish between a subject of Christ's spiritual kingdom , and a mere subject of the civil state . He that is a mere subject of the civil state , acknowledging no superior power above it , his conscience ( Though blind ) bids and binds him to obey : but he that is a true subject of Christ's kingdom , being also a subject of the civil state , owes a twofold obedience , one to the civil state , & another to Christ . According to that of Christ . render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's , and unto God the things that are God's . nor doth the order or disorder in churches ( As churches ) put any difference between the having , or not having of a civil power . In the Apostolic churches there were both heresies and schisms , ( 1 cor. 11. 18 , 19 1 joh. 2. 19  ) with the civil power took no cognisance of : nay , it was , and May be as apt to persecute the truth , as to censure or restrain either heresy , or schism , or apostasy . And Christ's government is sufficient in all church-cases whatsoever . 



Conf.   But , who in a Christian civil state do not acknowledge Christ as superior ? 



Consc .  This is sufficiently resolved before . Such as conform to a state religion , or a state church-government , make that the supreme law and Lord over their conscience , and so exclude Christ's supremacy . Enough is said of that . But you cut me off from what i was about to add . Man's nature is too prone to idolise the power so , as to make it as the shadow of the bramble , in Jotham's parable , under which to ease themselves of the labour to search into the scriptures , and so to come to know what they believe ; most men pinning their religion upon the sleeve either of the priest , as the Papists do ; or also of the magistrate , as our common Protestant's do , wrapping all up in an implicit faith and blind obedience , according to your remonstrance , that urgeth conformity to the religion and government of Christ already established , or which shall be set up . Thus it was enough for the Pharisees to say , * we have a law , and by that law Christ ought to die . thus Christ must not be God , because the Roman senate , according to their law formerly made , had not first motioned it , or passed their vote for it , before Tiberius Caesar had commended it to them , namely to admit of Christ into their Pantheon , to take place among their gods . And is it not even so with us ? Must not Christ be King of the Jews , only because by an act of state ( As before ) they will not have this man to reign over them . and Christ must not be God , because the Roman senate had not pre-resolved it . And so Christ must not be sole Lord over the conscience , nor sole law giver of his church , nor his word the sole rule of worship & of Christ's kingly government of his spiritual kingdom in the conscience , and churches of the saints , nor indeed Christ's kingdom spiritual ; because the sat hath made a law which must rule the conscience in point of forms of worship and of church-government , that Christ's kingdom must be worldly , perpetually entailed to a whole nation , making up one national church , the form whereof worldly , and the materials worldly , as either no saints at all , or else all saints , because all nominal Christians ; and all this and much more , because the civil state , by the instigation of men ecclesiastical or civil , domestical or foreign , hath so ordained it . 



Conf.   Well , conscience , i now perceive , that fame is no liar ; i have now heard thee myself and much more than ever i heard before , and such things , as my stomach is no way able to digest , but that i must needs go ease it , by acquainting those whom it specially concerns , with what thou hast here delivered . And so farewell . 



Consc .  Nay stay , conformity , and this withal take with thee . First , i would have thee know , that speaking so freely to thee , i was not so simple , as not to imagine thou wouldst divulge all ; nay in truth , i have spoken all this to thee to that very purpose , that thou shouldst communicate it ( If possible ) so far as the sun shines ; but first to thine at home , as thou sayest . But thus much let me entreat of thee . 1.  That thou wouldst not do any thing this way in malice , lest thou add to thy sin secondly , that thou wouldst speak nothing but truth , and the whole truth and that without aggravations whereof there is no need especially when thou speakest to thy friends of conscience , and much more of things of this nature , too harsh for delicate ears . And thirdly , assure them from conscience , that what i have here spoken to thee , it is out of pure zeal for the honour of Christ , out of pure charity to the persons concerned , out of pure piety to see my native country in such a perishing estate , and the honour of England to lie in the dust ; out of pure hatred of hypocrisy , idolatry , pride , covetousness , ambition , treachery and treason , walking up and down in long robes : and in a word , to deliver ( If no more , yet ) mine own soul , in discharge of my duty to God and my country , as a poor minister of Christ , by witnessing the truth , and convincing error . And for a close of all ( conformity ) if thou desirest peace with truth ( As we all should do ) if thou wouldst have me to hold correspondence with thee , and to give thee the right hand of fellowship ; if thou desirest that desirable reconciliation of our differences : first renounce thy name of conformity , in thy sense , and conform not to this world , but to God's word , let that be the cynosure or polestar of that uniformity of churches , according to the word of God , as in our late covenant . and this thou shalt do , if ( I say not , if thou dost shake off the fear and favour of men , the love of the world , of honours , pleasures , riches , preferments , ambition of greatness , of domination over God's persons , nor if thou castest out that old spirit of bondage under the prelates , lest it turn into a more dangerous tyranny , then that of the prelacy , as being more refined , and going under the plausible name of reformation : nor do i say , if thou becom'st a self denying man , taking up thy cross daily to follow Christ : without all which notwithstanding , thou canst not be his true disciple & follower , or enjoy true fellowship with him . ) But this i say , and urge , as being the main fundamental and essential of a true & right visible church of Christ : if thou confessest Christ in all that he is ; if thou givest him his due honour , in submitting thy conscience only and wholly to him , with profession thereof , and not to any human power , and as to the only lawgiver of his church and kingdom , to order and establish it with judgement and justice for ever : and to his word , as the only law and rule of the government of that kingdom , and the only judge to appeal unto in all doubts and controversies of faith : and if thou shalt confess every church and congregation of Christ to be only and immediately under Christ's jurisdiction , and not subject to any other church or churches , which are so many sisters , not Mistresses ; lest otherwise we set up the spouse above , or in stead of her husband Christ . If ( I say ) thou wilt confess and hold forth this in thy public profession , preaching , and practice of it : then , though thy churches have many other defects , yet if they have the being and constitution of true churches of Christ , for matter and form , i shall not scruple to hold communion with thee . But otherwise , so long as thou walkest not up to Christ , in not acknowledging and avowing all that he is , in not giving him his due honour in all things , and especially in not setting him up in his royal throne , without a consort : how can we entertain communion with you ? For , 

* farewell religion , where God's glory suffers the least diminution . 

And therefore ( conformity ) now that you are about the setting forth of your confession of faith , let not this one article be missing : 

that you do believe , confess , and profess before all the world , that Jesus Christ is the sole King and lawgiver to every particular visible church of his , and over every particular man's conscience : so as no power on earth May usurp authority , upon what pretence soever , to make and impose what laws they please to bind the conscience , or to regulate the churches of God ; but aught to leave both conscience and churches to the only rule , and law of Christ , the scripture , to which alone every man's conscience must be consigned , all divine worship in all things conformed , and all church-government reduced . 

And for a close of all , i pray thee ( conformity ) advise all thy colleagues , that they would abstain from stirring up sedition in pulpits , and great tables , against the parliament ; persuading to hold the parliament to it , till you obtain your desires , to retain the Scots in England , till their government be here settled : which would unsettle and overthrow our fundamental laws and liberties , which you go about , in thus seeking to force the parliament : but learn to be wise , honest , loyal , good Christians , true patriots , true-bred Englishmen ; lest it prove bitterness in the latter end : for God is avenger of all such . 



And so farewell , conformity . 

Finis . 

The contents of this dialogue . 

How Christ's kingdom is the troubler of states , p. 2.  How a worldly kingdom comes to be set up for Christ's spiritual kingdom . ibid. The heathen Emperor a shame to Christians . ib. How conformity is a troubler of Israel . ib. The opin•on we have of men , no good ground for conscience to build upon . p. 3.  Small difference between a Papist and Protestant at large . ib. How a synod of learned Protestant's May err in some fundamentals of faith . ib. Many in England under a grand heresy , and what it is . p. 5 Faith denied no less in practice , then in words . p. 7.  The evils of practical denial of the truth . p. 8.  Conformity can find no better proofs for it in scripture , than the Pope for his papality . p. 9  Conformity answered , concerning the model , wherewith conscience is so much cast in the teeth . ibid. Great difference between the pattern in the old testament , and the model in the new . ib. Conformity put to prove many particulars of his church by scripture . p. 10.  Conformitie's objection , concerning some Kings of Judah , answered . ib. Conscience free from men's yokes . p. 11.  Conformity , how the mystery of iniquity , its beginning , growth , full stature , p. 12.  Conformity the sluice , or inlet of all superstition and slavery . ibid. Sundry fearful examples of God's judgements upon conformity . p. 13.  Conformity a necessary introducer of popery , when a state hath a popish Prince and parliament ; as England hath had , and May have again for aught we know . p. 14.  Conformity in worship to men's precept , brings a wonderful spiritual judgement of blindness , and deprivation of wisdom and understanding . p. 15.  All sorts put to try and examine themselves in sundry weighty particulars , whether that prophecy ( Esay 29. 13 , 14. ) fall not heavy upon them ; wherein conscience severs the innocent from the guilty . p. 16.  How conformity is hypocrisy , and a removing of the heart far from God . ib. The many bad fruits of conformity . 17.  How conformity seeks to overtop the supreme power , p. 19  How the Scotish church-government , so much cried up by the English clergy , is incompatible with the fundamental laws and liberties of our English nation . p. 20.  How church order , or disorders , as heresy , or schism , May be , or not be , for all the civil power . p. 23.  How conscience clears itself from any withdrawing of due obedience to the magistrate . ib. What limits God hath set to the magistrate . ib. How prone man's nature is to idolise men in setting up a state-religion , and how slothful to search the scripture , the only rule of faith , and the evil consequence hereof . p. 25.  The counsel that conscience gives conformity at their parting ; and what he must of necessity do , to make peace , and hold communion with conscience . p. 26 

Finis . 





Job 32. 22  honos onus . 1 sam. 6. 9  mat. 23.  2 sam. 6.  rev. 17.  rev. 18.  

Luke 23. 2 , 5.  euseb. eccl. hist. John 7. 26. 48.  1 cor. 3. 11.  * 1 joh. 4. 3.  * thess. 2. 4.  * John 2. 22.  * John 8. 32.  * 1 cor. 15.  * 2 pet. 2. 1 , 2.  {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} haereses vastantes . * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . * {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . as those infamous books of tho. Edward's and John Bastwick , too welknown to all . notus nimis omnib . horat.  * tit. 1. 16  tit. 1. 14 , 15.  * mat. 16. 18.  * Luke 22 38.  * John 16. 13.  * exo. 25. 30.  Heb. 8. 5.  * 1 chro. 28. 12 , 19  chap. 43. 10.  * 2 cor. 2. 24.  * 1 pet. 5. 3.  * 1 cor. 7 23.  * mat. 23.  rom. 14. 4  2 thess. 2 4.  * 3 John  gen. 8. 9  dan. 3.  * 1 Kings 19 18.  * 1 Kings 12. 28.  * hos. 5. 11.  * John 11. 48.  esa. 26. 11  * mat. 26. 61.  Luke 23. 2  2.  3.  4.  regnum angliae , regnum dei . polydor. Virgil , chron.  * quos perdere vult deus , hos prius dementat . * 2 tim. 3. 5.  in ordine ad spiritual  . * and if the Reeder desire surthet satisfaction , ( were it needful to the wise ) let him read the late book , entitled , the Trojan horse of the presbyterial government , unboweled . iudg. 19 15.  * joh. 19 7  Luke 19 14.  rom. 12.  esa. 9 7.  * actum est de r•lig•one , ubi vel m••imum de rahitur de D•• gloria . Calvin . 




























