Mr. Prinns charge against the King , showing that the King's design , purpose , and resolution , his endeavours , practice , and conversation , have always been engaged , biased , and tended to settle , establish , confirm , popery , tyranny , and slavery , in , among , over his dominions , subjects , persons , and in order to that design , end , and purpose , he writ to the Pope of Rome ( Styling him his most holy father , Catholiqve majesty , thrice honoured Lord & father ) engaging himself to the said Pope , to endeavour to settle the popish religion only in his dominions ; and since his coming to the crown , hath extented extraordinary favours upon , and protecti-on of notorious Papists , priests & Jesuits , against all prosecution of laws enacted against them ; notwithstanding all his protestations to the contrary , hath raised up a most horrid , unnatural , and bloody war , arming his Roman Catholic subjects to massacre , plunder , torture , imprison , ruin , his loyal , faithful pious Protestant subjects to burn , sack , and spoil their cities , towns and villages , collected from the books written . By William Prinne of Lincoln's inn , esquire . Being but a very small taste from that main ocean of that which he hath written concerning the King , and his ill behaviour , since his coming to the crown ; as also with references unto clear , satisfactory , convincing answers unto several objections , concerning resisting , censuring , suspending , depriving Kings for their tyranny , yea capitally proceeding against them , by the said author . 

London , printed in the year 1648 

Several objections concerning the lawfulness of opposing , resisting , censuring , suspending , depriving , and ( In some cases ) capitally proceeding against Emperors , Kings , and Princes , for their oppression , tyranny , cruelty , clearly , fully , learnedly , and sufficiently answered , by the foresaid author , Mr. William Prinne . 

Which objections are taken , 1.  Out of the old testament . 2.  Out of the new testament . 3.  From reason . 4.  From the example of primitive Christians . 

1.  From the scriptures of the old testament . 

object . 1.  Numb 16.  Corah , Dathan , and Abiram , for their insurrection , of that very divine authority which God himself had delegated to Moses and Aaron , without any injury and injustice at all once offered to them , or any assault of them , etc , answered , page 84.  

object . 2. exod. 22. 28.  Thou shalt not revile the gods , nor curse the ruler of the persons . eccle. 10. 20.  Curse not the King , no not in thy thought , &c.  prov. 17. 26  It is not good to strike prines , &c.  Answered , page 84.  

object . 3. deut. 32 35.  Vengeance is mine , &c.  Answered , page 85.  

object . 4. eccl. 8. 2 , 3 , 4.  I counsel thee to keep the King's commandment , and that in regard of the oath of God ; be not hasty to go out of his sight ; stand not in an evil thing , for he doth whatsoever pleaseth him : where the word of a King is , there is power , and who May say unto him , what dost thou ? Answered , page 85 86.  

object . 5.  Psal. 105 14. 15.  Touch not mine annoited , answered , pag. 89. 90. 91. 92 , 93.  

object . 6. 1  Sam , 24 , 6. 10.  David's words concerning Saul ; the Lord forbid that i should do this thing unto my Master the Lord's annoynteed , to stretch forth my hand against him , seeing he is the Lords anointed ; i will not put forth my hand against him , for he is the Lords anointed . And so of David to Abishai , 1 sam. 26 , 9 11. 23 , And David said to Abishai , destroy him not , for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed , and be guiltless ? The Lord forbid , that i should stretch forth my hand against the Lords anointed ; the Lord delivered thee into my hand to day , but i would not stretch forth my hand against the Lord's anointed ; how wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand against the Lords anointed : thy blood shall be upon thy head , for thy mouth hath testified that thou hast slain the Lords anointed : answered very learnedly and divinely , pag. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97.  

object , 7 : 1 sam. 8. 11.  Samuel tells the persons how they should be oppressed under Kings , yet all that violence and injustice that should be done unto them , is no just cause of resistance , for they have no remedy left them but crying unto the Lord : answered pag. 98.  

objest . 8.  This was doctor Ferns , sect , 2. 3 , None of the prophets in the old testament , reprehending the Kings of Israel and Judah , for their gross idolatry , cruelty , oppression , did call upon the elders of the persons for the duty of resistance , neither do we find the persons resisting , or taking up arms against any of their Kings , no not against Ahab or Manasseh , upon any of these grounds , ergo , resistance is unlawful : answered , page 99 100 101. 102.  

ob. 9  Out of the new testament , rom. 13. 1 , 2.  Let every soul be subject to the higher powers , for there is no power but of God , the powers that be are ordained of God : whosoever therefore resisteth the power , resisteth the ordinance of God ; and they that resist , shall receive to themselves damnation , &c. with doctor Fernes enforcement of this text from the context answered very strongly , page 103. 104. 105. 106. 107. 108. 109. 110. 111. and that passage of Tertullian much insisted upon , colimus ergo & imperatorem sic , quomodo & nobis licet , & ipsi expedit , ut hominem a deo secundum , & quicquid est a deo consecutum , solo deo minorem hoc & ipse volet , sic enim omnibus major est , dum solo vero deo minor est , sic & ipsis diis major est , dum & ipsi in potestate sum ejus , answered , page 11. 12 , &c.  

Again , from dr. Ferne , that the efficient cause of royal & monarchical power is only from God , not the persons ; that Kings receive no regal authority or power from the persons , but from God alone ; that the power of Kings is not a human , but a divine power , of which God only is the efficient cause ; that the persons do not make the King , but God properly and absolutely ; this power , right and authority he hath from God ; that the King hath no dominion and poer from his subjects by way of trust , but from God , from whom he hath his kingdom and power , so that by idolatry and oppression , he breaks not the trust reposed in him by his subjects , because the persons have committed nothing to his charge , but God only ; proof whereof see , prov. 8. 15.  By me King's reign . dan. 2. 21.  God removeth Kings , and setteth up Kings . dan. 4. 17 , 25.  the most high ruleth in the kingdom of men , and giveth it to whomsoever he will , and setteth up over it the basest of men . Hosea 13. 11. 1 sam. 10. 1. jer. 27. 5 , 6 , 7.  Isai. 45. 1 2. and other texts answered with very great pain , good distinctions , and clear satisfaction , pag. 115. to 128.  

object . 10. 1 pet. 2. 13. 14. 15. 16.  Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake , whether it be to the King as supreme , &c. answered , pag. 128. 129. 130. 131.  Thus for the answers of scriptures from the old testament and from the new . 

The next are objections from reason . 

object . 11.  As first , Kings are the fathers , heads , Lords , shepherds of the commonwealth , therefore the sons , members , vassals , s•ookss , must not r•sist them , answered , pag. 131. 132.  

object . 12.  The invasions and oppressions of evil Kings and tyrants are afflictions and punishments inflicted on us by God , therefore we ought patiently to submit , and not forcibly to resist , answered , pag 133.  

obj•ct . 13.  Saints forcible resistance of tyrants begets civil wars , great disorders and many mischiefs in the state , ergo , it is unlawful and inconvenient , answered , pag. 134.  

The last , and grand obj•ction is the testimony of fathers , as 

First , that speech of saint Ambrose , lib. 5. orat . in auxentium , coactus rapugnare non audeo , dolere potero , potero flere , potero gemere , adversus arma , milites gothos lachrymae meae arma sunt , talia enim sunt munimenta sacerdotum , aliter nec , debeo , nec possum resistere , answered , pag. 135. 136.  

The second is that of Nazianzen , Oratio 2. in julianum , answered , pag. 137. 138.  

The third , that of Bernard , epist. 121. to King Lewis of France , answered , pag 138. 139.  

The fourth authority , was the example of prrimitive Christians , who submitted themselves willingly to their persecuting governors , without resistance in word or deed , answered , pa. 140. 142. 143.  

After all which he concludes the said third part of the sovereign power of parlioments and kingdoms , &c. with personal , natural , and public authorities , proving the same , which Mr. Prinne had maintained in the said book from page 143. to the end thereof . 

If any man desires more satisfaction of this nature and subject , he May be very richly and plentifully furnished herewith from several other books and labours of the said author , Mr. William Prin , who hath more engaged and endeared his country unto him , by detecting the King and his ill government , clearing the scruples , answering of questions , touching the lawfulness of opposing and resisting Kings and rulers in their tyranny and cruelty , than any lawer , divine , gentleman , or other , in the whole kingdom besides , as his four large and learned books , concerning the sovereign power of parliaments and kingdoms , Rome's masterpiece , the popish royal favou•ite , and other of his writings do witness . 

1.  That the present King Charles ( King of England , Scotland , &c. ) when he was Prince of Wales , did maintain correspondency with the than Pope of Rome , by letters wherein , he styled him the most holy father , chatholick majesty , thrice honoured Lord and father , professing that he did not esteem it a greater honour to be descended from great Princes , then to imitate them in their great piety , having exposed their estates & lives , for the exaltation of the holy Cheir , esteeming the Protestant religion , but a novelty & faction , engaging himself by promise to the Pope , that he would employ himself for the time to come to have but one religion , viz. the Roman Catholic , & that he would spare nothing that he had in the world , but that he was resolved to suffer all manner of discommodities , even to the hazarding of his estate and life , for a thing so pleasing unto God , as the advancement of the Romish religion . 

2.  That the said King hath taken two solemn oaths upon both his treaties of marriage with Spain and France , to protect and maintain to the utmost throughout his dominions , the Romish Catholic church and religion ; yea , to suspend and abrogate all laws against them , and is thereby deeply engaged by virtue of these oaths , to protect favour and defend the same , and in conscience of these oaths and articles ( Consented unto in the said matches ) he holds himself bound ( What ever his outward protestations and pretences be ) to side with the Roman Catholic subjects , both in England , Ireland , and Scotland , and arm them against his Protestant subjects and parliaments in all the 3.  Kingdoms , of purpose to make good these his oaths and articles . 

3.  That the said present King Charles , since his coming to the crown ( In prosecution of the aforesaid engagements to the Pope & church of Rome ) hath raised most bloody and unnatural war against the Protestant cause and party in his dominions , in which he hath sustained many incommodities , hazarded both his estate , life , and realms for the reducing all his subjects to one religion , viz. the Roman Catholic , and upon this ground he hath issued out proclamations , declarations , remonstrances against the Scots ; the former , and present parliament , proclaimed them traitors , rebels , no parliament , a faction , he broke up all former parliaments since his reign , by discontinuance , and endeavoured to dissolve this parliament , by the sword of Papists and atheists , against the very act of parliament assented unto by himself , and the aforesaid engagements of the King to the Pope , &c. are the real ground of the late horrid Irish conspiracy , massacre , rebellion , pacification , toleration , and the said King's connivance at , if not approbation of these horrid bloody execrable practices , as also the extraordinary favour lately indulged to these carsed barbarous rebels by the King , and his most gracious entertainment of them , not only into his royal favour , but court , army , and realm of England , as his securest guard . 

4.  The said King did permit the Papists , priests , and Jesuits , during the Scottish troubles ( A little before the beginning of this parliament ) to call a parliament and general council of state among themselves , even in London ; wherein the Popes own nuncio sat precedent , in which parliament the chief papists out of all parts of England and Wales assembled , made several laws and ordinances for imposing taxes , and raising monies upon all Roman Catholics for maintenance of the Scottish wars , which were seconded with the Queens own letters and instructions to the Catholics , reciting what great liberties and favours her highness had procured for them from his majesty , exciting them to a liberal contribution towards those wars , and this popish parliament was permitted without interruption , when the Protestant's and kingdom Might hold none at all , or , at least , are presently dissolved in discontents , and the Popes own nuncio sit Lord president to rule the roast , which parliament was thus openly tolerated to be held to make and maintain a war against the religious Protestant subjects , even with the King's own actual consent . 

5.  That the said King ( Dissembling with God and men , opposing Papists in words , yet cherishing and protecting them ( All he May ) in deeds , exhibited many royal orders , •xpresses , letters of grace , protection unto popish recusants , seminary priests , during all his reign , to stay all manner of proceedings and executions of the law against them , contrary to the judges and justices oaths , and since this , unhappy civil war , the Papists both in England and in Ireland , have been armed against the parliament by the said King's commission , yea put into places of great command & trust , admitted free access to his camp , & court , where they have been in favours , and preserved from all violence , injury , &c. notwithstanding his many printed declarations , proclamations , protestations , vows against popery and Papists , to blind and delude the over credulous vulgar ; and notwithstanding his brave , real , royal , defence of the Protestant religion so often promised , the best and most zealous Protestant's , ministers , persons , both in England and Ireland , have been everywhere most cruelly massacred , plundered , tortured , imprisoned , ruined by the bloodthirsty popish cavaliers , many of their houses and almost whole towns , fired , sacked by his special commission . 

6.  That the said King did admit Can , the Pope's legate , and that under the very name , notion , and authority of the Pope's legate , into familiar access to , and conference with him , by all arts , policies , and arguments , to pervert and draw him with his 3.  Kingdoms , to a new subjection to the see of Rome , as Cardinal Pool , the Pope's legate , extant in England before this in Queen Mary's reign , reconciled her and the realm to Rome , to their intolerable prejudice , an act so inconsistent to the laws of this realm , with the King's ancient and late remonstrances , oaths , protestations to maintain the Protestant religion ; as May ever amaze the world , which ever looks more at real actions , then verbal protestations . 

7.  That the King ( After Endimian Porter , had gained the custody of the great seal of England ) did issue out divers proclamations under the great seal , proclaiming the parliament traitors and rebels , yea , did grant commissions to Irish and English Papists , contrary to his former proclamations , to raise popish forces both at home and in foreign parts for his defence , as his trustiest and most loyal subjects , and did send letters and commissions of favour to the Irish rebels , and hinder all supply from hence to the Protestant party there . 

8.  That the said King ( After the bloody Irish rebels had destroyed the precious lives of above a hundred and forty thousand protestan•ss in Ireland , and were like to be overcome by the parliaments forces ( Sent from hence and from Scotland to relieve the prot•stant party ) condescended to articles of pacification with these rebels , contrary to an act of parliament , and both houses consents , wherein the said wicked rebels are declared his majesty's good Catholic subjects , and no rebels at all . 

9  That the said King did send for many thousands of the said rebels into England to massacre the Protestant English here , and fight against the parliament , as they did in Ireland heretofore . 

Whereas it flies up and down in the mouths of the over-credulous vulgar that Mr.  wil. Prinne ( Since his admission into the honourable house of Commons ) hath most petulently exclaimed against the armies late remonstrance ; wherein they desire justice May be done against the King ( As the grand delinquent of the kingdom , ) & furiously enu•ighed against the same , as if he was newly become the King's advocate : these therefore are to stop the current of such reports , and to desire that men May deffen their ears thereunto , considering that not only their tender care of the privileges of parl. ( Requiring no notice to be taken of any man's speech within these walls ) but also their respects and love unto mr Prinns ( That hath written so much of the peoples and kingdom's interest and power to call their Kings and governors to account for their unjust wicked and tyrannical government ) doth require the same , for if occasion be offered the present proceedings of the army in requiring justice to be done upon the King , and all other delinquents , as those that lately fomented . second war , invited the Scots into this kingdom to that end &c. shall be clearly , fully , convincingly , asserted , argu•d , and maintained from the several labours , pains , and writings of the said anthem , M• . William Prinne . 

Finis . 





vide the 3d. part of the sovereign power of parliaments & kingdoms page 83.  ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. popish royal favourite page 40.  popish royal favourite pag. 50.  ibid. p. 50  ibid. p. 41  ibid. p. 51  ibid. ibid. pag. 58. 57  epistle to the reader before the popish royal favourite . Rome's masterpiece , p. 31.  rooms masterpiece . p. 33  popish royal favourite . 35.  ibid. 
















