Sr. Walter Ralegh King 



Maxims of state . 

Written by Sir Walter Raleigh . 

Whereunto is added his instructions to his son ; and the son's advice to his aged father . 

London , printed by w. Bentley , and are to be sold by w. Shears , at the sign of the bible , over against the North door of Paul's . 1650.  

The contents . 

Page . 
of government . 1 
of policy . 2 
of monarchy . 3 
of aristocracy , or senatory state . 5 
of free state , or popular state . 6 
of •yranny . 7 
of oligarchy , or the government of a few . ibid. 
of a commonwealth . 8 
of causes of states , and commonwealths in general . 10 
of founding a state . ibid. 
of causes preserving a state or commonwealth . 15 
of mysteries or sophisms . ibid. 
of axioms or rules of preserving a state . 19 
rules for preserving of a kingdom . hereditary . 25 
rules for preserving of a kingdom . conquered . 25 
kingdoms hereditary are preserved at home by the ordering of a Prince . ibid. 
kingdoms new gotten , or purchased by force , are preserved by 10.  rules . 35 
rules politic of tyrants . 41 
sophisms of a barbarous and professed tyranny . 42 
sophisms of the sophistical , or subtle tyrant , to hold up his state . 46 
of preservation of an aristocracy . 52 
of preservation of an oligarchy , by sophisms . Ibid 
of preservation of an oligarchy , by rules . Ibid 
of conversion of states in general . 59 
causes of conversions of states are of two sorts : general and particular . ibid. 
particular causes of conversion of state , are of two sorts . 60 
of sedition . 61 
causes of sedition are of two sorts . ibid. 
of alteration without violence . 64 
a method , how to make use of the book before• in the reading of the story . 67 
old age is not ever unfit for public government . ibid. 
example of the like practice in Charles the fifth . 68 
of observation for the affirmative and the negative . ibid. 
of defence for David in marrying Abishag . 70 
Political nobility . 

of Adoniah aspiring to the kingdom . 71 
Observations . 

of ways of such as aspire to the kingdom , and marks to discern them . 73 
political Prince . 75 
The table of the chapters contained in Sir Walter Raleigh's instructions to his son . 

chap.  Page . 
virtuous persons to be made choice of for friends . 1 
i. great care to be had in the choosing of a wife . 4 
ii wisest men have been abused by flatterers . 10 
•v . private quarrels to be avoided . 11 
 . three rules to be observed for the preservation of a man's estate . 17 
vi . what sort of servant• are most fit to be entertained . 20 
vii . brave rags wear soonest out of fashion . 2• 
viii . riches not to be sough• by evil means . ibid• 
ix. . what inconvenience happen to such as deligh• in wine . 2• 
x. let God be thy protector and director in all the actions . 2• 
Maxims of state . 

Of government . 

Government is of two sorts . 1.  private , of himself . sobriety . of his family ; called o••onomie . 2.  public , of the commonwealth ; called poli•ie . a man must first govern himself , ere he be fit to govern a family : and his family , ere he be fit to bear the government in the commonwealth . 

Of policy . 

policy is an art of government of a commonwealth , and some part of it according to that state , or form of government wherein it is settled for the public good . 

state , is the frame or set order of a commonwealth , or of the governors that rule the same , specially of the chief and sovereign governor that commandeth the rest . 

The state or sovereignty consisteth in 5. points . 

1.  Making or anulling of laws . 
2.  Creating and disposing of magistrates . 
3.  Power over life and death . 
4.  Making of war , or peace . 
5.  Highest o• last appeal . 
Where these five are , either in one or in more , there is the state . 

These five points of state , rest either in , 1.  One monarchy or kingdom . 
2.  Some few chief men for virtue and wisdom , called an aristocracy . 
3.  Many , called a fr•e-state , or popular state . 


These three sorts of government have respect to the common good , and therefore are just , and lawful states . 

These 3. degenerate into 3. other governments . viz.  1.  monarchy , 
2.  aristocracy , 
3.  popular est•t , 
into 1.  tyranny . 
2.  oligarchy . 
3.  commonwealth o• government of all the common and base sort , and therefore called a commonwealth by an usurped nickname . 


These all respect their own , and not the public good , and therefore are •ailed bastard governments . 

I. monarchy . 

A monarchy , or kingdom , is the government of a state by one head , or chief , tending to the common benefit of all . 

monarchy , or kingdoms , are of three sorts touching the right , or possession of them ; viz.  

1.  hereditary , by de•cent , as the English , French , &c.  
2.  elective , by suffrage of the other orders , or some of them , as the Polonian . 
3.  mixed , or of both kinds ; viz. by descent , yet not tied to the next of blood , as the ancient Jewish state . 
monarchies are of two sorts touching their power or authority ; viz.  

1.  entire . where the whole power of ordering all state matters , both in peace and war , doth by law and custom appertain to the Prince , as in the English kingdom , where the Prince hath power to make laws , league , and w•r ; to create magistrates ; to pardon life : of appeal , &c.  though to give a contentment to the other degrees , they have a suffrage in making laws , yet ever subject to the Prince's pleasure , nor negative will . 
2.  limit•d or restrained , that hath no full power in all the points o• matters of state , as the military King that hath not the sovereignty in time of peace , as the making of laws , &c.  but in war only , as the Polonian Kings . 
Ii aristocracy , or senatorie state . 

An aristocracy is the government of a commonwealth by some competent number of the better sort , preferred for wisdom and other virtues for the public good . 

aristocracies are of three sorts , viz. where the senators are chosen , for 1.  virtue , riches , and the common good , as the Venetian . 
2.  virtue and the public good without respect of wealth , as sometimes the Roman , when some of the senators were fetched from the plough , and some from the schools . 
3.  virtue and wealth , more respecting their private , than their public good , which inclineth towards an oligarchy , or the government of the richer or nobler sort , as in Rome towards the end . 


Iii free-state , or popular sta•e . 

The popular state is the government of a state by the choicer sort of persons , tending to the public good of all sorts ; viz. with due respect of the better , nobler , and richer sort . 

In every just state , some part of the government is , or aught to be imparted to the persons ; as in a kingdom , a voice or suffrage in making laws ; and sometimes also , in levying of arms ( If the charge be great , and the Prince forced to borrow help of his subjects ) the matter rightly May be propounded to a parliament , that the tax May seem to have proceeded from themselves . So consultations , and some proceedings in judicial matters , May in part be referred to them . The reason , least seeing themselves to be in no number , nor of reckoning , they mislike the state , or kind of government : and where the multitude is discontented , there must needs be many enemies to the present state . for which cause , tyrants , ( Which allow the persons , no manner of dealing in state matters ) are forced to bereave them of their wits and weapons , and all other means whereby they May resist , or amend themselves , as in A•shland , •urk•y , &c.  

Iv. tyranny . 

A tyranny is the swerving , or distort•g of a monarc•ie , or the governm••• of one , tending not to the public good , but the private benefit of himself , and his followers . As in the ruff and Turkish government , where the state and wealth of other o••erss , are employed only to the upholding of the greatness of the King or Emperor . This is the worst of all the Basta•d states , because it is the perverting of the best regiment , to wit , of a monarchy , which resembleth the sovereign government of God himself . 

V. oligarchy , or the government of a few . 

An oligarchy is the swerving , or the corruption of an aristocracy ; or the gou••nment of some few , that are of the wealthier or nobler sort , without a•y respect of the public good . The chief end of these gover••••ss , is , their own greatness and enriching . And therefore their manner is , to prepare fi• mean• to uphold their Esta•es . This st•te is not wholly so bad , as is the tyranny , and yet worse than the commo•-wealth , because it respecteth the good of a few . 

Vi . Commonwealth . 

A commonwealth is the swerving or depravation of a f•ee , or popular state , or the government of the whole multitude of the base and poorer sort , without respect of the other orders . 

These two states , to wit ; the olig••chie , and commonwealth , are very adve•se the one to the other , and have many b•ckerings between them . For that the richer or nobler sort , suppose a right or superiority to appertain unto them in every respect , because they are superior , but in some re•pectss only , to wit , in riches , birth , parentage , &c.  on the other side , the common-people suppose , there ought to be an equality in all other things , and some state matters ; because they are equal• with the rich or noble , touching their lib••tie , whereas indeed neither the one nor the other are simply equal or superior , as touching government and fitness thereunto , because they are such , to wit , because they are rich , noble , free , &c.  but because they are wise , virtuous , valiant , &c. and so have fit parts to govern a state . 

These several states are sometimes mixed , and inter wrought one with the other , yet ever so , as that the one hath the preheminent predomination over the other , as in the humours and complexions of the body . So in the rom•n state , the persons had their plehis••ta , and gave the suffrage in the election of magistrates : yet the senate ( As the state stood ) for the most part swayed the state , and bare the chief rule . So in the Ven•tian state , the Duke seemeth to represe•• a mon•rch , and the s•nate to be his counc•l : yet the Duke hath no power in state matters , but is like a head set on by art , that heareth no brain . And so that state is s•natorical or aristocratical . 

Causes of states & commonwealths in general . 

Causes of states or of commonwealths are of 3. sorts , viz.  1.  founding , or settling a state where to be considered . 1.  measure . 
2.  parts , & their qualities . 

2.  preserving a state . 
3.  changing , and altering a state . 


Founding a state . 

In founding a state are to be considered 2. things . 

1.  proportion . 
2.  parts . 
proportion , is a just measure or mediocrity of the state , whereby it is framed and kept in that order , as that neither it exceed nor be defective in his kind , to wit , so that a monarch b• not too monarchical , nor strict , or absolute , as the •usse Kings ; nor aristocratical , that is over-mated or eclipsed by the nobility , as the Scottish kingdom , but ever respective to the other degrees . That aristocraty be not to magnificent nor entire to itself , but communicate with the persons some commodities of state or government , as the V•netian , and sometimes the Roman allowed the persons to elect certain magistrates out of themselves , to have a tribune , to make plebiscita , &c.  So a free-state or commonwealth that it be not over popular , viz. that it depress not to much the richer , wiser , nor learneder sort ; but admit them to offices with a caution out of the rules and mysteries of that state . that they seek no alteration of the present state . the reason , because the moderate states in their several kinds ( As all other things that observe the mean ) are best framed for their continuance , because they give less cause of grudge , envy , and affecting the wealth , honour , and liberty which they see in others that govern the state ; and so are less subject to stirs and commotions , and easiest kept in their present state wherein they are set . 

Parts . 

The parts of the state , or those magistrates that bear place or sway in the public government . 

parts or partakers of public government , are 1.  council or senate , which consul•eth of all matters pertaining to war and peace , magistrates , &c. in admitting of whom there ought to be a more special care , that they May be men expert in matter of policy , because it is their trade and vocation , as men use to choose pilots , and Masters of ships , such as know the art of navigation , and not husbandmen , &c.  and so the contrary . 
2.  magistrates and officers , which are to be executioners of that which is consulted , and found to be expedient for the commonwealth , wherein are to be observed , the kinds of magistrates , that they be such as fit that kind of government ; the time of their continuance , and the manner of their election or appointing , by whom , out of whom , and in what manner they be chosen . 
3.  judges ; to determine in civil , and criminal matters , where are to be observed , out of whom they are to be chosen ; what kinds are necessary , and the manner o•iudgement , and judicial proceeding . 


In magistrates are to be observed . 

1.  kinds of magistrates as , 

1. civil 

1.  superior , which are to be such & of that kind as agree with the state , as consuls for a year , and not perpetual dictators in a senatorie state . Praetors , & censors , that oversee manners & orders of the persons . 

For a kingdom lieutenant of shires , marshals , Masters of horse , admirals , &c.  

inferior , as conservatous of peace , constables , &c.  

overseers of youth , that take care for their education for civil & warlike exercise . 

clarks of the market that provide for the quantity , and price of victual . 

aediles for buildings , streets , bounds . 

questors , or treasurers , to keep and dispense the public treasury . 

a••uarieses , or recorders , which keep the public records . 

gaolers , to keep prisons and prisoners . 

surveyors of woods and fields , &c.  


2.  ecclesiastical . 

1.  As Bishops or pastors , elders , wardens . 

2.  time of magistrates , whereof some are perpetual , some for a time , viz. for more years , a year , half a year , according to the necessity of the commonwealth , and not perpetual ; or at least not hereditary in a kingdom . Yearly in an aristocracy , or half yearly in a free-state . 

3.  manner of choice , by whom and how to be chosen , where especially they are to be chosen by suffrage , and not by lot . 


Causes preserving a state , or commonwealth . 

In preserving of states , 2. things required . 

1.  mysteries , or sophisms . 1.  general to all states . 
2.  particular , for every several state . 

2.  rules , or actions . 1.  general , for all states . 
2.  particular , for every state . 

Mysteries , or sophisms . 

mysteries , or sophisms of state , are certain secret practices , either for the avoiding of danger , or averting such effects as tend to the preservation of the present state , as it is set or founded . 

state mysteries are of two sorts . 

1.  general : that pertain to all states ; as first , to provide by all means , that the same degree , or part of the commonwealth , do not exceed both in quantity and q•ality . in quantity , as that the number of the nobility , or of great persons , be not more , than the state or commonwealth can bear . In quality , as that none grow in wealth , liberty , honours , &c. more than it is meet for that degree ; for as in weights , the heavier weights bear down the scale : so in commonwealths , that part or degree that excelleth the rest in quality , and quantity , overswayeth the rest after it , whereof follow alterations , and conversions of state . Secondly , to provide by all means , that the middle sort of persons exceed both the extremes , ( viz. ) of nobility and ge•t•y , and the base rascal , and begarly sort . For this maketh the state constant and firm , when both the extremes are tied together by a middle sort , as it were with a band , as for any conspiracy of the rich and beggarly sort together , it is not to be feared . To these two points , the particular rules or sophisms of every commonwealth , are to be applied . 
2.  particular : that serve •or preservation of every commonwealth , in that form of state wherein it is settled as in a kingdom . That the nobility May be accustomed to bear the government of the Prince , especially such as have their dwelling in remote places from the Prince's eye , it is expedient to call them up at certain times to the Prince's court , under pretence of doing them honour , or being desirous to see , and enjoy their prese•ce ; and to have their children , especially their elder , to be attendant upon the Prince , as of special favour towards them and theirs , that so they May be trained up in duty and obedience towards the Prince , and be as hostages for the good behaviour , and faithful dealing of their parents , especially , if they be of any suspected note . To that end serves the pe•si•• practice , in having a band , or train of the S•trapa's' children , and other nobles to attend the court ; which was well imitated by our train of h•n••mens , if they were of the nobler sort . Again , sometimes to borrow small sums of his subjects , and to pay them again , that he May after borrow greater sums and never pay : so in an oligarchy , least it decline to a popular state , they deceive the persons with this and the like sophisms , ( viz. ) They compel their own sort , to wit , the rich men , by great penalties , to frequent their assemblies for choosing of magistrates , for provision of armour , warlike exercises , making an execution of laws , &c.  by that means seeming to bear a hard hand over the richer , but to suffer the poorer , and meaner sor• to be absent , and to neglect those assemblies und•r pretence , that they will not draw them from their business , and private earnings , : yet withal to cite thither some few of them , ( viz. ) so many as are easily over matched by the •icher sort , to make a show , that they would have the persons or poorer sort , partakers likewise of those matters , yet terrifying those that come to their assemblies , with the tediousness of consultations , greatness of fines , if they should misdo , to the end , to make them unwilling to come again , or to have to do with those consultations ; by which means , the richer sort do still govern the state , with the people's liking , and good contentment . 
Axioms . 

axioms or rules of preserving the state are , 1.  g•neral , that serve for all commonwealths . 
2.  particular , that serve for every several state . 


General rules . 

1.  The first and principal rule of policy to be observed in all states , is to profess , and practise , and maintain the true worship and religion of almighty God prescribed unto us in his word , which is the chief end of all government . the axio• , that God be obeyed simply without exception , though he command that which seemeth unreasonable , and absurd to human policy ; as in the Jews commonwealth , that all the men should repair yearly to one place to worship God four times , leaving none to defend their coast , though being beset with many enemies . Not to sow the seventh year , but to suffer the ground to rest untilled without respect or fear of famine , &c.  

2.  To avoid the causes of conversions , whereby states are overthrown , that are set down in the title of conversions ; for that commonwealths ( As natural bodies ) are preserved by avoiding that which hurteth the health and state thereof , a•d are so cured by contrary medicines . 

3.  To take heed , that no magistrate be create or continue contrary to the laws and policy of that Stat• . as that in a s•nate , there be no• create a perpetual dict•tor , as Caesar in Room . in a kingdom , that there be no senate , or convention of equal power with the Prince in state matters , as in Poland . 

4.  To create such magistrates as love the state as it is settled , and take heed of the contrary practice , as to advance popular persons in a kingdom , or a•istocracie . and secondly , to advance such as have skill to discern what doth preserve , and what hurteth or altereth the present Stat• . 

5.  To that end to have certain officers to p•y abroad , and to observe such as do not live and behave themselves in sit sort , agreeable to the present state , but de••e rather to be under some other form , or kind of government . 

6.  To take heed that magistracies be not sold for money , nor bribe in their offices , which is specially to be observed in that commonwealth which is governed by a few of the richer sort ; for if the magistrate gain nothing but his common fees , the common sort , and such as want honour , take in good part that they be not preferred , and are glad rather that themselves are suffered to intend private business . But if the magistrate buy and sell matters , the common persons are doubly grieved , both because they are debared of those preferments , and of that gain they see to grow by them , which is the cause that the germ•in oligarchi•s continue so firm ; for both they suffer the poorer sort to grow into wealth , and the richer sort are by that means freed , and secured from being under the poor . 

7.  To take heed that the state , as it is settled and maintained , be not overstuct , nor exceed in his kind ; ( viz. ) That a kingdom be not too monarchical , nor a popular state too popular : for which cause it is good , that the magistrates sometimes yield of his right touching honour , and behave themselves familiarly with those that are equal unto them in other parts , though inferior for place and office ; and sometimes popula•ly with the common persons , which is the cause that some commonwealths , though they be very simply , and unskilfully set , yet conti••e ••rm , because the magistrates behave thems•lveses wi•ely , and with due re•pect towards the r•st that are without honour ; and therefore •ome kind of modera•• popularity is to be used in every •ommonwealth . 

8.  To take heed of small beginnings , and to meet with them even at the first , as well touching the breaki•g and altering of laws , as of other rules which concern the continuance of every several state . for the disease and alteration of a commonwealth , doth not happen all at once , but grows by degrees , which every common wit cannot discern , but men expert in policy . 

9  To provide , that that part be ever the grea•er in number and power , which favours the s•ate as now •t sta•dss . This is to be observed as a ve•y oracle in all Common-weal•hs' . 

10 to observe a mean in all the degrees , and to suffer no pa•t to exceed , or decay over much . As first for p•efe•mentss , to provide that they be rather small and short , than great and long ; and if a•y be grown to overmuch greatness , to withdraw or diminish some part of his honour . Where the sophisms are to be practised ( viz. ) to do it by parts and degrees ; to do it by occasion , or colour of law , and not all at once . And if that way serve not , to advance some other , of whose virtu• and faithfulness , we are fully assur•d , to as high a degree , or to a greater honour ; and to be the friends and followe•ss of him that excelleth , above that which is meet . As touching wealth , to provide , that those of the middle sort ( As before was said ) be more in number ; and if any grow high , and overcharged with wealth , to use the so••ismss of a po•ula• state , viz. to send him on embassages , and foreign negotiations , or employ him in some office that hath g••at charges , and little honour , &c.  to which end , the edil•ship served in some commonwealths . 

11.  To suppress the factions , and quarrels of the nobles , and to keep other that are y•• free from joyni•g with them in their partakings and factions . 

12 to increase or remit the common taxes and contributions , according to the wealth , or want of the persons and Common-wealt• . if the persons be increased in wealth , the taxes and subsidies May be increased . If they be poor , and their wealth diminish , specially by dearth , want of traffic , &c. to forbear taxes and impositions , or to take little . Otherwise grudge and discontentments must needs follow . The sophisms that serve for imposi•itionss , are these , and other of like sort , to pretend business of great charge , as war , building of ships , making of havens , castles , fortifications , &c. for the common defence ; sometimes by lotteries and like devises , wherein some part May be bestowed , the rest reserved for other expenses ; but princely dealings needs no pretences . 

13 to provide that the discipline & training of youth of the better sort be such as agreeth with that commonwealth : as that in a kingdom , the sons of noble men to be attendant at the court , that they May be accustomed to obedience towards the Prince : in the senatory state , that the sons of the senators be not idly , nor over daintily brought up , but well instructed and trained up in le•rning , tongues , and martial exercise ; that they May be able to bear that place in the commonwealth , which their father held , and contrariwise , in a popular state , 

14.  To take heed , least their sophisms , or secret practices for the continuance and maintenance of that state , be not discovered ; least by that means they refuse and disappoint themselves , but wisely used , and with great secrecy . 

Particular rules . 

rules and axioms , for preserving of a kingdom . 

hereditary . 
conquered . 
Kingdoms hereditary , are preserved at home by the ordering , 

1.  himself , viz. by the tempering and moderation of the Prince's power and prerogative . for the less and more temperate their power and state is , the more firm , and stable is their kingdom and governm•nt ; because they seem to be further off from a master-like , and tyrannical empire ; and less unequal in condition to the next degree , to wit , the nobility , and so less subject to grudge and envy . 
2.  nobility ; viz. by keeping that degree and due proportion , that neither they exceed in number more than the realm , or state can bear , as the Scottish kingdom , and sometime the English , when the realm was overcharged with the number of Dukes , Earls , and other nobles ; whereby the authori•y of the Prince was eclipsed , and the realm troubled with their factions and ambitions . nor that any one excel in hono•r , power , or wealth , as that he resemble another King within the kingdom , as the house of Lancaster within this realm , to that end , not to load any with too much hono•r or preferment , because it is hard even for the best , and worthiest men , to bear their greatness , and high fortune tempera•ely , as appeareth by infinite examples in all states . the sophism for preventing , or reforming this inconvenience , are to be used with great caution and wisdom . If any great person be to be abated , not to deal with him by calumniation , or forg•d matter , & so to cut him off without desert , especially if he be gracious among the persons , after the Machiavilian policy , which besides the injustice , is an occasion many times of greater danger towards the Prince . Nor to withdraw their honour all at once , which maketh a desperate discontentment in the party , and a commiseration in the peole , and so greater love , if he be gracious for his virtue , and public service . Nor to banish him into foreign countries , where he May have opportunity of practising with forr•ign states , whereof great danger May ensue , as in the example of Coriolanus , Henry the fourth , and such like . But to use these , and the like sophisms , viz. to abate their greatness by degrees , as David Joabs' , Justinian bellisarius , &c.  To advance some other men to as great , or greater honour , to shadow , or over-mate the greatness of the other . To draw from him by degrees his friends , and followers by prefe•mentss , rewa•dss , and other good and lawful means ; especially , to be pr•vided that these great men be not employed in great or powerful affairs of the commonwealth , whereby they May have more opportunity to sway the state . 
3.  persons , viz. so to order and behave himself , that he be loved , and reverenced of the persons . for that the Prince need not greatly fear home-conspiracies , o• foreign invasion , if he be firmly loved of his own persons . The reason , for that the rebel can neither hope for any forces for so great enterprise , nor any refuge , being discovered and put to flight , if the multitude affect their Prince : but the common persons being once offended , hath cause to fear every moving , both at home and abroad . This May be effected by the Prince , if he use means and art of getting the favour of the persons , and avoid those things that breed hatred & contempt ; viz. if he seem as a tutor , or a father to love the persons , and to protect them , if he maintain the peace of his kingdom ; for that nothing is more popular , nor more pleasing to the persons , than is peace . 
4.  If he show himself oftentimes graciously , yet with state and majesty to his persons , and receive complaints of his suppliants , and such like . 
5.  If he sit himself sometimes in open courts , and place of iustic• , that he May seem to have a care of justice among his persons . If he bestow many benefits and graces upon that city , which he maketh the seat of his empire , and so make it sure and faithful unto him , which is fit to be in the middle of his kingdom , as the hear• in the middle of the body , or the sun in the middle of heaven , both to divide himself more easily into all the parts of his dominions ; and least the furthest parts• at one end move , whilst the Prince is in the other . I• he go in progress many times to see his provinces , especially , those that are remote . 
6.  If he gratify his courtiers and att•n•antss in that •ort , and by such means , as that he May seem not to pleasure them with the hurt and injury of his persons , as with monopolies , and such like . 
7.  If he commit the handling of such things as procure envy , or seem grievous to his ministers , but reserve those things which are grateful , and well pleasing to himself , as the French Kings , who for th•t purpose , as May seem , have erected their court at Paris , which acquitteh the Prince from grudge and •nvy , both with the nobles and the p•ople . 
8.  If he borrows sometimes sums of money of his persons , though he have no need , and pay the same justly without defalca•ion of any part by his exchequer , or other officer . 
9  If he avoid all such things as May breed •atred , or contempt of his person , which May be done , if he show himself not too light , inconstant , hard , cruel , •sfeminate , fearful , and dastardly , &c. but contrariwise , religious , grave , just valiant , &c.  Whereby appeareth the false doctrine of the Machiavilian policy , with far the betmeans to keep the persons in obedience , than love , and reverence of the persons towards the Prince . 
10 if the Prince be well furnished with warlike provision , which is to be rumoured , and made known abroad : if it be known , that he is reverenced , and obeyed by his peoples at home . 
11.  If he provide so much as lieth in him , that his neighbour kingdoms grow not over much in power and dominion ; which if it happen , he is to join speedily with other Princes , which are in like danger to abate that greatness , and to strengthen himself and the rest against it . An oversight of the Christian Princes towards the King of Spain . 
12.  If he get him intelligencers by reward , or other means , to detect or hinder the designs of that Prince , with whom he hath differences , if any thing be intended against his state . or at least have some of his own lodging abroad , about that Prince's court , under colour of embassage , or some other p•etence ; which must be men of skill and dexterity to serve for that turn . 
13.  To observe the laws of his country , and not to encounter them with his pr•rogative , nor to use it at all where there is a law , for that it maketh a secret and just grudge in the people's hearts , especially if it tender to take from them •••ir commodities , and to bestow them upon other of his courtiers and ministers . 
14.  To provide especially , that that part , which favoureth the state as it standeth , be more potent , than the other which favoureth it not , or desireth a change . 
15.  To make special choice of good and sound men to bear the place of magistrates , especially , of such as assist the Prince in his counsels , and policies , and not to lean over much to his own advise , contrary to the rule of Machiavil , who teacheth , that a Prince can have no good counsel , except it be in himself ; his reason , because if he use the counsel of some one , he is in danger to be overwrought , and supplanted by him ; & if he counsel with more , than he shall be distracted with the differences in opinions . as if a Prince of great , or mean wisdom , could not take the judgement of all his counsellorurs in any point of policy , or of so many as the himself thinketh good , and to take it either by word , or in writing ; and himself then in private peruse them all , and so after good and mature deliberation , make choice of the best , without any distraction or binding himself to the direction of one . for the proverb is true , that two eyes see more than one ; and therefore the advices , and consultations of a senatory state , is compared by some to a feast , or dinner , where many contribute towards the shot , by which means they have more variety of dishes , and so better fare ; and yet every man May make choice of that dish , that serveth him best •or his health and appeti•e . 
16.  The Prince himself is to sit sometimes in place of public justice , and to give an experiment of his wisdom and equity , whereby great reverence and estimation is gotten , as in the example of Solomon , which May seem the reason , why our Kings of England had their King's bench in place of public justice , after the manner of the ancient Kings that •ate in the gate ; where for better performing of this princely duty , some special causes May be selected , which May thoroughly be deba•ed and considered upon by the Prince in private , with the help and advise of his learned council , and so be decided publicly , as before is said , by the Prince himself ; at least , the Prince is to •ake accomp• of every minister of public justice , that it May be known , that he hath a care of justice , and doing right to his persons , which makes the justicers also to •e more ••reful in performing of their duties . 
17.  To be moderate in his taxes , and impositions ; and when need doth require to use the subjects purse , •o do it by parliaments , and with their consents , making the cause apparent unto them , and showing his unwillingness in charging them . Finally , so to use it , that it May seem rather an offer from his subjects , than an exaction by him . 
18.  To stop small beginnings ; unto •his end to compound the dissensions •hat arise amongst the nobles , with caution , that such as are free be not drawn into parts , whereby many times the Prince is endangered , and the whole commonwealth set in a combustion ; as in the example of the Barons wars , and the late wars of France , which grew from a quarrel betwixt the Guisian faction , and the other nobility . 
19  To stir up the persons , if they grow secure , and negl•gent of a•mour , and other provision for the commonwealth , by some rumour or fear of danger at home , to make more ready when occasion requireth . But this seldom to be used , least it be supposed a false alarm , when there is need indeed . 
20.  To have special care , that his children , especially , the heir apparent , have such bringing up as is meet for a King , viz. in learning , specially of matters pertaining to state , and in martial exercise , contrary to the practice of many Princes , who suffer their children to be brought up in pleasure , and to spend their time in hunting , &c. which by reason of their defects , afterwards is a cause of misgovernment and alteration of state . 
Ii kingdoms new gotten , or purchased by force , are preserved by these means . 

1.  First , if they have been subjects before to his ancestors , or have the same tongue , manners , or fashions , as have his own country , it is an eas•• matter to retain such countries within their obedience , in case the Prince's blood of the said country be wholly extinct . For men of the same quality , tongue , and condi•ion , do easily shoal , and combine thems•lveses together , so much the rather , if the persons of that country have served before , and were not accustomed to their own lib•r•y , wherein specially is to be observed , that the laws and customs o• that purchased country be not altered nor innovated , or at least it be done by little and little . So the •urgundianss and Acquitains were annexed to France . the reason , because partly they have been accustomed to serve , and partly , for that th•y will not •asily agree about any other to be their Prince , if the blood royal be once extinguished . as for the invasion of a foreign country , whereunto the Prince hath no right , or whereof the right heir is living , ; it is not the part of a just civil Prince , much less a Prince Christian to enforce such a country ; and therefore , the Machiavilian practices in this case , to make sure work by extinguishing wholly the blood royal , is lewd and imper•inent : the like is to be said of murdering the natives , or the greatest part of them , to the end he May hold the rest in sure possession . A thing not only against Christian religion , but it is inhuman injustice , cruel , and barbarous . 

2.  The safest way is , ( Supposing a right ) that some good part of the natives be transplanted into some other place , and our colonies , consisting of so many as shall be thought meet , be planted there in some part of the province , castles , forts , and havens , seized upon and more provided in fit places , as the manner was of the Babylonian monarch , which transplanted 10.  Jews : and of the Romans in France , tribes of the Germany , Br•tany , and other places . The reason : 1.  For that otherwise forces of horse and foot , are to be maintained within the province , which cannot be done without great charge . 
2.  For that the whole province is •roubled and grieved with removing and supplying the army with victuals , carriages , &c.  
3.  For that colonies are more sure and faith•ul , than the rest . 

As for the natives that are removed from their former years , they have no means to hurt , and the rest of the natives being free from the inconvenience , and fearing that themselves May be so served if they attempt any thing rashly , are content to be quiet . 

The Turks practice in Asia , where the chief grounds and dwellings are possessed by the soldiers , whom they call , Timariotae . 

That the Prince have his seat and his residence , in his new purchase , especially , for a time , till things be well settled ; especially , if the province be great and large , as the Turks in Greece : the reason ; 1.  Because the presence of the Prince availeth much to keep things in order , and get the good will of his new subjects . 
2.  They conceive that they have refuge by the Prince's presence , if they be oppressed by the lieutenants , and inferior governors : where it will be convenient for the winning the people's hearts , that some example be made of punishing of such as have committed any violence or oppression . 
3.  Because being present , he seeth and heareth what is thought and attempted ; and so May quickly give remedy to it , which being absent , he cannot do , or not do in time . 
4.  If the Prince himself cannot be present to reside , then , to take heed that the charge of governing , or new purchases be committed to such as be sure men , and of other meet quality , that depend wholly upon the Prince's favour , and not to natives , or other of their own subjects , that are gracious •or their nobil••y , or virtue ; especially , if the province be great , and somewhat far distant , which May soon seduce the unsettled affections of those new subjects . As for such governors , as depend wholly upon the Prince's favour , being not born , but create noble , they will not so easily suffer themselves to be won from their duty , and in case they would revolt , yet they are not able to make any great strength , for that the persons obey them but as instruments and ministers , to keep them in subjection , and not for any ill will . 



4.  To have the children of the ch•e• noble men , and of greatest authority , hostages with them in safe keeping , the more the better : for that no bound is stronger , than that of nature , to contain the parents and allies in obedience , and they the rest . 
5.  To alter the laws but by degrees one after another , and to make other that are more behooveful for the establishing of the present govern•ment . 
6.  To keep the persons quiet and peaceable , and well affected so much as May be , that they May seem by being conquered , to have gotten a protector , rather than a tyrant ; for the common-people , if they enjoy peace , and •e not distracted nor drawn from their business , nor exacted upon beyond measure , are easily con•ained under obedience ; yet notwithstanding , they are to be dis•used from the practice of arms , and other exercises which increase courage , and •e weakened of armour , that they have neither spi•it , •or will to rebel . 
7.  If the•e be any •action in the country , to take to him the defence of the better and stronger part , and to combine with it , •as Caesar in fra••e . 
8.  To look well to the borders , and confining provinces , and if any rule there of great , or equal power to him•elf , to join league with some other borderers , though of less strength , to hinder the attempts ( If any should be ) by such neighbour Prince . For it happeneth often , tha• a country in•e•ted by one neighbour p•ince , •calleth in another , of as great , o• greater power , to assist , and rescue it from the other that invadeth it ; so the Romans were called into Greece , by the Aetolians ; the Saxons , by the Britains , the Danes , by the Saxons . 
9  To leave their ti•leses and dignities to the natives , but the command and authority , wholly to his own . 
10.  Not to put much trust , nor to practise to often the sophisms of policy , especially those that appertain to a tyrannical state , which are soon de•ected by men of judgement , and so bring discredit to the Prince , and his policy among the wiser , and better sort of his subjects , whereof must needs follow very ill effects . 


The sophisms of tyrants , are rather to be known , than practised , ( Which are for the supporting of their tyrannical states , ) by wise and good Princes , and are these , and such like as follow . 

Rules politic of tyrants . 

Rvles' practised by tyrants are of 2. sorts . viz.  1.  barbarous , and pro•essed , which is proper to those that have got head , and have power sufficient of themselves , without others help , as in the Tu•kish , and ruff government . 
2.  so•histical , and dissembl•d ; as in some states that are repu•ed for good and lawful monarchies , but inclining to tyrannies , proper to those which are not yet ••tled , nor have power sufficient of themselves ; but must use the power and help of others , and so are forced to be politic soph•st••ss . 


I. sophisms of a barbarous and professed tyranny . 

To expel and banish ou• of his country all ho•est means , whereby his persons May a•tain to learning , wisdom , valour , and other virtues , that they Might be fit for that estate , and •ervile condition . For that these two , learning , and martial exercise , effect two things most dangerous to a tyranny : viz. wisdom , and valour . For that men of spirit and understanding , can hardly endure a servile state . To this end , to forbid learning of li•eral arts , and martial exercise ; as in the rus•e government , so Julian the apo•tata dealt with the Christians . Contrariwise , to use his persons to base occup•tionss , and mechanical arts , to keep them from idleness , and to put away from them all high thoughts , and manly conceits , and to give them a liberty of drinking drunk , and of other base and lewd conditions that they May be sotted , and so made unfit for great enterprises . So the Egyptian Kings dealt with the heb•ews ; so the ruff Emperor with his ruff persons : and Charles the fifth with the Neth•rlanderss , when he purposed to enclose their privileges , and to bring them under his absolute government . 

2.  To make sure to him , and his state , his military men by reward , liberty , and other means , especially , his guard , or Praetorian •and ; that being partakers of the spoil and benefit , they make like that state , and continue firm to it ; as the Turk , his janissaries ; the ruff , his Boyarens , &c.  

3.  To unarm his persons of weapons , money , and all means , whereby they May resist his power ; and to that end , to have his set and ordinary exactions , viz. once in two , three , or four years , and sometimes yearly , as the Turk and Russe ; who is wont to say , that his persons must be used as his flock of sheep , viz. their fle•c• taken from them , least it overlade them , and grow too heavy ; that t•ey are like to his beard , that the more it was shaved , the thicker it would grow . and if there be any of extraordinary wealth , to borrow of them in the mean while , till the tax come about , or upon some devised matter , to confiscate their goods , as the common practice is of the ruff and Tu•k . 

4.  To be still in wars , to the end , his persons May need a captain ; and that his forces May be kept in practice , as the ruff doth yearly against the tartar , Pol•nian , and Sweden , &c.  

5.  To cut off such as excel the rest in wealth , favour , or nobil•ty ; or be of a pregnant , or a spiring wit , & so are fearful to a tyrant , and to suffer none to hold office , or any honour , but only of him ; as the Turk , his bas•••ss ; and the ruff , his •u•zzess . 

6.  To forbid guild• , brotherhoods , feastings , and other assemblies among the persons , that they have no means or opportunity to conspire , or confer together of public matters , or to maintain love amongst themselves , which is very dangerous to a tyrant , the russes practice . 

7.  To have their beagles , or listeners in every corner , and parts of the realm ; especially , in places that are more suspect , to learn what every man saith , or thinketh , that they May prevent all attempts , & take away such as mislike their state . 

8.  To make schism , and division among his subjects , viz. to set one noble man , against another , and one rich man against another , that through faction & disagreement among themselves , they May be weakened , and attempt nothing against him , and by this means entertaining whisperings , and complaints , he May know the secrets of both parts , and have matter against them both , when need requireth . So the ruff made the faction of the ze••ky , and the oppress•nie . 

9  To have strangers for his guard , and to entertain parasites , and other base and servile fellows , not too wise , and yet subtle , that will be ready for reward to do and execute what he commandeth , though never so wicked and unjust . For that good men cannot flatter , and wise men cannot serve a tyrant . 

All these practices , and such like , May be contracted into one or two , viz. to bereave his subjects of will and power to do him hurt , or to alter the present state . The use is caution , not imitation . 

Ii sophisms of the sophistical , or subtle tyrant , to hold up his state . 

1.  To make show of a good King , by observing a temper and mediocrity in his government , and whole course of life ; to which end , it is necessary , that this subtle tyrant , be a cunning politician , or a Machiavilian at the least , and that he be taken so to be , for that it maketh him more to be feared and regarded , and is thought thereby , not unworthy for to govern others . 

2.  To make show not of severity , but of gravity , by seeming reverent , and not terrible in his speech , and gesture , and habit , and other demeanour . 

3.  To pretend care of the commonwealth ; and to that end , to seem loath to exact tributes , and other charges ; and yet to make necessity of it , where none is : to that end , to procure such war as can bring no danger toward his state , and that Might easily be compounded , or some other chargeable business ; and to continue it on , that he May continue his exaction and contribution so long as he list . And thereof to employ some in his public service , the rest to hoard up in his treasury , which is sometimes practised even by lawful Princes , as Edward the fourth in his wars against France , when having levied a great sum of money throughout his •ealm , especially of the Londoners , he went over seas , and returned without any thing doing . 

4.  Sometimes to give an account by open speech , and public writing , of the expense of such taxes and impositions , as he hath rec•ived of his •ubjectss , that he May so seem to be a good husband , and frugal , and not a robber of the commonwealth . 

5.  To that end , to bestow• some cost upon public buildings , or some other work for the common good , especially upon the ports , forts , and chief cities of his realm , that so he May seem a benenefactor , and have a delight in the adorning of his country , or doing some good for it . 

6.  To forbid feastings , and other meetings , which increase love , and give opportunity to confer together of public matters , under pretence of sparing cost for better uses , to that end , the curfew bell was first ordained by William the• conqueror , to give men warning to repair home at a certain hour . 

7.  To take heed that no one grow to be overgreat , but rather , many equally great , that they May envy , and contend one with another ; and if he resolve to weaken any of this sort , to do it warily , and by degrees ; if quite to wreck him , and to have his life , yet to give him a lawful trial , after the manner of his country ; and if he proceed so far with any of great power and estimation , as to do him contumely , or disgrace , not to suffer him to escape , because contumely and disgrace , are things contrary unto honour , which great spirits do most desire , and so are moved rather to a revenge for their disgrace , than to any thankfulness , or acknowledging the Prince's favour for their pardon or dismistion ; true in atheists , but not in true Christian nobility . 

8.  To unarm his persons , and store up their weapons , under pretence of keeping them safe , and having them ready when service requireth , and then to arm with them , such and so many as he shall think meet , and to commit them to such as are sure men . 

9  To make schism or division under hand among his nobility , and betwixt the nobility and the persons , and to set one rich man against another , that they combine no• together , and that himself by hearing the grief and complaints , May know the secrets of both parts , and so have matter against them both , when it listeth him to call them to an account . 

10.  To offer no man any contumely or wrong , specially , about woman's matters , by attempting the chastity of their wives or daughters , which hath been he ruin of many tyrants , and conversion of their states . As of •arquinius , by Brutus , Appius , by Virginius , Pisistratus , by Harmodius , Alexander Medici's , Duke of Florence , aloisus of Placentia , rodericus , King of Spain , &c.  

11.  To that end , to be moderate in his pleasures , or to use them closely , that he be not seen ; for that men sober , or watchful , or such as seem so , are not lightly subject to contempt , or conspiracies of their own . 

12.  To reward such as achieve some great or commendable enterprise ; or do any special action •or the commonwealth , in that manner as it May seem , they could not be better regarded , in case they lived in a free-state . 

13.  All rewards and things grateful , to come from himself , but all punishments , exactions , and things ungrateful , to come from his officers , & public ministers ; and when he hath effected what he would by them , if he see his persons discontented withal , to make them a sacrifice to pacify his subjects . 

14.  To pretend great care of religion , and of serving God , ( Which hath been the manner of the wickedest tyrants ) for that persons do less fear any hurt from those , whom they think virtuous and religious , nor attempt likely to do them hurt , for that they think that God protects them . 

15.  To have a strong & sure guard of foreign soldiers , and to bind them by good turns , that they having at least profit , May depend upon him , and the present state ; as C•ligula , the German guard , where the nobility are many and mighty . The like is practised by lawful Kings , as by the French King . 

16.  To procure that other great persons be in the same fault , or case with them , that for that cause they be forced to defend the tyrant , for their own safety 

17.  To take part , and to join himself with the stronger part ; if the common persons , and mean degree be the stronger , to join with them ; if the rich and noble , to join with them . For so that part with his own strength , will be ever able to overmatch the other . 

18.  So to frame his manners & whole behaviour , as that he May seem , if not perfectly good , yet tolerably evil , or somewhat good , somewhat bad . 

These rules of hypocritical tyrants , are to be known , that they May be avoided , and met withal , and not drawn into imimitation . 

Preservation of an aristocracy . 

Rules to preserve a senatory state , are partly taken from the common axioms , and partly from those that preserve a kingdom . 

Preservation of an oligarchy , by Sophisms . 
Rules . 


1.  In consultations and assemblies , about public affairs , to order the matter , that all May have liberty to frequent their common assemblies , and counsels , ; but to impose a fine upon the richer sort , if they omit that duty . On the other side , to pardon the persons , if they absent themselves , and to bear with them under pretence , that they May the better intend their occupations , , and not be hindered in their trades , and earnings . 

2.  In election of magistrates , and officers : to suffer the poorer sort to vow , and abjure the bearing of office , under colour of sparing them , or to enjoin some great charge , as incident to the office , which the poor cannot bear . But to impose some great fine upon those , that be rich , if they refuse to bear office , being elect unto it . 

3.  In judicial matters : in like manner to order , that the persons May be absent from public trials , under pretence of following their business . But the richer to be present , and to compel them by fines , to frequent the court . 

4.  In warlike exercise and arms : that the poor be not forced to have armour , horse , &c. under pretence of sparing their cost , nor to be drawn from their trades by martial exercises ; but to compel the richer sort to keep their proportion of armour , horse , &c. by excessive fines , and to exercise themselves in warlike matters , &c.  

5.  To have special care of instructing their children in liberal arts , policy , and warlike exercise , and to observe good order and discipline . For as popular states are preserved by the frequency , and liberty of the persons , so this government of the richer , is preserved by discipline , and good o•der of governors . 

6.  To provide good store of warlike furniture , especially of horse , and horsemen , and of armed men , viz. pike , &c. which are proper to the gentry , as shot , and light furniture , are for a popular company . 

7.  To put in practise some points of a popular state ; viz. to lade no one man with too much preferment ; to make yearly , or half years' magistrates , &c.  for that the persons are pleased with such things , and they are better secured by this means from the rule of one . And if any grow to too much greatness , to abate him by the sophisms fit for this state . 

8.  To commit the offices and magistracies , to those that are best able to bear the greatest charges for public matters , which both tendeth to the conservation of this state , and pleaseth the persons , for that they reap some relief , and benefit by it . 

9  To the same end , to contract marriages among themselves , the rich with the rich , &c.  

10.  In some things which concern not the points , and matters of state , as electing magistrates , making laws , &c. to giv• an equality , or sometimes a preferment to the common persons , and not to do , as in some oligarchies they were wont ; viz. to swear against the persons , to suppress and bridle them ; but rather contrary ; to minister an oath at their admission , that they shall do no wrong to any of the persons ; and if any of the richer offer wrong to any of the Commons , to show some example of severe punishment . 

For other axioms that preserve this state , they are to be borrowed from those other rules that tend to the preserving of a popular , and tyrannical state ; for the strict kind of oligarchy , is kin to a tyranny . 

Preservation of a popular state ; sophisms . 
rules or axioms . 


1.  In public assemblies and consultations about matters of state , creating of magistrates , public justice , and exercise of arms , to practise the contrary to the former kind of government , to wit , an oligarc•ie . for in popular states , the Commons and meaner sort are to be drawn to those assemblies , magistrates , offices , warlike exercises , &c. by mulcts and rewards , and the richer sort are to be spared , and not to be forced by fine , or otherwise , to frequent these exercises . 

2.  To make show of honouring and reverencing the richer men , and not to swear against them , as the manner hath been in some popular states ; but rather to prefer them in all other matters , that concern not the state and public government . 

3.  To elect magistrates from among the common• by lot , or ballading , and not to choose any for their wealth's sake . 

4.  To take heed , that no man bear office twice , except it be military , where the pay , and salary , &c. is to be reserved in their own hands , to be disposed of by a common-council , &c.  and to see that no man be too highly preferred . 

5.  That no magistracy be perpetual , but as short as May be , to wit , for a a year , half year , &c.  

6.  To compel magistrates when their time expireth , to give an account of their behaviour and government , and that publicly before the Commons . 

7.  To have public salaries and allowance for their magistrates , judges , &c.  and yearly dividents for the common persons , and such as have most need among them . 

8.  To make judges of all matters out of all sorts , so they have some aptness to perform that duty . 

9  To provide that public judgements and trials be not frequent ; and to that end to inflict great fines and other punishments upon pettifoggers and dilators , as the law of requital , &c.  because for the most part the richer and nobler , and not the Commons are indicted and accused in this commonwealth , which causeth the rich to conspire against the state ; whereby many times the popular state is turned into an oligarchy , or some other government . Hereto tendeth that art of civil law , made against accusers and calumniators : ad s•natus-consultum turpilianum , l. 1. de calumniatoribus . 

10.  In such free states as are popular , and have no revenue , to provide that public assemblies be not after : because they want salary for pleaders and orators ; and if they be rich ; yet to be wary , that all the revenue be not divided amongst the Commons . For , that this distribution of the common revenue among the multitude , is like a purse or barrel without a bottom . But to provide , that a sufficient part of the revenue be stored up for the public affairs . 

11.  If the number of the poor increase too much in this kind of state , to send some abroad out of the cities into the next country places , and to provide above all , that none do live idly , but be set to their trades . To this end , to provide that the richer men place in their farms and copyholds , such decayed citizens . 

12.  To be well advised what is good for this state , and not to suppose that to be fit for a popular state , that seemeth most popular ; but that which is •est for the continuance thereof : and to that end , not to lay into the exchequer , or common-treasury , such goods as are confiscate , but to store them up as holy and consecrate things , which except it be practised , confiscations , and fines of the common persons would be frequent , and so this state would decay by weakening the persons . 

Conversion of states in general . 

Conversion of a state , is the declining of the commonwealth , either to some other form of government , or to his full and last period appointed by God . 

Causes of conversions of states are of two sorts : general and particular . 

general , ( viz. ) 1.  Want of religion : viz. of the true knowledge and worship of God , prescribed in his word ; and notable sins that proceed from thence in Prince and persons , as in the examples of Saul , Uzziah , the Jewish state ; the four monarchies••nd all other . 

2.  Want of wisdom and good council to keep the state , the Prince , nobles , and persons in good temper , and due proportion , according to thei• several orders and decrees . 

3.  Want of justice , either in administration ( As ill laws , or ill magistrates ) or in the execution , as rewards not given where they should be , or there •estowed where they should not be , or punishments not inflicted where they should be . 

4.  Want of power and sufficiency to maintain and defend itself ; viz. of provision , as armour , money , captains , soldiers , &c.  execution , when the means or provision is not used , or ill used . 

2.  particular : to be noted and collected out of the contraries of those rules , that are prescribed for the preservation of the commonwealths . 

Particular causes of conversion of states , are of two sorts . 

1.  foreign : by the over-greatness of invasion of some foreign kingdom , or other state of meaner power , having a part within our own , which are to •e prevented by the providence of the chief , and rules of policy for the preserving of every state . This •alleth out very seldom for the great diff•cul•y to overthrow a foreign state . 
2.  domestic : Sedition or open violence by the stronger part . 
Alteration without violence . 

Sedition . 

sedition is a power of inferiors opposing itself with force of arms against the superior power , quasi ditio secedens . 

Causes of sedition are of two sorts . 

1.  general . 

liberty 
richer 

When they , that are of equal quality in a commonwealth , or do take themselves so to be , are not regarded equally in all , or in any of these three . 

Or , when they are so unequal in quality , or take themselves so to be , are regarded but equally , or with less respect than those that be of less de•ect in these three things , or in any of them . 


honour 
1.  in the chief : covetousness or oppression , by the magistrate or higher power , ( viz. ) when the magistrates , especially the chief , increaseth his substance and revenue beyond measure , either with the public or ( Private calamity , whereby the governors grow to quarrel among themselves as in oligarchies ) or the other degrees conspire together , and make quarrel against the chief , as in kingdoms : the examples of Wat Tyler , Jack Straw , &c.  

2.  in the chief : injury , when great spirits , and of great power , are greatly wronged and dishonoured , or take themselves so to be , as Coriolanus , Cyrus minor , Earl of Warwick . in which cases the best way is to decide the wrong . 

3.  Preferment , or want of preferment ; wherein some have overmuch , and so wax proud and aspire higher : or have more or less , than they deserve as they suppose ; & so in envy and disda• , seek innovation by open faction , so Caesar , &c.  

4.  Some great nec•ssity or calamity ; so Xerxes after the •oil of his great army . And Sena•harib after the loss of 185. in one night . 

2.  particular . 

1.  envy , when the chief exceed the mediocri•y before mentioned , and so provoketh the nobility , and other degrees , to conspire against him ; as Brutus' Cassius' , &c. against Caesar . 
2.  fear , viz. of danger , when one or more dispatch the Prince , by secret practice or force , to prevent his own danger , as artab•nus did Xerxes . 
3.  lust or lechery , as Tarqvinius Superbus , by Brutus ; Pisistratindae , by Armodius ; Appius by Virginius . 
4.  contempt ; for vile quality & base behaviour , as Sardanapalus by Arbaces ; Dionysius the younger by Dion . 
5.  contumely ; when some great disgrace is done to some of great spirit , who standeth upon his honour and reputation , as Caligula by Chaereas . 
6.  hope of advancement , or some great profit , as Mituridates , Anobarsanes . 
chief . 

other d•gr•es . 

other degrees . 

Alteration without violence . 

Causes of alteration without violence are ; 1.  excess of the state ; when by degrees the state groweth from that temper and mediocrity wherein it was , or should have been settled , and exceedeth in power , riches , and absoluteness in his kind , by the ambition and covetousness of the chiefs immoderate taxes , and impositions , &c. applying all to his own benefi• , without respect of other degrees , and so in the end changeth itself into another state or form of government , as a kingdom into a tyranny , an oligarch•• into an Aristocraci• . 

2.  excess , of some one or more in the commonwealth ; viz. when some one or more in a commonwealth grow to an excellency or excess above the rest , either in honour , wealth , or virtu• ; and so by permission and popular favour , are advanced to the sovereignty : by which means , popular states grow into oliga•chieses ; and Oligarchi•s and aristocracies into Monarchi•s . for which cause the Athenians and some other free states , made their laws of ostrocismos , to banish any for a time that should excel , though it were in virtue , to prevent the alteration of their state ; which because it is an unjust law , 't is better to take heed at the beginning to prevent the means , that none should grow to that height and excellency , than to use so sharp and unjust a remedy . 

Finis . 

A method , how to make use of the book before , in the reading of the story . 

David being seventy years of age , was of wisdom , memory , &c. sufficient to govern his kingdom ; 1. reg. cap. 1.  

Old age is not ever unfit for public government . 

Dauid being of great years , and so having a cold , dry , and impotent bodi• , married with Abishag , a fair maid of the best complexion through the whole realm , to revive his body and prolong his life , 1. reg. chap. 1. verse . 3.  

Example of the like practice in Charles the fifth . 

Dauid being old and impotent of bo•t• , by the advise of h•s nobles and p•isitianss , marri•d a young maid call•d Abishag , to warm and pres•rve his old bodi• . 

Observation . 

Wh•ther David did well in m••rying a maid ? and whether it be lawful for an old decayed and impotent man , to marry a young woman ; or on the other side , for an old , worn , and decrepit woman , to marry a young and lusty man ? 

For the affirmative . 

arg. the end of marriage is society and mutual comfort ; b•• th•r• May be soci•tie and mutual comfort in a marriage betwixt an old , and young party ; ergo , 't is lawful . 

answ. society and comfort is a cause & effect of marriage ; but none of the principal ends of marriage : which are : 1.  Pr•creation of children , and so the continuance o• mankind . 
2.  The au•iding of fornication . 


As for comfort and society they May be betwixt man and man , woman and woman , where no marriage is , and therefore no proper ends of marri•ge . 

The negative . 

arg. 1.  that conjunction which hath no respect to the right and proper ends , for which marriage was •rdained by God , is no lawful marriage . But the conjunction betwixt an old im•otent , and young party hath no respect t• th•••ght end , for which marriage was ordain•d by God . there•ore it is no lawful marriage . 

2.  No contract , wherein the part•e cont•acting , bindeth himself to an impossible condition , or to do that which he cannot do , is good or lawful . But the contract o• marriage by an impoten• person , wit• a young party , bindeth him to an impossible condition to do that which he cannot d• , viz. to perfo•m the duties of marriage ; therefore it is unlawful . 

For the same cause , the civil law determineth a nullity in these m•r•iageses , except the woman know before the infi•mitie of the man , in which case she ca• have no wrong , being a thing done with her own knowledge and cons•nt , because volenti non fit injuria : — in legem Julian . de adulteriis leg. si uxor , &c.  

It provideth further , •or the more certainty of the infirmiti• , that three years be expired before the dissolution of the marriage , because that men that have been infirm at the first , by reason of sickness , or some other accident , afterwards proved to be sufficient : de repudiis leg. in causis . 

Defence for David , in marrying Abishag . 

It was rather a medicine , than a marriage , without any evil , or disordered aff•ction . 

2.  it was by the persuasion of his nobles , and phisiti•nss . 

3.  it was for the public good , to prolong the life of a worthy Prince . 

4.  it was with the knowledge and consent of the young maid , who was made acquainted with the King's infirmity , and to what end she was married unto him ; who if she did it for the common good , and for duties sake , having withal the gift of continency , she is to be commended ; if for ambition , or some vain respect , it is •er own , and not David's fault . 

Political nobility . Adoniah aspiring to the kingdom . 

First , took the advantage of David's affection and kindness towards him , and made him secure of any ill dealing . 
Secondly , of his age and infirmities , disabling his father as unfit for government . 
Thirdly , blazed his title , and right to the crown . 
Fourthly , got him chariots , horsemen , and footmen , and a guard to make show of state . 
Fifthly , being a comely , and goodly person , made a popular show of himself , and his qualities . 
Sixtly , joined to himself in faction , Joab , the general of the army , who was in displeasure for murdering of Abner , and Amaza , and feared that David would supply Benajah in his place , and so was discontented . And Abiather the high priest , that was likewise discontented with David , for the preferment of Zadoch . 
Seventhly , had meetings with them , and other his confederates , under pretence of a vow , and offering at the fountain of Raguel , in the co••ineses of Judea . 
Eightly , made a show of religion by sacrificing , &c.  
Ninthly , made himself familiar with the nobles and persons , and entertai••d them with feasting . 
Tenthly , drew into his part the chief officers of the court , and servants to the King , by rewards , familiarity , &c.  
Eleventhly , disgraced and abased the competitor , and such as he knew would take part with him , and concealeth his ambition , and purpose from them . 
Twelftly , had Jonathan a favourite of the court , and near about the King to give him intelligence , if any thing were discovered , and moved at the court , whilst himself was in hand about his practice . 
Observations . Ways of such as aspire to the kingdom , & marks to discern them . 

First , they wind into the Prince's favour by service , officiousness , flattery , &c. to plant him in a good opinion of their loyalty and faithfulness , thereby to make him secure of their practices . 
2.  they take advantage of the Prince's infirmities , age , impotency , negligence , sex , &c.  and work upon that by disabling the Prince , and secret detracting of his state , and government . 
3.  they blaze their title , and claim to the crown , ( If they have any ) with their friends and favourites . 
4.  they provide them in secret of extraordinary forces , and furniture for the wars , make much of good soldiers , and have a pretence ( If it be espied ) of some other end , as for the King's honour , or service , and to be in readiness against foreign enemies , &c.  
5.  they make open show of their best qualities , and comeliness of their persons ( Which though it be vain as a dumb show , it is very effectual to win the liking of the popular sort , which according to the rul• of the election of Kings , in the bees commonwealth ; think that porma est digna imperare ) activity , nobility , ancestry , &c.  
6.  to have their blazers abroad , to set out their virtues , and to prepare their friends in every province . 
7.  to draw into their part , and make sure unto the• , of the chief peers , and men of best quality , such as are mightiest and most gracious with the soldiers , and the military men , and most subtle and politic , especially such as be ambitious and discontent with the state . 
8.  to have meetings for con•e•rence under some pretence of some ordinari• matter in some convenient place , not too near , nor too far off , but where friends May best resort and assemble unto them without suspicion . 
9  to take up a show , and pretence of religion , more than before , and beyond the practice of their former life . 
10.  they use popular courtesy ( Which in a great person is very effectual ) feasting , liberaliti• , gaming , &c.  
11.  to be over liberal , and win to them by gifts , familiarity , &c. the chief officers of the court , and governors of shires . 
12 to have some near about the Prince , to keep them in credit , and remove suspicion , if any rise . 
13.  to disgrace such as they know to be sure and faithful to the Prince , and present state , or to the competitor , and to bring them into contempt by slander , detraction , and all means they can , and to •onc•al the designs from them , least they be discovered before they be too ripe . 
14.  to have some spy ••ar about the Prince , to advertise them if any i•ckling of suspicion arise , whilst themselves are practising . 
Note the practices of Absolom :  sam. chap. 16.  and of cy•us minor in Xenophon ; {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} . cap. 1.  

Political Prince . 

David being a most worthy and excellent Prince for wisdom , valour , religion , and justice , and so highly deserving of the commonwealth , yet grown into age , grew withal into contempt , & had many , both of his nobles , & common persons , that fell from him ; first with Absolom , then with Adoniah , who affected the kingdom , and rebelled against him : for remedy whereof , he stirred up himself to public actions , which Might show his vigour and sufficiency to manage the affairs of his kingdom . 

1.  after the victory against Absolom , he forced himself to •orbear mourning , and showed himself to his discontented army , when all were like to fall from him , for his unreasonable sorrow and lamentation for his son . 

2.  after the victory , he caused a g•n•ral convention to be ass•mbled o• the whole nation , to bring him home with honour to Jerusalem , which was a renewing , and re-establishing of him . 2 sam. 19 12.  

3.  he gave an experiment of his power and authority , by deposing a person of great authority and estimation , to wit , Joab , general captain of the army , and advancing Amasa to his place . 

4.  he sent kind messengers to Jerusalem , and to other chief and head towns , and special men of Judea , his contributes , putting them of their alliance with him , with these words , that they were of his own flesh and blood , with protestation of his special love and affection towards them , to provide them with the like kindness and affection towards him . 

5.  he assembled a parliament of his whole realm , and took occasion upon the designing of his successor , to commend unto them the succession of his house , and the continuance and maintenance o• gods tru• worship and religion then established , and gave a grave and public ch•rge to his successor , now designed , touc•ing the manner of his gou•rnment , and maintaining of religion . 1. chron. 12. 13.  

6.  he showed his bounty and magnificence in cong•sting matter for the building of the temple , as gold , silver , brass , &c.  and caus•d it to be published and made known to the parliament and whole nation , 1. chron. 22. 13.  

7 he revived the church government , and set it in a right order , assigning to •u•ry church , officers , his place and function . 

8.  he suppressed the faction of Ado•niah , and ordained Solomon his successor , 1 reg. 1. 22.  by these means , h• retained his majesty and authority i• his old age , as appeareth by the eff•ct ; •o• that being bedrid , he suppressed the fa•ction of Adoniah , ( Which was grow•• mighty , and was set on foot ) with h•• bare commandment , and si•nification 〈◊〉 his pleasure , and so he died in peace . 

Finis . 























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































