¶ To all the most Illustrious Archbishops and Reverend Bishops of Ireland , but more particularly to those of the Province of Dublin their Honourable Lords , David Bishop of Osory , john of Fernes , Ross of Kildare , and Matthew Vicar Apostolical of Laghlein . 

1.  Most Illustrious Lords and Reverend Bishops , the Priests of Dublin make their complaint before you , That the most Illustrious Archbishop of Dublin , Thomas Fleming , of the Order of S. Francis , without alleging any cause against them , only for his will , and at his pleasure useth to exile and banish Priests out of his Diocese . And they protest that in so doing he exerciseth a tyranny over the Clergy , contrary unto the Canons of Holy Church , and the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom . 

2.  Most Illustrious Lords and Reverend Fathers in Christ , the aforesaid Priests do make their complaint , that the same most Illustrious Archbishop of Dublin , Thomas Fleming , of the Order of S. Francis , though humbly sought unto , and desired , doth refuse to do them justice in their causes , neither yet will he permit the Clergy to follow their actions merely civil before the Magistrate , contrary unto the received custom of this Kingdom , from the first conversion of the Nation . And they protest that in so doing , he exerciseth a tyranny over the Clergy , contrary unto the Canons of the Church , and the Laws and statutes of this Kingdom . 

3.  Most Illustrious Lords , and R. Fathers in Christ , the aforesaid Priests do make their complaint , Tbat the same most Illustrious Archbishop , Thomas Fleming , of the Order of S. Francis , in inflicting his Ecclesiastical censures , observeth no Canonical proceeding at all , omitting not only the solemnities of the Law , but those things also that are necessary and essential in all proceedings thereof , namely citations , and proof of causes . And they protest that in so doing , he exerciseth a tyranny over the Clergy , contrary unto the Canons of holy Church , and the Laws and statutes of this Kingdom . 

4.  Most Illustrious Lords , and R. Fathers in Christ , the aforesaid Priests do complain , that the same most Illustrious Archbishop , Thomas Fleming , of the Order of S. Francis , refused to hear all proofs against the Regulars in the matter of the eleven propositions condemned at Paris , which testimonies or proofs two venerable Priests presented unto him the 15. day of November , in the year of our Lord 1631. in Dublin . And moreover the aforesaid Priests do profess , that the same Illustrious Archbishop is a favourer and a Patron of certain new , & never heard of Heresies , published by the Friars of his Order , and others : of the which Heresies , or rather Blasphemies , being advertised by a petition , he utterly refused to hear the Accusers and Witnesses . And they protest that in so doing he exerciseth a tyranny in the Church of God , contrary unto the Canons of holy Church , and the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom . 

5.  Most Illustrious Lords and rev. Fathers in Christ , the aforesaid Priests do complain , that the same most Illustrious Archbishop Thomas Fleming , of the Order of S. Francis , did not suppress , extinguish or corrupt ( according as the Canons of the Church and the Laws of Princes do command ) a certain infamous Libel , made , printed and published under the false and feigned name of Edmund Utsulan , against the good name , fame and reputation of certain venerable Priests of the Clergy , who in the same aforesaid Libel are expressly and by name mentioned : but on the contrary the aforesaid Archbishop reads , commends , publisheth , and defends the same , to their irreparable dishonour and infamy , by whose example also others especially of the Regulars of this Kingdom are incited , provoked , and animated to do the like . And they protest that in so doing , he exerciseth a tyranny over the Clergy , contrary to the Canons of holy Church , and the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom . 

6.  Most Illustrious Lords and Reverend Fathers in Christ , the aforesaid Priests do complain , that the same most Illustrious Archbishop of Dublin , Thomas Fleming , of the Order of S. Francis , being given to understand by way of petition , in the behalf of the Clergy of Dublin , That a certain Parish Priest by name Patrick Brangan , with his assistant james Quin , but a few months ago , through extreme negligence had lost the blessed Sacrament consecrated in many hosts , and that without hope of recovery . Our aforesaid Archbishop making small or no account of so great a sacrilege , permit notwithstanding the aforesaid Priests , whereof the one is most unlearned , the other Lunatic , to execute all Ecclesiastical functions , by whose ministry he daily exposeth the Sacraments of the Church to profanation , and abuse . And in so doing they protest that he offends against the divine Majesty , and the sacred Canons of the Church . They profess also that in these aforesaid excesses he hath the Regulars his Counselors , aiders and abettors , especially one john Preston , a Friar of his Order , a most seditious and a turbulent fellow , to the ruin of the Clergy , and disturbance of the Christian Commonwealth . 

7.  Most Illustrious Lords , and R. Fathers in Christ , the aforesaid Priests do complain , that the same most Illustrious Archbishop of Dublin , Tho. Fleming , of the Order of S. Francis , doth make Parish Priests , young men , unlearned , and unbred . Others famous for their learning , gravity and virtue being neglected . And more it is to be lamented for , that such are the times & state of things , as if we had Augustine's , Ambrosies , and Hieromes , it were meet to prefer them unto the pastoral office ( others omitted . ) But what may we expect of this our Prelate ? who hath ordinarily in his mouth : To what end should Parish Priests be learned ? or preachers ? forasmuch as these matters belong unto Regulars . Moreover the aforesaid Priests do complain , that the most Illustrious Archbishop Thomas Fleming , of the Order of S. Francis , at the coming unto his Prelature , found within the walls of Dublin five Parish Priests , men of learning , ripe years , and uncorrupt conversation , in place of whom , either taken away by death or exile , he hath placed only two , & such as we are not willing to speak of what condition : so as it seems he desireth nothing more , then by this oppression and extirpation of the Clergy , a more easy and compendious way may be made unto those armies of Monks , and begging Friars , who in this Kingdom ( observing no Regular discipline ) do labour to create a Monarchy unto themselves , as already they have done under this Bishop , to the destruction of the Church , the impoverishing of the Inhabitants , and no small detriment to the Commonwealth . And they protest that in so doing , he exerciseth a tyranny over the Clergy , contrary unto the Canons of holy Church , and the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom . 

8.  Most Illustrious Lords and R. Fathers in Christ , The aforesaid Priests do complain , That the Illustrious Archbishop of Dublin Thomas Fleming , of the Order of S. Francis , is accustomed to answer the Clergy complaining of their grievances unto him : If I do you wrong , you may go to Rome to complain . In the mean time reporting himself to be so powerful in the Court of Rome , that he fears no Adversary . And of this that R. Priest Fa. Patrick Cahil , Doctor of Divinity had experience , who for a year treating of his injuries and grievances done unto him by the Archbishop of Dublin , could by no means prevail once to be admitted unto the presence and audience of the most eminent Cardinal Ludovisius , Vicechancellor of Rome : which Cardinal notwithstanding is given by his Holiness unto the Irish as the only Patron and Protector of the Irish Nation . These things we may remember with grief , but amend them we cannot . But we profess before Almighty God , his Holiness , and all faithful people , that this is nothing else but to tyrannize over the Clergy , to the dishonour of the Church , and no smaell contempt of the See Apostolic . 

For which and other causes besides to be alleged , and in their due time and place to be proved against the abovenamed Archbishop Tho. Fleming , of the Order of S. Francis , we the aforesaid Priests , and hereafter to be named , do set before your eyes most Illustrious and Reverend Lords these our grievances , as meet & honourable witnesses of this our deed , writing , and public instrument , and as far as is possible and lawful for us by the Canons of holy Church , declining the jurisdiction of our aforesaid Ordinary by this our present writing : and from this time forth we appeal unto the See Apostolic , from all Ecclesiastical censures hereafter to be inflicted upon us by the same Illustrious Archbishop Tho. Fleming , of the order of S. Francis. And in the mean time providing for our innocence and safety ( to the example of S. Paul , and S. Athanasius ) we do invocate the aid of the Secular arm for our present remedy , against the aforesaid Illustrious Archbishop Tho. Fleming , of the Order of S. Francis , and all Regulars of what order soever , as well Monks as begging Friars , Abbettours , Counsellors and participants with him in the premises , as violatours and contemners of all Laws divine and human , and men by the law excommunicate . Humbly beseeching your Lordships in the bowels of the Crucified , that you would be pleased to intimate with as much speed as may be , this our protestation and appeal unto the See Apostolic . And the God of peace and love long preserve your R. Lordships in safety . 

Dated at Dublin , May 3. in the year of our Lord , 1632.  Peter Caddell Doctor of Divinity . 
Paul Harris Pr. Deacon of the University of Dublin . 


Printed at Rouen at the sign of the three Lilies , with Edmund Fitzours . 

