The golden speech of Queen Elizabeth to her last parliament , 30 November , anno domini , 1601.  

This speech ought to be set in letters of gold , that aswell the majesty , prudence and virtue of this royal Queen Might in general most tightly appear ; as also that her religious love , and tender respect which she particularly , and constantly did bear to her parliament in unfeigned sincerity , Might ( To the shame , and perpetual disgrace and infamy of some of her successors ) be nobly and truly vindicated , and proclaimed , with all grateful recognition to God for so great a blessing to his poor persons of England , in vouchsafing them heretofore such a gracious Princess , and magnanimous defendor of the reform religion , and heroic patroness of the liberty of her subjects in the freedom and honour of their parliaments ; which have been under God , the continual conservators of the splendour , and wealth of this commonwealth against tyranny , and oppression . 

The 30. of November , 1601. her majesty being set under state in the council-chamber at Whitehall , the speaker , accompanied with privy councillors , besides knights and burgesses of the lower house to the number of eight-score , presenting themselves at her majesty's feet , for that so graciously and speedily she had heard and yielded to her subjects desires , and proclaimed the same in their hearing , as followeth : Mr. speaker , 

We perceive your coming is to present thanks unto us ; know , i accept them with no less joy , than your loves can have desire to offer such a present , and do more esteem it , than any treasure of riches ; for those we know how to prize , but loyalty , love , and thanks , i account them invaluable : and though God hath raised me high , yet this i account the glory of my crown , that i have reigned with your loves . This makes that i do not so much rejoice , that God hath made me to be a Queen , as to be a Queen over so thankful a persons , and to be the mean , under God , to conserve you in safety , and to preserve you from danger ; yea , to be the instrument to deliver you from dishonour , shame , and infamy ; to keep you from servitude , and from slavery under our enemies , and cruel tyranny , and vile oppression intended against us : for the better withstanding whereof , we take very acceptably your intended helps , and chiefly in that it manifesteth your loves , and largeness of heart to your sovereign . Of myself i must say this , i never was any greedy scraping grasper , nor a strict fast-holding Prince , nor yet a waster ; my heart was never set upon any worldly goods , but only for my subjects good . What you do bestow on me , i will not hoard up , but receive it to bestow on you again ; yea , mine own properties i account yours , to be expended for your good , and your eyes shall see the bestowing of it for your welfare . 

Mr. speaker , i would wish you , and the rest to stand up , for i fear i shall yet trouble you with longer speech . Mr. speaker , you give me thanks , but i am more to thank you , and i charge you , thank them of the Lower-house from me , for had i not received knowledge from you , i Might a fallen into the lapse of an error , only for want of true information . Since i was Queen , yet did i never put my pen to any grant but upon pretext , and semblance made me , that it was for the good , and avail of my subjects generally , though a private profit to some of my ancient servants who have deserved well : but that my grants shall be made grievances to my persons , and oppressions , to be privileged under colour of our patents , our princely dignity shall not suffer it . When i heard it , i could give no rest unto my thoughts until i had reform it , and those varlets , lewd persons , abusers of my bounty , shall know i will not suffer it . And Mr. speaker , tell the house from me , i take it exceeding grateful that the knowledge of these things are come unto me from them . And though amongst them the principal members are such as are not touched in private , and therefore need not speak from any feeling of the grief , yet we have heard that other gentlemen also of the house , who stand as free , have spoken as freely in it , which gives us to know that no respects or interests have moved them other than the minds they bear to suffer no diminution of our honour , and our subjects love unto us . The zeal of which affection tending to ease my persons , and knit their hearts unto us , i embrace with a princely care far above all earthly treasures . I esteem my people's love , more than which i desire not to merit ; and God that gave me here to sit , and placed me over you , knows that i never respected myself , but as your good was concerned in me : yet what dangers , what practices , and what perils i have passed , some , if not all of you know , but none of these things do move me , or ever made me fear , but it is God that hath delivered me . And in my governing this land , i have ever set the last judgement day before mine eyes , and so to rule , as i shall be judged and answer before a higher judge , to whose judgement-seat i do appeal in that , never thought was cherished in my heart that tended not to my people's good . And if my princely bounty have been abused , and my grants turned to the hurt of my persons contrary to my will and meaning , or if any in authority under me have neglected , or converted what i have committed unto them , i hope God will not lay their culps to my charge . To be a King , and were a crown , is a thing more glorious to them that see it , than it is pleasant to them that bear it : for myself , i never was so much enticed with the glorious name of a King , or the royal authority of a Queen , as delighted that God hath made me his instrument to maintain his truth and glory , and to defend this kingdom from dishonour , damage , tyranny , and oppression . But should i ascribe any of these things unto myself , or my sexly weakness , i were not worthy to live , and of all most unworthy of the mercies i have received at God's hands : but to God only and and wholly all is given and ascribed . The cares and trouble of a crown i cannot more fitly resemble , than to the drugs of a learned physician , perfumed with some aromatical savour , or to bitter pills gilded over , by which they are made more acceptable or less offensive , which indeed are bitter and unpleasant to take ; and for mine own part , were it not for conscience sake to discharge the duty that God hath laid upon me , & to maintain his glory , and keep you in safety , in mine own disposition i should be willing to resign the place i hold to any other , and glad to be freed of the glory with the labours : for it is not my desire to live or reign longer , than my life & reign shall be for your good . And though you have had and May have many mightier and wiser Princes sitting in this seat , yet you never had , nor shall have any that will love you better . 

Thus Mr. speaker , i commend me to your loyal loves , and yours to my best care , and your further counsels ; and i pray you Mr. controullor , and Mr.  secretary , and you of my council , that before these gentlemen depart into their countries you bring them all to kiss my hand . 

London , printed by tho. Milbourn , and are to be sold at his house in Jewen-street . 







