The censure of the Rota upon mr Milton's book , entitled , the ready and easy way to establish a free commonwealth . 

die lunae 26.  Martij , 1660.  ordered by the Rota , that m. Harrington be desired to draw up a narrative of this days proceeding upon Mr.  Miltons book , called , the ready and easy way , &c.  and to cause the same to be forthwith printed and published , and a copy thereof to be sent to Mr. Milton . 

Trundle Wheeler , clerk to the Rota . 

London , printed by Paul giddy , printer to the Rota , at the sign of the windmill in Turne-againe lane . 

1660.  

the censure of the Rota upon Mr.  Milton's book , entitled , a ready and easy way to establish a free commonwealth . 

Sir , 

I am commanded by this ingenious convention of the Rota , to give you an account of some reflections that they have lately made upon a treatise of yours , which you call , the ready and easy way to establish a free commonwealth ; in which i must first bespeak your pardon , for being forced to say something , not only against mine own sense , but the interest which both you and i carry on ; for it is enjoined me to acquaint you with all that was said , although i take as little pleasure to repeat it , as you will do to hear it . For whereas it is our usual custom to dispute every thing , how plain or obscure soever , by knocking argument against argument , and tilting at one another with our heads ( As rams fight ) until we are out of breath , and then refer it to our wooden oracle the box ; and seldom any thing , how slight soever , hath appeared , without some patron or other to defend it . I must confess , i never saw bowling-stones run so unluckily against any boy , when his hand has been out , as the ballots did against you , when anything was put to the question , from the beginning of your book to the end . for it was no sooner read over , but a gentleman of your acquaintance said , he wished for your own sake , as well as the cause you contend for , that you had given your book no name ( Like an anabaptist's child ) until it had come to years of discretion , or else that you had got some friend to be gossip , that has a luckier hand at giving titles to books than you have : for it is observed , you have always been very unfortunate that way , as if it were fatal to you to prefix bulls and nonsense to the very fronts of your learned works , as when you call Salmasius , Claudius anonymus , in the very title of that admired piece , which you writ to confute his wife and his maid . As also in that other learned labour of yours , which you style Tetrachordon , that is to say , a fiddle with four strings ; but , as you render it , a fourfold cord , with which you undertake ( Worse than captain Ottor , and Cuthbert the barber ) not to bind , but ( Most ridiculously ) to untie matrimony . But in this book , he said , you were more insufferable ; for you do not only style your declamation , the ready and easy way , as if it were the best or only way , to the disparagement of this most ingenuous assembly , who are confident , they have proposed others much more considerable ; but do very indiscreetly profess in the same place , to compare the excellencies of a commonwealth with the inconveniences and dangers of kingship ; this , he said , was foul play , and worse logic : for , as all conveniences in this world carry their inconveniences with them , to compare the best of one thing with that worst of another , is a very unequal way of comparison . He had observed , that comparisons were commonly made on the wrong side , and so was this of yours , by your own confession . To this , another added , he wondered you did not give over writing , since you have always done it to little or no purpose ; for though you have scribbled your eyes out , your works have never been printed but for the company of chandlers and tobacco-men , who are your stationers , and the only men that vend your labours . He said , that he himself reprieved the whole defence of the persons of England for a groat , that was sentenced to vile Mundungus , and had suffered inevitably ( But for him ) though it cost you much oil and labour , and the rump 300 i. a year , to whose service it was more properly intended ; although in the close , you pronounce them to be as very rascals as Salmasius , and all the Christian world calls them , if ever they suffered any of their fellow-members to invade the government ( As o. Cromwell and others have since dove ) and confess yourself fooled and mistaken , and all you have written to be false , howsoever you give yourself the second lie in writing for them again . After this , a grave gentleman of the long robe , said , you had broken the heads of all the sages of the law , and played false in the very first word of your treatise . For the parliament of England ( As you call the rump ) never consisted of a packed party of one house , that by fraud and covin had disseazed the major part of their fellows , and forfeited their own right , by abetting the ejectment of the whole house of peers , and the greater part of their own ( Which was always understood to be the whole house ) with whom they had but a joint right . That they had been several times justly dissolved by the army , from whom they really derived their authority ; and the general voices of the persons , in whom they had declared the supreme power to reside ; and their own confession upon record in their journal-book . But this , he said , you stole from patriot Whitlock , who began his declaration for a free state with the same words ; and he wondered you would filch and pilfer nonsense and fallacies , that have such plentiful store of your own growth . Yet this was as true as that which follows , that a great number of the faithfullest of the persons assisted them in throwing off King ship ; for they were a very slight number in respect of the whole , and none of the faithfullest that forswore themselves , to maintain and defend that which they judged dangerous , and resolved to abolish . And therefore they turned regal bondage ( As you word it ) into a free commonwealth , no more justly and magnanimously , than other knights of the post do their feats , by plain downright perjury . And the nation had little reason to trust such men with their liberty or propriety , that had no right to their own ears , but , among the rest of their cheats , had defrauded the very pillory of its due . This being put to the ballot was immediately carried on in the affirmative , without a diffenting pellet . When presently a gentleman , that hath been some years' beyond-seas , said , he wondered you would say any thing so false and ridiculous , as that this commonwealth was the terror and admiration of France itself ; for if that were true , the Cardinal and council were very imprudent to become the chief promoters of it , and strive by all means to uphold that , which they judged to be dangerous to themselves , and for the interest of a nation , which they hate and fear so much as they do us ; for if this free state be so terrible to them , they have been very unwise in assisting it to keep out the King all this while ; especially if they saw the persons of Paris and Bordeaux disposed ( As you say ) to imitate us , which appears very strange ; for by their history , any man would judge we had catched the disease of them . As for our actions abroad , ( Which you brag of ) he said , he never heard of anywhere he was , until o. Cromwell reduced us to an absolute monarchy under the name of a free state ; and then we beat the potent and flourishing republic of the united provinces . but for our actions at home , he had heard abroad , that they savoured much of Goeth and Vandal barbarism , if pulling down of churches , and demolishing the noblest monuments in the land , both public and private , ( Beside religion and all laws , human and divine ) May amount to so much . And yet , he said , he granted what you affirm , that they were not unbecoming the rising of a glorious commonwealth , for such are usually founded in faction , sedition , rebellion , rapine , and murder . And how much soever you admire the Romans , — ab infami gentem deducis asylo , if you remember , they were at first but a refuge for thieves and murderers . In all Asia , Africa , and the new world , there is no such thing as a republic , nor ever was ; but only that of Carthage , and some paltry Greek colonies upon the skirts of Asia minor ; and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 commonwealth there have been a hundred King  world , which argues , they should be the more agreeable to mankind . He added , commonly republics arise from unworthy causes , not fit to be mentioned in history ; and that he had heard many persons of honour in Flanders affirm , that it was not the tyranny of Spain , nor the cruelty of Duke d' Alva , nor the blood of their nobility , nor religion , nor liberty , that made the Dutch cast off their obedience to their Prince ; but one penny excise laid upon a pound of butter , that made them implacably declare for a commonwealth . That the Venetians were banished into a free state by Atila , and their glorious liberty was at first no other , than he May be said to have that is turned out of his house . That the Romans were cookolded into their freedom , and the Pisans Trepand into theirs by Charles the eighth . That as commonwealths sprung from base originals , so they have ruined upon as slight occasions . That the same Pisans , after they had spent all they had upon a freak of liberty , were sold ( Like cattle ) by Lewis the 12 . The Venetians hectored , and almost ruined by Maximilian the first , a poor Prince , for refusing to lend him money , as they were not long before by Francisco Sforza about a bastard . The Florentines utterly enslaved for spoiling an embossador's speech , and disparaging Petro do Medici's fine livereys . The Genoeses — but as he was going on , he was interrupted by a gentleman that came in and told us , that Sir Arthur Hazlerig , the Brutus of our republic , was in danger to be torn in pieces ( Like a Shrove-tuesday bawd ) by the boys in Westminster-hall ; and if he had not shown himself as able a footman as he that cudgeled him , he had gone the way of doctor lamb infallibly . This set all the company a-laughing , and made the traveller forget what he was saying . After a little pause , a learned gentleman of this society stood up , and said , he could not but take notice of one absurdity in your discourse , and that is , where you speak of liberty gloriously fough for , and kingly thraldom abjured by the persons , &c. for if by liberty , you mean commonwealth , ( As you do ) there was never any such thing , as either the one , or the other ; unless you will state the quarrel at the end of the war , which is very senseless , and directly contrary to all oaths and engagements : or can prove that hanging , drawing , and quartering of some of the persons , and selling others as slaves , for taking up arms in all parts of the nation for the King , are abjurations of his authority ; and he wondered , you could be so weak , or impudent to play foul in matters of fact , of which there are so many thousands witnesses to disprove you . But he was of opinion , that you did not believe yourself , nor those reasons you give in defence of commonwealth , but that you are swayed by something else , as either by a stork-like fate , ( As a modern protector-poet calls it , because that foul is observed to live nowhere but in commonwealths ) or because , you have unadvisedly scribbled yourself obnoxious , or else you fear such admirable eloquence as yours , would be thrown away under a monarchy , ( As it would be ) though of admirable use in a popular government , where orators carry all the rabble before them : for who knows to how cheap a rate this goodly eloquence of yours , ( If well manadged ) Might bring the price of sprats , as no wiser orators than yourself have done heretofore , in the petty factions , Greek republics , whom you chiefly imitate ; for all your politics are derived from the works of declaimers , with which sort of writers , the ancient commonwealths had the fortune to abound , who left many things behind them in favour , or flattery of the governments they lived under , and disparagement of others , to whom they were in opposition , of whom we can affirm nothing certain , but that they were partial , and never meant to give a true account of things , but to make them finer or worse than they really are ; of which men , one of their own commonwealth poets , gives a just character , by sorting them among the worst of men . 

— {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} , 
{non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} — 
All which you have outgone , ( According to your talon ) in their several waves , for you have done your feeble endeavour to rob the church , of the little which the rapine of the most sacrilegious persons hath left , in your learned work against tithes ; you have slandered the dead , worse than envy itself , and thrown your dirty outrage , on the memory of a murdered Prince , as if the hangman were but your usher . These have been the attempts of your stiff formal eloquence , which you arm accordingly , with any thing that lies in your way , right , or wrong , not only begging , but stealing questions , and taking every thing for granted , that will serve your turn ; for you are not ashamed to rob o. Cromwell himself , and make use of his canting with signal assistances from heaven , and answering condescensions : the most impious Mahometan docttrine , that ever was vented among Christians , and such as will serve as well to justify any prosperous villainy amongst men . He said , when God punishes a nation for sin , the executiones of his judgements , are commonly but malefactors reprieved , as they are usually among men ; for when he punished the Israelites for idolatry , he made use of greater idolaters than themselves : and when he afflicts a persons for their disobedience , to a just government , and fantastic longing after imaginary liberty , it is with infallible slavery , for their deliverers always prove their tyrants . This the Romans found true , for they had no sooner banished their Kings , but they were in few years glad to banish themselves , from the tyranny and oppression of their patriots , the assertors of their liberty , and that very contest furnished their free-state with sedition , and civil war for 500 years , and never ended , until they were reduced to an absolute tyranny , under the power of that faction , that took upon it to vindicate their liberty ; he added , that he could not but smile at one thing you said , and that is , that King and Bishops will encroach upon our consciences , until we are forced to spend over again all that we have spent , and fight over again all that we have fought , &c.  For if you did not look very like a cunning man , no would believe you , nor trust your predictions of the future , that give so ill an account of things past . But he held you very unwise to blab any such thing , for that party you call , we have gained so abundantly much more than they have spent , that they desire nothing more , then to fight over the same fights again , at the same rate ; and if you could but make your words good , he would undertake , they should be the first men that should set Bishops about your consciences : for how vile soever you make the blood of faithful English men , they have made such good markets of it , that they would be glad at any time to broach the whole nation at the same price , and affored the treasure of miraculous deliverances , ( As you call it ) into the bargain . This he added , was easier to be understood then your brand of gentilism , upon king-ship , for which you rest scripture most unmercifully , to prove , that though Christ said , his kingdom was not of this world , yet his commonwealth is . For if , the text which you quote , the Kings of the gentiles exercise lordship over them , and they that exercise authority over them , are called benefactors : but it shall not be so among you , &c. be to be understood of civil government , ( And to infer commonwealth ( As you will have it right or wrong ) and not to be meant of his spiritual reign , of which he was then speaking , and expressly calls so ; you must prove that he erected a republic of his apostles , and that notwithstanding the scripture , everywhere calls his government the kingdom of heaven , it ought to be corrected , and rendered the commonwealth of heaven , or rather the commonwealth of this world ; and yet the text , does as well prove benefactors heathenish as Kings , for if our saviour had meant to brand kingship with any evil character , he would never have styld himself King of the Jews , King of heaven , King of righteousness , &c. as he frequently does , but nowhere a state-holder , or keeper of the liberties . 

To this , a young gentleman made answer , that your writings are best interpreted by themselves , and that he remembered in that book , wherein you fight with the King's picture , you call Sir Philip Sydnes , Princes Pamela , who was born and bred of Christian parents in England ; a heathen woman , and therefore , he thought that by heathonish , you meant English , and that in calling kingship , heathenish , you inferred , it was the only proper and natural government of the English nation , as it hath been proved in all ages . To which another objected , that such a sense was quite contrary to your purpose , to which he immediately replied ; that it was no new thing , with you to write that , which is as well against us for your purpose : after much debate , they agreed to put it to the ballot , and the young gentleman carried it without any contradiction . That done , a gentleman of good credit here , taking occasion from the former discourse , said , you had shown yourself as able a divine , as a statesman ; for you had made as politic provision for spiritual , as civil liberty in those pious and orthodox , ( Though seeming absurd and contradictory ) grounds you have laid down in order thereunto , which being rightly interpreted , do say , or by consequence infer thus much . That the church of Christ ought to have no head upon earth , but the monster of many heads , the multitude , who are the only supreme judges of all matters that concern him ; a privilege they claimed , when he was upon earth , when they took upon them to condemn him , and cried crucifige : that all Christian laws and ordinances have a coercive power , to see themselves put in execution , and yet they ought to be subject to every man's will and humour , ( Which you call his best light ) and no man to them but in his own sense . That the scripture only ought to interpret itself , ( Just as it can read itself ) and every man is to take the interpretation in such a sense , as best suits with his own capacity , or his occasions ; that every man May do what he pleases in matters of religion , but only those that are in authority , who ought not to meddle in such matters , as being of so different a nature from their cognizance , ( Or any other ) that if it be their will to command the only true religion to be observed , it presently becomes inchristian inhuman , and barbarous . That no man can serve God , nor save his own soul , but in a commonwealth , in this certainty , you go after your own invention , for no man ever heard it before : but if it should be true , it is a sad thing to think , what is become of the apostles themselves , and all the saints in the primitive times , when there was never a Christian commonwealth in the world ? That any man May turn away his wife , and take another as oft as he pleases , as you have most learnedly proved upon the fiddle , and practised in your life and conversation , for which you have achieved the honour to be styld the founder of a sect.  All this you call liberty of conscience , and Christian liberty , which you conclude no government is more inclinable , not only to favour , but protect , than a free commonwealth . In this , ( He said ) you say right ; for it is notorious enough , that since we have been but called a commonwealth , such pious doctrines as these , have been so wonderfully propagated , that England does now abound with new Christians , no less than Spain did of late years , and of the same mongrel breed ; all which agree in nothing , but the extripation of Christian religion , and subversion of government , to which your discipline does naturally conduce . For certainly , the most ready and easy way to root out religion , is to render it contemptible , and ridiculous , which cannot be sooner done then by giving licence , and encouragement to all manner of frenzies , that pretend to new discoveries in matters of faith , these will quickly make it become a sport and mockery to the persons , until it be utterly extinct ; and this , some of the church of Rome found true , who give a greater check to the growth of reformation , by clothing some of the new professers in fools coats , and exposing them to the derision of the multitude , then by persecuting , and putting thousands to death . And this is the way you go which will never fail you , as long as there are fools and mad men to carry on the work . And with this if you could but introduce the wholesome cannons of the council of Munster it would make an admirable model for the ecclesiastical part of the republic , if it were not for one unlucky circumstance , and that is that Knipper Dolling proclaimed John of Leyden King , and not state-holder . This ( He said ) was an unhappy mistake and no less out of your way then that of the fift monarchy men , who would have been admirable for your purpose if they had but dreamt of a fift free-state . 

By this time they began to grow weary of your perpevall falsehoods and mistakes , and a worthy knight of this assembly stood up and said that if we meant to examine all the particular fallacies and flaws in your writing we should never have done , he would therefore ( With leave ) deliver his judgement upon the whole , which in brief was thus . That it is all windy foppery from the beginning to the end , written to the elevation of that rabble and meant to cheat the ignorant . That you fight always with the flat of your hand like a retorician , and never contract the logical fist . That you trade altogether in universals the region of deceits and fallacy , but never come so near particulars , as to let us know which among diverse things of the same kind you would be at . For you admire commonwealths in general , and cry down kingship as much at large , without any regard to the particular constitutions which only make either the one or the other good or bad , vainly supposing all flavery to be in the government of a single person , and nothing but liberty in that of many , which is so false that some kingdoms have had the most perfect form of commonwealths as ours had , and some republics have proved the greatest tyrannies , as all have done at one time or other . For many if they combine have more latitude to abuse power then a single person , and less sense of shame , conscience , or honour to restrain them , for what is wickedly done by many is owned by none , where no man knows upon whom in particular to fix it . And this we have found true by experience in your patriots and assertors ( As you call them ) for no one person could ever have done half the mischief they have done , nor outlived the infamy they have suffered without any sense of shame . Beside this , as all your politics reach but the outside and circumstances of things and never touch at realties , so you are very solicitous about weeds as if they were charms , or had more in them then what they fignifie : for no conjurer's devil is more concerned in a spell , than you are in a mere word , but never regard the things which it serves to express . For you believe liberty is safer under an arbitrary unlimited power by virtue of the name commonwealth , then under any other government how just or restrained soever if it be but called kingship . And therefore very prudently you would have the name parliament abolished , because it signifies a parley of our Commons with their Norman Kings . But in this you are too severe a Draco to punish one word for holding correspondence with another , when all the liberty you talk so much of consists in nothing else but mere words . For though you brag much of the people's managing their own affairs , you allow them no more share of that in your Utopia ( As you have ordered it ) then only to set up their throats and bawl ( Instead of every three years , which they Might have done before ) once in an age , or oftener , as an old member drops away , and anew one is to succeed , not for his merit or knowledge in state affairs , but because he is able to bring the greatest and most deep mouthed pack of the rabble into the field ; a more wise and equal way ( In your opinion ) of choosing counsellors , than any King is capable of . But he added , you had done worst of all , where you are most like yourself , and that is in that false and malicious aspersion of popish & Spanish counsels which you cast on the present King . For it is well known to all the world , he hath preferred his conscience before three crowns , and patiently endured to live so many years in exile , rather than change his religion ; which if he would have done , or been moved with such counsels , he Might long since have procured all the forces of the Catholic world upon us , whereas it cannot be denied of his greatest opposers , that they are so jealous of their ill-gotten purchases bought with their crimes , that rather be in danger of losing a pig , they would ( With the gergosens ) desire Christ to depart out of their coasts . After this said , he moved the assembly that i Might be desired to deliver my judgement upon the book , as he and others had done , which being immediatlypast ; i knew not ( Though unwilling ) how to avoid it ; and therefore i told them as briefly as i could , that that which i disliked most in your treatise was , that there is not one word of the balance of propriety , nor the agrarian , nor rotation in it , from the beginning to the end : without which ( Together with a Lord Archon ) i thought i had sufficiently demonstrated , not only in my writings but public exercises in that coffee-house , that there is no possible foundation of a free commonwealth . To the first and second of these ( That is the balance and the agrarian ) you made no objection , and therefore i should not need to make any answer . But for the third ( I mean rotation ) which you implicitly reject in your design to perpetuate the present members , i shall only add this to what i have already said and written on that subject , that a commonwealth is like a great top , that must be kept up by being whipped round , and held in perpetual circulation , for if you discontinue the rotation , and suffer the senate to settle , and stand still , down it falls immediately . And if you had studied this point as carefully as i have done , you could not but know , there is no such way under heaven of disposing the vicissitudes of command and obedience , and of distributing equal right and liberty among all men , as this of Wheeling , by which ( As Chauser writes ) a single fart hath been equally divided among a whole covent of friars , and every one hath had his just share of the favour . I told then , i could not but be sorry to find so learned a man so ignorant in the nature of government , as to make disproportionate parallels of councils as you do , where you compare the senate of Rome with the grand council of Venice , between which there is no analogy at all : for the senate of Rome was never the supreme power of the persons , as the grand council of Venice is , but merely a council of state . But i wondered most of all at what politic crack in any man's scull the imagination could enter of securing liberty under an oligarchy , seized of the government for term of life , which was never yet seen in the world . The metropolitan of all commonwealths the Roman did but once adventure to trust its whole power and authority in the hands of one council , and that but for two years , and yet they had like to have lost their liberty for ever ; whereas they had frequently in all ages left it wholly in the power of a single person , and found it so far from danger or inconvenience , that the only refuge they had in their greatest extremity was , to create a dictator . But i could not but laugh ( As they all had done ) at the pleasantness of your fancy who suppose our noble patriots , when they are invested for term of life , will serve their country at their own charge : this ( I said ) was very improbable , unless you meant as they do , that all we have is their own , and that to prey and devour is to serve , in which they have appeared so able and industrious , as if they had been made to no other purpose , but , like lobsters , were all claws and belly . For though many laugh at me for accounting 300000l . in wooden ware toward the erecting of a free-state ( In my Oceana ) but a trifle to the whole nation , ) because i am most certain that these little pills the ballots are the only physic that can keep the body politic soluble , and not suffer the humours to settle ) I 'll undertake that if the present members had but a lease of the government during life ( Notwithstanding whatsoever impeachment of waste ) they would raise more out of it to themselves in one year , then that amounts to ; beside the charge we must be at in maintaining of guards to keep the boys of them , and before half the term be expired , they would have it untenantable . To conclude , i told them , you had made good your title in a contrary sense ; for you have really proposed the most ready and easy way to establish downright slavery upon the nation that can possibly be contrived , which will clearly appear to any man that does but understand this plain truth . That wheresoever the power of proposing and debating , together with the power of ratifying , and enacting laws , is entrusted in the hands of any one person , or any one council ( As you would have it ) that Governnent is inevitable arbitrary and tyrannical , because they May make whatsoever they please lawful or unlawful . And that tyranny hath the advantage of all other that hath law and liberty among the instruments of servitude . 

J. h.  
















