Several proposals humbly tendered to the consideration of those that are in authority , for the ease , security , & prosperity of this commonwealth . 

By William Coal , a constant asserter of the rights and privileges of the persons , and opposer of the late tyranny and apostasy . 

Nehemiah ch. 5. vers. 14 , 15. &c.  

i and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor . 

but the former governors that had been before me , were chargeable unto the persons , and had taken of them bread and wine , besides forty shekels of silver : yea , even their servants bare rule over the persons : but so did not i , because of the fear of God , &c.  



London : printed mdclix . 

several proposals humbly tendered to the consideration of those that are in authority . 

1.  That it would be very much for the security of the nation , and satisfaction of the honest party , to have a review of all the officers in the commonwealth ; that so all those that have been put in employments chiefly to serve the lusts and ends of the late single person , and in their respective places to be informers , pimps , and trapans , both to entrap , and ensnare , those that were assertors of the native rights , May be expunged ; and that the fawnings and flatteries of time-serving men ( Who are terrae filii , sons of the earth , and will serve the worst of tyrants in the worst of wickedness , to satisfy their covetous and ambitious spirits ) May not be credited . 

2.  That men May be employed not on principles of favour , but from principles of ability and integrity ; and that plurality of offices , either civil or military , May be laid aside : that so those men that are brought low , either by sufferings for their constancy , or by loss of trade in these sad times , May find in some measure , a way open , to procure a livelihood for their families . 

3.  That in collection of customs and excise , it is convenient , that men of ability , and affability , May be employed , who May also be able to inform the merchants and others , why this present parliament is yet enforced to continue these great burdens ? and who was the occasion thereof ; which will much cool and qualify the heat , that at present hath much exasperated the persons of this nation against it , by the imperious carriage of insulting spirits ; especially if they May have assurance , that the excise ( Which is the bane of all trade and commerce ) May in short time cease . 

4.  That in regard of the poverty of the nation , there May be care taken , to collect all public monies at as cheap a rate as May be , and that whereas some men have vast sums given for salaries heretofore , it was more from a principle of design than necessity , that so their mercenary spirits Might be obliged to destroy their country's rights , and keep a strict hand and eye over the constant honest party : if there be care taken in this business , there will be many thousand pounds yearly added to the public treasury . 

5.  That some men of ability and activity May be employed , superintendents or overseers of the navies stores in Chattam , Porsmouth , and Plymouth , who May : if they are able and honest , save the state above 40000 l. per annum , it being a practice in most of the officers to comply and connive at one another's offences ; whereby timber , cables , sails , powder , cordage , provisions , &c. are usually sold by officers in great quantities . 

6.  That the number of officers , especially of the custom and excise , and value of their salaries May be regulated and lessened ; for that in many places the salaries of the custom-officers exceeds the receipts . 

7.  That the farming of the custom and excise May forthwith cease ; which is so cruelly executed , that there is a general outcry against it throughout the three nations , which much endangereth the peace of the commonwealth . 

8.  That there are 150 sail of English ships employed the less yearly by the means of Martin Noel's farming the custom of coals , which very much lesseneth the number of shipping , and prejudiceth the increase of mariners , which is of a very ill consequence ; for that the shipping are England's walls ; and sailors , the garrison to defend them . 

9  That it is of considerable importance , to employ an able public-spirited person to be governor of the isle of Barbadoes , which at present is , and so like to be , a trade of great advantage for the expense of the manufactures of this commonwealth , if the said governor shall wisely and uprightly , according to the act of trade made by this present parliament , prevent the importation of the manufactures of Holland and other countries , at which there hath been of late ( As is generally reported ) a great connivance either through bribery , or neglect . 

10.  That it will be of very great consequence to the increase of shipping and navigation , ( In some speedy time ) to make some free ports in England , whereby we shall be able to equal and match the Dutch in the trade of the zound and baltique-seas , and equal them with magazines of goods to furnish all parts at as cheap a rate , as the aforesaid Dutch or Hamburgers shall be able to do . 

11.  That there May be a survey of all the penal statute laws of the land , and a brief collection of them that are profitable and necessary , for the well and peaceable government of this commonwealth , owned by this supreme authory , and all those that are grounded on principles of tyranny and oppression ; & repugnant to the laws of God and reason , and unnecessary or vexatious May be exploded : and that they that are owned May be printed in one volume , that so the persons May know what is their duty , and not be punished by traps and snares of absolete laws , through the malice or subtlety of corrupt judges or justices , it being a desperate and cruel principle for the rulers to require obedience to laws that the persons are not capable to understand , and a known maxim that a multitude of laws are a multitude of fetters to enslave the ignorant , and destroy the simple hearted . 

12.  That seeing the whole commonwealth is in a lamentable condition of poverty , trade almost utterly lost , and thousands of poor ready to starve , let piety , pity , and desire of true renown persuade those that have thousands and hundred yearly means , to forbear sallaryes for some years , that so the persons May have food , and the commonwealth by their examples be encouraged and invited to charity and pity . This noble and true Christian practice and example was acted by Nehemiah , whose pattern i earnestly beseech our present lawmakers to imitate , in freeing this commonwealth from bondage , slavery , and tyranny ; God forbid they should follow Jehu , who destroyed Ahab's house , only to seat himself and his posterity in the throne . 

Finis . 







