Twelve queries humbly presented to the serious consideration of the high court of parliament . About the two soule-oppressing yokes of a forced maintenance and ministry , that have more oppressed the consciences of the knowing and godly persons of this nation , than all the tyranny either of the King or Bishops beside . 

First , whether it is warrantable for magistrates to force all the persons in a nation , city or town ( Some of them being godly , others being not , yet discerned to be so ) into one way of church-communion , and to submit unto one and the same ministry . 

2 secondly , whether it is yea or no the duty of such as fear the Lord in a parish or parishes near adjacent , to join themselves together , to walk in church-communion apart from those that yet appear ungodly . 

3 thirdly , whether it is the duty of such a persons to choose a minister one or more , such as they are persuaded in their consciences are faithful , and able likewise to edify and build them up , and also to instruct such poor souls as shall come in among them to hear . 

4 fourthly , when a persons are at the charges to maintain such a ministry . Whether it is not a great oppression to force them to maintain another parish minister , whether they judge him worthy or not . 

5 fifthly , whether it is not a sin in magistrates to force upon any persons a minister , of whom their consciences are not satisfied : which if it were an evil in the Bishops ( As all our zealous ministers have said ) why then is it not as great a sin in magistrates now ? 

6 sixthly , whether it is according to the appointment of Jesus Christ , for magistrates to force from the persons a maintenance for the ministry ; and if so , in what text of scripture it is to be found . 

7 seventhly , whether it is a probable way or means to advance the gospel , to force a maintenance for the ministry , or whether it is not rather a means whereby to foster an idle , proud , and sluggish ministry . 

8 eighthly , which be the most watchful , painful , and profitable preachers at this day . Namely those that have nothing but by a voluntary contribution , or those that usually go to law for maintenance . 

9 ninthly , whether it can be expected that such a ministry will ever work any effect upon the souls of such as are forced to maintain it against their wills . 

10 tenthly , when a man can take a forced maintenance from him or them , on whom his ministry never wrought so far as to make them willing to give it . Whether this doth not give just cause to doubt that this man seeks the fleece rather than the flock . And whether a wise man would not suffer hard things , rather than commit his soul , to the care of such a ministry , or help to maintain it . 

11 eleventhly , whether doth the prophet Micah in his third chap. and fifth verse . describe a true ministry or no , in these words : thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my persons to err , that bite with their teeth , and cry peace , and he that putteth not into their mouths , they even prepare war against him . 

12 twelfthly , the premises considered , whether it be not a duty incumbent upon the magistrates ( While the opportunity is in their hands ) to break the neck of those Antichristian yokes aforesaid , & the only way to glad the hearts of all God's persons , and to be called the repairers of Israel's breaches . 

London , printed for Samuel Howes in Popes-head alley , 1653.  







