Scotland's public acknowledgement of God's just judgement upon their nation for their frequent breach of faith , leagves , and solemn oaths made to their neighbours of England , in former ages , to gratify their treacherous confederates of France . 

Recorded in their own public liturgy , printed at Edinburgh by Thomas Bassandine , anno dom. 1575. page 54. 57 58. under this title , prayers used in the churches of Scotland in the time of their persecution by the Frenchmen ( In the year 1560. ) from whose tyranny and vassalage , they were then delivered by the free brotherly assistance and forces of the English , to whom they had been formerly so perfidious . 

Published to prevent the like breach of solemn leagues , oaths , and covenants between both nations now ( For fear of of incurring the like , or a worse judgement , ) by a wellwisher to both kingdoms . 

But now , oh Lord , the dangers which appear , and the trouble which increaseth , by cruel tyranny of forsworn strangers , compelleth us to complain before the throne of thy mercy , and to crave of thee protection and defence against their most unjust persecution . That nation , oh Lord , for whose pleasure , and defence of whom , we have offended thy majesty , and violated our faith , * oft breaking the leagues of unity , and concord which our Kings and governors have contracted with our * neighbours , that nation , oh Lord , for whose alliance our fathers and predecessors have shed their blood , and we ( Whom now by tyranny they oppress ) have oft sustained the hazard of battle , that nation finally , to whom always we have been faithful , now after then long practised deceit , by manifest tyranny do seek our destruction : 

worthily and justly May thou , oh Lord , give us to be slaves unto such tyrants ; because , for the maintenance of their friendship , we have not feared to break our solemn oaths , made unto others , to the great dishonour of thine holy name ; and therefore justly Mayest thou punish us by the same nation , for whose pleasure we feared not to offend thy divine majesty . In thy presence , oh Lord , we lay for ourselves no kind of excuse , but for thy dear son Jesus Christ his sake , we cry for mercy , pardon , and grace ; thou knowest , oh Lord , that their crafty wits in many things have abused our simplicity : for , under pretence of the maintenance of our liberty , they have sought , and have found the way ( Unless thou alone confound their counsels ) to bring us in their perpetual bondage , &c.  

This text needs no commentary : the sum of it is : national perjury will certainly 〈◊〉 punished with national misery ; and those who break their solemn oaths , and leagues wi•• their neighbour brethren , to gratify any other nation or party , shall by divine justice be betraed , enslaved , or endangered to be destroyed by that very nation and party , for whose ends they th•• violated their oaths and covenants . 

A strong engagement both to our brethren of Scotland and us , to take heed of covenant breaking one with another , least thereby we expose ourselves to heaven's vengeance , and to th•tyranny and slavery of the common enemy . 

Amos 1. 9 10.  

Thus saith the Lord ; for three transgressions of Tyrus , and for four , i will not turn away the punishment thereof , 〈◊〉 they delivered up the whole captivity to Edom , and remembered not the brother• covenant . therefore will i send a fire on the wall of Tyrus , which shall devour the palaces thereof . 



Printed at London for m. s. 1646.  





* see tho. Walsingham , hist. ang. an. 1383 p. 133.  & antiquitates , eccles. brit. p. 295. 296.  * to wit , of England . note . 




