THE BOOK OF MARTYRS 

Wherein are set down the names of such Martyrs as suffered persecution , and laid down their lives for witnesse-bearing unto the Gospel of CHRIST JESUS ; drawn down from the Primitive Church , to these later times , especially respecting such as have suffered in this Land under the tyranny of Antichrist , in opposition to Popish Errors . 

LONDON , Printed by I B. 1639.  

A Brief CATALOGVE of such Martyrs as suffered persecution , and laid down their lives for witnesse-bearing unto the Gospel of Christ jesus ; drawn down from the Primitive Church , to these later times , especially respecting such as have suffered in this Land under the tyranny of Antichrist in opposition to Popish Errors . 

I Sing their deaths who dying made death yield , 
By Scriptures sword , & faiths unbatterd shield , 
Whom Satan , men , or monsters could not tame , 
Nor force them to deny their Saviour's Name . 
Evangelists , that did the Gospel write , 
Apostles and brave Martyrs , that did fight 
'Gainst death and hell , and all the power of sin , 
And boldly died eternal life to win . 
john Baptist by King Herod lost his head , 
Who to the world repentance published , 
Our blessed Redeemer in his love did follow , 
And conquered death man's sinful soul to hollow , 
He was the death of death , and he did quell 
The sting and power of Satan , sin , and hell , 
And under his great standard , valiantly , 
A number numberless have dared to die . 
Through bondage , famine , slavery , sword and fire 
Through all divised torments they aspire 
Victoriously to gain th'imortall Crown , 
Of never ending honour and renown . 
Saint Steven was the third that lost his breath , 
And ( for his Master's sake ) was stoned to death : 
And after him in Scripture may be read , 
th' apostle james was brained and butchered . 
Saint Mark th'evangelist in fire did burn , 
And Bartholomew was flayed , yet would not turns 
Saint Andrew like a valiant champion died , 
And ( willing ) on a cross was crucified 
Mathias , Philip , Peter , and Saint Paul , 
Stoned , crucified , beheaded , Martyrs all . 
th' Apostles of their lives , no reckoning make , 
And think them well spent for their Saviors sake 
The Tyrant Emperors , in number ten , 
( Most cruel , barbarous , and inhuman men ) 
Moore Christians by their bloody means did slay 
then for a year five thousand to each day . 
And many Romish Bishops in those days , 
Were Martyred to their high Creator's praise ; 
And though each day so many thousands bleed , 
Yet doubly more and more they daily breed . 
As Camomile grows better being trod , 
So death and tortures draws more unto God. 
Or as the Vine that 's cut and pruned bears more 
In one year , than it did in three before : 
This bloody persecution did outwear 
After Christ's death the first 300. years : 
Thus did the Primitive Church first endure , 
Being Catholic , Apostolic , and pure : 
then over all the world was truly known , 
That Romish Bishops claimed but their own 
In their own Diocese to be chief Pastor . 
And not to be the world's great Lord and Master . 
And now our Britain's glory will I sing , 
From Lucius reign , the world's first Christian King 
Unto these days of happy peaceful state , 
A Catalogue of Martyrs I 'll relate : 
First Vrsulae , and eleven thousand with her , 
All Virgins , for Christ's faith did die together . 
then Hengist with the Saxons hither came , 
Who many killed with sword and furious flame . 
Besides eleven hundred Monks were killed . 
At Bangor Abbey all their bloods were spilled . 
And when the Saxons race to end was run , 
The Danes came in ; and all the Kingdom wone . 
Before whose swords did many thousands fall , 
Which on the name of jesus Christ did call . 
then William Conqueror with a multitude . 
Unto the Normans yoke this Land subdued , 
The Pope then caused all Priests to leave their wives , 
To lead foul Sodomitick single lives . 
then afterwards in second Henry's reign , 
Was saucy Saint Thomas Becket slain ; 
A Popish Saint and Martyr made , because 
He died a traitor to his Sovereign's Laws . 
King Henry and King Richard dead and gone , 
Their brother john ( by right ) ascends the throne , 
Whom all his life the Pope of Rome did vex , 
And with oppressions all the Realm perplex ; 
With candle , book , and bell , he cursed and blessed , 
And Bulls and Legates did the King molest ; 
Until such time he on his knees fell down , 
And to the Pope surrendered up his Crown . 
At last , because he durst the Pope withstand , 
He died empoisoned by a Friar's hand . 
When thus by treason they had killed King john , 
then the third Henry England's Crown put on : 
then England bought the Romish doctrine dear , 
It cost her threescore thousand marks a year . 
For Agnus Dei , pardons , Peter pence , 
For which the Pope had all this coin from hence : 
King Henry died , than Edward took the sway , 
His son and grandchild , England did obey , 
The first of them called Long shanks , conquests wone , 
Lost by Carnarvan his unhappy son , 
Who by his Queen was in a dungeon cast , 
Till ( being murdered ) sadly breathed his last . 
Edward the third , a brave victorious King , 
Did Frenchmens' pride into subjection bring . 
Richard the second next to Reign began , 
Who lost more than his royal Grandsire wan . 
then began john Wiekliffe boldly to begin 
To preach against Antichrist , that man of sin ; 
Who many trouble's stoutly did abide , 
Yet ( spite the Pope ) he naturally died ; 
And being dead , from out his grave was turned , 
And had his martyred bones to ashes burned ; 
Which ashes they did cast into a brook , 
Because he had the Romish faith forsook . 
Yet whilst the second Richard here survived , 
no Martyrs were by fire of life deprived . 
Henry the fourth was in the Throne invested , 
In whose reign many were too much molested . 
And William Sautre first his life did give 
Through flames of fire , who now in heaven doth live . 
The next john Badby in the furious flame , 
And William Thorp , but won immortal fame . 
then the fifth Henry , a victorious Prince , 
The Realm of France did conquer and convince . 
The good Lord Cobham then ( Oldcastle named ) 
By Popish Priests an Heretic was proclaimed , 
Was hanged and burned by the unlawful doom , 
Of Satan's servants , slaves to hell and Rome . 
And leaving some unnamed , john Browne Esquire , 
john Beverly a Preacher died in fire . 
Besides a number from the Lollards tower , 
Racks , tortures , halters , and the flame devour . 
john Hus a glorious Martyr of the Lord , 
Was in Bohemia burned for God's Word . 
And reverend jerom did to Constance come , 
From Prage , and stoutly suffered martyrdom . 
In Smithfield one john Claidon suffered death , 
And with him Richard Turming lost his breath , 
At this time sixteen godly folks in Kent , 
The Antichristian vassals did torment . 
then death cut off the fifth King Henry's reign , 
The Crown the sixth King Henry did obtain . 
And William Tailor a true zealous Priest , 
Did pass through fire unto his Saviour Christ. 
Good Richard Hoveden , with him William White , 
Each unto God ( through fire ) did yield his spirit , 
Duke Humphrey ( though no Martyr ) killed in 's bed , 
And Richard Wych a Priest was burned dead . 
then Saintlike good King Henry was deposed , 
By the fourth Edward in the Tower enclosed : 
then Edward fled , and Henry once again , 
By Warwick's power the Kingdom did obtain . 
Thus did the various state of human things , 
Make Kings of Captive , and of Captives Kings : 
Until at last King Edward turned back , 
Brought Henry's royalty to final wrack : 
In whose reign john Goose ( as the story saith ) 
Was the first Martyr , burned for Christ's Faith. 
King Henry in the Tower was stabbed to death , 
And Edward yieldeth up his life and breath , 
His son young Edward , of that name the fifth , 
Whom the third Richard from his life did lift . 
Who by foul murders , blood , and tyranny , 
Usurped the throne of England's Monarchy ; 
Till valiant Henry of that name the seven , 
Killed him , and made uneven England even : 
then first joan Broughton , & a man called Babrane 
By Faith ( thorough fire ) went to old father Abram . 
An old man was in Swithfield burned , because 
He did resist against the Roman Laws . 
One jerom hanged and burned on the Gallows , 
In Florence , with two other of his fellows : 
And William Tilsworth , Thomas Bernard , and 
james Morton , cause they did the Pope withstand 
Burned all , and Father Rogers , and old Rhine , 
Did die by fire , a better life to gain . 
One Thomas Novice , and one Thomas Chase , 
Died constant Martyrs by the heavenly grace . 
A woman and a man called Laurence Guest , 
By death gained everlasting life and rest : 
Besides a number past men's reckoning up , 
For jesus sake drank of afflictions cup. 
Some carried faggots through a world of mock 
Some racked , some pined , some fettered in the stocks : 
Some naked stripped and scourged with a lash , 
For their rejecting of the Romish trash . 
Some branded in the cheek did always bear 
The badge and mark of their Redeemer dear . 
Thus the insulting tyrannising Pope , 
With cursings , faggot , fire , and sword and rope . 
Did force the souls , and consciences of men , 
To run despairing to damnation's den . 
And they that valiantly his power withstood , 
Did seal their resolution with their blood . 
Before his triple , treble , trouble Crown , 
( In adoration ) Emperors must fall down , 
Were they as high as any Caesar born , 
To kiss his feet they must not hold it scorn . 
Henry the sixth the Emperor did fall down , 
Whom with his feet Pope Celestine did crown . 
Henry the fourth his Empress and young son , 
All three to Rome did barefoot go and run : 
And three days so , these three did all attend 
His holiness , a godless ear to lend , 
Which afterwards was granted on condition , 
That he should give his crown up in submission , 
Pandulphus the Popes Legate , with a frown , 
Did make King john of England yield his crown . 
King Henry of that name the second , he 
Kneeled down , and kissed the Romish Legates knee . 
The Emperor when Pope Adrian was to ride , 
Did hold his stirrup on the mere wrong side , 
For which his Holiness in angry sort , 
Disdainfully did check the Emperor for 't . 
When as the Pope doth ride in Cope of gold , 
Kings ( like to footmen ) must his bridle hold : 
In pomp he must be born upon men's shoulders , 
With glorious show , amazing the beholders . 
Whilst Kings and Princes must before him go , 
To usher him in his vainglorious show : 
This being true , as no man can deny , 
Those that will not be blind may plainly spy , 
That their insulting proud commanding Priest , 
Is absolute and only Antichrist ; 
H'exalts himself above all that 's called God , 
Upon the Emperor's neck he proudly trod : 
He is th'abomination ( void of grace ) 
That mounts himself into the holy place : 
He makes the Princes of the earth drink up , 
And quaff the poison of the cursed cup , 
Who being drunken with the dregss of sin , 
They have his sworn and forsworn vassals been , 
Bewitched with his soul enchanting charms , 
'Gainst one another they have rose in Arms ; 
By foreign and domestic bloody broils , 
Whilst he hath filled his coffers with their spoils : 
His double dealing too too plain appears , 
In setting Christian Princes by the ears , 
Whilst he into his avaricious hands , 
Hath seized their persons , moveables , and lands : 
And as the Christian kings themselves made weak , 
The Turk into their Kingdoms began to break ; 
And thus the Turk and Pope joined with the devil , 
Have been the authors of all Christian evil . 
The second BOOK . 

When the 7th Henry in his grave was laid , 
And the 8th Henry England's Sceptre swayed , 
Rome's bloody persecution raged more 
In England , than in ten Kings reigns before : 
And therefore Reader , in this little Book , 
For every Martyr's name thou must not look : 
But men of chiefest note , respect and fame , 
That died in England , only those I name . 
And first the Papists tyranny began , 
In murdering Richard Hun , a zealous man , 
For being kept in prison by their power , 
They closely hanged him in the Lollards Tower. 
And then they all in general decreed , 
Reporting Hun himself had done the deed . 
And sixteen days just after this was done , 
They burned the foresaid corpse of Richard Hun. 
then to the number of full thirty five , 
The furious flames did all of life deprive ; 
In several places of this woeful Land , 
Because they did the Pope of Rome withstand . 
At which time Thomas Bilney did begin , 
To preach and teach against Antichristian sin ; 
Where in Saint George's Church in Ipswich town 
The Papists from the Pulpit plucked him down 
And as in doleful prison he did lie , 
He put his finger into the flames to try ; 
He proved , & God did give him strength to bear 
His death , to live with his Redeemer dear . 
The next of note was one john Frub , a man 
Of learning great , a Martyr's fame he won . 
then learned Luther , and grave Zwinglius , 
With Calvin , Beza , Oecolampadius , 
All glorious , gracious reverend lamps of light , 
Were instruments to clear bleared England's sight . 
In Flanders William Tindall for God's Word , 
Was sacrificed to glorify the Lord 
john Lambert valiantly his death did take , 
And burned in Smithfield for his Saviour's sake . 
About this time , that honourable man , 
Lord Cromwell , life , and timeless death began ; 
He like an earthquake made the Abbeys fall . 
The Fryeries and the Nunneries all . 
This famous noble , worthy Essex Earl , 
This gem , this jewel , this most Orient Pearl , 
Was for his truth from all he had discarded . 
And with his heads loss , all his Faith rewarded , 
The next of worthy note by fire that died , 
Was good Anne Ayscough , who did strong abide , 
Racks , tortures , & the cruel raging flame , 
To magnify her high Creator's name . 
Then'gan the king's eyes to be opened quite 
Enlightened by the everlasting light . 
He banished superstitious idle fables , 
And packed the Papists hence with all their babbles . 
then Bonner , Gardner , brethren both in evil , 
Factors and actors , bloodhounds for the Devil , 
Their burning fame to infamy soon faded , 
They godless , graceless , were disgraced , degraded . 
The King then having this good work begun , 
He died , and left the Kingdom to his son . 
then reigned young Edward , that sweet princely child . 
By whom all Popery was clean exiled . 
But he too good to live amongst wicked men , 
th' almighty took him hence to heaven again : 
no sooner Edward was laid in his Tomb , 
But England was the slaughter-house of Rome . 
Gardner and Bonner were from prison turned , 
And whom they pleased were either saved or burned , 
Queen Mary imitating lezabel , 
Advanced again the Ministers of hell : 
then tyranny began to tyrannize , 
Tortures and torments than they did device ; 
then Master Rogers with a faith most fervent , 
Was burned , and died ( in Smithfield ) God's true servant . 
Next unto him did Laeurence Sanders die , 
By fire ( for jesus sake ) at Covenerie ; 
He did embrace , and kindly kiss the stake , 
To gain heaven's glory , did the world forsake . 
Good Bishop Hooper was at Gloster burned , 
'Cause he against the Romish doctrine spurned ; 
And Doctor Tayler a true zealous man , 
At Hadley burned , eternal glory wan . 
then Bishop Farrer next his life did spend 
In fire , to gain the life shall never end . 
Next William Flower , first did lose his hand , 
then burned , because he did the Pope withstand 
In Essex , Thomas Hawkes , with faith victorious 
Did die with fire to gain a life most glorious . 
Master John Bradford ( for his Saviour's sake ) 
In Smithfield burned , a godly end did make . 
Two reverend Bishops , Father Latimer , 
And Ridley , each of them a heavenly star , 
Lived in God's fear , and in his favour died ; 
At Oxford burned , and now are glorified . 
John Philpot gladly did the fire embrace , 
And died , and lives in his Redeemers grace . 
then that grave Father , and religious man , 
Archbishop Cranmers' troubles hot began , 
His pomp , his state , his glory , and his pride , 
Was to know jesus , and him crucified : 
He lived a godly Preacher of God's Word , 
And died a glorious Martyr of the Lord 
john Careless in close prison carefully , 
Did change his cares for joys eternally . 
But this small volume cannot well contain , 
One quarter of the Saints in England slain . 
In Henry's reign and mary's , ( cruel Queen ) 
Eight thousand people there hath slaughtered been 
Some by the sword , some hanged , some burned in fire 
Some starved to death in prison all expire : 
Twelve thousand and seven hundred more beside 
Much persecution trouble did abide , 
Some racked , some whipped , some tortured , some in stocks , 
Some doing penance with a world of mocks ; 
Some with an Iron in the faces burned , 
Some out of all their goods to beggary turned . 
Some bar-foot , bearing faggots on their shoulders 
Were made a wondering stock to the beholders : 
All this and more , much more they did endure , 
Because they would not yield to live impure : 
But now to speak the law less cause wherefore , 
And why these people troubled were so sore , 
Because they would not make their plaints and moans 
To senseless images , dead stocks & stones , 
Because they said the sacramental bread , 
Is not the Lord which shall judge quick & dead . 
Because they not believed a Purgatory , 
And held the Pope's decrees an Idle story . 
Because they would not creep unto the cross , 
And change Gods sacred Word for human dross 
Because they held the Mass an Idol soul . 
At once which picked the purse and damned the soul 
Because they knew the Pope and all his crew , 
Hellhounds whom heaven ( in rage ) on earth did spew . 
And in a word , they thus were over-trod , 
Because they truly served the living God. 
This was the main and only cause of all , 
Because they would not offer unto Baal . 
The Pope's outrageous and contagious actor , 
Was Bishop Benner , hell's most truly factor : 
Rome's hangman , & the firebrand of this Realm , 
That with a flood of blood did overwhelm , 
The true believers of Gods holy truth , 
He butchered , not regarding age or youth . 
With him was joined a man almost as i'll , 
Who took delight God's servants blood to spill ; 
Called Steven Gardner , England's Chanceller , 
And Bishop of the See of Winchester : 
These two did strive each other to excel , 
Who should do greatest service unto hell ; 
Until at last God heard his servants cry , 
And each of them did die immediately . 
Thus when jehovah heard the just complaints , 
Of his beloved , poor , afflicted Saints ; 
then this too cruel Pope defending Queen , 
( The bloodiest Princess that this land hath seen ) 
She did decease , and persecution ceased , 
And tired woeful England purchased rest . 
Queen Mary being dead , her welcome death 
Revived our joys in blessed Elizabeth , 
Innumerable were her woes and cares , 
Abundant were the subtle wiles and snares , 
Which Satan and his Ministers oft laid , 
To rave the life of that most harmless maid . 
She was accused , abused , reviled , miscalled ; 
She was from prison unto prison haled : 
Long in the Tower she was close prisoner shut , 
Her loving servants all away were put : 
From thence to Windsor , thence to Woodstock sent , 
Closely mewed up from all the world's content : 
But God whose mercies ever did defend her , 
Did in her greatest sorrows comfort send her . 
He did behold her from his Throne most high , 
And kept her as the apple of his eye , 
Let Hell and Hellhounds still attempt to spill , 
Yet the Almighty guards his servants still . 
And he at last did ease her sorrow's moan , 
And raised her to her lawful awful throne ; 
This royal Deborah , this princely Dame , 
Whole life made all the world admire the same . 
As judith in Bethulia's same was spread , 
For cutting off great Holophernes head : 
So our Eliza stoutly did begin , 
Vntopping and beheading Romish sin , 
She purged the Land of Papistry again , 
She lived beloved of God , admired of men : 
She made the Antichristian Kingdom quake , 
She made the mighty power of Spain to shake : 
As far as Sun or Moon dispersed their rays , 
So far and further went her matchless praise . 
She was at home , abroad , in every part , 
Lodestar and Loadstone to each eye and heart 
Supported only by Gods powerful hand , 
She four and forty years did rule this Land , 
And when she left this royal princely seat , 
She changed earth's greatness to be heavenly great . 
Thus did this western world's great wonder die , 
She fell from height to be advanced more high . 
Terrestrial Kings and Kingdoms all must fade . 
then blessed is she that is immortal made . 
Her death filled woeful England full of fears , 
The Papists longed for change with itching ears . 
For her decease was all their only hope , 
To raise again the doctrine of the Pope . 
But he whose power is all omnipotent , 
Did their unhappy hopeless hopes prevent . 
Succession lawfully did leave the Crown , 
Unto a prince whose virtue and renown , 
And learning doth outstrip all Kings as far , 
As doth the Sun obscure a little star . 
What man ( that is but man ) could baffle more 
Rome's seven headen purple whore , 
How wisely hath he Bellarmine confuted , 
And how divinely hath he oft disputed . 
How zealously he doth God's faith defend , 
How often on God's word he doth attend . 
How clement , pious , and how gracious good , 
Is he , as fits the greatness of his blood . 
Wert not for him , how would the Muses do ? 
He is their pattern , and their patron too . 
He is th'apollo , from whose radiant beams , 
The Quintessence of Poetry out-streames . 
And from the splendour of his piercing rays , 
A world of worthy Writers wins the bays . 
Yet all the worthy virtues so transparent , 
And so well known in him , to be inherent , 
Cannot persuade Papists leave their strife , 
With cursed treasons to attempt his life : 
For when their disputations helped them not , 
They would dispute in a damned powder-plot . 
In which the Romish went beyond the Devil , 
For hell could not invent a plot so evil . 
But he that placed him on his royal throne , 
( The God of Jacob's , judahs' holy one ) 
That God ( for jesus sake ) I do beseech , 
( With humble heart , and with unfeigned speech ) 
That he and his , may Britain's Sceptre sway ; 
Till time , the world , and all things pass away . 
FINIS 







 Daughter of Sir 〈◊〉 Ayscough , Knight  