The tenure of Kings and magistrates : proving , that it is lawful , and hath been held so through all ages , for any , who have the power , to call to account a tyrant , or wicked King , and after due conviction , to depose , and put him to death ; if the ordinary magistrate have neglected , or denied to do it . 

And that they , who of late , so much blame deposing , are the men that did it themselves . 

The author , j. m.  

London , printed by Matthew Simmons , at the gilded lion in Aldersgate street , 1649.  

The tenure of Kings and magistrates . 

If men within themselves would be governed by reason , and not generally give up their understanding to a double tyranny , of custom from without , and blind affections within , they would discern better what it is to favour and uphold the tyrant of a nation . But being slaves within doors , no wonder that they strive so much to have the public state conformably governed to the inward vicious rule , by which they govern themselves . For indeed none can love freedom heartily , but good men ; the rest love not freedom , but licence ; which never hath more scope or more indulgence then under tyrants . Hence is it that tyrants are not oft offended , nor stand much in doubt of bad men , as being all naturally servile ; but in whom virtue and true worth most is eminent , them they fear in earnest , as by right their Masters , against them lies all their hatred and suspicion . Consequently neither do bad men hate tyrants , but have been always readiest with the falsified names of loyalty and obedience , to colour over their base compliances . And although sometimes for shame , and when it comes to their own grievances , of purse especially , they would seem good patriots , and side with the better cause , yet when others for the deliverance of their country , endued with fortitude and heroic virtue , to fear nothing but the curse written against those that do the work of the Lord negligently , would go on to remove , not only the calamities and thraldoms of a persons , but the roots and causes whence they spring , straight these men , and sure helpers at need , as if they hated only the miseries but not the mischiefs , after they have juggled and paltered with the world , bandied and born arms against their King , devested him , disanointed him , nay cursed him all over in their pulpits , and their pamphlets , to the engaging of sincere and real men , beyond what is possible or honest to retreat from , not only turn revolters from those principles , which only could at first move them , but lay the stain of disloyalty , and worse , on those proceedings , which are the necessary consequences of their own former actions ; nor dislliked by themselves , were they managed to the entire advantages of their own faction ; not considering the while that he toward whom they boasted their new fidelity , Counted them accessary , and by those statutes and laws which they so impotently brandish against others , would have doomed them to a traitor's death for what they have done already . 't is true , that most men are apt enough to civil wars and commotions as a novelty , and for a flash , hot and active ; but through sloth or inconstancy , and weakness of spirit either fainting , ere their own pretences , though never so just , be half attained , or through an inbred falsehood and wickedness , betray oft times to destruction with themselves , men of noblest temper joined with them for causes which they in their rash undertakings were not capable of . If God and a good cause give them victory , the prosecution whereof for the most part , inevitably draws after it the alteration of laws , change of government , downfall of Princes with their families ; then comes the task to those worthies which are the soul of that enterprise , to be swett and laboured out amid the throng and noises of vulgar and irrational men . Some contesting for privileges , customs , forms , and that old intanglement of iniquity , their gibberish laws , though the badge of their ancient slavery . Others who have been fiercest against their Prince , under the notion of a tyrant , and no mean incendiaries of the war against him , when God out of his providence and high disposal hath delivered him into the hand of their brethren , on a sudden and in a new garb of allegiance , which their doings have long since canceled ; they plead for him , pity him , extol him , protest against those that talk of bringing him to the trial of justice , which is the sword of God , superior to all mortal things , in whose hand soever by apparent signs his testified will is to put it . But certainly , if we consider who and what they are , on a sudden grown so pitiful , we May conclude , their pity can be no true and Christian commiseration , but either levity and shallowness of mind , or else a carnal admiring of that worldly pomp and greatness , from whence they see him fallen ; or rather lastly a dissembled and seditious pity , feigned of industry to beget new commotions . As for mercy , if it be to a tyrant , under which name they themselves have cited him so oft in the hearing of God , of angels , and the holy church assembled , and there charged him with the spilling of more innocent blood by far , then ever Nero did , undoubtedly the mercy which they pretend , is the mercy of wicked men ; and their mercies , we read , are cruelties ; hazarding the welfare of a whole nation , to have saved one , whom so oft they have termed Agag , and villifying the blood of many Jonathan's that have saved Israel ; insisting with much niceness on the unnecessariest clause of their covenant ; wherein the fear of change , and the absurd contradiction of a flattering hostility had hampered them , but not scrupling to give away for compliments , to an implacable revenge , the heads of many thousand Christians more . 

Another sort there is , who coming in the course of these affairs , to have their share in great actions above the form of law or custom , at least to give their voice and approbation , begin to swerve and almost shiver at the majesty and grandeur of some noble deed , as if they were newly entered into a great sin ; disputing precedents , forms , & circumstances , when the common wealth nigh perishes for want of deeds in substance , done with just and faithful expedition . To these i wish better instruction , and virtue equal to their calling ; the former of which , that is to say instruction , i shall endeavour , as my duty is , to bestow on them ; and exhort them not to startle from the just and pious resolution of adhering with all their assistance to the present parliament and army , in the glorious way wherein justice and victory hath set them ; the only warrants through all ages , next under immediate revelation , to exercise supreme power ; in those proceedings which hitherto appear equal to what hath been done in any age or nation heretofore , justly or magnanimously . Nor let them be discouraged or deterred by any new apostate scarecrows , who under show of giving counsel , send out their barking monitories and momentoes , empty of aught else but the spleen of a frustrated faction . For how can that pretended counsel , be either sound or faithful , when they that give it , see not for madness and vexation of their ends lost , that those statutes and scriptures which both falsely and scandalously , they wrest against their friends and associates , would by sentence of the common adversary , fall first and heaviest upon their own heads . Neither let mild and tender dispositions be foolishly softened from their duty and perseverance with the unmasculine rhetoric of any puling priest or chaplain , sent as a friendly letter of advice , for fashion sake in private , and forthwith published by the sender himself , that we May know how much of friend there was in it , to cast an odious envy upon them , to whom it was pretended to be sent in charity . Nor let any man be deluded by either the ignorance or the notorious hypocrisy and self-repugnance of our dancing divines , who have the conscience and the boldness , to come with scripture in their mouths , glossed and fitted for their turns with a double contradictory sense , transforming the sacred verity of God , to an idol with two faces , looking at once two several ways ; and with the same quotations to charge others , which in the same case they made serve to justify themselves . For while the hope to be made classic and provincial Lords led them on , while pluralities greased them thick and deep , to the shame and scandal of religion , more than all the sects and heresies they exclaim against , then to fight against the King's person , and no less a party of his Lords and Commons , or to put force upon both the houses was good , was lawful , was no resisting of superior powers ; they only were powers not to be resisted , who countenanced the good and punished the evil . But now that their censorious domineering is not suffered to be universal , truth and conscience to be freed , tithes and pluralities to be no more , though competent allowance provided , and the warm experience of large gifts , and they so good at taking them ; yet now to exclude and seize on impeached members , to bring delinquents without exemption to a fair tribunal by the common national law against murder , is now to be no less than Corah , Dathan , and Abiram . he who but erewhile in the pulpits was a cursed tyrant , an enemy to God and saints , laden with all the innocent blood split in three kingdoms , and so to be sought against , is now though nothing penitent or altered from his first principles , a lawful magistrate , a sourane Lord , the Lord's anointed , not to be touched , though by themselves imprisoned . As if this only were obedience , to preserve the mere useless bulk of his person , and that only in prison , not in the field , and to disobey his commands , deny him his dignity and office , everywhere to resist his power but where they think it only surviving in their own faction . 

But who in particular is a tyrant cannot be determined in a general discourse , otherwise then by supposition ; his particular charge , and the sufficient proof of it must determine that : which i leave to magistrates , at least to the uprighter sort of them , and of the persons , though in number less by many , in whom faction least hath prevailed above the law of nature and right reason , to judge as they find cause . But this i dare own as part of my faith , that if such a one there be , by whose commission , whole massacres have been committed on his faithful subjects , his provinces offered to pawn or alienation , as the hire of those whom he had solicited to come in and destroy whole cities and countries ; be he King , or tyrant , or Emperor , the sword of justice is above him ; in whose hand soever is found sufficient power to avenge the effusion , and so great a deluge of inuocent blood . For if all human power to execute , not accidentally but intendedly , the wrath of God upon evil doers without exception , be of God ; then that power , whether ordinary , or if that fail , extraordinary so executing that intent of God , is lawful , and not to be resisted . But to unfold more at large this whole question , though with all expedient brevity , i shall here set down , from first beginning , the original of Kings ; how and wherefore exalted to that dignity above their brethren ; and from thence shall prove , that turning to tyranny they May be as lawfully deposed and punished , as they were at first elected : this i shall do by autorities and reasons , not learned in corners among schisms and heresies , as our doubling divines are ready to calumniate , but fetch 't out of the midst of choicest and most authentic learning , and no prohibited authors , nor many heathen , but mosaical , Christian , orthodoxal , and which must needs be more convincing to our adversaries , presbyterial . 

No man who knows aught , can be so stupid to deny that all men naturally were born free , being the image and resemblance of God himself , and were by privilege above all the creatures , born to command and not to obey : and that they lived so , till from the root of Adam's transgression , falling among themselves to do wrong and violence , and foreseeing that such courses must needs tend to the destruction of them all , they agreed by common league to bind each other from mutual injury , and jointly to defend themselves against any that gave disturbance or opposition to such agreement . Hence came cities , towns and commonwealths . And because no faith in all was found sufficiently binding , they saw it needful to ordain some authority , that Might restrain by force and punishment what was violated against peace and common right : this authority and power of self-defence and preservation being originally and naturally in every one of them , and unitedly in them all , for ease , for order , and least each man should be his own partial judge , they communicated and derived either to one , whom for the eminence of his wisdom and integrity they chose above the rest , or to more than one whom they thought of equal deserving : the first was called a King ; the other magistrates . Not to be their Lords and Masters ( Though afterward those names in some places were given voluntarily to such as had been authors of inestimable good to the persons ) but , to be their deputies and commissioners , to execute , by virtue of their entrusted power , that justice which else every man by the bond of nature and of covenant must have executed for himself , and for one another . And to him that shall consider well why among free persons , one man by civil right should bear authority and jurisdiction over another , no other end or reason can be imaginable . These for a while governed well , and with much equity decided all things at their own arbitrement : till the temptation of such a power left absolute in their hands , perverted them at length to injustice and partiality . Then did they who now by trial had found the danger and inconveniences of committing arbitrary power to any , invent laws either framed or consented to by all , that should confine and limit the authority of whom they chose to govern them : that so man of whose failing they had proof , Might no more rule over them , but law and reason abstracted as much as Might be from personal errors and frailties . When this would nor serve , but that the law was either not executed , or misapplyed , they were constrained from that time , the only remedy left them , to put conditions and take oaths from all Kings and magistrates at their first instalment to do impartial justice by law : who upon those terms and no other , received allegiance from the persons , that is to say , bond or covenant to obey them in execution of those laws which they the persons had themselves made or assented to . And this oft times with express warning , that if the King or magistrate proved unfaithful to his trust , the persons would be disengaged . They added also counsellors and parliaments , not to be only at his beck , but with him or without him , at set times , or at all times , when any danger threatn•d to have care of the public safety . Therefore saith Claudius sesell a French statesman , the parliament was set as a bridle to the King ; which i instance rather , because that monarchy is granted by all to be a far more absolute than ours . That this and the rest of what hath hitherto been spoken is most true , Might be copiously made appear throughout all stories heathen and Christian ; e'en of those nations where Kings and Emperors have sought means to abolish all ancient memory of the people's right by their encroachments and usurpations . But i spare long insertions , appealing to the German , French , Italian , Arragonian , English , and not least the Scottish histories : not forgetting this only by the way , that William the Norman though a conqueror , and not unsworne at his coronation , was compelled a second time to take oath at s. Albans , ere the persons would be brought to yield obedience . 

It being thus manifest that the power of Kings and magistrates is nothing else , but what is only derivative , transferrd and committed to them in trust from the persons to the common good of them all , in whom the power yet remains fundamentally , and cannot be taken from them , without a violation of their natural birthright , and seeing that from hence Aristotle and the best of political writers have defined a King , him who governs to the good and profit of his persons , and not for his own ends , it follows from necessary causes that the titles of souran Lord , natural Lord , and the like , are either arrogancies , or flatteries , not admitted by Emperors and Kings of best note , and disliked by the church both of Jews , isai. 26. 13. and ancient Christians as appears by Tertullian and others . Although generally the persons of Asia and with them the Jews also , especially since the time they chose a King , against the advice and counsel of God , are noted by wise authors much inclinable to slavery . 

Secondly , that to say , as is usual , the King hath as good right to his crown and dignity , as any man to his inheritance , is to make the subject no better than the King's slave , his chattel , or his possession that May be bought and sold , and doubtless if hereditary title were sufficiently enquired , the best foundation of it would be found but either in courtesy or convenience . But suppose it to be of right hereditary , what can be more just and legal , if a subject for certain crimes be to forfeit by law from himself and posterity , all his inheritance to the King , then that a King for crimes proportional , should forfeit all his title and inheritance to the persons : unless the persons must be thought create all for him , he not for them , and they all in one body inferior to him single , which were a kind of treason against the dignity of mankind to affirm . 

Thirdly it follows , that to say Kings are accountable to none but God , is the overturning of all law and government . For if they May refuse to give account , than all covenants made with them at coronation ; all oaths are in vain , and mere mockeries , all laws which they swear to keep , made to no purpose ; for if the King fear not God , as how many of them do not ? we hold then our lives and estates , by the tenure of his mere grace and mercy , as from a God , not a mortal magistrate , a position that none but court parasites or men besotted would maintain . And no Christian Prince not drunk with high mind , and prouder than those pagan Caesars , that deified themselves , would arrogate so unreasonably above human condition , or derogate so basely from a whole nation of men his brethren , as if for him only subsisting , and to serve his glory , valuing them in comparison of his own brute will and pleasure no more than so many beasts , or vermin under his feet , not to be reasoned with , but to be injured ; among whom there Might be found so many thousand men for wisdom , virtue , nobleness of mind and all other respects , but the fortune of his dignity , far above him . Yet some would persuade us that this absurd opinion was King David's ; because in the 51 psalm he cries out to God , against thee only have i sinned ; as if David had imagined that to murder Uriah and adulterate his wife , had been no sin against his neighbour , when as that law of Moses was to the King expressly , deut. 17. not to think so highly of himself above his brethren . David therefore by those words could mean no other , then either that the depth of his guiltiness was known to God only , or to so few as had not the will or power to question him , or that the sin against God was greater beyond compare then against Uriah . what ever his meaning were , any wise man will see that the pathetical words of a psalm can be no certain decision to a point that hath abundantly more certain rules to go by . How much more rationally spoke the heathen King . Demophoon in a tragedy of Euripides then these interpret•s would put upon King David , i rule not my persons by tyranny , as if they were barbarians , but am myself liable , if i do unjustly to suffer justly not unlike was the speech of Traian the worthy Emperor , to one whom he made general of his Praetorian forces . Take this drawn sword , saith he , to use for me , if i reign well , if not , to use against me . Thus Dion relates . And not Traian only , but Theodosius the younger a Christian Emperor and one of the best , caused it to be enacted as a rule undeniable and fit to be acknowledged by all Kings and Emperors , that a Prince is bound to the laws ; that on the authority of law the authority of a Prince depends , & to the laws ought submit . Which edict of his remains yet unrepeald in the code of Justinian . l. 1. tit. 24. as a sacred constitution to all the succeeding Emperors . How then can any King in Europe maintain and write himself accountable to none but God , when Emperors in their own imperial statutes have written and decreed themselves accountable to law . And indeed where such account is not feared , he that bids a man reign over him above law , May bid as well a savage beast . 

It follows lastly , that since the King or magistrate holds his authority of the persons , both originally and naturally for their good in the first place , and not his own , then May the persons as oft as they shall judge it for the best , either choose him or reject him , retain him or depose him though no tyrant , merely by the liberty and right of free born men to be governed as seems to them best . This , though it cannot but stand with plain reason , shall be made good also by scripture , deut. 17. 14.  when thou art come into the land which the Lord thy god giveth thee , and shalt say i will set a King over me , like as all the nations about me these words confirm us that the right of choosing , yea of changing their own government is by the grant of God himself in the persons . And therefore when they desited a King , though then under another form of government , and though their changing displeased him , yet he that was himself their King , and rejected by them , would not be a hindrance to what they inended , further than by persuasion , but that they Might do therein as they saw good , 1 sam. 8. only he reserved to himself the nomination of who should reign over them . Neither did that exempt the King as if he were to God only accountable , though by his especial command anointed . Therefore David first made a covenant with the elders of Israel , and so was by them anointed King , 1 chron. 11.  And Jehoiada the priest making Jehoash King , made a covenant between him and the persons , 2 Kings 11. 17.  Therefore when Roboam at his coming to the crown , rejected those conditions which the Israelites brought him , hear what they answer him , what portion have we in David , or inheritance in the son of Jesse . See to thine own house David . and for the like conditions not performed , all Israel before that time deposed Samuel ; not for his own default , but for the misgovement of his sons . But some will say to both these examples , it was evilly done . I answer , that not the latter , because it was expressly allowed them in the law to set up a King if they pleased ; and God himself joined with them in the work ; though in some sort it was at that time displeasing to him , in respect of old Samuel who had governed them uprightly . As Livy praises the Romans who took occasion from Tarqvinius a wicked Prince to gain their liberty , which to have extorted , saith he , from Numa or any of the good Kings before , had not been seasonable . Nor was it in the former example done unlawfully ; for when Roboam had prepared a huge army to reduce the Israelites , he was forbidden by the profet , 1 Kings 12.24 . thus saith the Lord ye shall not go up , nor fight against your brethren , for this thing is from me . he calls them their brethren , not rebels , and forbids to be proceeded against them , owning the thing himself , not by single providence , but by approbation , and that not only of the act , as in the former example , but of the fit season also ; he had not otherwise forbid to molest them . And those grave and wise counsellors whom Rehoboam first advised with , spoke no such thing , as our old grey headed flatterers now are wont , stand upon your birthright , scorn to capitulate , you hold of God , and not of them ; for they knew no such matter , unless conditionally , but gave him politic counsel , as in a civil transaction . Therefore kingdom and magistracy , whether supreme or subordinat is called a human ordinance , 1 pet. 2. 13. &c. which we are there taught is the will of God we should submit to , so far as for the punishment of evil doers , and the encouragement of them that do well . Submitt saith he , as free men . and there is no power but of God , saith Paul , rom. 13. as much as to say , God put it into man's heart to find out that way at first for common peace and preservation , approving the exercise thereof ; else it contradicts Peter who calls the same authority an ordinance of man . It must be also understood of lawful and just power , else we read of great power in the affairs and kingdoms of the world permitted to the devil : for saith he to Christ , Luke 4. 6. all this power will i give thee and the glory of them , for it is delivered to me , and to whomsoever i will , i give it : neither did he lie , or Christ gainsay what he affirmed : for in the thirteenth of the revelation we read how the dragon gave to the beast his power , his seat , and great authority : which beast so autorized most expound to be the tyrannical powers and kingdoms of the earth . Therefore saint Paul in the forecited chapter tells us that such magistrates he means  , as are , not a terror to the good but to the evil , such as bear not the sword in vain , but to punish offenders , and to encourage the good . If such only be mentioned here as powers to be obeyed , and our submission to them only required , then doubtless those powers that do the contrary , are no powers ordained of God , and by consequence no obligation laid upon us to obey or not to resist them . And it May be well observed that both these apostles , whenever they give this precept , express it in terms not concrete but abstract , as logicians are wont to speak , that is , they mention the ordinance , the power , the authority before the persons that execute it , and what that power is , lest we should be deceived , they describe exactly . So that if the power be not such , or the person execute not such power , neither the one nor the other is of God , but of the devil , and by consequence to be resisted . From this exposition Chrysostom also on the same place dissents not ; explaining that these words were not written in behalf of a tyrant . And this is verified by David , himself a King , and likeliest to be author of the psalm 94. 20. which saith , shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee . and it were worth the knowing , since Kings , and that by scripture boast the justness of their title , by holding it immediately of God , yet cannot show the t•me when God ever set on the throne them or their forefathers , but only when the persons chose them ; why by the same reason , since God ascribes as oft to himself the casting down of Princes from the throne , it should not be thought as lawful , and as much from God when none are seen to do it but the persons , and that for just causes . For if it needs must be a sin in them to depose , it May as likely be a sin to have elected . And contrary if the people's act in election be pleaded by a King , as the act of God , and the most just title to enthrone him , why May not the people's act of rejection , be as well pleaded by the persons as the act of God , and the most just reason to depose him ? So that we see the title and just right of reigning or deposing in reference to God , is found in scripture to be all one ; visible only in the persons , and depending merely upon justice and demerit . Thus far hath been considered briefly the power of Kings and magistrates ; how it was , and is originally the peoples , and by them conferred in trust only to be employed to the common peace and benefit ; with liberty therefore and right remaining in them to reassume it to themselves , if by Kings or magistrates it be abused ; or to dispose of it by any alteration , as they shall judge most conducing to the public good . 

We May from hence with more ease , and force of argument determine what a tyrant is , and what the persons May do against him . A tyrant whether by wrong or by right coming to the crown , is he who regarding neither law nor the common good , reigns only for himself and his faction : thus St. Basil among others defines him . And because his power is great , his will boundless and exorbitant , the fulfilling whereof is for the most part accompanied with innumerable wrongs and oppressions of the persons , murders , massacres , rapes , adulteries , desolation , and subversion of cities and whole provinces ; look how great a good and happiness a just King is , so great a mischief is a tyrant ; as he the public father of his country , so this the common enemy . Against whom what the persons lawfully May do , as against a common pest , and destroyer of mankind , i suppose no man of clear judgement need go surder to be guided then by the very principles of nature in him . But because it is the vulgar folly of men to desert their own reason , and shutting their eyes to think they see best with other men's , i shall show by such examples as ought to have most weight with us , what hath been Don is this case heretofore . The Greeks and Romans as their prime authors witness held it not only lawful , but a glorious and heroic deed , rewarded publicly with statues and garlands , to kill an infamous tyrant at any time without trial ; and but reason , that he who trod down all law , should not be voutsafed the benefit of law . Insomuch that Seneca the tragedian brings in Hercules the grand suppressor of tyrants , thus speaking , — Victima haud ulla amplior 
Potest , magisque opima mactari jovi 
Quam rex iniquus — 
— there can be slain 
No sacrifice to God more accetable 
Than an unjust and wicked King — 




But of these i name no more , lest it be objected they were heathen ; and come to produce another sort of men that had the knowledge of true religion . Among the Jews this custom of tyrant-killing was not unusual . First Ehud , a man whom God had raised to deliver Israel from Eglon King of Moab , who had conquered and ruled over them eighteen years , being sent to him as an ambassador with a present slew him in his own house . But he was a foreign Prince , an enemy , and Ehud besides had special warrant from God . To the first i answer , it imports not whether foreign or native : for no Prince so native but professes to hold by law ; which when he himself overturns , breaking all the covenants and oaths that gave him title to his dignity , and were the bond and alliance between him and his persons , what differs he from an outlandish King or from an enemy ? For look how much right the King of Spain hath to govern us at all , so much right hath the King of England to govern us tyrannically . If he , though not bound to us by any league , coming from Spain in person to subdue us or to destroy us , Might lawfully by the persons of England either be slain in fight , or put to death in captivity , what hath a native King to plead , bound by so many covenants , benefits and honours to the welfare of his persons , why he through the contempt of all laws and parliaments , the only tie of our obedience to him , for his own wills sake , and a boasted prerogative unaccountable , after seven years warring and destroying of his best subjects , overcome , and yielded prisoner , should think to scape unquestionable , as a thing divine , in respect of whom so many thousand Christians destroyed should lie unaccounted for , polluting with their slaughtered carcases all the land over , and crying for vengeance against the living that should have righted them . Who knows not that there is a mutual bond of amity and brotherhood between man and man over all the world , neither is it the English sea that can sever us from that duty and relation : a straighter bond yet there is between fellow-subjects , neighbours , and friends ; but when any of these 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to another so as hostility  doth the law decree less against them , then oepn enemies and invaders ? or if the law be not present , or too weak , what doth it warrant us to less than single defence or civil war ? and from that time forward the law of civil defensive war differs nothing from the law of foreign hostility . Nor is it distance of place that makes enmity , but enmity that makes distance . He therefore that keeps peace with me near or remote of whatsoever nation , is to me as far as all civil and human offices an Englishman and a nighbour : but if an Englishman forgetting all laws , human , civil and religious offend against life and liberty , to him offended and to the law in his behalf , though born in the same womb , he is no better than a Turk , a Saracen , a heathen . This is gospel , and this was ever law among equals ; how much rather than in force against any King whatsoever , who in respect of the persons is coufessd inferior and not equal : to distinguish therefore of a tyrant by outlandish , or domestic is a weak evasion . To the second that he was an enemy , i answer , what tyrant is not ? yet Eglon by the Jews had been acknowledged as their sovereign , they had served him eighteen years , as long almost as we our William the conqueror , in all which time he could not be so unwise a statesman but to have taken of them oaths of fealty and allegiance by which they made themselves his proper subjects , as their homage and present sent by Ehud testifyd . To the third , that he had special warrant to kill Eglon in that manner , it cannot be granted , because not expressed ; 't is plain that he was raised by God to be a deliverer , and went on just principles , such as were then and ever held allowable , to deal so by a tyrant that could no otherwise be dealt with . Neither did Samuel though a profet , with his own hand abstain from Agag ; a foreign enemy no doubt ; but mark the reason , as thy sword hath made women childless ; a cause that by the sentence of law itself nullifies all relations . And as the law is between brother and brother , father and son , Master and servant , wherefore not between King or rather tyrant and persons ? And whereas Jehu had special command to slay Jehoram a successive and hereditary tyrant , it seems not the less imitable for that ; for where a thing grounded so much on natural reason hath the addition of a command from God , what does it but establish the lawfulness of such an act . Nor is it likely that God who had so many ways of punishing the house of Ahab would have sent a subject against his Prince , if the fact in itself as Done to a tyrant had been of bad example . And if David refused to lift his hand against the Lord's anointed , the matter between them was not tyranny , but private enmity , and David as a private person had been his own revenger , not so much the peoples ; but when any tyrant at this day can show to be the Lord's anointed , the only mentioned reason why David with held his hand , he May then but not till then presume on the same privilege . 

We May pass therefore hence to Christian times . And first our saviour himself , how much he favoured tyrants and how much intended they should be found or honoured among Christians , declares his mind not obscurely ; accounting their absolute authority no better than gentilism , yea though they flourishd it over with the splendid name of benefactors ; charging those that would be his disciple to usurp no such dominion ; but that they who were to be of most authority among them , should esteem themselves ministers and servants to the public . matt. 20. 25.  the Princes of the gentiles exercise lordship over them , and Mark 10. 42.  they that seem to rule , saith he , either slighting or accounting them no lawful rulers , but ye shall not be so , but the greatest among you shall be your servant . and although he himself were the meekest , and came on earth to be so , yet to a tyrant we hear him not vouchsafe an humble word : but tell that fox , luc. 13.  And wherefore did his mother the virgin Mary give such praise to God in her profetic song , that he had now by the coming of Christ Cutt down Dynasta's or proud monarchs from the throne , if the church , when God manifests his power in them to do so , should rather choose all misery and vassalage to serve them , and let them still sit on their potent seats to be adored for doing mischief . Surely it is not for nothing that tyrants by a kind of natural instinct both hate and fear none more than the true church and saints of God , as the most dangerous enemies and subverters of monarchy , though indeed of tyranny ; hath not this been the perpetual cry of courtiers , and court prelates ? whereof no likelier cause can be alleged , but that they well discerned the mind and principles of most devout and zealous men , and indeed the very discipline of church , tending to the dissolution of all tyranny . No marvel then if since the faith of Christ received , in purer or impurer times , to depose a King and put him to death for tyranny hath been accounted so just and requisite , that neighbour Kings have both upheld and taken part with subjects in the action . And Ludovicus Pius , himself an Emperor , and son of Charles the great , being made judge , Du Haillan is my author , between Milegast King of the vul•zeses and his subjects' who had deposed him , gave his verdict for the subjects , and for him whom they had chosen in his room . Note here that the right of electing whom they please is by the impartial testimony of an Emperor in the persons . For , said he , a just Prince ought to be preferred before an unjust , and the end of government before the prerogative . and Constantinus Leo , another Emperor in the Byzantine laws saith , that the end of a King is for the general good , which he not performing is but the counterfeit of a King . and to prove that some of our own monarchs have acknowledged that their high office exempted them not from punishment , they had the sword of St. Edward born before them by an officer who was called Earl of the palace e'en at the times of their highest pomp and solemnity , to mind them , saith Matthew Paris , the best of our historians , that if they erred , the sword had power to restrain them . And what restraint the sword comes to at length , having both edge and point , if any sceptic will needs doubt , let him feel . It is also affirmed from diligent search made in our ancient books of law , that the peers and Barons of England had a legal right to judge the King : which was the cause most likely , for it could be no slight cause , that they were called his peers , or equals . This however May stand immovable , so long as man hath to deal with no better than man ; that if our law judge all men to the lowest by their peers , it should in all equity ascend also , and judge the highest . And so much i find both in our own and foreign story , that Dukes , Earls , and marquesses were at first not hereditary , not empty and vain titles , but names of trust and office , and with the office ceasing , as induces me to be of opinion , that every worthy man in parliament , for the word Baron imports no more , Might for the public good be thought a fit peer and judge of the King ; without regard had to petty caveats , and circumstances , the chief impediment in high affairs , and ever stood upon most by circumstantial men . Whence doubtless our ancestors who were not ignorant with what rights either nature or ancient constitution had endowd them , when oaths both at coronation , and renewed in parliament would not serve , thought it no way illegal to depose and put to death their tyrannous Kings . Insomuch that the parliament drew up a charge against Richard the second , and the Commons requested to have judgement decreeed against him , that the realm Might not be endangered . And Peter Martyr a divine of foremost rank , on the third of judges approves their doings . Sir Thomas Smith also a Protestant and a statesman in his commonwealth of England putting the question whether it be lawful to rise against a tyrant , answers that the vulgar judge of it according to the event , and the learned according to the purpose of them that do it . But far before those days Gildas the most ancient of all our historians , speaking of those times wherein the Roman empire decaying quitted and relinquishd what right they had by conquest to this island , and resigned it all into the people's hands , testifies that the persons thus reinvested with their own original right , about the year 446 , both elected them Kings , whom they thought best ( The first Christian British Kings that ever reigned here since the Romans ) and by the same right , when they apprehend cause , usually deposed and put them to death . This is the most fundamental and ancient tenure that any King of England can produce or pretend to ; in comparison of which , all other titles and pleas are but of yesterday . If any object that Gildas condemns the Britons for so doing , the answer is as ready ; that he condemns them no more for so doing , than he did before for choosing such , for saith he , they anointed them Kings , not of God , but such as were more bloody than therest . next he condemns them not at all for deposing or putting them to death , but for doing it over hastily , without trial or well examining the cause , and for electing others worse in their room . Thus we have here both domestic and most ancient examples that the persons of Britain have deposed and put to death their Kings in those primitive Christian times . And to couple reason with example , if the church in all ages , primitive , Romish , or Protestant held it ever no less their duty then the power of their keys , though without express warrant of scripture , to bring indifferently both King and peasant under the utmost rigor of their canons and censures ecclesiastical , e'en to the smiting him with a final excommunion , if he persist impenitent , what hinders but that the temporal law both May and aught , though without a special text or precedent , extend with like indifference the civil sword , to the cutting off without exemption him that capitally offends . Seeing that justice and religion are from the same God , and works of justice oft-times more acceptable . Yet because that some lately with the tongues and arguments of malignant backsliders have written that the proceedings now in parliament against the King , are without precedent from any Protestant state or kingdom , the examples which follow shall be all Protestant and chiefly Presbyterian . 

In the year 1546.  The Duke of Saxony , landgrave of Hessen , and the whole Protestant league raised open war against Charles the fifth their Emperor , sent him a defiance , renounced all faith and allegiance toward him , and debated long in counsel whether they should give him so much as the title of Caesar . Sleidan . l. 17.  Let all men judge what this wanted of deposing or of killing , but the power to do it . 

In the year 1559. the Scotch Protestant's claiming promise of their Queen regent for liberty of conscience , she answering that promises were not to be claimed of Princes beyond what was commodious for them to grant , told her to her face in the parliament then at Sterling , that if it were so , they renounced their obedience ; and soon after betook them to arms . Buchanan hist. l. 16. certainly when allegiance is renounced , that very hour the King or Queen is in effect deposed . 

In the year 1564.  John kn•x a most famous divine and the reformer of Scotland to the Presbyterian discipline , at a general assembly maintained op'nly in a dispute against Lethington the secretary of state , that subjects Might and ought execute God's judgements upon their King ; that the fact of Jehu and others against their King having the ground of God's ordinary command to put such and such offenders to death was not extraordinary , but to be imitated of all that preferred the honour of God to the affection of flesh and wicked Princes , that Kings , if they offend , have no privilege to be exempted from the punishments of law more than any other subject ; so that if the King be a murderer , adulterer , or idolater , he should suffer not as a King , but as an offender ; and this position he repeats again and again before them . Answerable was the opinion of John Craig another learned divine , and that laws made by the tyranny of Princes , or the negligence of persons , their posterity Might abrogate , and reform all things according to the original institution of commonwealths , and Knox being commanded by the nobility to write to Calvin and other learned men for their judgements in that question refused ; alleging that both himself was fully resolved in conscience , and had heard their judgements , and had the same opinion under hand-writing of many the most godly and most learned that he knew in Europe ; that if he should move the question to them again , what should he do but show his own forgetfulness or inconstancy . All this is far more largely in the ecclesiastic history of Scotland l. 4. with many other passages to this effect all the book over ; set out with diligence by Scotchmen of best repute among them at the beginning of these troubles , as if they laboured to inform us what we were to do and what they intended upon the like occasion . 

And to let the world know that the whole church and Protestant state of Scotland in those purest times of reformation were of the same belief , three years after , they met in the field Mary their lawful and hereditary Queen , took her prisoner yielding before fight , kept her in prison and the same year deposed her . Buchan . Hist. l. 18.  

And four years after that , the Scots in justification of their deposing Queen Mary , sent ambassadors to Queen Elizabeth , and in a written declaration alleged that they had used towards her more lenity than she deserved ; that their ancestors had heretofore punished their Kings by death or banishment ; that the Scots were a free nation , made King whom they freely chose , and with the same freedom unkinged him if they saw cause , by right of ancient laws and ceremonies yet remaining , and old customers yet among the high-landers in choosing the head of their clanns , or families ; all which with many other arguments bore witness that regal power was nothing else but a mutual covenant or stipulation between King and persons . buch. hist. l. 20.  These were Scotchmen and Presbyterians ; but what measure then have they lately offered , to think such liberty less beseeming us then themselves , presuming to put him upon us for a Master whom their law scarce allows to be their own equal ? If now then we hear them in another strain then heretofore in the purest times of their church , we May be confident it is the voice of faction speaking in them , not of truth and reformation . 

In the year 1581. the states of Holland in a general assembly at the Hague , abjured all obedience and subjection to Philip King of Spain ; and in a declaration justify their so doing ; for that by his tyrannous government against faith so often given and broken he had lost his right to all the Belgic provinces ; that therefore they deposed him and declared it lawful to choose another in his stead . thuan. l. 74.  From that time , to this no state or kingdom in the world hath equally prospered : but let them remember not to look with an evil and prejudicial eye upon their neighbours walking by the same rule . 

But what need these examples to Presbyterians , i mean to those who now of late would seem so much to abhor deposing , whenas they to all Christendom have given the latest and the liveliest example of doing it themselves . I question not the lawfulness of raising war against a tyrant in defence of religion , or civil liberty ; for no Protestant church from the first Waldenses of lions , and Languedoc to this day but have done it round , and maintained it lawful . But this i doubt not to affirm , that the Presbyterians , who now so much condemn deposing , were the men themselves that deposed the King , and cannot with all their shifting and relapsing , wash off the guiltiness from their own hands . For they themselves , by these their late doings have made it guiltiness , and turned their own warrantable actions into rebellion . 

There is nothing that so actually makes a King of England , as righful possession and supremacy in all causes both civil and ecclesiastical : and nothing that so actually makes a subject of England , as those two oaths of allegiance and supremacy observed without equivocating , or any mental reservation . out of doubt then when the King shall command things already constituted in church , or state , obedience is the true essence of a subject , either to do , if it be lawful , or if he hold the thing unlawful , to submit to that penalty which the law imposes , so long as he intends to remain a subject . Therefore when the persons or any part of them shall rise against the King and his authority executing the law in any thing establishd civil or ecclesiastical , i do nor say it is rebellion , if the thing commanded though establishd be unlawful , and that they sought first all due means of redress ( And no man is further bound to law ) but i say it is an absolute renouncing both of supremacy and allegiance , which in one word is an actual and total deposing of the King , and the setting up of another supreme authority over them . And whether the Presbyterians have not done all this and much more , they will not put me , i suppose , to reckon up a seven years' story fresh in the memory of all men . Have they not utterly broke the oath of allegiance , rejecting the King's command and authority sent them from any part of the kingdom whether in things lawful or unlawful ? Have they not abjured the oath of supremacy by setting up the parliament without the King , supreme to all their obedience , and though their vow and covenant bound them in general to the parliament , yet sometimes adhering to the lesser part of Lords and Commons that remained faithful as they term it , and e'en of them , one while to the Commons without the Lords , another while to the Lords without the Commons ? Have they not still declared their meaning , whatever their oath were , to hold them only for supreme whom they found at any time most yielding to what they petitioned ? Both these oaths which were the straitest bond of an English subject in reference to the King , being thus broke and made void , it follows undeniably that the King from that time was by them in fact absolutely deposed , and they no longer in reality to be thought his subjects , notwithstanding their fine clause in the covenant to preserve his person , crown , and dignity , set there by some dodging casuist with more craft than sincerity to mitigate the matter in case of ill success , and not taken i suppose by any honest man , but as a condition subordinate to every the least particle that Might more concern religion , liberty , or the public peace . To prove it yet more plainly that they are the men who have deposed the King , i thus argue . We know that King and subject are relatives , and relatives have no longer being then in the relation ; the relation between King and subject can be no other than regal authority and subjection . Hence i infer past their defending , that if the subject who is one relative , takes away the relation , of force he takes away also the other relative ; but the Presbyterians who were one relative , that is to say subjects , have for this seven years taken away the relation , that is to say the King's authority , and their subjection to it , therefore the Presbyterians for these seven years have removed and extinguish the other relative , that is to say the King , or to speak more in brief have deposed him ; not only by depriving him the execution of his authority , but by conferring it upon others . If then their oaths of subjection broken , new ` supremacy obeyed , new oaths and covenants taken , notwitstanding frivolous evasions , have in plain terms unkinged the King , much more than hath their seven years' war not deposed him only , but outlawd him , and defied him as an alien , a rebel to law , and enemy to the state . It must needs be clear to any man not averse from reason , that hostility and subjection are two direct and positive contraries ; and can no more in one subject stand together in respect of the same King , than one person at the same time can be in two remote places . Against whom therefore the subject is in act of hostility we May be confident that to him he is in no subjection : and in whom hostility takes place of subjection , for they can by no means consist together , to him the King can be not only no King , but an enemy . So that from hence we shall not need dispute whether they have deposed him , or what they have defaulted towards him as no King , but show manifestly how much they have done toward the killing him . Have they not levied all these wars against him whether offensive or defensive ( For defence in war equally offends , and most prudently before hand ) and given commission to slay where they knew his person could not be exempt from danger ? And if chance or flight had not saved him , how often had they killed him , directing their artillery without blame or prohibition to the very place where they saw him stand ? Have they not converted his revenue to other uses , and detained from him all means of livelihood , so that for them long since he Might have perished , or have starved ? Have they not hunted and pursued him round about the kingdom with sword and fire ? Have they not formerly denied to treat with him , and their now recanting ministers preached against him , as a reprobate incurable , an enemy to God and his church marked for destruction , and therefore not to be treated with ? Have they not besieged him and to their power forbid him water and fire , save what they shot against him to the hazard of his life ? Yet while they thus assaulted and endangered it with hostile deeds , they swore in words to defend it with his crown and dignity ; not in order , as it seems now , to a firm and lasting peace , or to his repentance after all this blood ; but simply , without regard , without remorse or any comparable value of all the miseries and calamities suffered by the poor persons , or to suffer hereafter through his obstinacy or impenitence . No understanding man can be ignorant that covenants are ever made according to the present state of persons and of things ; and have ever the more general laws of nature and of reason included in them , though not expressed . If i make a voluntary covenant as with a man to do him good , and he prove afterward a monster to me , i should conceive a disobligement . If i covenant , not to hurt an enemy , in favour of him and forbearance , and hope of his amendment , and he , after that , shall do me tenfould injury and mischief to what he had done when i so covenanted , and still be plotting what May tend to my destruction , i question not but that his after actions release me ; nor know i covenant so sacred that withholds me from demanding justice on him . Howbeit , had not their distrust in a good cause , and the fast and loose of our prevaricating divines overswayed , it had been doubtless better , not to have inserted in a covenant unnecessary obligations , and words not works of a supererogating allegiance to their enemy ; no way advantageous to themselves , had the King prevailed , as to their cost many would have felt ; but full of snare and distraction to our friends , useful only , as we now find , to our adversaries , who under such a latitude and shelter of ambiguous interpretation have ever since been plotting and contriving new opportunities to trouble all again . How much better had it been , and more becoming an undaunted virtue to have declared op'nly and boldly whom and what power the persons were to hold supreme , as on the like occasion Protestant's have done before , and many conscientious men now in these times have more than once besought the parliament to do , that they Might go on upon a sure foundation , and not with a riddling covenant in their mouths , seeming to swear counter almost in the same breath allegiance and no allegiance ; which doubtless had drawn off all the minds of sincere men from siding with them , had they not discerned their actions far more deposing him then their words upholding him ; which words made now the subject of cavillous interpretations , stood ever in the covenant by judgement of the more discerning sort an evidence of their fear not of their fidelity . What should i return to speak on , of those attempts for which the King himself hath often charged the Presbyterians of seeking his life , whenas in the due estimation of things they Might without a fallacy be said to have done the deed outright . Who knows not that the King is a name of dignity and office , not of person : who therefore kills a King , must kill him while he is a King . Then they certainly who by deposing him have long since taken from him the life of a King , his office and his dignity , they in the truest sense May be said to have killed the King : nor only by their deposing and waging war against him , which besides the danger to his personal life , set him in the farthest opposite point from any vital function of a King , but by their holding him in prison vanquished and yielded into their absolute and despotic power , which brought him to the lowest degradement and incapacity of the regal name . I say not whose matchless valour next under God , lest the story of their ingratitude thereupon carry me from the purpose in hand , which is to convince them that they , which i repeat again , were the men who in the truest sense killed the King , not only as is proud before , but by depressing him their King far below the rank of a subject to the condition of a captive , without intention to restore him , as the chancellor of Scotland in a speech told him plainly at Newcastle , unless he granted fully all their demands , which they knew he never meant . Nor did they treat or think of treating with him , till their hatred to the army that delivered them , not their love or duty to the King , joined them secretly with men sentencd so oft for reprobates in their own mouths , by whose subtle inspiring they grew mad upon a most tardy and improper treaty . Whereas if the whole bent of their actions had not been against the King himself , but against his evil council , as they feigned , and publishd , wherefore did they not restore him all that while to the true life of a King , his office , crown , and dignity , when he was in their power , and they themselves his nearest counselers . The truth therefore is , both that they would not , and that indeed they could not without their own certain destruction , having reduced him to such a final pass , as was the very death and burial of all in him rhat was regal , and from whence never King of England yet revived , but by the new re enforcement of his own party , which was a kind of resurrection to him . Thus having quitc extinguished all that could be in him of a King , and from a total privation clad him over like another specifical thing with forms and habitudes destructive to the former , they left in his person dead as to law and all the civil right either of King or subject the life only of a prilner , a captive and a malefactor . Whom the equal and impartial hand of justice finding , was no more to spare then another ordinary man ; not only made obnoxious to the doom of law by a charge more than once drawn up against him , and his own confession to the first article at Newport , but summoned and arraigned in the sight of God and his persons , cutte'st and devoted to perdition worse than any Ahab , or Antiochus , with exhortation to curse all those in the name of God that made not war against him , as bitterly as Meroz was to be cursed , that went not out against a Canaanitish King , almost in all the sermons , prayers , and fulminations that have been uttered this seven years by those clou'n tongues of falsehood and dissension , who now , to the stirring up of new discord , acquitt him ; and against their own discipline , which they boast to be the throne and sceptre of Christ , absolve him , unconfound him , though unconverted , unrepentant , unsensible of all their precious saints and martyrs whose blood they have so oft laid upon his head : and now again with a new sovereign anointment can wash it all off , as if it were as vile , and no more to be reckoned for then the blood of so many dogs in a time of pestilence : giving the most opprobrious lie to all the acted zeal that for these many years hath filled their bellies , and fed them fat upon the foolish persons . Ministers of sedition , not of the gospel , who while they saw it manifestly tend to civil war and bloodshed , never seized exasperating the persons against him ; and now that they see it likely to breed new commotion , cease not to incite others against the persons that have saved them from him , as if sedition were their only aim whether against him or for him . But God as we have cause to trust , will put other thoughts into the persons , and turn them from looking after these firebrands , of whose fury , and sals prophecies we have enough experience ; and from the murmurs of new discord will incline them to heark'n rather with erected minds to the voice of our supreme magistracy , calling us to liberty and the flourishing deeds of a reform commonwealth ; with this hope that as God was heretofore angry with the Jews who rejected him and his form of government to choose a King , so that he will bless us , and be propitious to us who reject a King to make him only our leader , and supreme governor in the conformity as near as May be of his own ancient government ; if we have at least but so much worth in us to entertain the sense of our future happiness , and the courage to receive what God vouchsafes us : wherein we have the honour to precede other nations who are now labouring to be our followers . For as to this question in hand what the persons by their just right May do in change of government , or of governor , we see it cleared sufsiciently ; besides other ample authority e'en from the mouths of Princes themselves . And surely they that shall boast , as we do , to be a free nation , and not have in themselves the power to remove , or to abolish any governor supreme , or subordinate with the government itself upon urgent causes , May please their fancy with a ridiculous and painted freedom , fit to coz'n babies ; but are indeed under tyranny and servitude ; as wanting that power , which is the root and source of all liberty , to dispose and oeconomize in the land which God hath given them , as Masters of family in their own house and free inheritance . Without which natural and essential power of a free nation , though bearing high their heads , they can in due esteem be thought no better than slaves and vassals born , in the tenure and occupation of another inheriting Lord . Whose government , though not illegal , or intolerable , hangs over them as a lotdly scourge , not as a free government ; and therefore to be abrogated . How much more justly than May they fling off tyranny , or tyrants ? who being once deposed can be no more than private men , as subject to the reach of justice and arraignment as any other transgressors . And certainly if men , not to speak of heathen , both wise and religious have done justice upon tyrants what way they could soonest , how much more mild and human then is it to give them fair and open trial ? To teach lawless Kings and all that so much adore them , that not mortal man , or his imperious will , but justice is the only true sovereign and supreme majesty upon earth . Let men cease therefore out of faction and hypocrisy to make outcries & horrid things of things so just and honourable . And if the parliament and military council do what they do without precedent , if it appear their duty , it argues the more wisdom , virtue , and magnanimity , that they know themselves able to be a precedent to others . Who perhaps in future ages , if they prove not too degenerate , will look up with honour and aspire toward these exemplary , and matchless deeds of their ancestors , as to the highest top of their civil glory and emulation . Which heretofore in the pursuance of fame and foreign dominion spent itself vaingloriously abroad ; but henceforth May learn a better fortitude to dare execute highest justice on them that shall by force of arms endeavour the oppressing and bereaving ofreligion and their liberty at home : that no unbridled potentate or tyrant , but to his sorrow for the future , May presume such high and irresponsible licence over mankind to havoc and turn upside-down whole kingdoms of men as though they were no more in respect of his perverse will then a nation of pismires . As for the party called Presbyterian , of whom i believe very many to be good & faithful Christians , though misled by some of turbulent spirit , i wish them earnestly and calmly not to fall off from their first principles ; nor to affect rigor and superiority over men not under them ; not to compel unforcible things in religion especially , which if not voluntary , becomes a sin ; nor to assist the clamour and malicious drifts of men whom they themselves have judged to be the worst of men , the obdurate enemies of God and his church : nor to dart against the actions of their brethren , for want of other argument those wrested laws and scriptures thrown by prelates and malignants against their own sides , which though they hurt not otherwise , yet taken up by them to the condemnation of their own doings give scandal to all men and discover in themselves either extreme passion or apostasy . Let them not oppose their best friends and associates who molest them not at all , infringe not the least of their liberties ; unless they call it their liberty to bind other men's consciences , but are still secking to live at peace with them and brotherly accord . Let them beware an old and perfect enemy , who though he hope by sowing discord to make them his instruments , yet cannot forbear a minute the open threatening of his destined revenge upon them when they have served his purposes . Let them fear therefore , if they be wise , rather what they have done already , than what remains to do , and be warned in time they put no confidence in Princes whom they have provoked , lest they be added to the examples of those that miserably have tasted the event . Stories can inform them how Christiern the second , King of Denmark not much above a hundred years past , driven out by his subjects , and received again upon new oaths and conditions , broke through them all to his most bloody revenge ; slaying his chief opposers when he saw his time , both them and their children invited to a feast for that purpose . How Maximilian dealt with those of Bruges , though by mediation of the German Princes reconciled to them by solemn and public writings drawn and sealed . How the massacre at Paris was the effect of that credulous peace which the French Protestant's made with Charles the ninth their King : and that the main visible cause which to this day hath saved the Netherlands from utter ruin , was their final not belei•ing the perfidious cruelty which as a constant maxim of state hath been used by the Spanish Kings on their subjects that have taken arms and after trusted them ; as no later age but can testify , heretofore in Belgia itself , and this very year in Naples . and to conclude with one past exception , though far more ancient , David after once he had taken arms , never after that trusted Saul , though with tears and much relenting he twice promised not to hurt him . These instances , few of many , Might admonish them both English and Scotch not to let their own ends , and the driving on of a faction betray them blindly into the snare of those enemies whose revenge looks on them as the men who first begun , fomented and carried on beyond the cure of any sonnd or safe accommodation all the evil which hath since unavoidably befallen them and their King . 

I have something also to the divines , though brief to what were needful ; not to be disturbers of the civil affairs , being in hands better able and more belonging to manage them ; but to study harder and to attend the office of good pastors , knowing that he whose flock is least among them hath a dreadful charge , not performed by mounting twice into the chair with a formal preachment huddled up at the odd hours of a whole lazy week , but by incessant pains and watching in season and out of season , from house to house over the souls of whom they have to feed . Which if they ever well considered , how little leisure would they find to be the most pragmatical sidesmen of every popular tumult and sedition ? And all this while are to learn what the true end and reason is of the gospel which they teach ; and what a world it differs from the censorious and supercilious Lording over conscience . It would be good also they lived so as Might persuade the persons they hated covetousness , which worse than heresy , is idolatry ; hated pluralities and all kind of simony ; left rambling from benefice to benefice , iike raunous wolves seeking where they May devour the biggest . Of which if some , well and warmly seated from the beginning , be not guilty , ' twere good they held not conversation with such as are : let them be sorry that being called to assemble about reforming the church , they fell to progging and soliciting the parliament , though they had renouncd the name of priests , for a new settling of their tithes and oblations ; and double lined themselves with spiritual places of commodity beyond the possible discharge of their duty . Let them assemble in consistory with their elders and deacons , according to ancient ecclesiastical rule , to the preserving of church discipline each in his several charge , and not a pack of clergy men by themselves to belly cheer in their presumptuous Zion , or to promote designs , abuse and gull the simple laity , and stir up tumult , as the prelates did , for the maintenance of their pride and avarice . These things if they observe and wait with patience , no doubt but all things will go well without their importunities or exclamations : and the printed letters which they send subscribed with the ostentation of great characters and little moment , would be more considerable than now they are . But if they be the ministers of Mammon instead of Christ , and scandalize his church with the filty love of gain , aspiring also to sit the closest and the heaviest of all tyrants , upon the conscience , and fall notoriously into the same sins , whereof so lately and so loud they accused the prelates , as God rooted out those immediately before , so will he root out them their imitators : and to vindicate his own glory and religion , will uncover their hypocrisy to the open world ; and visit upon their own heads that curse ye Meroz , the very motto of their pulpits , wherewith so frequently , not as Meroz , but more like atheists they have mocked the vengeance of God , and the zeal of his persons . 

The end . 





jer. 48. 10.  prov. 12. 10.  






















