The idol of the clowns , or , insurrection of Wat the Tyler , with his priests Baal and straw ; together with his fellow Kings of the Commons , against the English church , the King , the laws , nobility , and royal family and gentry , in the fourth year of k. Richard the 2d . an. 1381.  

in rebus humanis saecula ac personae inter••unt , causae & eventa eadem recurr•••• nulla tyrannis vel quieta est vel di••••• 

London printed in the year  

John of Lydgate , lib. 4.  

And semblably to put it at a proof , 
And execute it by clear experience , 
One the most contrarious mischief 
Found in this earth by notable evidence , 
Is only this by fortunate violence 
When that wretches thurlish of nature 
The estate of Princes unwarey doth recure . 
A crown of gold is nothing according , 
For to be set upon a knaves heed 
A foltish clerk for to wear a King , 
Accordeth nat , who that can take heed , 
And in this world there is no greater drede 
Than power give ( If it be well sought ) 
Unto such one that first rose up of naught . 
There is no manner just convenience 
A royal carbuncle , ruby , or Garnet , 
Nor a chaste Emeraud of virtues excellence , 
Nor Ind saphires in copper to be set , 
Their kind'ly power in foul metal is let , 
And so the state of politic puissance 
I•… ever lost where knaves have governance ▪ 
For a time they May well up ascend , 
Like windy smokes their fumes spread , 
A crowned ass plainly to comprehend , 
Void of discretion is more for to drede 
Then is a lion for that one indeed ; 
Of his nature is mighty and royal , 
Void of discretion that other bestial . 
The gentle nature of a strong lion , 
To prostrate persons of kind is merciable , 
For unto all that fall afore him down , 
His royal puisaunce cannot be vengeable : 
But churlish wolves by rigour untreatable , 
And follyshe asses eke of bestialty 
Failing reason brayed ever on cruelty . 
None is so proud as he that can no good , 
The lender heed the more presumption , 
Most cruelty and vengeance in low blood 
With malapertness and indiscretion : 
Of churl and gentle make this division 
Of outhor of them i dare right well report 
Fro thens they came , thereto the will resort . 
To the reader . 

the beginnings of the second Richard's reign are turmoiled with a rebellion , which shook his throne and empire : a rebellion , not more against religion and order , than nature and humanity too ; a rebellion never to be believed , but in the age it was acted in , and our own , in which we find how terrible the overflows of the common persons ( ever delighted in the calamities of others ) untied , and hurried on by their own wills , and beastly fury must prove ; though Masanello is short of Tyler , yet if we compare that fisherman with our hind , the Neapolitan mechanics and our clowns , we shall not find them much unlike , not in their sudden flourish and prosperity , not in the mischiefs they did , and the barbarous savage rudeness in the doing them : Masanello made a show of foolish unseasonable piety to the Prince and Archbishop , which 〈◊〉 not his part , which made him the 〈◊〉 imperfect rebel , the worse politician ; however , he Might seem the better man ; but these too Might be but counterfeit reuerences ; this Might be his disguise , and h•… Might have come up to more , according to the new lights which we May imagine were breaking in . The continuance and misrule of these worthies were much of a length ; in a few days the brands themselves had fired , broke upon their own heads , they were plucked up before their full growth , like airy flitting clouds , they were blown over ere they could pour down the storm they were big with . The colours of thes•… tumults were fair , and taking , such as their architects b•…l and straw , the priests had laid , such as the Masters of these school•…ss have delivered in all ages . The weal public , the liberty of the freeborn persons ( peeled , and flayed by the King's taxes , and the cruel oppression of the gentry ▪ ) justice , reformation , or regulation of fundamental laws long subverted ( considerable nam•…ss if we May believe them ) set them on . The King , his glory , his honour , his safety , the King and the Commons are cried up . But the King was compassed with traitors and malignants , they will have it so , and it is their care to re•…ove the•… r•…t and branch ; they will fire the house to cleanse it ; much other business they had , much was amiss , much to be reform , but in the first sall•…y all is not noised ; what was not handsome , what Might give a fuller fright was lapped up in folds , to be discovered as they had thriven , to be swallowed , but gilded with a victory : we know crimes carried in a happy streams of luck , lose their names in it , are beautiful , and must be thought so : the Ordale of the sword justified Caesar , and condemned Pompey , not his cause , adversae res etiam bonos detractant ( says Sallust . ) good men , if they miscarry , do not only lose themselves but their integrity , their justness , their honesty , they are what the conqueror pleases , and the silly multitude , which ever admires the glitter of prosperity , will hate them . Providence preserved the English nation from this blow . The laurel of success crowned not the rebels , they crumble to their first dust again , are ruined by their own weight and confusion . They had ris•…ns lik•… those sons of the dragon's teeth , in tempests , without policy or advice . Their leaders were merely fantastical , but goblins and shadows , men willing to embr•…yl , and daring , whose courage was better than their cause ; and who to advance the design would not boggle at a piece of honesty , an oath , a protestation , on covenant , a verse of St. Paul , or St. Peter , a case of conscience in the way of brave , bold , manly spirits , yet without heads or wits to manage the great work , which in so vast a body suddenly composed like the spawns of Nile , of slime and dirt , of so different parts , so unequal members , was fatal to the whole . Tyler had no brains , he could not plot , not contrive ; and those about him were as heavy , as very asses as himself : he is said to be a crafty fellow , and of an excellent wit , but wanting grace ; yet crafty enough he was not for the great and dangerous enterprise : a Marius ( however impious ( for such he must be ) p•…ce pessimus , fit to remove things , to overturn , overturns , than for peace ( but as Plutarch of him ) subtle , faithless•… , one who could overdo all men in dissembling , in hypocrisy , practised in all the arts •…f lying ( and some of these good slights Tyler wanted not ) one who had sense and judgement to carry things on as well as desperate confidence to undertake had become this part incomparably , had gone through with it , how easily under such a captain ( if we look upon the weakness of the opposition , and the villainous baseness of the gentry ) had the frame of the ancient building been razed , the mod•… must have held . Richard ( whose endeavours of defence or loyalty alone should have been killing ) had not fallen by the sword of Lancaster , he had found his grave on Tower-hill , or Smithfield , where the faithful lieges of his crown were torn in pieces by these cannibals . The reverence due to the anointed heads of Kings began to fall away , and naked majesty could not guard where innocency could not : but Tyler blinded with his own fatal pride , throws himself foolishly upon the King's sword , and by his over-muoh haste preserves him whom he had vowed to destroy . The heathens make it a mark of the divinity of of their gods , that they bestowed benefits upon mortal men , and took nothing from them . The clowns of the idol upon this rule were not very heavenly , they were the meek ones of those times , the only inheritors of right , the kingdom was made a prey by them , it was cantoned out to erect new principalities for the mock-kings of the Commons ; so their chiefs or captains would be called . Here , though the title of the rebellion spoke fair , was sh•…wn somewhat of ambition , and no little of injust private interest , no little of self-seeking which the good of the persons ( in pretence only ) was to give way to , and no wonder for the good of the persons properly , was meeraly to be intended of themselves : and nowhere but amongst those was the commonwealth . Had these thistles , these brambles flourished , the whole wood of noble trees had perished : if the violent casting other men out of their possessions , firing their houses , cutting off their heads , violating of all rights , be thought God's blessing , any evidence of his owning the cause , these thieves and murderers were well blessed , and sufficiently owned . Such was then tho face of things , estates were dangerous , every rich man was an enemy , men's lives were taken away without either offence or trial , their reign was but a continuation of horrible injuries ; the laws were not only silent , but dead : the idols fury was a law , and faith , and loyalty , and obedience to lawful power , were damnable : servants had the rule over Princes , England was near a slavery , the most unworthy of free and ingenious spirits of any . 

what i relate here ( to speak something of the story ) i collect out of Sir John Froissart , a Frenchman , living in the times of King Edward the third , and his grandchild , King Richard , who had seen England in both the reigns , was known and esteemed in the court , and came last over after these tumults were appeased : and out of Thomas of Walsingham , a monk of St.  Albans in Henry the sixth's days ; who ( says Bale in his centuries of him ) writes many the most choice passages of affairs and actions , such as no other hath met with . In the main , and to the substance of things , i have made no additions , no alterations , i have faithfully followed my authors , who are not so historically exact as i could wish , nor could i much better what did not please me in their order . No man ( says Walsingham ) can recite fully the mischiefs , murders , sacrilege , and cruelty of these actors ; he excuses his digesting them upon the confusion of the combustions flaming in such variety of places , and in the same time . Tyler , Litster , and those of Hartfordshire take up most part of the discourse ; Westbrome is brought in by the halves ; the lesser snakes are only named in the chronicle : what had been more , had not been to any purpose : those were but types of Tyler the idol , and acted nothing but according to the original , according to his great example , they were wolves alike , and he that reads one knows all . Thomas of Becket , Simon of Montfort ; the English Catiline , Thomas of Lancaster , rebels and traitors of the former years are canonised by the monks ( generally the enemies of their Kings ) miracles make their tombs illustrious , and their memories sacred . The idol and his incendiaries are abho•…ed everywhere , every history detests them , while faith , civility , honesty and piety shall be left in the world , the enemies of all these must neither be beloved nor pitied . 

The idol of the clowns . 

The reign of King Richard the second , was but a throw of state for so many years , a fever to whose distempers all pieces of the home dominions contributed by fits ( * the foreign part only continuing faithful ) in the fourth year of his reign , and fifteenth of his age , the dregs and off scum of the Commons unite into bodies in several parts of the kingdom , and form a rebellion ( Called the rebellion of the clowns ) which lead the rest , and showed the way of disobedience first . Of which May truly be said ( Though amongst other causes we May attribute it to the indisposition and unseasonableness of the age , that the fruits of it did not take ) it was strongly begun , and had not providence heldback the hand , the blow had fallen , the government had broke into shivers then . The young King at this time had few besides Thomas of Woodstock his uncle , Earl of Buckingham , and after Duke of Gloucester , but the servants of his house in ordinary about him , the Lord Edmund of Langly Earl of Cambridge , after Duke of York , with the Lords Beauchamp , Botereaux , Sir Matthew gourny with others of the nobility , and gentry had set sail for Portugal , the Duke John of Lancaster , another of his uncles was in Scotland treating a peace , when this commotion broke out . Though no cause can be given for seditions , those , who design public troubles , can never want pretences ; Polidore ( As much out in this story as any ) gives this reason for this . The Polle money says he ( Imposed by parliament ) a groat sterling upon every head was intolerable . It was justly imposed , and so by some to whom law and custom of England were intolerable not to be endured , but we shall find in the tyranny breaking in , not only fifth and tentieth parts and loans forced out of fear of plunder and death , but subsidies in troops and regiments , by fifties , ( More than sequeltrations and compositions ) not under foot , low sales , for what had these rascals to give , but downright robbery and violent usurpation of estates . 

Thus would Polidore have it in defence of his priests , who blew the fire , and thrust the silly rout into the midst of it . He takes it ill that Baal ( valle he calls him ) should be supposed by i know not what slaterers of the nobles to have filled these sails , to have let these winds out of their caverns . 

In the fourth year of this King ( Says the monk•… there was a grievous tax exacted in Parllament , after cause of great trouble , every religious paid half a mark , every secular priest as much , every layman or woman 12d . This Might discontent the persons , but who prepared the mutineers for such dangerous impressions ? who fell in with them after and pushed them forward will be soon found . frois•… sart complains of the servitude of the villains or bondmen , ( Now names worn out ) a miserable sort of drudges frequentth known here in the Saxon times : excluded from any right of propriety , sold , and passed away with the manor or lands to which they belonged , bound to till the Lord's ground , cut down , and carry in his corn , cleanse his ditches , cover his Halle , &c.  these Froissart make the first stirrers in the insurrection , these he makes look back to the beginning of men and things to talk of the 〈◊〉 freedom , of the liberties of the creature , above ordinances , that only treason against the Lords could forfeit l•…berty , which was the case of Lucifer , and could not be made theirs , who were neither angels nor spirits , but men of the same shape , extraction , and souls with those who proudly would be thought their Lords , which ( Say they ) was an height too much , and deserved levelling , must not be endured hereafter , equality was the way of peace and love . But can clouds fire in thunder and lightning , can earth quakes tear the entrails of expiring kingdoms , without a Muncer , or a Wiggington , a Garnet , or an hall in the mine ? 

If the church and government must be blown up , it is fit a sanctified hand should ( Cast the balls ) a man ( According to the pure dialect ) of immediate calling , who has had the seal of it , of wonderful zeal , of resolute dealings , the Lord's messeng•… ▪ extraordinarily gifted and exercised , is only fit to advance God's matters , the holy caus•… , and action , and a renegado from his orders : an apostate churchman will best become this person , a man with whom nothing else is sacred but his own ambition , his innovation , and the propagation of his schism . One Baal the most sottish and most unworthy , but most factious of the clergy is stirred up by the devil ( Who , if rebellion be as the sin of witchcraft , is the father of both ) to be the Antichrist of this reign , to blaspheme and cry down God and Cesar his anointed , the rights of God and Cesar ; and who , if he knew any thing , was certainly the very atheist of that age , of these imaginations ( So Froissert of those before ) was a foolish priest in the county of Kent called John Wall ( For Baal ) and to make it plain th•… he was the father of the uproar , he had been ( Says this knight ) three times in the Archbishop's prison ( a persecuted saint ) for these opinions , but delivered by him , his conscience was scrupulous of proceeding farther , which this historian condemns him for : we shall hereafter see the Archbishop in John's hands , who shall come short of this mercy . John had preached ( If it be not impious to use the word here ) twenty years , and more , ever babbling those things which he fancied would be gracious to the multitude ; he haunted by-places , the cloisters of the cathedral ; when the church was shut against him , the streets and fields were holy ground ; there this excommunicated apostate laid his nets . His discourses to the persons were partly invectives against tithes ( Which he allowed not where the parishioner was of better life and smaller estate than the parson , whose estate at this rate must be small enough ) against Bishops , and the clergy , nobility , and gentry ; then he had his quarrels to the government , his doctrine struck at propriety , and order , the world was impaired with diseases , which must be the more for their age , the crisis would be dangerous , and there could be no health , no soundness hoped for , till names , estates , and things were common . His advise was to let the King know the resolutions of the new commonwealths-men , to tell him where the supreme power lies , whose trustee he was , that another course must be taken , and if he would not join with them , other remedies thought of : the third time he was imprisoned , he had his revelations , his enlightnings , was full of divine raptures , he foretold his deliverance by 20000 men , which happened in the following tumults , when his disciple made so many gaol-deliveries . This , knowing what numbers he had seduced and abused , he Might presume upon probable conjecture . He was no sooner loose , but he incites and stirs up the unruly clowns to all the mischiefs possible . 

He tells them they were pious and necessary excesses , and that the law of nature , which allows all acts for our own preservation , would justify them : that a mad father , who seeks to rob and destroy his offspring , Might be resisted , his thrusts Might be put by , the son Might bind his hands , and if there were no other way to escape his furious violence kill him in his own defence . The safety of the persons is the supreme law . If the Prince persisting ( After fair warning ) to make himself a shield and defence to wicked instruments of mischiefs , malignants and enemies of the Commons , securing them from the justice of the Commons , endanger himself and his kingdom , he May thank himself ; we ( Says he ) are willing to hazard ourselves ( Good men ) to preserve both ; we will never give any impediment , or neglect any proper means of curing the distempers of the kingdoms , and of closing the dangerous breaches ( Made by themselves ) according to the trust which lies upon us . at black•…heath , where an assembly of 200000 men made their rendezvous , after some time sp•…nt in seeking God , he baits in rhyme , Uuahn Adam dalf and Eve span , 
uuho was than a gentleman ? 


was his levelling lend text : hence it was to be consequent , that as nature , and the cr•…tion made no distinction , no more ought laws to make or suffer any ; that servitude is the daughter of unjust oppression , introduced by wicked men against God's will . That if it had pleased him to have create slaves , in the beginning he would have chosen , and marked out who should have been the Lord , who the vassal ; he asks where the word allows these sweet things called Lords , verily knaves in purple , sons of Cain , of Nimrod , of Esau , of Ishmael , fat by the blood and sweat of the poor innocent plebeians , honourable in nothing but the outside , •…nd noble only in riots and adulteries , as cruel , as ravenous , as killing ( And as barbarously ) as the bears , the lions , the tigers of their escutcheons , the dragons of their bearing ; he asks why •…he limb•… knights , and Francklin's , who are only better combed , can kiss the hand and lout with more grace , must •…t the c•…ponss , which the sturdy brave Commons must starve themselves to cram : nothing could be good which was great , nothing but independency was divine . 

He bids them consider , now was the time appointed them by God to cast off the yoke , that if they would not be wanting to themselves , they should assert their long looked for liberty , and like good husbandmen , who love their field , pluck up the weeds which over run it ( Which signified rooting out the wicked , and those who carried the mark of the beast ) he points them out the heads devoted , destined for slaughter . * the house of Lords , the peers ( A•… yet they speak no higher ) whom he would have brought to repentance . then the lawyers , justices , judges , jurymen , † all the enemies of the commonalty were to be swept from the earth , there could not else ( So he concludes ) be any peace or security for the future , * lopping off the heads of those which were too tall , which overtopped too much , equal nobility , equal liberty , dignity and power ( This was his old doctrine ) were the only antidotes , without which the poisoned commonwealth must perish . Whosoever loved not the cause was a reprobate , hateful to God , and damned body and soul . John concludes with an exhortation , that in order to the security and preservation of religion and liberty of the subject , they will never consent to the laying down of arms , so long as the evil councillors and prelates arming , or in open war shall by force of arms be protected against the justice of the Commons . John adds , of long time there hath been , and now is , a traitorous plo•… for the subversion of us and the liberty of the subject . 

No wonder , when Peter the hermit's goose was believed to be the holy ghost , that John , amongst as very ninnyhammers , could strike up for a prophet . 

The base crew prick up their ears , and wonder at the new truths , which their pastor heldforth , they applaud him , he is † Archbishop elect , and chancellor , the true archb•…shop must be called a traitor , * a traitor of the Commons and the realm , to make him room , is voted so , to be apprehend wheresoever he could be found in England , and his head to be cut off . Here was a new treason , and a new way of trial and sentence . But though Baal had more of the spirit , there were other adventurers not to be robbed of their honours , other worthies , precious men , called to do the work of the Lord ; who put to their hands , and brought trowels and mortar toward the raising this Babel . Jack-straw , another priest full of life and vigour , the confessor , and Bosom-chaplein of Tyler , more inward with him , his special counsellor , acquainted with all his plots , in the contrivance of which he had a great part , bestowed his pains upon the cause , and for action next Tyler the idol carried the name , which May be one cause why Polydore kills him in Tyler's stead , with the mayor's sword , the most eminent sticklers of the laity , of the profane sty , where Wat the Tyler , a tiler by trade , not by name , his name was Helier ( an ungracious patron , as Froissart ) was * King of the ribauldes , the idol of the Kentish clowns . John Kirkby , Alan Treder , Thomas Scot , and Ralph Ruyg , a magnifico , who gave freely away amongst his fellow scoundrels the spoils of his conquests , were Princes of the separation of the tribes in Kent and Essex . Robert Westbrome ( Wraw his chaplain refusing to set * crown upon crown , and contented to be the arch priest of the province ) was King of Suffolk , and the parts adjacent . St. Edmunds-bury , once the palace of the East angle Kings , and Mildenhalle , were the seats of his sovereignty . John Litster a tanner usurps the name and power of a King at Northwalsham in Norsolk ; i May say the power and more , never was any English King so absolute , nor can any just and legal principality be so large , and arbitrary , law of the land with which the old Englishman was free enough , and contented , was here to be thrown out of doors . The heptarchy of the Saxons seemed to revive again , but prodigiously , the blaz•… of these comets must have been fatal to the nation ; to keep an order in the history of these ruffians , who abhorred it , i will give the van to the idol of the clowns , it is due to him , he is the first who lists up his head in the confusion among the brethren , and deserves the first chair , he was the dragon , and no question in the conclusion , had swallowed up or clipped the rest , Litster , Westbrome , and the others merited highly , but they must have been taken down some pins , Tyler must have elbowroom , he must have been Lord paramount , and one such comet would have been more than enough for one horizon . Besides Kent and Essex , were the puddle , the Lerna which bred this Hydra with the many heads which poisoned most of the counties , and in the conjunction of these two provinces , Tyler the idol swayed all : and here i must observe this , that however Walsingham hatches the cause in Essex , yet his own relations of Baal and the letters and sermons of this seducing prophe•… bring this into question , and by him I•…kent be not the mother , yet are the treasons of her and Essex , Sister-twint of the same birth , Essex only started first . 

The fire kindled from a small spark , the clowns of two village•… not named in the chronicles contrive the conspiracy there ; they send warrants to the smaller towns about , and rather command than entreat , all men of what age soever without any stay or deliberation to repair to a rendezvous set down . The conclusion was terrible ; it threatened plundering of goods , burning , p•…ucking down houses , and cutting off the heads of those who disobey the present power . 

The summoned villages are frighted into obedience , which is to rebel ; they leave their ploughs , their fields , their wives and farms , and in their first rising no •…esse than 5000 of the sink of the persons meet ill armed , some with staffs , some with rusty swords , some with bows and featherlesse arrows , few knowing any cause of their assembling , gazing upon one another , and not finding any enemie•… of their own peace and good but themselves . Not one of a thousand was provided like a soldier , but their number supplied all things , they were highly conceited of themselves , and believed they were invincible , not to be resisted . To confirm their steps , Baal ( Watching to catch , who had long waited for such an opportunity of embroiling ) drives them headlong forward , he writes to them his letters exhortatory ( Where to consecrate the enterprise , God's name is brought in ; he is made to own the cause ) composed of a jargon , a canting gibridge , sit for the design ( To abuse and cheat the innocent peasant , who cannot pry into things , cannot look farther than the bait ) fuller of riddles than sense , one of them found in the sleeve of one of these wretched men condemned , and under the gallows was this . 

John Schep , sometimes St.  Marry priest in Yorkn , and now of Colchester greeteth well John nameless , and John the miller , and John Carter , and biddeth them that they beware of guile in borough ( Which Stow by a notable mistake calls Gillinborough ) and stand together in God's name , and biddeth pierce ploughman go to his w•…rk , and chastise Hob the robber , and take with you John Trewman , and all his fellows and no more , John the miller hath yground small , small , small , the King's son of heaven shall pay for all . Beware or ye be woe , know your friend from your foe . Have enough and say ho . And do well and better , and fle•… sin and seek peace , and hold therein ; and so biddeth John Trewman and all his fellows . a list of sanctity does well in these cases , but his seeking of peace , chastising the robber , and fleeing of sin , i must leave a•… mystical . This shows the industry , carefulness , and vigilancy of the prophet in his preparations , and his willingness to hurt . He disperseth other letters of this kind , in one , he chargeth all men in the name of the trinity , &c. to stand manlike together , and help truth ( Now we have truth to our peace ) and truth shall help them , in his rags of verses ( For a rhymer he would be ) he is as earnest for truth . they begin , Jack Crewman doth you to understoud 
That falseness , & guile hath reigned too long , 
And truth hath been set under a lock , 
And falseness reigneth in every flock ; 
No man May come truth to 
But he must sing fi dedero . 




Many remonstrances and declarations flew abroad from him . The Kentishmen , seasoned by this priest or prophet of the idol , are easily tempted by the Essexians to associate in the undertakings , and share in the honour of gaining liberty , precious liberty for the persons , and taking away the evil customs of the kingdom ; which is the glorious title of the tumult . This was no more ( Says the monk ) than the Kentishmen had long wished for . They are quickly ready , and by the arts used by those of Essex put all the country into a combustion . That they May not appear with too much horror at the first sight , they would seem to pretend to an outside piety , they account ( So they tell the kingdom and the world ) the professing of any thing in the sight of God , the strongest obliga•…ion that any Christian , and the most solemn public faith , that any such state , as a commonwealth can give , in all humility and reverence they contrive a sacred vow and covenant . 

They fasten the knot of their holy league with national covenants and oaths , which themselves will first break ( Than which there can be no stronger tie , religion consists in faith , he who loses hi•… faith hath lost himself ) oaths contrary to their sworn allegiance , and former oaths , which is a most absurd impiety , here God must be called upon to help•… , and witness the perfidiousness , oathe•… use to end — so help me God — he who performs not his oath , directly and plainly , renounces God , and all that is sacred and divine , to swear to day against what we were sworn to yesterday , must be strange amongst Christians , these impieties being once allowed , there can be neither peace , society , nor government amongst men safe and unindangered . The ways leading to Canterbury are beset , the pilgrims swarming thither ( According to the superstition of those ages ) are seized , and forced to swear with these extraordinary workers . to keep faith to King Richard ( whose most faithful servants , most humble and loyal subjects , they profess themselves to be ) and the Commons according to their power and vocation . to accept no King called John ( A vanity thrown in for Duke John of Lancaster's sake the King's uncle , and neglected by the Norfolk reformers , who advanced King John litstere to the sovereignty ) to be ready upon summons to assist the Commons ( The great wheel of the new state , for whom this oath was given , and to be principally respected by it . ) To induce their friends and allies to hold with them , and to allow no tax but the fifteenth ( Which say they falsely was the only tax their forefathers ever heard of , or submitted , to . ) How sacred in all the parts this oath will be with them ( Which never was to be intended more than temporary ) will soon be discovered , diversity of words cannot change the nature of things . Their first March is to Canterbury , where they visit Thomas of Canterbury , who lived and died a rebel to his Prince , and to use the words of Rogerius a Norman , in Caesarius the monk deserved death , and damnation for this contumacy against his King ( the minister of God , a fit saint for such votaries ; their kindness was not much , they spoil his church , break up the Bishop's chamber , and make a prey of all they find , protest the Bishop shall give them an account of the profits of his chancery , and here they begin their audit . 

Thus we see our new reformers are entered , but sacrilege ushers them in , they break open the prisons , and free the saint in bonds , Baal ; when they had done what they came for , the citizens , who had entertained them , willingly leave their houses to keep them company ; a council is called to resolve upon what ground the next storm should pour down , London ever false to the Prince . The wood , which no doubt would lodge the wolves , is set by their orders . Tyler the idol who knew his reign would last no longer than while these men continue mad , thought this the only place likely to keep them so ; London too was the fairest mark ; and besides , the clowns were assured of a welcome upon a private invitation from some of the citizens , whose ancestors and predecessors in all ages , in the tumults of the confessor s. Edward's reign , in all the Barons wars since , have gained the renowned to be lovers of reformation , otherwise pure rebellion , enemies to courtiers and malignants , enemies to the enemies of their dear liberties , which yet sometimes they pursue with too much heat and blind zeal , sometimes to their cost and repentance , mistäking everywhere both notions and things ; the bridles which they without fear or wit , provide for their Kings being often thrust into their own mouths by the new riders , which themselves lift into the saddle , while they grown sober mules , dare neither kick nor sting . behold the common persons ( Says the knight ) when they be up against their Prince , and especially in England , among them there is no remedy , for they are the perillousest persons of the world , and most out , rageous if they be up , and specially the Londoners ; says the monk . The Londoners never want fury if they be not kept in , if licence or insolence be permitted them . The Princess dowager of the incomparable Edward the black Prince , mother of the young King , then at Canterbury , hardly escapes these savages , who rudely assault her chair , and put her and her Ladies in no small fear of villainy to be done to their persons . 

This Princess was so willing to be out of their reach , that notwithstanding she was very fat and unwieldie , she got to London in a day . Tyler , who had insinuated himself into the good grace of these churls by appearing the most stirring and active of the kennel , who began and ruled the cry , and was by i know not what ceremony , perhaps like that Irish election by casting an old shoe over his head , declared Prince of the rabble , leads them to Rochester , which will not come behind Canterbury in kindness . The persons of the town ( Says the knight ) were of the same sect , it seems the castle ( Once one of the strongest in the kingdom , ) was now neither fortified nor manned , the governor Sir John Moton yields himself into their hands , he was one of the King's family , of his household , and must be thought awed , as he was into the engagement . Here the Commons Might be thought ashamed of their own choice , they offer Sir John the general's staff ; which had he accepted , he must have commanded according to the motions of the lieutenant general tilers spirit , and when this turn had been over , at the least stamp of his foot have vanished , sneaked off the stage . 

They tell him Sir John , you must be our captain , and ( Which shows the power of his commission ) you shall do what we will have you . The knight likes not their company , he tries his best wit & language to be rid of them , but could not prevail , they reply downright , Sir John , if you will not do what we will have you , you die for it ; we will not be denied , but at your peril . Enough was said , the knight yields , but his charge of captain general is forgotten , we shall see hereafter what use they make of him , and in what manner he must be employed . This example is followed in the other countries . The gentry did not only lose their estates , and honour , but their courage and gallantry , their bloods were frozen , fear had stifled their spirits . The clowns ( As th•… knight ) had brought them into such obeisance , that they caused them to go with them , whether they would or not , they fawned on them , humbled themselves to them , like dogs grovelling at their fear . The Lord Molines , Sir Stephen Hales , Sir Thomas Guysighen , this Sir John Moton , and others were attendants and vassals to the idol . every day new heaps of men flock to them , like Catiline's troops , all that were nec•…ssitous at home , unthrifts , broken fellows , such as for their misdeeds feared the justice of the laws ; who resent the dangerous and distracted state of the kingdom alike , and will no doubt hammer out an excellent reformation , they will mend their own condition which will be enough , we must expect no more , and now the confidence in their strength made them bold enough to throw off their ma•…ke of hypocrisy , they began to open the inside . They departed from Rochester ( Says Froissart ) and passed the river ( He says the Thames at Kingston ) and came to Brentsord , ( Where i think he leads them out of their way ) beating down before them , and round about , the places and houses of advocates , and procurers , and striking off the heads of diverse persons . Walsingham tells us , who those advocates , and procurers were ; all men ( Says he ) were amused , some looked for good from the new Masters , others feared this insurrection would prove the destruction of the realm . The last were not deceived . All the lawyers of the land ( So he goes on ) as well the apprentices , counselors , as old justices , all the jurymen of the country , ( This was priest balls charge ) they could gripe in their clutches had their heads chopped off . 

It was a maxim of the cabal , that there could be no liberty while any of these men were suffered to breathe . From little to great they fell upon things which they never thought of in their first overflow , which Guicciardine observes ( In civil discords , where the rebellion is fortunate and men's minds are puffed up with success ) to be ordinary . The statue of Cumaan Apollo weeps for the destruction of Cumae , we shall here read of men without sense or apprehensions ; both the stories will seem as incredible . The stupid nobility , and gentry sleep in their houses , till they are roused by these bloodhounds , that they Might seem to deserve the calamity tumbling upon their heads ; they were becoming tenants at will , in villeinage , to their vassals , under their distress , their task , and taxes , more by the sottish baseness of themselves , than any virtue in these rascals , scorned and slighted by every tattered Clunch ; their lands continually upon any vote or information to be sold , or given away upon any information of loyalty or faithfulness : the ancient virtues of the gentleman , not to be found in that age , and serving only for a pretence to ruin , no one could form an expectation of more than this , to be the last man born , ( What was Polyphemus his kindness to Ulysses ) to be devoured last , all which they were contented to hazard , and endure to preserve a shred , or jagge of an incertain ragged estate ( For the health or Mistress' sake ) subject ever to the violence of the same lawless spoiling force which maimed , and rent it before . N•…xt ( To return to this riff-raff ) their cruelty reaches to parchment deeds , charters , rolls of courts , evidences are cast by them into the fire , as if they meant to abolish all remembrance of things ; this was to defeat their Lords in the claims of any ancient rights ; and to leave no man more title , than themselves had to their sword and power . 

The Kentish and Essexian rout , were joined ( Says the monk , but he tells us not where ) and approached near London , at black heath they made an halt , where they were near 200000 strong . 

Thither came two knights sent by the King to them , to inquire the cause of the commotion , and why they had amassed such swarms of the persons . They answer , they met to confer with the King concerning business of weight , they tell the messengers they ought to go back to the King and show him , that it behoves him to come to them , they would acquaint him with their desires ( We shall quickly discover why his presence was required , ) upon return of the knights , it was debated in council by the Lords about the King , wher•…e he should go or no , some of the table more willing to venture the King than themselves , willing to throw him into the gulf , or perhaps not scenting the design of the clowns , persuade him to see them , your majesty ( Thus they ) must make a trial of these men , necessity now must be looked on above reason , if any thing can give the check to the uproars , it must be your presence , there can be no safety but in this venture , it is now as dangerous to seem not to trust , as to be deceived ; fate is too much feared , if it be imagined that this tree of your empite , which has flourished so many ages , can fall in an hour . 

The Archbishop of Canterbury , Simon Theobald of Sudbury , Lord chancellor of England , the most eloquent , most wise , and most pious prelate of the age , faithful to his Prince , and therefore odious to those who conspired against his majesty , and authority , likes not the advise ; the King ought not ( Says he ) to venture his person among such hoseless ribalds , but rather dispose things so as to cu•…be their insolence : Sir , ( Says he ) your sacred majesty in this storm ought to show how much of a King you can play ; what you will go for hereafter ; by your present carriage , you will either be feared for the future , or contemned ; if you seriously consider the nature of these rough hewed savages , you will find the gentle ways pernicious , your tameness will undo you , mercy will ever be in your power , but it is not to be named without the sword drawn ; God and your right have placed you in your throne , but your courage and resolution must keep you there ; your indignation will be justice , good men will think it so , and if they love you , you have enough , you cannot capitulate , not treat with your rebels ; without hazarding your honour , and perhaps your royal faith ; if you yield to the force of one sedition , your whole life and reign will be nothing but a continuation of broils , and tumults , if you assert your sovereign authority betimes , not only these dolts , these sots , but all men else will reverence you ; remember Sir , God by whom lawful Prince's reign , whose vicegerent you are , would not forgive rebellion in angels , you must not trust the face , petitions delivered you upon swords points are fatal if you allow this custom you are ruined , as yet Sir , you May be obeyed as much as you please . of this opinion was Sir Robert Hales , Lord Prior of saint John of Jerusalem , newly Lord treasurer of England , a magnanimous and stout knight , but not liked by the Commons . When this resolution was known to the clowns , they grow stark mad , they bluster , they sweat to seek out the King's traitors , ( For such now they must go for ; no man was either good or honest , but he who pleased them ) the Archbishop , and Lord Prior , & to chop off their heads , here they Might be trusted , they were likely to keep their words . 

Here upon , without more consideration they advance toward London , not forgetting to burn , and raze the lawyers and courtiers houses in the way , to the Kings honour no doubt , which they will be thought to arm for , Sir John Froissart , and others report this part thus , which probably Might follow after this refusal . 

The rebels say they sent their knight ( * so they called him , yet was he the King's knight , for Tyler came not up to dubbing , we find no Sir John , nor Sir Thomas of his making , ) Sir John Moton , to the King , who was then in the tower with his mother , his half brothers Thomas Holland Earl of Kent , after Duke of Surry , and the Lord Holland , the Earls of Salisbury , Warwick , and Oxford , the Archbishop , Lord Prior and others . The knight casts himself down at the King's feet , beseeches him , not to look upon him the worse as in this quality and employment , to consider he is forced to do what he does ; he goes on , Sir the Commons of this realm ( Those few in arms comparatively to the rest would be taken for the whole ) desire you by me to speak with them . Your person will be safe , they repute you still their King ( This deserved thanks ) but how long the kindness will hold we shall soon find , they profess that all they had done or would do was for your honour , for your glory , ( your honour and security are their great care ) they will make you a glorious King , fearful to your enemies , and beloved of your subjects , they promise you a plentiful and unparalleled revenue , they will maint•…ine your power and authority in relation to the laws , with your royal person , according to the duty of their allegiance , their protestation , their vow , their solemn league , and covenant , without diminishing your just power and greatness , and that they will all the days of their lives continue in this covenant against all opposition ; they assure you Sir , that they intend faithfully the good of your majesty , and of the kingdom , and that they will not be diverted from this end by any private or self-respects whatsoever . but the kingdom has been a long time ill governed by your uncles , and the clergy ; especially by the Archbishop of Canterbury , of whom they would have an account . They have found out necessary counsels for you , they would warn you of many things , which hitherto you have wanted good advise in . 

The conclusion was sad on the knight's part , his children were pledges for his return , and if he fail in that , their lives were to answer it . Which moved with the the King ; he allows the excuse , sends him back with this answer , that he will speak with the Commons the next morning ; which it should seem the report of the outrages done by the clowns upon his refusal , & this message made him consent to . At the time he takes his barge & is rowed down to Redriffe , the place nearest the rebels , ten thousand of them descend from the hill to see , and treat with him , ( With a resolution to yield to nothing , to overcome by the treaty ; as they must have done , had not the Kings fear preserved him . ) When the barge drew nigh , the new c•…uncell of state ( Says out knight ) howled , and shouted , as though all the devils of hell had been amongst them ; Sir John Moton was brought toward the river guarded , they being determined to have cut him in pieces , if the King had broke his promise . 

All the desires of these good and faithful counselors contracted suddenly into a narrow room , they had now but one demand . The King asks them what is the matter which made them so earnestly solicit his presence ? They have no more to say , but to entreat him to land . Which was to betray himself to them , to give his life and sovereignty up to those fickle beasts , to be held of them during their good pleasures ; which the Lords will not agree to . The Earl of Salisbury , of the ancient nobility , and illustrious house of Montacute , tells them their equipage and order were not comely , and that the King ought not to adventure amongst their troops . They are now more unsatisfied , and London , how true soever to the cause , and faithless to the Prince , shall feel the effects of their fury , Southwark a friendly borough , is taken up for their first quarters . Here again they throw down the malignants houses , and as a grace of their entrance , break up the King's prisons , and let out all those they find under restraint in them ; not forgetting to ransack the Archbishop's house at Lambeth , and spoil all things there — plucking down the stews standing upon the Thames bank , and allowed in the former ages ; it cannot be thought but that the idol loved adultery well enough , but perhaps these public bawdy-houses were too unclean , and Might stink in his nostrils ; we cannot find him anywhere quarrelling with the bears , those were no malignants . 

They knocked not long at the city-gates , which ( Some say ) were never shut against them , or ( As others ) quickly opened ▪ the citizens fancied themselves privy counselors born , inspired from their shops for affairs of state , and would not suppose , the reformation could be effected without them , they were rich by lies , and all the most sordid ways of falsehood , and must be sage and knowing , pride the first sin the devil taught man tickles them . The major Sir William Waleworth , whose memory ( While truth and loyalty shall be thought virtues ) must be honourable , and nine of the aldermen held for King Richard , in vain ; a prosperous wicked chief shall never want wicked instruments , three aldermen , and the greatest part of the persons for the King of the Commons , the idol , and his priests . Those , the considers , and well affected to Tyler , forbid their major to keep him out , own his actions , as done for the go•…d of the faithful persons of the land , and the commonwealth , & his followers for their brethren and companions of the holy cause . They vow to live and die with Tylar . many of those who had no thoughts of doing mischief ( Yet being none of the wisest ) were cheated into a good belief of them , because of their protestation ( Which in their first entrance they made solemnly ) that they had no intent , but this only , to search and hunt out the traitors of the kingdom , the subverters of the fundamental laws , evil counselors , and malignants , and that this done they would give over , they would disband , and return home the same men they were , to their farms and cottages , without enriching themselves , without any other harvest of their labours , not doubting bu•… that in the end , it should appear to all the world , that their endeavours have been most hearty and sincere , for the maintenance of religion , the King's just prerogatives , the laws and liberties of the land ; in which endeavours , by the grace of God , they would persist , though they should perish in the work . which was believed ; what confirmed this faith was , they made theft capital ( Which yet was confined , all without the fold of the godly were Egyptians , and could not be robbed ) and paid justly for what they had , but they paid not often , nor could their reckonings be great . 

The citizens were their purveyors , and made provision for them , every house was open to them , and tables continually furnished . Their entry was on the 14 of June , 1385. on Wednesday ( A little before midsummer ) the eve of corpus christi day ; they spend the morning of the next day , being the festival in rings , discoursing of the piety , honesty , and fairness of their cause , of liberty and the courses to gain it , of seizing traitors , of bringing incendiaries , malignants , and evil instruments to condign punishment , of the Duke John of Lancaster , who was above all men•…hated by them , but too far off for the scratches of their olawoes , being employed in Scotland to treat a peace there , whence these report him turned a traitor to the King , and become Scottish : about •…noone , being warmed more by their cups , than with the sun , for the richest wines were drawn for them , and swallowed with that greediness , that they were got to the height of drunkenness and •…aved like mad men , they are for execution ; the Savoy of the Duke of Lancaster a princely building , the most stately fabric of the kingdom was fired by them , his servants there murdered , his plate and jewels broke in pieces , a coat of his of great value ( Called in that age a Jack ) in contempt and scorn to this Prince , was stuck on the top of a lance , made a mark for their arrows , then cut and gashed to jags with their hatch•…ss , one of them who had hide a piece of plate , was thrown by the rest into the fire with it , crying out , we be zealous of truth and justice , and not thieves and robbers . the Londoners were here no slow men , they knew themselves guilty of receiving , and that their condition could be no worse , they Might think too , it would be their shame for ever to be overdone in mischief , nor were they here exceeded . 

The next fiery shower is discharged up . the temple an inns of court , or college for students of the laws of the nobler sort , but belonging to the knights of saint John of Jerusalem , to whom the possessions of the knight's templars were given by this King's grandfather . Many men lost there the evidences of their estates , many their lives . From hence in malice to the Lord Prior , they hasten to Clerkenwell , where they leave nothing of that noble palace of the knights of s. John of Jerusalem , but rubbish , and ashes , their church too was consumed in the same wicked flames . This house was seven days burning down . They break open the exchequer and 〈◊〉 Westminster the same day . The Flemings or Dutch strangers , who siace the Jews were banished , suffer their part in every sedition , are sought for all the streets through , all of them massacred , no sanctuary could save them , thirteen Flemings were drawn out of the church of the friar's hermits of saint Augustine , and beheaded in the streets , and seaventeen others pulled out of another parochial church die in the same manner . They had a shibboleth to discover them , he who pronounced Brot and cause , for bread and cheese had his head lopped off ; it was their 〈◊〉 if they could catch any man , who had not sworn their oath , was not of the side , or was hated by any of the Commons to snatch off his hood or capuch ( Which w•…s a part of the cloak , or outward garment worn then , and served to cover the head ) with the accustomed cry , or yelling which they used in beheading and overthrowing houses , then to rush in to the streets , and hack with their fellow Jobernolles , at his neck in crowds , till the head dropped down . 

Our most famous Chaucer flourishing then , in his description of the terrible fright , and noise , at the carrying away of chanticleer the cock by Reinold the fox , reflects upon these cries , but in an hyperbole of his poetical feigned ones , and much undervaluing the horror of the R•…ntish throats , as he will have it . They yellen as fiends do in hell , &c.  
So hideous was the noise , ah benedicy ! 
Certes jack-straw ne his many 
He made shouts half so shrill , 
When they would any Fleming kill . 




The Lombards scaped better , they were only robbed of what they had , their skins were left them whole , What the idol had long agone in France s•…rved Richard lion a merchant , and lapidary , formerly sheriff of London , one of the wealthyest of the city , who had given him blows , it was not fit this inju•…y should be forgotten , nor was it ; it was a score now , or never to be paid , he strikes off his old Master's head , which in triumph is carried before him on a spear . 

This night the King was counselled to fall upon these beasts , for the most part drunk , and cut their throats , easy to be destroyed , if any man had had but the courage to overcome . It was the gallant mayors advise , they lay on heaps without sense or motion , tired with the mischiefs of the day , drunk and asleep , without guards or watch ; the e•…e of Salisbury and the nobility , against whose l•…veses , honours and fortune's thes•… beasts had conspired , desire the King to •…y all fair and gentle ways of appeasing them , which counsel he approves . Th•…y were not so kind to themse•…veses ; many lost their lives by the hands and swords of their companions ; every petty discontent , or grudging , being enough to provoke them . Thirty two of them being drunk in a cellar of the Savoy , were immured there , finding in the same place death and th•… grave together . Some of them threw barrels of gunpowder ( Which was little known then ) into the fire , and are blown up with part of the palace . 

Proclamations were formerly made in Tyler's name , not in straws , ( As Polydore would have it . ) straw was this while busied elsewhere . The country about was by these proclamations summoned to repair to London with all speed , to spoil this Babylon ; the close menaces ( lest they provoke God's judgments ) pluck them down upon their heads , which themselves explain , if ye fail , if ye and your officers give not obedience freely to the protector , we will send ou•… 20000 men ( 20000 of our locusts ) who shall burn the towns of the children of disobedience ; those of s. Albans and Barnet ( Whose famous deeds challenge a place in this story by themselves ) struck with the thunder of this edict , haste to London ; in their journey thither , A•…h•…ibury , a retiring house of the lo : prior of s. John near 〈◊〉 , they find 20000 or thereabouts casting down the firmer parts of the house , which the fire could not consume . 

Jack Straw c•…ptain of this herd , calls these new comers •…o him , and forces them to swear to adhere to King Richard , and the Commons . How long this oath will b•… sworn to we shall see , and how much the safer the King will be for it . 

We shall see too what is lost by this new union of King and Commons , by the new fellowsh•…p , to observe the horrible irreligious hypocr•…sie of these clowns who only would be thought the protectors of his crown and person . They alone had decreed his ruin , who swear thus often to prevent it , to guard him from it ; a treason not to be believed by some then till it had taken . The Commons were then divided into three bodies , this with Jack Straw , the second at Mile-end unde•… the Essexian Princes , Kirkby , Treder , Scot , and Ruyg , the third on Tower-hill , where the idol , and priest Baal were in chief . 

This last crew grew horribly rude , and haughty ; the Commons there were not cont•…nted to be the King's tasters and no more , they snatch the King's provision violently from the purveyors , he is to be starved for his own good , and after . Harpies or vultures , choose you whether , strike high , like brave birds of prey they will kill no more flies , th•…ss was the way to secure their smaller mischiefs . polydores conceit that the Archbishop and Lord Prior of s. John , were sent out by the King to allay their heat , is not probable . 

Walsingham relates it thus , that they demanded these two ( With full cries no doubt of justice , justice ) with some others traitors by their law , ( A fundamental , never to be found or heard of before ) to be given up to them by the King with all the earnestness , and violence imaginable . 

They give him his choice , bid him consider of it , they will either have the blood of these their traitors or his ; they making all those d•…linquents , who attended on him , or executed his lawful commands ; whom say they , the King with an high and forcible hand protects , will not be appeased , unless they be delivered up ; conjuring him to be wise in time , and dismiss his extraordinary guards , his cavaliers , and others of that quality , who seem to have little interest or •…ffection to the public good . whether the tower doors flew open at this fright , or the m•…n-wolfeses crowded in , at the king•… going out to appease the party at mil•…end , as Sir John Froissart tells it , What the id•…l with priest Baal are now Masters of the tower , into which on Friday the 16 of June they entered , not many more than 400 of their company guarding them , where then were commanded six hundred of the King's men of arms , and six hundred archers , a guard not so extraordinary as was necessary then , all so faint-hearted , so unmanned at the appatition at the sight of these goblins , they stood like the stones of M•…dusa , remembered not themselves , their honour , nor what they had been . The clowns , the most abj•…ct of them , singly with their clubs , or 〈◊〉 in their hands , venture into all the rooms , into the King's bedchamber , ( Which perhaps had been his scaffold had he been there ) sit , lie , and tumble upon his bed , they press into his mother's chamber , where some of the merry wanton devils offer to kiss her , others g•…ve her blows , break her head . She swowne•… , and is carried privately to the wardrobe by her servants ; some revile and threaten the noblest knights of the household some strok•… their herds with their unclean hands ( Which beyond the Roman patience in the same •…udenesse from the Gauls is endured ) and this to claw , and sweeten , ( They meant it so ) they gloze with smooth words , and bespeak a lasting friendship for the time to come , they must maintain the injuries done to themselves , must not distu•…be the 〈◊〉 of their estates and rights , must not show any sense of gene•…sity , of faith , of honour , ( It concerned Tyler that they should be the veriest fools and cowards breathing ) if they stir make any cla•…meses , they shall be reputed seditious , tu•…bulent , and breakers of the public ( Otherwise and plainly ) Tyler's peace . it was never heard ( Says the Emperor charl•…s in Sl•…idan ) that it should be lawfu•…l to despoil any man of his estates and rights , and unlawful to restore him : our Tiler and his Anabaptists thought otherwise . 

As Walsingham , they went in and out like Lords , who were varlets of the lowest rank , and those who were no•… cowherds to knights , but to boars , value themselves beyond kights . Here was a hotchpotch of the rabble , a mechanic sordid state composed as those under Kettes oak of reformation , after , of country gnoofs , Hob , Dick , and Hick , 
with clubs , and clouted shoes . 




A medley or huddle of butchers , cobblers , tinkers , draymen , of apron men and plough-joggers , domineering in the King's palace , and rooting up the plants and wholesome flowers of his kingdom in it ; this place was now a vile and nasty sty , no more a King's palace , who will value a stately pile of building , of honourable title , or antique memory , since Constantine , when it is intected with the plague , haunted by goblins , or possessed by thieves . The knights of the court , were but knights of the carpet or hangings . No man seemed discontented , all was hushed and still . Whitehall was then a Bishop's palace , the tower was to be prepared for Tyler's highness , and his officers but the cement of the stratocraty of the government by sword , and club-law , could not be well tempered with vulgar blood , a servant of the Archbishops ( Who had trusted himself to these guards and walls ) is forced to betray his Lord . He brings them into the chapel , where the holy prelate wa•… at his prayers , where he had cel•…brated mass th•…t morning before the King , and taken the sacred communion , where he had spent the whole night in watching and devotion , as presaging what followed . 

He was a valiant man and pious , and expected these bloodhounds with great security , and calmness of mind ; when their bellowing first struck his ears , he tells his servants that death came now as a more particular blessing ; where the comforts of life w•…re taken away , that life was i•…kesome to him , ( Perhaps his pious fears for the church and monarchy , both alike endangered , and fatally tied to the same chain , Might make him weary of the world ) and that he cou•…d now die with more quiet of conscience than ever ; a quiet wh•…ch these patricides will not find when they shall pay the score of this and their other crimes . However the flattery of success May abuse , our deathbed represents things in their own shape , and as they are : after this the rout of wolves enter p•…ophane'y roaring , wh•…re is the traitor where is the robber of the common-people ? he answers , not •…oubled at what he saw , or heard . 

Ye are welcome my sons . I am the Archbishop whom you seek , neither traitor nor robber ; presently these 〈◊〉 of the devil gripping him with their wicked clutches , tear him out of the chapel , neither reverencing the altar , nor crucifix , figured on the top of his crosier , nor the host , ( These are the monks observations , for which he condemns them in the highest impiety , and makes them worse than devils , and as religion went then , well he Might condemn them so . ) They drag him by the arms and hood to tower hill without the gates , there they howl hideously , which was the sign of a mischief to follow . 

He asks them what it is they purpose , what is his offence , tells them he is their Archbishop ( This makes him guilty , all his eloquence , his wisdom are now of no use ) he adds the murder of their sovereign pastor will be severely punished , some notorious vengeance will suddenly follow it . These destroyers will not trouble themselves with the idle formality of 〈◊〉 mock-trial or court of their own erecting , an abominable ceremony , which had made their impiety more ugly , they proceed down tight , and plainly , which must be instead of all things , he is commanded to lay his neck upon the block , as a false traitor to the commonalty and realm : to deal roundly , his life was forfeited , and any particular charge , or defenc•… would not be necessary , his enemies were his accusers , and judge•… , ( His enemies who had combined and sworn to abolish his order , the church , and spoil the sacred patrimony ) and what innocency , what defence could save ? Without any reply farther , he forgives the headsman , and bows his body to the axe . 

After the first hit , he touches the wound with his hand , and speaks thus , it is the hand of the Lord . the next stroke falls upon his hand , ere he could remove it , and cuts off the tops of his fingers , after which he fell , but died not till the eight blow , his body lay all that day unburied , and no wonder , all men were thoroughly scared , under the tyranny of these monsters , all humanity , all piety , were most unsafe . 

The Archbishop died a martyr of loyalty to his King , and has his * miracles recorded , an honour often bestowed by monks ( Friends of regicide , and regicides , ) on traitors , seldom given to honest men . In his epitaph ( His rhyming epitaph , where is shown the pitiful ignorant rudeness of those times ) he goes for no less , he speaks thus : Sudburiae natus Simon jacet hic tumulatus , 
Martyrizatus n•…ce pro republica stratus . 


Sudbury's Simon hear entombed lies , 
who for the commonwealth a martyr dies . 




It is fit ( Says Plato ) that he who would appear a just man , become naked , that his virtue be despoiled of all ornament , that he be taken for a wicked man by others ( Wicked indeed ) that he be •…ocked , and hanged . The wisest of men tell us . † there is a just man that perisheth in his righteousness , and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness . The seas are often calm to pirates , and the scourges of God , the executioners of his fury , the Goths , Huns , and Vandals heretofore , Tartars and Turks now , how happy are their robberies , how do all thing•… succeed with them beyond their wish•… ! Our saviour's passion , the great mystery of his incarnation lost him to the j•…wes his murderers . Whereupon Grotius notes , it is often permitted by God , that pious men be not only vexed by wicked men , but murdered too — he gives ex•…mpleses in Abel , Isaiah , and others , the Messiah died for the sins of the world , Ethelbert and saint Edmund the East-angles , saint Oswald the Northumbrian , saint Edward the monarch , &c.  Saxon Kings , are examples at home . 

Thucydides in his narration of the defeat and death of Nician the Athenian in Sicily , speaks thus : being the man who of all the Grecians of my time had least deserved to be brought to so great a degree of misery . it is too frequent to proclaim God's judgements in the misfortunes of others , as if we were of the celestial council , had seen all the wheels , or orbs , upon which providence turns , and knew all the reasons and ends which direct and govern its motions : men love by a strange abstraction to separate facts from their crimes ; where the fact is beneficial , the advantage must canonize it , it must be of heavenly offspring , a way to justify Cain , Abimelech , Phocas , our third Richard , Ravilliac , every lucky parricide whatsoever . 

Alexander Severus that most excellent Emperor assassinated by the militia or soldiery , by an ill fate of the commonwealth ( For Maximinus a Thracian or goth.  lieutenant general of the army , a cruel savage tyrant , by force usurped the empire after him ) replied , to one who pretended to foretell his end ; that it troubled him not , the most renowned persons in all ages die violently . This gallant Prince condemned no death but a dishonest fearful one . Heaven itself declared on the Archbishop's side , and cleared his innocency . starling of Essex who challenged to himself the glory of being heads man , fell mad suddenly after , run through the villages with his sword hanging naked upon his breast , and his dagger naked behind him , came up to London , confessed freely the fact , and lost his head there ; as most of those did , who had laid their hands upon th•…s Archbishop coming up severally out of their countries to that city , and constantly accusing themselves for the parricide of their spiritual father . Nothing was now unlawful , there could be no wickedness after this ; they make more examples of barbarous cruelty under the name of justice . 

Robert Lord Prior of St. John , and Lord treasurer of England John leg , or laige one of the King's sergeants at arms , a Franciscan , a physician belonging to the Duke of Lancaster ( Whom p•…rhaps they hated because they had wro•…ged his Master ) a friar Carmelite , the King's confessor were murdered there in this fury . Whose heads with the Archbishops , were born before them through London streets , and advanced over the bridge . 

This while the King was softening the rebels of Essex at Mile-end , with the ea•…leses of Sal•…bury , Warwick , and Oxford , and other Lords thither by p•…oclamation he had summoned them , as presuming the Essexians to be the more civilised , and by much the fairer enemies , as indeed they were . There he promises to grant them their d•…sireses , liberty , precious liberty is the thing they ask , this is given them by the King , but on condition of good behaviour . They are to cease their burning , and destruction of houses , to return quietly to their homes , and offend no man in their way . Two of every village were to stay as agents behind for the King's charters , which could not be got ready in time . Farther the King offers them his banners . 

Some of the were simple , honest persons , of no ill meaning , who knew not why the garboils were begun ; nor why they came thither . These were won , and win others ; without more stir those of Essex return whence they came . Tyler and Baal are of another spirit , they would not part so easily , Tyler the future monarch , who had designed an empire for himself , and was now , sceleribus suis ferox atque praeclarus famous for his villainies and haughty , would not put up so , he and his K•…ntish rabble tarry . The next day being Saturday the 17 of June , was spent as the other days of their tyranny , in burning , ruining houses , murders , and depopulations . 

The night of this day the idol and his priest upon a new resolution ; intended to have struck at the neck of the nation , to have murdered the King ( the Achan of the tribes , ) probably by beheading , the death these parricides had used hitherto , the Lords , gentlemen , the wealthiest and honestest part of the citizens , then to have pillaged their houses , and fired the city in four parts , they intended this haste to avoid odious partnership in the exploit , and that those of Norfolk , Suffolk , and other parts Might not share in the spoil . This counsel of destruction was against all policy , more profit Might have been made of this city by excise , assessment , and taxes upon the trade , Tylor Might sooner have enriched himself , and have been as secure . Estate makes men lofty , fearo and poverty , if we May trust Machiavel , bend and supple , every man had been in danger , and obnoxious to him , one clown had awed a street . Near the Abby-church at Westminster , was a chapel with an image of the virgin Mary , this chapel was called the chapel of our Lady , in the p•…w it stood near the chapel of s. steph. since turned from a chapel to the parliament house , here our Lady then ( Who would not believe it ) did great miracles . Richard's preservation at this time was no small one being in the hands of the multitude , let loose , and enraged . There he makes his vows of safety , after which he rides towards these sonnet of perdition under the idol Tyler . 

Tyler , who meant to consume the day in cavils , protests to those who were sent by the King to offer those of Kent the same peace , which the Essex clowns had accepted , that he would willingly embrace a good and honest peace , but the propositions or articles of it were only to be dictated by himself . He is not satisfied with the King's charters , three draughts are presented to him , no substance , no form would please , he desires an accommodation , but he will have peace , and truth together . H•… exclaims that the liberty there is deceitful , but an empty name , that while the King talks of liberty , he is actually levying war , setting up his standard against his Commons , that the good Commons are abused to their own ruin , and to the miscarriage of the great undertaking , that they have with infinite pains and labour acquainted the King with their humble desires , who refuses to join with them , misled , and carried away by a few evil and rotten-hearted Lords and delinquents , contrary to his coronation oath ; by which he is obliged to pass all laws off•…red him by the Commons ( whose the legislative power is ) which denial of his if it be not a forfeiture of his trust and office ( both which are now useless ) it comes near it , and he is fairly dealt with ; if he be not deposed , which too Might be done without any want of modesty or duty , and with the good of the commonwealth , the happiness of the nation not depending on him , or any of the regal branches . i will deliver the nation from the Norman slavery , and the world ( Says he ) of an old silly superstition , that Kings are only the tenants of heaven , obnoxious to God alone , cannot be condemned and punished by any power else , i will make : here he lied not , an wholesome precedent to the world formidable to all tyrants , i declare , that Richard Plantagenet , or Richard of Bordeaux , at this time is not in a condition to govern , i will make no addresses no applications to him , nor receive any from him ; though i am but a dry bone , too unworthy for this great calling , yet i will finish the work , i will settle the government without the King and against him , and against all that take part with him ▪ which sufficiently justifies our arms . God with us , says he , ownt them , success manifests the righteousness of our cause , this is ( Says he ) the voice of the persons , by us their representative , and our counsel . After the vote of no more addresses , which with all their other vote of treasons were to be styled the resolution of the whole realm ; and while he swells in this ruffle , Sir John Newton a knight of the court , is sent to entreat rather than invite him to come to the King then in Smithfield ; where the idols regiments were drawn up , and treat with him , concerning the additional provisions he desired to be inserted into the charter . 

No observance was omitted which Might be thought pleasing to his pride ( Which pride was infinitely puffing . ) Flattery was sweet to him , and he had enough of it , that made him bow a little , when nothing else could do it . We May judge at the unreasonableness of all his demands , and supplies of new articles out of his instrument , by one : he required of the King a commission to empower himself and a committee team of his own choosing , to cut off the heads of lawyers and escheators , and of all those , who by reason of their knowledge , and place were any way employed in the law . He fancied i•… those who were learned in the law , were knocked i' th' head , all things would be ordered by the common persons , either there would be no law , or that which was should be declared by him and his , subject to their will , with which his expression the day before did well agree ; then , attributing all things to God ( The god of war ) and his conquering arms , and striking his sword ( Which showed the present power ) on london-stone . 

The Cyclops , or centaur of Kent spoke these words : from this day ( Or within four days ) all law ( Or all the laws of engl. as others ) shall fall from Wat Tyler's mouth . The Kings indeed had bound themselves , and were bound by the laws . They were named in them . Tyler was more than a King , he was an Emperor , he was above the laws ; nor was it fit the old overworn Magnacharta should hold him . the supreme authority and legislative power ( No one knows how derived ) were to be , and reside in him , according to the new establishment , Tyler like Homer's Mart , {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} {non-roman} was a whirlwind , he was * Egnatius in Paterculus rather a fencer , a swash buckler than a senator ; his right a•…me , his brutish force , not justice , not reason must sway all things , Tyler will not rule in fetters , his will , his violence shall be called law , and grievous slavery under that will . falsely peace . Had those , whom no government never so sweet , and gracious will please , unless the supreme power be given the persons , seen the confusions and dangers , the cruelty and tyranny of these few days , they would quickly have changed this opinion . 

The knight performs his embassy , he urges the idol with great earnestness to see the King and speedily . He answers , if thou be'st so much for haste , get thee back to the King thy Master , i will come when i list , yet he follows the knight on horseback , but slowly . In the way , he is met by a citizen , who had brought sixty doublets for the Commons , upon the public faith . this citizen asks him for his money , he promises payment before night , & presses on so near the King that his horse touched the croup of the King's horse . 

Froissart reports his discourse to the King , Sir King ( Says the idol ) seest thou yonder persons ? The King answers yes , and asks him what he means by the question . He replies , they are all at my command , have sworn to me faith , and truth , to do what i will have them . He and they had broke their faith and truth to their Prince , and he thinks these men will be true to him . Here though it be a digression too much , i cannot omit a passage of the late civil wars of France , begun and continue by the jesuited party to extirpate the royal family there . 

Villers , governor of Roüen for the holy league , tells the Duke of Mayen captain general of the rebellion , that he would not obey him ; they were both companions and spoilers of the state together : the King being leveled , all men else ought to be equal . 

The idol , as he that demanded ( So the knight ) nothing but riot , continues his discourse ( Thus ) believest thou King , that these persons will depart without thy letters ? The King tells him , he means fairly , that he will make good his word , his letters are near finished , and they shall have them . But the glory of the idol ( Which was merely the benefit of fortune ) begin to fade , his principali•…y was too cruel , too violent to be lasting . Vengeance here hovered over his head , and he who had been the destruction of multitudes hastens , nay precipitates his own fate , and ruins himself by his own fury , he puts himself into the King's power , who should in his first towering had hebeen wisely wicked , likea vulture of the game , have flown at his throat . * the judicious politic will not begin to give over ; however , will never venture himself in the Prince's hands whom he has justly offended by treasons against his government . 

† Charles' of Burgundy confesses this to be a great folly ; his grandfather Philip lost his life at Montereau upon the Yonne by it , and our idol shall not escape better . 

Sir John Newton the knight employed to fetch him , delivered his message on horseback , which is now remembered , and taken for an high neglect ; besides , it seemeth the carriage and words of the knight were not very pleasing . Every trifle in omission was treason to the idols person , and new state . he rails foully draws his dagger , and bellowing out , traitor , menaces to strike the knight , who returns him in exchange the lie ; and not to be behind in blows , draws his : this the idol takes for an intolerable affront , but the King fearful of his servant , cools and assuages the heat ; he commands the knight to dismount , and offer up his dagger to the idol , which ( Though unwillingly ) was done . 

This would not take off his edge : the Prince who yields once to a rebel , shall find heaps of requests , and must deny nothing . The King had given away his knight's dagger : now nothing will content Tyler but the King's sword , with which the militia or power of arms impliedly was sought . This he asks , than again rushes upon the knight , vowing never to eat till he have his head . 

When the nobility and gentry of the kingdom , whom neither necessity nor misery could animate , lie down trampled on by these villains without soul , or motion ; in comes the major of London , Sir William Walworth , the everlasting honour of the nation , a man who over-did ages of the Roman scaevolae , or Curtij in an hours action & snatches the King & kingdom out of these flames . He tells the King it would be a shame to all posterity to suffer more insolences from this hongman , this lump of blood . This the rest of the courtiers now wakened by their own danger , ( For he who destroys one man contrary to law or justice , gives all men else reason to fear themselves and take heed ) are echoes to . This puts daring into the young King ; he resolves to hazard all upon this chance : this way he could not but die kingly , at least , like a gentleman , with the sword , which God ( Of whose great m•…jesty he was a beam ) gave him in his hand . The only way left to avoid a shameful death , was to run the danger of a brave one , and a wise coward ( I will not say an honourable one ) considering the incertainty of things under that iron socage tenure would think so . 

The King commands the major to arrest the butcher : this was charge enough , and rightly understood , indeed there was then no time for fo•…me nor trial , the suspension of the courts was Tyler's act , his crime , a•…d he ought not to look for any advantag•… from it : an historian says the Duke of Guyse's power was so much , that the ordinary forms of justice could not be observed ; fair law is handsome , but it is not to be given to wolves and tigers , Tyler was a traitor , a common enemy ; and against such ( Says a father long agone ) every man is a soldier ; whosoever st•…ck too , st•…uch as much in his own defence , in his own preservation , as the Kings : and the safety of the King and persons made this course necessary ; besides , Tyler's crimes were public and notorious . 

The generous Lord Major obeys the sentence , which was given by the same power , by which the judges of courts sat and acted , when justice flowed down from the fountain in the ordinary channel , and which the dam head being thus troubled by this wolf , could flow no otherwise , which was authority sufficient ; by this power Richard's captains must fight when he has them , and kill those whom the courts of justice cannot deal with : Tyler saints , and shrinks to what he had been , he was as cowardly as cruel , and could not seem a man in any thing but that he was a thief , and a rebel ; he asks the brave major in what he was offended by him ; this was a strange question to an honest man , he finds it so . the major ( Says Fraissart ) calls him false stinking knave , and tells him he shall not speak such words in the presence of his natural Lord the King . the major answers in full upon the accursed sacrilegious head of the idol with his sword . He struck heartily , and like a faithful zealous subject . Dagon of the clowns sinks at his feet . The King's followers environ him round , John Standish an esquire of the court , alights , and runs him into the belly , which thrust sent him into another world , to accompany him who taught rebellion , and murder first . Event was then no sign of a good cause . 

All history now brands him for a traitor , which by some will be attributed to his miscarriage : witho•… doubt had he prospered in the works , he had had all the honours which go along with prosperity . The King had been the wrong doer , and his afflictions , if nothing in so much youth could have been found out , had been crimes ; we must overpower those whom we would make guilty . Henry the great of France under the Popes interdict , is told by a gentleman , Sir , if we be overcome , we shall die condemned heretics , if your majesty conquer , the censures shall b•… revoked , they will fall of themselves . He who reads the mischiefs of his usurpation will think he perished too late . 

Now i come to an act of Richards , the most glorious of his history , which the annals past can nowhere parallel , here his infancy excels his after manhood . Here , and in the gallantry of his death he appears a full Prince , and perhaps vies with all the bays of his usurpers triumphs . 

Alexander the monarch of the world , ( Not more wondered at for his victories , then for that suppressing the sedition of his Macedons in Asia , tired , and unable to March , whither his ambition carried him on wings ) leaps from his throne of state , into the battles of his phalanges•…raged , se•…ses thirteen of the chief malcontents , and delivers them to the custody of his guards . Curtius knows not what he should impute this amazement of the seditious to , every man returning upon it to his old duty , and obedience , and ready to yield himself up into the same hands : it Might be ( Says he ) the veneration of the majesty of Kings , which the nations submitted under , worship equally with the gods , or of himself which laid the tempest . That confidence too of the Duke Alessandro of Parma , in a mutiny of the German reiters at namures•…ss memorable , who made his way with his sword alone through the points of all their lances , into the midst of their troops , and brought thence by the collar one of the mutineers , whom he commanded to be hang•…d to the terror of the rest . The youth of Richard begat rather contempt , than reverence , of which too these clowns breasts were never very full : when the fall of the idol was known to the rout , they put themselves into a posture of defence , thunder out nothing but vengeance to the King and his , whom they now arraign of murder and tyranny : he is guilty of innocent blood ; a tyrant , a traitor , an homicide , the public enemy of the common wealth . Richard plantagin•…t is indicted in the name of the persons of England , of treason , and other heinous crimes . he is now become less than Tyler's ghost , a traitor to the freeborn persons . 

His treason was , he would not destroy himself , he would not open his body to tylars full blow . They roar out , our captain general is slain treacherously , let us stand to it , and revenge his precious blood , or die with him : i cannot pass this place without some little wonder ; had these ruffians ( With whom Kings hedged about by holy scripture , and laws human , are neither divine nor sacred ) been asked whether Tyler the idol , of their own clay and hands , Might have been tried , touched or struck , according to their resenting this blow here : let his tyrannies , his exorbitances have been what they would , they would have answered no doubt in the negative : though Richard Might have been struck through and through , Tyler who had usurped his power , must have been sacred , it must have been treason to touch him : Phocas must not be hurt : in Tyler's case straw would allow the old texts again : the powers were to be obeyed . Their bows were drawn when the King gallops up to them alone , and riding round the throng , asks them , what madness it was that armed them thus against their own peace , and his life , whether they would have no end of things or demands . 

He tells them if liberty be their only aim , as hitherto they have pretended , they May assure themselves of it , and that it is an extreme folly to seek to make that our own with the breach of faith , of laws , with impieties , violating God and man , which we May come by fairly . But they trod not the path to liberty , that where every man commands , no man can be free ; the liberty too they fancy cannot be had , the world cannot subsist without order and subjection , men cannot be freed from laws : if they were , there could be no society , no civility anywhere , men must be shunned as much as wolves or bears , rapine and bloodshed would overrun the world , the spoiler must fear the next comer , like savage beasts , who hurt others , and know not it is ill to hurt them , men would devout men , the stronger thief would swallow up the rest ; no relations would be sacred , where every man has the power of the sword , the aged sire ( Could there be any such ) must defend his silver hairs from the unnatural violence of his own sons . 

He adds , if there can be any just cause of sedition , yet is the sedition unjust which outlasts it , which continues , when the cause is yielded to , and taken away ; that if his prerogative has been sometimes grievous , his tax 's heavy , and any of those they call evil counselors faulty , they ought to remember , in their first risings , and all along in all their oaths , and covenants they swore continually not to invade the monarchy , nor touch the rights of his free crown . you ought to remember your own remonstrances ; you once declared , that you acknowledged the maxim of the law , the King can do no wrong ; if any ill be committed in matters of state , the councillors ; if in matters of law , the judges must answer for it — my person was not to be violated . He expects they should deal with him , as the honest husbandman does in overflows of waters , who clears and drains his ground , repairs the banks , but does not usurp upon the stream , does not enhance within the channel . And farther that quarrels to his government and laws are unreasonable from those , who out of ambition arm to overthrow both , that reformation is not the work of sedition , which ever disorders what is well settled . He conjures them to forsake these suries , who , says he , abuse their lightness merely for their own ends , whose companions or Masters they were lately , now are they but their g•…urdss , and that if they refuse a subjection according to all laws divine and human to his sceptre , they must become slaves and tributaries to their iron , to the flails and pitchforks of some mushroom of their own dirt , and that advancing their mushroom , thus upon his power by the ways of force , gives an example to the next tumults against themselves . 

There can be no safety for any new power raised upon this force , the obedience to that upon these rules being limited , and annexed to the force , and success , and to yield , and give way to the next power visible which shall overbear it . A way to thrust a nation into a state of war , continual perjury and impiety to the world's end . This realm ( As he goes on ) is my inheritance , which i took possession of after the death of my grandfather being a child , and did i claim only by your gift ( Which i shall never grant ) yet are not you free , to make a new choice , you are bound to me by oaths and compacts , and no right of new compliance , or submission can be left you to transfer . He concludes , that despair was a dangerous sin , which would drive them headlong to destruction ; that whatsoever their offences had been , they were not above his mercy . 

He bids them not trouble themselves for Tyler , a base fellow , who thrust them into dangers , and blew them into a storm to raise himself upon the billows , upon the ruins of his country . He promises to lead them , he will be their captain , if they will follow him he will please them in all their desires . This he spoke , to draw them off farther into Smithfield , fearing they would again fall to burning of houses . They now wanted their devil , who possessed them , and being in doubt whether they should kill the King , or return home with his charters , there being no incendiary to command , follow the King in suspense ; Baal and straw about this time amazed at the idols fall , lose courage and fl•…p away . In the mean time the stout major spurs to the city with one servant , where in a few words he acquaints the citizens with the King's peril and his own , and requests their sudden assistance , if not for himself , for the King , who ( Says he ) is in danger now to be murdered . Some loyal hearts , some good men of the King's party arm , and join , to the number of one thousand , and range themselves in the street , expecting some of the cavaliers , of the King's knights to conduct them , resolved either to overcome , or not to fear the conqueror . 

Sir Robert Knowles , a renowned commander in the French wars of the King's grandfather ( Called falsely Canol by Polydor , and others ) undertakes this charge . Sir perducas d' Albret ( Called d' Albreth ) a noble Gascoigne and a commander too in those wars , Nicholas Brembre the King's draper , and other alderm•…ns , come in with their levies , and March to the King in sight of the rebels . There the King knights the brave Will : Walworth . John Standish , one of his esquires , Nicholas Brembre , John Philpot , ( A most generous citizen , famous for his faithful service to his Prince in the times succeeding ) and others . The n•…bility about the King desire him to strike off an hundred or two of the clowns heads , in revenge of the injuries and infamy they had received from them . Sir Robert Knowles would have him fa•…l on and cut them all to pieces . The King dislikes both these counsels ; he says many of these unhappy men were awed to side , without either malice to his p•…rson or power ; and that if the first advise were taken , the most innocent Might be punished , and the guilty escape ; if the second , the very rebel and the counterfeit ( The forced one ) must be swallowed up together , which was high injustice . Yet were there many of these r•…belss called to account , and their acts of blood , rapine and burning cost them dear ; but these acts of theirs done against law , were punished legally , upon the finding of juries , when the tumults were composed : which was fair and handsome , and shows the honourable justice of our King . All that was done against them that night was , to forbid the citizens by proclamation to entertain any of these men in the city , or communicate with them ; and to command all men who had not dwelled there for one year before , to depart : 

So far was the young King from approving the cruelty of the 〈◊〉 counsels , that in the next place , he causes the charters , which he had promised them to be delivered ; yet some May suppose this but a pardon of show , and the pardon-piece of the charters , as well as the other part , rather a piece of policy than any thing else , the countries being yet tumult•…ous , the clowns were upon their good behaviour , that was a condition of their pardon , which they would not observe , they commit new outrages , break the King's laws , & pluck down the vengeance of justice upon their heads afresh , they did not give over their mischiefs after their return says , wals.  by the King and his counsel , the charters , as extorted out of force , and necessity were recalled ; and though the m•…ynie generally were pardoned , the King ( Again provoked ) stayed but for a fit time to take vengeance on the ringleaders , and punish particular offenders who could not be forgiven : it being necessary in so desperate a revolt for the terror of others , to make 〈◊〉 of some such maliciou•… disturbers of the peace , as would never have been reclaimed . The King's charters contained a manumission of the villains , and abolition of the memory of what was past for the rest . The tenor , says Walsingham , of the charters ixtorted from the King by force , was this , ( He gives us only that of Hartfordshire the province of his monastery . ) 

Richard by the grace of God King of England and of France , Lord of Ireland , to all his bailies , and others his trusty , to whom these letters shall come greeting . Know ye that we of our special grace have made free all our lieges , and every of our subjects of Hartfordshire , and we free those , and every of them from all * bondage , and quit them by these presents , and also we pardon the same our lieges , and subjects , for all felonies , treasons , trespasses , and extortions by them , or any of them in any wise done , or committed , and also every outlawry , or outlawries , if any against them , or any of them , are or shall be published , and our full peace to them or any of them , therefore we grant , in witness whereof these our letters we have caused to be made patents . Witness ourself at London the 15. day of June , the 4th year of our reign . 

This charter was granted about the time the clowns of Essex disbanded , and received theirs , it was brought into Harfordshire to saint Albans by Wallingford one of the town ; * Friday says Walsingham the day of tribulation , &c. ( Which was the 16 of June ) the towns . men of saint Albans being at the time of Matines' acquainted by those of Barnet with the command of the ordinance or act for repairing to London presently with the esquires of the abbot set forth ; so that i conceive the day of this charter is mistaken in it by the monk . 

The clowns throw down their arms at the King's feet , sue for mercy , and deliver up their chiefs ; the principal of which priest Straw was after drawn from his hiding holes , and laid hold of by the King's officers . What became of them we shall see below , in the visitation made by the King , and his ministers , through the provinces in uproar . 

The Commons of Kent now scatter and dissolve , the heads of the Archbishop , Lord Prior , and the rest , are taken down from the bridge , and the idols advanced there ; that Baal should now be taken in an old house is an error of the knights ; Baal must take his turn , but he shall have a longger run for it . That the dagger should now be given in honour of Sir William Walworth as an addition to the city arms is fabulous , this dagger is the sword of St. Paul , and was born by the city when Tyler was living . 

The King now rides to Westminster where he gives God thanks for his deliverance , and presents his offering to the virgin Mary , in her chapel of the pew , next he visits the Princess mother in the tower royal , called the Queen's wardrobe , and bids her rejoice , for ( Says he ) this day i have recovered mine heritage , the realm of England near lost , the Lords return to their own houses . The other countries now in combustion , and upon their March to London , make halt , they were thunder-stricken at the disaster of the idol , they hated the fortune not the wickedness of that monster , and tarry to pour out those plagues at home , if they be not checked , which before they intended to carry farther off . The example and success of the idol had moved with many , but his invitation , and solicitation by the emissaries of this confederacy and spirit more . The s•…ctarieses , or ringleaders of the hurden rustic ragamiuffin's in the several provinces of the association ( While Tyler was thus busied in the chief seat of his new dominions ) promote the cause , and pursue the instructions of the Prince of devils , they were all to tread his steps , as we shall find in what follows . 

I have before spoken of the summons of the i•…ol to fetch the bordering rogues into the line of communication , who were to serve as auxiliaries only , to strengthen Tyler , rather than to enrich themselves , and likely to be cashiered , and cast off when he had perfected his work : amongst these take hells were the townsmen of saint Alban with the abbot's servants shuffled in the throng of purpose to oversee and awe the clowns from the new fangles of our fan•…tickss ; these as is related , were sworn to the engagement at Heibury , whence they come to London , whither they are no sooner got , but the towns men separate from the servants of the monastery , and in St.  Marry bow . church does their profane conventicle consult how to make advantage of the tumult . 

And what pretences of revolt from their Lord abbot would seem most fair , and taking . Here they make not the causes of their disobedience , they were hatched secretly amongst themselves , they deliberate how to perfect things , how to come to effects . The enlarging the bounds of their common , free fishing , hunting in certain places , when they pleased , and hand-mills , that the bailie of the liberty shall no more meddle within the precincts of the town , the revocation of charters prejudicial to the freeborn burgesses , cancelling the bonds of their forefathers made to abbot Richard , are the propositions first voted . 

One , who would be wiser than the rest , persuades them not to attempt things rashly , and giddily , without authority , he tells them that Wat Tyler , protector and captain general of the clowns was near , that the protector , was a righter of wrongs raised , and inspired by providence to redeem the faithful Commons from the thraldom of the wicked , at the suit of the godly party , says he , Tyler has accepted the government , he is to govern the two nations ; the supreme executive power resides in him , from him ( Says he ) and from the keepers of the liberties let us seek for remedy . 

Let us make our addresses to him , let us seek to his highness for power , and comm•…ssion ; this he said ( As Walsingham writes ) supposing a greater than Tyler should not be seen in the kingdom , that Tyler's greatness , for the time to come would only be eminent ; that the laws of the land ( The most ancient English , Saxon laws ) would be of no force , of no validity , because the most of the lawyers were already murdered , and the rest in their account not long lived , the axes edge was turned towards them . He concludes , let us return home , and in the puissance of Wat , and ourselves , force the abbot to reason ; if he deny our requests , we will awe him with burning and demolishing the monastery , with killing the monks , we will threaten not to leave one stone upon another ; others conceive it more safe to petition the King ( Who Might be spoken with by every man , and durst refuse nothing ) for his letters under the privy seal , commanding the abbot , to restore to the townsmen the rights , and liberties which their ancestors enjoyed in the time of King Henry the first , as if the English church had been lately endowed , the monasteries founded , their royalties , liberties , privileges granted by the Norman Princes , than which nothing could be more false . The most Christian Saxon Kings of blessed memory , twelve of which died martyrs of the faith , ten shine glorious stars in the calendar of saints , were all nursing fathers of the church , scarcely was there one in the illustrious roll , who gave not lands and possessions with exemptions , and immunities to the church , who erected not bishoprics , or monasteries into which thirty of our crowned , heads , Kings , or Queens entered , the superstition of the ages than ought not to blemish their piety : the Mercian King Offa , his son Ecgfryd . King Ethelred , King Edward , are the founders and donors of St.  Albans what King Henry the first did for the town i cannot say , nor how ample its liberties were then , this is true , he confirms the grants of the Saxon Princes , to the monastery , and adds the Norman seal to strengthen the Saxon crosses , this is all , but truth is not necessary in such uproars , the credulity of a light headed multitude is quickly abused , their duty and obedience easily corrupted without it . 

To keep our way ; both these counsels are approved . William Greyndcob an hind , who had eaten the bread of the monastery for the most part of his life , is elected with others , and sent on this errand to the King , before whom he kneels six times out of zeal to prevail . This lo•… too was made principal prolocutor ( Says our monk ) or speaker to the idol : before whose sordid excellency and his unclean council he complains of the grievous tyranny of the abbot and prior , ( Some few monks are thrust in to make up the number ) of the oppressures of the Commons , of withholding the wages of poor labourers , the design was to rowz•… the wolf . 

Tyler meant not to leave London , yet he promises , if need be , to send twenty thousand of the saints , who shall not •…all to shave the beards of the abbot and the rest , which signified ( In plain English ) cutting off their heads . 

The gracious captain general was yet more kind ; he vows , if it be convenient , to assist them in his own person . He gives them directions and orders to govern themselves by , and makes their obedience here , a condition of his love . These orders were generally enjoined by our English Mahomet , through all the provinces of his conquest , and were framed according to the law of his bloody Koran . he swears them to omit nothing either in his commands or doctrine . A servant of the abbot , one of the spies upon the townsmen , rides in full career to s. Albans , and gives intelligence to the abbey of the exploits of the new Masters at London . he tells them in what manner that didst of a captain ( Tyler ) sullied and polluted with the blood of the noblesse , had butchered the English patriarch , and the Lord treasurer . That London , the den of these ravenous beasts , falsely called the chamber of her Kings , was likely now to become the charnel-house of Richard , and his loyal vassals ; that these fiends , who would go for saints , and the only good patriots commit the acts of thieves , and murderers , neither reverencing religion nor laws : and that the conquering French , who makes fair war , nay the barbarous Scot , broke out of the fastness of his own desert , mortal enemies of the nation , could not spoil not ruin with more cruelty and villainy . No mercy , says he , ( Yield who will upon mercy ) no favour , no goodness can be expected from this rout of wolves . He bids those pointed at , and named by Greyndcob to Tyler , shift for themselves , which they are not long in resolving of . The prior , four monks , and some of their servants , one part horsed , another on foot , fly for their lives , not assuring themselves till they got to Tynmouth , a priory of this monastery of saint Alban in Northumberland , William Greyndcob , and William Cadindon a baker , on Friday had hastened to s. Albans , that they Might make the honour of the achievement theirs by first appearing in the action ; these brag aloud of the prosperity of affairs , that they were no more drudges and slaves , but Lords for the time to come ; that they had brought about great and wonderful feats against the abbey ; they propose , first to defy the abbot , to renounce all amity and peace with him , then to break down his folds and gates in Fauconwood , Eywood , and his other words , and to pull down the underbowsers house , standing over against the fishmarket , and hindering the prospect of the burgesses and nobility of the town , this is their own style , a nobility scarce to be paralleled in the world discovered , unless we fetch in the man-eaters of Brasil , who have neither letters nor laws , acknowledge neither god nor Prince . 

This night the first seen of the tragedy is acted ; the next day , being Saturday , fatal to the hangman Tyler ; the upstart nobility of churls assemble and make proclamation , that no man able to serve his country , presume to slight the lieutenants of the idol , but that every man furnish himself with such arms as he can provide , to attend them the lieutenants in his own defence . The crew summoned are commanded to press the gentry for the survice , and to cut off the heads of those who would not join with them , and swear to be faithful to them ; beheading , burning houses , forfeiture of goods were menaced to all that would not assist the forces raised by Tyler , and fight the Lord's battles , that is , for the cause . this , says our monk , was the charge of their Lord and Master wa•… , this was his rubrie of blood . 

Next , with great pomp they March to Fauconwood ; to level the slips of their haste and nightwork , something they feared Might be left whole , upon review when root and Branoh were pared and torn up , they retire . 

The other growtnolls of the neighbourhood , subject to the distress , or siegniory of saint Alban , wait for them ; these were cited upon the same threats to meet , and promised bellyfuls , care loads of liberties . now or never for the liberty of the subject , and the power of godliness . this supply swells them into huge hopes , it puffs them up . Greyndcob and Cadindon more haughty now than ever ; lead their battaliaes , blustering with surly pride and disdain , to the gates of the monastery , which with the same loftiness they command the porter to set open . Some of the company , friends of the house , had given private intelligence to the abbots of the contrivances against him , who had instructed his servants how to carry themselves towards this tag and rag of swains , they observe them punctually . 

That they May seem pious in their entrance , they free the public malefactors out of the abbot's prison ; but so that they shou•…d owe faith hereafter , and grace of the benefit to the Commons ( A name the most honourable , and which must swallow up all things else ) and ins•…parably stick to them , one of the offenders , whom they suppose unworthy of liberty or life , ( Grown judges and executioners by the same inspiration and spirit ) they behead on the ground before the gates , than fi•… his head upon the pillory , roaring with that devilish cry they had learned at London . this was plain murder by the law whatsoever this man's crime was , those rogue•… were guilty in a most high nature , so th•… besides the baseness of their condition , they were incapable of any jurisdiction by the ancient fundamental laws of England , as being traitors , and out of the King's faith ; but to wave all thi•… by these ancient laws , every prisoner Might demand oyer , hearing of the judges commission , these villains had neither authority nor commission , but from Tyler's sword , which was but a derivative of his usurpation . No act of which can be just , the foundation of his tyranny this way , in being just , and illegal at the first . 

From the idols first entrance no act of confirmation or grant was done ( Could any such act be done and valid ) to establish or make a right , by the power which had that right to bestow , he asked for a commission of life , and death , but was refused ; and his arbitrary acts were only a continuance of his intrusion , and of the violence upon which he began . 

To fill up their tattered regiments , their fellow leaguers or covend•…terss of Barnet , Luton , Watford , and the towns round enter St.  Albans of the same sacrilegious aff•…ction to the abbey , in all these conspiracies the church was the main mark aimed at , about the carcases of the cathedrals and abbeys ( They were now nothing else ) did these vultures gather ; in the same conjuncture of time enters Richard Wallingford , head borough or constable of the place , who tarried at London for the King's letters of manumission and pardon , ( Which Greyndcob had been so earnest for ) bearing the King's banner or pennon of the arms of s. George , being the red cross before him , according to the fashion of the clowns of London . the Commons heating of his coming , pour themselves out in heaps to meet him . He alights , strikes the Penon into the earth , and bids them keep close and encircle it like a standard . He entreats them to continue about it , and expect his return , and the lieutenants , who were resolved with all speed to treat with the abbot , and would suddenly bring them an answer to their propositions . Which said , he and they enter the church , and send for the abbot to appear before them , •…nd answer the Commons ( Only sacred then , and to whom all knees were to bow . ) The abbot was at first resolute to die for the liberty of his church , ( A pious gallantry which will be admirable ) but overcome with the prayers of his monks , who told him , as things stood his death could advantage nothing , that these stinking knaves , these hellhounds were determined to murder the monks ; and burn the monastery if they had the repulse , and that there was no way of safety but to fall down before these Baal's , he yields . After he was come to the church , and a short salutation past ; Wallingford reaches out to him the King's letter or writ ( As Walsingham calls it ) in these words , as i have rendered them out of the barbarous French of that age . 

beloved in God , at the petition of our loved lieges of the town of St. Alban we will and command you , that certain charters being in your custody made by our progenitor King Henry to the burgesses and good persons of the said town of common of pasture and fishing , and of certain other commodities expressed in the said charters , in what they say , you do as law , and reason requires , so that they May not have any matter to complain to us for that cause . Given under our signet at London the 15. day of June , the fourth year of our reign . 

Here certainly again is a mistake of the day , for till Friday the 16. of June , the clowns of saint Albans ( As is observed ) stirred not . Thus is the King forced to be the author of other men's injustice , to consent to those insolences ( And wrongs ) which must undo all those , those who are faithful to him , to please a base rabble , engaged to turn in the end their destroying hands upon himself and his royal family , the abbot receives the letter with due reverence , and reads it : then thinking to work upon the consciences of these hellhounds , he begins a discourse of law , reason , equity , and justice , law and reason were the princely bounds betwixt which the King's commands run . He tells them whatsoever was demanded by them , had been long ago determined in the courts of justice , by the public judges , persons knowing , and honourable , sworn to do•… equill right . 

That the records were kept amongst the King's rolls at Westminster , whence he inferred , that according to the laws anciently in use , they had neither right nor claim left : he adds , the usurpation upon another's propriety is tyranny in the abstract ; it is the greatest injustice : the very heathens will have it unnatural to enrich ourselves , to make our advantage from spoil and robbery , but force is odious to God and man , that aggravates the sin ; violence is a more heinous crime than theft . This was ridiculous wisdom , considering who they were the good abbot spoke to , he had forgot perhaps how antigon•…s armed to invade and seize the cities , and countries of other Princes , laughed at the serious grave folly of one ; who presented him with a tractate of justice . Wallingford with his hand upon his sword takes him off pertinently , as reflecting upon the manners of men , whose treasons prosper , and practise of the times ; in which new men did not advance themselves by virtue , by learning , by justice , or valour , but by murder and robbery . 

My Lord ( Says he ) every story is not true , because it is eloquently told , you endeavour here to inveigle and deceive us in a long discourse of equity , of law , and justice , we come not hither for words but things , we pretend not to refute your reasons , ( Which are but injust defences of your oppression , but cunning subtleties , but colours to paint o'er the wrongs you do us , nor can we , the rudeness of our education must disable us for this part , we have been born and bred under your dominion , slaves , and villains to you , under a dominion so unmanly cruel , you have always kept us deprived , not only of all means of learning or knowledge , but would willingly have taken away ou•… very reason and common understanding ; that we Might groan under our miseries , with the feeling of beasts , but be Masters neither of sense nor language for 〈◊〉 complaint . 

It is time now that we of the commonalty as you call and range us , should take our turn of command , however of liberty . nor is this to be wondered at if you consider our strength , and the happiness of the new model , the eminency of the Commons is visible to every eye , theirs is the present , theirs is the supreme power , we are armed , and we will not think of the laws , not regard them , they only submit to laws , who want power to help themselves . Besides these laws you tell us of , are but the will of our enemies in form and rule , they were made by them , they favour them ; and our captain general Tyler , who has conquered ( A sad unhappy word , where it is used of one part of a nation against another , and of Benjamin against Israel , by the worst and least against the better and greater ) the makers of them , the lawgivers , was so become above the laws themselves ; your reasons , when these laws were backed with force , when your King could protect you , before our success , Might have served well enough ; now we expected them not , nor will we accept them . 

He concludes in persuasion , not to exasperate the godly party , the righteous Commons , who says he will not be appeased , will not give over , not lay down arms till they be Masters of their desires . 

The abbot , entering into a new speech , is again stopped , and told , the thousand before the doors of his monastery sent for him not to parley , but consent , which they look he should be sudden in , if not we ( Says Wallingford ) the lieutenants , chosen by the captain representatives of the persons , will deliver up and resign the powers to him , which we received of him . we have voted , if you comply not , to send for the captain general Tyler , and twenty thousand of his militia to the danger of this place , and of the monks heads . 

The abbot here recites his good deeds , how often in their necessities he had relieved them , he had been ( He says ) their spiritual father thirty two years , in all which time , no man had been grieved , or oppressed by him , this giving implyedly the lie to Wallingford , they grant , but will not be denied . The obligations and charters , which they r•…quire , are delivered them , which they burn in the marketplace , near the cross ; this did not content them , they ask for an ancient charter concerning the town liberties , the capital letters of which ( Say they ) were one of gold , another of azure ; * the abbot prays them to be satisfied for the time , he protests , they have all he has to give them , he knew of no more , yet he would make a search , and if any such deed could be found , it should faithfully be delivered to them ; this too was the answer of the covent , it was agreed that the abbot should after dinner disclaim under his hand and seal in all things prejudicial to their liberty . In memory of an old suit betwixt abbot Richard the first , and the townsmen in the reigns of William the second , and Henry the first , wherein the townsmen were overthrown , were laid millstones before the door of the * parlour . These John the barber with others took away , as a token of victory over the law ; these they break into small pieces , and distribute amongst the worthies , as the sacred bread is given in the eucharist . 

Who could forbear •…earess ( Says Walsingham ) heavi•…y bewailing these changes , to see servants command their Lords , who know not how to rule , nor how to pity . To see London ( Once the noble head of our cities ) become a sty for unclean swine . Who would not tremble to hear that the Archbishop and the Lord treasurer should be offered victimes to wicked spirits , to the Kentish idol , the Kentish Saturn or Moloch , and his hobgoblins in the midst of the kingdom . Nay ( Says he ) whose heart would it not have wounded through to have seen the King of England , who of right for majesty and dignity ought to precede all Kings in the world , out of fear of his head , observe the nods , and becks of these varlets , and the nobility and gentry , mortifi•…d beasts , trampled on by these scullions , it slaved at their own charge , lick up their dust . 

After dinner , a sad dinner to the monks , this merdaille , these stinka•…dss , throng before the gates , and demand the charter of l•…bertieses , which the abbot had promised them to seal , which was sent , and read to them in the thickest of the rout : if they please to accept it , ( This was the abbot's compliment ) he is ready to seal . They ( Resolved never to be pleased ) with much scorn and pride answer by an esquire of the abbot . That the abbot must appoint some clerk of his to attend them with ink and parchment , themselves would dictate , and after the abbot and covent should confirm what was done ; when this humour was satisfied , the safety and peace of the monastery and monks were as desperate as ever . The old charter , which they will everlastingly believe concealed , must be produced , else they will bury the covent in the ruins of the cloisters . 

This charter did certainly ( As they will have it ) contain all their ancient liberties and privileges , and if this was true , there was no great reason it should be in the abbots keeping . 

Here the abbot employs the most honourable esquires of the country , as mediators to soften them , and offers ( If they desire it ) to say mass before them next morning , and to swear upon the sacrament he should be about to take , with what monks they would name , that he kept from them no such charter with his knowledge . 

Make choice ( Says he ) of what liberties you can , you shall have my charters drawn , they shall be granted you by it ; i will seal you a real charter instead of a fantastical one , never seen by you , nowhere to be had . The abbot struggles in vain against these waves , this charter of their fancies they will have : nor shall any other price redeem the monastery , they intended the subversion of the house , and wrangle thus crossly , that they Might seem to have some pretences to do it , but because they had much business to go about , and could not be here and there too , a truce was taken for that day , and many of these pure brethren betake themselves to other parts ; some of them would not be prevailed with , the bread and ale of the monastery brought forth to them in huge fats , would not work upon them to lay their fury , they stayed only for a leading hand . Here an honest burgess interposes , ribalds ( Says he ) what is it you purpose ? most of you here are foreigners of the villages about , this is the most famous mischief which can be acted in this country , this beacon must set all on fire , and it is fit we , who are burgesses and freemen of this town should give the onset : by this fineness they are gained to quit the gates , and join to the assistance of their fellow-labourers . The rest of the day is spent by their united forces , in overthrowing of houses , clashing of vessels , and spoiling of goods according to the rule of Walter the false founder of the order . At night the lieutenants make proclamation under the King's banner , commanding strong guards to be set about the town , that they May be assured against surprises , and about the river Werlam , and saint Germans ; making it loss of the head to any monk , who should be found issuing from , or entering the monastery that way , this was done to set a trap for the prior ; and those who fled with him . They proclaimed also that whosoever could challenge any debts due to him from the monastery , Might put in his claim ( And little proof should be needed ) the next day , and the burgesses of the town , would discharge as far as the goods of the monastery would reach ; much more was magisterially thrown in , to show a cast of the present power : which was no sooner done , but there appears a farmour of the manor of Kingsbury belonging to this abbey , armed with his sword and buckler , this man was much in arrears for his farm , and durst not peep abroad from his lurking holes before these broils , which hiding of himself he imputes now to the injustice , and cruelty of the prior , this chuff demands one hundred marks damages for the losses he had sustained in his absence , and threatens to burn the grange of saint Peter , and manor-house of Kingsbury near the abbey , if he be not repaired ; twenty pounds , he receives upon this demand , and goes away , swearing , he would freely give it back again for the prior's head . 

Saturday night passed with much perplexity to the monks , who were at their wits ends , and lives too , ( They could not hope better things ) about the charter , which was nowhere extant but in the ndodles of these cluster-fists . But day , and comfort broke out together upon them ; suddenly this overflow of pride , and arrogancy abated , their loftiness fell , and their bristles were somewhat laid , very unpleasing rumours concerning the army were spread , and the death of the idol tyrant Wat , of stinking memory was certainly known and divulged , and what was as stabbing , that the citizens of London grown wise , and resolute , either out of loyalty ( Or which is the rather to be supposed experience of their new Master ) began now to own their Prince , their natural Lord unanimously , and to side with him against all seditious opposers of his majesty , and the just rights and liberties of his persons , which they saw like to perish together . Farther a knight of the court , seconds the report , and by proclamation in the King's name ( Now legal again ) commands this herd to keep the King's peace under forfeiture of life , and members from that hour . 

The King now grown a protector again of his subjects , sends his letters protectory to the abbot in these words . 

Richard , &c. to all our lieges , and Commons of Hartford &c.  We pray , charge , command , straightly as we May , &c. by the faith and ligeances which to us ye owe , that to our beloved in God , the abbot of St. Alban , nor to our house and monastery of the said place , of our patronage , nor to none of the persons , monks , nor •…therss , nor to none of the goods of the said monastery , etc , ye suffer to be done , as much as in you lies any grievance , damage , &c.  Given under our great seal at our city of London , &c.  

Though now these carls were well cooled , yet ere the zeal was quite •…akened , and the clouds dispelled , which hovered weakly , and were likely to scatter with the next breath of wind , they conclude to perfect their building , which to the great nuisance of this monastery they ha•… raised ; b•…sideses , the lieutenants , or major generals of Tyler , thought it a much unworthiness to droop too soon , before those whom they had summoned in to piece up their deformed insutrection with so much bravery , and insolence . They continue and pursue their requests to the abbot , but with less noise than formerly , the abbot was advised by letters from Sir Hugh Segrave , Lord steward of the household , and Sir Thomas Percy create after Earl of Worcester , to grant all things , assuring him these grants being thus forced from him would be void in law , and could not hurt his monastery . The abbot's chamber , the chapel , all places are full of them , they give directions to the abbot's clerk for their charter of liberties , which now they were contented to accept , but will have a bond of one thousand pounds sterling for the delivering up the charter unknown , before the annunciation of the blessed virgin next , if it can be found , if not , that the abbot with his twelfth hand ( An ancient Saxon manner of purging or clearing the offender , where the offence was secret ) with twelve of his chief monks should swear , that he neither has nor detains any such charter with his knowledge . 

The abbot agrees , he and the covent seal ; but oh the miracle ( Not to be believed , nor understood without another upon our faith , and understanding the seal , in which the glorious protomarty•… was figured , three times together could not be pulled from the wax , no slight , no strength could do it ; to pass by the pious frauds , and dreams of monks ; from thence the black-bands depart to the market place , there at the cross they publish their new acquisitions , the charters of the King , and abbot , with the King's protection of the monastery , which was but a counterfeit of their love . On Monday and Tuesday following the villains of the patrimony of our protemartyr ( As the others did in all places else imbroiled ) exact of the abbot deeds of manumission , and liberty , according to the effect of the royal charter before , which charter the abbot recites , and confirms . 

From villains these now conceive themselves gentlemen of Welsh pedigree , descended of Princes , nay as our monk , noble beyond the line and race of Kings , they are mere freeholders , hold only of God and the sun , rather of the sun , and club , and will neither perform their customs , and services , nor pay rent . The common persons , who are neither swayed by religion or honesty , stop and check themselves , not that they were contented , but because they could not , nay they durst not go on to more . 

The plague of this distemper was not only epidemical , but kept its days , on the fatal Saturday , fifty thousand clowns , out of Suffolk , Essex , Cambridgeshire , the isle of eli•… ( Places miserably harrassed according to the former precedents ) were incorporated by the juggling tricks of the Essexian impostors , sent out by the fathers of disobedience , in the first conception of the ruffle to inveigle proselytes to the holy league . this was but an indigested mass without shape or form , Wraw not straw ( As sometimes he is called ) a most lewd presbyter as Walsingham , or priest , who came from London , the day before with orders from Tyler ( Who according to his own establishment had the executive power ) was employed into those parts to lick and fashion the monster . He with Robert Westbrome King of this congregation , lead the tattered reformers from Mildenhall to St. Edmund's bury , where then stood a most glorious monastery , and where their fellow scoundrels expected them , Wraw finds these Choperloches good disciple , willing to learn , and quick of apprehension , so capable they understood his least signs . The same frenzies are again acted by other lunatics , the lawyers or apprentices of the law ( As the monk ) and their houses are the first objects of their spite , they do not only cut off them , but fire their nests . Lir John Cavendish chief justice of the King's bench , who had been one of the most able sergeants of this King's grandfather's reign , and was made chief justice by him , they intercept , and behead . Orpheus' tra•…it , ner•… the Roman , belgabred the Britain , excellent in the sweetness of a voice and skill of song , with John of Cambridge prior of saint Edmund's lose their lives in the same manner , as they unluckily fell in to their hands . 

The cause of the prior's death is made this ; he was discreet , and managed the affairs of his monastery faithfully , and diligently , he was taken near Mildenhall , a town then belonging to saint Edmund of the demesne of the abbey , the vassals , hinds , Villeins' , and bondmen of the house , sentenced him , murdered him by vote ; his body lay five days naked in the field unburied . In saint Edmund's bury , these cutthroats compass the prior's head round as in a procession , after they carry it upon a lance to the pillory , where that and the chief justice's head , are advanced . Their next work was the levelling a new house of the priours . After they enter the monastery , which they threaten to fire , unless John Lakinhethe guardian of the temporalities of the barony in the vacancy than were delivered to them , which the townsmen mingled in the throng ▪ put them upon : the guardian stood amid the crowd unknown . This man out of piety to preserve the monastery ( It was piety then though it May be thought impiety now ) discovers himself , he tells them he is the man they seek , and asks what it is the Commons would have with him . They call him traitor ( It was capital to be called so , not to be so ) drag him to the marketplace , and cut off his head , which is set upon the pillory to keep company with the priors , and chief justices . 

Walter of Todington a monk was sought for , they wanted his head , but he hide himself , and escaped . Our hackster's errant , of the round table knights of industry , would be thought general redeemers , to take care of all m•…nin distress ; for the burgesses sake , they command the monks , ( Threatening them and their walls if they obey not ) to deliver up all the obligations of the townsmen for their good behaviour , all the ancient charters from the time of King Cnut the founder any way concerning the liberties of the town , besides they must grant and confirm•… by charter the liberties of the town , which ▪ could not be done in the vacancy ( For so it was ) Edmund of Brumfield abbot in name , by provision : of the Pope was a prisoner at Nottingham , nor had any election been since the death of abbot John Brivole , and therefore the jewels of the house are pawned to the townsmen as a g•… that Edmund of Brumfield ( Whom they would suppose abbot , and whom they intended to set free ) should seals , which jewels were a cross and Calais of gold , with other things , exceeding in value one thousand pounds , these were restored again in time of peace , but with much unwillingness . Upon the brute of the idol•… mishap , and the suppression of his legions at London , these caterpillars dissolve of themselves , Wraw the priest , Westbrome , & the rest of the capital villains in the general audit , or doomsday for these hurliburlies , shall be called to a reckoning for their outrages . Cambridge suffered not a little in these uproars , the townsmen with the country peasants about confederated together , break up the treasury of the universi•…y , tear and burn its charters , they compel the chancellor and scholars under their common seals to release to the major and townsmen all rights and liberties , all actions , and to be bound in 3000•… , not to molest the burgesses by s•…itss of law concerning these things for the time to come . The mayor and bailiffs were fetched up by writ to the next parl. where the deeds were delivered up and canceled , the liberties of the town seized into the King's hand , as forfeited ; new ones granted by him to the university , all which they owe yet to the piety of this King , and his parliament , a court which the idol never names : had he set up one of his own b•…getting , it must have had nothing else but the name ; it would have been as destroying as the field . 

Norfolk the mother of the Kets would not loiter this while , nor sit lazily , and sluggishly looking on . John Litster a dyer of Norwich King of the Commons there , infuses zeal and daring into his countrymen ; he had composed out of his own empire , and the borders , an army of fifty thousand men . This upstart kingling would not wholly move by example , h•… makes precedents of his own , and tramples not like a dull beast the r•…ad beaten by others . He had heard what was done by the London congregations , he had a stock of traditions from the elders there , which he was able to improve ; and although i know not how he could exceed the idol with his council , yet ( So the monk ) exceed them he did , he presumed greater things . 

Tyler lost his life before things were ripe , was watched and undermined by the King and nobility , he could not spread his full sa•…leses , else for his presumption he far outgoes Litster . Litster the Norfolk devil begins with plunder and rapine ( The only way to fl•…sh a young rebellion . ) The malignants of the King's party ( The rich and peaceable go under that notion ) are made a prey , no place was safe , or privileged . Plots were laid to get the Lord William of Ufford Earl of Suffolk , at his manor of Ufford near Debenham in Suffolk , into the company , out of policy ; that if the cause succeeded not , than the rebels Might cover themselves under the shadow of that peer . The Earl warned of their intention , rises from supper , and disguised as a groom * of Sir Roger of Bois , with a portmanteau behind him , riding byways , and about , ever avoiding the routs , comes to St.  Albans , and from thence to the King . 

The Commons failing here ; possess themselves of the places , and houses of the knights near , and compel the owners to swear what they list , and for greater wariness to ride the country over with them , which they durst not deny : among those enthralled by this compulsion were the Lords scales , and Morley , Sir John brews , Sir stephan•… of Hales , and Sir Robert of sall•… , which last was no gentleman born , but as full of honour and loyalty as any man , knighted by the King's grandfather for his valour , he was ( Says Froissart ) one of the biggest knights in England , a man not supple enough , who could not bend before the new Lords ; he had not the solidity of judgement ( As some more subtle than honest call it ) to accommodate himself to the times . Like Messala he would be of the justest side , let the fortune be what it would , he would not forsake justice under colour of following prudence , he thought it not in vain to prop up the falling government , perhaps his judgement May be blamed he stayed not for a fit time , had he not failed here , he had not •…ought against heaven , against providence , whose counsels and decrees are hide from us , are in the clouds , not to be pierced , our understanding is as weak , as foolish , as providence is certain and wise . Our hopes and fears deceive us alike , we cannot resolve ourselves upon any assurance , to forsake our duty for the time to come , God's designs are known only to himself , it is despair , not piety ( Despair too far from that ) to leave our country in her dangerous diseases , in her public calamities ; the insolency of injust men is a prodigy of their ruin , and the incerteinty of thing•… human May teach us , that those we esteem most established most assured , are not seldom soonest overthrown•… , Plato would not have men refer all things to fate , there is somewhat in ourselves ( Says he ) not a little in fortune , ours are but cockfights , the least remainder of force and life May strike a necking blow , and by an unlooked for victory raise what is fallen , if death cannot be kept off , if our country cannot be saved by our attempts , there is a comeliness in dying handsomely , nor can any man be unhappy but he who outlives it . We have heard of women who cast themselves into the fiery pits where their dead husbands are consumed ; of vassals who stab themselves to follow their Prince into the next world ; of otho•… praetorians , of the Saguntines burning in their city's flames . What can be so honourable as to die for or with our country , or faith , our religion , or honesty , to die with that which gave us life , and liberty , and sense of these ? 

Litster's hog-herds vow to burn Norwich , unless this knight will come out to them , which he does well mounted , and forsakes his horse to please them . They seem to honour him highly , and offer him a fair canton of the new commonwealth , if he will command their forces . 

The faithful cavalier abhorred the proposition , and could not dissemble his dislike ; he tells them he will not to his eternal dishonour renounce his sovereign , whom all good men obeyed , to engage with the veriest perfidious traitors living , in their villainies . He attempts to horse himself again , but fails ; it was treason to speak against the government . 

The Commons grow furious , they cry out treason , against treason and rebellion : thousands of hands are lifted up against him , as if they all moved by the same nerves , and sinews ; they hew him down , but he crushes some of them with his ruin ; whosoever stood within his reach , lost either head , legs or arms ; he kills twelve of them , at length avillein of his own beats out his brains ; then do the infernal curs rush in with full mouths , and mangla him to b•… , who ( Says Walsingham ) would have driven a thousand of them before him , had he had fair play . This amazes the rest of the gentry , they strive for vassalage , with the same emulation others do for liberty , they observe Litster , they receive his commands upon their knees who in all things imitates the state and pomp of Kings ; Sir Stephen of Hales a knight of honour ca•…ves before him , and tastes his meats , and drinks , the rest of the miserable courtiers are employed in their several offices . But when the same of the King's good fortune began to grow strong , and of his preparations to assert his right and authority , Litster sends on embassy ( From Northwalsham , the thorn of his tyranny ) to London , the Lord Morley , and Sir John brews , with three of the confiding Commons , to obtain charters of manumission , and pardon , with great sums of monies , ( Squeezed out of the citizens or Norwich , under pretence of preserving the city from slaughter , fire and spoil , or as others raised by an ordinary tribute to Litster . ) which monies were sent for presents to the King , to win him to grant them charters more ample and beneficial , than had been given to any others . 

These messengers are met at Ichlingham near New-market by Henry le Spenser , Lord Bishop of Norwich , of a noble family , stout and well armed ; he had been at his manor of Burleigh near Okeham , and there heard of the tumults in Norfolk and was now hasting thither to see how thing•… were carried , with eight lances only i•… his company , and a few archers . He charges the Lord Morley , and Sir John upon their allegiance to tell him , whether any of the Commons ( The King's traitors ) we•… with them . They look upon the Bishop a•… a young rash man , and the awe of thei•… Masters was so prevalent , he could hardly wrest the secret from them . After many words they discover it ; and the Bishop causes the heads of the clowns to be struc•… off , and fixed on a public place at Newmarket . Then taking with him that Lord and knight , he posts for Northwalsham ; the gentry hearing of the Bishop's arrival in his coat of male , with his helmet upon his head , his sword by his side , and his lance upon his thigh , crowd in to him , the Bishop quickly found himself in 〈◊〉 gallant equipage , and as quickly reach•… Northwalsham , the sink of the rebellion . 

Litster was entrenched , he had fortified his ditch with pales , stakes , and doors , and shut himself in behind with his carts , and carriages . The heroic Bishop like another Maccabeus , charges bravely through the ditch , into the midst of the rebels ( When all the Barons of England hide themselves , ) so suddenly that the archers could not let an arrow fly at him , and came to handy blows . As the French historian de Serres observes , in affairs of the world oftentimes he that is most strong carries it , a good fortune , and a good mind seldom go together . 

Otho tells his soldiers oftentimes where the causes of things are good , yet if judgement be wanting ( I May put in ) where the counsels are unsound , the agents faithless , where money , arms , and men are wanting , the issue must be per•…icious ; the goods and honours of this world which follow the triumphers chariots are common to the good and bad ; grace , charity and love , are the marks of a pious man , not success , to brag of which becomes rather a Spartacus or Mahomet , ( Who carry faith and law upon the sword's point ) than a Christian : the god of the Christians is not the God of robbery , and blood , but things here fell out as could be wished , the innocency of the side prevailed , and the righteout weak side overcame the strong injust ; Litster touched with the conscience of his mischiefs , struggles to the utmost to avert his danger , at length gives ground , and attempts to shift for himself by leaping over his carriages in the rear . The Bishop pressed forward so fiercely , this course proved in vain , most of the unhappy clowns are laid along upon the place . Litster and the captains of the conspiracy are taken and condemned to be drawn , hanged and beheaded , which was done . Others of the chief conspirators dispersed over the country , are searched out and executed . 

The monk here tells us , it was apparent by the works of these demoniacs , by their fruits , that they had conspired ( He speaks of the whole ) not only the destruction of the church and monarchy , but of the Christian faith too . Schoolmasters were sworn by them never to teach grammar more , and whosoever was taken with an inkhorn about him , never saved his head . 

Our monk attributes these calamities to the remissness of the Bishops ; to the conceits and fangles of presbyter Wycliffe , which if they be truly registered by the monks , his mortal enemies , were pestilential and damnable . Indeed presbyter Wycliffe was then living , but is not named in these commotions , as one busy in them , by the monk•… , ( Though busy he Might be , we shall find Sir John Oldcastle , Lord Cobham , and others of Wycliffes disciple , rebels , and traitors , too too busy in Henry the fists beginning ) Baal , and straw , and Wraw were priests of the idol , and his lieutenants , and Might serve the turn to i•…broyle without fetching more aid in : he attributes too these mischiefs to the licentious invectives of the clowns against their Lords , generally to the sins of the nation , inclusively taking in the orders of mendicants , or begging friars , ( Like factious lecturers ) who had nothing of their owns , and were obliged to flatter the persons , and make themselves popular ) who says he forgetful of their profession and vows , greedy and covetous of money , foster the persons in their errors , call good evil , and evil good , seducing the great men with fawning , and the rabble with liar . So that in those days ( Thus he proceeds ) the argument held in every man's mouth , this is a friar , therefore a liar , as strong as this , this is white , therefore coloured . 

Here again is Walsingham at a stand , he complains , that it is impossible to relate the villanie•… of the rustic devils , done in all parts . 

We will now return to see what the King does next , who was not asleep this while . After he had cleared the city ( Lately tilers good town ) of the Kentish fry , he commands the nobility and gentry ( Wh•… durst now peep abroad ) all the kingdom over to repair to him at London well armed , and well horsed , as they loved him ; and his royal honour . Their own danger , and late fears , add wings to their haste . Within a few days , forty thousand horse meet at a rendezvouz upon Black-heath , whither the young King , who had taken •…his sequestration off , and restored himself to his blood and majesty , rides daily upon a royal courser , to view their order , with his imperial banner born before him : he delighted to be seen and acknowledged for what he was amongst his own homagers . Here he is informed , that the Kentishmen ( A stirring persons , but with what generous resolution will soon be found ) are again in mutiny , ( A mutiny however else contemptible ) not to be fl•…ighted at that time . The King commands his cavalry ( On fire , as much as himself ) to March , and root out this perfidious r•… , of miscreants . Here the nobility and gentry of the county interpose , and become pledges for the Commons , which appeases , the King ; who now disbands his army , and resolves to take no other course of justice , but such as was ordinary and usual , by judgements upon the known laws of the land and by juties of twelve men , the a•…clent birthright of the Englishmen . Laws which could not have fitted Tyler's courts , nor trials , but which have been ever the rule in all just and legal trials , in all calm , and pious ages . The law martial being proper to an army Marching , to be exercised in it . If otherwise , all sentences by colour of it , are against the magna charta , &c. and to the manifest subversion of the privileges of subjects . 

Upon this fair , and kingly conclusion of Richard , commissions were given , and justices of oyer and terminer to hear and determine the treasons and felonis committed in the late insurrections , and principally to inquire , who were the chief authors , fomenters , and incendiaries of the broils , are sent into Kent , Essex , and the rest of the provinces in rebellion . 

The most honourable mayor of London with others in commission with him , sa•… upon those of Kent , Essex , Norfolk , and Suffolk , &c. who were apprehend in London . Straw taken in an old rotten house about London , Kirkby , Treder , Sterling are condemned , and beheaded , straws head being set upon London bridge with Tyler's ; but Jack Straw , who was privy to all the contrivances , and plots of the confederacy could give light into the midnight darkness of Tyler's steps , through all the close windings of his labyrinths of treasons ; is urged ( The major promising with some hon•…st citizens to be at the charge of m•…sseses for his soul , the good of which they desire him to consider ) to declare his full knowledge of the counsels , and votes passed , and to what end they had conjured up the wicked spirits of those garboils , John was obstinate at the first , and would confess nothing , but gained by these promises , and a little penitent ( Which was much to be believed of one possessed with legions ) he tells them , because i have hopes of help from your suffrages after my death , and because this discovery May be advantageous to the commonwealth , i will confess truly to you what we intended ; when we met at b•…ck-heath , and sent for the King by our captain general's order , we purposed to have massacred all the nobility and gentry with him , then to have lead the King with us respected , and treated kingly from place to place , to bait the vulgar by the authority of his presence into our league , whom they Might so have taken for the head of our commotion , he being by those means likely to have been supposed by his own party too to have trusted us , when by the confluence of all the counties our companies had been full , and the supreme executive power wholly ours , we meant to have purged the nation , to have destroyed the gentry , and , first the knights of saint John's of Jerusalem , with all the rags of royalty , which by this time had been but a rag itself . Afterwards to have killed the King , whose name could then have been of no use to us . 

Their oath to preserve him could not last longer than their conveniency and opinions , which had then changed . We meant so once , but we mean otherwise now , had been a satisfactory excuse . They had often sworn and covenanted that they neither meant nor had power to hurt the King's prerogative , that they intended to maintain the King's authority in his royal dignity , the free course of justice , and the laws of the land , with infinite expressions and protestations of this kind . They Might answer , the time was when all this was real , when they would not have subverted the government , not have destroyed the ancient family ; to which says a statute ( Which we hope it can be no treason to Tyler's ghost to recite ) the dominions , and rights of the realm of England , &c.  Aught by inhaerent birthright and lawful and undoubted succession descend and come . this we being bounden ( Thus speak the members heretofore ) thereunto by the laws of God and man do recognise , &c.  The answer we say Might have been easy , they would not have done it some time agone , they swore and covenanted , and covenanted again they would , not now they will ; Tyler is still Tyler , but his liberty ( False cheating liberty ) is everywhere free , both to will and dislike , as the safety of the commonwealth shall require and carry him on . this was the faith and honesty of that age , by which we May guess at the cause and men who acted for it , who were the undertakers , what trust is to be given to such perfidious knaves whose protestations , and covenants of one day are wiped out by an inspiration of the next ; we May say by an inspiration . it was wondrous fit for these changes . Our Proteus' should bring inspiration in . all those of estates , and possessions , Bishops , canons , parsons of churches , monks , we would have rooted out of the earth : only the begging friars should have been preserved , who would have served ( Such sheep such shepherds ) well enough for church-duties , which we May wonder after all these pranks that they should think of ; here would have been a very plain church , questionless after all these actions the devotion of these reformers could not have been much ; by that time our public thieves had cast lots for the Kings , churches , nobilities , and gentry's revenues , what boors of others countries could have compared with the riches of our peasants and their captain Tyler . When there should have been ( So straw goes on , ) none left more great , more strong , or more wise than ourselves , than we had set up a law of our own forging , at our pleasure , by which our subjects should have been regulated . necessary it was the old law should be voted down ; it condemned them in every line . then had we create us Kings , Tyler for Kent ( A part too small for the archtyrant ) and others for other shires ; here was to be monarchy still , not evil in itself , but where it ought to be of right , only the family was to be changed , the ancient Saxon Norman stem , for an upstart dunghill brood of vipere , Tyler to be advanced upon the ruins of Richard , the c•…dar to be torn up , to make the bramble room enough , while any of the royal off spring had been in being to claim the right , to have involved the miserable , perjured , foolish persons in an everlasting civil war ; never to have ceased while there had been a vein of blood to run . The maintenance of Tyler's wrong , his usurpation ( Not to look farther than the present world ) would have been more fatal than ten plagues . John adds , no man thwarted these ends of ours more than the Archbishop , therefore we hated him to death , and made all the hast possible to bring him to it . 

in the evening of that Saturday in which Wat perished , because the poorer sort of the Londoners favoured us , we intended to have fired the city in four places , and to have divided the spoils ( So the faithful citizens , as forward as they were , had at last paid for their love ) he calls God to witness these truths . The confessions of many others of the engagement agreed with this of straw . 

The lawyers , and those ( As one ) who fled from the tyranny of the time , durst now show their faces . Here is tyranny of the rout , tyranny of a savage clown their bouteseu ; whose few days of cruel usurpation , were more bloody , more destroying than the years of any Caligula , any near , any Domitian whatsoever . A civil war ( Says a noble Frenchman ) makes more breaches , as to a country , as to manners , laws , and men in six months , then can be repaired in six years . 

What then can be thought or said of those monsters , who , against all ties of nature and piety , shall raise a desperate civil war , merely with the intent to overthrow religion , the church , the government , laws , and humanity , out of a cursed devilish ambition to advance themselves ( Tyler's and sons of the earth before ) to an height which God ( As some love to speak ) never called them to . For though power is of God , it is only so when the coming to it is by lawful means . He that ordains the power , allows , not the usurpation of it , Tyler had the power to do mischief , the power of rebellion , the power which must have ruined the church & common wealth , but whether this be the power which Christians are to submit to , let the next casuists judge . 

The Septuagint translation of the bible says of Abimelech , who slew his seaventy brethren , ( Murder ushers usurpation in ) he made himself King , by tyranny . the monk , who writes the lives of the Offa's , speaking of beormred the Mercian usurper , has these words : in the same region of the Mercians , a certain tyrant rather destroying and dissipating the nobility of the realm , than ruling , &c. persecuting , banishing , &c.  Lest any one , especially of the royal blood , should be advanced in his place , he vehemently feared . the thirty usurpers in the time of Gallienus are everywhere called tyrant's . Paulus diaconus writing of Valentine in the time of Valentinian , says , he was crushed in Britanny , before he could invade the tyranny ; and of Maximus , that he was stout and valiant , and worthy of the empire , had he not against the faith of his oath , raised himself per tyrannidem , by tyranny . in other places , Eugenius , Gratian , Constance , Sebastian , create tyrant's . the words tyrant , and tyranny , and tyrannous party , being used often by him , are ever opposed to just and regal power , never used in any other sense . Widdrington , to the example of Athalia urged by Bellarmine against Kings , says she was no lawful Queen , she had seized the kingdom as an usurpresse by tyranny , the kingdom belonged to Joash , in whose right , and by whose power she was justly slain — our most learned prelate Bishop abbot of Salisbury tells the cubs of Loyola , Athalia had snatched , had grasped , and held the kingdom with no right , no title , but by butchery , robbery , rapine , and forcible entry — and that she was thrown down and killed by the common bounden duty and faith of subjects to their Prince . Baronius a Cardinal , that the Maccabees of Levi or house of the Assamoneans , May not be made usurpers , matches them with the royal line of David , else says he , absque labe tyrannidis , without the stain of tyranny , they could not meddle with the kingdom . Rodolph Duke of Survia or Suabenland set up for a false Emperor by that devilish Pope Hildebrand against the Emperor hen. the iiii. is called by the Germans a tyrant upon this score . A full tyranny ( Says one of our chief justices , speaking of the papal power in church causes here ) has two parts , without right to usurp , and inordinately to rule , and the statute 28 of King Henry the 8. against the papal authority , calls it an usurped tyranny , and the exercise of it a robbery , and spoiling of the King , and his persons . 

The statute 31 Henry 6. adjudging John Cade another imp of hell , and successor of Wat to be a traitor , which are the words of the title , and all his indictments , and acts to be void , speaks thus ; the most abominable tyranny , horrible , odious , and arrant false traitor ; John Gade , naming himself sometime Mortimer ( He and Tyler had two names ) taking upon him royal power , &c. by false , subtle , and imagined language , &c.  robbing , stealing , and spoiling , &c.  and that all his tyranny , Acts , feats , and false opinions , shall be voided , and that all things depending thereof , &c. under the power of tyranny , shall be likewise void , &c. and that all indictments in times coming in like case under power of tyranny , rebellion , &c. shall be void in law ; and that all petitions delivered to the King in his last parliament , &c. against his mind , by him not agreed , shall be put in oblivion &c. as against God , and conscience , &c.  

To proceed , the King , because all these risings were by the ring leaders protested to be made for him and his rights , and that the forces then raised , were raised by his authority , and all their actions owned by him , issues out a proclamation from London , to this effect . 

Richard &c. to all and singular sheriffs , majors , bailiffs , &c. of our county of n. &c.  Because we are given to understand ; that divers of our subjects , who against our peace , &c. have raised and in diverse conventicles and assemblies , &c.  do affirm , that they the said assemblies , and levies have made , and do make by our will and authority , &c.  we make known to all men , that such levies , assemblies , and mischiefs , from our will and authority have not proceeded ( he adds ) they were begun , and continue much to his displeasure and disgrace , to the prejudice of his crown , and damage of the realm . Wherefore he enjoins and commands , &c.  to take the best care for the keeping of his peace , & opposing of all such levies with a strong hand : farther , he commands every man to leave such assemblies , and return home to his own house under penalty of forfeiture of life , and member , and all things forfeitable to the King , &c.  

These clowns charge not the King to be transported furiously , and hostilely , to the destruction of the whole persons , which can never happen , where the King is in his wits ; but what is fully as mad , they will suppose him to arm against his own life and power , against his own peace , and the peace of all that love him . This proclamation put life into the royalists , into all honest hearts , and dismays as much the rebels , yet after this the Essex traitors , gather again at Byllericay near Hatfield Peverell , and send to the King , now at Waltham , to know whether he intends to make good his grants of liberties , and require to be made equal with their Lords , without being bound to any suits of court view of frankpledge , only excepted twice the year . 

The King and his counsel are startled at this impudence : the King answers the agents , that if he did not look upon them as messengers , he would hang them up : return ( Says he ) to your fellow rebels , and tell them , clowns they were , and are , and shall continue in their bondage , not as hitherto , but far more basely trampled on . While we live , and rule this kingdom , by God's will we will employ all our means and power to keep you under : so that your misery shall frighten all villains hereafter : and your posterity 〈◊〉 curse your memory . at the heels of the messengers , the King sends his uncle Thomas of Woodstock Earl of Buckingham , and Sir Thomas Piercy with a body of horse to quell them . The rebels were entrenched according to the manner of Litster's camp , in the midst of woods ; ten lances of the avant currours rout them ; the Lords , when they were come up , enclose the woods round , five hundred are killed , eight hundred horses for carriage taken , the broken remainders of the defeat escape to Colchester , a town ever honest , and faithful to the Prince , where the loyal townsmen would not be gotten to stir ; they solicit the townsmen ( Says the monk ) with much entreaty , great threats , and many arguments ; neither entreaties , nor threats , nor arguments would move them : from thence they get to Sudbury , making everywhere such proclamations as of old they had used ; where the Lord fitz. walter ( Whose seat was at Woodham Walters in Essex ) and Sir John Harlestone rush suddenly upon them , kill and take them : the King meaning to visit Essex in his own person , comes to Havering at the bou•… , a manor of his own demain , of the sacred patrimony , and from thence to Chesmsford , where he appoints Sir Robert Tresilian chief justice of his bench of pleas of the crown , to sit and inquire of the malefactors , and troublers of the country , and to punish the offenders according to the custom of the realm , known , and visible . 

Five hundred of these wretched peasants , who had no mercy for others heretofore , cast themselves down before the King bare footed , and with heads uncovered , implore his pardon , which he grant•… them , on condition , they discover the great conspirators , the captain rogues . The jurors are charged by the chief justices to carry themselves indifferently , and justly in their verdicts , neither swayed by love , or hatred , to favour , or prosecute any man : many upon the evidence given in , and the finding of the jury , were condemned to be drawn and hanged ; nineteen of them were trussed upon one gallows . Heading had formerly been the execution of others in Essex , Kent , and London , because of the numbers of the guilty , which was now thought a death short of the demerits of the most foul and heinous offenders ; wherefore according to the custom of the realm , it was decreed ( Says the monk ) that the captains should be hanged . 

The like was done in other countries by the justices in commission , where the King was in person . Here the King with the advice of his counsel , revokes his letters patents , the charters granted to the clowns : although ( So he speaks ) we have have in the late detestable troubles , &c. manumised all the Commons , our liege subjects of our shires , and them , &c. have freed from all bondage and service , &c.  and also have pardoned the same , our liege men and subjects all insurrections by riding , going , &c.  and also all manner of treasons , felonies , trespasses , and extortions , &c.  notwithstanding for that the said charters , were without mature deliberation , and unduly procured , &c.  to the prejudice of us , and our crown , of the prelates , and great men of our realm ; as also to the disherison of holy English church , and to the hurt and damage of the commonwealth , the said letters we revoke , make void , and annul , &c.  yet our intention is such gr•…e upon every of our said subjects to confer , though enormiously their allegiance they have forfeited , &c.  as shall be useful to us , and our realm . 

The close commands to bring in to the King and his council all charters of manumission , and pardon to be canceled upon their faith and allegiance , and under forfeiture of all things forfeitable , &c.  witness ourself at Chelmsford the 2. of July , and 5. year of our reign . false for the 4.  

In the case of a subject ( And no reason Kings shall be more bound ) every act extorted by violence , and awe upon the agent is void . In the time of Edward the third , two thieves ( Which was the case here ) force a traveller to swear that he will at a day appointed bring them a thousand pound ; and threaten to kill him if he refuse their oath ; he swears , and perform what he had sworn ; by advice of all the justices these two were indicted of robbery , and the court maintains that the party was not bound by this oath . Yet if this be denied as unsafe , violence , or force , which strikes a just fear into any man , makes any contract void , say the casuists . 

Bishop Andrew's , than most learned prelate , answers to the pretended resignation of King John , urged by Bellarmine , that what this King did , ( If any such act was done ) was done by force , and out of fear . 

Widdrington , the mostloyall of all Roman Catholic priests , who writ much against the gunpowder Jesuits , in defence of the right of Kings , against those Jesuits who would have cut off the King , the royal family , the Bishops of the English Catholic church , the nobility and gentry , as their letter speaks , with one blow , says of this resignation , or donation , if we May ( So he ) call it so , that it was not freely given . The Jesuits challenge the perpetual dictature , or regency of the university of Pontamousson by bull of Sixtus the fift , contrary to the statutes of the foundation by Gregory the thirteenth . Were the bull true ( Says Barclay ) yet it ought not to be of force , because it was obtained presently after his creation , when things are presumed to be rather extorted than obtained . Bodin denies that a King deceived or forced can be bound by his grants . The justice of contracts is that alone which binds . The distinction of royal and private acts is of more sound than strength , and answers not the injustice of the impulsive violence , which must be naturally vicious everywhere , and corrupt , and weaken the effects , and cannot be good and bad by changes , or as to this , or that . Grotius , who loves this distinction , in another place is positive , there must be equality in all contracts . He condemns all fear , or awe upon the person purposely moved for the contracts sake , and tells us out of Xenophon of those of Lacedaemon who annulled a sale of lands which the Elians had forced the owners to pass out of fear . 

A charter of King Henry the third imprisoned and forced , is said by ald•…nhanss to be void upon this reason , and i judge the justice of this revocation by the law of England , by which , as ou•… old parli•…mentss , such force is treason . The fruits of which were here more justly plucked up than they were planted . He who gives up his money to thieves , according to his oath , May lawfully take it away from them : however they are bound to make restitution . Nor can any prescription of time establish a right of possession in him , who makes his seizure upon no other title but plunder and robbery . The 5th of this King , the parliament declares these grants to be forced and void . Enough to clear the honour of King Richard , as to this part . 

At Chelmsford the King is informed of the whole history of mischiefs done at St.  Albans , and resolved in person with all his guards and cavalry to ride thither , and sentence the malefactors with his own mouth ; but Sir Walter Leye of Hartfordshire , fearing the mu•…h impoverishing th•… country , if the King should make any long stay there with such numbers as then attended him , beseeches him to make a trial wehther things Might not be composed without him , and offers to reconcile the abbot and townsmen , if the King would , which was consented to : the King grants him a commission , and joins with him Edward benstude , Geoffrey stukelye , and others of the gent•…y of that county . 

The coming of these commissioners was noised at St.  Albans : the fiercest of the clowns knowing what they had done was condemned by the law , and not to be defended , but by force , which now they had not , began to shake and take fright , are plotting to get out of the way . Grindecob , lieutenant of the late idol , comforts them , he persuades to go to horse ; let us meet the knight ( Says he ) and see whether his looks promise peace or not ; if not , the towns about us have engaged , they have associated , and are of our league , we are rich , and cannot want good fellows , who will assist us while our monies last : on St.  Peter's day this ill advised crew meets the knight upon the road , who wa•… ignorant of their resolutions , and conduct him honourably , according to their fashion to the town : Sir Walter had with him fifty lances , and some companies of archers , listed at random , many of them being of the churls , and confederates with them : the knight cites the townsmen and their neighbours to appear before him in derfold , to hear the pleasure and commands of the King ; they fail not , there h•… tells them what forces the King had assembled , how rigorously those of Essex were sentenced : that the King was highly inc•…nsed at the troubles and seditions of this place of which he was the patron and defender : that with great difficulty he had procured of the King a commission , by which himself , and others , not strangers , or enemies , but their friends and neighbours were authorised to do justice in the King's stead ; he concludes , if they will appease the King , they must find out , and deliver up the beginners of these broils , and make satisfaction to the Lord abbot , an holy , and a just man , for the wrong they had done him . 

This many of the hearers approve , and promise to obey . The knight charges a jury to be made ready the next morning , and make what discovery they can , and gives the persons leave to depart . Towards night he send•… for the jury to his chamber , intending to have apprehend the lieutenants , by the assistance of the jury , without any noise . These good men and true know nothing , it was the case of their fellows in mischief , and Might be their own . They answer in a plain ignora•… , they can indict no man , accuse no man . Amongst all the founder of these swine , there was not one who had been faithless and disloyal to his natural liege Lord , not one breaker of his peace , not one who could appear so to them . 

The knight seems not to understand the falseness and cunning of these hob n•…ile perjured jugglers : he takes another way , and next requires them within a peremptory time to bring him the charters which they had forced from the monastery , they return after a short consultation , and in the abbot's chamber , where the knight then was , tell him , they dare not obey out of fear of the Commons , what was more , they knew not in whose custody the charters were . the knight grows angry , and swears , they shall not go out of the chamber till he have them , which they call imprisoning their persons . Here the abbot intercedes , and though he knew them as very knaves and liars as any Tyler had set on work , yet he will not ( He says ) distrust their honesty , he will leave things to their consciences , upon which they are freed . 

Another assembly is appointed at Barnet wood , whither the villagers about throng in multitudes . Three hundred bowmen of Barnet , and Berkhamsted , make here so terrible a show nothing is done . 

The commissioners privately charge the gentry , constables , and bailiffs to seize : in the night Greyncob , Cadindon , John the barber , with some others , and to bring them to Hartford , whither themselves went in all haste , which was performed : the esquires and servants of the abbey were sent with them to strengthen the company . This enrages the townsmen afresh , they gather into conventicles in the woods , and fields , so much frightful to the monastery , that the abbot recalls his esquires , let 's the prosecution fall , and fearfully summons in his friends to guard him , Greyndcobs' friends take advantage of this change , and bail him for three days , within which time they were either tied to agree with the abbey , or render up Greyndcob to the justices again . The townsmen fierce enough still , yet earnest to preserve their worthy , are content to part with the charters ; but this Greyndcob ( More foolhardy than wise ) would not consent to , nor does he , as knowing the stiffness of his clowns , whine in a religious tone , never used by him . 

He prays them to consider how beautiful liberty is , how sweet , how honourable ; dangerous liberty ( Says he ) is more valuable than safe and quiet slavery , let us live , or die with liberty , in so generous , so honest a contention , it will be glorious to be overcome ; whatsoever our fears are , worse we cannot be , than now we are about to make ourselves ; success too does not so often fail men as their own industry and boldness ; fear not for me , nor trouble yourselves at my dangers , i shall think myself more happy than our Lords , if they prosper , or their King , to die a martyr of the cause , with the reputation of such a gallantry . Let such courage as would have hurried you forward to all brave and signal mischiefs , had i lost my head at Hartford , inflame your heavy sprights : methinks i see the hero Tyler's ghost chiding our sluggish cowardice , and by the blazes of his firebrands kindled in hell , and waved by fiends about his head , lead on to noble villainies . 

Let dreaming monks and priests tremble at the airy sounds of God , and saints ; he who fears thunderbolts is a religions heartless coxcomb , and shall never climb a molehill . Thus our buskined martyr swaggers , after the raptures put upon him by Walsingham ; Greyndcobs' stubbornness hardens on the clowns , they now accuse themselves of baseness , that they did not cut off the knight's head , and nail it on the pillory , to the terror ( Say they ) of all judges , and false justices . Greyndcob had raised spirits which he could not lay when he would . 

Three days being expired , he is again sent to Hartford gaol , where he hears news from his brother , who mediated for him in the court , not very pleasing , which he communicates to his townsmen . His intelligence was to this effect ; that rich : of Beauchamp Earl of Warwick , and Sir Thomas Percy with a thousand armed men were appointed to visit s. Albans . 

At this report the rebels startle , they fall to new treaties , offer the charters and book , in which the old pleas betwixt the abbey and the town were recorded , with 200 l. for amends . The book is received , the rest put off till the next day . The Earl of Warwick sends only excuses , •…he heard his own house was on fire , that the clowns of his own lordships were up , and he leaves all thing•… else to quell them . This raises the fallen courages of those of St.  Albans , they now laugh at their late fear•… , if the Commons , say they , must quit their right of conquest , and surrender their charters , yet will not we ( the renowned mechanics ) of St.  Albans be their president . and as in all tumults ( Which can never be observed too often ) lying is necessary , and must not be useless , whatsoever else is ; they lay the blame of their obstinacy upon the inhabitants of Barnet and Watford , who threaten ( So they would have it believed ) to burn their town if they deliver up their liberties . 

Which inhabitants of Barnet , and Watford had humbly surrendered their•… before , and submitted to the King's mercy : thus we find these rebels of St.  Albans again swaggering in their old rhodomontadoes . an esquire of the abbots acquaints the King with these turnings , who vows to sit personally in judgement upon these everlasting malcontents . 

The abbot full of pity and charity , who had saved some of these enemies of his house from the axe by intercession at London : continues his goodness still , he solicits Sir Hugh Segrave , steward of the household , and others of his friends to mitigate the King's displeasure , and hinder his journey thither , which was not in their power . Now again are the townsmen dejected , and seek by all means to keep off the tempest which threatened them : they fee Sir William Croyser a lawyer to make their defence , and mediate with the abbot , where there was no danger : an agreement is concluded the day of the King's entry , by which they would bind the abbot not to disclose them , or inform against them . 

He promises ( If they fail not in performance on their part ) not to make any complaints to the King of them , that he would be a suitor for their peace if his prayers May be heard , but that here he cannot assure them , pardons were acts flowing merely from the King's grace . no man had any power or authority to pardon or r•…mit treasons , &c. but the King ; and whether he could prevail for them he knew not . This doubtfulness troubles them , it seems to call their innocency too much into question : they tell him , his good will was sufficient , and that as to what belonged to the royal dignity they should satisfy the King . 

After Vespers the King made his entry into the town , being met by the abbot and covent , the bells rang aloud ; and the monk sang merrily his welcome : he was followed by some thousands of bowmen , and cavaliers . In this train was Sir Robert Tresilian chief justice of the King's bench , who the next day , being Saturday the 13. of July , and first of the dog-days sat in judgement at the Moot-hall ( Says Walsingham ) at the townhouse . 

Greyndcob , Cadindon , and John the barber are fetched from Hartford , and said fast till Monday , against which time new jurymen are chosen , and charged to be ready with their verdicts : prophet Baal , the Sergius of the new Alcaran , the priest of the idol , and his calves , the Martin of the yoke , of pure discipline of the eldership , was taken by the townsmen of Coventry , brought to St.  Albans the day before , and this Saturday condemned by the chief justice to be drawn . Hanged , beheaded embowelled , and quartered which was done on the Monday following . 

He confessed to the Bishop of London ( To whose Christian piety he ought the two last days of his life , which were begged for his repentance ) that certain hot , and powerful pastors of the separation , brethren of simple hearts , called by the spirit ( He named six or seven ) had covenanted , and engaged to compass England and Wales round , as itinerant apostles to propagate the gospel , beat down all abomination of the outward man , Antichristian Hierarehy , and tyranny of the Nimrodes of the earth , to cry up the great and holy cause , and to spread the law , principles , and heresies of b•…l , which disciple ( Says this rabbi ) unless they be prevented , and taken off will destroy the realm in two years : he Might have said , two months , and been believed , as to the civility , humanity , order , and honour ( Never intermitted but in the confusion of a barbarous , impious age ) which made England glorious , they had been destroyed , and torn up in a less time , a few licentious ill acts easily beget a custom , and an hundred ill customs quicklier grow and prevail than one single good one , there is a proneness in unruly man to run into deboshments , and no wonder that the arrogant , misled , silly multitude capable of any ill impressions should deprave and disorder things , where all ties of restraint are loosened , hay , where disorders are not only defended by the corrupt wits of hirelings , but bidden , strengthened by a law , and villainies made legal acts . 

Had the idol King Tyler , with his Councll not gone on too far in the way of examination , but endeavoured to repair the breaches of his entrance ; it would have been no small labour to have restored things to any mean and tolerable condition . If presbyter Wicklief , and his classes by their pernicious doctrines ( As they are charged to this day ) did first pervert and corrupt the persons , and broach that vessel with which father Baal and Straw poisoned them , they must have ruined themselves by the change , sure enough they had been no more comprehended in any of Tyler's toleration than the prelatical or papistical party . 

In the turmoils and outrages of this tyranny , had it taken , innocence , virtue , ingenuity , honesty , faith , learning , and goodness had been odious , and dangerous . The profit , and advantage of the new usurpers had been the measure of justice and right : the noble and ignoble had died streets and scaffolds with their blood , not by laws and judgement , but out of malice to their height and worth , out of fury and covetousness to enrich public thieves and murderers . The jealousies too and fears of Tyler had made all men unsafe . Yet the repute , the renown of the founders could not have been much : the glory of success cannot be greater than the honesty of the enter ; prize ; there must be justice in the quarrel , else there can be no true honour in the prosperity . Cato will love the conquered commonwealth : Jugurtha's fame , who is said to be illustrious for his parricides and rapines , will not make all men fall down and worship . 

On Monday the fifteenth of July ( Not of October , as Walsingham is misprinted ) the chief justice Tresilian calls before him the jury for inquiry , who falter , and shamel•…sly protest they cannot make any such discovery as is desired . The chief justice puts them in mind of the King's words to them upon the way , promising pardon if they will find out the offenders , else threatening them with the punishment they should have suffered , who through such silence cannot be apprehend . 

Out they go again , and the chief justice follows them ; he shows them a roll of the principal offenders names , tells them they must not think to delude and blind the court with this impudence , and advices them out of a care to preserve wicked men's lives not to hazard their own . 

Hereupon they indict many of the town and country , which indictments are allowed by a second inquest appointed to bring in the verdict , and again affi•…med by a third jury of twelve , charged only for the fairness of the trial : so no man was pronounced guilty , but upon the finding , of thirty six jurors . Then were the lieutenants Greyndcob ; Cadingdon , and Barber , and twelve more condemned , drawn , and hanged . Wallingford , John Garleck , William Berewill , Thomas Putor , and many more ; with eighty of the country , were indicted by their neighbours ; and impriprisoned , but forgiven by the King's mercy , and discharged . They were forgiven most by the King's mercy ; for he had forbidden by proclamation , all men to sue or beg for them , a command which the good abb•… sometimes disobey - and he shall bee-well thanked for it . 

No benefic•… oblige some men 〈◊〉 true rugged ch•… can never be made fast never be tied by any merit whatsoever nothing can so•… him : see an unhe•…rd of shamelesness till then ; these lazi•… ▪ tender-hearted clowns , who could hardly be got to discover the guilty , now run with full speed to betray the innocent : they indict the abbot as the principal raiser , and contriver of these tumults , which struck at his own life , and the being and safetis of his monastery . The abbot , as it is said , sent to Tyler , upon his ordinances some of the town and monastery , but to temporiz , and secure himself . This is now supposed by the very traitors indeed , treason by common law and statute against the King his natural l•…ige Lord . this having not the fear of God in his heart•… &c. but being seduced by the instigation of the devil , 〈◊〉 compassing the death , &c. the deprivation and deposing of his sovereign Lord from his royal state , &c. ( 〈◊〉 such indictments use to run ) this must go for levying war against our Lord the King , adhering to , comforting , and a•…ding his enemies by opon fact ; which are the words of the statute of treason , declarative of the common law . 

The chief justice , abominating and cursing the treacherous malice , and perfidiousness of these bruits , makes them tear the indictment , which themselves , though urged , are not wicked enough to swear to : nay , which publicly they confess to be false in the face of the court . 

villeinage was not now abolished , though so methink otherwise , but by degrees extinguished since this reign . Besides , the letters of revocation before , restoring all things to their old course , a commission , which the abbot procured from the King out of the chancery , then kept in the chapterhouse of this monastery , makes this manifest , which speaks to this effect : 

Richard by the grace of God King of England , and of France , and Lord of Ireland , &c.  To his beloved John Lodowick , Jo : Westwycomb , &c.  We command you , and every of you , upon sight of these presents , &c.  That on our part , forthwith ye cause to be proclaimed , that all and singular the tenants of our beloved in Christ , the abbot of s. Alban , as well free as bond ; the works , customs and services , which they , to the foresaid abbot ought to do , and of ancient time have been accustomed to perform ; without any contradiction , murmur , &c.  Do as before they have been accustomed . 

The disobedient are commanded to be taken , and imprisoned as rebels . 

In the time of King Henry the seventh there were villains . This i observe , to make it appear how little it is which the miserable common persons , without whom no famous mischief can be attained , are gainers by any of their riots , or seditions ; whatsoever the changes are , their condition is still the same or worse ; if some few of them advance themselves by the spoils of the public shipwreck , the rest are no happier for it ; the insolent sight offends their eyes , they see the dirt of their own ditches Lord it over them , and the body of them ( Perhaps ) more despised than ever . Tyler ( Who could not but have known that nothing can be so destructive to government , as the licentiousness of the base Commons ) would doubtless ( When his own work had been done ) quickly have chained up the monster , he would have perched in the King's sacred o•…ke ; all the forest should have been his , bishoprics , earldoms , nay the kingdoms had been swallowed by him ; instead of a just ligall power by which the Kings acted , an arbitrary , boundless , unlimited power must have been set up ; instead of a fatherly royal monarchy , a tyranni•… after the Turkish mode , a monarchy seignioral ; and had he brought in upon the fall of the Christian faith and worship , which must have followed his establishment , circumcision , and the creed of Maho•…et : as the spirits of men were then debased , he must have been obeyed . All the King's right ( And more ) must have been his ; sultan Tyler's prerogative would have been found more grievous , more heavy , more killing than all the yokes and scorpions of our Kings ; no man , when he went to sleep , could assure himself that one law would he left next morning ; the ordinances of Tyler and his council slew about in swarms , killing and rooting up the laws : one proclamation of this tyrants was of force to blow up the ancient foundation ; enough to have made men mad , if ever they could wake , and understand : when the French had Conquere•…naples , the persons looked for a golden world , they thought their new Master would ( As the King of Mexico's oath used to say ) do justice to all men , make the su•… to shine , the clouds to rain , the earth to be fruitful : they promise themselves liberty , and that the accustomed imposts of their former Kings of the house of Arragon should not only be taken off , but the very word gabelle driven out of the kingdom , there should be no such thing in nature last ; but foolish dolts as they were , they found an alteration quickly , instead of a court cavalry before ( The new Masters ill established and assured , not daring to trust any thing ) standing armies were continually to be kept on foot , instead of one tax , intolerable of late , they are oppressed with ten , their backs and shoulders crack under the load . 

Upon this fancy of these abused Italians , says the historian , this is the custom , for the most part of all persons weary ever of the presens condition , and inconsiderately gaping after a change , but they receive such wages of their fond and disorderly lightness . 

The war undertaken against Lewis the 11 of France by the house of Burgundy . Dukes of Berry , Britain , and Bourbon , called the weal public was not made against the King ( Say the allies ) but against evil order , injustice in the government , and for the public good of the realm . In the treaty for peace these fine things are forgotten , the wretched peasants torn , and ground with taxes , left to shift for themselves . 

The Prince of the Burgaundies demands the towns upon the some for himself : Normandy for the Duke of Berry , and other places , offices , and pensions for the rest , some overtures were made for the weal public ( Says the history ) that is all , the weal public was the least of the question , the weal public was turned to weal particular , self seeking was the sum of the business . This has been the fashion of all rebels hitherto , and will be to the world's end . After these proceedings the Hartfordshire men betwixt the ages of 15 and 60 present themselves according to command , and take the oath of allegiance ; they are sworn too to unkennel and apprehend the late Incendies . 

The King having now quieted the commotions removes to Berkhamsted eight miles from St.  Albans , a royal castle then , and at Easthamsted where he hunts , is informed , that the bodies of the traitors executed were taken down from the gallows , hereupon he directs his writ or letter to the bailies of St.  Albans , commanding them under penalty of forfeiting all things forfeitable to hang up again the said bodies now rotten , and stinking in iron chains , which the townsmen are forced to do with their own hands . 

A parliament sitting in May the fift year of this King's reign , John Wraw priest of the reformation at Mildenhall , and St. Edmundsbury was taken , and upon the petition of the house of Commons to the King , judged to be drawn , and hanged . In the same parliament too it was enacted , that wheresoever any clowns by six or seven in a company kept suspicious conventicles , the King's good and faithful subjects should lay hold of them , and commit them to the next gaol without staying for the Kings written . in the same parliament of the King it was made treason to begin a riot , rout , or rumour , by this parliament , and that of the 6.  Provisions are made for those whose deeds were burned or destroyed in the late insurrection , and in the 6. of Richard , the King pardons the multitudes for their misdemeanours in the cumul•… . The clowns now everywhere returned to thei•… old obedience , and the winds were laid in all their quarter . Richard , a Prince born for troubles , shall be turmoiled with the rebellion of his peers and parliaments , deposed •…nd murdered by them , his his memory shall be sacred , his peers•…d Chans ▪ shall dig for him in his grave , po•…ity too shall owe all th•… to his person . Af•…r the death of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 a •…d bloody thi•…f a cruel tyrane 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 •…d the p•…man 〈◊〉 , capit•…•…it 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , tory Petter writtn by claud•… 〈◊〉 consul to the Emperor's ma•…us and Balbinus , whom he ca•…s pre•…vers and redeemers of the common wealth , there the consul tells them they had resto•…d to the senate ( The house of Lords ) their ancient dignity , to the Romans their laws , equity , and clemency abolished , their lives , their manners , their liberty , the hopes of succession to their heirs he add they had freed the provinces from the insatiable covetousness of tyrants , no voice , language , not wit can express ( Says he ) the public happiness . 

King Richard restored to the church and universities their rights and possessions , to the nobility their honour , to the  their respect , to the cities their free ,  the plenty of his harvest to the ind  countryman , security , peace , and libert••• to all orders , what Prince could best 〈◊〉 greater benefits upon a persons ? he was the stator , the saviour of the nation , a nation not worthy of him , whose ingratefulness to his sacred head , whose perfidiousness and impiety in advancing an usurper upon his ruins , were punished with a fatal civil war , which lasted ages , with an issue of blood which could not be stopped till the true and lawful heir of this Prince was seated in the imperial throne , according to the , faith and oaths of this persons ( Which whatsoever May be pretended no power on earth can dispense with ) and according to the fundamental laws of England . 

Finis . 





hypod. neust.  par. wals. 〈◊〉 . &c. per thomae sanguivem salva nos breviar. . fest. s. tho. cant. rishang polyd. D'avilla Jaques clem. the parricide of hen. 3. of France was prayed for as a saint . 

* guinue . froiss. Walsingh . deposito scrvitu•…is jugo , libertate , &c.  wals. more boni patris . samil . excelentis agri•… suum . * regni majores . † quoscunque nocivos•… communitati•… de terra sua tolle . reut . * si sublatis majoribus aequa libertas , &c.  in the 〈◊〉 for holy land . † ut acclamarer•… cum archiepiscopum . * communium & regni proditorem . * wals. rex ribaldorum , idolum rusticorum . * wals.  wals.  wals.  froiss. •…esar dial. 〈◊〉 . 8 , c. 69.  •…roiss . Wals. lond. quib . nunque deest furia , &c.  froiss. wals. qui censuram juris timebant propter mal•… , &c.  wals.  wals.  wals.  discaligaios r•…bauldos . graion . fro•…ss . wals.  Knighton  wals.  wals.  Richard . wals. alias scire•… semetipsum vita p•…ved dum . Nevilli kettus . wals. sacram communionem . qui pastor &c.  ab , ab , ma•… domini•…  wals.  † eccles. 15.  grot. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 d•…o p•… 〈◊〉 , u•… ab impi•… non ve•… turmodo 〈◊〉 tur . wal•… . d' Avila . li•… . non est diuturua possessio in quam gladio indu•… mur . gurt . wals. froiss. * ab omni bondagio . illucescente die venerls . froiss. so . froiss. the lewd pranks of the clowns at saint Albans . wals. ducem ribaldorum , ut accepta ab co potestate , &c.  wals.  all these grants end with horrible curses against sacrilege . Walsingh . Walsingh . wals. a•… di•…dum . sub•…rii . •…um megna pompa . 〈◊〉 . 114.  perque uterum sonlpe•… hic matris agendus . * de azorio  * locutorii . wals.  super sacramentum . Ribaldi . quod didicerant . À waltero . wals. foedae memoriae . Walsingh . wals. •…erlingorum . wals.  wals.  sceleratiss . Presbyt . * garci•…  rar•… si 〈◊〉 bonam fortunam cum bona me•…e . liv. nisi enim daemoni•…s pleni fuissent , nequaquam in destruct , sacr. eccles. chr. fidei & regni extermini•… conspirass . Earl of s•… . case ? see mag. chart &c. see 25 h. 8. 1 eliz. 1 jac.  quib. sujecti regu•…i , &c.  •…ow . sieur de l•… n•…ué . apolog. 234.  Antilog . c. 32  apparat.  wals.  wals.  wals.  〈◊〉 . 3. 14.  •…esp . ad apolog.  ad•…nit . disp. dejur . •…d . l. 1.  •…xil . Hugle de Spencer pat . & •…il , •…ei 〈◊〉 •…terna authorita•… 〈◊〉 , per tale martyrium vitam fi•…ire . si Hertfordia , hesterno decollat•… , &c.  see 27 h. 8. c. 24.  25 edw. 3.  11 h. 7. 13  come . wals. hypod.  〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉  
































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































