A rope for pol. 

Or , a hue and cry after Marchemont Nedham . 

the late scurrilous news-writer . 

Being a collection of his horrid blasphemies and revilings against the King's majesty , his person , his cause , and his friends ; published in his weekly politicus . 

2 sam. 19 21.  

shall not Shimei be put to death for this , because he cursed the Lord's anointed . 

1 Kings 2. 44 , 45.  

The King said moreover to Shimei , thou knowest all the wickedness thy heart is privy to , that thou didst to David my father , therefore the Lord shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head . 

And King Solomon shall be blessed , and the throne of David shall be established before the Lord for ever . 



London , printed in the year , 1660.  

An advertisement to the reader . 

It has been made a question long ago , whether more mischief than advantage were not occasioned to the Christian world by the invention of typography . But never was any question more fully determined then this has been of late years in these nations . We have seen the hierarchy of the church of England traduced and profaned by the writings of zealous incendiaries , the pious and learned governors of it loaded with loaded and accusations , the reverend clergy decried and almost proscribed , yea religion itself publicly struck at , the mysteries of it despised by notorious heretics the holy ordinances declaimed against by fanatics and enthusiasts . This in the church . In the state we have seen sedition and rebellion defended and propagated in full treatises , murder , treachery , rapine , perjury , ambition , tyranny , oppression , perfidiousness justified and applauded , calumny taken into the arts of state , the steps of God's anointed slandered , his honour wounded with scurrility and reproach , his person exposed to scorn and derision , his sufferings insulted over , his just title maliciously and impudently debased . and the honourable and loyal of the land basely aspersed and derided . Writings of this strain , and many-others as they have been the issue of traitorous and postilent minds , so they have been brought into the world and propagated by the assistance of the press . But what was by others singly attempted in several ways , has been in all practised by the late writer of politious , Marchemont Nedham , whose scurrilous pamphlets flying every week into all parts of the nation , 't is incredible what influence they had upon numbers of unconsidering persons , who have a strange presumption that all must needs be true that is in print . This was the Goliath of the Philistines , the great champion of the late usurper , whose pen was in comparison of others like a weaver's beam : and certainly he that shall peruse these papers will judge that had the devil himself ( The father of lies and who has his name from calnmny ) been in this man's office , he could not have exceeded him . It will therefore , i conceive , be demanded wherefore these exceptions are now published , and not rather suffered to perish in perpetual oblivion , and perhaps it will be judged that they deserve rather to be burned then read ? That they May be so , & that so grand a delinquent & blasphemer of God's anointed , as the author , May not ( Through the inconsider ableness of his person ) pass untaken notice of , but May have some share in that satisfaction which is now intended to justice , is the reason of this publication . I have no enmity to his person , but methinks there is some kind of necessity , that he that hath with so much malice calumniated his sovereign , so scurrulously abused the nobility , so impudently blasphemed the church , and so industriously poisoned the persons with dangerous principles , should ( At least ) carry some mark about him , as the recompense of his villainies . 

Farewell . 

A rope for poll , or a hue and cry after Marchemont Nedham . 

Why should not the commonwealth have a fool as well as the King had ? 't is a point of state , and the ready road to preferment and a Lady's chamber . 

Is not this a ticklish time to write intelligence ? but what ever happens , you shall have it to the purpose ; for i fear no colours , neither black coat nor blue-cap ; nor that rawhead and bloody-bones in the royal banner of Scotland . 

Long May the Scotch royal progeny and priesthood , be all fellows at football , and enjoy sunshine once a quarter , for the reviving of factions , that they May never return again to struck the gills of the city , and compare notes with the clergy , for the restauration of their members , and the thrice reverend assembly . 

The depth of the plot , is to barrel up their King like other merchandise in a Dutch hoy , that he May slink away among the fishermen , and be landed anywhere in a kingly pickle , upon the coast of Scotland . 

For his better entertainment when he comes to Edinburgh , there is montross's head of the kirks own dressing , provided for his breakfast , and mounted on the townhouse , on purpose to bid him welcome , and many thanks for the remembrance of his famous services ; which the young man ( Having one quality of a King ) hath already learned to forget . 

How much better must it needs be for the cavalry to live in peace with their own country men , under the present government , then to ruin themselves and families , to restore the unlucky family of a Scot . 

Those are the shame of presbytery , and the goblins of that party , who make a scarecrow of the covenant , to fright the persons : these are the precious vessels , that can sail with a side-wind , and tack about any way with a foisted scruple of conscience , so it be to satisfy their concupiscence and serve a faction ; these are the dreamers that speak evil of dignities . 

Prince Rupert being commander in chief , over all the Squibbs and petty fireworks , for his poor majesty of Scotland . 

The Scots put up a politic prayer for him , that God would turn his episcopal heart to the Scottish modules , and make him worship their grand idol as his only Diana , and prove himself , more affectionate to her , than ever he was to any of his mother's maids of honour , when he lay in France at St. Germans . 

An act past for settling the militia of London ; the next i hope will be for settling the militia of our priesthood of London : 't is a wonder to all men they dare be so impudent , as to make a mortar piece of the pulpit , shooting squibs and granadoes to blow up the parliament ; certainly these persons have a world of lechery in faction , the four and twentieth of June is coming , and they had best beware they be not taken napping , for their adulteries with the great whore of Scotland ; but the comfort is , they are pretty well guelt-of their jure divino . 

I hope to see crowns pass for two pence a piece , and they that take them will lose by the bargain . 

The late Queen of England continues still in the monastery ; monasteries ( You know ) were ever accounted holy places , and 't is thought they are as godly in France as ever they were in England , being very comfortable retreats , for o'er worn and disconsolate sinners . They say in France , a monk is every jot as good as a gentleman usher , and she hath many of them . 

As for Newcastle , he is to act a comedy in hope of supplies from his majesty of Denmark ; his lordship is a good poet , and a few begging rythms May do much when the Dane is in his cups , of which he May chance to send a dozen or two to his cousin Stewart . 

The King of Scotland was alive at Hounslaer-dike , where after he had given his chaplain a few pence and a pass for their episcopacy , they were discharged for ever coming within the borders of the more holy presbytery . 

I am confident not one elder of an hundred but had rather die the death of a wittol then of a traitor . 

The presbytery cry out , that politicus is an atheist , because he tosses the kirk like a football , and jerks their hypocrisy . Oh ye publican sectaries and harlots ! come ye not near them ? for these are the congregation of Dathan and Abiram who stood upon holy ground , and are more holy than you , if you list to believe them : these are the little Levites that cannot abide you , because your sacrilegious troopers have carried away all the provender of reformation , and tied them up to the manger . Woe and alas for the glory of the priesthood ; who since they have lost their command , must not look hereafter to go so merrily a wiving , because they cannot promise their pretty Mistresses to make them Queens of the parish : no more must they March like george-a-horseback upon their steeds to Westminster , with their hearts full of pluralities and tithes ; their souls swollen with pride , their heads with faction beyond the pomp of a diocese , and other appurtinances of their jure divino , no longer shall they sit cheek by Joule with the supreme authority , in the state of an assembly to catechise the parliament , and con over their most elaborate confession , with the more wondrous directory , which being once past the press , were worn out in chapels of ease , though they cost us many thousands , with their four shillings a day wages , and more than three years' patience ere the works were brought to perfection . 

His kingship of Scotland took his journey from Breda to the Hague , his brother Orange providing him ships for a convoy . Because he durst not trust himself with the Schippers , for fear he Might have been put off with other small fish , and sent in pickle to England ; therefore in regard these ships were but borrowed , the young man went aboard , and bade them strike sail for three kingdoms when he can catch them . Thrice they put to sea , and as oft were driven back , so that the wind had like to have blown away the shuttle cock of monarchy . Certainly , the chicken of this family are none of the halcyon brood , because never without a storm ; old Mary Queen of Scots never crossed the sea but in a storm : her son King James 'scaped it , because he never was so valiant as to venture , or else he had raised a storm in his breeches , his son Charles went a wooing to Spain in a storm and so returned , &c. and since the storm ever follows by land as well as by water , i suppose it was wisely done of the parliament , to throw them all over board , to save themselves and the vessel ; but i hear he is blown back again by that pretended blast of honour and conscience that blasted his father . 

The kirk are very righteous , even as righteous as their elder brethren the Pharisees , ten of whose righteousnesses would have hardly saved a louse out of Gommorrha . 

Judge you then whether the kirk be not bravely enthroned in Scotland , where she destinies whom she pleaseth to death , and causeth them to kiss the scaffold , and those whom she pleases to let live , she makes to kiss her breech , or serve ( Without ceremony ) for a footstool . 

The bold whore ( Bolder than her sister Babylon ) would fain come hither a madding , and set up her trade here in England . 

The King is at a pause , because he perceives ( Without the help of astrology ) that his head May be made the price of their peace and security , he remembers who they were that hunted his great grandmother , like a polecat , and were suspected for hanging her husband : who they were likewise that baited his grandsire Jemmy , and whipped him out of his royalty : also how they handled his father , and therefore he will look before he leaps , having cause to fear , that the same rods are laid in piss now by the kirk and her assembly . 

When they send young Tarquin for a token to his friends in England . 

This is like to be the last King that ever they shall be Masters of . And if they be wise they will have their pennyworths out of him for all his projects . 

He hath played fast and loose with them and Montrosse at the same time : i mean the same Montrosse that was the gallant royalist , whom they buried under the gallows , in pure love to his majesty , if he please to believe them . 

This is dad's own son , two faces under one hood , being an hereditary posture . 

Montrosse acted nothing but by his instigation and commission , for which they hanged him in a most Presbyterian manner , and yet at the same time the kirk opens her bosom most lovingly to receive his Master as her son into her protection ; the crime is the same in both , but the guilt greater in him being the author , than in Montrosse the actor , wherefore i must here proclaim to all the world the partiality and hypocrisy of the Presbyterians , that they should anathematise one delinquent even to hell , and the death and burial of a dog , yet spare another more guilty than he , and not only so , but give him sugar-sops , &c.  

Ormond , ( According to the common fate of all Lords ) is a thing that lives but by courtesy . 

As for the rest of the runagates , the curse of Cain pursues them beyond hopes of a pardon . 

All that begins with the name of Charles is unlucky , and must down . 

I cannot blame them more than their brother curs here in England . 

The Duke of York is a good boy to be doing abroad i say , and not a rambling after Charles , now upon his voyage to Whitehall , for if he be catcht here , he will be soundly whipped for running away from St. James' . 

The young lad of Scotland hath left Holland . 

No letters come yet upon what coast young Tarquin is a fishing . 

Madam kirk and a baby King , a dainty covenant with other rare knacks . 

The ministers or Scotch trumpeters . 

It is not known yet in what part of the world young Tarquin is landed . 

The late Duke of York is turned servingman to his cousin the King of France , who hath bestowed a cast office upon him being made commander of his Scottish janissaries ; a warm place ( Believe me ) and if it will hold i warrant he will teach his brother more wit then to venture his neck in two such cold climates , as England and Scotland . 

Young Tarquin slunk away in a flyboat , and embarked like Poor-john , ships being sent to scour the road of kingfishers , if the young trout had been worth taking . 

When the kirk strokes up the boy's forehead , and gives him her blessing , which passeth all understanding . 

He wept at montross's death by the water side , like a young crocodile upon the ba•kss of Nilus , as all King's use to do , when they have worn out their favourites .. 

baby Charles of Scotland . 

The kirk longs much , and is like to miscarry for a tried bit of young Tarquin . 

They say young Tarquin is landed among his good persons , and must once more be proclaimed King by the sound of bagpipes , that he May be sent after his beloved cousin Montrosse . 

There is not a cavalier in England , but swears , this it will come to ; and therefore they are mad if they stir from the pipe and the pisspot in hope of a knighthood ; nor have they a mind to be led by the nose , or tied by the tails with those foxes , and firebrands which frighted the Pope and the prelates quite out of the parish , into the King's own belly , so that now she languisheth for a cordial of new insurrections , in hope of a safe deliverance , if the old cavalry and bumkins will be made midwives or monkeys , in the behalf of her holiness . 

Cranford and Jenkins' , two principal rabbis of the leviticat order , brought a company of starchted faces along with them . 

The kirk is a monster of a Scotch stomach , whose keen appetite , will know no difference between Presbyterian and independent morsels . 

The thing of Scotland landed among his beloved beasts , the Redshanks and the highlanders . 

Upon the landing of Tarquin , &c.  

The young gentleman came a shore without his cousin Hamilton or Lauderdail , and not so much as a frippery of the old priesthood and liturgy . 

Rather than Tarquin should be no King , 't is but rubbing up an old kettle or warming-pan ; and either May serve for a Scotch coronation . 

How sweet the air of a commonwealth is beyond that of monarchy . 

Young Tarquin is a coming with a world of majesty and vermin , and there 's not a royalist in England , but dreams of an office ( Sir reverence ) to be at least groom of the stool . 

rabbi Jenkins' , what a platter face full of impudence he presented before the committee , attended with his old gang of lugs and ruffs . 

Young Tarquin creeps on still . 

Farewell William Pryn too , and farewell all ye wild wittols of the nasty faction . 

An ill fate attends all that take part with the baby of Scotland . the young lad. Young Tarquin . One rout makes Tarquin not worth a pamphlet . 

The pride and covetousness of a pulpit incendiary ; the spleen and melancholy of a secluded member ; the purse of a city elder ; and the wit and valour of a Presbyterian lordling . 

jockey Charles . his baby majesty . 

The young man is full of hope ; and at Dundee , he and the bonny jockeys are fellows at football . 

His pretty majesty of Scotland the lad , behaves himself like an obedient son of the kirk : he never moves , but like a puppet upon the wire of the covenant , and ambles altogether after their interpretation : they feed him just as the priests did Bell and the dragon ; they set meat before him , but give him a sermon of temperance , and eat up all themselves , and then catechise him with a Scotch primmer for digestion : his very authority is all apocrypha , and the kirk only canonical , so that he dares not question a tittle , for fear of a whipping jure divine . 

A fine baby King for a company of Scots to play withal . 

The old projects that were left in legacy by his father . 

There is no thriving for any whatsoever , upon the same account of the Tarquins . 

The poor pill of Orange , if things do not mend , he will never be able to set an excise upon the provinces , to buy petticoats for his wenches . 

Upon the young lad 's arrival at Dundee , ringing of bells , shooting of pottles and quarts : those canon and Demicanon of royalty were freely discharged upon their knees , to the health of his medlcy majesty , yet all will not avail to the health of the baby . 

If jockey please to search his pockets , 't is ten to one , but he will find madam kirk , to be a bull by an urchin , with the Pope's broad seal and a dispensation for the covenant . 

Young Tarquin is grown sick upon his new sovereignty . 

This old doctor Bishop hall in my opinion , next to William Prynne , and the mercurial pamphleteer , is one of the greatest paper-worms that ever crept into a closet or library . 

His clipped majesty of Scotland . 

The thing called his majesty . 

Young Tarquin May have the luck to wipe the nose of the Kirk's holiness . 

The idol of majesty . 

The thing called King . 

That puppet of their own making ( I dare promise ) will in the end ( If they do not look to him ) be their utter confusion . 

Their great God Tarquin . 

The young lad begins to grow confident , and hath thrown away the Kirk's hornbook . 

The kingly kickshaw . 

The great Lords and their idol , have a design of their own . 

Sr. John Culpepper , ambassador extraordinary from the thing of Scotland , that calleth itself King of great Britain . 

The Earl of Derby intends to convert his leaden crown into bullets , as Queen Mall did her jewels . 

The young lad of Scotland . 

That trifle called Charles the second , and avowed the roy Charles to be King of England and Scotland . 

The Scotch baby King of England . 

Alas poor thing ! he hath played his part long enough in this tragedy , so that now it is high time to quit the stage , since it is resolved above and below too , that none of the Tarquins shall have any inheritance in England . the two birds here of the same nest shall be sent away beyond sea . 

The broad seal of young Tarquin . 

The diet , dwelling and designs of young Tarquin ; the plots of his great Lords , &c.  

His baby majesty . 

Strip Tarquin out of all his titles and pretty trinkets of majesty . 

James Tarquin is not yet come from Jersey to Paris . 

The thing of Scotland . 

Incheqnin the dapper giant of the jockeys interest . 

The drums have been long beaten up in the pulpit for young Tarquin . 

Young Tarquin's majesty . They promised the baby , a bell , a bib , and a rattle . 

What would you have ? A royal puppet to play withal . 

Mother Mall made a muster of the forlorn fobs and pockets of her family . 

The plague landed out of Ireland in the Western parts , much about the same time with young Tarquin in England . 

Alas poor Tarquin what a pickle art thou in . 

Alas poor Tarquin , whither wilt thou go ? 

The state was put to far greater trouble and expenses upon the hanging of Montrosse , than some were pleased to bestow upon Tarquin's great grandfather , when they trussed him up upon a pear tree . 

Young Tarquin intends to mount the royal Galloway , to run a race with the Scotch hierarchy , and out run Mon and his father's destiny ; and this if he do , he May do well to call upon his brother . James , at the I 'll of Jersey , that they May learn to trail a pike , and rant away a pension for the maintenance of the French . 

In every line you will find we and us , as if he had a litter of pigs , besides Popes in his belly . 

He confesseth the sins of his father's house ( A foul house indeed ) if he had reckoned up his mother's house too . 

The thing called King . 

The Scots King hath been in the penitential chair ; he hath acknowledged his father's sin , and his own wickedness , and his mother's idolatry . 

The Scots King is wholly passive , led up and down by the nose at their pleasure . 

Charles Tarquin being already a Catholic , swore he would turn Turk too , but he would be revenged upon the English ; James Tarquin is to be a Cardinal , and Rupert Tarquin is as good as the best in the bunch , having been a thief in two elements , and a runagate in divers countries ; all which being considered by our brethren of London and others , they have little confidence in a cause that admits of a combination with that wretched family . 

It is very possible , young Tarquin May lick up again the late vomit of the sins of his family . 

Attempts have been made , to make a purse to buy gunpowder and milk for the baby of Scotland . 

The young proselyte . 

Their young King is in a consumption i believe , both of purse and reputation : they say he spits blood , but not so fast i suppose as he and his father spilt it ; his doctors tell him he cannot live three months , and yet i fear he will out live both his religion and reputation . 

We had leisure to take notice of young Tarquin's declaration . 

He will believe all these evils to have occasioned , through the blood spilt by his father and himself ; the idolatry of his mother , and the sins of his father's house ; that all his own miscarriages are excusable by reason of his education , age , evil council and company . 

Out of a desire to recover the crown ) for which i will not give him a halfpenny ) he is content to pass an act of oblivion for all , but such who had the courage to do justice upon his father , whom he himself hath acknowledged to be guilty of all the blood in the three nations . The rest concludes with an exhortation to rebellion . 

given at our court at Dumfermlin , aug. 16. 1650.  

Young Tarquin hath shown the kirk a fair pair of heels . 

James Tarquin is gone to Brussells , and required of Jermin , an account of 600 pistols , lent him by the Duke of Orleans for his journey , but Jermin had played away 60 of them . 

A crown he May have , but not of gold ; for some Princes have been crowned with brown paper , and some with ivy.  

James Tarquin ( Whom they call Duke of York ) the lad &c.  

His father was justly put to death for his acts of tyranny . 

The King of Scots having received his crown , designed the parliament to appoint a fast for his sins . 

I saw the Duke of York accompanied with bad tutors , being part of the fates of that family . 

The nominal Duke of York intends speedily for France , being constrained thereunto against his will , because upon Jermins' persuasions to the Princess his sister , that she would not countenance him in his disobedience to his mother , he is like to receive no farther supplies from her . 

There will not •ide with the royal party any persons of note , that have but moral honesty in them . 

The new tyrant will be as absolute as was William the conqueror . 

Young Pharaoh's chariot wheels drive not with that fury as was expected . 

The young pretender . 

The only way to be rid of taxes and make the nation happy is utterly to desert the common enemy , and cast off the tyrannic family , with all the curses that attend it . 

The Scots have an Ishbosheth amongst them , heir of a family of the very same complexion and condition , against whom destruction hath been written in broad characters by the special hand of providence , that no party whatsoever that joins with it doth prosper . 

They have an Achan and an Isbosheth amongst them . 

Tarquin the second . 

The abominable interest . 

malignants , cavaliers , Papists , yea and Irish rebels are upon the account of their Charles the second . 

When a nation hath cast off the yoke of tyranny , or kingship , and newly obtained their liberty , it must look to have all those for enemies that were familiars and retainers to the tyrant . 

The Scotch King came with his covenant-pretences and acted the mockery of repentance with much hypocritical solemnity . 

Though the Presbyterians laid not the tyrant down upon the block , yet they brought him to the scaffold . 

The Scots deprived him ( k. Charles the first ) of his earthly crown as he deserved . 

The young raven hath rooked the kirk . 

The Scots have taken a snake into their bosom . 

He was born to the old corrupt interest , he sucked it in with his milk , was nursed up with blood and malignancy , and had a share ( So far as he was capable ) in all the sins of his family . 

The tyrant being beheaded , 

The young gentleman by his guardian the Scot is very active . 

They will see what Tarquin can do for himself . 

The cunning sleights and devices of the Scottish King . 

That heroic and most noble act of justice in judging and executing the late King . 

The Scots pronounced and printed the late King , a man of blood , one that had shed more blood in his time than had been shed in the ten Christian persecutions . 

Marry , James his mother massacred her own husband by poison , gunpowder and halter , for the love that she bare to a fiddler and another of her adulterers , by name Bothwell . 

The wicked ways of his father , the idolatry of his mother , and the blood-guiltiness of his father's house ; woe to that bloody house . 

A bloody generation . 

He hath approved himself heir apparent of that blood and vengeance which belongs to his father's house . 

As for the title of young Tarquin who now would fain be accounted heir . 

The treason of the father hath cut off the son . 

What a governor he is like to be , who took in his father's principles with his mother's milk . Who hath been bred up under the wings of popery and prelacy , one who hath been bedabbled in all the blood of England , Scotland and Ireland . 

We have cause to cut off this accursed line of tyranny , blood and usurpation in this young pretender . 

That tyrannical line . 

Charles the father is gone to his own place , and so is Charles the son likewise , he being in his own proper nation , Scotland . 

The execution of justice is then most proper , when an offender appears incorrigible , and by a settled obstinacy puts himself out of the capacity of mercy : surely then now or never is the time that men May expect an administration of justice without respect of persons , this being an age that is able to take a full prospect of such delinquents through all the sacred colours of title and function . The time was , when this nation was wedded to the vanity of admiring Kings , placing them in a lofty seat of impunity like gods , that were not bound to give men an account of their actions , but had a liberty to thunder at pleasure , and put the world into combustion , so that there was no love , but lust ; no rule , but the Princes will , which so vassalized the spirits of this great and mighty persons , that they were content to establish the highest piece of injustice by such maxims of law , as said , the King can do no wrong ; as if whatsoever he did could not make him a delinquent , or traitor ; nor was it law only , but those antiquated cheats of the clergy too made it pass for divinity ; so that the commonwealth of England for almost 600. years hath been pinioned like a captive , with that twofold cord of the law and the gospel , which the corrupt professors have made use of after their own inventions . 

Yet notwithstanding that this glorious idol of royalty was elevated to such a height over the liberties of the parliament , and set upon the very pinnacle of the temple , we have lived to see a noble generation of English hearts , that have fetched it down with a vengeance , and cured the land of that idolatry , by one of the most heroic and exemplary acts of justice that ever was done under the sun . 

Nothing farther ( Speaking of transactions in parliament , and news a little before ) save that the Lord chancellor Lowdon hath been found in bed with a Scotch officers wife , getting privy-counselors ; so that without the mercy of the kirk , he must once more to the stool of repentance . 

So great was the stupidity of elder times , being ridden by the clergy , that in all our chronicles we can hardly meet with a piece of justice done upon any of that tribe , till the time of Harry the viii . when Bishop Fisher was brought to the block as a martyr for the Pope's supremacy , and yet from sodomy and private murder to public treason and rebellion there is not any crime whereof they were not guilty ; and from the penalty whereof they were not guarded by impunity and exemption from secular power . This having been so in time past , May prompt us upon the consideration of the present actions of many of our ministers , to believe that we May be still at the same pass that our forefathers were , and that our new clergy are still the same idol , only a little disguised with a new dress of mummery ; they have taken a new form , but labour to hold up the old grandeur , and punctilios of veneration , only here is the difference : heretofore they got an outward power to control the temporal jurisdiction ; from which plea being now nonsuited in all civil courts , they now renew their sanctimonious pretences by tampering everywhere in the court of conscience ; but a conscience well informed knows , that with God there is no respect of persons ; and methinks in those days it ought to be so too among men , yea it must be so , since he that sat in the royal throne , in the midst of his iniquity could not rest secure ; but being disrobed of all his sacred titles , laid him down upon the block , to show all inferior orders of men how vain it is to hope for impunity , and that they must all expect to submit and bow before the throne ofe justice . 

It is the old cavaliers interest ( Speaking of his majesty's leaving Scotland , and now coming into England ) that comes in new clad with a new cloak of the covenant , after the Scottish fashion ; and it comes attended by the Scot , the apostatising Scot , that will cide any way for a thriving voyage into England . let the presbytery remember , that though they laid not the old tyrant down upon the block , yet the young one knows they were the men that brought him to the scaffold , and they are the old enemies of his family ; in which respect , he ever bore a mortal hatred to their whole faction , ( And a little after ) and we will allow both cavalier and presbyter so much sense , ( Were their spleen never so high ) as not to embark their heads and estates in the bottom of a beaten rabble , for the sake of a toy called King ; who as he first sailed into Scotland , so now he is driven out again by pure necessity ; yet for fashion sake he pretends great matters , and playing the second part of Perkin Warbeck , who once invaded the North after the same manner , with a crew of Scots at his heels , and had every jot as good a title as himself , or as his predecessor Henry the 7th , and played the King with as good a grace ; issuing out proclamations and declarations ; calling folks rebels with as brazen à confidence , and tossing pardons about to no purpose ; till at length poor Perkin and his Scots were packed out again with a vengeance , as that lousy nation ever hath been upon every offer of invasion , as May be seen in the chronicles of both countries . 

Let not the presbyters flatter themselves , ( Upon a change ) that they shall scape any better than others , because they never opposed this man's person ( viz. his majesty ) it would be ground sufficient for his hatred , and the spleen of his prelatic clergy ; that they first bandied against his father , the prerogative , and prelacy . And let them consider ( Before they feel it ) that revenge is reckoned inter arcana imperii ; a prime mystery in the cabinet counsel of royalty ; even the best of Kings could not refrain it , as May be seen in the practice of David and Solomon . let them consider too , how he hath rooked all their party in Scotland . 

Let the cavalier and compounders consider , they will get nothing by this change ; they can be but Masters of what they have already ? the high ranters and fugitives are they that will be looked on at court : those belweathers of tyranny will bear away the bell of preferment , while the poor country royalists ( Both gentry and yeomen ) shall be glad to drudge and plow , to pay those yet unknown taxations , which must needs be collected , to satisfy the forlorn brethren of the sword , the plunderers and hungry Scots that come along with the grandees , in hope to purchase a fortune by squeezing the public . Let the whole nation also consider , that if young Tarquin come in by conquest , he will be as absolute as was William the conqueror ; and we all must be in the same slavish condition , as our forefathers were under this Norman bastard ; by having our birth-rights trampled under foot , our parliaments , laws , liberties and privileges resolved all into the the will of an arbitrary tyrant , and his Scottish privy council . 

't is reported , their King ( Meaning our most gracious Lord and sovereign ) blames major Astnerst , for bringing him to Lancashire , since he finds no more access of forces : i do not hear that any considerable person doth openly own him since his March into England ; wherefore we doubt not , but God hath ordered his coming hither , for the more speedy ruin of him and his adherents . 

What a happiness it is , to live to see this day , wherein we have experience of the noble temper of our nation that though many of them be divided in matter of particular interest and opinion , yet they so well understand the general interest of England , that they scorn to embark themselves in such courses , as must of necessity , either debase us under the miserable yoke of a Scottish tyranny , or vassalize us under the will of an everlasting tyrant : for , had God given over the persons to run a-madding after the royal puppet , we could have expected no other consequents , but endless taxes , and inevitable slavery . 

But the world is grown wiser now , then to throw away their lives and estates for a trifle called a King ; an officer that we have little cause to be in love with , if we take a view of them all since the conquest . 

As it was said of old concerning Israel , that God gave them a King in his wrath . So we May say of our own nation , if we view all the practices of our Kings ; that they seem to have been given by God , as the scourges and rods of his anger , rather than tokens of favour unto the persons ; and this in our last ( Meaning his 64 number ) was in part made evident , by giving you a character of each King since the conquest , to the end of Edward the second ; therefore now in the next place , give me leave to trace them downward to the present age , drawing them in their pourtraictures after the copy of our English chronicles , and then let every different man judge , how little reason we have to be in love with Kings , and how much the whole nation are obliged unto the parliament , for blotting out so pernicious and tyrannical a session . 

( Then after the enumeration of the rest till Queen Elizabeth , and so to King James ) the Scot brought in ( As he saith ) with , and for a plague to the nation ; the whole design of whose reign , was to undermine the liberties of England , who laid the main plot of tyranny , and then being sent as his son Henry , down into another world , he left his son Charles to execute it . 

Charles being in the saddle took a course to ride the nation quite off its legs ; all his reign was to enslave , and embroil the persons , and to enhance the prerogative ; for which he died a martyr , being executed a tyrant , traitor , murderer , and a public enemy to the nation . 

As for the title of the present young pretender ( Meaning his most gracious majesty ) remember from whence he had it , and how it is now tainted : had it been just , yet the treason of the father hath cut off the son ; who hath lived already to embroil Scotland , and now takes the same course in England . his interest is revenge against the very nation ; for the effecting whereof , he hath harassed the land with a desperate crew of barbarians . consider what misery we have had by Kings in times past , and how they May be multiplied in time to come . Tyranny hath been the practice and design ( You see ) of the whole race ; but , admit this young Boutefeu , and he will soon bring it to perfection ; then farewell to parliaments , laws , liberties and estates , which will be little enough for the haughty Scot , whose hopes and aims are all leveled at these , and his quarrel at the very name and nation of the English . 

If after so many eminent discoveries of the will and purpose of God , touching the establishment of this commonwealth , any man shall be such a sot , as to continue a malignant , let him remember how God useth to dispose of his incorrigible , and implacable enemies . But i perceive one main impediment , that keeps men from quitting their old corrupt principles , is , the fear of being Counted a turncoat ; yet know , that if God once declare , as it were from heaven against thy ways , thy principles , or thy party ; then it is no dishonour , but ingenuity , and thy duty to turn : for , he hath said in this case ; if a man do not turn , he will whet his sword ; he hath bent his bow , and made it ready ; he hath prepared for him the instruments of death and destruction . 

Let the old malignants and cavaliers consider , that in what shape they have appeared , with what pretences soever they have clothed their conferences , yet God hath found them out and confounded them . Let the new malignants of the Presbyterian opinion consider , how often , and notoriously God hath checked them , and cursed their unrighteous combination with the old malignants . Let both old and new consider , what an inseparable course is annexed ( As i have often told you ) to the family and interest of the Tarquins , that it proves ruin and destruction to all that own it . Let England herself , and all the nations about consider , what God hath done for England ; and how in this auspicious time of trial , he gave in the hearts of the persons to live and die for the present government . Lastly , let all parties consider , it is high time to lay aside animosities , and unite again upon the common interest of our nation ; and there is no doubt but the parliament will consider , that as God hath his design of glory in all these things , so it should be their design to improve them all to that end ; and for the ease and benefit of so willing and obedient a persons . 

If ever there were a season of observation , ( Or rather admiration ) certainly it is the present ; wherein we have been eye-witnesses of so many outgoings of God's presence among us , and the many miraculous turns of providence within a short revolution . Some memorable hints of those things you had in our last ( Meaning his relation of the fight at Worcester ) but now observe farther ; and in the first place , from whence came the rise of all our distractions ; of which we May truly say , according to the old proverb used by our fathers ; in nomine domini incipit omne malum , all our evils have been derived from the corruption of the clergy , and such of the laity as have been wedded to their faction . The first war May be truly called bellum episcopale , the Bishop's war , as being made for the upholding the second correlated interests of prerogative and prelacy . The two last wars , May as well be called bellum Presbyteriale , being raised by the ranting presbyters ; for erecting of a new tyranny , upon the ruin of the old one ; by labouring to make one compound of two incompossibles , viz. presbytery and monarchy . thus you see , how when one part of the clergy prove bankrupt , the other fell to traffic for the old ambitious interest in a new form , upon a new stock of reputation ; wherein , it is very observable , how they have thrived accordingly ; by joining issue and interest with the old malignant traitors of regality . The end then of this observation is , to show , that it concerns the peace of every commnowealth to see that the civil interest be secured out of the reach of any clerical encroachments or pretences . 

The next observable that falls in of courle is , how mightily the Lord hath prospered the commonwealth in a short time , since it began to execute justice upon our modern traitors of the clergy , for that blood which hath been shed through their designs and instigation : yet , notwithstanding their confidence is more observable than all , seeing , when they suffer for manifest treasons , they dub themselves with the title of confessors and martyrs : thus the late Charles died a martyr for tyranny and treason ; thus Mr.  Love followed him , proclaiming himself a martyr , when under his own hand , and with his own mouth , he had confessed himself guilty of the treasons charged upon him ; and it appears unto all the impartial part of the world , that he died a martyr for the old tyrannic interest ( Which he had so oft cried down ) as it is now settled in the person of the young pretender , though cloaked with a pretence of the covenant . 

The English church ( Meaning at Amsterdam ) together with their day of thanks giving , joined their humiliation and supplication for the good success of the King of Scots : but i hope their crying to God was like those Baal's priests , whom Elias mocked . Certain it is , these Baal's priests are extremely lifted up with hopes , that their idol episcopacy shall be set up again , as soon as their King , for whom they pray so fervently , shall be settled in his throne . 

The day following ( That is the 1• of September ) many thousands of tattered Scots , that had been taken prisoners at Worcester , were conducted through the city , to show the cavaliers a true copy of their King's countenance , in his gallant design to overrun the nation at once with barbarism and tyranny . 

The King of Scots , the Duke of York ( That would be the Duke of Beaufort , and madamoselle d'orleance ( In his intelligence from Paris ) are much given to hunting , dancing , balls and masking . The pretended King ( Meaning our most gracious sovereign ) is much in discourse about the miracle of his escape , and his episcoparians do much enlarge upon it in their sermons , hinting out to the world , as if God did thereby declare his will to restore him . 

He much magnifies the fidelity of the English Papists to him above all other friends , and as much vilifies the Scots ; whom he seems resolved never more to trouble . It seems too , that the covenant lay very foul upon his stomach , having voided it , and licked up the old vomit of the English common-prayer-book , which is now become again the rosary of his devotions ; his chapel being crowded with Copes , surplices and Bishops that would be . The great kindnesses , the frequent visits and revels that pass between him and madamoselle d'orleans minister to all men large occasion of discourse , as if there were an intent of marriage that way , and that thereupon his quarrel would be owned by that valiant man the Duke , her father , who is able to do wonders , if we May credit town-talk , or could they but believe quarrelling with each other . But the wiser sort say , that this often sporting of mademoiselle with him , is only to make a sport of him , he being now of late become a great pretender to wit , and jesting among the Ladies ; a thing wherein things of his leaden complexion are seldom happy . 

What , more of thy scurrilous language still , profane rebel ? but 't is no matter , thy tongue is no slander , because 't is nothing else but slander . 

We hear how the fugitive King of Scots hath resumed his mass-book of commonprayer again , at which the king-doting Scots are much offended , and cry shame upon him . Are these the fruits of his sitting in the stool of repentance ? of his taking the covenant ? have the silly Scots ventured their lives and estates for such an hypocrite ? It appears well that he observed his good mother's counsel , to do any thing till he had gotten strength and power , and then do afterward as he list . How finely had the Presbyterians been served , if their designgs had taken effect , to enthrone such a dissembler for the enslaving of themselves . 

This was remarkable in the late tyrant Charles ( Falsely accusing Princes of perjury , and violation of promises ) whose inconstancy in this kind was beyond compare ; who no sooner had past any promises , made vows and protestations , and first appeals in the high court of heaven , in the behalf of himself and his family , but presently he forfeited all , and canceled them by his actions . How closely his son also hath trodden the father's steps , appears by the last game with the presbyters in Scotland , where he played fast and loose with the covenant and the stool of repentance . 

Believe it , all your other enemies are tame beasts to the high presbyter , and yet with the winding and turning of a religious pretence , and artificial zeal against heresy , he will , like a tame snake , ( If not warily avoided ) get into your bosom . As the Scottish presbyter and the cavalier look several ways , but are tied together by the tail with a point of Stewart's interest . 

We have a very notable instance also in our own nation , which May serve for a just example to all the world in point of behaviour ; for , if we reflect upon these 30 years past , we shall find how cautious the parliaments and persons of England have been , before they proceeded to arms , the utmost and most desperate remedy . If we run over the catalogue of the late tyrant's defaults in government , we find extraordinary patience in the persons , notwithstanding his extraordinary encroachments from time to time . It were needless to reckon up the several monopolies , impositions and other oppressions of the persons , both in soul and body , which were made public and known to all the world ; together with that highest of all practices , not only in dissolving parliament , abruptly , but professedly designing the ruin of parliaments , in depriving the persons of their due succession . Though all these tyrannies of his were sufficiently felt and known , yet such was the wisdom and caution of our nation from time to time , and particularly of this parliament , that they used all the ways under heaven , by petitioning , declaring , remonstrating to God and man , in hope to reduce him ; and though all would not do ; yet notwithstanding , that desperate remedy of the sword was forborn , till after he had first taken it up , and that invincible necessity did put it into their hands , for the preservation of themselves , with the rights and liberties of the persons . 

After this , it was wicked reason of state that continue monarchy , and brought in a Scotchman upon us . This was James , who was so great an admirer of reason of state , that he adopted it for his own darling , by the name of kingcraft , and his motto , no Bishop no King , showed , that he preferred reason of state before interest of religion , as in other things before honesty ; witness among many other , his quitting the cause of God and the palatinate , to keep fair with the house of Austria ; for which , and for the same reason of state , put in practice by his son Charles , for the ruin of religion and liberty by a bloody war , the whole family hath been brought to a sad destruction . Yet reason of state is still the grand idol of the present youngster : ( Villainously endeavouring to scandalize our most gracious sovereign ) it made him first resolve to join with the Irish ; but things not falling out to his mind there , it made him wheel about into Scotland , and turn covenanter . afterwards it made him cast off the covenant and Covenanters both together ; and therefore , no doubt but the next wheeling will be towards Rome , or any way , if reason of state require it , that he May finish the transgressions of the family . 

It must not be forgotten , what hazard our nation hath run of late , through the malice of falsehood and faction , of the late Presbyterian drivers . He that will remember what they did in the year 1647 , 48 , 49 , 50 and 51 , must needs confess , that great hath been the deliverance of this commonwealth , and the manner of it almost incredible , considering the ways and means whereby we have been rescued out of the claws of the old tyranny . 

From the Hague . 

Here are daily productions of pamphlets , so simple as not worth naming . There is a kite abroad , entitled , England possessed with the devil ; wherein all are converted to devils , dogs , serpent ▪ tails , king-murtherers , villains , and i know not what ; but after all , he flings you into the bottomless pit , there to be kept close prisoners , that Charles the second May be restored to his father's throne , and become a friend to the Netherlands , and receive bribes as his father , grandfather , and their courtiers did , to betray the trade and interest of England ; that these men May catch herrings in the sea in peace , and tickle the trouts in a corrupt monarchy , and bait them now and then with a golden gudgeon , whilst they draw the wealth of the world hither into this bog through English channels ; but if ever they truck with young Stewart , ( As some would have them ) I 'll send you word immediately ; for if once they be so mad , as to become your irreconcilable enemies : i suppose i cannot send you more welcome news into England , than of an uniting with that bloody house , which hitherto hath drawn a swift and inevitable ruin and curse upon all its partakers . 

Another pamphleteer entitles himself the Batavian admonisher ; he is full of rapture too , though in prose ; and brings in the Belgic bear , ( I mean you ) and Van trump together ; and the first work he doth , is to rouse the lion , and make him seize upon poor Britain with his paws , that it May become Holland's portion : rise up ( Saith he ) oh lion , magnanimous lion ; yes then lie down again , that Charles Stuart and his young nephew May get up and ride thee , and pick thy teeth with thine own bundle of arrows : oh brave lion , strut and be stately ; for the Princess royal is in love with thee , and means to make a trim shock of thee , for the little boy to play with thee , oh magnanimous lion . 

Salmasius , that dirty and most dissolute parasite of Kings , is to be set on work by authority , which is an ill sign , that a cause should want colour of his tempering to point it over , and give it a strumpet's face , that it May pass the more currant to delude the world . This is that Salmasius , who railed so admirably , under pretence of defending that foul cause of Stewarts ; who broached such wild principles , as are not only prejudicial to Princes themselves , but even to human society . And thus much young Stewart was told to his face out of the pulpit , even upon the day of his coronation at Scone , by Mr. Robert Douglas , where he condemned that hireling Salmasius , before the face of the tyrant — would — be . 

They are much exalted at St.  german's , to hear the zealanders are so zealous for the house of Orange , that they have in a manner given their vote , for making the young brat stadtholder , by which news Charles hopes to have a finger in the pie.  

Likewise the pretended Duke of York returned lately to the French camp . 

Charles Stuart lurks still at St.  german's ; being tossed and tumbled betwixt hopes and fears ; Lorain is a strange fellow , for plunder of wagons , carriages , or houses , he transcends even the Palatine Rupert . 

The persons are generally weary of war , and the court of Charles Stuart , whom they would willingly supply with money , to take a journey out of France , if he knew whether to bend his course . 

Charles Stuart is gone back to the house of the Duke of cheiureuse , to spend some little time in pleasure there , and then return to Paris ; sure , his affairs are defunct , because the ranters about him are very pensive and silent ; which is not usual when the world goes on their side . 

Here are divers commissions brought into this country , which run in the name of a King of Scots : but whether any such thing as a King of Scots commissions ( As they call them ) be of any validity , it will concern you in England to determine that question , when you catch any of them that shall venture to rob at sea , under pretence of acting by his commission . 

Sir Richard Brown ( Who would be called the Scottish Kings resident ) is by the heels still , under the sergeant's hands that arrested him , to the great reproach of his Master's kingship . The pretended Duke of York is still in the army , and hath got another regiment , but it is Irish . Ormond also hath got such another . The Lord Digby hath been here , and showed himself a great favourite : he hath gotten fairly by his government of Maute , where he hath drained the country by contributions and now means to brave it in town here this winter . Buckingham is mending , but not a word of comfort yet to any of them from the Low-countries . 

If the Dutch miscarry in their design , they are resolved to take up the rotten interest of young Stewart . Stermont is translating clamour regii sanguinis ad coelum , &c.  But it is the muzzle of the canon , and not such squibs must resolve our case . 

Sir Richard Brown , that calls himself the Scotch King's resident , is at length released by order from the Queen , out of the sergeants hands , but was fain to pay the gaoler his fees at his departure . 

The Lord Digby , with his brother Sir Lewis dives , by him made deputy governor of Lile Adam , intends to brave it out this winter ; having hired a great house , and given order to have it stately furnished , to show how he hath thrived ( To his great dishonour ) by squeezing the country . 

The English cavaliers and princely party are half out of heart ; they have long cried up the taking in of the Stewarts interest , to be the only remedy for the distempers and misfortunes of these lands ; but perceiving nothing but delays , and that their pretended King is rejected : they are highly discontented , and seed their starved hopes , as well as their bodies , with air and expectations from France . 

It is said Charles Stewart would for Holland , were he supplied with monies for the journey ; and a rumour goes , as if he had a design for Ireland or Scotland ; but his party have often made the like reckonings to no purpose . 

Charles Stuart hath sent order to my Lord Wilmot , to go to the diet at Ratisbone , having got wherewith to go himself , to bear his charges , to excite the Princes of Germany to join with the states of Holland against the commonwealth of England . 

From Paris . 

Sir Richard Brown , who styles himself agent for Charles Stewart , being released out of prison , not being able to subsist here , is gone into Britain , to exact a share of those thefts and piracies , that the royalists have taken and brought thither , which Charles Stewart had given him for his subsistence many years since . 

Charles Stewart hath been fairly offered by the French court ; who to be rid of him , have promised him 5000 pistols , the Lord Digby Ran•s it with his stately house ; but the world being very short with the Lord of Ormond , the fair Isabel is fain to pawn her plate , and retire into the country . 

The states of Holland have not given their Master Charles his pretended title of King of England , or of great Britain , but style him the high & mighty King Charles . there is no news yet of Rupert , but they heartily wish him in the seas ; and have sent Sir Marmaduke Langdale and Sir Richard Page to sea , to try if they can find him out , and bring him back with all speed , supposing he Might be able to serve them and their broken interest in this nick of time . 

Wilmot is not gone on his German embassy , though it 's supposed he will be going every day : he is for his better accommodation set forth with a new airy title , being create and called Earl of Rochester . the pretended Duke of York is still in the army . 

Charles Stewart hath kept but a cold melancholy Christmas , without any sports save a game at cards , and a dinner that he had on Thursday at the Lord jermins . 

On Monday he kept up the old popish custom , of offering fankincence , myrrh and gold , a small pittance for an oblation ; where Ormond and Inchequin assisted . The Lady Denbigh having been turned Roman Catholic , hath hoped long for a pension , but missed it . No sign as yet of any hopes for these poor courtiers . 

The Earl of Bristol was buried in a mean churchyard , with little solemnity ; not one Lord appearing at his funeral , nor any other person of quality , except his second son Mr. John Digby and a certain knight : his elder the Lord Digby absented himself , though he were in town ; and not only so , but it 's said , that he forbore inviting any to save funeral expenses ; which being talked abroad , hath much cracked his reputation , because he is observed lavish enough upon other occasions . 

The high court of justice sits now in Dublin , and another is erected at Galoway , to try the Lord Mayo , who pleased to own the court , in bringing out evidences very strangely against some persons that were condemned . I cannot but admire and adore providence , to see the work of justice which began in England in a high court , against that tyrant , should next take its place in another high court in Ireland ; to give those wretch's blood to drink , who first opened the sluice of blood , which afterwards overflowed the three nations . 

On Wednesday an Irish factor delivered a letter to the high and mighties at the Hague . this gives just occasion to suspect that the Scottish King endeavours to hook in his own interest , in the engagement of the hogen state upon an Irish account ; so that if the Dutch should clap between these two interests of Achan and Babel , they would be daintily engaged , and a fine blessing must follow the business . But at present the Stewarts interest is kept off by the wiser sort , and that upon very rational grounds , in despite of all the projects of the orange party ; for they apprehend their taking part with him , were to hazard their whole , in going halves with a desperate gamester , that hath nothing to stake but a broken reputation . 

The Irish broken faction have not wanted a letter recommendatory from Charles Stewart to several Lords here at the Hague ; and if ever Prince Rupert return into these parts , they will not want a head like themselves , to restore the lost hopes of that wicked rebellion ; but if stories hold true , Rupert's highness is laid low enough ; for here are strong reports , that he , or the best part of his ships are cast away . 

Sir Philim Oneale is under examination , and will shortly receive the reward of his labour : he is a pitiful low spirited man . Col. Luke tool and seven more were hanged on Saturday last , and many more are upon their trial ; the goals are full in every province ; we have at least 200 men in hold of considerable account . The high court of justice will have work enough for one twelve month . 

There is news that he that is called Duke of Gloucester , is arrived at Dunkirk , where he was entertained by the governor . 

rnpert that pirate-prince is in the French road at St. Christopher's . 

Sir Phelim Oneale was lately condemned of high treason , at our high court of justice in Dublin ; and within a few hours a period shall be put to all his high titles , being called the Earl of Tyrone by the vltaghs , Prince of Ulster by the Pope's commission or bull , general of the Lemster and Ulster forces by commission from the Lords of the pale , and prime and chief actor in all the massacres of rebellion by commission from the late Charles , Stewart . this monster of men , when he came first to the bar , was not able to stand for trembling , or to speak for tears . 

That grand piratical Prince Rupert having fitted his ships , surprised two ships of London , and having plundered what was in her left her . 

The Scottish King ( As they call him ) and his courtiers have gotten an ill name in France ; for , 't is said their counterfeit King and they have of late turned coiners , and set a mint of their own a-going in the palace-royal , but with counterfeit coin ; upon which they have stamped the French image & superscription , & now being weary of that country he is like to leave it , and an ill report behind him . 

Prince Rupert is the man of whom the great discourse is , and the Hollanders have more mind to put him upon action than his cousin : one while they will have him make work for England in Ireland , and another while in the Scotch Highlands : any desperate attempt over a bog or a break-neck they think him fit for . Others would have him put upon a present action at sea , and supply him with two or three frigates , to wear the King of great Britain's colours ( As they call them ) thinking these fantasies would draw away seamen ; but they are not yet agreed about the manner , scene , or stage of action ; for the performance of those wonders must be wrought by Rupert . 

When the work of justice shall be done in the province of Ulster , as we trust it will ere long to some purpose , i suppose the land will in some measure be purged from the guilt of innocent blood . These wretches which we cut off with the sword of justice , are but part of the tail of that serpent , whose head you first lopped off in England . 

This know , that rather than the interests of the Stewarts should be any impediment to a friendly composure between England and Holland , it is laid aside , and that fatal family left to sink or swim , under the weight of their own destiny . 

And here i cannot let pass this last provison without this remark thereupon ( After the mentioning of an ordinance , passed by Oliver and his council ) that the persons of God in these dominions have abundant cause to bless the Lord , who hath put it into the hearts of our governors to make such provision against the faction ( Called religion ) of popery , and those desperate engineers , the popish priests , who seek the ruin of us , our country , and of the gospel of Christ , which is above all other considerations : and truly , there was never more need than now of such a law ; seeing popery is become the great interest of that family , which the Lord hath cast out before us ( Meaning the family of the Stewarts ) if ever they procure any force or power again , it must be upon a popish account . And that their endeavours lie wholly upon that foot , is evident by Charles Stewart's many applications to the court of Rome , which are commonly known , and to the Emperor ; besides his alliance and combination to , and and with other popish Princes ; so that the good and security of the reform religion , is absolutely involved in this present form of government , and the utter exclusion of that family of the Stewarts for ever . 

This day Charles Stuart , the Princess royal his sister , and his brother the Duke of Gloucester , &c. are gone by water to Mentz . i find not that their conversation here hath made them commendable to any , so much as to the English stage-players , who style themselves to be his . 

Concerning Charles Stewart and his fortune , there is great variety of opinions and inclinations in the empire : some do bewail his unfortunate condition , others do not pity him at all . That he Might gain to himself the affection of the several states of the empire , and oblige them to furnish him with monies , he sometimes professes himself to be a Lutheran , sometimes to be a Papist , but never appears to be of the reform religion ; and that gives a very strong suspicion of him among the orthodox professors , who thereupon do openly pronounce , that his bad fortuneiss a just judgement of God upon him . He is daily seen among the pastimes of the common persons ; he misses of no comedy or stage-play , and is a constant spectator of all kinds of puppet-plays ; he is seen everywhere , and therefore is neglected of all ; and having lately received a very considerable sum of money , he presently wasted it . 

The said Charles Stewart was resolved to go to Heidelberg , but the Prince elector prevented him ; perhaps lest the number of illustrious beggars should be too great in the palatinate ; therefore misery hath obliged the miserable to return to Colen . 

Charles Stewart with all his train having finished his rambling progress , is returned again to Colen . 

It is a great satisfaction to the well affected , that a course be taken to suppress the cavalier clergy and schoolmasters , by depriving them of the opportunity to seduce the souls , and pervert the youth of the nation . 

The gentleman of the King of Scots , who kept correspondency ( As it is said ) with some in England , was carried in a wagon to Drynwald , where he hath been shot to death with three bullets . The place where this execution was done , is in the country of the Duke of Newburgh , an apostate from the Protestant religion , and now the most jesuited Papist in these parts , and therefore so great a favourer of Charles Stewart , that he admits him ( It seems by this action ) to be partly sovereign with him , by allowing him the power of life and death within his principality , 

Edinburgh continues in very good quiet , nor is it observed , that many so much as hearken after Charles Stewart . it seems those few he hath raked together are most of them Irish , and with such company you May imagine how welcome he would be to Scots or English , and as little welcome would he be with any other foreigners his assistants : but i suppose there 's little regard to be had to him or his designs , which usually have so fatal a success , that hitherto they have sunk all those who took his part . We here cannot but observe , how the Lord deals in a most remarkable way of vengeance with the King of Spain , presently after his owning and taking the Stewarts into his protection : hitherto none have prospered that have had to do with them , and therefore they are the fittest friends that May be for the Spaniard . 

The titular King of Scots continueth at Brussells , having made but little progress in his affairs , though he hath hopes given him by the house of Austria , the fittest house that May be to receive him ; for therein he doth follow the generation of his fathers , whose juggling compliance with that house ( To the betraying of the Protestant interest throughout Europe ) hath provoked divine justice , to send him and his brothers to beg alms of the Austrian family , it being the last , and ( If all be considered ) the most miserable refuge . 

The remnants of Charles Stuart's patched up regiments in Flanders , which for want of money began to moulder , were designed to pass over towards Edinburgh , to make a little noise for upholding his and the Spaniards reputation . 

The party of Charles Stuart in these parts do hug themselves , to think what a game they shall have of it , if Hans knock his pitchers together . 

Yesterday his majesty , the Queen and the King's brother , with the Cardinal , were feasted by the little Queen at the palace royal ; where met also the titular Duke of York . 

It is said , that at Vienna and other parts , they talk high of choosing Charles Stuart King of Hungaria ; in the mean time he comes not at that court : they suppose they bought him off at 200000 rixdollars they promised him , of which he hath gotten a good part . Some say he and his junto are at their wit's end at the spa , since they heard of Middleton's defeat : i am sure they were at that long since , or they would never have run such desperate courses . 

The Princess royal and her son , and her brother Charles are gone to Colen : but they have their busybodies and agents here behind them , to do what mischief they can , in stirring up dissension among those that are honest , and mean well towards their country : wherein i doubt not but they will miss of their aim . 

The ninth of this month , he whom they call the King of great Britain arrived here . 

On the 28. instant , our magistrates bestowed a sumptuous collation upon him whom they call the King of great Britain , and the Princess royal of Orange his sister . 

The Duke of Gloucester hath a pension conferred on him by the Jesuits college in this town in the street of St.  James' , where he is lodged , and hath three of them to be his tutors , who are English by nation . 

Charles Stuart is still at Colen , where he intends to blow his fingers this cold winter . 

The marquess of Ormond is still in this city : some say he is come to fetch away the titular Duke of Gloucester , who is said to be turned Catholic , through the persuasion of his friends , and promise of a Cardinals cap. Charles Stuart is still at Colen , expecting the assistance of his friends in those parts for his subsistence . 

The marquess of Ormond hath taken the Duke of Gloucester out of the Jesuites college , and that ( As 't is said ) by order of his brother Charles , pretending that he will not suffer his brother to be of the Queen his mother's religion . 

The Duke of Gloucester since he was taken out of the Jesuites college , is gone towards Colen to his brother Charles , without taking any leave of the Queen his mother , to whom Charles wrote a letter , desiring her to excuse the taking away his brother in that manner : but she threw the letter into the fire . 

Charles Stewart is still in his old station at Colen . 

The Duke of Gloucester went out of town yesterday with the marquess of Ormond , to go towards his brother Charles at Colen . before he went the Queen his mother sent to him the marshal de Praslin to persuade him that he would only go and take a dinner in the Jesuites college , to signify his obedience to her . And when this would not do , Wat Montague the abbot of Nuntuel was sent to him , but all failed . The Duke's answer was , that though she were his mother , yet he must obey his brother : and besides , that he could not have to do with the Jesuites in the least , without wronging his conscience . Which his mother understanding , order was given to turn him out of doors at ten a clock at night : so that he went away hence , without so much as being admitted to take leave of her . 

Charles Stuart lieth still here at his old quarters at Colen . 

Not a word of their King , save only that malcontented Kirkman remembers him now and then , as they have great reason , considering how he slurred them and their party , when he was among them . 

Further discoveries are still making of unchristian designs laid to involve the nation in blood again upon the score of Charles Stuart ; but God hath disappointed them . 

Charles Stuart is frozen up at Colen , no news yet of his removal . 

Charles Stuart is still in his quarters at Colen . the waters are now open , and passage free for him to retreat at pleasure . 

The Prince of Orange is with his mother at Teyling . the name of him and his family is not now much talked on among the persons , and will in time be forgotten . They are as mute as fishes . 

We are here full of expectation to know what is become of Charles Stuart , who is gone privately from Colen with two or three at the most of his attendants . Many conjectures are made about his stealing away from thence at this conjuncture of time , when your country is said to be generally discontented , and commissions ready to enter in at your gates . Some will have him to be landed at Hull , which place is said to be revolted , and to have declared against the Lord protector . Others say he is gone for Holland : but none know certainly where he hath hide himself . 

Some further light was given touching the dangerous conspiracies in divers parts on the behalf of Charles Stuart , and that fatal interest of his , which hath sunk so many . 

The late Queen of England went to the Lovure to visit the Queen : thereupon it was presently raised about , that the occasion of her going was to communicate a letter which she had received from her son Charles , relating how that on the 5. instant he arrived at Hull , a strong town and seaport of England , having none in company with him but the marquess of Ormond , col. Blague , and his barber , and a groom . 

Here are letters come hither from the Hague which say , that Charles went from Colen the 24 last past , about 5 in the morning , with the marquess of Ormond , col. Blague , his barber & a groom , intending to embark himself at Embden for England , divers seaports and inland . Towns having declared for him . 

We are still in expectation , to hear what success Charles Stuart has had in England ; whether he is held to be certainly gone , to head the risings and designs that are on foot there , for the bringing him in again . 

The last letters that are come from England , have much calmed the reports that were here invented by the royalists , of the risings and commotions there ; that Hull and Newcastle were revolted , but now we hear the contrary , and their fabulous stories are but laughed at ; yet we have no certainty to what place Charles Stuart is gone , the news thereof is as diverse as uncertain . Some will have him in England , others that he is gone towards Hamburgh ; and some will have him to be still in these parts , which is the most likely of any : for the present state of affairs of England is not so bad and declining as was reported , for him to venture himself there . In the mean time i hope we shall not be ill thought on by you for having him here among us , since we cannot prevent it , he coming in a disguise ; otherwise he would soon be made to retreat hence . 

I am wholly in the dark how it goes with you , whilst from all parts it 's generally reported and written , that Charles Stuart is gone to embark himself in some port , in or about Holland for England , Hull or Lynne being his designed landing place ; both which places they say , are certainly made for him ; and that he hath such assurance from his party in England , as that he doubts not to adventure in thither , and carry on his design , notwithstanding the large discovery you made of it : and all this ( As they also say ) comes from the encouragement he hath presumed from some in England : but i trust , as you have been long forewarned , so you are well fore-armed , to perceive them to their cost ; and that you have secured those , and all other important ports and places , in more faithful hands then to betray them . Your enemy's glory much in their expectations at this time , however former attempts have failed : but i trust they will be taken in their own snare ; God can , and i hope will do it . 

Here is a fresh report of the King of Scots being in England ; whereof we expect a confirmation by the next . 

Three days past hath produced some matters of news in these parts : there is a considerable party of old cavaliers risen , and in arms in Montgomery shire in North-wales : they act very publicly , and are confident . it 's conceived upon good grounds , their purpose was , and perhaps is , to possess themselves of some holds , as Shrewsbury and Chirk castle . 

They cannot leave their old tricks , and honest men cannot forget their old malice . We know a little what liberty cost , and would not lose it to them , though it cost us another knock . 

We have prisoners here , most of the considerable cavaliers in this county ; some evidently guilty , others only suspected . 

Also that there was an endeavour in Yorkshire to form a party , with an intent to seize York for Charles Stuart . they had two cart-fulls of arms and ammunition with them , and divers of the gentry ; among whom was Sir Henry Slingsby and Sir Richard Maleverer ; but they dispersed , perceiving no such appearance as they expected : and Sir Henry Slingsby is taken by col. Lilburn : Sir Richard Maleverer escaped home , took leave of his Lady , and told her his condition , despaired of his estate and is fled ; Sir William Ingraham is also in hold . The Lord Darcy had sent in six horses with his groom , who will also be secured . The Lord doth confound and scatter this frenetic generation in their conspiracies . The like we are to expect to hear from other parts ; knowing , they embark in a cause , that will sink all its owners and defenders . How much then doth it concern all sober men , to be active in resolution for the maintenance of the public peace . 

The expectation here is , that Charles Stuart should be entered England ; and it 's said , that before his entry he took a solemn oath to allow a liberty of conscience . The titular Duke of York gives out to all his acquaintance , that he is ready to take horse upon the first order that shall be sent him from his brother . 

At the Hague things are represented , as if there were great inclinations to a change in England , and that for this cause Charles Stuart went from Colen feb. 24. in design to make some advantage by the present occasion ; but since that we hear the wind hath been so contrary , that he can find no place convenient to land in . 

it 's meet you should hear from me sometimes , though i have been long silent . The reason why i trouble you now , is the report of a comet which appeared lately here , i mean young Charles the fourth King of Colen ; for the Papists have long enthroned and enshrined three Kings at Colen , and Charles is come thither for a fourth of the same litter . 

The Princess withdraws from the Hague , because the states of Holland have straitened her lodging rooms in the Hoss , for their own use , which she saith belong unto her ; and therefore will not come thither again until they be restored her , which will be done at the Greek kalends , or at the feast of St. Charles the second : for there is talk here , he shall be canonised for a saint and a martyr , if Walter Montague or Sir Toby Matthews be chose Pope in this vacancy . 

Here has been of late no small conflux , not only of the royal stock , the Lady Elizabeth , whom the Princess calls one of mine aunts ; and the Duke of Gloucester , who has as much profit of his dukedom , as the aunt and brother have of their kingdoms : but also a great tail of English fugitives and hucksters , and chaplains and fiddlers , and gamesters of both sexes . This tail made me call young Charles a comet . They have been marvellous merry at Teyling , with balls and ballets , crying Victoria in England . and indeed , as the blaze , so the gaze here was very great , and that in the judgement of many potent ones ; so that we long to here the issue among you , which we believe to be bad to the Carolists ; for it was told him at Teyling , that by letters from England to the states , it was clear , his highness the protector knew of young Charles his coming from Colen , long before he came thence ; which as they tell us here , hath made him turn back to his kingdom of Colen , and there to enshrine himself again with his three brethren , Melchior , Belthazar and Caspar , because the design was known , although they gave out here , that all England was up in arms for him ; and by their healthing and dancing , drabbing and damning , you would judge all their own : but in very sooth , it appears that you in England are notable astrologers , who could foretell a comet before he rose , and that some Mercury was , and is in conjunction with him , that has revealed his designs and motions ; and that our states are faithful to the protector , who upon a bare rumour only sent to the Princess royal , that if young Charles were there , he should depart the country . 

Myself with the assistance of a friend , have discovered , and since secured an arch youth , that was a lieutenant for Charles Stuart , who three or four days before the appearance , went as a messenger from Papist to Papist , and the the old crew , as to a rise ; telling one that was formerly a cavie , that some would raise horse , others foot , for the Scots King , &c.  

Charles Stuart ( For certain ) was at the meeting at Hessammoor . all care is taken for discovery of him , and all others . 

From Dantzick they write , the Holland merchants there , were so confident of c. s. his designs , that they offered to sell goods to pay for them , when he should reign in England : and i hear not of an English man that durst take the bargain 

From Colen a friend writes to night , that chancellor hide was going from Breda : most of c. s. servants depart also , only secretary Nichols is to abide there with his goods . It is absolutely believed the Lord Wilmot is gone for England : and it 's now said , that since c. s. design is dashed , he will return for Colen , and so wait upon a future diet in Germany ; which it 's conceived will be at Franckfort . all c. s. followers makes Holland their rendezvouz , which agrees well with the late peace . 

The Duke of York and his servants gave out , that his brother hath assuredly entered England , and was at the head of 4000 gentlemen . This fills all men here with expectation of great matters to be done for him and his party ; the issue whereof is the subject of all the present discourse . The little Queen his mother is upon her knees for success , at her lenten devotion , in the nunnery of Chaliot . 

There is yet no certainty what is become of the Scots King ; he is still under the bushel . 

Since he whom they call King of great Britain departed hence , his family have been putting themselves also in a condition to depart as soon as they shall receive command from their Master , of whom we have no farther news . 

Charles Stewart himself doth not appear yet : it is supposed he will return to his old quarters at Colen , where he May live both pleasantly , and at a cheaper rate than at any other place . 

Letters from several parts relate , that things are in a quiet condition in all counties , but no news of Charles Stuart , who doubtless was in England ; for some foreign letters do say , he had obliged himself to appear here at a certain day among his party . 

It is said in these parts , and generally believed , that Charles Stuart was in England : if so , it is probable you May have met with him . It is talked by divers who understand the transactions of men in these northerly parts , that c. s. should have had assistance considerable from some who speak you fair , had his project proved prosperous . 

The little Queen is retired to the nunnery of Chaliot ; which her servants say is done partly for devotions sake , and partly to avoid the visits of persons that would flock to her , to rejoice with her , for the happy success of her sons affairs in England . 

Such as favoured the King of Scots , are very much dejected at the disastrous news of his undertaking ; and the more , because it is reported , that many of his good friends in England are like to suffer both in their lives & estates , himself having the wit to keep out of harms way , loving to sleep in a whole skin , whilst his friends adventure and lose their lives for his sake . 

The King of Scots is said here to be gone for Colen , but no certainty . He is little regarded , and no ways beloved in these parts . 

The news of the protectors successes in England makes all men at a gaze ; and when it came first , he was thought mad or vain that would believe it ; so that now the Stuarts are given for lost ; their party appearing so inconsiderable in their actings , that they have lost their reputation . 

It was certified also , that Charles Stuart perceiving how his designs were broken here , was gotten again to his quarters at Colen . 

The King of Scotland is now at Colen , where he keeps himself very private . Many of his followers are trooping after him from all parts , with heavy hearts and light purses . 

The King of Scots , who was said to be at Teyling , his design having failed , he was fain to retreat to his old quarters , from his royal p••resse , which was so privately managed by him , that few have certainly known the place of his abode since he went from Colen . 

The colours are remarkable ; having no motto , but only three great letters , h. d. g. which i cannot tell what to make of , unless it signify Henry Duke of Gloucester : and perhaps their intent was to have gotten the youth over sea , to have been in the head of their party . 

Charles Stuart was the 14 instant , with only five men with him , at Osterwick , in the majoralty or lordship of the buss : from thence he went the 15 , and about the 18 arrived at Colen , and has betaken himself to his old lodging . 

Having information that the Duke of Gloucester ( As they call him ) doth reside with his sister the Princess royal , contrary to the treaty made with England , they have ordered him to be gone within three days . 

The pretended Duke of York is to go to Rome , in case the peace be concluded between France and England , to reside there from his brother Charles , to solicit the Pope , who calls himself the common father of all Christians , to oblige the Kings and Princes to a general peace , that so with joint forces they Might help him in the conquest of his kingdoms and states . 

We hear not yet in what country Middleton is landed , but it 's generally believed he is gone to Colen to his young Master . 

The Lord Wilmot is returned out of England to this city , and remains here with him whom they call King of great Britain . 

Charles Stuart remains still at Colen , being a man much esteemed among the Jesuites . 

The Queen of Sweden continues still in these parts , and the Scottish King at Colen , where his company increaseth more than his purse . 

The King of great Britain , as they call him , brought back money , ordered a general rendezvous of his men , and gave them some pay for encouragement , it being the first pittance they have received . 

It seems Charles Stuart thinks his debauched ranting remnants will hardly effect any thing upon England , so long as his highness is alive . 

Charles Stuart is still at Bruges , where the straggled sheep his brother is also returned from his progress . 

The Scottish King and his two brothers rant as high as ever , and talk as if they had the world at will , which makes them ridiculous . 

Of all the armies in Europe there is none wherein so much debauchery is to be seen , as in their few forces which the said King hath gathered together , being so exceeding profane from the highest to the lowest . 

Colonel grace a man famous for his cruelty , and many bloody villains in the Irish rebellion . 

The Scottish King was at Dunkirk with his brother the titular Duke of York . 

Finis . 





pol.  numb 1.  page 1.  page 2.  ibid.  ibid.  p. 3.  ibid.  p. 4.  p. 6.  p. 8.  p. 9  p. 11.  ibid.  p. 14.  ibid.  ibid.  num. 2.  pag. 17.  p. 18.  p. 20.  ibid.  ibid.  p. 21.  p. 22.  ibid.  ibid.  p. 24.  ibid.  p. 25.  p. 26.  ibid.  p. 27.  p. 29.  p. 31.  p. 32.  n. 3. p. 38  p. 39  p. 40.  p. 42.  p. 45.  ibid.  ibid.  p. 47.  p. 48.  n. 4. p. 49  ibid.  p. 50.  p. 60.  p. 62.  p. 63.  ibid.  p. 64.  num. 5.  p. 65.  ibid.  p. 66.  p. 79.  ibid.  p. 80.  ibid.  p. 82.  p. 83.  p. 84.  ibid.  ibid.  p. 87.  p. 88  p. 91.  num. 6.  p. 92.  p. 95.  num. 7.  p. 100  p. 103.  p. 108.  p. 110.  p. 111.  ibid.  ibid.  num.  . pag. 113.  p. 114.  ibid.  ibid.  p. 116.  p. 118.  p. 124.  p. 127.  ibid.  ibid.  p. 128.  num. 9  p. 129.  p. 131.  ibid.  p. 134.  p. 135.  num. 10.  p. 159.  ibid.  num. 11.  p. 161.  p. 174.  p. 175.  num. 12.  p. 178.  p. 179.  p. 180.  ibid.  p. 187.  num. 13.  p. 194.  ibid.  p. 195.  p. 201.  p. 203.  num. 14.  p. 211.  num. 15.  p. 230.  p. 232.  p. 259.  num. 16.  p. 267.  p. 274.  p. 275.  ibid.  num. 20.  p. 329.  p. 336.  num. 22.  p. 163.  p. 365.  p. 369.  num. 33.  p. 540.  p. 546.  num. 35.  p. 580.  num. 37.  p. 606.  num 38.  p. 607.  n. 39  p. 633.  num. 40.  p. 640.  num 42.  p. 673.  num. 43.  p. 686.  ibid.  p 691.  num. 44.  p. 703.  ibid.  num. 45.  p. 719.  ibid.  p. 720.  ibid.  num. 47.  p. 751.  ibid.  ibid.  num. 48.  p. 769.  p. 771.  ibid.  num. 49.  p. 783.  p. 784.  ibid.  num. 50.  p. 799.  p. 801.  ibid.  num. 51.  p. 816.  num. 52.  p. 832.  ibid.  ibid.  p. 833.  num. 53.  p. 855.  ibid.  num. 56.  pag. 885.  p. 886.  num. 57 : p. 915.  num. 58.  p. 917.  p. 918.  num. 62.  p. 982.  ibid.  num. 63.  p. •99 . ibid.  p. 1009.  num. 64.  p. 1013.  ibid.  num. 65.  p. 1019.  p. 1031.  p. 1032.  ibid.  n. 66.  p. 1045.  p. 1047.  n. 67  p. 1061.  p. 1062.  ibid.  p. 1071.  n. 66.  p. 1071.  n. 78.  p. 1248.  n. 79.  p. 1265.  n. 97.  p. 1523.  n. 98.  p. 1552.  n. 105.  p. 1644.  n. 10• . p. 1693.  n. 111.  p. 1739.  p. 1734.  p. 1784.  p. 1735.  n. 117.  p. 1848.  n. 11• . p. 1873.  n. 120.  p. 1895.  n. 123.  p. 1939.  n. 123. . p. 1941  n. 126.  p. 1981.  p. 1987.  n. 127.  p. 2001.  p. 2002.  p. 2004.  p. 2000  n. 128.  p. 2023.  p. 2023.  n. 132.  p. 2078.  n. 134.  p. 2114.  n. 136.  p. 2148.  n. 137.  p. 2180.  p. 2188.  n. 13• . p. 2206.  n. 139.  p. 2119.  n. 141.  p. 2241.  n. 143.  p. 2280.  n. 144.  p. 2294.  p. 2308.  n. 145.  p. 2310.  n. 147.  p. 2344.  p. 2354.  n. 148.  p. 2372.  n. 153.  p. 2450.  n. 189.  p. 3217.  n. 279.  p. 5691.  n. 280.  p. 5697.  ibid.  p. 5700.  n. 285.  p. 5781.  n. 289.  p. 2850.  n. •31 . p. 7316.  n. 336.  p. 7385.  n. 338.  p. 7407.  n. 221.  p. 3734.  p. 3740.  n. 2•2 . p. 3750.  n. 225.  p. 3814.  n. 229.  p. 3876.  n. 231.  p. 4017.  n. 232.  p. 4032.  p. 4037.  n. 233.  p. 4052.  n. 234.  p. 4067.  n. 235.  p. 4081.  p. 4088.  n. 236.  p. 5601.  n. 237.  p. 5016.  p. 5017.  n. 236.  p. 5950.  n. 240.  p. 5065.  n. 246.  p. 5161.  n. 246.  p. 5163.  n. 247.  p. 5179.  p. 5179.  n. 248.  p. 5191.  ibid.  p. 5192.  ibid.  p. 5193.  p. 5194.  ibid.  ibid.  p. 5195.  p. 5196.  n. 249.  p. 5261.  p. 5204.  p. 5208.  ibid.  ibid.  p. 5210.  p. 5212.  n. 250.  p. 5220.  ibid.  p. 5222.  p. 5226.  n. 251.  p. 5239.  p. 5240.  p. 5243.  n. 252.  p. 5245.  p. 5249.  n. 253  p. 5271.  p. 5272.  p. 5275.  p. 5276.  n. 254.  p. 5290.  p. 5291.  ibid.  n. 255.  p. 5298.  n. 256.  p. 5322.  n. 260.  p. 5386.  n. 265.  p. 5453.  n. 266.  p. 547• . n. 267.  p. 5479.  n. 268.  p. 5514.  n. 344.  p. 7508.  n. 347.  p. 756• . n. 350.  p. 7624.  n. 358.  p. 3624.  ibid.  p. 775• . n 386.  p. 8383.  



















