The undeceiver . 

London : printed for Samuel Gellibrand , and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the brazen-serpent in Paul's churchyard . 1643.  

The undeceiver . 

All neuters are in a state of enmity , and therefore in an accursed condition ; he that is not with me , is against me , saith our saviour , Luke 11. 23.  And , curse ye Meroz , said the angel , curse them bitterly , because they came not to the help of the Lord against the mighty , judges 5. 23.  Solon made a law , that in such unnatural divisions as we are too well acquainted with , all that would not apply themselves to one side or other , should be put to death , because they would not adventure their private persons for the public good ; for men not to declare themselves at such a time , was not accounted moderation , but treachery ; because it is clear and evident , that men of that strain did but wait for an opportunity to advance themselves , and betray the commonwealth , by going over to the stronger side , as some have lately done since the taking of Bristol : pity it is that Solon's law is not in force . 

But there are divers who are startled out of their neutrality and indifferency , who are still at their wit's end , and know not which side to take ; if they take part with the parliament , they are afraid they shall resist the ordinance of God ; and if they go over to the King and Queen , they are afraid they shall join with those who labour to overthrow the church and kingdom , by bringing in of popery and slavery both at once . 

For the satisfaction of these ignorant and perplexed souls , it concerns them to peruse the parliamentary-covenant , and the court-covenant , for one of these covenants must now be taken by every man in the kingdom . 

The court-covenant : 

First , for the court-covenant , there is nothing in it to assure us of the princely truth and goodness of Prince Rupert , or Prince Maurice , who have a greater command in the army , than his majesty himself : 2.  We are not yet assured of the Queen's truth and goodness , nor of the truth and goodness of those Papists , English and Irish , who vow and swear , that they will maintain the true Protestant religion : 3.  We cannot be assured , much less rest assured , and fully assured of his Majestics princely truth , who hath broken so many solemn protestations ; nor of his goodness , who sets his hand and seal to such unmerciful and bloody commissions , witness that commission never to be forgotten , which was sent to Tompkins the Queen's agent , to bear him and his fellows out in a plot as black as that of the gunpowder-treason . 

Secondly , moreover , every man that takes the court-covenant must say , i do believe that the raising and employing of forces by his majesty , for the purpose and cause before mentioned , to be most just and necessary . But all the question is , whether the King did raise , and doth employ all his forces and the Queens , for the purpose aforesaid , that is , the maintenance of the Protestant religion ; or rather it is out of question , that he doth not employ them to that purpose . 

Thirdly , it is to be wondered at , that the cavaliers , negroes , Welsh & Irish , &c. should endeavour to procure the re-establishment of the peace and quiet of this kingdom ; and that they should help his majesty's subjects to recover , nay enjoy their liberty and property , according to the law of the land ; for they imprison the persons of good subjects ; is that the way to help them to their liberty ? They take away their estates ; is that the way to make them enjoy their property ? And is all this done according to the law of the land ? 

Fourthly , they vow that they will not hinder or prejudice the designs of his majesty , in the conduct or employment of his army . Now , what designs his majesty had upon Bristol last March , and what designs he had upon London but the other day , is well known ; and shall any man bind himself from hindering such black and bloody designs , nay bind himself by a covenant made with God , from hindering designs so extremely displeasing to the god of heaven ? Let even heathens judge in this particular ; for it is against the very light of nature , to promote this unnatural war , and such unchristian , nay inhuman and barbarous designs . 

Fiftly , it is very strange that any Englishman should believe , that the subjects of England are not bound by any order or ordinance of parliament ; for an order of the house of Commons doth oblige all the Commons of England ; and an ordinance of Lords and Commons doth oblige all the subjects of England . 

Sixthly , it is beyond admiration , that the roisters or cavaliers vow that they will not obey any act or declaration made by the King's majesty solely , which is not according to some known law , custom of the realm , or statute enacted by the King , Lords and Commons in parliament : when as their taking up of arms against the parliament , and such as are quiet in the land , is directly contrary to the laws of the land , and to all enacted customs , as shall be shown anon ; nay sure they are not able to prove , that it hath been a custom to take up arms against the parliament , we need not put them to prove that it hath been a legal custom . 

Finally , though the covenant did declare but now , that a declaration made by the King's majesty solely , doth not oblige , yet here in the close there is a shrewd intimation , that his Maj•st•eses warrant is sufficient to justify a man's bearing of arms ; their practice doth declare their intention ; for if they have but the King's warrant , they presently take up arms , and are not so vain to stay till the Lords and Commons give them leave to take up arms against the parliament . But as wise as they are in framing a covenant , a parliament-captain May assent to the last words of the covenant ; for he that takes up arms by the authority of parliament , doth take up arms by authority justly derived from his majesty's immediate warrant ; for they are his majesty's highest court and council , called by his majesty's writ , and what they do as the supreme court , they do by the Kings own authority . 

So much for the court-covenant , taken by the roisters , cavaliers , Papists , delinquents , &c. in the King's army , and by too many simple and cowardly men , who are under the power of the army of the King or Queen . 

The parliamentary-covenant : 

In the next place , i shall give clear satisfaction to such objections as are urged against the parliamentary-covenant ; some stumble at the penitential , others at the civil part of the covenant . 

First , they say they are not prepared to enter into so strict a covenant . To this it is answered ; 1.  That they have above twice as much time given them to prepare , as is usually given to prepare for the sacrament . 2.  Our covenant of reformation , is a covenant of grace ; and therefore we do not enter into this covenant , presuming upon our own , but trusting upon the free and effectual grace of God . 

Others there are , who tell us that a believer need not , nay ought not to repent : sure these men know not what faith or repentance means , for it is impossible for any man but a believer to repent . From whence do penitent purposes arise , or penitent tears flow , but from the love of God , and hatred of sin ; now no man but a believer can love God , or hate sin ; and therefore no man but a believer can repent . It is clear and evident that no man will repent , till he doth believe that it is to some purpose to repent . He repents of his sin , who repents from his sin , heb. 6. 1.  Now no man but a believer can repent from his sin . 

And the selfsame men are not ashamed to say ; that the sins of believers are not charged upon their own persons , much less upon the kingdom or nation , and therefore they should lie and be forsworn , if they should say and swear that the nation fares the worse for their sins . 

To which i answer , that it is one thing to say that God doth inflict satisfactory punishments ; and another to say , he doth inflict exemplary chastisements upon believers , nay upon the kingdom for their sake ; for God May pardon the sin of a persons , and yet take vengeance of their inventions , psal. 99 8.  the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel , 2 sam. 24. 1. and God smote the persons with pestilence , and yet David a penitent believer , cries out , lo i have sinned , and i have done wickedly , but these sheep , what have they done , in the 17.  Verse of that chapter . If it May go ill with a believer for a rash word , because he speaks unadvisedly when his spirit is provoked , psal. 106. 32 , 33.  If God May visit their iniquity with stripes , from whom he doth not take his loving kindness , psal. 89. 32 , 33. then certainly God May so far impute iniquity to believers , as to afflict them with temporal chastisements . I read that the heart of Asa was perfect all his days , and therefore he was a believer , 2 chron. 15. 17. but i read likewise , that the kingdom was troubled with wars , because Asa dealt foolishly , 2 chron. 16. 9 and therefore the whole kingdom May fare the worse for a believers sake . If you ask why the sword did not depart from David's house , the reason is given , because he despised God , and took the wife of Uriah , 2 sam. 12. 10.  Hath not God written bitter things enough against his persons of late , to recall them from this error ? God hath put it past dispute , that the kingdom fares the worse for the carnal confidence , security , unthankfulness , and unfruitfulness even of believers . And if any do yet make it a question , whether or no they should be humbled in these days of humiliation , God will soon put it out of question . Oh let us tremble under the hand of God , and say with David , psal. 119. 120.  my flesh trembleth for fear of thee , and i am afraid of thy judgements . 

Another objection is , that the King hath vowed to be revenged on the parliament , and therefore we must not covenant to defend the parliament ; because by this means our oath would be contrary to the Kings . 

sol. it is answered in a word , when Saul swore that Jonathan should die , the persons swore he should not die , 1 sam. 14. 44 , 45.  And yet doctor Fern grants that these were good subjects , because they used only a loving violence ; and yet here was not only a resistance , but a rescue and resistance with an oath , and an oath contrary to the King's oath . We May then swear , that if we can prevent it , none of our Jonathan's , no good parliament-man , or commonwealths-man shall be put to death , unless he be legally condemned , but that if it lie in our power , we will rescue them , as the persons rescued Jonathan . 

It is farther objected , that this covenant is not only against the King's oath , but against our own oath , the oath of allegiance . 

For answer , be pleased to observe , that the law doth direct aswell as oblige , and we are obliged to follow the direction of the law ; our duty then according to our allegiance , is nothing else but our duty according to law ; if that the King command any thing against law , obedience to such a passionate command is not allegiance , but dislegiance or disobedience ; for he that disobeys the law , disobeys the King . Now it is clearly against the known laws of the land , to join with those forces which labour Might and main to overthrow the laws of the kingdom , and the religion established by law , under a pretence of defending the king. 2.  The oath of allegiance concerns our resistance of foreign force ; and therefore the valiant governor of Gloucester denied to give up the city to Prince Rupert or Prince Maurice , because it was against his oath of allegiance , to subject himself and the city to any foreign Prince . 3.  The parliament-forces were raised for the defence of King and parliament . 4.  The King is our liege-lord , as well as we are his liege-people ; and therefore he is to command according to law , and we to obey his legal commands . That the illegal summons of a King is not to be regarded , is evident , 2 Kings 1. from the ninth verse to the sixteenth , here is a royal command sent by military officers , the summons was peremptory , thou man of God , the King hath said , come down : and yet the prophets refusing to obey this command , is justified by two miracles from heaven . 5.  In the oath of allegiance we promise to defend the authority of the King ; now we are ready to obey the King's authority , but we are not bound to obey the King's pleasure . If the King command a thing which he hath no authority to command , and enforce his command upon his goods subjects by an army , they that resist , do not in this case resist the ordinance of God , but the violation of his ordinance ; and though it be a resisting of the supreme person , yet it is not a resisting of the supreme power ; because the King hath no power or authority to give , much less to enforce that command . 6.  In the oath of allegiance we promise to defend the government of the kingdom ; now the King himself in his answer to the nineteen propositions tells us , that the kingdom is not governed by himself alone , but by the Lords and Commons also ; for though in one place he saith , the Commons were never intended for any share in government ; yet he saith , the house of Commons is an excellent conserver of liberty , and solely entrusted with the first propositions concerning the levys of money , the sinews of war ; and with the impeaching of those , who for their own ends have got a command from the King to break the law : nay farther , that there is a power legally placed in both houses , which is more than sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of tyranny . this power of the two houses , this sufficient , this more then sufficient power of restraining tyranny , must be defended by us , according to our oath of allegiance ; for the kingdom is governed by the courts of justice , and if the highest court the parliament be overthrown , what justice is there to be hoped for in lower courts ; the government of the kingdom will be overthrown . his majesty adds in the place forecited , page 20.  That if one estate be suffered to encroach upon the rest ( And the King is now most likely , nay doth most dangerously encroach upon the other two estates ) there will be a total subversion of , or overthrow of the fundamental laws , and that excellent constitution of this kingdom , which hath made this nation so many years both famous and happy . Finally we are bound by our oath of allegiance , to defend the subjects as well as the King , and therefore we are perjured , if we do not now defend our fellow-subjects from that violence which is daily offered them , by those who pretend some commission from the King . We are therefore much encouraged by the oath of allegiance , to defend the parliament and our country from all illegal oppressions , and by the grace of God we will keep our oath . 

Their next objection is , that there is nothing in this covenant concerning the defence of the King's person . 

To which it is answered , that we have already engaged ourselves to defend the King's person in a former covenant , when we took the protestation , and therefore there was no necessity of repeating it in this covenant . 2.  The King's person is most endangered by those very forces who call themselves the King's guard ; for they put the King upon most dangerous attempts , they urge him to go into the field , which if they loved him , they would never do . David was beloved of his subjects , and therefore his subjects would not suffer him to go down into the battle . the King said unto the persons , i will surely go forth with you myself also . But the persons answered , thou shalt not go forth , for thou art worth ten thousand of us , 2 sam. 18. 2 , 3.  It is true , the King's person is in danger , but who 's in the fault ? Not the parliament , for they have like his great counsel advised him , like Christians prayed for him , like subjects petitioned him , like states treated with him , but all in vain . The delinquents than are in fault , who cried out , that the King was in danger , and now indeed they have made it good , for the King was in no danger till he came into their hands , only they themselves were in danger of a legal trial , and therefore under pretence of protecting the King , the truth is , they endanger the King , to protect themselves from a court of justice . If they did not love themselves better than the King , they would adventure themselves , and keep the King out of danger . 

It is farther objected , that it seems unlawful to enter into covenant against those forces which are raised by the King . 

There are three things very considerable for the satisfying of this doubt ; 1.  Whether the forces which are raised by the King , have been legally raised . 2.  What kind of forces they are which are raised . 3.  Against whom they employ their strength now they are raised . 

For the first , it is the known law of the land , that the King ought not to raise any forces , whilst a parliament is sitting , without consent of parliament . 2.  The ports , forts , navy , ammunition of England , belong to the kingdom in point of interest and propriety , and to the King only in point of trust , for the use , service , and defence of the kingdom . 3.  It is against the intent and scope of the late law of press or levy , made this very parliament ; the King himself then hath delivered his deliberate judgement concerning this point , and declared the raising of forces without consent of parliament , to be illegal . What scruple then can remain ? It being most lawful to defend ourselves from unlawful force . 

The second point considerable is , what kind of forces they are which are raised : first , there are two foreign Princes called in , who do plunder , rob , murder , domineer at pleasure : and all wise men will confess , that the nearer they are to the crown , and the better they are esteemed and beloved in the army , the more danger there is to the King and his royal issue . Some statesmen , not long since , were so jealous of that family , that they would not have had it mentioned in our prayers ; but we are now grown so secure , that they May be trusted with an army . But we have not only foreign Princes , and barbarous Welsh-men , but wild Irish , professed rebels , and more black regiments then one . 2.  There are delinquents up in arms , some that broke prison , others that fled beyond the seas to avoid the stroke of justice ; now these are protected contrary to law , they cannot be pardoned before trial , nor should they be kept from trial , nay it is a question whether the King alone can pardon them after trial , for they who have offended against the three estates , must be pardoned by all three , if equity and reason May prevail . 3.  Papists are armed , contrary to law . Now whether the commonwealth of England , legally assembled in parliament , May not protect the kingdom against an army of malignants , fugitives , delinquents , evil-counsellors , Papists , rebels , foreigners , we appeal to the conscience of mankind , let the world judge . 

We are engaged by that solemn protestation which was taken all England over , by the King's consent , to use our utmost power and diligence to bring such persons as these to their deserved punishment ; and the wisest of Kings assures us , that this is the only means to establish the King's throne , and consequently to quiet the kingdom , prov. 25. 5.  take away the wicked from before the King , and his throne shall be established in righteousness . the direction is especially given to magistrates and courts of justice , and therefore to the highest court the parliament ; for the King being blinded and seduced by them , is not likely to put them away , but rather to protect , prefer them . Now the parliament hath used all fair ways to take away these malignants from before the King , they have presented an humble petition , they have presented a legal summons , they are now forced to send a legal army , that these protected delinquents May be brought to a legal trial ; for their legal summons was derided , the messenger committed and abused , witness the summons sent to the fourteen Yorkshire gentlemen for disturbing the peace ; the gentlemen being cited to appear before the parliament , refused , and alleged his majesty's warrant for their stay . We need say nothing of the protection and rescue of Beckwith that jesuited Papist , the story is sufficiently known . 

The third thing considerable is , against whom these forces ; raised by the King and Queen , employ their strength ; the King hath now declared , that he will not treat any more with the Lords and Commons under the notion of a parliament , and his soldiers presently shoot or apprehend any man that declares himself for King and parliament , and some of them drink healths upon their knees to the confusion of the parliament . 

Now to fight against the parliament , is to fight against the King and the kingdom both at once ; against the King , because the parliament is the King's court , his highest court , from whence there is no appeal , and therefore they who oppose that court , are guilty of the highest rebellion , because they oppose the Kings highest power and authority : the parliament then fighting for the maintenance of the King's authority in that court , and the cavaliers fighting against it , is clear and evident , that the parliament fight for the King , and the cavaliers against him , because they that oppose the King's authority in his courts , do manifestly oppose the King . And if the King in person be so far seduced , as to oppose the authority of that court , we ought not to assist the King , in opposing of his own authority ; for by that means we should disobey his authority , that we Might obey his pleasure , which every wise man and good subject will Count most absurd . Malignants and cavaliers Might learn by the Lord of Straffords case , that the Kings personal or verbal command will not bear them out against the King's legal power and authority in his highest court . Moreover , to fight against the parliament , is to fight against the kingdom , for the parliament is the representative body of the kingdom , and if that court be overthrown , then farewell religion , liberty , law and all . Finally , the King's army employ their strength against all strict and pure Protestant's , they do either plunder , imprison , or murder them in all places where e'er they come ; whereby it is evident , that they fight against the religion established by law , and endeavour by force and violence to root all cordial and sincere Protestant's out of the kingdom : in a word , they would by an absolute conquest make all the subjects of England slaves , to that so much affected absolute and arbitrary power , and make all the wealth , &c. of the kingdom a present booty to their pride , lust , malice , covetousness , and what not ? 

But the great question is , whether the parliament hath power to raise an army without the consent of the King ? 

First , the King hath consented that this parliament should not be dissolved , without the consent of Lords and Commons , but should have the full power and privileges of a parliament . Now the parliament by its ordinary power , as a court of judicature , can declare , and enforce law , and therefore May in case of resistance , compel stubborn delinquents by force of arms to abide a legal trial ; for this May be done by an inferior court , and therefore much more by the highest court . Now this power being settled in the parliament by law , it is settled there by the King's consent ; and therefore no man can say , that the parliament doth raise forces without the King's consent . but on the other side , the King cannot raise forces by his own personal command , without consent of the parliament , because the King in his own person is not a legal court of justice . 

2.  In case that the whole frame of the state be endangered , & the commonwealth like to be ruined , the parliament hath a privilege to do what in their wisdom seems meet for the preservation of the kingdom , for the safety of the persons is the highest law , an higher law than statute-law , for all statutes must give place to it , and therefore the parliament need not urge statute for those things which they do by privilege , as the highest counsel , and the highest court ; nay when they seem to break statutes according to their letter , they fulfil them according to their scope and intent , for the scope and intent of all laws , is to preserve the kingdom , by preserving the properties , liberties , lives of the persons , and preventing or restraining acts of oppression and tyranny ; that the parliament hath such a power , a legal and sufficient power , to prevent and restrain tyranny , is acknowledged by the King himself , as hath been already shown . 

3.  This privilege of the parliament tends not only to the preservation of the kingdom , but to the preservation of the King himself ; for as it is in the natural body , if there be a mortal wound in the body , the head dies aswell as the body ; so is it in the body politic , if there be a mortal wound given to the state and commonwealth , the King and the kingdom will both perish together , for it is impossible he should be a King without a kingdom . 

4.  The two estates of Lords and Commons have more power to preserve the kingdom , than the King hath to destroy it ; for the two estates , by the very fundamentals of government , are bound to prevent the dissolution of the established frame , and the primary intention of the frame in such states as ours , justifies the exercise of any power conducing to the safety of the community and government established , as is proved at large in a modest treatise of monarchy , lately published by an earnest desirer of his country's peace , in the second and fourth chapters of the first part , and in the third and fift chapters of the second part . For it is clear and evident , that the two estates were purposely ordained to prevent or restrain the excesses of the third , and therefore their power is not wholly dependent upon , and derived from the third , because than their power would be insufficient to compass that very end for which they were ordained ; for to go about to restrain and limit a governor , by a power wholly subject to , and depending on himself , is all one , as to leave him at large without any limitation at all . Besides , it is manifest that the two estates have a share in the highest act of the highest power , to wit , the making of laws , and therefore they have a share in the highest power itself , and by virtue of that power May supply the defects , and curb the wilfulness of a passionate King , who affects an absolute or arbitrary government . 

5.  The parliament hath a power to recall all the illegal commissions which the King hath granted to foreign Princes , Papists , delinquents , cavaliers , or any other , and to disannul or damn them , by pronouncing them to be void in law , and therefore of none effect . And , nothing is more usual , then for a parliament to damn illegal commissions , patents , writs , &c. and therefore no commission of array can justify the proceedings of those hot spirits who are risen in rebellion against the parliament , the state and commonwealth of this realm . 

But you 'll say , that in this vow you do likewise promise to defend and maintain others in whatsoever they shall do in purfuance of this vow and covenant , and you do not know what excesses your confederates May run into . 

The answer is easy , you are bound to assist them according to your power or vocation ; if then they demand some assistance that is beyond your power , you are not bound to an impossibility , this yoke is easy , and burden light . Again , if they call upon you to do any thing that is sinful , that is not a vocation , but a temptation , you May refuse . Besides , you are to assist him in the pursuance of this vow ; now every man that takes this covenant , doth in the beginning of it , covenant to amend his ways ; and therefore you May remember your friend or neighbour , that he must set upon a work worthy of a reform Protestant , because he hath entered into a covenant of amendment or reformation , and then you will , according to your power and vocation , assist him in the pursuance of his vow of reformation , though it cost you your life ; for that text must in these times work powerfully upon all tender consciences : we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren , 1 ioh. 3. 16. not only for our brethren in a spiritual sense , but for our brethren in civil respects ; if i would have my brethren of the same town or city , my brother-subject , my brother-english-man , to lay down his life for me , i am bound by the law of nature , to do as i would be done by ; namely , to lay down my life for him : let us therefore in obedience to the law of God , the laws of the land , and the authority of the highest court of the kingdom , according to our power and vocation , take away the wicked from before the King ; if we love the King let us do it , for by that means the King's throne will be established : let us lay down our lives for God and our brethren , that religion , kingdom , throne , law , liberty , peace and all May be established ; 

Amen , amen . 

Imprimatur 

Ja : Cranford . 

Finis . 











