Physician cure thyself : or , an answer to a seditious pamphlet , entitled eyesalve for the English army , &c.  

Written and published for the information and benefit of the soldiery ; and to them directed . 

April 23. 1660.  

London , printed for h. b. at the gun in Ivy-lane , 1660.  

Physician cure thyself , &c.  

there 's a lewd pamphlet titled , — eyesalve for the English army , &c. — which being but a breviate of plain English , and the alarm , &c. — needs no particular answer . He that reads one , reads all . 

It is divided into 4.  Heads . 

first . a tedious and scandalous charge against the late King . 

secondly . a groundless invective against our present sovereign . 

thirdly . reasons to the private souldjers : persuading them of the necessity to alter both the laws and government in order to their safety . 

lastly . a letter from some regiments of the army , to encourage the rest , into a revolt from the general , and an attempt of violence upon the nation . 

It were time lost to spend 20.  Sheets of paper upon the first section , and no 20.  Pins the better for 't ▪ first , the particulars have been already answered ; and then , all before 1648. is beside the present question . The reason of the war , or the transactions of it , is not the point ; but why was blood shed in the time of peace ? why did these fellows , that during the Hazzard of the war , vowed , and covenanted to preserve the King : but having got the power of the sword into their hands , usurped also that of the government , and murdered him : acting extravagancies themselves , far greater than calumny itself could ever have the face to fasten upon the King ? and all this under no pretence of other necessity , than what the foulness of their crimes , and the gild of their own souls engaged them in . 

In one word : the question dates from the seclusion of the members in 1648. and that act shows us who were reformers , and who jugglers . 

Now for his clamours against the present King : as they are neither likely in themselves , nor credited by the persons ; so i shall not clog myself with proofs unnecessary , to acquit him : referring rather what i have to deliver , upon this subject , to the next head ; and that is , his advice to the private soldiers ; to which , i should subjoin my own , and to whom i shall dedicated the rest i have to say . 

This eyesalve , gentlemen , which our pretending oculist presents you with , is a medicine of the same composition , which ( By general report ) struck Milton blind : and 't is his interest that you should be so too . You cannot but observe how full of calumny and treason it is : and one thing most remarqualle take notice of . 

Your safety is the only argument he employs , to engage you in the most bloody , unchristian , traitorous , hopeless , and ridiculous design that ever was projected . Consider , my Masters : you are men , not beasts ▪ Christians , not Turks ; subjects , not governors ; reasonable creatures , not asses : and in fine , you have souls to save . i should esteem myself exceeding happy to see a good event of my wishes , and endeavours towards you : and i do undertake by a plain evidence of sober reasons , to show you both a clear light to walk by ; and a far safer way to a much nobler end than he proposes . 

His counsel is , that for your future safety you would seriousl• mind these ensuing particulars . and mine is the same counsel too ; mind them well , and you 'll find your safety lies in avoiding what he advices you to follow : and that his hand was in the wrong box ; for , what he calls an eyesalve , is rather a plague-plaster — but now to the particulars themselves . 

First , to abandon King , and Lords , spiritual , and temporal , for these reasons . 

1.  they 'll seek revenge against you , for what you did against them . 

2ly . they 'll have the sword in their hands ; and regulate their actions by will , not law , &c.  

3ly . expect the same , if not greater tyranny than formerly , over your persons for conscience sake ; by whips , &c.  

4ly . by the establishment of a single person , monopolies will be upheld , and trade destroyed , &c. — 

5ly . if the King should be established ; that money which should pay your arriers , must go to pay his debts . 

6ly . you that have no fortunes , will be punished in your carcases ; and branded with scorn , and ignominy as traitors to all posterity . 

In order : — and to the first , in the first place : 

1.  Can any thing be more unreasonable , than to object revenge as dangerous to the private souldjers ? were ours the most vindictive Prince that ever lived ( As you yourselves know the quite contrary , so much as you know of him ) they were still safe . that revenge must be exercised either upon your lives , or fortunes . — 

As to your lives : what would that cruelty avayl him ; or what should move him to employ it ? A personal pique there can be none , he knows you not ; and beside ; - many of his father's party are mingled with you ; that took up arms for bread , and not in malice . — neither are you looked upon as designers , but as souldjours ; under command : and such , as during a suspension of the civil government , subjected yourselves to the law of arms : — you were neither judges , nor executioners ; — your business was in the field ; and the Kings greatest harms were done in the intervals of peace . — further , your obligations under your present general give you both honour and protection . from whom , when ever you start , you are lost for ever . 

These very circumstances , would secure you , even from a barbarous enemy : much more then , from a Prince , that by a principle of courage loves a souldjour : — by an impression of generosity , that loves a candid enemy : — and by a strong impulse of natural goodness and divine charity , that reckons duty in a subject , as a friendship : — and softens treason itself , in his familiar discourses , with the terms only of human frailty . — how eagerly was he pursued at Worcester , and how miraculously preserved ! yet after this ; with how much tenderness , and bounty ( Out of his little stock ) did he compassionate , and relieve those very persons , in Flanders , that sought his life at Worcester ? 

Enough is said to this point . Examine now your danger in the point of fortune . ( I do not find many purchasers among the private soldiery . ) What have you got , for all your hazards , but hunger , infamy , and rags ? when yet your thankless Masters have put up half the revenue of three kingdems into their private pockets : without the venture of a broken head for 't . 

For shame , gentlemen , bethink yourselves . Leave these ungrateful wretches to their , Lot : and save your souls ; your lives ; your freedoms ; — briefly ; all the benefits which your condition is capable of , you May enjoy ; and 't is not possible for you to prevail against the present posture and unity of the nation . Do you consider what it is these your sweet counsellors oppose ? The King forsooth . — to that ; — no names him , but in return to them : and the main issue of our settlement is committed to . This immediate , and next parliament ; so that effectually ; — you are advised to alter the foundation of our long-established laws , and some two thousand of you to make a war upon the whole rest of the nation . to end this point ; here 's the question . 

Whether you should rather serve a pack of inconsiderable , covetous traitors ; that contrary to law , have rifled , and embroiled three nations ; and cheated you of your pay , that did their business for them ; and then ruin yourselves too into the bargain ; — or on the contrary , return to your right Mastor ; redeem your honour , and your country , by serving him , who having lost all that these persons got ; yet succoured you ? ( having been long upon this particular , i shall be the shorter in the rest ) 

2ly . you are advised to provide against a lawless tyranny 

Do so , and quit them . but let me tell you ; they fear the law , more than the tyranny . 

3ly . you shall be persecuted for conscience . ( they tell you ) 

No . they 're afraid of being lashed for want on 't . Can you have better security in nature , for all religious liberties ; than the promise of that Prince , whose habitual piety ; — tenderness of nature ; — exact faith , and justice to his word : and whose unalterable firmness to the Protestant religion , under so great temptations to desert it ; — are so unquestionably evident ? 

4ly . trade will not flourish under a single person . 

Committee-trade indeed it 's like will down : so will the trade of juggling in a pulpit ; — of showing tricks with rings , and bodkins . but where 's the trade these fellows drive ? they would be major generals again perhaps ; — or is it , that Hewson has a mind to cobble again ; — and my Lord-sir-john-master-jack-berkstead would fall again to his old trade of thimble-making . 

5ly . your arrieres must go to pay the King's debts . 

No : they that oppose the government , will probably be desired to pay for settling of it . 

6ly . your carcases shall be punished , if you have no fortunes ; and you recorded for traitors . 

These gentlemen measure others by themselves . The first , hath been their practice , and the latter will be their fortune . for traitor is a brand upon such as resist authority , not upon those that submit to it . 

Hitherto ; why no King . — now ; — why the law must run in another name ; ( In truth a seasonable consideration ) and a commonwealth be established . 

The reasons are so trivial , and so tedious , i shall not trouble myself with the particulars . this , in short , is the gross of them . 

The law in the King's name speaks you traitors ; — 











