The levellers design discovered : 

Or the anatomy of the late unhappy mutiny : 

Presented unto the soldiery of the army under the command of his excellency the Lord Fairfax ; for prevention of the like in others . 

Written by Henry Denne , an actor in this tragedy . 

London , printed for Francis Titan , and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the three daggers in Fleetstreet , near the inner temple . 1649.  

The levellers design discovered , &c.  

How great and dangerous a mutiny happened lately in part of the army , is not unknown to the nation . How great , and manifold miseries were thereby threatened unto the languishing commonwealth is beyond expression : this mutinous and turbulent spirit that was amongst us , not being included within the quarters of one regiment , but diffused ( Like evil blood through the veins ) into many regiments of the army : wherein this discontented humour hath infected divers . I having had too much experience , by bearing too great a part in this discontented rebellion ) shall do what i can to discover unto the world both the causes and effects thereof ; that by the manifestation of the weakness of the groundwork , and by the declaration of the hideous consequences : men being undeceived , they who are any way entangled , May be recovered , out of that dangerous and destructive faction ; they who are yet free May have their thoughts prevented , that dangers of like nature May be anticipated , and a right understanding settled . That peace and union , love and concord , May knit and unite the joints of this present army so together , that neither open enemy , or pretended friend , May be able by force or flattery to divide it . 

The first , and great occasion of this unexpected mutiny , was this : our regiments , with some others , were by lot designed for the service of Ireland . the service we granted both very honourable , and also necessary , for the prevention of war , and settling of peace in this nation : yet did we believe that there stood between us and Ireland , an engagement made by the army , at that famous rendezvouz at Triploe Heath , June 5. 1647. binding us neither to suffer dividing nor disbanding of this army : until such satisfaction were given , as in that engagement required : it was thought essentially conducing to the satisfaction of the army , to the reconciliation of differences , to the procuring of national freedom , and to the relief of Ireland : to require such a council , to be set up again in the army , consisting of two commission officers , and two agitators , chosen by every regiment of horse or foot ; together with the concurring general officers , in this we were very bold , ( I do not say wise ) propounding to his excellency this condition , to be performed before we could submit unto his excellency's order : this performed , we were contented to refer ourselves to the censure of this council . That which gave us boldness herein , and that which beguiled us , was this : that we did not conceive how the engagement , could possibly admit of a dispensation . 

Such a council being by that engagement appointed , as a representative of the army , ought ( As we did then believe to be still continue , unless we would prove perfidious covenant-breakers . I could not , ( I confess ) untie this knot : but here i was entangled , and ensnared , and therefore , for that present , thought myself bound in duty to God and men , to prosecute this engagement : hence it was ( Many being of the same mind ) that 12.  Troops of horse were drawn together and looking upon superior commanders , as tyrannical covenant-breakers . We Marched contrary to his excellencies expresses ; being heightened with the zeal of the performance of our engagement . 

And touching this thing we were further persuaded , that it did hold forth such strength of reason , that the greatest part of the army would suddenly have joined with us : and this was the cause why i joined with that party , deviding from the army , notwithstanding there appeared less safety , and greater hazard : and i believe this cord drew on many honest hearted men , who did conscientiously seek to make good that engagement . But herein i confess a double error : first , had this engagement been to be prosecuted : yet ought not we to have moved beyond our sphere ; and to break one engagement by the prosecution of another ; to disobey his excellency's order under any pretence . It is a good thing to yield obedience unto that authority under which we are placed . Our second error was , in not peracquainting his excellency and his council of war , with our grievances , in whom we have found so great meekness and moderation , that we could not have missed expected satisfaction . 

But that further answer May be given , and thereby the snare May be broken , and no more be entangled , i shall declare what satisfaction i have received : that so i May give the same satisfaction unto others . Such a council indeed , the engagement required , and such a council was constituted in the army , acting , and transacting of matters pertaining to the discipline of the army . And so long was this council continue ; until the inconvenience thereof was so far manifest ; that most of the regiments of horse and foot did petition his excellency to send back the several agitators , unto their respective regiments , until he should be pleased to resummon them : professing a willingness in themselves , to submit unto his excellency with his council of war , according to the pristine discipline of the army . His excellency having received these petitions , did not immediately send back the agitators ( As requested ) but having first summoned a council , and communicated the petitions unto them ; it was by them concluded , that according to the petitions of the several regiments , the council of agitators should be dissolved , until his excel . should fee cause to resummon them . Now this being so : his excel . cannot be charged with violation of that engagement : neither doth th•re remain any obligation on his excel . to have continue or revived any such council . Much less is it warrantable in the soldiery of the army to assume that power to themselves seeing they suffered a dissolution by the same power , by which they had their first constitution . 

And if this had been formerly known unto some of us , i am persuaded many had been prevented in this precipitate action . 

This that hath been spoken ( Though now it seems weak ) was the first and chief ground of our discontent , which broke forth into irregularity and high disobedience . Some other grounds there are which did add fuel to this fire , and blow up the sparkles which did here begin to be kindled . A second ground was , the many aspersions which are cast upon some general officers of the army , to the blasting of their fame and reputation , have proved as a whetstone , to set a rough edge upon the resolutions of many and to stir them up unto further discontent . I need not repeat what is spoken and written by some men . As to myself , i do profess , i did never believe them ; and i bless God i see less cause to believe them then ever : i have thought strange that men should seek to dishonour them whom the Lord hath honoured . But truly i do observe great credulity ( The character of lightness ) in very many , whom i could wish otherwise minded . I desire that diligent search May be made , whether this proceed not either from jealousy , which always suspecteth the worst , and betrayeth all hope of good , or from envy , repining at the felicity of other men : yet least some should say , that there is no smoke but some fire ; all these accusations cannot be false . I shall plainly show that much such smoke hath been where no fire was to be found , and that the best men ( Especially in authority ) have been partakers of this portion . And tacitly to answer another objection , i shall show , that good men have sometimes been infected with the forenamed contagion . Moses was the meekest man in his time upon the earth , yet did the conspirators charge him as fiercely and heinously as any officer of the present army is charged this day , in taking too much upon him , lifting up himself , making himself a Prince over the persons ; and this is not only spoken by sons of Belial , but by those that were men of renown , and famous among the persons , yea countenanced , because believed by the whole congregation of Israel . now unless we will say , that all the congregation were evil , we must be forced to confess , that good men are sometimes overtaken with this fault , of accusing and condemning others when there is no cause . Experience will teach us , not to be too credulous to give ear to reports , lest we be induced to believe that which we have no ground for : if flying reports Might be taken for evidence , we should in all ages find very few good men , but we should be ready to condemn the generation of the just . 

Another complaint exaspering the minds of some , is , that one tyrant is pulled down , and a second set up in his room . I confess this complaint were of great weight if it were true : but truly i suppose this ariseth from the want of discerning of true government from tyranny : as flattery was wont of late years to extol tyranny , as if it had been the perfection of government ; so ignorance and envy is ready to brand true and lawful government with the name of tyranny . I see the difference between the one and the other , and i desire other men May discern it . A tyrant makes his will the law , the other makes the law his will . And truly if we exclaim against tyranny when our rulers govern not according to lust , but according to law and rule , we shall incur a just suspicion , that it is not tyranny but magistracy that we complain of . 

Another thing that hath much disturbed the minds of men , and filled them with discontent is , the slow motion of the parliament , as to the taking away of oppressions , and easing the grievances of the persons . In answer to this , we are to consider the parliament before , and after , the army's entrance into London . as to the former consideration , before the army's entrance into London , i am so far from admiring their slow motion , that it is a wonder to me that they moved at all any other way then backward : and i do admire the great providence of God , who withheld them from turning all things upside down , while the house was filled with so many men of corrupt interests . As to the parliament in the second consideration , since the armies approach to London , we have cause to bless God , that they have done so many things for us , which our eyes have seen ; and what is not yet done , is in promise already performed unto us , with assurance of such celerity as matters of so great weight will possibly admit . And for answer unto this complaint , there needeth not any to a patient spirit , and the impatient are not capable of an answer . In conclusion of this i shall declare my thoughts . That although some men do not cease to cast dust in the faces both of parliament and council of the army , yet hath not that cloud been thick enough to hinder the appearance of those beams of justice , mercy , pity , clemency , moderation , which shine forth in them , which have drawn me to so reverend an esteem of both , as i cannot conveniently now set forth , lest i should incur suspicion of falling from one extreme into another . 

I shall only say this , that i bless God for them ; and it were no small degree of ingratitude , if we should deny it a great mercy to the nation , that God hath raised up such men amongst us . These are the ordinary causes of our discontents , which being weighed in the balance it will appear , that the greatest of all is the unthankfulness of our hearts and impatiency of our spirits , our want of love to cover offences , and our too much envy , aggravating what May be amiss . I shall now proceed to show the effects of this distraction , if it be lawful to judge of the effects in the cause ; the fruits of this mutiny would have proved so bitter , that had i many tongues , and great strength of invention , i could not sufficiently declare them : but when i shall have done that which i am able , it will appear clearly to the world ( Though we with faces of brass should deny it , ) that the sentence passed on us all , and the execution upon some , was very just and righteous ; and that his excellency's clemency in sparing of us was very great . Let me speak truly of the consequences likely to have attended this insurrection , as they were represented unto me upon serious meditations , after i had received the sentence of death , at such time as i judged myself , not only unworthy , but also incapable of mercy ( From men ) in respect of my deep crime . And i shall make it appear , that if we had not been prevented , this mutiny would have proved more dangerous and destructive than the first war raised by the King , with his cavalry , or the second revived by the Welsh , the Kentish , the invading Scots , and others . 

The first and second war did unite the hearts of the army together , and caused the well-affected in the nation , with heart and hand , to join in one : but this would have procured a division between the well-affected , and made a breach in this victorious army , by forcing one part to engage against the other , and one in fury to destroy the other ; and thereby ham-string the sinews of this nation , rendering all former victories null ; bringing upon us a more desperate condition their ever , redelivering us up into the hands of our conquered , yet insulting , enemies . Surely hereby great joy had sprung up to the malignant party : but exceeding sorrow and woe to the well-affected . 

I cannot but with shame acknowledge blindness of heart , and a spirit insatuated , when we undertook this desperate and dangerous enterprise . We have therefore cause to say ; blessed be the Lord who gave us into his excellency's hand . And blessed be his excellency of the Lord , who hath been so happy an instrument to withhold our hands from the blood and ruin of our nation . 

The first and second war had some basis and foundation to build upon , some appearance of visible authority to countenance it : from which appearance of authority it derived a beginning , in which also it did terminate itself ; ( viz. ) in the will and pleasure of a King . But this mutiny was without any foundation at all : the name of a King we disclaimed : from the parliament we had neither received nor required commission : the persons knew not our desires , and they were more against us then for us , for aught we knew . Now what success could be expected from such confusion ? Justly did the Lord disown us , to teach all men that he is a God of order , and not of confusion , to teach us that he needeth not our disobedience to superiors , or any evil action , to consummate this determination . 

The first and second war was managed by men of one interest , as touching the King , they all aimed at his restitution , at the advancing of his prerogative : but we were an heterogenial body , consisting of parts very diverse one from another , settled upon principles inconsistent one with another . So that although the intentions of some men were good and plausible ; yet the major part must needs be far different , unless we think it possible , that light and darkness , good and evil , can be concentric together , insomuch that had we proved the stronger party , and prevailed , where should we have terminated ? Who can imagine otherwise , but that parties amongst us of several dispositions would have every one sought to fulfil his own will ? and so should we have run into division , and subdivisions , until we had ended in confusions . These things i have declared for this end , that i May manifest unto my fellow-soldiers , that i am ashamed of the late proceedings , and do conceive great indignation against myself , for being accessary unto such rash attempts ; that i May give warning unto others , that they May beware and fear to do any such thing . Oh , how necessary is it at all times to draw near unto God for wisdom and understanding to guide us and direct us in all our ways . And lastly , i desire all May consider and acknowledge how great the preventing mercy of God hath been towards us at this time , that so we May be incited to offer praise , and honour , and glory to him that liveth for ever and ever . 

Finis . 











