England's present distractions . 

Paralleled with those of Spain , and other foreign countries , with some other modest conjectures , at the causes of the said distempers , and their likeliest cure . 

Written by a loyal subject to his majesty , and a true servant of the parliament , in vindication of that aspersion cast upon them , for declining his majesty's royal prerogative , or seeking to confine it to limits . 

tempora mutantur , & nos mutamur in illis . 



by h. g. b. l. c.  

London , printed for Francis Wright . 1642.  

Doctrina parit virtutem . 



England's present distractions . 

Distractions when national , are diffusive , nothing escapes their violence , like Samson's foxes , they carry fire about them , and consume all before them : and for the most part they fall like hailstones , one no sooner drops , but a whole storm do follow . These late years have been pregnant with distempers . Germany leading this dance of death , being the greatest of the European provinces , France , the fairest of them , and Spain , the powerfullest , have since , as it were , celeri pede , followed their leaders steps . And now & hinc illae lachrymae . England the little eye of nature , the darling and delight of Europe , has thrust itself into the same bloody matachin : wherein ( As you shall observe ) especially in those of Spain , embroiled with the civil differences of Catalonia and Portugal ; they keep one figure with ours in England , and its rebellious province Ireland , being true parallels , that run even still through several ways : it shall be needless to relate the circumstances of the Catalonian revolt from the Spanish government ; it having been , ( As Ireland to England ) an appendix for some hundred of years to that large book of Arragon : the world knows it is revolted , and that is sufficient for our purpose : not two twin cherries carry more resemblance , than the horrid faces of the present rebellions in these two subordinate provinces . Catalonia for many years past , being under the government of Don John de Muscu•ena , the Catalonian prefe•t there , under went with pavement shoulders , unheard of insolences ▪ ( Custom in suffering as it doth in sinning , taking away the sense of their sufferings : the austere condition of the man at which they durst not repine , making them like good dull mules , ma•ch silently without braying under their burdens : the state of Ireland just under the late Lord lieutenant Thomas Earl of Strafford a man of as much severity in his vice royship there : his government ( I would be loathe to brand his memory with a false imputation , because he fell under the axe of justice ) almost devolving to tyranny . And if tha• maxim in philosophy hold true , that causae judicantur ab effect•bus & é contra . certainly we May well affirm , both the Catalonian and Irish defections derivative from the oppressive injustice of their too tyrannous governors . Catalonia immediately upon the revocation of Muscurena , bleeding with the wounds of his former cruelties ; which yet for the present , if they were closed up had left large scars upon their bodies , resolves to provide for their future safeties , or sell them at a dear rate , to open a conspicuous ruin , break forth into an acknowledged and maintained rebellion . So did Ireland on the Earl of Strafford , though perhaps the levity and malice of that nation , only sought by the specious presence of his tyranny to palliate their wicked intentions , which had destined them for this fatal and impious purpose , long before Straffords arrival thither : but that rebellion were not considerable to us , as Catalonia's is to the Spaniard , nor could the Irish ( Though their quarrel for their religion makes them resolutely desperate , being assured by those that guide their souls , their mutinously superstitious priests , that they achieve the glorious condition of martyrs and confessors in their death and sufferings , resist the English powers , if England were once blessed with an unity between its King and persons , the distractions there being so well known to the world , that in our very enemies ( If we had any such besides ourselves , they would have invited pity : England that thus many years hath stood the envy of all it 's neighbours : like a fruitful olive teeming with blessings of a constant and continue peace , while they teemed with fire , famine , and a thousand inexplicable ruins , having now two armies of its own sons , violating with their hostile steps their mother's pleasant and plenteous bosom ; their active spirits , like millstones wanting other matter to employ their motion upon , being ready to set fire upon themselves . And yet few distinctly know the reason of these so sudden and hydra•-headed confusions . In Spain , tyranny in the King at least in his officers , caused the Catalonian revolt ; the same with hope of liberty that of Portugal : here none can accuse the King of that blemish ( I would we could as easily acquit his cabinet councillors , nor yet condemn the persons , that they have fallen , or do yet defect their obedience : and yet ( So paradoxical is this difference , ) all is distraction , the King bent against his persons , and they as natural justice gives them privilege , resolute to defend themselves , not against the King , he offers them no violence : but to preserve their lives , laws , and liberties , from the rapine of his evil ministers , who oft-times render the rule of good and gracious Kings odious to their subjects , and if we May believe that great legislator , that second Numa of the Romans cicere , that these aught to be accounted good men ; qui consulta patrum qui leges & reipublicae instituta servant . sure ours here are no ill patriots of their country , my logic knowing no such nicety of distinction betwixt servare and preservare , but that they May be by as direct a title admitted to March under the ensigns of goodness , who strive to preserve the laws and constitution of the commonwealth , as they who only keep them . And now without offence , if we May positively set down , or at leastwise probably conjecture at the causes of these so lamented distractions , we shall find ours here , and those of Spain , if not uno & eodem , yet valde simili fonte manare , to wit , the unlimited and infinitely ambitious power of the clergy . The Spanish nobility and most of the ancient gentry ( Though nationally and naturally that persons is most superstitiously affected to their clergy , than we ever were to ours ) repining and disdaining to see these men , who but yesterday were their menial servants , to morrow , being by their help andsuffrage , advanced to that supreme ecclesiastical dignity ; Demean themselves as their equals if not superiors ; nay , sitting as it were , to use our course old English proverb , even cheek by jowl with majesty , and swaying if not a wing that . Most of the King of Spain's cabinet counsellors , bating his favourite Olivares , the constable and adelantado of Castille , who enjoy that honour by the privilege of their offices , being churchmen , the Kings and those nobleman's ghostly fathers . And undoubtedly where they have so great a tie over men's minds , as the knowledge of their consciences , they must needs have a superintendent power over their actions , which are but the children of men's propensions ; so that those insolences of Mascarena , circumstantly are derivatived from the Spanish clergy , they being , if not by their consent and directions committed , yet by their patronage and conivence . And is not this comparatively our condition , while the clergy were revera , not nomine , only the ministers of the almighty , when they were boni pastores oves solum tondentes non deglubientes , what an excellent harmony was heard through this kingdom , joy and gladness being only in dwellings ? but when the mitre grew in competition with the crown here , when the proud and insolently presumptuous prelates began to rank themselves with the chief nobility , contemn the gentry , and tyrannize over the communality , introducing strange and impertinent , nay , superstitious cannons & ceremonies of our ancient faith , backed too by authority of such or the secular magistracy , as durst not , or at least would not contradict their proceedings , than the wisest of this nation jam proximus ardens , Vtalegon : their neighbour's houses being on fire , began to look to the safety of their own dwellings , endeavouring to repress that torrent which else threatened the whole island with a deluge . And certainly that wise and sacred senate , the illustrious high court of parliament seek not to diminish the King's royal prerogative , descendent to him as his crown is from his ancestors , by seeking to regulate the power of the clergy , by extirpation of Bishops , though it is their constant tenant where the church is reduced to an anarchy , there is likewise the temporal power altered . But i durst not dispute it with any of them , that not neither is episcopacy so correlative , or consubsistent with majesty , that one cannot stand without the other , nor that the parliament ever intended to confine the royal prerogative to limits , but secure the right & prosperity of the subject from being swallowed up in that extensive power of royalty ▪ which being contiguated , if not one continuum , with the subject's safety , ought not to be employed to his ruin . To prevent a danger , certainly is the greatest point of wisdom , and though none will imagine , our good and gracious King ever meant to put any power against his persons in practice , and in his own princely intention , yet certainly it was an honourable and conscionable justice in the parliament , being entrusted as feoffees with the kingdom's safety , to seek to provide for futurity , lest some such King there Might be hereafter , that Might invert the charter of his royalty sealed to him by the people's obedient suffrage upon the persons themselves . And yet this hath separated the King from his persons , and given birth to these unhappy distractions : in Spain , especially in Catalonia , where the King now is , he seeks to reduce them to his obedience , by affording them his presence . All we sue for here , is his majesty's royal presence , which would suddenly give a sure and happy period to these distempers . If his highness desserting those few incendiaries , who by their malignant counsels , and affections have instigated and fomented these dissensions would vouchsafe to comply with the universal body of his kingdom , contracted in this present parliament . And certainly in this climetricall year of the world , when it labours with the empidemical contagious sickness of combustions , we alone are bound to thank heaven that our disease here is not so violent , but it May be cured by time and good council . Nothing but blood , being able to extinguish the burning rays of those flaming combustions , that like prodigious meteors predominant in other nations . Catalonia nor Portugal , being never to be reduced to the Spanish obedience , but by extirpation of all those families and their adherents , who were the prime Botefeus in the revolt of those provinces . And certainly if the Spaniard do go out victorious , no misery will equal that of those vanquished wretches , upon whom and their unbappy posterity will be afflicted cruelty without pity , by the insolent and implacable victors : tyrants shed blood for pleasure , Kings for necessity : in what a happy condition than is England , even in its misfortune , being compared with other nations . Spain being oppressed , both with French , French , Dutch and Turkish , foreign enemies , and embroylded with domestic troubles , France is neither free from civil dissensions , nor safe from the Spanish invasions , which both out of Biskay and Handers , and Artoys infest it with frequent inroads : Germany has so long been the theatre of war and bloodshed , that it has almost worn out the race of the old Swedish actors ; yet their still spring up new ones , as if that country were destined only for fertility of miseries ; we only , as we are in situation , et penitus toto divisos orbe britannos , so we are in condition ; being safe from foreign enemies we have ourselves unmade our own safeties like Cadmus earthborn brothers , striving to boast in one another's destructions . 

Populumque potentem . 
In sua victrici conversum viscera dextra : 


Such is the uncertainty of all human and worldly happiness , which resembles aptly a fair hopeful plant , set with much care by the industrious owner : to day it buds , within a few week's blossoms , dressing as it were ▪ its bushy beauties at the sunbeams , when suddenly comes an unexpected April frost , and nips at the root , and then it withers ; that fair and hopeful foundation of peace and happins , and for us by our ancestors , being now ready by our own hands to be sacrificed as a victima tyrannidis , yet is not our case altogether so desperate as our neighbours ; good council having power to rectify and reconcile our differences , force only theirs . 

And 't is to be hoped , at least 't is all good men's wishes , that a speedy reconcilement May proceed betwixt his majesty and parliament , that the rumor of their war , May like thunder , though loud , having cleared our English air of its pestilential vapours like it be sudden , its noise once past , the memory of it forgotten , that this land flowing with milk and honey , May not be converted into a wilderness , nor sit desolate like widow , who so lately appeared a Queen among the nations , the very Empress of the islands rich in her inhabitants and merchandise , that so tears May be wiped away from all men's eyes , and that we May see peace again in this our Israel , that the example of unity amomg ▪ us May set a happy period to the dissension of our neighbours when they shall behold our destructions which begun last end first ; that our common mother , Europe , that sometime Empress of the world ▪ now groaning under the burden of her sons mutual arms , May resume her ancient glories by the expulsion of that common enemy to human nature the Turk , that so true religion May extend its branches like a fruitful vine through the face of the earth , and we sit happy under the shadow of it , which heaven in its mercy send sp•edily to come to pass , that all the ends of the world May praise the Lord ▪ 

Finis . 

























