Scotland's ancient obligation to England and public acknowledgement thereof , for their brotherly assistance to , and deliverance of them , with the expense of their blood , and hazard of the state and tranquillity of their realm , from the bondage of the French , in the time of their greatest extremity . anno dom. 1560.  

psalm 133. 1.  

Behold how good and how pleasant it is , for brethren to dwell together in unity . 



ezech. 37. 22 , 23 , &c.  

And i will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel , and one King shall be King to them all , and they shall be no more two nations , neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all . Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols , nor with their detestable things , nor with any of their transgressions : but i will save them out of all their dwelling places , wherein they have sinned and will cleanse them : so shall they be my persons , and i will be their god . And David my servant shall be King over them , and they all shall have one shepherd ; they shall also walk in my judgements , and observe my statutes and do them . Moreover i will make a covenant of peace with them , it shall be an everlasting covenant with them ; and i will place them and multiply them , and set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore . 



London , printed by John Macock , for m. s. 1646.  

Scotland's ancient obligation to England , and public acknowledgement thereof , for their brotherly assistance to , and deliverance of them , ( With the expense of their blood , and hazard of the state and tranquillity of their realm ) from the bondage of the French , in the time of their greatest extremity ; anno dom. 1560.  

Not only our own historians ( As Holinshed , Cambden , Speed , Stow , &c. ) but our brethren of Scotland in their printed histories ( Especially Buchanon and the late published history of the reformation of the church of Scotland , lib. 3. pag. 217. to 255.  Printed at London , anno 1644. ) make honourable mention of the brotherly relief , and comfortable support , which the English nation , readily and freely afforded to their Protestant brethren of Scotland , in the year of our Lord 1560. in their greatest extremity , when as their religion , liberties , estates , lives , were ready to be sacrificed to the tyranny of their popish Queen Marie , and fury of an insulting merciless foreign popish French army , introduced to extirpate or enthrall them . How free that relief of ours was , without any expense at all to , or pay from our Scottish brethren ; how puissant and well-provided our forces then were , both by land and sea ; how expeditious in their Marches , inoffensive in their carriages , valorous in their encounters , patient in their extremities , faithful in their engagements , successful in their expedition , quick in their return , and fair-carriaged in their departure thence , to their eternal honour ( the most part of the Scottish Protestant nobility , honourably convoying and accompanying them , as indeed they had well deserved : ) the history of the reformation of the church of Scotland , records at large : for which extraordinary brotherly assistance , in such a time of need , our brethren of Scotland most thankfully acknowledged this their preingagement unto us , many years before we of England were reingaged unto them for any such reciprocal aid : the memory whereof they gratefully recorded in their public liturgy , printed at Edinburgh , an.  Dom. 1575. which i find not only in the original book itself p. 63. but likewise thus lately reprinted at London for Franc• Constable , anno 1641.  By some wellwishers to both nations , with this ensuing preface thereunto . 

To the courteous reader . 

This ancient prayer coming accidentally into the hands of some English wellwishers of the Scottish nation , and finding it , in a manner by special providence , now produced , in the time of our happy pacification with that nation , there being no greater blessing upon earth than the peace between the two kingdoms , under one and the same governor ; it was thought fit and seasonable to publish this to all , which whosoever shall read , will easily perceive the constant perseverance of their affection to the English nation , since the year of their deliverance from France . 

A thanksgiving unto God , taken out of the form of prayer and administration of the sacraments used in the church of Scotland after their deliverance from the tyranny of the Frenchmen , by the English : with prayers made for the continuation of peace between the realms of England and Scotland . printed at Edinburgh by Thomas Bassandine , anno dom. 1575.  

Now , Lord , seeing that we enjoy comfort both in body and spirit by reason of this quietness of thy mercy granted unto us , after our most desperate troubles , in the which we appeared utterly to have been overwhelmed ; we praise and glorify thy mercy and goodness , who piteously looked upon us when we in our own selves were utterly confounded . But seeing , oh Lord , that to receive benefits at thy hands , and not to be thankful for the same , is nothing else but a seal against us in the day of judgement ; we most humbly beseech thee to grant unto us hearts so mindful of the calamities past , that we continually fear to provoke thy justice •o punish us with the like or worse plagues . And seeing that we by our own power were altogether unable to have freed ourselves from the tyranny of strangers , and from the bondage and thraldom pretended against us , thou of thine especial goodness didst move the hearts of our neighbours ( of whom we had deserved no such favour ) to take upon them the common burden with us , and for our deliverance , not only to spend the * lives of many , but also to hazard the estate and tranquillity of their realm and commonwealth . grant unto us , oh Lord , that with such reverence we May remember thy benefits received , that after this , in our default , we never enter into hostility against the realm and nation of England . suffer us never , oh Lord , to fall to that ingratitude and detestable unthankfulness , that we shall seek the destruction and death of those whom thou hast made instruments to deliver us from the tyranny of merciless strangers . Dissipate thou the counsels of such as deceitfully travel to stir the hearts of the inhabitants of either realm against the other . Let their malicious practices be their own confusion , and grant thou of thy mercy that love , concord , and tranquillity May continue and increase amongst the inhabitants of this isle , even to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ , by whose glorious evangel thou of thy mercy dost call us both to unity , peace , and Christian concord . the full perfection whereof we shall possess in the fullness of thy kingdom , when all offences shall be removed , iniquity shall be suppressed , and thy chosen children be fully endued with that perfect glory , in the which now our Lord Jesus Christ reigneth . To whom with thee , and the holy ghost , be all honour , praise , and glory , now and ever . So be it . 

In the history of the reformation of the church of Scotland , l. 3. f. 251. 252. 253  I read , that on a public day of thanksgiving at s. Giles church in Edinburgh , for this great deliverance and settlement they received by the English , ( At which the whole nobility and greatest part of the congregation of Scotland assembled , ) after the sermon made for the purpose , public thanks were given unto God for this merciful deliverance concluding in form as followeth , the same in substance , but a little different in words from that forementioned , recorded in their liturgy . 

but seeing that thou hast mercifully heard us , and hast caused thy virtue to triumph in us ; so we crave of thee continuance to the end that thy godly name May be glorified in us thy creatures . And seeing that nothing is more odious in thy presence ( oh Lord ) then is ingratitude and violation of an oath and covenant made in thy name . And seeing thou hast made our confederates of England the * instrument by whom we are now set at this liberty , and to whom in thy name we have promised mutual faith again . Let us never fall to that unkindness ( oh Lord ) that either we declare ourselves unthankful unto them or prophaners of thy holy name . Confound thou the counsel of those that go about to break that most godly league contracted in thy name , and retain thou us so firmly together by the power of thy holy spirit , that Satan have never power to set us again at variance not discord . Give us thy grace to live in that Christian charity , which thy son our Lord Jesus hath so earnestly commended to all the members of his body , that other nations provoked by our example , May set aside all ungodly war , contention , and strife , and study to live in tranquillity and peace , as it becometh the sheep of thy pasture , and the persons that daily look for our final deliverance by the coming again of our Lord Jesus . To whom with thee and the holy spirit be all honour , glory , and praise now and ever . Amen . 



A prayer very fit to be publicly used now . 

The contract made at Barwick with the kingdom of England , by our brethren of Scotland , dated the 10 of May 1560. whereupon we were induced to send them this brotherly assistance , was thus prefaced by themselves ; recorded in the selfsame history , p. 233.  

James , Duke of Chattellarault , Earl of arrane , Lord Hamilton , and others of the council , nobility , and principal estates of Scotland ; to all and sundry whose knowledge these presents shall come , greeting . we have well considered and are fully persuaded , in what danger , desolation , and misery , the long enmity with the kingdom of England hath brought our country heretofore : how * wealthy and flourishing it shall become , if those two kingdoms , as they are joined in one island by creation of the world , so they May be knit in a constant and assured friendship . These considerations grounded upon a most infallible truth , ought no less to have moved our progenitors and forefathers than us . But the present danger hanging over our heads , by the unjust dealing of those , of whom we have always best deserved , hath caused us to weigh them more earnestly than they did . The misbehaviour of the * French Monsieurs , i had almost said monsters , here , hath of late years been so great . The oppressions and cruelties of the soldiers , the tyranny and ambition of their superiors and rulers , so grievous to the persons , the violent subversion of our liberty , and conquest of the land , whereat they have by most crafty and subtle means continually pressed , hath been , i say , so intolerable to us all ; that at last when we could not obtain redress by humble suits , and earnest supplications presented to the Queen dowager , who both for duties sake , and place she doth occupy , aught to have been most careful of our state ; we have been by very necessity constrained , not only to assay our own forces , but also to implore the Queen's majesty of England's aid and support , which her majesty hath most willingly granted , upon certain conditions specified in a treaty past at Barwick , betwixt the Duke of Norfolk , lieutenant to her majesty , on the one part , and certain our commissioners on the other part , whereof the tenor followeth . &c.  



These public professions of our Scottish brethren's deep engagements to our nation heretofore , to omit our brotherly aid and large contributions towards them in the year 1641. and denial to grant any subsidies to the King himself against them , when extremely pressed in the dissolved parliament , anno 1640. as they were forcible enducements ( By way of retaliation and gratitude ) to induce them to contribute the like brotherly assistance unto us in our necessities ( Though upon our own expense , pay , and for the preservation of their own kingdom and liberties as well as ours ; ) so i presume the publication of them to the world , will be a most strict obligation to them inviolably to maintain that ancient league of friendship , into which they then entered with us , and have of late more solemnly renewed by their most solemn vow and covenant , than before , and to demean themselves in these distracted times , ( When so many seek to divide and dash us one against another even now we have vanquished the common enemy ) with that sincerity , integrity , simplicity , and candour towards us , without giving the least just occasion of jealousy or complaint unto our nation by speech , action , or violating the least title of their covenant and articles of agreement with the parliament ; as May exactly answer our ancient and late brotherly square carriage towards them ; and their last fair and honourable retreat from hence into their own country , to the silencing of all malignant , jealous , spirits : & most inseparably unite , most cordially glue us one to another for eternity , and frustrate all the Machiavellian plots and remaining hopes of our inveterate enemies , who have now no other policy left to raise themselves and ruin us , but our division after so solemn and sacred an union . si collidimur frangimur ; the prevention whereof , is the only end and motive of this seasonable publication . 

Finis . 





* note . * note . * note . * note . 










