A sudden essay or subitaneous conceit , occasioned by the last clause in the second quaere upon the armies late declaration by a lover of truth , and a constant friend to the quiet and repose of his native country . 

The clause of that second is , whether their refusal to disband , or to remove farther off from London , or obey the parliaments present just commands ( upon what ever specious printed pretexts ) be not a very sad public precedent , likely to conjure up a spirit of universal disobedience to parliaments , magistrates , and superiors of all sorts throughout the kingdom , to its utter ruin , if not timously prevented , disliked , opposed by all wellwishers to the weal and tranquillity of church and state ? 

methinks Sir , you should have consulted with your fellow-advocates for defensive arms ; who will authorize ( against the Oxonians ) and legitimate such an armed resistance , of all destructive commands , from any superiors whatsoever ; without all fear of overthrowing government or obedience ; whom the author of that seasonable advice to the city of London seemeth to follow ; confidently averring , that neither fathers , Masters , Kings , nor parliaments , are to be obeyed if they command things unnatural , impious , or unjust : nay , that they are to be resisted , whensoever they reach towards the ruin or bondage of those who trust them ; and that he who assisteth not to their suppression , shall be guilty of siding with the murderous malefactors , &c.  If you say , he is a partial advocate for the army's party , than i must tell you , by the pretty title , in probability , he is and hath been an able proctor , and studious solicitor to the parliament . But because in favour of tyranny ( as some say ) you urge here the inconvenience of subverting all authority , and hint so heavily upon a sin , which our surly adversaries ( the royal doctors ) do so sadly damn from rom. 13. that they do privately conceit , and publicly proclaim , how that many of the parliament side , must needs in trouble of spirit , wish that very text expunged . Therefore for mine own and other's satisfaction , i only crave unto some quaeres upon that text , your punctual resolution ; the only antidote to preserve from error , and remove all doubt , as touching the chiefest thing in debate . 

1.  Whether it enjoin subjection active and passive , unto all manner of magistrates , ( Though entering the office by fraud , treason , or tyrannous usurpation , and exercising the same , by acting arbitrarily , and setting forth edicts , authorising all injustice ) or only unto such , as lawfully enter the office , and rightly exercise the same . If you maintain the former , you avow the arrant flattery of Anaxarchus , ( So much abominated by John Bodin . ) if the latter , you comply with Thrasimachus in Plato , viz. that a magistrate cannot err as a magistrate ; for in that he erreth , he digresseth from the rule of his office ; in which exorbitancy , neither person nor action , can retain any stamp of power and authority . Let us therefore see how you can by any reason divine , or human , regulate , limit , or circumscribe the authority or power of the magistrate , and not by the same rule make him resistible . 

2.  How it May appear from any part of Christ's testament , that ever he intended to have any sort of persons , ( Especially in a mere Christian society ) under any pretext whatsoever , in the exercise of injustice , rapine , murder , or tyranny , to be held sacred and inviolable . 

3.  Seeing that all along Paul's time , the chief magistrates ( As histories manifest ) have spared only the base and bad , that they Might have upon whom to exercise the burning ardour of domination ; and raged only against the good and worthy , least there should be any that would or could resist them . In what sense could the apostle promise , from the magistrate praise and security to the pious , upon their uprightness and well-doing ? 

4.  Doth Paul here authorise error , falsehood , vice , and iniquity , ( Most often possessing the chair of authority ) with power of definitive judgement over laws and persons , and so to try sentence , and punish truth , virtue , and innocency , which are bound to submit without verbal or real opposition , after the apostolical example of such as were enabled thereunto by the spirit poured out according to promise , Joel 2.  And whether the sheepish sufferings of such , as wanting the same spirit , will yet ( From humour or heat of proceeding against the violence of power or impression of danger ) imitate those supernatural examples : tend not to the great encouragement of tyrants , whilst their constancy is interpreted folly and obstinacy , and their patience and silence after such extraordnary patterns , is mistaken , for the weakness of an indefensible cause ? 

5.  Whether the ordinance of our god ( Who is goodness itself ) can ever tend to the trouble , ruin , or affliction of his own children , when they are most obedient to his will ? 

6.  Whether the weakness of our condition only , do absolutely require that lawgivers , and law-rulers , must be held in undoubted admiration ; without which advantage no wit of man , can ever secure , order , and government from subversion ? 

7.  Whether this text do not enjoin more obedience to the army in the upright prosecution of just and honest designs , than was ever due to the Caesars in their usurpation ; or is now to the Ottoman family in the administration of the empire ; or whether time and custom only , can legitimate violence and tyranny , and canonize the same for an ordinance of Christ ? 

8.  Whether you yourself have not known this very text , of late years to have been irreligiously wrested , rejected , and taken up again by all sorts of time-serving zealots , with a strange impudence and unheediness . If you please to satisfy my scruple in these particulars , i shall presently pay all humble obedience unto the parliament , and as freely reprove the army without fear of their shot and powder . 

postscript . the corrector to the reader . 

The author of these quaeres ( As himself said ) taking notice of the zealous digladiation now stirring , between some emulous antagonists ; saw them effeminately chiding , and by light skirmishing , daily increasing the difficulty . But never kindly closing , like brave spirits , more covetous of truth , than victory . Therefore as an essaying prabationer made to submit unto common and lawful resolution , he published this subitane apprehension , therein addressing himself , unto the only determining man of England , hoping that for the public satisfaction , he will briefly and rightly represent the sense of the rule , so that we May all submit , and stagger no longer in uncertainty . 







