A question answered : how laws are to be understood , and obedience yielded ? 

Necessary for the present state of things , touching the militia . 

question . now in our extreme distractions , when foreign forces threaten , and probably are invited , and a malignant and popish party at home offended ? The devil hath cast a bone , and raised a contestation between the King and parliament touching the militia ▪ his majesty claims the disposing of it to be in him by right of law ; the parliament saith rebus sic stantibus , and nolenti rege , the ordering of it is in them ? 

answer . which question , May receive its solution by this distinction . That there is in laws and equitable , and a literal sense . His majesty ( Let it be granted ) is entrusted by law with the militia , but it 's for the good and preservation of the republic , against foreign invasions or domestic rebellions . For it cannot be supposed that the parliament would ever by law intrust the King with the militia against themselves , or the commonwealth , that entrusts them to provide for their weal , not for their woe . So that when there is certain appearance or grounded suspicion , that the letter of the law shall be improved against the equity of it ( That is , the public good , whether of the body real or representative ) than the commander going against its equity , gives liberty to the commanded to refuse obedience to the letter : for the law taken abstract from its original reason and end , is made a shell without a kernel , a shadow without a substance , and a body without a soul . It is the execution of laws according to their equity and reason , which ( As i May say ) is the spirit that gives life to authority , the letter kills . 

Nor need this equity be expressed in the law , being so naturally employed and supposed in all laws that are not merely imperial , from that analogy which all bodies politic hold with the natural ; whence all government and governors borrow a proportionable respect ; and therefore when the militia of an army is committed to the general , it is not with any express condition , that he shall not turn the mouths of his cannons against his own soldiers , for that is so naturally and necessarily employed , that its needless to be expressed , insomuch as if he did attempt or command such a thing against the nature of his trust and place , it did ipso facto estate the army , in a right of disobedience , except we think that obedience binds men to cut their own throats , or at least their companions . 

And indeed if this distinction be not allowed , than the legal and mixed monarchy is the greatest tyranny , for if laws invest the King in an absolute power , and the letter be not controlled by the equity , then whereas other Kings that are absolute monarchs and rule by will , and not by law , are tyrants perforce . Those that rule by law and not by will , have hereby a tyranny conferred upon them legally , and so the very end of laws , which is to give bounds and limits to the exorbitant wills of Princes , is by the laws themselves disappointed , for they hereby give corrobaration ( And much more justification to an arbitrary tyranny , by making it legal , not assumed ; which laws are ordained to cross not countenance : and therefore is the letter ( Where it seems absolute ) always to receive qualification from the equity , else the foresaid absurdity must follow . 

Printed for the good of the commonweal ▪ 







