Political discourses : tending to the introduction of a free and equal commonwealth in England . 

By James Harrington , esquire . 

London : printed by j. c. for Henry Fletcher , at the three gilt cups in Paul's churchyard . 1660.  

Pour enclover le canon . 

It is obvious and apparent unto sense , that Venice , Holland , Switz , are not molested with civil war , strife or sedition , like Germany , France , Spain and England ; yet will men have a commonwealth to be a confusion . What confusions we have had in England , while the Norman line strove for absolute power , while the Barons strove for ancient liberty , while the houses of York and Lancaster strove for royal dignity ; and last of all , during these eighteen years , in the wars that have been between the King and the persons , in the difference of judgement both concerning religion and government , and under the perfidious yoke of the late tyranny , is known . At the apparition , or but name of a commonwealth , and before any such orders are introduced , or perhaps truly understood , all men , or the most of them , are upon a sudden agreed that there be a good and perfect fixation of the army unto the old cause ; and that the remnant of the long parliament be assembled : so we have this for a taste or relish of a commonwealth , that of the eighteen , the present year is already the most unanimous . Nor can this be attributed unsto chance ; seeing the wit of man , our case considered , could not , i think , have invented a more natural and necessary way of launching into the orders of a commonwealth , than first by fixation of the army so , as no council ensuing May have any ambitious party on which to set up : and then to assemble that council which hath given testimony of itself , to have been the most popularly addicted . By these it is no less than demonstrated , that the army is faithful , and the persons ( For the most active part of them , which in like cases cometh to more than all the rest ) is wise . Be it granted , that the far greater part of them ( libertatis dulcedine nondum expecta ) would force us unto the continuation of monarchy , if they could , this is the old temper of a persons in like cases : thus the Romans , upon the death of Romulus , forced the senate , who would have introduced a commonwealth , to elect Numa with the succeeding Kings ; and could not be brought unto the abolition of monarchy , till it was imposed upon them by Brutus to abjure it . Nevertheless , this persons having once tasted of liberty , were of all others the most constant assertors of the same . It causeth with the best politicians despair , and , as it were , a kind of tearing themselves , that the persons , even where monarchy is apparently unpracticable , and they have no way but a commonwealth or confusion , hold their ancient laws and customs unalterable , and persecute such as advise the necessary change of them , how plainly soever demonstrated , as authors of innovation , with hatred , if not in tumult and with violence , as when Lycurgus in a like assault lost one of his eyes . here is the discouragement ; the many through diversity of opinions , want of reach into the principles of government , and unacquaintance with the good that May by this means be acquired , are never to be agreed in the introduction of a new form : but then there is also this consolation , that the many upon introduction of a new form , coming once to feel the good , and taste the sweet of it , will never agree to abandon it . This is all the comfort that politicians , in like cases , have been able to give themselves upon consideration of the nature of the persons in general . But if we consider the nature of the persons of England , i am much deceived , or the consolation of knowing men , and good patriots , May yet be far greater . For though the persons of England May be twenty to one for monarchy , they are but deceived by the name , seeing they having of late years been more arbitrarily governed then formerly , desire no more under this name , in the truth of their meaning , than not to be at the will of men , but return unto the government of laws ; for the late monarchy being rightly considered , was indeed no more than an unequal commonwealth ; only here is the fault of all unequal commonwealths , they pretend to be governments of laws , and at the same time defer unto some one , or few men , such power , prerogative and pre-eminence , as May invade and oppress laws ; which fault was the cause of perpetual feud , or at least jealousy between our Kings and our parliaments . But there is in relation unto the persons of England , yet a greater encouragement unto commonwealths-men : for though if we look upon the true cause of popular government , the balance hath been many years in turning , yet since it came to be so perceivable as to cause any mention of a commonwealth , it is but a short time . Should we go so far as to compute it from the beginning of the late war , it exceedeth not eighteen years , in which the eyes and affections of the persons are so wonderfully opened and extended , that i do not think there are fewer than fifty thousand of the more active and knowing that drive vigorously at a commonwealth ; while the rest are not only calm and passive , but mature for any good impression without danger , or indeed appearance of any war or tumult that can ensue upon the introduction of a new form : nor is there the least improbability that an equal commonwealth May be received with embraces , seeing a tyranny came not only in , but was supported without blood . But if persons for the extent of their territory , and for their bulk or number so great as this of England , should fall ( To take a larger compass than i hope we shall need ) within the space of thirty years out of monarchy , to which they have ever been accustomed , into a commonwealth of which they have had no experience nor knowledge , and that ( Except in the ruin of monarchy , which how infirm soever , useth not to expire otherwise ) without rapine , war , or indeed without any great confusion , i doubt whether the world can afford another example of the like natural , easy and sudden transition of one government into another . Yet ere two parts in three of this time be expired , men can be despairing . In what ( Say they ) have you shown us that we must necessarily be a commonwealth ? Why in this , ( Say i ) that you cannot show me how we should be any thing else . In what posture ( Say they ) do we see the persons to give us this hope ? Why in the very best ( Say i ) that in this state of affairs a persons ( If you consider their humour or nature ) could have cast themselves into . This posture to return is thus , or at least thus i take it to be : the armies of this nation by restitution of their old officers , are fixed , resolved upon , and encouraged by the most active part of the persons towards the prosecution of the old cause , or introduction of a popular form : the framing of this form is modestly and dutifully defered by them unto the civil power in the restitution of the long parliament , in that remnant of the same which declared for , and obliged themselves unto this end . 

Now putting this to be the case , i come to the scope of this paper , which is to discourse upon this posture ; in which to my understanding , there are but three things that can interpose between us and a commonwealth , and but two more that can interpose between us and an equal commonwealth . The things that May interpose between us and a commonwealth , are such monarchy , as can no otherwise get up then by foreign invasion ; or tyranny , which at the strongest among us was not of any duration , and which changing hands must still be weaker : of these two , they being only possible , and no whit probable , i shall say no more . But the third thing which can interpose between us and a commonwealth is oligarchy , which in like cases hath been more probable and incidental , than i conceive it to be at the present : such a thing if it be introduced among us , is most likely to be of this form . 

It May consist of a council not elected by the persons , but obtruded upon us , under the notion of a senate or a balance , or of religion ; and it May be for life , or for some certain or pretended term , with a Duke or princely precedent at the head of it , or without one . 

The power at which such a council doth naturally drive , is to call parliaments , and to govern in the intervals : but the success of such a council , will be , that if in calling parliaments , it do not pack them , it will be forthwith ruined ; and if it do pack them , than the case of such a council and a parliament will be no otherwise different from the case of a single person and a parliament , than that more Masters less able to support their greatness , & whose greatness we shall be less able to support , will be a burden by so much more heavy , than one Master more able to support his greatness , and whose greatness we were more able to support . But this will either not be , or be of no continuance . 

The things that can interpose between us and an equal commonwealth , are either a senate for life , or an optimacy . 

The seventy elders in Israel , were a senate for life ; this though constitutively elected by the persons , became after the captivity , or in the Jewish commonwealth ( How anciently is uncertain ) mere oligarchy , by the means of ordination ; no man being capable of magistracy except he were a presbyter , no man being made a presbyter but by laying on of hands , and the Prince with the senate engrossing the whole power of laying on of hands . 

Nor were the persons thus excluded , and trampled upon by the Pharisees under other colour then that of religion , or tradition derived in their oral law or cabala from Moses , in whose chair they sat , and not only pretended their government to be a government of saints , but in some things bade fairet for that title than others , who assumed it afterwards : for that they did miracles , is plain in these words of our saviour , unto them : if i by Beelzebub cast out devils , by whom do your children cast them out ? therefore they shall be your judges , mat. 12. 27.  By which i May believe that miracles themselves do not in any wise oblige us to hope that such a state of government can be religious or honest : much less , where there are no miracles , nor any such certain distinction to be outwardly made between a saint and an hypocrite , as May secure us that we shall not have hypocrites imposed upon us for saints . The surest testimony of saintship in rulers , is , when they are willing to admit of such orders in government , as restrain the power to do wickedly , or of Lording it over their brethren . 

Upon the pattern of the high-priest , and the seventy elders , 〈◊〉 the government of the Pope and his seventy cardin••ss , pretending also unto saintship ; which nevertheless is li•••• yielded unto them , as they assume that a council of se••nty for life , is a good guard of the liberty of conscience . 

The next senate for life , was that of Lacedaemon , consisting of two Kings hereditary , and twenty eight senators elective . These notwithstanding they were not eligible but by the persons , and at the sixtieth year of their age , and by the balance or equal agrarian of their commonwealth , could not any one of them excel the meanest citizen in their lot , or shares in land ; so vigorously attempted to draw the whole result of the commonwealth unto themselves , that if the persons had not 〈◊〉 riven as vigorously for the preservation of their right , they had been excluded from making their own laws . The expedient found out by the persons in this exigent , was their election of five annual magistrates out of their own number , called the ephori , with power to try , condemn and execute any of their Kings or senators which thenceforth should go about to subvert the fundamental laws of their government , by which it belonged unto the senate to debate and propose only , and unto the assembly of the persons to resolve . Without this expedient ( Which in another commonwealth not planted upon a like agrarian , would have availed little , as the Roman persons heard afterwards by their tri•uneses ) had the persons of Lacedaemon through a senate for life been deprived of their liberties . 

The Roman commonwealth was also founded upon a senate for life ; which though first instituted by election of the persons , came afterwards to be such into which their children found other admittance , in such manner as from hence grew a pairician order , engrossing not only the senate , and excluding the persons from bearing magistracy in the commonwealth , but oppressing them also by an heavy yoke of tyranny , which caused perpetual feud between this senate and the persons , and in the end the ruin of the commonwealth . Yet entitled this nobility themselves unto these prerogatives , no otherwise then by such religious rites , as among them were believed to confer saintship , and thereby to entitle them unto dominion over the persons , in which they were also aided by the optimacy . 

Now examples of a senate for life being of like nature and necessary consequence , it is my hope and prayer , that never any such be introduced in England . 

But in case of an optimacy , a commonwealth , though not admitting of a senate for life , May yet be unequal . 

Athens consisted of a senate upon annual rotation ; yet through the optimacy which was instituted by Solon , came under such a yoke of the nobility , as upon victory obtained in the battle of Plataea , they took the opportunity to throw off , and reduce the commonwealth unto more equality . 

An optimacy is introduced , where a persons is not only divided by tribes according to their habitation ; but every tribe into classes , according unto their estates or different measures in riches ; as if you should cast all that have above two thousand pounds a year into one classis ; all that have above one thousand pounds a year , into another ; all that have above five hundred , into a third ; and so forth , for as many classes as you like to make . 

Now if in this case the first and second classes May give the suffrage of the whole persons , as in Rome ; or that these only May enjoy the senate , and all the magistracies , though but upon rotation , as in Athens ; yet the persons , as to these parts being excluded , the commonwealth must needs remain unequal : wherefore this also ought to be forewarned , to the end that it May be prevented . 

To conclude , if we in England can have any monarchy , we shall have no commonwealth ; but if we can have no monarchy , then bar but a senate for life , and an optimacy , and we must have an equal commonwealth . Successive parliaments , whether immediately , or with counsels in the intervals , and like fancies , will be as void of effect , as of example , or reason . 

But an abundance of things is tedious ; we would have such a commonwealth as May be dictated in a breath . Thus then : let a senate be constituted of three hundred , and a popular assembly of one thousand and fifty , each for the term of three years , and to be annually changed in one third part . But in case a commonwealth were thus briefly dictated , what would this abate of those many things which must of necessity go unto a like structure , that it May be equally and methodically brought up from a firm and proper foundation ? there is no way of dictating a commonwealth unto facile practice , but by the seeming difficulty of the whole circumstances requisite , even to a tittle . Nevertheless to try again : let the lands throughout England be all cast into some parish . Let every parish elect annually a fifth man ; let every hundred of these fifth men , with the places of their habitation , constitute one hundred ; then cast twenty of these hundred into one tribe or shire . Putting the case the tribes or shires thus stated amount unto fifty , let the fifth men or deputies in every tribe or shire , elect annually two out of their own number , to be senators for three years , and seven to be of the assembly of the persons for a like term , each term obliging unto an equal interval : which senate being for the first year constituted of three hundred , and the assembly of the persons of one thousand and fifty , gives you those bodies upon a triennial rotation , and in them the main orders of an equal commonwealth . If you must have a commonwealth , and you will have an equal commonwealth , than ( Pardon my boldness ) after this or some like manner must you do , because like work never was , nor can be done any otherwise . 

May 2. 1659.  J. Harrington . 

London , printed for Henry Fletcher . 1659.  





see m. b. 1. c. 9  










