The Character of Thomas Merkes , Bishop of Carlisle , out of Bishop Godwin's Commentaries of the Bishops of England , Part 2. pag. 149.  Together with his Speech in the last Parliament of King Richard II Anno 1399. as it is recorded by Sir john Hayward , in the first Part of the Life and Reign of K. Henry IU. pag. 101.  Printed at London by john Wolf , Anno 1599  

The CHARACTER . 

Thomas Merkes , a Monk of Westminster , was made Bishop of Carlisle by the Pope , at the Request of King Richard II Anno 1397. against the liking of the Chapter , and consecrated the same Year ; who being entered upon his Charge , showed himself not unworthy of his Office : For besides that he is commended for his Learning , and his no small Prudence , he is celebrated , and that not undeservedly ; in the first place for his singular Faith and Constancy towards his Patron K. Richard ; as likewise for his famous Magnanimity , that without any Fear he boldly professed his Loyalty , not without great and manifest Danger , when he might honestly have held his peace , and aught to have done so , if he had regarded only his own safety . 

There were some of the Nobles who did not desert the Cause of that unfortunate Prince , till he was Prisoner to his Rival , Henry Duke of Lancaster . But this Prelate despising the danger that hung over himself , would not desert the King , even when he had some while before deserted himself ; but durst manfully defend the King and his Cause , when he had lost his Power and Interest , and when he certainly might conclude , that no sort of Benefit could redound to the King , but Ruin might befall himself thereby . 

At that very time when the mad multitude , always excessive in their Passions , not content to have deposed King Richard , and placed Henry of Lancaster ( their Darling ) in his Throne , but with their Clamours seemed to extort from the Parliament , that they might deal yet more severely with the King ; and there were not wanting some in the Parliament itself , who cast out dark and ambiguous Speeches of putting him to death ; this Bishop then was not afraid to pronounce , That there were none there present , who had right to proceed to judgement against the King , 〈◊〉 as their lawful Prince they had obeyed twenty two Years . 

Some few Heads of this Speech being only related by Bishop Godwin , the whole is therefore , without any alteration , ( Spelling excepted ) here printed from Sr. john Hayward's Book . 

When the Inheritance of the Crown was settled on K. Henry , and his Line , it was moved in Parliament , what should be done with King Richard ? In answer to which the Bishop of Carlisle declared as followeth . 

The SPEECH . 

This Question ( right honourable Lords ) concerneth a matter of great consequence and Weight ; the 〈◊〉 whereof will assuredly procure either safe Quiet , or dangerous 〈◊〉 , both to our particular Consciences , and also to the common State : Theresore before you resolve upon it , I pray you call to your considerations these two things : First , Whether King Richard be sufficiently deposed or no. Secondly , Whether King Henry be with good justice or judgement chosen in his place . For the 〈◊〉 point , we are first to examine , Whether a King , being lawfully and fully instituted by any just Title , 〈◊〉 upon imputation either of Negligence , or of Tyranny , be deposed by his Subjects . Secondly , What King Richard hath omitted in the one , or 〈◊〉 in the other , for which 〈◊〉 should deserve so heavy judgement . I will not speak what may be done in a popular State , or in a consular ; in which although one beareth the name and honour of a Prince , yet he hath not supreme power of Majesty ; but in the one the People have the highest Empire , in the other the Nobility and chief Men of Estate ; in neither the Prince . Of the first sort was the Commonwealth of the Lacedæmonians , who after the Form of Government which Lycurgus framed , oftentimes fined , oftentimes fettered their Kings , and sometimes condemned them to death . Such were also in Caesar's time the petty Kings of every City in France , who were many times arraigned upon Life and Death , and ( as Ambicrix , Prince of the Leodienses , confessed ) had no greater Power over the People , than the People had over them . Of the second condition were the Roman Emperors at the first ; of whom some , namely , Nero and Maximinus , were openly 〈◊〉 ; others were suddenly surprised by judgement and Authority of the Senate : and such are now the Emperors of Germany , whom the other Princes , by their Aristocratical Power , do not only restrain , but sometimes also remove from their imperial State. Such are also the Kings of Denmark and Sweveland , who are many times by the Nobility 〈◊〉 , either into Prison or Exile . Such likewise are the Dukes of Venice , and of some other sree States in Italy ; and the chiefest cause for which Lewis Earl os Flanders was lately expelled from his place , was for drawing to himself cognisance in matters of Life and Death , which high Power never pertained to his Dignity . 

In these and such like Governments , the Prince hath not 〈◊〉 Rights , but is himself subject to that Power which is greater than his , whether it be in the Nobility , or in the common People . But if the Sovereign Majesty be in the Prince , as it was in the three first Empires , and in the Kingdoms of judaea and Israel , and now is in the Kingdoms of England , France , Spain , Scotland , Moscovia , Turkey , Tartary , Persia , Ethiopia , and almost all the Kingdoms of Asia and Africa ; although for his 〈◊〉 he be unprofitable to the Subjects , yea hurtful , yea intolerable ; yet can they lawfully neither harm his Person , nor hazard his Power , whether by judgement , or else by Force ; for neither one nor all Magistrates have any authority over the Prince , from whom all Authority is derived , and whose only Presence doth silence and 〈◊〉 all inferior jurisdiction and Power . As for Force , what Subject can attempt , or assist , or counsel , or conceal Violence against his Prince , and not incur the high and 〈◊〉 Crime of Treason ? 

It is a common Saying , Thought is free : Free indeed from punishment of secular Laws , except by Word or Deed it break forth into Action . Yet the secret Thoughts against the 〈◊〉 Majesty of a Prince , without attempt , without endeavour , have been adjudged worthy of death ; and some who in auricular Confession have discovered their treacherous Devices against the Person of their Prince , have afterwards been executed for the same . All Laws do exempt a Madman from punishment , because their Actions are not governed by their Will and Purpose : and the Will of Man being set aside , all his doings are indifferent ; neither can the Body offend without a corrupt or erroneous Mind ; yet if a Madman draw his Sword upon his King , it hath heen adjudged to deserve death . And lest any man should surmise that Princes , for the maintenance of their own Safety and Sovereignty , are the only Authors of these judgements , let us a little consider the Patterns and Precepts of holy Scripture . Nabuchadnezzar , King of Assyria , wasted all Palestine with Fire and Sword , oppugned jerusalem a long time , and at last expugned it , slew the King , burned the Temple , took away the holy Vessels and Treasure ; the rest he permitted to the Cruelty and Spoil of his unmerciful Soldiers , who defiled all places with Rape and Slaughter , and ruinated to the ground that flourishing City : After the glut of this bloody Butchery , the People which remained he led captive into Chaldaea , and there erected his golden Image , and commanded that they which refused to worship it , should be cast into a fiery Furnace . 

What Cruelty , what Injustice , what Impiety is comparable to this ? And yet God calleth Nabuchadnezzar his Servant , and promises him Hire and Wages for his Service : And the Prophets jeremiah and Baruch did write unto the jews , to pray for the Life of him , and of Balthasar his Son , that their Days might be upon Earth as the Days of Heaven : And Ezechiel , with bitter terms , abhorred the Disloyalty of Zedechiah , because he revolted from Nabuchadnezzar , whose Homager and Tributary he was . What shall we say of Saul ? Did he not put all the Priests to Execution , because one of them did relieve holy and harmless David ? Did he not violently persecute that his most faithful Servant , and dutiful Son in Law ? During which Pursuit , he fell twice into the power of David ; who did not only spare , but also protect the King , and reprove the 〈◊〉 Soldiers for their negligent Watch , and was touched in Heart for cutting away the lap of his Garment ; and afterwards , caused the Messenger to be slain , who upon Request , and for Pity , had lent his Hand ( as he said ) to help forward the voluntary death of that sacred King. As for the contrary Examples , as that of jehu , who slew jehoram and Ahazia , Kings of Israel and judah , they were done by express Oracle and Revelation from God , and are no more set down for our Imitation , than the robbing of the Egyptians , or any other particular and privileged Commandment , but in the general Precept , which all men must ordinarily follow , not only our Actions , but our Speeches also , and our very Thoughts , are strictly charged with Duty and Obedience unto Princes , whether they be good or evil . The Law of God ordaineth , that he which doth presumptuously against the Ruler of the People , shall die ; and the Prophet David for biddeth to touch the lord 's Anointed . thou shalt not ( saith the Lord ) rail upon the judges , neither speak evil against the Ruler of the People . And the Apostles do demand further , that even our Thoughts and Souls be obedient to the higher Powers : And , lest any should imagine that they meant of good Princes only , they speak generally of all ; and further to take away all doubt , they make express mention of the Evil , for the Power and Authority of wicked Princes is the Ordinance of God : And therefore Christ told Pilate , that the Power which he had , was given him from above : And the Prophet esay calleth Cyrus , being a profane and heathen Prince , the 〈◊〉 Anointed . For God stirreth up the Spirit even of wicked Princes , to do his Will ; and ( as jehoshaphat said to his Rulers ) they execute not the judgement of Man , but of the Lord ; in regard whereof , David calleth them Gods , because they have their Rule and Authority immediately from God ; which if they abuse , they are not to be adjudged by their Subjects , for no Power within their Dominion is superior to theirs ; but God reserveth them to the sorest Trial : Horribly and suddenly ( saith the Wise Man ) will the Lord appear unto them , and an hard judgement shall they have . 

The Law of God commands , that the Child should be put to death for any Contumely done unto the Parents : 〈◊〉 what if 〈◊〉 Father be a Robber , if a Murderer , if , for all 〈◊〉 of Villainies , odious and execrable both to God and Man ? Surely he deserveth the highest degree of Punishment , and yet must not the Son 〈◊〉 up his Hand against him ; for no Offence is so great , as to be punished by Parricide . But our Country is dearer to us than our 〈◊〉 , and the Prince is Pater patriae , the Father of our Country ; and there fore more sacred and dear unto us than our Parents by Nature , and must not be violated , how imperious , how impious soever he be . Doth he command , or demand , our persons , or our Purses ? We must not eat for the one , or shrink for the other ; for ( as 〈◊〉 saith ) Kings have Dominion over the Bodies , and over the dattle of their Subjects , at their pleasure . Doth he enjoin those Actions 〈◊〉 are contrary to the Laws of God ? We must neither wholly obey , nor violently resist ; but with a constant Courage submit ourselves to all manner of 〈◊〉 , and show our Subjection by enduring , and not performing . Yea , the Church 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 an Heresy , to hold , that a Prince may be slain or deposed by his Subjects ; for any Disorder or Default , either in Life , or else in Government , there will be Faults so long as there are Men : And as we endure with patience a barren Year , if it hap , and unseasonable Wether , and such other Defects of Nature ; so must we tolerate 〈◊〉 Imperfections of Rulers , and quietly expect either Reformation , or else a Change.  

But alas , good King Richard ! What such Cruelty , what such Impi ty hath he ever committed ? Examine rightly those Imputations 〈◊〉 are laid against him , without any false Circumstance of Aggrava 〈◊〉 , and you shall find nothing objected , either of any truth , or of great moment . It may be that many Errors and Oversights have escaped him , yet none so grievous to be termed Tyranny ; as proceeding rather from unexperienced Ignorance , or corrupt Council , than from any natural and wilful Malice . O , how shall the World be pestered with Tyrants , if Subjects may rebel upon every pretence of Tyranny ? How many good Princes shall daily be suppressed by those , by whom they ought to be supported ? If they levy a Subsidy , or any other Taxation , it shall be claimed Oppression : If they put any to death for traitorous Attempts against their persons , it shall be 〈◊〉 aimed Cruelty : If they do any thing against the Lust and Liking of the People , it shall be proclaimed Tyranny . 

But 〈◊〉 it be , that without Authority in us , or Desert in him , King Richard must be deposed ; yet what Right had the Duke of Lancaster to the Crown , or what reason have we , without his Right , to give it to him ? If he make Title as Heir unto King Richard , then must he yet stay until King Richard's death ; for no Man can succeed as Heir to one that liveth . But it is well known to all Men , who are not either wilfully blind , or grossly ignorant , that there are some now 〈◊〉 , lineally descended from Lionel Duke of Clarence , whose Officer 〈◊〉 was , by judgement of the high Court of Parliament , holthe 8th Year of the Reign of King Richard , declared next Successor to the Crown , in case King Richard should die without Issue . 〈◊〉 the Title from Edmond Crouchback , I will pass it over , seeing the Authors thereof are become ashamed of so absurd Abuse , both of their own Knowledge , and our Credulity and therefore all the Claim is now made , by Right of Conquest , by the Session and Grant of King Richard , and by the general Consent of all the People . It is a bad Wool , that can take no Colour : But what Conquest can a 〈◊〉 pretend against his Sovereign , where the War is Insurrection , and the Victory high and heignous Treason ? As for the Resignation which King Richard made , being a penned Prisoner for the same cause , it is an Act exacted by force , and therefore of no force and validity to bind him ; and seeing that , by the Laws of this Land , the King alone cannot alienate the ancient jewels and Ornaments 〈◊〉 to the Crown , surely he cannot give away the Crown it 〈◊〉 , and therewithal the Kingdom . 

Neither have we any Custom , that the People at pleasure should elect their King ; but they are always bound unto him who , by Right of Blood , is right Successor ; much lesle can they confirm and make good that Title , which is before by Violence usurped ; for nothing can then be freely done , when Liberty is once restrained by Fear . So did Scylla , by terror of his Legions , obtain the Law 〈◊〉 Velleia to be made , whereby he was created Dictator for fourscore Years : And by like impression of Fear , Caesar caused the Law Servia to be promulged , by which he was made perpetual Dictator ; but both these Laws were afterwards adjudged void . As for the deposing of King Edward TWO , it is no more to be urged , than the poisoning of King john , or the murdering of any other good and lawful Prince ; we must live according to Laws , and not to Examples ; and yet the Kingdom was not then taken from the lawful Successor . But if we look back to Times lately passed , we shall find these Titles were more strong in King Stephen , than they are in the Duke of Lancaster ; for King Henry I , being at large 〈◊〉 , neither restrained in Body , nor 〈◊〉 in Mind , had appointed him to succeed , ( as it was , upon good Credit , certainly assirmed : ) The People assented to this Designment , and thereupon , without Fear , and without Force , he was appointed King , 〈◊〉 obtained full Possession of the Realm . Yet Henry , ( Son of the Ear● of Anjou , ) having a nearer Right , by his Mother , to the Crown , ( notwithstanding his Father was a Stranger , and himself 〈◊〉 beyond the Seas , ) raised such rough Wars upon King Stephen , that there was no end of spoiling the Goods , and spilling the Blood of the unhappy People , besides the Ruins and Deformities of many Cities and Holds , until his lawful Inheritance was to him assured . It terrifieth me to remember how many flourishing Empires and 〈◊〉 have been , by means of such Contentions , either torn 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 with detestine Division , or subdued to Foreign Princes , 〈◊〉 pretence of Assistance and Aid : And I need not 〈◊〉 how 〈◊〉 this Realm hath heretofore been shaken with these 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and yet neither the Examples of other Countries , 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 of our own , are sufficient to make us to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 

OH Englishmen , worse 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 after our own Harms : no 〈◊〉 have more 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 none lesle Quiet at home ; in other Countries the Sword of Invasion hath been shaken against us , in our own Land the Fire of Insurrection hath been kindled among us ; and what are these Innovasions , but Whetstones to sharpen the one , and Bellowss to blow up the other . 

Certainly I fear that the same will happen unto us , which Aesop 〈◊〉 to have been fallen unto the Frogs ; who being desirous to have a King , a Beam was given unto them , the first Fall whereof did Put them in some fear ; but when they saw it lie still in the Stream , they insulted thereon with great Contempt , and desired a King of quicker Courage : then was sent unto them a Stork , which stalking among them with stately Steps , continually devoured them . The Mildness of King Richard hath bred in us this Scorn , interpreting it to be Cowardice , and dulness of Nature ; the next Heir is 〈◊〉 rejected : I will not say , that with greater Courage , we shall find greater Cruelty ; but if either of these shall hereafter be able to 〈◊〉 up their Side , and bring the matter to trial by Arms , I do 〈◊〉 say , that which Part soever shall carry the Fortune of the Field , the People both ways must go to wrack . 

And thus I have declared my Mind concerning this Question , in more Words than your Wisdom , yet fewer than the weight of the Cause doth require ; and do boldly conclude , that we have neither Power nor Policy , either to depose King Richard , or to elect Duke Henry in 〈◊〉 place ; that King Richard remaineth still our Sovereign Prince , and therefore it is not lawful for us to give judgement upon him : That the Duke , whom you call King , hath more offended against the King and the Realm , than the King hath done , either against him , or us ; for , being banished the Realm for ten Years , by the King and his Council , ( amongst whom , his own Father was chief , ) and sworn not to returnn without special Licence , he hath not only violated his Oath , but with 〈◊〉 Arms disturbed the Quiet of the Land , and dispossessed the King from his Royal Estate , and now demandeth judgement against his Person , without Offence proved , or Defence heard . If this Injury , and this Perjury doth nothing move us , yet let both our private and common Dangers somewhat withdraw us from these violent proceedings . 

FINIS . 





Tranquil . in Calig . Tacitus in 〈◊〉 . jer 25. 9  jer. 29. 7.  Baruc. 1. 11.  Ezek. 12. 18.  So did Domitian put to death Epaphroditus , Nero's Libertine , because he helped Nero ( although in love ) to kill himself . So did Severus kill all the killers of Pertinax , his Predecessor : and like wise Vitellius did put to death all the 〈◊〉 of Galba . Theophilus , Emperor of Grecia , caused all those to be 〈◊〉 who had made his Father Emperor by kill Leo Armenius . And Alexander the Great put to cruel Execution those that had 〈◊〉 Darius , his mighty and mortal Enemy . Deut. 17. 12.  Psal. 105. 15  Exod. 22. 28.  Act. 23. 5.  Rom. 13. 1 13.  〈◊〉 . 3 1. 1  〈◊〉 2. 13 , 14 , 17.  1 〈◊〉 2. 2.  Rom. 13 2  job. 19 〈◊〉  Isa. 45 1.  2 〈◊〉 . 36 22.  & 19 6.  Psal. 28.  Sap. 6.  Quin. in declam . Cic. offic . lib. 1  〈◊〉 . 9 37.  Alphons . a c●st . in lib. de haeresi in verb.  Tyrannus . Dominic . Soto 1. 5. the just . & jur . ● . 1 . artic . 3.  