The commonwealth of Israel , or a brief account of Mr. Prynne's anatomy of the good old cause . 

by h. s.  

prov. 15. 2.  

The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright , but the mouth of fools babbleth out foolishness . 



London , printed for tho. Brewster , and are to be sold at the sign of the three bibles at the West-end of Paul's , 1659.  

The commonwealth of Israel , or a brief account of Mr. Prynne's anatomy of the good old cause . 

Sir , 

I know you are very inquisitive of news since this miraculous revolution , which God hath brought a bout by means altogether unexpected , for the salvation of his persons amongst us : this morning i met with something which May no less divert you , than it hath for some time entertained me . The cooks and the grocers have once more excited Mr. Prynne to write , least they should be put to the expense of clean paper : the world is already satisfied , Mr. Prynne ▪ doth not diminish his repute by any such performance , and it is no small ▪ benefit to these his abettors ; and this is the good old cause for which he now writes . I assure you the piece is genuine , and no way imposed on the author ; it hath a large title page , and sundry insignificant texts of scripture prefixed ; it is as full of impertinency , railing , lying and false quotations as any work he ever published . There is a great contest now on foot , whither the juncto of Lincoln's inn , or the parliament at Westminster , adhere to the old cause ; and if so great personages differ , i May be allowed to dissent from Mr. Prynne bencher ( And dancer at the late revels ) in Lincolns-inn . i say nothing to his introduction , that piece need not be dismissed to the pastry , for i think there never will come out an enquiry to the end of the world , whereunto that May not agree . ( pag. 1. ) He talks of a confederated triumvirate of republicans , sectaries and soldiers : i am sorry Mr. Prynne himself contributes so much to the upholding that report , that himself hath lost his senses ▪ as to write thus . A triumvirate , signifying only a government of three jointly , he must be destitute of common sense that finds out a triumvirate of republicans , sectaries , and soldiers , unless he will baptise each of them legion , for they are many : i am sure this is not the good old language . as for the good old cause , he saith , he did not only superficially view the outside of it , but considerately penetrated into the true original seminal source and entrails of it . If he had not told us this , we had never guessed so much : but what did Mr. Prynne discover ? that the good old cause is a plot to blow up subvert destroy the King , Queen , Prince , royal posterity , Lords , Commons , kingdom , government , laws , liberty and property of the persons of England , yea the very constitution , freedom , power , privileges of all true English parliaments , the church and ministry of England ▪ and true Protestant religion itself , formerly established , to set up oligarchy , anarchy , tyranny , oppression , libertinism , marshal-government , and all kind of heresies , blasphemies , religions , sects , yea atheism , popery itself at last in their stead . 

i would Mr. Prynne would write sing-songs ; again to be poet and mad , were natural , and his fictions would not be lies . It is not a disgrace , but an indearmeat of the good old cause , that it destroys King , Queen , Prince , Lords and kingdom in their political capacity , and that is all that is intended by it : to destroy the Commons ( Whereof the sectaries and republicans , and soldiers , are a part ) is impossible ; as it is inconsistent with a commonwealth ( Which is a form of government , and an empire of laws ) to destroy government , laws and property , or freedom as for the pulling down the true Protestant religion ( Which is Lutheranism , and which was never established here , though Cranmer were at first a Lutheran ) and setting up heresies , &c.  I understand not that , how it can be verified in a just and innocent toleration , nor shall i ever comprehend it , till patience and long-suffering ( In Mr.  Prynne's new language ) he rendered active in signification . But the old cause sets up oligarchy , tyranny [ and Martial government : ] these are such synonimas to express a commonwealth , as none makes use of , but he that calls good evil ▪ and evil good . but suppose it did set up either of these ( For to erect both any man but mr ▪ Prynne would think it impossible ) how shall it set up an anarchy ▪ which is a 〈◊〉 of all government , whereas oligarchy , tyranny marshal-government impose some ? If Mr. Prynne had any philosophy , i would a•k him how anarccy could be set up any way ▪ it being a thing of pure privation , and so not to be composed by positive actings . but why should you or any expect philosophy , where there is no sense ? Till it be proved , that our old laws , kingship , church-state , &c. were good , it is a begging of the question , to think the pulling down of that is ignominious and execrable . 

Well , but you will say , that he proves monarchy to be the best of governments : therefore it was an ill and not good cause ( How old soever ) that pulled down kingship . truly Sir , this lawyer's logic is as bad as lawyers Latin ; for though our late governors were called Kings , they were no monarchs : the latter being a name for such only , who are absolved from all law , and May do what they please without any further use of others , then as instruments and counsellors : but our Kings could act no such things ; if the trials and depositions of former Kings did not prove their subjection to coercion ; yet in that they could do nothing in taxes , or law-making , but by the advice and consent of parliament , they were no monarchs . thus all his texts which make for monarchy , do no way render the pulling down of kingship illegal , or r•sh , but rather in part prudential , since that is not the best form of government , as Mr. Prynne confesses ; monarchy must have that pre-eminence , and so slavery becomes the best of conditions . I hope the assembly at Lincolns-inn will keep a fast for the good success and prosperity of the Turk , that so they May have the best of governments , a monarchy . 

His texts of scripture are excellently impertinent , i never heard better answers at cross questions . is monarchy the best of governments ? yes in good sooth lafoy ! for jer. 21. v. 3 , 4.  then said Jeremiah , thus shall you say to Z•dekiah , thus saith the Lord God of Israel behold i will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands , wherewith you fight against the King of Babel , and against the Chaldeans which besiege you without the walls , and i will assemble you into the midst of this city . Might not Mr. Prynne as well have quoted any text in scripture , in which the name of King is mentioned ? even that of , Tophet is prepared for the Kings of the earth . so jer. 17. 25.  then shall the Kings and the Princes enter in at the gates of the city , &c.  Than , that is , after the captivity , they had no monarchs in Israel : such were only they that were the descendants of David , as the Jewish rabbins tell us , and they were subordinate to the Sanhedrin , and Might be scourged by them in case of offence : so that this text proves nothing ( But yet as much as the former ) that monarchy is best , but for the paramount dignity of parliaments over the Kings . but you May reply , that it is promised as a blessing , and therefore that is better than a republic . i answer , that where the executive power is in one person triable by a Sanhedrin upon breach of law , it is a republic , and the controversy is merely grammatical , whether this or that is duly named . So that Mr. Prynne here proves a commonwealth to be the best form of government . but is not Mr. Prynn a man of admirable qualities to be followed by any , that can think there is any government absolutely best , and abstracting from circumstances ? It is the posture of the nation , and the disposition of the persons , which makes this or that government best here or there . In France a monarchy at present is best , but an extraordinary revolution May so order things , that it May be as little feasible there , as amongst us ; and where the land is so modelled , it is a blessing to have a King : all that Ezekiel saith is , that God did bless Jerusalem , and she fared deliciously , and was very beautiful , and did grow up to a kingdom ; and her name was spread amongst the nations for her beauty , ezek. 16. 13 , 14.  What then ? he doth not say , that monarchy was the beauty he put upon her to make her perfect ; but that beauty was precedaneous thereunto : and it was for that she was famous among the heathen . These are pretty allegations ! Monarchy is so far from being proved best here , that it is not so much as said to be any way good . In Deuteronomy no more is said to the advantage of monarchy , than is to be expected from Mr. Prynne's quotations , deut. 17. 14  ▪ when thou shalt come unto the land — if thou say . I will set a King over me ▪ like as all the nations that are about me . Then thou shalt make him King over thee — and thou shalt write him this law ▪ — i had thought that Mr. Prynne would have thought if 's and and's to prove nothing ▪ such suppositions infer nothing but the conveniency of tying a King to laws , if one be chosen , not that it is best to choose one . God did institute a commonwealth in Israel , as Mr. Harrington hath excellently shown ▪ and the rejecting thereof he calls a rejecting of God , 1 Sam ▪ 8. v 7.  I desire all judicious ▪ persons to read that chapter , and consider the pre-eminence of the best of governments , viz. Mr. Prynne's monarchy . 

He pleadeth for monarchy because God is a King , and this he proves by sundry texts ! I would too submit to a monarchy , if my King were omnipotent , omnipresent , omniscient , without passion or shadow of change . This is not for the advantage of every monarchy , no more than if i should say , it is better to ride on horseback then go on foot ; ergo , let 's go buy hobby-horses : if God and Christ were as men , passionate and fallible , they should not be my monarchs . 

In that he calls the good old cause jesuitical , it is not such accusations will make it censurable : the Jesuits are ( Generally ) against Bishops ; so is Mr. Prynne ; ergo , it is jesuitical to be against Bishops : Bellarmine too is for monarchy , and saith , it is the best of governments : so says Mr. Prynne too : you see then by his argument , Mr. Prynne of Swanswick is a Romish Jesuite . the Dominican are against freewill , &c. so is Mr. Prynne , ergo Mr. Prynne is a Dominican . the Pope is principally against a toleration , so is Mr. Prynne ; ergo , he is an errant Papist . but primitive Christianity , under Christian Emperors , allowed and avowed an universal toleration , with a capacity for each not differing in opinions , but religions , to be preferred to the highest dignities ; ergo , the good old cause is agreeable thereunto , and justified by their judgement as well as practise : but of this i shall more at large discourse against Mr. Prynne , or any else that defy the host of Israel : my haste permits me to add no more , but that you May find an ample confutation of all that Mr. Prynn either hath , or shall write , in pantagruels library within New-college in oxon : by the name of Tartaretus de modo cacandi ▪ i am , 

Sir , Yours , &c.  

Finis . 

Postscript . 

Sir , 

i suppose these reflections May suffice for to evince the goodness of the cause against Mr. Prynne ; and to let you see that his writings have much of the lawyer in them ; high charges and imputations are but words of course with them ; and all that cry he makes , is but the way of the man's indicting . As to the antiquity of the cause ; ( Though i Might say with Tertullian upon another account , illud prius quod verius , truth , reason , honesty , and foundations upon nature , will make a cause not only better but older than any plea from musty records , and concessions extorted from tyrants ) enough by other pens hath been said ; and what he saith was never the design of the parliament , was objected to them for such by their quick sighted adversaries . I cannot examine his proofs , but you May conjecture by his scripture allegations how his others would appear upon a review . It is clear from the covenant , that the generous English never intended the defence of the King , otherwise then as it was consistent with the subject's liberty and privileges of parliament . As to the seclusion of members , i understand not why if some betray their-trust , others May not be faithful , Mr. Prynne once taught , that if the house of Lords dissented and refused to provide for the safety of the persons , the house of Comomons' alone Might do it : why May not a part of the latter house take the like care upon the like exigency ? I profess i see not how one is a greater breach of privilege then the other : or less inconsistent with Mr.  Prynne's similitude used by him in his defence of the war against the King , viz. as in a storm , if the mariners are drunk or neglect their duty , or drive upon rocks , the rule of self-preservation permits any to interpose . So is there not as great a danger now as ever , of the nation ? May we only use arms to provoke , not secure ? and take them up that we May lay them down at the feet of Kings together with our necks , to be trampled on ? It were more prudential in case of oppression to go with halters at first , and so to incline to mercy , then to enrage them , and then give them opportunity to satisfy their fury . 















