
        Chapter XXIII
        
          "Help, masters, help; here 's a fish hangs in the net, like a poor
          Man 's right in the law." --Pericles of Tyre
        
        The advance of the season now became as rapid as its first approach had been tedious and lingering. The days were uniformly mild, while the nights, though cool, were no longer chilled by frosts. The whip- poor- will was heard whistling his melancholy notes along the margin of the lake, and the ponds and meadows were sending forth the music of their thousand tenants. The leaf of the native poplar was seen quivering in the woods; the sides of the mountains began to lose their hue of brown, as the lively green of the different members of the forest blended their shades with the permanent colors of the pine and hemlock; and even the buds of the tardy oak were swelling with the promise of the coming summer. The gay and fluttering blue- bird, the social robin, and the industrious little wren were all to be seen enlivening the fields with their presence and their songs; while the soaring fish- hawk was already hovering over the waters of the Otsego, watching with native voracity for the appearance of his prey.
        The tenants of the lake were far- famed for both their quantities and their quality, and the ice had hardly disappeared before numberless little boats were launched from the shores, and the lines of the fishermen were dropped into the inmost recesses of its deepest caverns, tempting the unwary animals with every variety of bait that the ingenuity or the art of man had invented. But the slow though certain adventures with hook and line were ill suited to the profusion and impatience of the settlers. More destructive means were resorted to; and, as the season had now arrived when the bass fisheries were allowed by the provisions of the law that Judge Temple had procured, the sheriff declared his intention, by availing himself of the first dark night, to enjoy the sport in person.
        "And you shall be present, Cousin Bess," he added, when he announced this design," and Miss Grant, and Mr. Edwards; and I will show you what I call fishing not nibble, nibble, nibble, as' Duke does when he goes after the salmon- trout. There he will sit for hours, in a broiling sun or, perhaps, over a hole in the lee, in the coldest days in winter, under the lee of a few bushes, and not a fish will he catch, after all this mortification of the flesh. No, no-- give me a good seine that 's fifty or sixty fathoms in length, with a jolly parcel of boatmen to crack their jokes the while, with Benjamin to steer, and let us haul them in by thousands; I call that fishing."
        "Ah! Dickon," cried Marmaduke," thou knowest but little of the pleasure there is in playing with the hook and line, or thou wouldst be more saving of the game. I have known thee to leave fragments enough behind thee, when thou hast headed a night party on the lake, to feed a dozen famishing families."
        "I shall not dispute the matter, Judge Temple; this night will I go; and I invite the company to attend, and then let them decide between us."
        Richard was busy during most of the afternoon, making his preparations for the important occasion. Just as the light of the settling sun had disappeared, and a new moon had begun to throw its shadows on the earth, the fisher- men took their departure, in a boat, for a point that was situated on the western shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than half a mile from the village. The ground had become settled, and the walking was good and dry. Marmaduke, with his daughter, her friend, and young Edwards, continued on the high grassy banks at the outlet of the placid sheet of water, watching the dark object that was moving across the lake, until it entered the shade of the western hills, and was lost to the eye. The distance round by land to the point of destination was a mile, and he observed:
        "It is time for us to be moving; the moon will be down ere we reach the point, and then the miraculous hauls of Dickon will commence."
        The evening was warm, and, after the long and dreary winter from which they had just escaped, delightfully invigorating. Inspirited by the scene and their anticipated amusement, the youthful companions of the Judge followed his steps, as he led them along the shores of the Otsego, and through the skirts of the village.
        "See!" said young Edwards," they are building their fire already; it glimmers for a moment, and dies again like the light of a firefly."
        "Now it blazes," cried Elizabeth;" you can perceive figures moving around the light. Oh! I would bet my jewels against the gold beads of Remarkable, that my impatient Cousin Dickon had an agency in raising that bright flame; and see! it fades again, like most of his brilliant schemes."
        "Thou hast guessed the truth, Bess," said her father;" he has thrown an armful of brush on the pile, which has burnt out as soon as lighted. But it has enabled them to find a better fuel, for their fire begins to blaze with a more steady flame. It is the true fisherman 's beacon now; observe how beautifully it throw s its little circle of light on the water!"
        The appearance of the fire urged the pedestrians on, for even the ladies had become eager to witness the miraculous draught. By the time they reached the bank, which rose above the low point where the fishermen had landed, the moon had sunk behind the top of the western pines, and, as most of the stars were obscured by clouds, there was but little other light than that which proceeded from the fire. At the suggestion of Marmaduke, his companions paused to listen to the conversation of those below them, and examine the party for a moment before they descended to the shore.
        The whole group were seated around the fire, with the exception of Richard and Benjamin; the former of whom occupied the root of a decayed stump, that had been drawn to the spot as part of their fuel, and the latter was standing, with his arms akimbo, so near to the flame that the smoke occasionally obscured his solemn visage, as it waved around the pile in obedience to the night airs that swept gently over the water.
        "Why, look you, squire, said the major- domo. You may call a lake- fish that will weigh twenty or thirty pounds a serious matter, but to a man who has hauled in a shovel- nosed shirk, d'ye see, it 's but a poor kind of fishing after all."
        "I do n't know, Benjamin," returned the sheriff;" a haul of one thousand Otsego bass, without counting pike, pickerel, perch, bull- pouts, salmon- trouts, and suckers, is no bad fishing, let me tell you. There may he sport in sticking a shark, but what is he good for after you have got him? Now, any one of the fish that I have named is fit to set before a king."
        "Well, squire," returned Benjamin," just listen to the philosophy of the thing. Would it stand to reason, that such a fish should live and be catched in this here little pond of water, where it 's hardly deep enough to drown a man, as you 'll find in the wide ocean, where, as every body knows that is, everybody that has followed the seas, whales and grampuses are to be seen, that are as long as one of the pine- trees on yonder mountain?"
        "Softly, softly, Benjamin," said the sheriff, as if he wished to save the credit of his favorite;" why, some of the pines will measure two hundred feet, and even more."
        "Two hundred or two thousand, it 's all the same thing," cried Benjamin, with an air which manifested that he was not easily to be bullied out of his opinion, on a subject like the present. "Have n't I been there, and have n't I seen? I have said that you fall in with whales as long as one of them there pines: and what I have once said I 'll stand to!"
        During this dialogue, which was evidently but the close of much longer discussion, the huge frame of Billy Kirby was seen extended on one side of the fire, where he was picking his teeth with splinters of the chips near him, and occasionally shaking his head with distrust of Benjamin 's assertions.
        "I 've a notion," said the wood- chopper," that there 's water in this lake to swim the biggest whale that ever was invented; and, as to the pines, I think I ought to know so'thing consarning them; I have chopped many a one that was sixty times the length of my helve, without counting the eye; and I believe, Benny, that if the old pine that stands in the hollow of the Vision Mountain just over the village-- you may see the tree itself by looking up, for the moon is on its top yet-- well, now I believe, if that same tree was planted out in the deepest part of the lake, there would be water enough for the biggest ship that ever was built to float over it, without touching its upper branches, I do."
        "Did'ee ever see a ship, Master Kirby?" roared the steward," did'ee ever see a ship, man? or any craft bigger than a lime- scow, or a wood- boat, on this here small bit of fresh water?"
        "Yes, I have," said the wood- chopper stoutly;" I can say that I have, and tell no lie."
        "Did'ee ever see a British ship, Master Kirby? an English line- of- battle ship, boy? Where did'ee ever fall in with a regular built vessel, with starn- post and cutwater, gar board- streak and plank- shear, gangways, and hatchways, and waterways, quarter- deck, and forecastle, ay, and flush- deck?-- tell me that, man, if you can; where away did'ee ever fall in with a full- rigged, regular- built, necked vessel?"
        The whole company were a good deal astounded with this overwhelming question, and even Richard afterward remarked that it" was a thousand pities that Benjamin could not read, or he must have made a valuable officer to the British marine. It is no wonder that they overcame the French so easily on the water, when even the lowest sailor so well understood the different parts of a vessel." But Billy Kirby was a fearless wight, and had great jealousy of foreign dictation; he had risen on his feet, and turned his back to the fire, during the voluble delivery of this interrogatory; and when the steward ended, contrary to all expectation, he gave the following spirited reply:
        "Where! why, on the North River, and maybe on Champlain. There 's sloops on the river, boy, that would give a hard time on't to the stoutest vessel King George owns. They carry masts of ninety feet in the clear of good solid pine, for I 've been at the chopping of many a one in Varmount State. I wish I was captain in one of them, and you was in that Board- dish that you talk so much about, and we 'd soon see what good Yankee stuff is made on, and whether a Varmounter 's hide ai n't as thick as an Englishman 's." The echoes from the opposite hills, which were more than half a mile from the fishing point, sent back the discordant laugh that Benjamin gave forth at this challenge; and the woods that covered their sides seemed, by the noise that issued from their shades, to be full of mocking demons.
        "Let us descend to the shore," whispered Marmaduke," or there will soon be ill- blood between them. Benjamin is a fearless boaster; and Kirby, though good- natured, is a careless son of the forest, who thinks one American more than a match for six Englishmen. I marvel that Dickon is silent, where there is such a trial of skill in the superlative!"
        The appearance of Judge Temple and the ladies produced, if not a pacification, at least a cessation of hostilities. Obedient to the directions of Mr. Jones the fishermen prepared to launch their boat, which had been seen in the background of the view, with the net carefully disposed on a little platform in its stern, ready for service. Richard gave vent to his reproaches at the tardiness of the pedestrians, when all the turbulent passions of the party were succeeded by a calm, as mild and as placid as that which prevailed over the beautiful sheet of water that they were about to rifle of its best treasures.
        The night had now become so dark as to render objects, without the reach of the light of the fire, not only indistinct, but in most cases invisible. For a little distance the water was discernible, glistening, as the glare from the fire danced over its surface, touching it here and there with red quivering streaks; but, at a hundred feet from the shore, there lay a boundary of impenetrable gloom. One or two stars were shining through the openings of the clouds, and the lights were seen in the village, glimmering faintly, as if at an immeasurable distance. At times, as the fire lowered, or as the horizon cleared, the outline of the mountain, on the other side of the lake, might be traced by its undulations; but its shadow was cast, wide and dense, on the bosom of the water, rendering the darkness in that direction trebly deep.
        Benjamin Pump was invariably the coxswain and net caster of Richard 's boat, unless the sheriff saw fit to preside in person: and, on the present occasion, Billy Kirby, and a youth of about half his strength, were assigned to the oars. The remainder of the assistants were stationed at the drag- ropes. The arrangements were speedily made, and Richard gave the signal to" shove off."
        Elizabeth watched the motion of the batteau as it pulled from the shore, letting loose its rope as it went, but it soon disappeared in the darkness, when the ear was her only guide to its evolutions. There was great affectation of stillness during all these manoeuvers, in order, as Richard assured them," not to frighten the bass, who were running into the shoal waters, and who would approach the light if not disturbed by the sounds from the fishermen."
        The hoarse voice of Benjamin was alone heard issuing out of the gloom, as he uttered, in authoritative tones," Pull larboard oar,"" Pull starboard,"" Give way together, boys," and such other indicative mandates as were necessary for the right disposition of his seine. A long time was passed in this necessary part of the process, for Benjamin prided himself greatly on his skill in throwing the net, and, in fact, most of the success of the sport depended on its being done with judgment. At length a loud splash in the water, as he threw away the" staff," or" stretcher," with a hoarse call from the steward of" Clear," announced that the boat was returning; when Richard seized a brand from the fire, and ran to a point as far above the centre of the fishing- ground, as the one from which the batteau had started was below it.
        "Stick her in dead for the squire, boys," said the steward," and we 'll have a look at what grows in this here pond."
        In place of the falling net were now to be heard the quick strokes of the oars, and the noise of the rope running out of the boat. Presently the batteau shot into the circle of light, and in an instant she was pulled to the shore. Several eager hands were extended to receive the line, and, both ropes being equally well manned, the fishermen commenced hauling in with slow, and steady drags, Richard standing to the centre, giving orders, first to one party, and then to the other, to increase or slacken their efforts, as occasion required. The visitors were posted near him, and enjoyed a fair view of the whole operation, which was slowly advancing to an end.
        Opinions as to the result of their adventure were now freely hazarded by all the men, some declaring that the net came in as light as a feather, and others affirming that it seemed to be full of logs. As the ropes were many hundred feet in length, these opposing sentiments were thought to be of little moment by the sheriff, who would go first to one line, and then to the other, giving each small pull, in order to enable him to form an opinion for himself.
        "Why, Benjamin," he cried, as he made his first effort in this way," you did not throw the net clear. I can move it with my little finger. The rope slackens in my hand."
        "Did you ever see a whale, squire?" responded the steward:" I say that, if that there net is foul, the devil is in the lake in the shape of a fish, for I cast it as far as ever rigging was rove over the quarter- deck of a flag- ship."
        But Richard discovered his mistake, when he saw Billy Kirby before him, standing with his feet in the water, at an angle of forty- five degrees, inclining southward, and expending his gigantic strength in sustaining himself in that posture. He ceased his remonstrances, and proceeded to the party at the other line.
        "I see the' staffs,'" shouted Mr. Jones--"gather in boys, and away with it; to shore with her!--to shore with her!"
        At this cheerful sound, Elizabeth strained her eyes and saw the ends of the two sticks on the seine emerging from the darkness, while the men closed near to each other, and formed a deep bag of their net. The exertions of the fishermen sensibly increased, and the voice of Richard was heard encouraging them to make their greatest efforts at the present moment.
        "Now 's the time, my lads," he cried;" let us get the ends to land, and all we have will be our own-- away with her!"
        "Away with her, it is," echoed Benjamin!--"hurrah! ho- a- hay, ho- a- hoy, ho- a!"
        "In with her," shouted Kirby, exerting himself in a manner that left nothing for those in his rear to do, but to gather up the slack of the rope which passed through his hands.
        "Staff, ho!" shouted the steward.
        "Staff, ho!" echoed Kirby, from the other rope. The men rushed to the water 's edge, some seizing the upper rope, and some the lower or lead rope, and began to haul with great activity and zeal, A deep semicircular sweep of the little balls that supported the seine in its perpendicular position was plainly visible to the spectators, and, as it rapidly lessened in size, the bag of the net appeared, while an occasional flutter on the water announced the uneasiness of the prisoners it contained.
        "Haul in, my lads," shouted Richard--"I can see the dogs kicking to get free. Haul in, and here 's a cast that will pay for the labor." Fishes of various sorts were now to be seen, entangled in the meshes of the net, as it was passed through the hands of the laborers; and the water, at a little distance from the shore, was alive with the movements of the alarmed victims. Hundreds of white sides were glancing up to the surface of the water, and glistening in the fire light, when, frightened at the uproar and the change, the fish would again dart to the bottom, in fruitless efforts for freedom." Hurrah!" shouted Richard:" one or two more heavy drags, boys, and we are safe."
        "Cheerily, boys, cheerily!" cried Benjamin;" I see a salmon- trout that is big enough for a chowder."
        "Away with you, you varmint!" said Billy Kirby, plucking a bullpout from the meshes, and casting the animal back into the lake with contempt. "Pull, boys, pull; here 's all kinds, and the Lord condemn me for a liar, if there ai n't a thousand bass!"
        Inflamed beyond the bounds of discretion at the sight, and forgetful of the season, the wood- chopper rushed to his middle into the water, and began to drive the reluctant animals before him from their native element.
        "Pull heartily, boys," cried Marmaduke, yielding to the excitement of the moment, and laying his hands to the net, with no trifling addition to the force. Edwards had preceded him; for the sight of the immense piles of fish, that were slowly rolling over on the gravelly beach, had impelled him also to leave the ladies and join the fishermen.
        Great care was observed in bringing the net to land, and, after much toil, the whole shoal of victims was safely deposited in a hollow of the bank, where they were left to flutter away their brief existence in the new and fatal element.
        Even Elizabeth and Louisa were greatly excited and highly gratified by seeing two thousand captives thus drawn from the bosom of the lake, and laid prisoners at their feet. But when the feelings of the moment were passing away, Marmaduke took in his hands a bass, that might have weighed two pounds, and after viewing it a moment, in melancholy musing, he turned to his daughter, and observed:
        "This is a fearful expenditure of the choicest gifts of Providence. These fish, Bess, which thou seest lying in such piles before thee, and which by to- morrow evening will be rejected food on the meanest table in Templeton, are of a quality and flavor that, in other countries, would make them esteemed a luxury on the tables of princes or epicures. The world has no better fish than the bass of Otsego; it unites the richness of the shad to the firmness of the salmon." [1]
        "But surely, dear sir," cried Elizabeth," they must prove a great blessing to the country, and a powerful friend to the poor."
        "The poor are always prodigal, my child, where there is plenty, and seldom think of a provision against the morrow. But, if there can be any excuse for destroying animals in this manner, it is in taking the bass. During the winter, you know, they are entirely protected from our assaults by the ice, for they refuse the hook; and during the hot months they are not seen. It is supposed they retreat to the deep and cool waters of the lake, at that season; and it is only in the spring and autumn that, for a few days, they are to be found around the points where they are within the reach of a seine. But, like all the other treasures of the wilderness, they already begin to disappear before the wasteful extravagance of man."
        "Disappear, Duke! disappear!" exclaimed the sheriff" if you do n't call this appearing, I know not what you will. Here are a good thousand of the shiners, some hundreds of suckers, and a powerful quantity of other fry. But this is always the way with you, Marmaduke: first it 's the trees, then it 's the deer; after that it 's the maple sugar, and so on to the end of the chapter. One day you talk of canals through a country where there 's a river or a lake every half- mile, just because the water wo n't run the way you wish it to go; and, the next, you say some thing about mines of coal, though any man who has good eyes like myself-- I say, with good eyes-- can see more wood than would keep the city of London in fuel for fifty years; would n't it, Benjamin?"
        "Why, for that, squire," said the steward," Lon'on is no small place. If it was stretched an end, all the same as a town on one side of the river, it would cover some such matter as this here lake. Thof I dar'st to say, that the wood in sight might sarve them a good turn, seeing that the Lon'oners mainly burn coal."
        "Now we are on the subject of coal, Judge Temple," interrupted the sheriff," I have a thing of much importance to communicate to you; but I will defer it-- until tomorrow. I know that you intend riding into the eastern part of the Patent, and I will accompany you, and conduct you to a spot where some of your projects may be realized. We will say no more now, for there are listeners; but a secret has this evening been revealed to me,' Duke, that is of more consequence to your welfare than all your estate united."
        Marmaduke laughed at the important intelligence, to which in a variety of shapes he was accustomed, and the sheriff, with an air of great dignity, as if pitying his want of faith, proceeded in the business more immediately be fore them. As the labor of drawing the net had been very great, he directed one party of his men to commence throwing the fish into piles, preparatory to the usual division, while another, under the superintendence of Benjamin, prepared the seine for a second haul.
        [1] Of all the fish the writer has ever tasted, he thinks the one in question the best.
      
