ALBION AND ALBANIUS : AN OPERA . 

Performed at the QUEENS Theatre , in Dorset Garden . 

Written by Mr. Dryden . 

Discite justitiam moniti , & non temnere Divos . 
Virg.  



LONDON , Printed for jacob Tonson , at the Judge's Head in Chancery-lane , near Fleetstreet . 1685.  

THE PREFACE . 

IF Wit has truly been defined a propriety of Thoughts and Words , than that Definition will extend to all sorts of Poetry ; and amongst the rest , to this present entertainment of an Opera . Propriety of thought is that Fancy which arises naturally from the Subject , or which the Poet adapts to it . Propriety of Words , is the clothing of those thoughts with such Expressions , as are naturally proper to them : and from both these , if they are judiciously performed , the delight of Poetry results . An Opera is a poetical Tale or Fiction , represented by Vocal and Instrumental Music , adorned with Scenes , Machine's and Dancing . The supposed persons of this musical Drama , are generally supernatural , as Gods and Goddesses , and Heroes , which at least are descended from them , and are in due time , to be adopted into their Number . The Subject therefore being extended beyond the Limits of Human Nature , admits of that sort of marvellous and surprising conduct , which is rejected in other Plays . Human Impossibilities , are to be received , as they are in Faith ; because where Gods are introduced , a Supreme Power is to be understood ; and second Causes are out of doors . Yet propriety is to be observed even here . The Gods are all to manage their peculiar Provinces : and what was attributed by the Heathens to one Power , ought not to be performed by any other . Phoebus' must foretell , Mercury must charm with his Caduceus , and juno must reconcile the Quarrels of the Marriagebed . To conclude , they must all act according to their distinct and peculiar Characters ▪ If the persons represented were to speak upon the Stage , it would follow of necessity , That the Expressions should be lofty , figurative and majestical : but the nature of an Opera denies the frequent use of those poetical Ornaments : for Vocal Music , though it often admits a loftiness of sound : yet always exacts an harmonious sweetness ; or to distinguish yet more justly , The recitative part of the Opera requires a more masculine Beauty of expression and sound : the other which ( for want of a proper English Word ) I must call , The Songish Part , must abound in the softness and variety of Numbers : its principal Intention , being to please the Hearing , rather than to gratify the understanding . It appears indeed , Preposterous at first sight , That Rhyme , on any consideration should take place of Reason . But in order to resolve the Problem , this fundamental proposition must be settled , That the first Inventors of any Art or Science , provided they have brought it to perfection , are , in reason , to give Laws to it ; and according to their Model , all after Undertakers are to build . Thus in Epique Poetry , no Man ought to dispute the Authority of Homer , who gave the first being to that Masterpiece of Art , and endued it with that form of Perfection in all its Parts , that nothing was wanting to its excellency . Virgil therefore , and those very few who have succeeded him , endeavoured not to introduce or innovate any thing in a Design already perfected , but imitated the plan of the Inventor : and are only so far true Heroic Poets , as they have built on the Foundations of Homer . Thus Pindar , the Author of those Odes , ( which are so admirably restored by Mr. Cowley in our Language , ) ought for ever to be the Standard of them ; and we are bound according to the practice of Horace and Mr. Cowley , to Copy him . Now , to apply this Axiom , to our present purpose , whosoever undertakes the writing of an Opera , ( which is a modern Invention , though built indeed , on the foundations of Ethnique Worship , ) is obliged to imitate the Design of the Italians , who have not only invented , but brought to perfection , this sort of Dramatic Musical Entertainment . I have not been able by any search , to get any light either of the time , when it began , or of the first Author . But I have probable Reasons , which induce me to believe , that some Italians having curiously observed the gallantries of the Spanish Moors at their Zambras , or Royal Feasts , where Music , Songs and Dancing were in perfection ; together with their Machine's , which are usual at their Sortiia's , or running at the Ring , and other Solemnities , may possibly have refined upon those Moresque Divertisements , and produced this delightful Entertainment , by leaving out the warlike Part of the Carousels , and forming a poetical Design for the use of the Machine's , the Songs and Dances . But however it began , ( for this is only conjectural , ) we know that for some Centuries , the knowledge of Music has flourished principally in Italy , the Mother of Learning and of Arts ; that Poetry and Painting have been there restored , and so cultivated by Italian Masters , That all Europe has been enriched out of their Treasury : and the other Parts of it in relation to those delightful Arts , are still as much provincial to Italy , as they were in the time of the Roman Empire . Their first Operas seem to have been intended for the Celebration of the Marriages of their Princes , or for the magnificence of some general time of Joy. Accordingly the Expenses of them were from the Purse of the Sovereign , or of the Republic , as they are still practised at Venice , Rome , and other Places at their Carnivals' . Savoy and Florence have often used them in their Courts , at the Weddings of their Dukes : And at Turin particularly , was performed the Pastor Fido , written by the famous Guarini , which is a Pastoral Opera made to solemnize the Marriage of a Duke of Savoy . The Prologue of it , has given the Design to all the French , which is a Compliment to the Sovereign Power by some God or Goddesses : so that it looks no lesle than a kind of Embassy from Heaven to Earth . I said , in the beginning of this Preface , that the persons represented in Operas , are generally , Gods , Goddesses and Heroes descended from them , who are supposed to be their peculiar care : which hinders not , but that meaner persons , may sometimes gracefully be introduced , especially if they have relation to those first times , which Poets call the Golden Age : wherein by reason of their Innocence , those happy Mortals , were supposed to have had a more familiar intercourse with Superior Being's : and therefore Shepherds might reasonably be admitted , as of all Callings , the most innocent , the most happy , and who by reason of the spare time they had , in their almost idle Employment , had most leisure to make Verses , and to be in Love : without somewhat of which Passion , no Opera can possibly subsist . 

't is almost needless to speak any thing of that noble Language , in which this Musical Drama , was first invented and performed . All , who are conversant in the Italian , cannot but observe , that it is the softest , the sweetest , the most harmonious , not only of any modern Tongue , but even beyond any of the Learned . It seems indeed to have been invented for the sake of Poetry and Music : the Vowels are so abounding in all Words , especially in the Terminations of them , that excepting some few Monosyllables , the whole Language ends in them . then the Pronunciation is so manly and so sonorous , that their very speaking has more of Music in it , than Dutch , Poetry and Song . It has withal derived so much Copiousness and Eloquence from the Greek and Latin in the composition of Words , and the formation of them , that ( if after all , we must call it barbarous ) 't is the most beautiful and most learned of any Barbarism in Modern Tongues . And we may , at least , as justly praise it , as Pyrrhus did the Roman Discipline , and Martial Order , that it was of Barbarians , ( for so the Greeks called all other Nations ) but had nothing in it of barbarity . This Language has in a manner been refined and purified from the Gothick , ever since the time of Dantè , which is above four hundred Years ago ; and the French , who now cast a longing Eye to their Country , are not lesle ambitious to possess their Elegance in Poetry and Music : in both which they labour at Impossibilities . 't is true indeed , they have reformed their Tongue , and brought both their Prose and Poetry to a Standard : the Sweetness as well as the Purity is much improved , by throwing off the unnecessary Consonants , which made their Spelling tedious , and their pronunciation harsh : But after all , as nothing can be improved beyond its own Species , or farther than its original Nature will allow : as an ill Voice though never so thoroughly instructed in the Rules of Music , can never be brought to sing harmoniously , nor many an honest Critic , ever arrive to be a good Poet , so neither can the natural harshness of the French or their perpetual ill Accent , be ever refined into perfect Harmony like the Italian . The English has yet more natural disadvantage than the French ; our original Teutonique consisting most in Monosyllables , and those encumbered with Consonants cannot possibly be freed from those Inconveniences . The rest of our Words , which are derived from the Latin chiefly , and the French , with some small sprinkling of Greek , Italian and Spanish , are some relief in Poetry ; and help us to soften our uncouth Numbers , which together with our English Genius , incomparably beyond the trifling of the French , in all the nobler Parts of Verse , will justly give us the Preeminences But , on the other hand , the Effeminacy of our pronunciation , ( a defect common to us , and to the Danes ) and our scarcity of female Rhymes , have left the advantage of musical composition for Songs , though not for recitative , to our neighbours . 

Through these Difficulties , I have made a shift to struggle , in my part of the performance of this Opera ; which , as mean as it is , deserves at least a Pardon , because it has attempted a discovery beyond any former Undertaker of our Nation : only remember , that if there be no North-east Passage to be found , the fault is in Nature , and not in me . Or as Ben. johnson tells us in the Alchemist , when Projection had failed , and the Glasses were all broken , there was enough however in the Bottoms of them to cure the Itch ; so I may thus far be positive , That if I have not succeeded , as I desire , yet there is somewhat still remaining , to satisfy the Curiosity or Itch of Sight and Hearing . so Wise as not to be imposed upon , and fooled out of their satisfaction . The newness of the undertaking is all the hazard : When Operas were first set up in France , they were not followed over eagerly ; but they gained daily upon their Hearers , till they grew to that height of Reputation which they now enjoy . The English I confess , are not altogether so Musical as the French , and yet they have been pleased already , with the Tempest , and some pieces that followed , which were neither much better Written , nor so well Composed as this . If it finds encouragement , I dare promise myself to mend my hand , by making a more pleasing Fable : In the mean time , every Loyal Englishman , cannot but be satisfied with the Moral of this , which so plainly represents the double restoration of his Sacred Majesty . 

POSTSCRIPT . 

This Preface being wholly Written before the Death of my late Royal Master , ( quem semper acerbum , semper honoratum , sic Dii voluistis , habebo , ) I have now , lately , reviewed it , as supposing I should find many notions in it , that would require correction on cooler thoughts . After four Months lying by me , I looked on it as no longer mine , because I had wholly forgotten it ; but , I confess , with some satisfaction , and perhaps a little vanity , that I found myself entertained by it ; my own judgement was new to me , and pleased me when I looked on it , as another Man's . I see no Opinion that I would retract or alter , unless it be , that possibly the Italians went not so far as Spain , for the Invention of their Operas . They might have it in their own Country ; and that by gathering up the Shipwrecks of the Athenian and Roman Theaters ; which we know were adorned with Scenes , Music , Dances and Machine's , especially the Graecian . But of this the Learned Monsieur Vossius , who has made our Nation his second Country , is the best , and perhaps the only judge now living : As for the Opera itself , it was all composed , and was just ready to have been performed when he , in Honour of whom it was principally made , was taken from us . 

He had been pleased twice or thrice to command , that it should be practised , before him , especially the first and third Acts of it ; and public●ly declared more than once , That the compositio and Chorus ' s , were more Just , and more Beautiful , than any he had heard in England . How nice an Ear he had in Music is sufficiently known ; his praise therefore has established the Reputation of it , above censure , and made it in a manner Sacred . 't is therefore humbly and Religiously dedicated to his Memory . 

It might reasonably have been expected , that his Death must have changed the whole Fabric of the Opera ; or at least a great part of it . But the design of it Originally , was so happy , that it needed no alteration , properly so called : for the addition of twenty or thirty lines , in the Apotheosis of Albion , has made it entirely of a Piece . This was the only way which could have been invented , to save it from a botched ending ; and it fell luckily into my imagination ▪ As if there were a kind of fatality , even in the most trivial things concerning the Succession ; a change was made , and not for the worse , without the least confusion or disturbance : And those very causes which seemed to threaten us with troubles , conspired to produce our lasting Happiness . 

Names of the persons Represented ; in the same Order as they appear first upon the STAGE . 

Mercury . 
Augusta . London . 
Thamesis . 
Democracy . 
Zelota . Feigned Zeal . 
Archon . The General . 
juno . 
Iris.  
Albion . 
Albanius . 
Pluto . 
Allecto . 
Apollo . 
Neptune . 
Nereids . 
Acacia . Innocence . 
Tyranny . 
Asebia . Atheism or Ungodliness . 
Proteus . 
Venus . 
Fame . 
A Chorus of Cities . 
A Chorus of Rivers . 
A Chorus of the People . 
A Chorus of Furies . 
A Chorus of Nereids and Tritons . 
A Grand Chorus of Heroes , Loves and 
Graces . 
The FRONTISPIECE . 

The Curtain rises , and a new Frontispiece is seen , joined to the great Pylasters' , which are on each side of the Stage : On the flat of each Basis is a Shield , adorned with Gold : In the middle of the Shield on one side , are two Hearts , a small Scroll of Gold over 'em , and an Imperial Crown over the Scroll ; on the other , in the Shield are two Quivers full of Arrows Saltyre , etc.  Upon each Basis stands a Figure bigger than the life ; one represents Peace , with a Palm in one , and an Olive Branch in the other Hand ; to other Plenty , holding a Cornucopia , and resting on a Pillar . Behind these Figures are large Columns of the Corinthian Order adorned with Fruit and Flowers : over one of the Figures on the Trees is the King's Cypher ; over the other the Queens : over the Capitals , on the Cornice sits a Figure on each side ; one presents Poetry crowned with Laurel , holding a Scroll in one Hand the other with a Pen in it , and resting on a Book ; the other painting with a Pall●● and Pencils , etc.  On the sweep of the Arch lies one of the Muses , playing on a Base Voyal ; another of the Muses , on the other side , holding a Trumpet in one Hand , and the other on a Harp. Between these Figures , in the middle of the Sweep of the Arch , is a very large Panel in a frame of Gold ; in this Panel is painted on one side a Woman representing the City of London , leaning her Head on her Hand in a dejected Posture . ( showing her Sorrow and Penitence for her Offences ; ) the other Hand holds the Arms of the City , and a Mace lying under it : on the other side , is a Figure of the Thames with his Legs shakleed and leaning on an empty Vin● behind these are two Imperial Figures ; one representing his present Majesty ; the other the Queen ; by the King stands Pallas ( or Wisdom , and Valour , ) holding a Charter for the City , the King extending his Hand , as raising her drooping Head , and restoring her to her ancient Honour and Glory : over the City are the envious devouring Harpies flying from the face of Majesty : by the Queen stand the three Graces holding Garlands of Flowers , and at her feet Cupids bound , with their Bows and Arrows broken , the Queen pointing with her Sceptre to the River , and commanding the Graces to take off his Fetters : over the King in a Scroll , is this Verse of Virgil , Discite justitiam , moniti , & non temnere Divos . 
Over the Queen , this of the same Author , 
Non ignara mali , miseris succurere disco . 




ERRATA . 

Page 7th , Line 3d. for Hypocracy , read Hypocricy 

Page 9 line the last , for the , read thy . 

Page 11. line the third , for you , read yond . 

Page 16 read the sixteenth line thus ▪ 

With Pity Jove beholds thy State.  

Page 17. the last line , read . And from her Mantle ▪ 

Page 22. line the third , read it thus , 

Sea-raceing Dolphins are trained for our Motion . 

Ibid. line the 7th , for unattended , read ●attending . 

PROLOGUE To the OPERA . 

By Mr. Dryden . Full twenty years and more , our labouring Stage 
Has lost , on this incorrgible age : 
Our Poets , the john Ketches of the Nation , 
Have seemed to lash ye , even to excoriation : 
But still no sign remains ; which plainly notes , 
You bore like Heroes , or you bribed like Oats . 
What can we do , when mimicking a Fop , 
Like beating , Nut-trees , makes a larger Crop ? 
Faith we 'll even spare our pains : and to content you , 
Will fairly leave you what your Maker meant you . 
Satire was once your Physic , Wit your Food ; 
One nourished not , and tother drew no Blood. 
We now prescribe , like Doctors in despair , 
The Diet your weak appetites can bear . 
Since hearty Beef and Mutton will not do , 
here 's Julep dance , Ptisan of Song and show : 
Give you strong Sense , the Liquor is too heady ; 
you 're come to farce , that 's Asaph's milk , already . 
Some hopeful Youths there are , of callow Wit , 
Who one Day may be Men , if Heaven think fit ; 
Sound may serve such , ere they to Sense are grown ; 
Like leading strings , till they can walk alone : 
But yet to keep our Friends in countenance , know , 
The Wise Italians first invented show ; 
Thence , into France the Noble Pageant past ; 
't is England's Credit to be cozened last . 
Freedom and Zeal have choosed you over and over ; 
Pray give us leave to bubble you once more ; 
You never were so cheaply fooled before . 
We bring you change , to humour your Disease ; 
Change for the worse has ever used to please : 
then 't is the mode of France , without whose Rules , 
None must presume to set up here for Fools : 
In France , the oldest Man is always young , 
sees Opera's daily , learns the Tunes so long , 
Till Foot , Hand , Head , keep time with every Song . 
Each sings his part , echoing from Pit and Box , 
With his hoarse Voice , half Harmony , half Pox. 
Le plus grand Roy du Monde , is always ringing ; 
They show themselves good Subjects by their singing . 
On that condition , set up every Throat ; 
You Whiggs may sing , for you have changed your Note . 
Cits and Citesses , raise a joyful strain , 
't is a good Omen to begin a Reign : 
Voices may help your Charter to restoring ; 
And get by singing , what you lost by roaring . 
EPILOGUE To the OPERA . 

By Mr. Dryden . After our Aesop's Fable , shown to day , 
I come to give the Moral of the Play. 
Feigned Zeal , you saw , set out the speedier pace ; 
But , the last heat , Plain Dealing wone the Race : 
Plain Dealing for a Jewel has been known ; 
But never till now the Jewel of a Crown . 
When Heaven made Man , to show the work Divine , 
Truth was his Image , stamped upon the Coin : 
And , when a King is to a God refined , 
On all he says and does , he stamps his Mind : 
This proves a Soul without allay , and pure ; 
Kings , like their Gold , should every touch endure . 
To dare in Fields is Valour ; but how few 
Dare be so thoroughly Valiant to be true ? 
The Name of Great , let other Kings affect : 
he 's Great indeed , the Prince that is direct . 
His Subjects know him now , and trust him more , 
Than all their Kings , and all their Laws before . 
What safety could their public Acts afford ? 
Those he can break ; but cannot break his Word . 
So great a Trust to him alone was due ; 
Well have they trusted whom so well they knew . 
The Saint , who walked on Waves , securely trod , 
While he believed the beckoning of his God ; 
But , when his Faith no longer bore him out , 
began to sink , as he began to doubt . 
Let us our native Character maintain , 
't is of our growth , to be sincerely plain . 
TO excel in Truth , we Loyally may strive ; 
Set Privilege against Prerogative : 
He Plights his Faith ; and we believe him just ; 
His Honour is to promise , ours to Trust. 
Thus Britain's Basis on a Word is laid , 
As by a Word the World itself was made . 
FINIS . 

ALBION , AND ALBANIUS ; An OPERA . 

Decorations of the Stage in the First Act.  

THE Curtain rises , and there appears on either side of the Stage , next to the Frontispiece , a Statue on Horseback , of Gold , on Pedestal's of Marble , enriched with Gold , and bearing the Imperial Arms of England : one of these Statues is taken from that of the late King , at Charing-cross ; the other , from that Figure of his present Majesty ( done by that noble Artist Mr. Gibbons ) at Windsor . 

The Scene , is a Street of Palaces , which lead to the Front of the Royal Exchange ; the great Arch is open , and the view is continued through the open part of the Exchange , to the Arch on the other side , and thence to as much of the Street beyond , as could , properly be teaken . 

Mercury descends in a Chariot drawn by Ravens . 

He comes to Augusta , and Thamesis . They lie on Couches , at a distance from each other , in dejected postures ; She attended by Cities , He by Rivers . 

On the side of Augusta's Couch are Painted Towers falling , a Scarlet Gown , and Gold Chain , a Cap of Maintenance thrown down , and a Sword in a Velvet Scabbard thrust through it , the City Arms , a Mace with an old useless Charter , and all in disorder . Before Thamesis , are broken Reeds , Bulrushes , Sedge , etc. with his Urn Reversed . 

ACT I  

Mercury Descends . Merc.   Thou glorious Fabric ! stand for ever , stand : 
Well Worthy thou to entertain 
The God of Traffic , and of Gain ! 
To draw the Concourse of the Land , 
And Wealth of all the Main . 
But where the shoals of Merchant's meeting ? 
Welcome to their Friends repeating , 
Busy Bargains deafer sound ! 
Tongue's Confused of every Nation ? 
Nothing here but Desolation , 
Mournful silence reigns around . 


Aug.   OH Hermes ! pity me ! 
I was , while Heaven did smile , 
The Queen of all this Isle , 
Europe's Pride , 
And Albion's Bride ; 
But gone my Plighted Lord ! ah , gone is He ! 
OH Hermes ! pity me ! 


Tham.   And I the Noble Flood , whose tributary Tide 
Does on her Silver Margin smoothly glide ; 
But Heaven grew jealous of our happy state : 
And bid revolving Fate , 
Our Doom decree : 
no more the King of Floods am I , 
no more the Queen of Albion , She ! 


These two Lines are Sung by Reprises , betwixt Augusta and Thamisis . Aug.   OH Hermes ! pity me ! 


Tham.   OH Hermes ! pity me ! 


Sung by Augusta and Thamesis together . Aug.   Behold ! 


Tham.   Behold ! 


Aug.   My Turrets on the ground 
That once my Temples crowned ! 


Tham.   The Sedgy Honours of my brow 's dispersed ! 
My Urn reversed ! 


Merc.   Rise , rise , Augusta , rise ! 
And wipe thy weeping Eyes : 
Augusta ! for I call thee so ! 
't is lawful for the Gods to know 
Thy Future Name , 
And growing Fame . 
Rise rise , Augusta , rise . 


Aug.   OH never , never will I rise ! 
Never will I cease my mourning , 
Never wipe my Weeping Eyes , 
Till my plighted Lords returning ! 
Never never will I rise ! 


Merc.   What brought Thee , Wretch , to this despair ? 
The Cause of thy Misfortune show . 


Aug.   It seems the Gods take little Care 
Of Human things below , 
When even our Sufferings here they do not know ! 


Merc.   Not unknowing come I down , 
Disloyal Town ! 
Speak ! didst not thou 
Forsake thy Faith , and break thy Nuptial Vow ? 


Aug.   Ah 't is too true ! too true ! 
But what could I , unthinking City , do ? 
Faction swayed me , 
Zeal allured me , 
Both assured me , 
Both betrayed me ! 


Merc.   Suppose me sent 
Thy Albion to restore , 
Canst thou repent ? 


Aug.   My falsehood I deplore ! 


Tham.   thou seest her mourn ; and I 
With all my Waters , will her Tears supply . 


Merc.   then by some loyal Deed regain 
Thy long lost Reputation , 
To wash away the stain 
That blots a Noble Nation ! 
And free thy famous Town again 
From force of Usurpation ! 


Chor. of all .  we 'll wash away the stain 
That blots a noble Nation , 
And free this famous Town again 
From force of Usurpation . 


[ Dance of the followers of Mercury . Aug.   Behold Democracy and Zeal appear , 
She that allured my Heart away , 
And He that after made a prey . 


Merc.   Resist , and do not fear ! 


Chor. of all .  Resist , & do not fear ! 


[ Enter Democracy and Zeal attended by Archon . Democ.   Nymph of the City ! bring thy Treasures , 
Bring me more 
To waste in Pleasures . 


Aug.   thou hast exhausted all my Store , 
And I can give no more . 


Zeal .  thou Horny Flood for Zeal provide 
A new Supply ; And swell thy Moony tide , 
That on thy buxom Back the floating Gold may glide . 


Tham.   Not all the Gold the Southern Sun produces , 
Or Treasures of the famed Levant , 
Suffice for Pious uses , 
To feed the sacred hunger of a Saint ! 


Democ.   Woe to the Vanquished , woe ! 
Slave as thou art , 
Thy Wealth impart , 
And me thy Victor know ! 


Zeal .  And me thy Victor know , 
Resistless Arms are in my hand , 
Thy Barrs shall burst at my Command , 
Thy Towry Head lie low . 
Woe to the Vanquished , woe ! 


Aug.   Were I not bound by fate 
For ever , ever here , 
My Walls I would translate 
To some more happy Sphere , 
Removed from servile fear . 


Tham.   Removed from servile fear , 
Would I could disappear 
And sink below the Main ; 
For Commonwealth's a Load 
My old Imperial Flood 
Shall never never never bear again . 


Thamesis and Augusta  together . A Commonwealth's a Load 
Our old Imperial Flood 
Shall never never bear again . 


Dem.   Pull down her Gates Expose her bare ; 
I must enjoy the proud , disdainful fair . 
Haste , Archon , Haste 
To lay her waste ! 


Zel.   I 'll hold her fast 
To be embraced ! 


Dem.   And she shall see 
A Thousand Tyrants are in thee , 
A Thousand thousand more in me ! 


Archon   to Aug.  From the Caledonion Shore 
Hither am I come to save thee , 
Not to force or to enslave thee , 
But thy Albion to restore : 
Hark! the peals the People ring , 
Peace , and freedom and a King.  


Chor.   Hark! the Peals the People ring . 
Peace and freedom and a King.  


Aug. Tham.   To Arms ! to Arms ! 


Archon .  I lead the way ! 


Merc.   Cease your Alarms ! 
And stay , brave Archon , stay ! 
't is Doomed by Fates Decree ! 
't is Doomed that Albion's dwelling , 
All other Isles excelling , 
By Peace shall Happy be ! 


Archon .  What then remains for me ? 


Merc.   Take my Caduceus ! take this awful Wand , 
With this th' Infernal Ghosts I can command , 
And strike a Terror thro' the Stygian land 
Commonwealth will want pretences 
Sleep will Creep on all his Senses ; 
Zeal that lent him her assistance , 
Stand amazed without resistance . 


Archon touches Democracy with a Wand . Dem.   I feel a lazy slumber lays me down ! 
Let Albion ! let him take the Crown ! 
Happy let him reign , 
Till I wake again ! 


[ falls-asleep . Zel.   In vain I rage , In vain , 
I rouse my Powers ; 
But I shall wake again ; 
I shall to better Hours . 
Even in slumber I will vex him ; 
Still perplex him , 
Still encumber : 
Know you that have adored him , 
And Sovereign power afford him , 
we 'll reap the gains 
Of all your pains 
And seem to have restored him ! 


[ Zel. falls asleep . Aug. and Tham.   A stupyfying sadness 
Leaves Her without motion ; 
But sleep will cure her madness , 
And cool her to Devotion . 


A double Pedestal rises : On the Front of it is painted , in Stone colour , two Women ; one holding a double Faced Vizor ; the other a Book , representing Hypocracy and Phanaticism ; when Archon has charmed Democracy and Zeal with the Caduceus of Mercury , they fall a sleep on the Pedestal , and it sinks with them . Merc.   Cease , Augusta ! Cease thy mourning , 
Happy days appear , 
Godlike Albion is returning 
Loyal Hearts to Cheer ! 
Every Grace his youth Adorning , 
Glorious as the Star of Morning , 
Or the Planet of the Year . 


Chor.   Godlike Albion is returning , etc.  


Merc.   to Arch.  Hast away , Loyal chief , hast away . 
no delay , but obey : 
To receive thy loved Lord ! hast away . 


Ex. Arch.  Tham.   Medway and Isis , you that augment me , 
Tides that increase my watery store , 
And you that are Friends to Peace and Plenty , 
send my merry Boys all ashore ; 
Sea Men Skipping , 
Mariners Leaping , 
Shouting , Tripping , 
send my merry Boys all ashore ! 


A Dance of Watermen in the king 's and Duke's Liveries . The Clouds divide , and Juno appears in a Machine drawn by Peacocks ; while a Symphony is playing , it moves gently forward , and as it descends , it opens and discovers the Tail of the Peacock , which is so Large , that it almost fills the opening of the Stage between Scene and Scene . Merc.   The Clouds divide , what Wonders , 
What Wonders do I see ! 
The Wife of jove , 't is she , 
That Thunders , more than thundering He ! 


juno .  no , Hermes , no ; 
't is Peace above 
As 't is below : 
For jove has left his wand'ring Love.  


Tham.   Great Queen of gathering Clouds ; 
Whose Moisture fills our Floods , 
See ; we fall before Thee , 
Prostrate we adore Thee ! 


Aug.   Great Queen of Nuptial Rites , 
Whose power the Souls Unites , 
And fills the Genial Bed with chaste Delights , 
See ; we fall before Thee 
Prostrate we adore Thee ! 


juno .  't is ratified above by every God , 
And jove has firmed it with an Awful Nod ; 
That Albion shall his love renew : 
But o , ungrateful Fair , 
Repeated Crimes beware , 
And to his Bed be true ! 


Iris appears on a very large Machine . This was really seen the 18th of March 1684. by Capt. Christopher Gunman , on Board his R. H. Yacht , then in Calais Pierre : He drew it as it then appeared , and gave a draught of it to us . We have only added the Cloud where the Person of Iris sits . juno .  Speak Iris , from Batavia , speak the News ! 
Has she performed my dread Command , 
Returning Albion to his longing Land , 
Or dares the Nymph refuse ? 


Iris.   Albion , by the Nymph attended , 
Was to Neptune recommended , 
Peace and plenty spread the Sails : 
Venus in her shell before him , 
From the Sands in safety bore him , 
And supplied Etesian gales . 
[ Retornella Archon on the Shore Commanding , 
Lowly met him at his Landing , 
Crowds of People swarmed around ; 
Welcome rang like Peals of Thunder ; 
Welcome , rend the Skies asunder ; 
Welcome , Heaven and Earth resound . 


juno .  Why stay we then on Earth 
When Mortals laugh and love ? 
't is time to mount above 
And send Astraea down , 
The Ruler of his Birth , 
And Guardian of his Crown . 
't is time to mount above , 
And send Astraea down . 


Merchant Iu. Ir.   't is time to mount above , 
And send Astraea down . 


[ Merchant Ju. and Iris ascend . Aug. and Tham.   The Royal Squadron Marches , 
Erect Tryumphal Arches , 
For Albion and Albanius : 
Rejoice at their returning , 
The passages adorning : 
The Royal Squadron marches , 
Erect Triumphal Arches 
For Albion and Albanius . 


Part of the Scene disappears , and the 4 Triumphal Arches erected at his Majesty's Coronation are seen . Albion appears , Albanius by his side , preceded by Archon , followed by a Train , etc.  Full Chor.   Hail , Royal Albion , Hail . 


Aug.   Hail Royal Albion , Hail to thee , 
Thy longing People's expectation : 


Tham.   Scent from the Gods to set us free . 
From Bondage and from Usurpation ! 


Aug.   To pardon and to pity me , 
And to forgive a guilty Nation ! 


Tham.   Behold the differing Climes agree . 
Rejoicing in the Restauration . 


Entry ; Representing the Four parts of the World , rejoicing at the Restauration of Albion . ACT II  

The Scene is a Poetical Hell. The Change is Total . The Upper part of the House , as well as the Side Scenes . There is the Figure of Prometheus chained to a Rock , the Vulture gnawing his Liver . Sisyphus rolling the Stone , the Belides , etc. beyond , abundance of Figures in various Torments . then a great Arch of Fire . Behind this Three Pyramids of Flames in perpetual agitation . Beyond this , glowing Fire which terminates the Prospect . Pluto , the Furies , with Allecto , Democracy and Zelota . Plut.   Infernal Offspring of the Night , 
Debarred of Heaven your Native right , 
And from the glorious Fields of Light , 
Condemned in shades to drag the Chain , 
And fill with groans the gloomy Plain ; 
Since Pleasures here are none below , 
Be ill our good , our joy be Woe ; 
Our Work to embroil the Worlds above , 
Disturb their Union , disunite their Love , 
And blast the Beauteous frame of our Victorious Foe . 


Democ. and Zealot . together .  O thou for whom those Worlds are made , 
thou Sire of all things and their end , 
From hence they spring , and when they fade 
In Shuffled Heaps they hither tend ; 
Here Human Souls receive their Breath , 
And wait for Bodies after Death . 


Democ.   Hear our Complaint and grant our Prayer . 


Pluto .  Speak what you are , 
And whence you fell ? 


Democ.   I am thy first begotten care , 
Conceived in Heaven ; but born in Hell , 
When thou didst bravely undertake in fight 
You Arbitrary Power , 
That rules by Sovereign might , 
To set thy Heav'n-born fellows free 
And leave no difference in Degree , 
In that Auspicious Hour 
Was I begot by Thee . 


Zelota .  One Mother bore us at a Birth , 
Her Name was Zeal before she fell ; 
no fairer Nymph in Heaven or Earth 
Till Saintship taught her to rebel : 
But losing Fame 
And changing Name 
she 's now the Good Old Cause in Hell.  


Plut.   Dear Pledges of a Flame not yet forgot , 
Say , what on Earth has been your lot ? 


Dem. and Zel.   The Wealth of Albion's Isle was ours , 
Augusta stooped with all her stately Towrs ! 


Dem.   Democracy kept Nobles under . 


Zel.   Zeal from the Pulpit roared like Thunder . 


Dem.   I trampled on the State.  


Zel.   I lorded o'er the Gown . 


Dem. and Zel.   We both in Triumph sat 
Usurpers of the Crown . 
But o Prodigious turn of Fate ! 
Heaven controlling , 
Scent us rolling , rolling , down . 


Plut.   I wondered how of late our Acherontique shore 
Grew thin , and Hell unpeopleed of her Store ; 
Charon for want of Use forgot his Oar. 
The Souls of Bodies Dead flew all Sublime , 
And hither none returned to purge a Crime : 
But now I see since Albion is restored , 
Death has no Business , nor the vengeful Sword. 
't is too too much that here I lie 
From glorious Empire hurled ; 
By jove excluded from the Sky , 
By Albion from the World.  


Dem.   Were Commonwealth restored again , 
thou shouldst have Million of the slain 
To fill thy dark abode . 


Zel.   For He a Race of Rebels sends , 
And Zeal the Path of Heaven pretends ; 
But still mistakes the road . 


Pluto .  My labouring thought 
At length hath wrought 
A bravely bold design , 
In which you both shall join ; 
In borrowed shapes to Earth return ; 
thou Commonwealth , a Patriot seem , 
thou Zeal , like true Religion burn , 
To gain the giddy Crowds Esteem . 
Allecto , thou to fair Augusta go , 
And all thy Snakes into her Bosom throw . 


Dem.   Spare some to fling 
Where they may sting 
The Breast of Albion's King.  


Zel.   Let Jealousies so well be mixed , 
That great Albanius be unfixt ! 


Pluto .  Forbear your vain Attempts , forbear ; 
Hell can have no admittance there : 
The People's fear will serve as well , 
Make him suspected , them Rebel . 


Zel.   YE have all forgot 
To forge a Plot 
In seeming Care of Albion's Life ; 
Inspire the Crowd 
With Clamours loud 
TO involve his Brother and his Wife . 


Allecto .  Take of a Thousand Souls at thy Command , 
The basest , blackest of the Stygian band : 
One that will Swear to all they can invent , 
So thoroughly Damned that he can ne'er repent : 
One often sent to Earth , 
And still at every Birth 
He took a deeper stain : 
One that in Adam's time was Cain : 
One that was burned in Sodom's flame , 
For Crimes even here too black to name : 
One , who through every form of ill has run : 
One who in Naboth's days was Belial's Son : 
One who has gained a Body fit for Sin ; 
Where all his Crimes 
Of former Times 
Lie Crowded in a Skin . 


Pluto .  Take him ; 
Make him 
What you please ; 
For He 
Can be 
A Rogue with ease . 
One for mighty Mischief Born : 
He can Swear and be Forsworn . 
Pluto and Allecto take him , etc.  Take him , make him what you please ; 
For He can be a Rogue with ease . 


Pluto .  Let us laugh , let us laugh , let us laugh at our Woes , 
The Wretch that is damned has nothing to lose . 
Ye Furies advance 
With the Ghosts in a Dance , 
't is a Jubilee here when the World is in trouble : 
When People rebel 
We frolic in Hell ; 
But when the King falls , the pleasure is double : 


A single Entry of a Devil followed by an Entry of 12 Devils . Chorus .  Let us laugh , let us laugh , let us laugh at our Woes ; 
The Wretch that is damned hath nothing to lose . 


The Scene changes to a Prospect taken from the middle of the Thames ; one side of it begins at York-stairs , thence to White-hall , and the Mill-bank , etc.  The other from the Saw-mill , thence to the Bishop's Palace , and on as far as can be seen in a clear Day . Enter Augusta ; She has a Snake in her Bosom , hanging down . Aug.   OH Jealousy , thou raging ill , 
Why hast thou found a Room in Lovers Hearts , 
Afflicting what thou canst not kill , 
And Poisoning Love himself , with his own Darts ? 
I find my Albion's Heart is gone , 
My first offences yet remain , 
Nor can repentance Love regain ; 
One written in Sand , alas , in Marble one . 
I rave , I rave , my Spirits boil 
Like flames increased and mounting high with pou'ring Oil : 
Disdain and Love succeed by turns ; 
One freezes me , and tother burns ; It burns . 
Away soft Love , thou Foe to rest , 
Give Hate the full possession of my Breast . 
Hate is the nobler passion far 
When Love is ill repaid ; 
For at one blow it ends the War , 
And Cures the Lovesick Maid . 


Enter Democracy and Zelota ; one represents a Patriot , the other Religion . Dem.   Let not thy generous passion waste its rage , 
But once again restore our golden Age ; 
Still to weep and to complain , 
Does but more provoke disdain , 
Let public good , 
Inflame thy Blood ; 
With Crowds of Warlike People thou art stored , 
And heaps of Gold ; 
Reject thy old , 
And to thy Bed receive another Lord  


Zel.   Religion shall thy Bonds release , 
For Heaven can lose , as well as tie all ; 
And when 't is for the Nation's peace 
A King is but a King on Trial ; 
When Love is lost , let Marriage end , 
And leave a Husband for a Friend . 


Dem.   With Jealousy swarming 
The People are Arming 
And frights of oppression invade ' 'em . 


Zealot .  If they fall to relenting , 
For fear of repenting , 
Religion shall help to persuade ' 'em . 


Aug.   no more , no more Temptations use 
To bend my Will ; 
How hard a task 't is to refuse 
A pleasing ill ? 


Dem.   Maintain the seeming duty of a Wife , 
A modest show will jealous Eyes deceive , 
Affect a fear for hated Albion's Life , 
And for imaginary Dangers grieve . 


Zealot .  His Foes already stand protected , 
His Friends by public Fame suspected , 
Albanius must forsake his Isle : 
A Plot Contrived in happy hour 
Bereaves him of his Royal Power , 
For Heaven to mourn and Hell to smile . 
The former Scene continues . Enter Albion and Albanius with a Train . Then Zeal and Commonwealth infest 
My Land again ; 
The fumes of madness that possessed 
The People's giddy Brain , 
Once more disturb the Nations rest , 
And die Rebellion in a deeper Stain . 
2.  

Will they at length awake the sleeping Sword , 
And force revenge from their offended Lord ? 
How long , ye Gods , how long 
Can Royal patience bear 
th' Insults and wrong 
Of Madman's jealousies , and causeless fear ? 
3.  

I thought their love by mildness might be gained , 
By Peace I was restored , in Peace I Reigned : 
But Tumults , Seditions , 
And haughty Petitions , 
Are all the effects of a merciful Nature ; 
Forgiving and granting , 
Ever Mortals are wanting , 
But leads to Rebelling against their Creator . 


Mercury descends . Merc.   With pity jove beholds thy State , 
But jove is circumscribed by Fate ; 
th' over whelming Tide rowls on so fast , 
It gains upon this Islands waste : 
And is opposed too late ! too late ! 


Albion .  What then must helpless Albion do ? 


Merc.   Delude the fury of the Foe , 
And to preserve Albanius , let him go ; 
For 't is decreed , 
Thy Land must bleed , 
For Crimes not thine , by wrathful jove ; 
A Sacred Flood 
of Royal Blood , 
Cries Vengeance , Vengeance loud above . 


Mercury ascends . Albion .  Shall I , to assuage 
Their Brutal rage , 
The Regal stem destroy ; 
Or must I lose , 
( To please my Foes , ) 
My sole remaining joy ? 
Ye God what worse , 
What greater Curse , 
Can all your Wrath employ ? 


Alban .  O Albion ! hear the Gods and me ! 
Well , am I lost in saving Thee . 
Not exile or danger can fright a brave Spirit 
With Innocence guarded , 
With Virtue rewarded ; 
I make of my sufferings a Merit . 


Albion .  Since then the Gods , and thou wilt have it so ; 
Go : ( can I live once more to bid Thee ? ) go , 
Where thy Misfortunes call Thee and thy Fate : 
Go , guiltless Victim of a guilty State , 
In War my Champion to defend , 
In peaceful Hours , when Souls unbend , 
My Brother , and what 's more my Friend ! 
Born where the Foamy Billows roar , 
On Seas lesle Dangerous than the Shoar : 
Go , where the Gods thy Refuge have assigned : 
Go from my sight ; but never from my Mind . 


Alban .  Whatever Hospitable ground 
shall be for me , unhappy Exile , found , 
Till Heaven vouchsafe to smile ; 
What Land so ever , 
Thou none so dear , 
As this ungrateful Isle ; 
OH think ! OH think ! no distance can remove 
My vowed Allegiance , and my Loyal Love.  


Albion . and Alban .  The Rosy fingered Morn appears , 
And from and her Mantle shakes her Tears , 
In promise of a glorious Day : 
The Sun , returning , Mortals cheers , 
And drives the Rising Mists away , 
In promise of a glorious Day . 
[ Ritornelle . 

The farther part of the Heaven opens and discovers a Machine ; as it moves forward the Clouds which are before it divide , and show the Person of Apollo , holding the Reinss in his hand . As they fall lower , the Horses appear with the Rays and a great glory about Apollo . Apoll.   ALL Hail ye Royal pair ! 
The God's peculiar care : 
Fear not the malice of your Foes ; 
Their Dark designing 
And Combining , 
Time and truth shall once expose : 
Fear not the malice of your Foes . 
2.  

My sacred Oracles assure , 
The Tempest shall not long endure ; 
But when the Nations Crimes are purged away , 
then shall you both in glory shine ; 
Propitious both , and both Divine : 
In Lustre equal to the God of Day . 
Apollo goes forward out of sight . 

Neptune rises out of the Water , and a Train of Rivers , Tritons , and Sea Nymphs attend him . Thames ,  Old Father Ocean calls my Tide : 
Come away ▪ come away , 
The Barks upon the Billows ride , 
The Master will not stay ; 
The merry Boatswain from his side , 
His Whistle takes to check and chide 
The lingering Lads delay , 
And all the Crew aloud has Cried , 
Come away , come away . 
See the God of Seas attends Thee , 
Nymph's Divine , a Beauteous Train : 
All the calmer gales befriend Thee 
In thy passage o'er the Main : 
Every Maid her Locks is binding , 
Every Triton's Horn is winding , 
Welcome to the watery Plain . 


Chacon . Two Nymphs and Triton  Sing . YE Nymphs , the Charge is Royal , 
Which you must convey ; 
Your Hearts and Hands employ all , 
Hasten to obey ; 
When Earth is grown disloyal , 
Show there 's Honour in the Sea.  


The Chacon continues . The Chorus of Nymphs and Tritons repeat the same Verses . The Chacon continues . Two Nymphs and Tritons .  Sports and Pleasures shall attend you 
Through all the Watery Plains , 
Where Neptune Reigns : 
Venus ready to defend you , 
And her Nymphs to ease your Pains , 
no storm shall offend you , 
Passing the Main ; 
Nor Billow threat in vain , 
So Sacred a Train , 
Till the Gods that defend you , 
Restore you again . 


The Chacon continues . The Chorus repeat the same Verses , Sports and Pleasure . etc.  The Chacon continues . The two Nymphs and Triton  Sing . See at your blessed returning 
Rage disappears ; 
The Vvidowed Isle in Mourning 
Dries up her Tears , 
With Flowers the Meads adorning , 
Pleasure appears , 
And love dispels the Nations causeless fears . 


The Chacon continues . The Chorus of Nymphs and Triton repeat the same Verses , See at your blessed returning , etc.  The Chacon continues . then the Chorus repeat , See the God of Seas , etc.  And this Chorus concludes the Act.  ACT. III  

The Scene is a view of Dover , taken from the Sea : a row of Cliffs fill up each side of the Stage , and the Sea the middle of it , which runs into the Peer : beyond the Peer , is the Town of Dover : on each side of the Town , is seen a very high Hill ; on one of which is the Castle of Dover ; on the other , the great Stone which they call the Devils drop . Behind the Town several Hills are seen at a great distance which finish the view . Enter Albion bareheaded : Acacia or Innocence with him . Albion .  Behold ye Powers ! from Whom I own 
A Birth immortal , and a Throne : 
See a Sacred King uncrowned , 
See your Offspring , Albion , bound : 
The gifts you gave with lavish hand , 
Are all bestowed in vain : 
Extended Empire on the Land , 
Unbounded over the Main . 


Acacia .  Empire over the Land and Main , 
Heaven that gave can take again ; 
But a mind that 's truly brave , 
Stands despising , 
Storms arising , 
And can never be made a Slave . 


Albion .  Unhelpt I am , who pitied the distressed , 
And none oppressing , am by all oppressed ; 
Betrayed , forsaken , and of hope bereft : 


Acacia .  Yet still the Gods and Innocence are left . 


Albion .  Ah! what canst thou avail , 
Against Rebellion armed with zeal , 
And faced with public good ? 
OH Monarch's see 
Your Fate in me ! 
To rule by Love , 
To shed no Blood , 
May be extolled above ; 
But here below , 
Let Princes know 
't is fatal to be good . 


Chorus of both .  To rule by Love etc.  


Albion .  But see ! what prodigies are these ? 


Acacia .  Your Father Neptune from the Seas , 
Has Nereids and blue Triton's scent , 
To charm your discontent . 


Nereids   rise out of the Sea and Sing , Triton's dance . From the low Palace of old Father Ocean , 
come we in pity your cares to deplore : 
Sea-spouting Dolphins are tamed for our motion , 
Moony Tides swelling to roll us ashore , 
2.  

Every Nymph of the flood , her Tresses rending , 
Throws of her Armlet of Pearl in the Main ; 
Neptune in anguish his Charge unattended , 
Vessels are foundering , and Vows are in vain . 


Enter Tyranny , Democracy , represented by Men , attended by Asebia , Zelota , Women . Tyrant .  ha , ha , 't is what so long I wished and vowed , 
Our Plots and delusions , 
Have wrought such confusions , 
That the Monarch's a Slave to the Crowd . 


Democ.   A Design we somented , 


Tyr.   By Hell it was new ! 


Dem.   A false Plot invented , 


Tyr.   To cover a true . 


Democ.   First with promised faith we flattered , 


Tyr.   then jealousies and fears we scattered . 


Asebia .  We never valued right and wrong , 
But as they served our cause ; 


Zealot .  Our Business was to please the throng , 
And Court their wild applause : 


Asebia .  For this we bribed the Lawyer's Tongue , 
And then destroyed the law 's . 


Chor.   For this , etc.  


Tyrant .  To make him safe , we made his Friends our Prey ; 


Dem.   To make him great we scorned his Royal sway , 


Tyrant .  And to confirm his Crown , we took his Heir away . 


Dem.   TO increase his store , 
We kept him poor : 


Tyrant .  And when to wants we had betrayed him , 
To keep him low , 
Pronounced a Foe , 
Who ever presumed to aid him . 


Asebia .  But you forget the noblest part , 
And Masterpiece of all your Art , 
You told him he was sick at Heart . 


Zealot .  And when you could not work belief 
In Albion of th' imagined grief ; 
Your perjured vouchers in a Breath , 
Made Oath that he was sick to Death ; 
And then five hundred Quacks of skill 
Resolved 't was fit he should be ill . 


Asebia .  Now heigh for a Commonwealth , 
We merrily Drink and Sing , 
't is to the Nations Health , 
For every man 's a King.  


Zealot .  then let the Masque begin , 
The Saints advance , 
To fill the Dance , 
And the Property Boys come in . 


The Boys in White begin a Fantastic Dance . Chor.   Let the Saints ascend the Throne . 


Dem.   Saints have Wives , and Wives have Preachers , 
Guifted men , and able Teachers ; 
These to get , and those to own ; 


Chor.   Let the Saints ascend the Throne . 


Asebia .  Freedom is a bait alluring ; 
Them betraying , us securing , 
While to Sovereign power we foar . 


Zelota .  Old delusions new repeated , 
Shows 'em born but to be cheated , 
As their Fathers were before . 


Six Sectaries begin a formal affected Dance , the two gravest whisper the other Four , and draw 'em into the Plot : They pull out and deliver Libels to 'em , which they receive . Democr .  SEE Friendless Albion there alone , 
Without Defence 
But Innocence ; 
Albanius now is gone . 


Tyrant .  Say then , What must be done ? 


Dem.   The Gods have put him in our hand . 


Zelota .  He must be slain ! 


Tyrant .  But who shall then Command ? 


Dem.   The People : for the right returns to those , 
Who did the trust impose . 


Tyrant .  't is fit another Sun should rise , 
To cheer the World , and light the Skies . 


Dem.   But when the Sun , 
His race has run , 
And neither cheers the World , nor lights the Skies ; 
't is fit a Commonwealth of Stars should rise . 


Asebia .  Each noble vice , 
Shall bear a Price , 
And Virtue shall a drug become : 
An empty Name 
Was all her Fame , 
But now she shall be Dumb.  


Zelota .  If open Vice be what you drive at , 
A Name so broad we 'll never connive at . 
Saints love Vice , but more refin'dly , 
Keep her close , and use her kindly . 


Tyrant .  Fall on . 


Dem.   Fall on : E'er Albion's death we 'll try , 
If one or many shall his room supply . 


The white Boys dance about the Saints : The Saints draw out the Association , and offer it to 'em : They refuse it and quarrel about it : then the white Boys and Saints fall into a confused Dance , imitating fight : The white Boys at the end of the Dance , being driven out by the Sectaries with Protestant Flails . Albion .  SEE the Gods my cause descending ; 
When all human help was passed ! 


Acacia .  Factions mutually contending , 
By each other fall at last . 


Albion .  But is not yonder Proteus Cave , 
Below that steep , 
Which rising Billows brave ? 


Acacia .  It is : And in it lies the God asleep : 
And snorting by , 
We may descry , 
The Monsters of the deep . 


Albion .  He knows the past , 
And can resolve the future too . 


Acacia .  't is true ! 
But hold him fast , 
For he can change his hue . 


The Cave of Proteus rises out of the Sea , it consists of several Arches of Rock work , adorned with mother of Pearl , Coral , and abundance of Shells of various kinds : Through the Arches is seen the Sea , and parts of Dover Peer : In the middle of the Cave is Proteus a sleep on a Rock adorned with Shells , etc. Like the Cave . Albion and Acacia , seize on him , and while a Symphony is playing , he sinks as they are bringing him forward , and changes himself into a Lion , a Crocodile , a Dragon , and then to his own shape again : He comes toward the front of the Stage , and Sings . Symphony . Proteus .  Albion , loved of Gods and Men , 
Prince of Peace too mildly Reigning , 
Cease thy sorrow and complaining ; 
thou shalt be restored again : 
Albion , loved of Gods and Men.  
2.  

Still thou art the care of Heaven , 
In thy Youth to Exile driven : 
Heaven thy ruin then prevented , 
Till the guilty Land repent : 
In thy Age , when none could aid Thee , 
Foes conspired , and Friends betrayed Thee ; 
To the brink of danger driven , 
Still thou art the Care of Heaven . 


Albion .  To whom shall I my preservation own ? 


Proteus .  Ask me no more ! for 't is by Neptune's Foe . 


Proteus' descends . Democracy and Zelota return with their Faction . Democ.   Our seeming Friends , who joined alone , 
To pull down one , and build another Throne , 
Are all dispersed and gone : 
We brave republic Souls remain . 


Zealot .  And 't is by us that Albion must be Slain : 
Say , whom shall we employ 
The Tyrant to destroy ? 


Democ.   That Archer is by Fate designed , 
With one Eye clear , and tother blind . 


Zelota .  He seems inspired to do 't . 


Omnes .  Shoot Holy Cyclops , shoot . 


The one Eyed Archer advances , the rest follow : A fire arises betwixt them and Albion . [ Ritornel . Democ.   Lo ! Heaven and Earth combine , 
To blast our bold design . 
What Miracles are shown ? 
Nature's alarmed , 
And Fires are armed , 
To guard the Sacred Throne . 


Zelota .  What help , when jarring Elements conspire 
To punish our audacious Crimes . 
Retreat betimes , 
To eat th' avenging Fire . 


Chor.   To eat the avenging Fire . 


[ Ritor . As they are going back a Fire arises from behind : They all sink together . Albion .  Let our tuneful accents upwards move , 
Till they reach the vaulted Arch of those above ; 
Let us adore 'em ; 
Let us fall before 'em : 


Acacia .  Kings they made , and Kings they love ▪ 
When they protect a rightful Monarch's Reign , 
The Gods in Heaven , the Gods on Earth maintain . 


Both.   When they protect , etc.  


Albion .  But see what glories gild the main . 


Acacia .  Bright Venus brings Albanius back again , 
With all the loves and graces in her train . 


A Machine rises out of the Sea : It opens and discovers Venus , and Albanius sitting in a great Scallop-shell , richly adorned : Venus is attended by the Loves and Graces , Albanius by Hero's : The Shell is drawn by Dolphins : It moves forward , while a Symphony of Fluts-doux , etc. is playing till it Lands 'em on the Stage , and then it closes and sinks . Venus   Sings . Albion , Hail ; The Gods present Thee , 
All the richest of their Treasures , 
Peace and Pleasures . 
To content Thee , 
Dancing their eternal measures . 


Graces and Loves , Dance an Entry . Venus .  But above all human blessing ; 
Take a Warlike Loyal Brother , 
Never Prince had such another : 
Conduct , Courage , truth expressing , 
All Heroic worth possessing . 


Chor. of all .  But above all , etc.  


Here the Hero's Dance is performed . [ Ritor . Whilst a Symphony is playing ; a very large , and a very glorious Machine descends : The figure of it Oval , all the Clouds shining with Gold , abundance of Angels and Cherubins flying about 'em , and playing in 'em ; in the midst of it sits Apollo on a Throne of Gold : he comes from the Machine to Albion . Phoeb.   From Jove's Imperial Court , 
Where all the God's resort ; 
In awful Council met , 
Surprising news I bear : 
Albion the Great , 
Must change his Seat , 
For he 's adopted there . 


Ven.   What Stars above shall we displace ? 
Where shall he fill a Room Divine ? 


Nept.   Descended from the Sea God's Race , 
Let him by my Orion shine . 


Phoeb.   no , Not by that tempestuous sign : 
Betwixt the Balance and the Maid , 
The Just , 
August , 
And peaceful shade , 
Shall shine in Heaven with Beams displayed , 
While great Albanius is on Earth obeyed : 


Ven.   Albanius Lord of Land and Main , 
Shall with fraternal virtues Reign ; 
And add his own , 
To fill the Throne ; 
Adored and feared , and loved no lesle : 
In War Victorious , mild in Peace , 
The joy of men , and Jove's increase . 


Acacia .  OH thou ! Who mount'st th' Aethereal Throne , 
Be kind and happy to thy own ; 
Now Albion is come , 
The People of the Sky , 
Run gazing and Cry , 
Make Room , make Room , 
Make room for our new Deity . 


Here Albion mounts the Machine , which moves upward slowly . A full Chorus of all that Acacia sung . Ven.   Behold what Triumphs are prepared to grace 
Thy glorious Race , 
Where Love and Honour claim an equal place ; 
Already are they fixed by Fate , 
And only ripening Ages wait . 


The Scene changes to a walk of very high Trees : At the end of the Walk is a view of that part of Windsor , which faces Eton : In the midst of it is a row of small Trees , which lead to the Castle-hill : In the first Scene , part of the Town and part of the Hill : In the next the Terrace Walk , the King's Lodgings , and the upper part of St. George's Chapel , than the Keep ; and lastly , that part of the Castle , beyond the Keep.  

In the Air is a Vision of the Honours of the Garter ; the Knights in Procession , and the King under a Canopy : Beyond this , the upper end of St. George's Hall.  

Fame rises out of the middle of the Stage , standing on a Globe ; on which is the Arms of England : The Globe rests on a Pedestal : On the Front of the Pedestal is drawn a Man with a long , lean , pale Face , with Fiend's Wings , and Snakes twisted round his Body : He is encompassed by several Fanatical Rebellious Heads , who suck poison from him , which runs out of a Tap in his Side . 

Fame .  Renown , assume thy Trumpet ! 
From Pole to Pole resounding : 
Great Albion's Name ; 
Great Albion's Name shall be 
The Theme of Fame , shall be great Albion's Name , 
Great Albion's Name , Great Albion's Name . 
Record the Garters glory : 
A Badge for Heroes , and for Kings to bear : 
For Kings to bear ! 
And swell th' Immortal Story , 
With Songs of Gods , and fit for Gods to hear ; 
And swell th' Immortal Story , 
With Songs of Gods , and fit for Gods to hear ; 
For Gods to hear . 


A full Chorus of all the Voices and Instruments : Trumpets and Ho-boys make Returnelloes of all Fame sings ; and Twenty four Dancers join all the time in a Chorus , and Dance to the end of the Opera . FINIS . 

Advertisement . 

The History of the League , Written in French by Monsieur Maimbourg . Englished upon His majesty 's Command , by Mr. Dryden . 

Miscellany Poems in Two Parts ; containing new Translations of Virgil's Eccloges . Ovid's Love-elegies , several parts of Virgil's Eneids , Lucretiùs , Theocritus , Horace , etc.  With several Original Poems never before Printed . By the most Eminent Hands : Published by Mr. Dryden . 

Threnodia Augustalis : A Funeral Pindaric Poem , Sacred to the Happy Memory of King Charles the 2d . By Mr. Dryden . 

Sold by jacob Tonson , at the Judge's Head in Chancery-lane , near Fleetstreet . 

