THE ASSIGNATION : OR , Love in a Nunnery . As it is ACTED , At the THEATRE-ROYAL . 

Written by JOHN DRYDEN Servant to His MAJESTY . 

Successum dea dira negat — 
Virg.  



LONDON : Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman , and are to be sold at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange . 1673.  

TO MY MOST HONOURED FRIEND Sir CHARLES SEDLEY , Baronet . 

Sir , 

The Design of Dedicating Plays , is as common and unjust , as that of desiring Seconds in a Duel . 't is engaging our Friends ( it may be ) in a senseless quarrel , where they have much to venture , without any concernment of their own . I have declared thus much beforehand , to prevent you from suspicion , that I intent to interest either your judgement or your kindness , in defending the Errors of this Comedy . It succeeded ill in the representation , against the opinion of many the best Judges of our Age , to whom you know I read it ever it was presented publicly . Whether the fault was in the Play itself , or in the lameness of the Action , or in the number of its Enemies , who came resolved to damn it for the Title , I will not now dispute : that would be too like the little satisfaction which an unlucky Gamester finds in the relation of every cast by which he came to lose his Money . I have had formerly so much success , that the miscarriage of this Play was only my giving fortune her revenge : I owed it her ; and she was indulgent that she exacted not the payment long before . I will therefore deal more reasonably with you , than any Poet has ever done with any Patron : I do not so much as oblige you for my sake to pass two ill hours in reading of my Play. Think , if you please , that this Dedication is only an occasion I have taken to do myself the greatest honour imaginable with Posterity ; that is , to be recorded in the number of those Men whom you have favoured with your Friendship and esteem . For , I am well assured , that besides the present satisfaction I have , it will gain me the greatest part of my reputation with after-ages , when they shall find me valuing myself on your kindness to me : I may have reason to suspect my own credit with them , but I have none to doubt of yours . And they who perhaps would forget me in my Poems , would remember me in this Epistle . 

This was the course which has formerly been practised by the Poets of that Nation who were Masters of the Universe . Horace and Ovid , who had little reason to distrust their Immortality ; yet took occasion to speak with honour of Virgil , Varius , Tibullus , and Propertius their Contemporaries : as if they sought in the testimony of their Friendship a farther evidence of their fame . For my own part , I , who am the least amongst the Poets , have yet the fortune to be honoured with the best Patron , and the best Friend . For , ( to omit some Great persons of our Court , to whom I am many ways obliged , and who have taken care of me , even amid the Exigencies of a War , ) I can make my boast to have found a better Maecenas in the person of my Lord Treasurer Clifford , and a more Elegant Tibullus in that of Sir Charles Sedley . I have chosen that Poet to whom I would resemble you , not only because I think him at least equal , if not superior to Ovid in his Elegies : nor because of his quality for he was ( you know ) a Roman Knight as well as Ovid : but for his Candour , his Wealth , his way of Living , and particularly because of this testimony which is given him by Horace , which I have a thousand times in my mind applied to you . Non tu Corpus eras sine pectore ; Dii tibi formam , 
Dii tibi divitias dederant , artemque fruendi . 
Quid voveat dulci Nutricula majus Alumno 
Quam sapere , & fari possit quae sentiat , & cui 
Gratia , forma , valetudo contingat abunde ; 
Et mundus victus , non deficiente crumena ? 


Certainly the Poets of that Age enjoyed much happiness in the Conversation and Friendship of one another . They imitated the best way of Living , which was to pursue an innocent and inoffensive Pleasure ; that which one of the Ancients called Eruditam voluptatem . We have , like them , our Genial Nights ; where our discourse is neither too serious , nor too light ; but always pleasant , and for the most part instructive : the raillery neither too sharp upon the present , nor too censorious on the absent ; and the Cups only such as will raise the Conversation of the Night , without disturbing the business of the Morrow . And thus far not only the Philosophers , but the Fathers of the Church have gone , without lessening their Reputation of good Manners , or of Piety . For this reason I have often Laughed at the ignorant and ridiculous Descriptions which some Pedants have given of the Wits ( as they are pleased to call them : ) which are a Generation of Men as unknown to them , as the People of Tartary or the terra Australis are to us . And therefore as we draw Giants and Anthropophagis in those vacances of our Maps , where we have not Travelled to discover better ; so those wretches Paint lewdness , Atheism , Folly , ill-reasoning , and all manner of Extravagances amongst us for want of understanding what we are . Oftentimes it so falls out , that they have a particular picque to some one amongst us ; and then they immediately interest Heaven in their quarrel : As 't is an usual trick in Courts ; when one designs the ruin of his Enemy , to disguise his malice with some concernment of the Kings : and to revenge his own cause , with pretence of vindicating the Honour of his Master . Such Wits as they describe , I have never been so unfortunate to meet in your Company : but have often heard much better Reasoning at your Table , than I have encountered in their Books . The Wits they describe , are the Fops we banish : for Blasphemy and Atheism , if they were neither Sin nor Ill Manners , are Subjects so very common , and worn so Threadbare , that people who have sense avoid them , for fear of being suspected to have none . It calls the good Name of their Wit in question , as it does the Credit of a Citizen when his Shop is filled with Trumperies , and Painted Titles in stead of Wares : we conclude them Bancrupt to all manner of understanding : and , that to use Blasphemy , is a kind of applying Pigeons to the Soles of the Feet : it proclaims their Fancy as well as judgement , to be in a desperate condition . I am sure for your own particular , if any of these Judges had once the happiness to converse with you , to hear the Candour of your Opinions ; how freely you commend that wit in others , of which you have so large a Portion yourself ; how unapt you are to be censorious ; with how much easiness you speak so many things , and those so Pointed , that no other Man is able to excel , or perhaps to reach by Study ; they would , in stead of your Accusers , become your Proselytes . They would reverence so much good Sense , and so much good Nature in the same person : and come , like the Satire , to warm themselves at that Fire , of which they were ignorantly afraid , when they stood at distance . But , you have too great a Reputation to be wholly free from Censure : 't is a fine which Fortune sets upon all extraordinary persons , and from which you should not wish to be delivered till you are dead . I have been , used by my Critics much more severely , and have more reason to complain , because I am deeper taxed for a lesle Estate . I am ridiculously enough accused to be a contemner of Universities , that is in other words , an Enemy of Learning : without the Foundation of which I am sure no Man can pretend to be a Poet. And if this be not enough , I am made a Detractor from my Predecessors , whom I confess to have been my Masters in the Art But this latter was the accusation of the best Judge , and almost the best Poet in the Latin Tongue . You find Horace complaining , that for taxing some Verses in Lucilius , he himself was blamed by others , though his Design was no other than mine now , to improve the Knowledge of Poetry : and it was no defence to him , amongst his Enemies , any more than it is for me , that he Praised Lucilius where he deserved it ; Paginâ laudatur eâdem . 't is for this reason I will be no more mistaken for my good meaning : I know I honour Ben johnson more than my little Critics , because without vanity I may own , I understand him better . As for the Errors they pretend to find in me , I could easily show them that the greatest part of them are Beauties : and for the rest , I could recriminate upon the best Poets of our Nation , if I could resolve to accuse another of little faults , whom at the same time I admire for greater Excellencies . But I have neither concernment enough upon me to write any thing in my own Defence , neither will I gratify the ambition of two wretched Scribblers , who desire nothing more than to be Answered . I have not wanted Friends , even amongst Strangers , who have defended me more strongly , than my contemptible Pedant could attack me . For the other : he is only like Fungoso in the Play , who follows the Fashion at a distance , and adores the Fastidius Brisk of Oxford . You can bear me witness , that I have not consideration enough for either of them to be angry : Let Maevius and Bavius admire each other , I wish to be hated by them and their Fellows , by the same reason for which I desire to be loved by you . And I leave it to the world , whether their judgement of my Poetry ought to be preferred to yours ; though they are as much prejudiced by their Malice , as I desire you should be led by your Kindness , to be partial to , Sir , 

Your most Humble and most Faithful Servant John Dryden . 

Prologue . 

Prologues , like Bells to Churches , toul you in 
With Chimeing Verse ; till the dull Plays begin : 
With this sad difference though , of Pit and Pew ; 
You damn the Poet , but the Priest damns you . 
But Priests can treat you at your own expense : 
And , gravely , call you Fools , without offence . 
Poets , poor Devils , have ne'er your Folly shown 
But , to their cost , you proved it was their own . 
For , when a Fop's presented on the Stage , 
Strait all the Coxcombs in the Town engage : 
For his deliverance , and revenge they join : 
And grunt , like Hogs , about their Captive Swine . 
Your Poets daily split upon this shelf : 
You must have Fools , yet none will have himself . 
Or , if in kindness , you that leave would give , 
no man could write you at that rate you live : 
For some of you grow Fops with so much haste , 
Riot in nonsense , and commit such waste , 
'T would Ruin Poets should they spend so fast . 
He who made this , observed what Farces hit , 
And durst not disoblige you now with wit. 
But , Gentlemen , you overdo the Mode : 
You must have Fools out of the common Rode. 
th' unnatural strained Buffoon is only taking : 
no Fop can please you now of Gods own making . 
Pardon our Poet if he speaks his Mind , 
You come to Plays with your own Follies lined : 
Small Fools fall on you , like small showers , in vain : 
Your own oiled Coats keep out all common rain . 
You must have Mamamouchi , such a Fop 
As would appear a Monster in a Shop : 
he 'll fill your Pit and Boxes to the brim , 
Where , Rammed in Crowds , you see yourselves in him . 
Sure there 's some spell our Poet never knew , 
In hullibabilah damn , and Chu , chu , chu . 
But Marabarah sahem most did touch you , 
That is : O how we love the Mamamouchi ! 
Grimace and habit sent you pleased away : 
You damned the Poet , and cried up the Play. 
This thought had made our Author more uneasy , 
But that he hope's I'm Fool enough to please ye : 
But here 's my grief ; though Nature joined with art , 
Have cut me out to act a Fooling Part ; 
Yet , to your praise , the few wits here will say , 
'T was imitating you taught Haynes to Play.  
persons Represented . 

By 
Duke of Mantova Major Mohun . 
Prince Frederick his Son Mr. Kynaston . 
Aurelian a Roman Gentleman Mr. Hart.  
Camillo his Friend Mr. Burt.  
Mario Governor of Rome Mr. Cartwright . 
Ascanio , Page of Honour to the Prince Mistress Reeve . 
Benito , Servant to Aurelian Mr. Haynes . 
Valerio , Confident to the Duke 
Fabio , Servant to Mario 
Sophronia , Abbess of the Torr'di Specchi . Mistress james.  
Lucretia , a Lady designed to be a Nun Mistress Martial . 
Hippolita , a Nun Mistress Knep . 
Laura Sisters , Nieces to Mario Mistress Bowtel . 
and Violetta Sisters , Nieces to Mario Mistress Cox.  
Scene , ROME . 

THE ASSIGNATION : OR , Love in a Nunnery . 

SCENE ROME . A Great Glass Placed . Enter Benito , with a Guittar in his hand . Benito   bowing to the Glass . Save you , sweet Signior Benito ; by my faith I am glad to see you look so bonily to day : Gad , Sir , every thing becomes you to a miracle ! your Peruke , your Clotheses , your Hat , your Shoe-ties ; and , Gad , Sir , let me tell you , you become every thing ; you walk with such a grace , and you bow so pliantly — 



Aurelian   within . Benito , Where are you , Sirrah ? 



Ben.   Sirrah ! That my damned Master should call a man of my extraordinary endowments , Sirrah ! A man of my endowments ? Gad , I ask my own pardon , I mean , a person of my endowments ; for a man of my parts and talents , though he be but a Valet de Chambre , is a person ; and , let me tell my Master — Gad , I frown too , as like a person as any Jack-gentleman of 'em all ; but , Gad , when I do not frown , I am an absolute beauty : whatever this Class says to the contrary : and , if this Glass deny it , 't is a base , lying Glass , so I 'll tell it to its face , and kick it down into the bargain . 



Aurelia   within . Why Benito , How long shall we stay for you ? 



Ben.   I come , Sir. What the Devil would he have ? But , by his favour , I 'll first surveyed my Dancing , and my Singing . He plays on the Guittar , and Dances and Sings to the Glass . I think that was not amiss : I think so . Gad , I can Lays down the Guittar . Dance , and play no longer , I am in such a rapture with myself . What a villainous base fate have I ? with all these excellencies , and a profound wit , and yet to be a Servingman ! 



Enter Aurelian and Camillo . Aur.   Why , you Slave , you Dog , you Son of twenty Fathers , am I to be served at this rate eternally ? A pox o' your conceited coxcomb . 



Camillo .  Nay , prithee , Aurelian , be not angry . 



Aur.   You do not know this Rogue , as I do , Camillo . Now , by this Guittar , and that great looking-glass , I am certain how he has spent his time . He court's himself every morning in that Glass , at least an hour : there admires his own person , and his parts , and studies postures and grimaces , to make himself yet more ridiculous , than he was born to be . 



Cam.   You wrong him sure . 



Aur.   I do ; for he is yet more fool than I can speak him : I never sent him on a message , but he runs first to that Glass , to practise how he may become his errand . Speak , Is this a lie , Sirrah ? 



Ben.   I confess , I have some kindness for the mirror . 



Aur.   The mirror ! there 's a touch of his Poetry too , he could not call it a Glass . then the Rogue has the impudence to make Sonnets , as he calls 'em ; and , which is a greater impudence , he sings 'em too : there 's not a Street in all Rome which he does not nightly disquiet with his villainous Serenades : with that Guittar there , the younger brother of a Cittern , he frights away the Watch ; and for his Violin , it squeaks so lewdly , that Sir Tibert in the gutter mistakes him for his Mistress . 't is a mere Cat-call . 



Cam.   Is this true Benito ? 



Ben.   to Cam. aside . My Master , Sir , may say his pleasure ; I divert myself sometimes with hearing him : Alas , good Gentleman , 't is not given to all persons to penetrate into men's parts and qualities ; but I look on you , Sir , as a man of judgement , and therefore you shall hear me play and sing . 



He takes up the Guittar and begins . Aur.   Why , you invincible Sot you , will nothing mend you ? Lay 't down , or — 



Ben.   to Camillo . Do ye see , Sir , this Enemy to the Muses ? he will not let me hold forth to you . Lays down the Guittar . OH Envy , and Ignorance , whither will you ! — But , Gad , before I 'll suffer my parts to be kept in obscurity — 



Aur.   What will you do , Rascal ? 



Ben.   I 'll take up the Guittar , and suffer heroically . 



He Plays , Aure. Kicks . Aur.   What ? Do you Mutiny ? 



Ben.   Aye , do , kick till your toes ache ; I 'll be baffled in my Music by ne'er a foot in Christendom . 



Aur.   I 'll put you out of your time , with a vengeance to you . 



As Aurelian kicks harder , Benito sings faster , and sometimes cries out . Cam.   holding Aurelia  Nay , then 't is time to stickle . Hold , Aurelian , prithee spare Benito , you know we have occasion for him . 



Aur.   I think that was well kicked . 



Ben.   And I think that was well Sung too . 



Cam.   Enough , Aurelian . 



Ben.   no , Sir ; let him proceed to discourage virtue , and see what will come on 't . 



Cam.   Now to our business : but we must first instruct Benito . 



Aur.   Be ruled by me , and do not trust him : I prophesy he 'll spoil the whole affair ; he has a Worm in 's head as long as a Conger , a brain so barren of all sense , and yet so fruitful of foolish plots , that if he does not all things his own way , yet at least he 'll ever be mingling his designs with yours , and go halves with you , so that what with his ignorance , what with his plotting , he 'll be sure to ruin you , with an intention to serve you . For my part I had turned him off long since ; but that my wise Father , commanded me the contrary . 



Cam.   Still you speak , as if what we did were choice , and not necessity : you know their Uncle is suspicious of me , and consequently jealous of all my Servants ; but if we employ yours , who is not suspected , because you are a stranger ; I doubt not to get an Assignation with the younger Sister . 



Aur.   Well , use your own way , Camillo : but if it ever succeed , with his management — 



Cam.   You must understand then , Benito , that this old Signior Mario , has two Nieces , with one of which I am desperately in Love , and — 



Ben.   aside to him , I understand you already , Sir , and you desire Love reciprocal : Leave your business in my hands , and , if it succeed not , think me no wiser than my Master . 



Cam.   Pray take me with you . These Sisters are great Beauties and vast Fortunes ; but , by a Clause in their Father's Will , if they Mary without their Uncle's Consent , are to forfeit all . Their Uncle , who is covetous , and base to the last degree , takes advantage of this Clause , and under pretence of not finding fit Matches for them , denies his consent to all who love ' 'em . 



Ben.   Denies 'em marriage : very good , Sir.  



Cam.   more than this , he refuses access to any Suitor , and immures 'em in a mean apartment on the garden side , where he barbarously debars 'em from all human Socitey . 



Ben.   Uses them most barbarously : Still better and better . 



Cam.   The younger of these Sisters , Violetta , I have seen often in the Garden , from the Balcony in this Chamber , which looks into it , have diverse times shot Tickets on the point of an Arrow , which She has taken , and by the signs she made me I find they were not ill received . 



Ben.   I 'll tell you now , just such an Amour as this had I once with a young Lady , that — 



Aur.   Quote yourself again , you Rogue , and my feet shall renew their acquaintance with your Buttocks . 



Cam.   Dear Benito , take care to convey this Ticket to Violetta : I saw her just now go by to the next Chapel ; be sure to stand ready to give her Holy-water , and slip the Ticket into the hand of her Woman Beatrix ; And take care the elder Sister Laura sees you not , for she knows nothing of our Amour . 



Ben.   A word to the wise . Have you no Service to Laura ? To Aurelian . 



Aur.   None that I shall trouble you withal : I 'll see first what returns you make from this Voyage , before I put in my venture with you . Away ; be gone , Mr. Mercury . 



Ben.   I fly , Mr. jupiter . Exit . 



Aur.   This Lady Laura I have seen from your Balcone , and was seen by her : methought , too , she looked with a languishing eye upon me , as who should say , Are you a man , and have no pity for a poor distressed Virgin ? For my part , I never found so much disposition in myself to Love any woman at first sight : handsome she is , of that I am certain . 



Cam.   And has Wit , I dare assure you ; but I have not heard she has admitted of any Gallantry . 



Aur.   Her hour is not come yet ; she has not met with a man to Love : when that happens ( as I am resolved to push my fortune ) you shall see that , as her love warms , her virtue will melt down , and dissolve in it ; for there 's no such Bawd to a woman , as her own wit is . 



Cam.   I look upon the Assignation , as certain : Will you promise me to go ? You and Benito shall walk in the Garden , while I search the Nymph within the shade ; one thing I had forgot to tell you , that our General of the Church , the Duke of Mantova , and the Prince his Son , are just approaching the Gates of Rome : Will you go see the Ceremony of their Entrance ? 



Aur.   With all my heart . They say , he has behaved himself gallantly against the French , at their return from Naples : besides , I have a particular knowledge of young Prince Frederick , ever since he was last at our Venetian Carnival . 



Cam.   Away , then , quickly ; lest we miss the Solemnity . 



Exeunt . Enter Laura , and Violetta striving about a Letter , which Laura holds . Vio.   Let it go , I say : 



Lau.   I say , let you go . 



Vio.   Nay , sweet Sister Laura . 



Lau.   Nay , dear Violetta , 't is in vain to contend , I am resolved I 'll see it . Plucks the Paper from Violetta . 



Vio.   But I am resolved you shall not read it . I know not what authority this is which you assume , or what privilege a year or two can give you , to use this Sovereignty over me . 



Lau.   Do you rebel young Gentlewoman ? I 'll make you know I have a double right over you : one , as I have more years ; and the other as I have more wit.  



Vio.   Though I am not all Air and Fire , as you are , yet that little wit I have , will serve to conduct my Affairs , without a Governess . 



Lau.   no , Gentlewoman , but it shall not : are you fit at Fifteen to be trusted with a Maidenhead ? 't is as much your betters can manage at full twenty . 

For 't is of a nature so subtle , 
That , if 't is not Luted with care 
The Spirit will work through the Bottle , 
And vanish away into Ayr. 
To keep it , there 's nothing so hard is , 
'T will go betwixt waking and sleeping , 
The Simple too weak for a guard is , 
And no Wit would be plagued with the keeping . 


Vio.   For aught I see , you are as little to be trusted with your Madness , as I with my Simplicity ; and therefore pray restore my Letter . 



Lau.   reading it . what 's here ? An humble Petition for a private Meeting ? Are you twittering at that sport already , Mistress Novice ? 



Vio.   How ! I a Novice , at ripe Fifteen ? I would have you to know , that I have killed my Man before I was Fourteen , and now am ready for another execution . 



Lau.   A very forward Rose-bud : you open apace , Gentlewoman . I find indeed your desires are quick enough ; but where will you have cunning to carry on your business with decency and secrecy ? Secrecy , I say , which is a main part of chastity in our Sex. Where wit , to be sensible of the delicacies of Love ? the tenderness of a farewell-sigh ? for an absence ? the joy of a return ? the zeal of a pressing-hand ? the sweetness of little quarrels , caused , and cured , by the excess of Love ? and , in short , the pleasing disquiets of the Soul , always restless , and wand'ring up and down in a paradise of thought , of its own making ? 



Vio.   If I understood not thus much before , I find you are an excellent instructor , and that argues you have had a feeling of the cause in your time too , Sister . 



Lau.   What have I confessed before I was aware ! she 'll find out my inclination to that stranger , whom I have only seen , and to whom I have never spoken — Aside . no , good Violetta , I never was in Love ; all my experience is from Plays and Romances : But who is this man , to whom you have promised an Assignation ? 



Vio.   you 'll tell my Uncle . 



Lau.   I hate my Uncle more than you do . 



Vio.   You know the man , 't is Signior Camillo : his Birth and Fortunes are equal to what I can expect ; and he tells me his intentions are Honourable . 



Lau.   Have I not seen him lately in his Balcone , which looks into our Garden , with another handsome Gentleman in his Company , who seems a stranger ? 



Vio.   They are the same . Do you think it a reasonable thing , dear Laura , that my Uncle should keep us up so strictly , that we must be beholden to heresay , to know a young Gallant is in the next house to us ? 



Lau.   't is hard , indeed , to be mewed like Hawks , and never Maned : to be locked in like Nuns here . 



Vio.   They that look for Nun's flesh in me shall be mistaken . 



Lau.   Well , What answer have you returned to this Letter ? 



Vio.   That I would meet him at eight this evening , in the close walk in the Garden , attended only by Beatrix my Woman . 



Lau.   Who comes with him ? 



Vio.   Only his friend's Man Benito ; the same who brought me the Letter which you took from me . 



Lau.   Stay , let me think a little . Do Camillo , or this Benito , know your Maid Beatrix ? 



Vio.   They have never talked with her ; but only seen her . 



Lau.   't is concluded then ; you shall meet your Servant , but I 'll be your Beatrix : I 'll go in stead of her , and sergeant your waiting-woman : in the dark I may easily pass for her : By this means I shall be present to instruct you ; for you are yet a Callow Maid : I must teach you to Peck a little , you may come to Prey for yourself in time . 



Vio.   A little teaching will serve my turn : if the old one left me to myself , I could go near to get my Living . 



Lau.   I find you are eager , and Baiting to be gone already , and I 'll not hinder you when your hour approaches . In the mean time go in , and sigh , and think fond , and ignorantly of your approaching pleasures : 

Love , in young hearts , is like the must of Wine ; 
't is sweetest then ; but elder 't is more fine . Exeunt . 


ACT. II SCENE I  

The Front of a Nunnery . Prince Frederick , Aurelian , Camillo , and Ascanio the Prince's Page . Fred.   MY Fathers ' ancient , and may repose himself , if he pleases , after the Ceremony of his Entrance ; but we , who are younger , should think it a sin , to spend any part of daylight in a Chamber . What are your ways of living here ? 



Cam.   Why Sir , we pass our time , either in conversation alone , or in Love alone , or in Love and Conversation together . 



Fred.   Come , explain , explain , my Counsel learned in the Laws of Living . 



Cam.   For conversation alone ; that 's either in going to Court , with a Face of Business , and there discoursing of the affairs of Europe , of which , Rome , you know , is the public Mart ; or , at best , meeting the Vertuosis , and there , wearying one another with rehearsing our own works , in Prose and Poetry . 



Fred.   Away with that dry method , I will have none on 't . To the next . 



Cam.   Love alone , is either plain wenching , where every Courtesan is your Mistress , and every Man your Rival ; or else , what 's worse , plain whining after one Woman : that is , walking before her door by day , and haunting her street by night , with Guittars , dark Lanterns , and Rondaches . 



Aur.   Which , I take it , is , or will be our case , Camillo . 



Fred.   Neither of these will fit my humour : if your third prove not more pleasant , I shall stick to the old Almain recreation ; the Divine bottle , and the bounteous glass , that tuned up old Horace to his Odes . 



Aur.   You shall need to have no recourse to that ; for Love , and Conversation will do your business : that is , Sir , a most delicious Courtesan , I do not mean downright Punk , but Punk of more than ordinary sense in Conversation : Punk in Ragou , Punk who plays on the Lute , and Sings ; and , to sum up all , Punk who Cooks and Dresses up herself , with Poignant Sauce , to become a new Dish every time she is served up to you . 



Fred.   This I believe , Aurelian , is your method of living , you talk of it so savorily . 



Aur.   There is yet another more insipid sort of Love and Conversation : as for example , look you there , Sir ; the Pointing to the Nunnery Courtship of our Nuns . They talk prettily ; but , a Pox on 'em , they raise our appetites , and then starve us . They are as dangerous as cold Fruits without Wine , and are never to be used but where there are abundance of Wenches in readiness , to qualify ' 'em . 



Cam.   But yet they are ever at hand , and easy to come by ; and if you 'll believe an experienced sinner , easiness in Love is more than half the pleasure of it . 



Fre.   This way of chatting pleases me ; for debauchery , I hate it ; and , to Love , is not in my nature , except it be my Friends . Pray , What do you call that Nunnery . 



Cam.   't is a House of Benedictines , called the Torre di Specchi , where only Ladies of the best Quality are Professed . 



Lucretia and Hippolita appear at the Grates . Aur.   Look you yonder , Sir , are two of the pretty Magpies , in white and black : if you will lull yourself into a Platonic Dream you may : but , consider your sport will be but dull , when you play without Stakes . 



Fred.   no matter , I 'll fool away an hour of Courtship ; for I never yet was engaged in a serious love , nor I believe can be . Farewell , Gentlemen ; at this time I shall dispense with your attendance : nay , without Ceremony , because I would be incognito . 



Cam.   Come then , Aurelian , to our own affairs . 



Exeunt Aur. and Camillo . The Prince and Ascanio approach . Fred.   to Lu.  For what Crime , fair Creature , were you condemned to this perpetual Prison ? 



Luc.   For Chastity and Devotion , and two or three such melancholy virtues : they first brought me hither , and now must keep me company . 



Fred.   I should rather have guessed it had been Murder , and that you are veiled , for fear of doing more mischief wirh those Eyes : for , indeed , they are too sharp to be trusted out of the Scabbard . 



Luc.   Cease , I beseech you , to accuse my Eyes , till they have done some execution on your heart . 



Fred.   But I am out of reach , perhaps . 



Luc.   Trust not to that ; they may shoot at a distance , though they cannot strike you near at hand . 



Fred.   But , if they should kill , you are ne'er the better : there 's a Grate betwixt us , and you cannot fetch in the dead Quarry . 



Luc.   Provided we destroy the Enemy , we do not value their dead bodies : but you , perhaps , are in your first error , and think we are rather Captives than Warriors ; that we come like Prisoners to the Grate , to beg the Charity of Passengers for their love . 



Fre.   to Ascanio . Inquire as dexterously as you can , what is the Name and Quality of this Charming Creature . 



Luc.   to Hip.  Be sure , if the Page approaches you , to get out of him his Master's Name . The Prince and Lucretia seem to talk . 



Hip.   to Asca.  By that short whisper which I observed you took with your Master , I imagine , Mr. Page , you come to ask a certain question of me . 



Asca.   By this thy question , and by that whisper with thy Lady , ( OH thou Nymph of Devotion ! ) I find I am to impart a secret , and not to ask one : therefore , either confess thou art yet a mere Woman under that Veil , and by consequence most horribly inquisitive , or thou shalt lose thy longing , and know nothing of my Master . 



Hip.   By my Virginity , you shall tell first . 



Asca.   you 'll break your Oath , on purpose to make the forfeit . 



Hip.   Your Master is called — 



Asca.   You Lady is Yclept — 



Hip.   For decency , in all matters of Love , the Man should offer first , you know . 



Asca.   That needs not , when the Damsel is so willing . 



Hip.   But I have sworn not to discover first , that her Name is Madam Lucretia ; fair , as you see , to a Miracle , and of a most charming conversation ; of Royal blood , and Niece to his Holiness ; and , if she were not espoused to Heaven , a Mistress for a Sovereign Prince . 



Asca.   After these Encomiums , 't were vain for me to praise my Master : he is only poor Prince Frederick , otherwise called the Prince of Mantova ; liberal , and valiant , discreet and handsome , and , in my simple judgement , a fitter Servant for your Lady , than his old Father , who is a Sovereign . 



Hip.   Dare you make all this good you have said of your Master ? 



Asca.   Yes , and as much more of myself to you . 



Hip.   I defy you upon 't , as my lady 's Second . 



Asca.   As my Masters , I accept it . The time ? 



Hip.   Six this evening . 



Asca.   The place ? 



Hip.   At this Grate . 



Asca.   The Weapons ? 



Hip.   Hands , and it may be Lips.  



Asca.   't is enough : expect to hear from me . 



They withdraw and whisper to their Principals . After the Whisper . Fred.   to Luc.  Madam , I am glad I know my enemy ; for since it is impossible to see , and not admire you , the name of Lucretia is the best excuse for my defeat . 



Luc.   persons , like Prince Frederick , ought not to assault Religious Houses ; or to pursue Chastity and Virtue to their last retreat . 



Fred.   A Monastery is no retreat for Chastity ; 't is only a hiding place for bad faces , where they are thrust in Crowds together , like heaps of rubbish out of the way , that the world may not be peopled with deformed persons , and that such who are out of Play themselves , may pray for a blessing on their endeavours , who are getting handsome Children : and carrying on the work for public benefit . 



Luc.   then you would put off Heaven with your leave , and use it like them who play at Cards alone , take the Courts for yourselves , and give the refuse to the Gentleman . 



Fred.   You mistake me , Madam ; I would so contrive it , that Heaven and we might be served at once : we have occasion for Wit and Beauty ; now Piety and Ugliness will do as well for Heaven ; that plays at one Game , and we at another , and therefore heaven may make its hand with the same Cards that we put out . 



Luc.   I could easily convince you if the argument concerned me ; but I am one of those , whom , for want of wit and beauty , you have condemned to Religion : and therefore am your humble Servant to Pray for your handsome Wife and Children . 



Fred.   Heaven forbid , Madam , that I should condemn you , or indeed any handsome woman , to be Religious . no , Madam ; the occasions of the World are great and urgent for such as you : and , for my part , I am of opinion , that it is as great a Sin for a Beauty to enter into a Nunnery , as for an ugly woman to stay out of it . 



Luc.   The Cares of the World are not yet upon you ; but as soon as ever you come to be afflicted with Sickness , or visited with a Wife , you 'll be content I should pray for you . 



Fre.   Any where , rather than in a Cloister ; for , truly , I suppose , all your Prayers there will be how to get out of it ; and , upon that supposition , Madam , I am come to offer you my service for your redemption . Come , faith , be persuaded , the Church shall lose nothing by it : I 'll take you out , and put in two or three Crooked Apostles in your place . Bell ring's within . 



Luc.   Hark , the Bell ring's , I must leave you : 't is a summons to our Devotion . 



Fred.   Will you leave me for your Prayets , Madam ? You may have enough of them at any time , but remember you cannot have a Man so easily . 



Luc.   Well , I 'll say my Beads for you , and that 's but Charity , for I believe I leave you in a most deplorable condition . 



Exeunt Women . Fred.   Not deplorable neither , but a little altered : if I could be in Love , as I am sure I cannot , it should be with her , for I like her conversation strangely . 



Asca.   then , as young as I am , Sir , I am beforehand with you ; for I am in Love already . I would fain make the first proof of my Manhood upon a Nun : I find I have a mighty grudging to Holy Flesh.  



Fred.   I 'll ply Lucretia again , as soon as ever her devotion 's over . Methinks these Nuns divide their time most admirably : from Love to Prayers ; from Prayers to Love : that is , just so much Sin , just so much Godliness . 



Asca.   then I can claim that Sister's Love by merit : 
Half Man , half Boy ; for her half Flesh , half Spirit . Exeunt . 


SCENE II  

A Street . Aurelian and Camillo . Aur.   I 'll proceed no farther , if Benito goes : I know his folly will produce some mischief . 



Cam.   But Violetta desired me , in her Note , to bring him , on purpose to pass the time with her Woman Beatrix . 



Aur.   That objection is easily removed : I 'll supply Benito's place ; the darkness will prevent discovery , and , for my discourse , I 'll imitate the half Wit , and patched breeding of a Valet de Chambre . 



Cam.   But how shall we get rid of him ? 



Aur.   Let me alone for that . 



Enter Benito . Ben.   Come , Are we ready , Gallants ? the Clock's upon the stroke of Eight . 



Aur.   But we have altered our resolution : we go another way to night . 



Ben.   I hope you have not broke my Assignation . 



Aur.   Why do you hope so ? 



Ben.   Because my reputation is engaged in 't : i  stipulated upon my honour that you shall come . 



Aur.   I shall beaten you if you follow me . Go , Sirrah , and adjourn to the great looking-glass , and let me hear no more from you till to morrow morning . 



Ben.   Sir , my fidelity , and , if I may be so vain , my discretion may stand you in some stead . 



Aur.   Well , come along then , they are brave Fellows who have challenged us , you shall have fight enough , Sir.  



Ben.   How , Sir , Fight ? 



Aur.   You may scape with the loss of a Leg , or an arm , or some such transitory limb . 



Ben.   no , Sir ; I have that absolute obedience to your commands , that I will bridle my courage , and stay at home . Exit . 



Cam.   You took the only way to be rid of him . there 's the wall : behind yond pane of it we 'll set up the Ladder . Exeunt . 



SCENE III  

A Night-piece of a Garden . Enter Laura and Violetta . Vio.   Remember your waiting-woman's part , Laura . 



Lau.   I warrant you , I 'll wait on you by night as well as I governed you by day . 



Vio.   Hark , I hear footsteps ; and now , methinks , I see something approaching us . 



Lau.   They are certainly the Men whom we expect . 



Enter Aurelian and Camillo . Cam.   I hear Woman's voices . 



Aur.   We are right , I warrant you . 



Cam.   Violetta , my Love ! 



Vio.   My dear Camillo ! 



Cam.   OH speak those words again : my own name never sounded so sweetly to me , as when you spoke it , and made me happy by adding Dear to it . 



Vio.   Speak softly then . I have stolen these few minutes from my watchful Uncle and my Sister , and they are as full of danger as they are of love . Something within me cheques me too , and says , I was too forward in venturing thus to meet you . 



Cam.   You are too fearful rather , and fear 's the greatest enemy to Love.  



Vio.   But night will hide my blushes , when I tell you I love you much , or I had never trusted my virtue and my person in your hands . 



Cam.   The one is sacred , and the other safe ; but this auspicious minute is our first of near converse . May I not hope that favour , which strangers , in civility , my claim even from the most reserved ? 



Kisses her hand . Vio.   I fear you 'll censure me . 



Cam.   Yes , as the blessed above tax heaven for making them so happy . They walk farther off . 



Aur.   stepping towards Lau.  Damsel of darkness , advance , and meet my flames . 



Lau.   stepping forward . Right trusty Valet , heard , but yet unseen , I have advanced one step on reputation . 



Aur.   Now , by laudable custom , I am to love thee vehemently . 



Lau.   We should do well to see each other first : You know 't is ill taking Money without light . 



Aur.   OH , but the coin of Love is known by the weight only , and you may feel it in the dark : Besides , you know 't is Princelike to Love without seeing . 



Lau.   But than you may be served as Princes are sometimes . 



Aur.   Let us make haste however , and dispatch a little Love out of the way : we may do it now with ease , and save ourselves a great deal of trouble , if we take it in time , before it grows too fast upon our hands . 



Lau.   Fie , no ; let us Love discreetly , we must manage our passion , and not love all our love out at one meeting , but leave some for another time . 



Aur.   I am for applying the Plaster whilst the wound is green , 't will heal the better . Takes her by the hand . 



Lau.   Let go my hand : What crime has the poor wretch committed that you press it thus ? I remember no mischief it has done you . 



Aur.   OH 't is a heinous malefactor , and is pressed by Law , because it will confess nothing . Come , withdraw a little farther , we have urgent business with one another . 



Lau.   'T were a shame to quit my ground upon the first charge ; year if you please to take truce a little , I will consent to go behind the Lovers , and listen with you . 



Aur.   I wonder you deferred the Proposition so long . I were neither true Valet , nor you true Woman if we could not Eavesdrop . 



They retire behind the other two , who come forward upon the Stage . Cam.   kissing Violetta's hand . Give me another yet , and then — 



Vio.   And then will you be satisfied ? 



Cam.   And then I 'll ask a thousand more , and ne'er be satisfied . Kisses are but thin nourishment , they are too soon digested , and hungry Love craves more . 



Vio.   You feed a Wolf within you . 



Cam.   then feast my Love with a more solid diet . He makes us now a Miser's Feast , and we forbear to take our fill . The silent night , and all these downy hours were made for Lovers : Gently they tread , and softly measure time , that no rude noise may fright the tender Maid , from giving all her soul to melting joys . 



Vio.   You do not love me ; if you did , you would not 
Thus urge your satisfaction in my shame ; 
At best , I see you would not love me long , 
For they who plunder do not mean to stay . 


Cam.   I haste to take possession of my own . 


Vio.   Ever Heaven and holy vows have made it so ? 


Cam.   then witness Heaven , and all these twinkling Stars — 


Vio.   Hold , hold ; you are distempered with your love : 
Time , place , and strong desires now swear , not you . 


Cam.   Is not Love love without a Priest and Altars ? 
The Temples are inanimate , and know not 
What Vows are made in them ; the Priest stands ready 
For his hire , and cares not what hearts he couples , 
Love alone is marriage . 


Vio.   I never will receive these Midnight Vows ; 
But when I come hereafter to your Arms , 
I 'll bring you a sincere , full , perfect bliss , 
Than you will thank me that I kept it so , 
And trust my faith hereafter . 


Lau.   there 's your destiny , Lover mine : I am to be honest by infection ; my Lady will none you see . 



Aur.   Truth is , they are a lost couple , unless they learn grace by our example . Come , shall we begin first , and shame them both Takes her by the hand again . 



Lau.   you 'll never be warned of this hand , Benito . 



Aur.   O , 't is so soft , as it were made on purpose to take hearts , and handle them without hurting . These Taper fingers too , and even joints , so suppling , that methinks I mould 'em as they pass through mine : nay , in my conscience , th' it be nonsense to say it , your hand feels white too . 



Lau.   Methinks yours is not very hard , for a Servingman's : but where , in the name of wonder , have you learned to talk so courtly ? you are a strange Valet de Chambre . 



Aur.   And you are as strange a Waiting-woman : you have so stabbed me with your Repartees to night , that I should be glad to change the weapon to be revenged on you . 



Lau.   These , I suppose , are fragments which you learned from your wild Master Aurelian : many a poor woman has passed through his hands , with these very words . You treat me just like a Servingman , with the cold Meat which comes from your Master's Table . 



Aur.   You could never have suspected me for using my Master's wit , if you had not been guilty of purloining from your Lady . I am told , that Laura , your Mistress' Sister , has wit enough to confound a hundred Aurelians . 



Lau.   I shall do your commendations to Laura for your compliment . 



Aur.   And I shall not fail to revenge myself by informing Aurelian of yours . 



Enter Benito with a Guittar . Ben.   The poor souls shall not lose by the bargain , though my foolish gadding Masters have disappointed them . That Ladder of ropes was doubtless left there by the young Lady in hope of them . 



Vio.   Hark , I hear a noise in the Garden . 



Lau.   I fear we are betrayed . 



Cam.   Fear nothing , Madam , but stand close . 



Ben.   Now , Benito , is the time to hold forth thy talent , and to set up for thyself . Yes , Ladies , you shall be Serenaded , and when I have displayed my gifts , I 'll retire in Triumph over the Wall , and hug myself for the adventure . He fums on the Guittar . 



Vio.   Let us make haste , Sister , and get into Covert , this Music will raise the House upon us immediately . 



Lau.   Alas , we cannot , the damned Musician stands just in the door where we should pass . 



Ben.   Singing . Eveillez vous , Bells endormies ; 
Eveillez vous : car il est jour : 
Mettez la tete a la fenestre 
Vous entendrez parler d'amour . 


Aur.   aside to Cam.  Camillo , this is my incorrigible rogue ; and I dare not call him Benito , for fear of discovering myself not to be Benito . 



Cam.   The alarm 's already given through the house . Ladies , you must be quick : secure yourselves , and leave us to shifted . 

Exeunt Women . Within . This way , this way . 



Aur.   I hear 'em coming ; and , as ill luck will have it , just by that quarter where our Ladder is placed . 



Cam.   Let us hide in the dark walk till they are passed . 



Aur.   But then Benito will be caught , and being known to be my man , will betray us . 



Ben.   I hear some in the Garden : Sure they are the Ladies , that are taken with my melody . To 't again Benito ; this time I will absolutely enchant ' 'em . Fums again . 



Aur.   he 's at it again . Why Benito , Are you mad ? 



Ben.   Ah , Madam ! Are you there ? this is such a favour to your poor unworthy Servant . 

Sings . But still between kissing Amintas did say , 
Fair Phillis look up , and you 'll turn night to day . 


Aur.   Come away , you unsufferable rascal , the House is up , and will be upon us immediately . 



Ben.   OH Gemini , Is it you Sir ? 
Within . This way ; follow , follow . 


Aur.   Leave your scraping and croaking , and step with us into this Arbour . 



Ben.   Scraping and Croaking ! 'Sfoot , Sir , either grant I sing and play to a Miracle , or I 'll justify my Music , though I am caught , and hanged for 't . 



Enter Mario and Servants . Mar.   Where is this Serenading Rascal ? If I find him , I 'll make him an example to all midnight Caterwaulers , of which this Fiddler is the lewdest . 



Ben.   OH that I durst but Play my Tune out to convince him ! Soul of harmony ! Is this lewd ? 



Plays and Sings softly . Cam.   Peace , dear Benito : We must flatter him . 



Ben.   Singing softly . Mettez la tete : the Notes which follow are so sweet , Sir , I must sing 'em , though it be my ruin — Parlour d' amour . Laura and Violetta in the Balcone . 



Lau.   Yes , we are safe , Sister ; but they are yet in danger . 



Vio.   They are just upon 'em : 



Lau.   We must do something : Help , help ; Thief's , thiefs ; we shall be murdered . 



Mar.   Where ? Where are they ? 



Lau.   Here , Sir , at our Chamber door , and we are run into the Balcone for shelter : Dear Uncle , come and help us . 



Mar.   Back again quickly : I durst have sworn they had been in the Garden . 't is an Ignis fatuus I think that leads us from one place to another . Exeunt Mar. and Servants . 



Vio.   They are gone . My dear Camillo , make haste , and preserve yourself . 



Cam.   May our next Meeting prove more propitious . 



Aur.   to Benito . Come , Sirrah , I shall make you sing another note when you are at home . 



Ben.   Such another word , and I 'll sing again . 



Aur.   Set the Ladder , and mount first , you Rogue . 



Ben.   Mount first yourself , and fear not my delaying : 
If I am caught , they 'll spare me for my playing . 
Sings as he goes off . Vous entendrez parler d'amour . Exeunt omnes . 


ACT. III SCENE I  

The Front of the Nunnery . Hip.   Iascanio , and Hippolita at the Grate . 
See you have kept touch , Brother , 


Asca.   As a man of honour ought , Sister , when he is challenged : and now , according to the Laws of Duel , the next thing is to strip , and , in stead of seconds , to search one another . 



Hip.   we 'll strip our hands , if you please , Brother ; for they are the only weapons we must use . 



Asca.   That were to invite me to my loss , Sister ; I could have made a full meal in the World , and you would have me take up with hungry commons in the Cloister . Pray mend my fare , or I am gone . 



Hip.   OH , Brother , a hand in a Cloister , is fare like flesh in Spain , 't is delicate , because 't is scarce . You may be satisfied with a hand , as well as I am pleased with the Courtship of a Boy . 



Asca.   You may begin with me Sister , as Milo did , by carrying a Calf first , you may learn to carry an Ox hereafter : In the mean time produce your hand , I understand Nuns-flesh better than you imagine : give it me , you shall see how I will worry it . She gives her hand . Now could not we thrust out our lips , and contrive a Kiss too ? 



Hip.   Yes , we may ; but I have had the experience of it : it will be but half flesh , half Iron . 



Asca.   Let 's try however . 



Hip.   Hold , Lucretia is here . 



Asca.   Nay , if you come with odds upon me , 't is time to call Seconds . Ascanio Hems.  



The Prince and Lucretia appear . Luc.   Sir , though your Song was pleasant , yet there was one thing amiss in it , that was your Rallying of Religion . 



Fred.   Do you speak well of my Friend Love , and I 'll try to speak well of your friend Devotion . 



Luc.   I can never speak well of Love : 't was to avoid it that I entered here . 



Fred.   then , Madam , you have met your Man : for , to confess the truth to you , I have but counterfeited Love to try you ; for I never yet could love any Woman : and , since I have seen you , and do not , I am certain now I shall scape for ever . 



Luc.   You are the best man in the World , if you continue this resolution ▪ Pray , then , let us vow solemnly these two things : the first , to esteem each other better than we do all the world besides ; the next , never to change our amity to love . 



Fre.   Agreed Madam : shall I kiss your hand on 't ? 



Luc.   that 's too like a Lover : or , if it were not , the narrowness of the Grate will excuse the ceremony . 



Hip.   no , but it will not , to my knowledge : I have tried every bar many a fair time over , and , at last , have found out one where a hand may get through , and be gallanted . 



Luc.   giving her hand . There , Sir ; 't is a true one . 



Fre.   kissing it . This , then , is a Seal to our perpetual friendship ; and a defiance to all Love.  



Luc.   That seducer of virtue . 



Fre.   That disturber of quiet . 



Luc.   That madness of youth . 



Fre.   That dotage of old age . 



Luc.   That enemy to good humour . 



Fre.   And , to conclude all , that reason of all unreasonable actions 



Asca.   This Doctrine is abominable , do not believe it Sister . 



Hip.   no , if I do , Brother , may I never have comfort from sweet youth at my extremity . 



Luc.   But remember one article of our friendship , that though we banish Love , we do not Mirth , nor Gallantry ; for I declare , I am for all extravagancies , but just loving . 



Fre.   Just my own humour ; for I hate gravity and melancholy next to love . 



Asca.   Now it comes into my head , the Duke of Mantova makes an entertainment to night in Masquerade : if you love extravagancy so well , Madam , I 'll put you into the head of one ; lay by your Nun-ship for an hour or two , and come amongst us in disguise . 



Fre.   My Boy is in the right , Madam . Will you venture ? 
I 'll furnish you with Masking-habits . 


Hip.   OH my dear Sister , never refuse it : I keep the Keys you know , I 'll warrant you well ' return before we are missed . I do so long to have one fling into the sweet World again before I die . Hang 't , at worst , 't is but one sin more , and then we 'll repent for all together . 



Asca.   But if I catch you in the World , Sister , I 'll make you have a better opinion of the Flesh and the Devil for ever after . 



Luc.   If it were known , I were lost for ever . 



Fre.   How should it be known ? you have her on your side , there , that keeps the Keys : and , put the worst , that you are taken in the World ; the world 's a good World to stay in ; and there are certain occasions of waking in a morning , that may be more pleasant to you than your Matins . 



Luc.   Fie , Friend , these extravagancies are a breach of Articles in our Friendship : but well , for once , I 'll venture to go out ; Dancing and Singing are but petty transgressions . 



Asca.   My Lord , here 's company approaching : we shall be discovered . 



Fred.   Adieu then , jusqu'a revoir ; Ascanio shall be with you immediately , to conduct you . 



Asca.   How , Will you disguise , Sister ? Will you be a Man , or a Woman ? 



Hip.   A Woman , Brother Page , for life : I should have the strangest thoughts if I once wore Breeches . 



Asca.   A Woman , say you ? here 's my hand , if I meet you in place convenient , I 'll do my best to make you one . Exeunt . 



Enter Aurelian and Camillo . Cam.   But , Why thus melancholy , with Hat pulled down , and the hand on the Region of the Heart , just the reverse of my Friend Aurelian , of happy memory ? 



Aur.   Faith , Camillo , I am ashamed on 't , but cannot help it . 



Cam.   But to be in Love with a Waiting-woman ! with an eater of Fragments , a Simperer at lower end of a Table , with mighty Golls , rough-grained , and red with Starching , those discouragers and abettors of elevated love ! 



Aur.   I could Love Deformity itself , with that good humour . She who is armed with Gaiety and Wit , needs no other Weapon to conquer me . 



Cam.   We Lovers are the great Creators of wit in our Mistresses . For Beatrix , she a mere utterer of Yes and no , and has no more Sense than what will just dignify her to be an arrant waiting-woman : that is , to lie for her Lady , and take your Money . 



Aur.   It may be then I found her in the exaltation of her wit ; for , certainly , women have their good and ill days of talking , as they have of looking . 



Cam.   But , however , she has done you the courtesy to drive out Laura : and so one Poison has expelled the other . 



Aur.   Troth , not absolutely neither ; for I dote on Laura's beauty , and on Beatrix's wit : I am wounded with a forked Arrow , which will not easily be got out . 



Cam.   Not to lose time in fruitless complaints , let us pursue our new contrivance , that you may see your two Mistresses , and I my one . 



Aur.   That will not now be difficult : this plot 's so laid , that I defy the Devil to make it miss . The Woman of the house , by which they are to pass to Church , is bribed ; the Ladies are , by her , acquainted with the design ; and we need only to be there before them , and expect the prey , which will undoubtedly fall into the net . 



Cam.   Your Man is made safe , I hope , from doing us any mischief . 



Aur.   He has disposed of himself , I thank him , for an hour or two : the Fop would make me believe that an unknown Lady is in love with him , and has made him an Assignation . 



Cam.   If he should succeed now , I should have the worse opinion of the Sex for his sake . 



Aur.   Never doubt but he 'll succeed : your brisk Fool that can make a Leg , is ever a fine Gentleman among the Ladies , because he 's just of their talent , and they understand him better than a Wit.  



Cam.   Peace , the Ladies are coming this way to the Chapel , and their Jailor with 'em : let 'em go by without saluting , to avoid suspicion ; and let us go off to prepare our Engine . 



Enter Mario , Laura , and Violetta . Aur.   I must have a look before we go . Ah , you little Divine rogue ! I 'll be with you immediately . 

Exeunt Aur. and Cam.  

Vio.   Look you , Sister , there are our Friends , but take no notice . 



Lau.   I saw them . Was not that Aurelian with Camillo ? 



Vio.   Yes . 



Lau.   I like him strangely . If his person were joined with Benito's Wit , I know not what would become of my poor heart . 



Enter Fabio , and whispers with Mario . Mar.   Stay , Nieces , I 'll but speak a word with Fabio , and go with you immediately . 



Vio.   I see , Sister , you are infinitely taken with Benito's wit ; but I have heard he is a very conceited Coxcomb . 



Lau.   They who told you so , were horribly mistaken : you shall be judge yourself , Violetta ; for , to confess frankly to you , I have made him a kind of an appointment . 



Vio.   How ! Have you made an Assignation to Benito ? A Servingman ! a Trencher-carrying Rascal ! 



Lau.   Good words , Violetta ! I only sent to him from an unknown Lady near this Chapel , that I might view him in passing by , and see if his person were answerable to his conversation . 



Vio.   But how will you get rid of my Uncle ? 



Lau.   You see my project ; his man Fabio is bribed by me , to hold him in discourse . 



Enter Benito , looking about him . Vio.   In my conscience this is he . Lord , what a Monster of a Man is there ! With such a Workiday-rough-hewn face too ! for , faith , Heaven has not bestowed the finishing upon 't . 



Lau.   't is impossible this should be Benito ; yet he stalks this way : from such a piece of animated Timber , sweet Heaven deliver me . 



Benito   aside . This must of necessity be the Lady who is in Love with me . See , how she surveys my Person ! Certainly one Wit knows another by instinct . By that old Gentleman , it should be the Lady Laura too . Hum ! Benito , thou art made for ever . 



Lau.   He has the most unpromising Face , for a Wit , I ever saw ; and yet he had need have a very good one , to make amends for his face . I am half cured of him already . 



Ben.   What means all this Surveying , Madam ? you bristle up to me , and wheel about me , like a Turkeycock that is making Love : Faith , How do you like my Person , ha ? 



Lau.   I dare not praise it , for fear of the old Compliment , that you should tell me , 't is at my service . But , pray , Is your Name Benito ? 



Ben.   Signior Benito , at your service , Madam . 



Lau.   And have you no Brother , or any other of your Name , one that is a Wit , attending on Signior Aurelian ? 



Ben.   no , I can assure your Ladyship : I myself am the only wit who does him the honour , not to attend him , but to bear him company . 



Lau.   But sure it was another you , that waited on Camillo in the Garden , last night . 



Ben.   It was no other Me , but me Signior Benito . 



Lau.   't is impossible . 



Ben.   't is most certain . 



Lau.   then I would advice you to go thither again , and look for the wit which you have left there , for you have brought very little along with you : your voice , methinks , too , is much altered . 



Ben.   Only a little overstrained , or so , with Singing . 



Lau.   How slept you , after your adventure ? 



Ben.   Faith , Lady , I could not sleep one wink , for Dreaming of you . 



Lau.   Not sleep for Dreaming ! When the place falls , you shall be Bull-master-general at Court.  



Ben.   Et tu Brutus ! Do you mistake me for a Fool too ? then , I find there 's one more of that opinion besides my Master . 



Vio.   Sister , look to yourself , my Uncle's returning . 



Lau.   I am glad on 't ; he has done my business : he has absolutely cured me . Lord , that I could be so mistaken ! 



Vio.   I told you what he was . 



Lau.   He was quite another thing last night : never was Man so altered in four and twenty hours . A pure Clown , mere Elementary earth , without the least spark of Soul in him ! 



Ben.   But , tell me truly , Are not you in Love with me ? Confess the truth : I love plain-dealing : you shall not find me refractory . 



Lau.   Away , thou Animal ; I have found thee out for a high and mighty fool , and so I leave thee . 



Mar.   Come , now I am ready for you ; as little Devotion , and as much good Housewifery as you please : take example by me ; I assure you no body debauches me to Church , except it be in your Company . Exeunt . 



Manet Benito ▪ Ben.   I am undone for ever : What shall I do with myself ? I 'll run into some Desert , and there I 'll hide my opprobrious head . no , hang 't , I won't neither ; all Wits have their failing sometimes , and have the fortune to be thought fools once in their lives . Sure this is but a copy of her countenance ; for my heart 's true to me , and whispers to me , she love's me still : well , I 'll trust in my own merits , and be confident . 



A noise of throwing down water within . Enter Mario , Fabio , Laura , and Violetta . Lau.   shaking her Clotheses , O Sir , I am wet quite through my Clotheses , I am not able to endure it . 



Vio.   Was there ever such an insolence ? 



Mar.   send in to see who life's there : I 'll make an example of 'em . 



Enter Frontona . Fab.   here 's the Woman of the House herself , Sir.  



Fron.   Sir , I submit , most willingly , to any punishment you shall inflict upon me ; for , though I intended nothing of an affront to these sweet Ladies , yet I can never forgive myself the misfortune of which I was the innocent occasion . 



Vio.   OH I am ready to faint away . 



Fron.   Alas , poor sweet Lady , she 's young and tender , Sir : I beseech you , give me leave to repair my offence , with offering myself , and poor House , for her accommodation . 



Ben.   I know that Woman : there 's some villainous Plot in this , I 'll lay my life on 't . Now , Benito , cast about for thy credit , and recover all again . 



Mar.   Go into the Coach , Nieces , and bid the Coachman drive apace . As for you , Mistress , your smooth Tongue shall not excuse you . 



Lau.   By your favour , Sir , I 'll accept of the Gentlewoman's civility ; I cannot stir a step farther . 



Fro.   Come in , sweet Buds of Beauty , you shall have a Fire in an inner Chamber , and if you please to repose yourself a while , Sir , in another Room , they shall come out , and wait on you immediately . 



Mar.   Well , if it must be so . 



Fron.   whispering the Ladies . Your Friends are ready in the Garden , and will be with you as soon as we have shaken off your Uncle . 



Ben.   A Cheat , a cheat , a rank one ; I smell it , old Sir , I smell it . 



Mar.   what 's the matter with the Fellow ? Is he distracted ? 



Ben.   no , 't is you are more likely to be distracted ; but that there goes some wit to the being mad , and you have not the least grain of wit to be gulled thus grossly . 



Fron.   What does the fellow mean ? 



Ben.   The Fellow means to detect your villainy , and to recover his lost reputation of a Wit.  



Fron.   Why , Friend , What villainy ? I hope my house is a civil house . 



Ben.   Yes , a very civil one ; for my master lay in of his last Clap there , and was treated very civilly to my knowledge . 



Mar.   how 's this , how 's this ? 



Fron.   Come , you are a dirty Fellow , and I am known to be a person that — 



Ben.   Yes , you are known to be a person that — 



Fron.   Speak your worst of me , What person am I known to be ? 



Ben.   Why , if you will have it , you are a little better than a procuress : you carry messages betwixt party and party , and , in one word Sir , she 's as arrant a Fruit-woman as any is about Rome . 



Mar.   Nay , if she be a Fruit-woman , my Nieces shall not enter into her doors . 



Ben.   You had best let them enter , you do not know how they may fructify in her house , for I heard her with these Ears whisper to 'm , that their Friends were within call . 



Mar.   This is palpable , this is manifest ; I shall remember you , Lady Fruiterer , I shall have your baskets searched when you bring Oranges again . Come away , Nieces ; and thanks honest Fellow for thy discovery . Exeunt Mario and Women . 



Ben.   Ha couragio : Il Diavolo e morto . Now I think I have tickled it ; this discovery has re-instated me into the Empire of my wit again . Now , in the pomp of this achievement , will I present myself before Madam Laura , with a Behold , Madam , the happy restauration of Benito . 

Enter Aurelian , Camillo , and Frontona , overhearing him . O , now , that I had the Mirror , to behold myself in the fullness of my glory ! and , o , that the domineering Fop my Master were in presence , that I might triumph over him ! that I might even contemn the wretched wight , the mortal of a grovelling Soul , and of a debased understanding . 

He looks about him and sees his Master . How the Devil came these three together ? nothing vexes me but that I must stand bare to him , after such an enterprise as this is . 



Aur.   Nay , put on , put on again , sweet Sir ; Why should you be uncovered before the Fop your Master ? the wretched wight , the mortal of a grovelling Soul.  



Ben.   Aye , Sir , you may make bold with yourself at your own pleasure : But for all that , a little bidding would make me take your Counsel and be covered , as Affairs go now . 



Aur.   If it be lawful for a man of a debased understanding to confer with such an exalted wit , pray what was that glorious achievement which rapt you into such an ecstasy ? 



Ben.   't is a sign you know well how matters go , by your ask me so impertinent a question . 



Aur.   putting off his Hat to him . Sir , I beg of you , as your most humble Master , to be satisfied . 



Ben.   Your Servant , Sir ; at present I am not at leisure for conference . But hark you , Sir , by the way of friendly advice , one word , henceforward tell me no more of the adventure of the Garden , nor of the great Looking-glass — 



Aur.   You mean the Mirror . 



Ben.   Yes , the Mirror ; tell me no more of that , except you could behold in it a better , a more discreet , or a more able face for stratagem , than I can , when I look there . 



Aur.   But , to the business ; What is this famous enterprise ? 



Ben.   Be satisfied , without troubling me farther , the business is done , the Rogues are defeated , and your Mistress is secured : if you would know more , demand it of that Criminal , Pointing to Frontona . and ask her how she dares appear before you , after such a signal treachery , or before me , after such an overthrow ? 



Fron.   I know nothing , but only that , by your Master's Order , I was to receive the two Ladies into my house , and you prevented it . 



Ben.   By my Master's Order ? I 'll ne'er believe it . This is your stratagem , to free yourself , and defraud me of my reward . 



Cam.   I 'll witness what she says is true . 



Ben.   I am deaf to all asseverations that make against my honour . 



Aur.   I 'll swear it then . We two were the two Rogues , and you the discoverer of our Villainy . 



Ben.   then , woe , wo , to poor Benito ! I find my abundance of wit has ruined me . 



Aur.   But come a little nearer : I would not receive a good office from a Servant , but I would reward him for his diligence . 



Ben.   Virtue , Sir , is its own reward : I expect none from you . 



Aur.   Since it is so , Sir , you shall lose no further time in my service : henceforward pray know me for your humble Servant ; for your Master I am resolved to be no longer . 



Ben.   Nay , rather than so , Sir , I beseech you let a good honest sufficient beating atone the difference . 



Aur.   't is in vain . 



Ben.   I am loath to leave you without a guide . 



Aur.   he 's at it again , do you hear , Camillo ? 



Cam.   Prithee , Aurelian , be molifyed , and beaten him . 



Fron.   Pray , Sir , hear reason , and lay 't on , for my sake . 



Aur.   I am obdurate . 



Cam.   But , What will your Father say , if you part with him ? 



Aur.   I care not . 



Ben.   Well , Sir , since you are so peremptory , remember I have offered you satisfaction , and so long my conscience is at ease : what a Devil , before I 'll offer myself twice to be beaten , by any Master in Christendom , I 'll starve , and that 's my resolution , and so your Servant that was Sir.  Exit . 



Aur.   I am glad I am rid of him ; he was my Evil Genius , and was always appearing to me , to blast my undertake : Let me send him never so far off , the Devil would be sure to put him in my way , when I had any thing to execute . Come , Camillo , now we have changed the Dice , it may be we shall have better fortune . 



SCENE . II  

Enter the Duke of Mantova in Masquerade , Frederick , Valerio , and others . On the other side Enter Lucretia , Hippolita , and Ascanio . Luc.   to Asca.  The Prince I know already , by your description of his Masking-habit ; but , Which is the Duke his Father ? 



Asca.   He whom you see talking with the Prince , and looking this way . I believe he has observed us . 



Luc.   If he has not , I am resolved we 'll make ourselves as remarkable as we can : I 'll exercise my talent of Dancing . 



Hip.   And I mine of Singing . 



Duke   to Frederick . Do you know the Company which came in last ? 



Fred.   I cannot possibly imagine who they are : at least I will not tell you — Aside . 



Duke .  there 's something very uncommon in the Air of one of them . 



Fred.   Please you , Sir , I 'll discourse with her , and see if I can satisfy your Highness . 



Duke .  Stay , there 's a Dance beginning , and she seems as if she would make one . 

SONG and DANCE . 

Long betwixt Love and fear Phillis tormented , 
Shunned her own wish yet at last she consented : 
But loath that day should her blushes discover , 
Come gentle Night She said , 
Come quickly to my aid , 
And a poor Shamefaced Maid 
hide from her Lover . 
Now cold as Ice I am , now hot as Fire , 
I dare not tell myself my own desire ; 
But let Day fly away , and let Night hast her : 
Grant ye kind Powers above , 
Slow hours to parting Love , 
But when to Bliss we move , 
Bid 'em fly faster . 
How sweet it is to Love when I discover , 
That Fire which burns my Heart , warming my Lover ; 
't is pity Love so true should be mistaken : 
But if this Night he be 
False or unkind to me , 
Let me die ere I see 
That I 'm forsaken . 
After the Dance . My curiosity redoubles , I must needs hale that unknown Vessel , and inquire whither she 's bound , and what freight she carries . 



Fred.   she 's not worth your trouble , Sir : she 'll either prove some common Courtesan in disguise , or at best , some homely person of Honour , that only dances well enough to invite a sight of herself , and would look ill enough to fright you . 



Duke .  that 's maliciously said ; all I see of her is charming , and I have reason to think her face is of the same piece , at least I 'll try my fortune . 



Fred.   What an unlucky accident is this ! If my father should discover her , she 's ruined : if he does not , yet I have lost her conversation to night . 



Duke approaches Lucretia . Asca.   't is the Duke himself who comes to court you . 



Luc.   Peace , I 'll fit him ; for I have been informed to the least title of his actions since he came to Town . 



Duke   to Lucretia . Madam , the Duke of Mantova , whom you must needs imagine to be in this company , has sent me to you , to know what kind of face there is belonging to that excellent shape , and to those charming motions which he observed so lately in your Dancing . 



Luc.   Tell his Highness , if you please , that there is a Face within the Masque , so very deformed , that if it were discovered , it would prove the worst Vizor of the two ; and that , of all Men , he ought not to desire it should be exposed , because than something would be found amiss in an entertainment which he has made so splendid and magnificent . 



Duke .  The Duke I am sure would be very proud of your compliment , but it would leave him more unsatisfied than before , for he will find in it so much of Gallantry , as , being added to your other graces , will move him to a strange temptation of knowing you . 



Luc.   I should still have the more reason to refuse him ; for 't were a madness , when I had charmed him by my motion and converse , to hazard the loss of that conquest by my eyes . 



Duke   aside . I am on fire till I discover her . 
At least , Madam , tell me of what Family you are . 


Luc.   Will you be satisfied if I tell you I am of the Colonne ; you have seen julia of that House . 



Duke .  then you are she . 



Luc.   Have I not her Stature most exactly ? 



Duke .  As near as I remember . 



Luc.   But , by your favour , I have nothing of her shape ; for , if I may be so vain to praise myself , she 's a little thicker in the shoulders , and , besides , she moves ungracefully . 



Duke .  then you are not she again . 



Luc.   no not she : but you have forgotten Emilia of the Ursini , whom the Duke saluted yesterday at her Balcone , when he entered . Her Air and Motion — 



Duke .  Are the very same with yours . Now I am sure I know you . 



Luc.   But there 's too little of her to make a Beauty : my stature is much more advantageous . 



Duke .  You have cozened me again . 



Luc.   Well , I find at last I must confess myself . What think you of Eugenia Beata ? the Duke seemed to be infinitely pleased last night , when my Brother presented me to him at the Belvedere . 



Duke .  Now I am certain you are she ; for you have both her stature , and her motion . 



Luc.   But , if you remember yourself a little better , there 's some small difference in our wit : for she has indeed the Air and Beauty of a Roman Lady , but all the dulness of a Dutch-woman . 



Duke .  I see , Madam , you are resolved to conceal yourself , and I am as fully resolved to know you . 



Luc.   See which of our resolutions will take place . 



Duke .  I come from the Duke , and can assure you he is of an humour to be obeyed . 



Luc.   And I am of an humour not to obey him . But , Why should he be so curious ? 



Duke .  If you would have my opinion , I believe he is in love with you . 



Luc.   Without seeing me ? 



Duke .  Without seeing all of you : Love is love , let it wound us from what part it please ; and if he have enough from your shape and conversation , his business is done , the more compendiously , without the face . 



Luc.   But the Duke cannot be taken with my conversation , for he never heard me speak . 



Duke   aside . ' 'Slife , I shall discover myself . Yes , Madam , he stood by , incognito , and heard me speak with you : but — 



Luc.   I wish he had trusted to his own courtship , and spoke himself ; for it gives us a bad impression of a Prince's wit , when we see fools in favour about his person . 



Duke .  What ever I am , I have it in Commission from him to tell you , he 's in Love with you . 



Luc.   The good old Gentleman may dote , if he so pleases ; but love , and fifty years old , are stark nonsense . 



Duke .  But some men , you know , are green at fifty . 



Luc.   Yes , in their understandings . 



Duke .  You speak with great contempt of a Prince , who has some reputation in the world . 



Luc.   no ; 't is you that speak with contempt of him , by saying he is in love at such an Age.  



Duke .  then , Madam , 't is necessary you should know him better for his reputation : and , that shall be , though he violate the Laws of Masquerade , and force you . 



Fred.   I suspected this , from his violent temper . Aside . Sir , the Emperor's Ambassador is here , in Masquerade , and I believe this to be his Lady : it were well if you enquired of him , before you forced her to discover . 



Duke .  Which is the Ambassador ? 



Fred.   That farthermost . Duke retires farther . 



Fred.   to Luc.  Take your opportunity to escape , while his back is turned , or you are ruined . Ascanio , wait on her . 



Luc.   I am so frighted , I cannot stay to thank you . 



Exeunt Luc. Asca. and Hippolita . Duke   to Fred.  't is a mistake , the Ambassador knows nothing of her : I 'm resolved I 'll know it of herself , ere she shall depart . Ha! Where is she ? I left her here . 



Fred.   aside . Out of your reach , Father mine , I hope . 



Duke .  She has either shifted places , or else slipped out of the Assembly . 



Fred.   I have looked round : she must be gone , Sir.  



Duke .  She must not be gone , Sir. Search for her every where : I will have her . 



Fred.   Has she offended your Highness ? 



Duke .  Peace , with your impertinent questions . Come hither , Valerio . 



Valerio .  Sir ? 



Duke .  OH , Valerio , I am desperately in love : that Lady , with whom you saw me talking , has — But I loose time ; she 's gone ; haste after her ; find her ; bring her back to me . 



Val.   If it be possible . 



Duke .  It must be possible ; the quiet of my life depends upon it . 



Val.   Which way took she ? 



Duke .  Go any way , every way ; ask no questions : I know no more , but that she must must be had . Exit Valerio . 



Fred.   Sir , the assembly will observe , that — 



Duke .  Damn the assembly , 't is a dull insignificant crowd , now she is not here : break it up , I 'll stay no longer . 



Fred.   aside . I hope she 's safe , and then this fantastic love of my Fathers will make us sport too morrow . Exeunt . 



SCENE III  

Lucretia , Ascanio , Hippolita . Luc.   Now , that we are safe at the gate of our Covent , methinks the adventure was not unpleasant . 



Hip.   And now that I am out of danger , Brother , I may tell you what a Novice you are in love , to tempt a young Sister into the wide World , and not to show her the difference betwixt that and her Cloister : I find I may venture safely with you another time . 



Asca.   OH , Sister , you play the Brazenhead with me ; you give me warning when Time's past ; but that was no fit opportun●●y : I hate to snatch a morsel of Love , and so away ; I am for a set-meal , where I may enjoy my full gust ; but when I once fall on , you shall find me a brave man upon occasion . 



Luc.   't is time we were in our Cells . Quick , Hippolita , where 's the Key ? 



Hip.   Here , in my pocket — no , 't is in my other Pocket — ha — 't is not there , neither . I am sure I put it in one of them . 



Luc.   What should we do , if it should be lost now ? 



Hip.   I have searched myself all over , and cannot find it . 



Asca.   A woman can never search herself all over ; let me search you , Sister . 



Luc.   Is this a time for Raillery ? O , sweet heaven ! speak comfort quickly ; Have you found it ? 



Here Ascanio slips away . Exit . Hip.   Speak you comfort , Madam , and tell me you have it , for I am too sure that I have none on 't . 



Luc.   OH unfortunate that we are ! day 's breaking ; the handicraft's shops begin to open . Clock strikes . 



Hip.   The Clock strikes two : within this half hour we shall be called up to our Devotions . Now , good Ascanio — Alas he 's gone too ! we are left miserable , and forlorn . 



Luc.   We have not so much as one place in the Town for a Retreat . 



Hip.   OH , for a Miracle in our time of need ! that some kind good-natured Saint would take us up , and heave us over the Wall into our Cells . 



Luc.   Dear Sister , Pray ; for I cannot : I have been so sinful , in leaving my Cloister for the World , that I am ashamed to trouble my Friends above to help me . 



Hip.   Alas , Sister , with what face can I Pray , then ! Yours were but little vanities ; but I have sinned swingingly , against my Vow ; yes , indeed , Sister , I have been very wicked ; for I wished the Ball might be kept perpetually in our Cloister , and that half the handsome Nuns in it might be turned to Men , for the sake of the other . 



Luc.   Well , if I were free from this disgrace , I would never more set foot beyond the Cloister , for the sake of any Man  



Hip.   And here I Vow , if I get safe within my Cell , I will not think of Man again these seven years . 



Ascanio Reenters . Asca.   Hold , Hippolita , and make no more rash Vows : if you do , as I live , you shall not have the Key . 



Hip.   The Key ! why , Have it you , Brother ? 



Luc.   He does but mock us : I know you have it not , Ascanio . 



Asca.   Ecce signum ; Here it is for you . 



Hip.   OH , sweet Brother , let me kiss you . 



Asca.   Hands off , sweet Sister ; you must not be forsworn : you vowed you would not think of a man these seven years . 



Hip.   Aye , Brother , but I was not so hasty , but I had wit enough to cozen the Saint to whom I vowed ; for you are but a Boy , Brother , and will not be a Man these seven years . 



Luc.   But , Where did you find the Key , Ascanio ? 



Asca.   To confess the truth , Madam , I stole it out of Hippolyta's Pocket , to take the Print of it in Wax ; for , I 'll suppose , you 'll give my Master leave to wait on you in the Nunnery-garden , after your Abbess has walked the Rounds . 



Luc.   Well , well , good morrow : when you have slept , come to the Grate for a Letter to your Lord Now will I have the headache , or the Megrim , or some excuse , for I am resolved I 'll not rise to Prayers . 



Hip.   Pray , Brother , take care of our Masking-habits , that they may be forthcoming another time . 



Asca.   Sleep , sleep , and dream of me , Sister : I 'll make it good , if you dream not too unreasonably . 



Luc.   Thus dangers in our Love make joys more dear ; 
And pleasure 's sweetest , when 't is mixed with fear . Exeunt . 


ACT. iv. SCENE I  

A Dressing-chamber . The Masking-habits of Lucretia and Hippolita laid in a Chair . Fred. and Ascanio . Fred.   I Never thought I should have loved her . Is 't come to this , after all my boasting and declarations against it ? Sure I loved her before , and did not know it , till I feared to lose her : there 's the reason . I had never desired her , if my Father had not . This is just the longing of a Woman : she never finds the appetite in herself , till she sees the Meat on another's Plate . I 'm glad however , you took the impression of the Key ; but 't was not well to fright them . 



Asca.   Sir , I could not help it ; but here 's the effect on 't : the Workman sat up all night to make it . Gives a Key 



Fred.   This Key will admit me into the Seraglio of the Godly . The Monastery has begun the War , in Sallying out upon the World , and therefore 't is but just that the World should make Reprizals on the Monastery . 



Asca.   Alas , Sir , you and Lucretia do but skirmish ; 't is I and Hippolita that make the War : 't is true , opportunity has been wanting for a Battle , but the forces have been stoutly drawn up on both sides . As for your concernment , I come just now from the Monastery , and have Orders from you Platonic Mistress to tell you , she expects you this evening in the Garden of the Nunnery ; withal , she delivered me this Letter for you . 



Fred.   Give it me , 



Asca.   OH , Sir , the Duke your Father ! 



The prince takes the Letter , and thinking to put it up bastily , drops it . Enter Duke . Duke .  Now , Frederick ! not abroad yet ? 



Fred.   Your last night's entertainment left me so weary , Sir , that I over-slept myself this morning . 



Duke .  I rather envy you , than blame you : our sleep is certainly the most pleasant portion of our lives . For my own part , I spent the night waking , and restless . 



Fred.   Has any thing of moment happened to discompose your Highness ? 



Duke .  I 'll confess my follies to you : I am in love with a Lady I saw last night in Masquerade . 



Fred.   't is strange she should conceal herself . 



Duke .  She has , from my best search ; yet I took exact notice of her Masking habit , and described it to those whom I employed to find her . 



Fred.   aside . 'Sdeath , it lies there unremoved ; and , if he turns himself , full in his eye . Now , now 't will be discovered . 



Duke .  For 't was extremely remarkable . I remember very well 't was a loose long Robe , streaked black and white , gird with a large Silver Ribbon , and the Vizor was a Moor's Face . 



Fred.   Running to the Chair where the Habits are , sits down . Sir , I beg pardon of your Highness for this Rudeness , I am — OH , O — 



Duke .  what 's the Matter ? 



Fred.   I am taken so extremely ill o' the sudden , that I am forced to sit before you . 



Duke .  Alas , what 's your distemper ? 



Fred.   A most violent gripping , which pulls me together on a heap . 



Duke .  Some cold , I fear , you took last night . Runs to the Door . Who waits there ? Call Physicians to the Prince . 



Fred.   Ascanio , remove these quickly . 



Ascanio takes away the habits , and Exit . Duke   returning . How do you find yourself ? 



Fre.   arising . Much better . Sir : that which pained me is removed : as it came unexpectedly , so it went as suddenly . 



Enter Valerio . Duke .  The Air , perhaps , will do you good . If you have health , you may see those Troops drawn out , which I design for Milan . 



Fred.   Shall I wait your Highness ? 



Duke .  no , leave me here with Valerio ; I have a little business , which dispatched , I 'll follow you immediately . Well , What success , Valerio ? Exit Frederick . 



Val.   Our endeavours are in vain , Sir : there has been inquiry made about all the Palaces in Rome , and neither of the Masking-habits can be discovered . 



Duke .  Yet , it must be a Woman of Quality . What paper 's that at my foot ? 



Val.   taking up the Letter . 't is Sealed , Sir , and directed to the Prince . 



Duke ,  taking the Letter . 't is a Woman's hand . Has he got a Mistress in Town so soon ? I am resolved to open it , though I do not approve my own curiosity . Opens and Reads it . Now my fear is over , I can laugh at my last night's adventure : I find that at Fifty all Men grow incorrigible , and Lovers especially ; for , certainly , never any Creature could be worse treated than your Father , ( how 's this , Valerio ? I am amazed ) and yet the good , old , out of fashion Gentleman heard himself Raillied , and bore it with all the patience of a Christian Prince . ( Now 't is plain , the Lady in Masquerade is a Mistress of my son 's , and the undutiful wretch was in the Plot to abuse me . ) Ascanio will tell you the latter part of our misfortune , how hardly we got into the Cloister , ( A Nun too ! O , the Devil ! ) when we meet next , pray provide to laugh heartily , for there is subject sufficient for a plentiful fit , and fop enough to spare for another time 

Lucretia . 





Val.   Lucretia ! now the Mystery is unfolded . 



Duke .  Do you know her ? 



Val.   When I was last at Rome , I saw her often ; she is near Kinswoman to the present Pope ; and , before he placed her in this Nunnery of Benedictines , was the most celebrated Beauty of the Town . 



Duke .  I know I ought to hate this Woman , because she has affronted me thus grossly ; but yet I cannot help it , I must love her . 



Val.   But , Sir , you come on too much disadvantage to be your Son's Rival . 



Duke .  I am deaf to all considerations : prithee do not think of giving a Madman Counsel : pity me , and cure me , if thou canst ; but remember there 's but one infallible Medicine , that 's enjoyment . 



Val.   I had forgot to tell you , Sir , that the Governor Don Mario is without , to wait on you . 



Duke .  Desire him to come in . 



Enter Don Mario . Mar.   I am come , Sir , to beg a favour from your Highness , and 't is on the behalf of my Sister Sophronia , Abbess of the Torr ' di Specchi . 



Val.   Sir , she 's Abbess of that very Monastery where your Mistress is enclosed . Aside , to the Duke . 



Duke .  I should be glad to serve any Relation of yours , Don Mario . 



Mar.   Her request is , That you would be pleased to grace her Chapel this afternoon . There will be Music , and some little Ceremony , in the Reception of my two Nieces , who are to be placed in Pension there . 



Duke .  Your Nieces , I hear , are fair , and great Fortunes . 



Mar.   Great vexations I 'm sure they are ; being daily haunted by a company of wild Fellows , who buzz about my house like Flies . 



Duke .  Your design seems reasonable ; Women in hot Countries are like Oranges in cold : to preserve them , they must be perpetually housed . I 'll bear you company to the Monastery . Come , Valerio ; this opportunity is happy beyond our expectation . Exeunt . 



SCENE II  

Camillo , Aurelian . Cam.   He has smarted sufficiently for this offence : prithee , dear Aurelian , forgive him ; he waits without , and appears penitent ; I 'll be responsible for his future carriage . 



Aur.   For your sake , then , I receive him into grace . 



Cam.   at the door . Benito , you may appear , your peace is made . 



Enter Benito . Aur.   But , it must be upon conditions . 



Ben.   Any conditions that are reasonable ; for , as I am a Wit , Sir , I have not eaten — 



Aur.   You are in the path of perdition already ; that 's the principal of our Conditions , you are to be a Wit no more . 



Ben.   Pray , Sir , if it be possible , let me be a little Wit still . 



Aur.   no , Sir : you can make a Leg , and Dance ; those are no Talents of a Wit : you are cut out for a brisk fool ▪ and can be no other . 



Ben.   Pray , Sir , let me think 〈…〉 Wit , or my heart will break . 



Cam.   That you will naturally do , as you are a Fool.  



Aur.   then , no farther meddling with adventures , or contrivances of your own : they are all belonging to the Territories of wit , from whence you are banished . 



Ben.   But what if my imagination should really furnish me with some — 



Aur.   Not a Plot , I hope ? 



Ben.   no , Sir , no Plot ; but some expedient then , to molify the word , when your invention has failed you ? 



Aur.   Think it a temptation of the Devil , and believe it not . 



Ben.   then farewell all the happiness of my life . 



Cam.   You know your doom , Benito , and now you may take your choice , whether you will renounce wit , or eating . 



Ben.   Well , Sir , I must continue my Body at what rate soever : and the rather , because now there 's no farther need of me in your adventures ; for I was assured , by Beatrix , this morning , that her two Mistresses are to be put in Pension in the Nunnery of Benedictines , this afternoon . 



Cam.   then I am miserable . 



Aur.   And you have deferred the telling it till it is past time to study for prevention . 



Cam.   Let us run thither immediately , and either perish in 't , or free them . you 'll assist me with your Sword ? 



Aur.   Yes , if I cannot do 't to more purpose , with my counsel . Let us first play the fairest of our Game , 't is time enough to snatch when we have lost it . Exeunt . 



SCENE III  

A Chapel . The Duke , Valerio , Attendants . At the other door , Laura , Violetta , Beatrix , Mario . Instrumental and vocal Music . In the time of which , Enter Aurelian and Camillo . After the Music , Enter Sophronia , Lucretia , Hippolita , and other Nuns . Duke   to Valeria , who had whispered to him . I needed not those marks to know her . she 's one continued excellence ; she 's all over Miracle , 



Soph.   to the Duke . We know , Sir , we are not capable , by our Entertainments , of adding any thing to your pleasures , and therefore we must attribute this favour of your presence , to your piety and devotion . 



Duke .  You have treated me with Harmony so excellent , that I believed myself among a choir of angels ; especially , when I beheld so fair a Troop behind you . 



Soph.   Their Beauty , Sir , is wholly dedicated to Heaven , and is no way ambitious of a commendation , which from your mouth might raise a pride in any other of the Sex.  



Cam.   I am impatient , and can bear no longer . Let what will happen — 



Aur.   Do you not see your ruin inevitable ? Draw in a holy place ! and in the presence of the Duke ! 



Mar.   I do not like Camillo's being here : I must cut short the Ceremony . Whispers Sophronia , 



Soph.   to Lau. and Violet . Come , fair Cousins , we hope to make the Cloysteral life so pleasing , that it may be an inducement to you to quit the wicked world for ever . 



Violetta passing by Camillo . Take that , and read it at your leisure . 

Conveys a Note into his hand . Cam   A Ticket , as I live , Aurelian . 



Aur.   Steal off , and be thankful : If that be my Beatrix with Laura , she 's most confoundedly ugly . If ever we had come to Love-work , and a Candle had been brought us , I had fallen back from that face , like a Buck Rabbit in coupling . 



Exeunt Camillo and Aurelian . Soph.   Daughters , the time of our Devotion calls us . All happiness to your Highness . 



Luc.   to Hip.  Little thinks my venerable old Love there , that his Mistress in Masquerade is so near him . Now do I even long to abuse that Fop-gravity again . 



Hip.   Methinks he looks on us . 



Luc.   Farewell , poor love , I am she , I am , for all my demure looks , that treated thee so inhumanely last night . 



She is going off , after Sophonia . Duke   following her . Stay Lady ; I would speak with you . 



Luc.   Ah! ( screaking . ) 



Soph.   How now , Daughter ? what 's the meaning of that undecent noise you make ? 



Luc.   aside . If I speak to him , he will discover my voice , and then I am ruined . 



Duke .  If your name be Lucretia , I have some business of concernment with you . 



Luc.   to Soph.  Dear Madam , for Heaven's sake make haste into the Cloister , the Duke pursues me on some ill design . 



Soph.   to the Duke . 't is not permitted , Sir , for Maids once entered into Religion , to hold discourses here of worldly things . 



Duke .  But my discourses are not worldly Madam ; 
I had a Vision in the dead of night , 
Which showed me this fair Virgin in my sleep , 
And told me , that from her I should be taught 
Where to bestow large Alms , and great Endowments , 
On some near Monastery . 


Soph.   — Stay , Lucretia , 
The Holy vision 's will must be obeyed . 


Exeunt Soph. cum suis.  Luc.   aside . He does not know me , sure ; and yet I fear Religion is the least of his business with me . 



Duke .  I see , Madam , Beauty will be beauty in any habit . 
Though I confess , the splendour of a Court 
Were a much fitter Scene for yours , then is 
A Cloistered privacy . 


Luc.   counter-feiting her voice . The World has no temptations for a mind 
So fixed , and raised above it , 
This humble Cell contains and bounds my wishes . 
My Charity gives you my Prayers , and that 's all my 
Converse with human kind . 


Duke .  Since when , Madam , have the World and you been upon these equal terms of hostility ? time was you have been better friends . 



Luc.   no doubt I have been vain , and sinful ; but , the remembrance of those days cannot be pleasant to me now , and therefore , if you please , do not refresh their Memory . 



Duke .  Their memory ! you speak as if they were Ages past . 



Luc.   You think me still what I was once , a vain , fond , giddy creature ; I see , Sir , whether your discourses tend , and therefore take my leave . 



Duke .  Yes , Madam , I know you see whither my discourses tend , and therefore 't will not be convenient that you should take your leave . Disguise yourself no farther ; you are known , as well as you knew me in Masquerade . 



Luc.   I am not used enough to the World , to interpret Riddles ; therefore , once more , heaven keep you . 



Duke .  This will not do : your voice , your mien , your stature , betray you for the same I saw last night : you know the time and place . 



Luc.   You were not in this Chapel ; and , I am bound by vow to stir no farther . 



Duke .  But you had too much wit to keep that vow . 



Luc.   If you persist , Sir , in this raving madness , 
I can bring witness of my innocence . Is going . 


Duke .  To save that labour , see if you know that hand , and let that justify you . ( Shows her Letter . ) 



Luc.   What do I see ! my ruin is inevitable . 



Duke .  You know you merit it : 
You used me ill , and now are in my power . 


Luc.   But you , I hope , are much too noble 
To destroy the Fame of a poor silly Woman ? 


Duke .  then , in few words , for I am bred a Soldier , 
And must speak plain , it is your Love I ask : 
If you deny , this Letter is produced ; 
You know the consequence . 


Luc.   I hope I do not : 
For , though there are appearances against me , 
Enough to give you hope I durst not eat you ; 
Yet , could you see my heart , 't is a white Virgin-tablet , 
On which no Characters of earthly love 
Were ever written : and , betwixt the Prince and me ; 
If there were any Criminal affection , 
May heaven this minute — 


Duke .  Swear not ; I believe you : 
For could I think my Son had ever enjoyed you , 
I should not be his Rival . Since he has not , 
I may have so much kindness for myself 
To wish that happiness . 


Luc.   You ask me what I must not grant , 
Nor if I loved you would : you know my vow of Chastity . 


Duke .  Yet again that senseless argument ? 
The Vows of Chastity can never be broken , 
Where Vows of secrecy are kept : those I 'll swear with you . 
But 't is enough , at present , you know my resolution . 
I would persuade , not force you to my Love ; 
And to that end I give you this night's respite . 
Consider all , that you may fear or hope ; 
And think that on your grant , or your denial , 
Depends a double welfare , yours and mine . Exit . 


Luc.   A double ruin rather , if I grant : For what can I expect from such a Father , when such a Son betrays me ! could I think of all Mankind , that Frederick could be base . And , with the vanity of vulgar Souls betray a Virgin's fame : one who esteemed him , and I much fear did more than barely so — But I dare not examine myself farther ; for fear of confessing to my own thoughts , a tenderness of which he is unworthy . 



Enter Hippolita . Hip.   I watched till your old Gallant was gone , to bring you news of your young one . A mischief on these old dry Lovers , they are good for nothing but tedious talking ; Well , yonder 's the Prince at the Grate ; I hope I need say no more to you . 



Luc.   I 'll come when I have recovered myself a little . 
I am a wretched creature , Hippolita ; the Letter 
I written the Prince — 


Hip.   I know it , is fallen into his Father's hands by accident . he 's as wretched as you too . Well , well , it shall be my part to bring you together ; and then , if two young people that have opportunity , can be wretched and melancholy — I 'll go before and meet Ascanio . Exit . 



Luc.   I am half unwilling to go , because I must be accessary to her Assignation with Ascanio ; but , for once , I 'll meet the Prince in the Garden walk : I am glad however that he is lesle criminal than I thought him . Exeunt . 



SCENE IU.  

The Nunnery-garden . Hippolita , Ascanio , meeting Laura and Violetta . Hip.   I hear some walking this way . Who goes there ? 



Lau.   We are the two new Pensioners , Laura and Violetta . 



Hip.   Go in , to your devotion : these undue hours of walking savour too much of worldly thoughts . 



Lau.   Let us retire to the Arbour , where , by this time , I believe our Friends are . Good-night , Sister . 



Hip.   Good Angels guard you . Exit Laura and Violetta . Now , Brother , the coast is clear , and we have the Garden to ourselves , Do you remember how you threatened me ? but that 's all one . How good soever the opportunity may be , so long as we two resolve to be virtuous . 



Asca.   Speak for yourself , Sister , for I am wickedly inclined . Yet , I confess , I have some remorse , when I consider you are in Religion . 



Hip.   We should do very well to consider that , both of us ; for , indeed , What should young people do , but think of Goodness and Religion ; especially when they love one another , and are alone too , Brother ? 



Asca.   A curse on 't , here comes my Lord , and Lucretia . We might have accomplished all , and been repenting by this time ; yet who the Devil would have thought they should have come so soon ? — Ah — Sets his Teeth . 



Hip.   Who the Devil would have put it to the venture ? This is always the fault of you raw Pages : you that are too young , never use an opportunity ; and we that are elder can seldom get one . — Ah! Sets her Teeth . 



Enter Frederick and Lucretia . Luc.   I believe , indeed , it troubled you to lose that Letter . 



Fred.   So much , Madam , that I can never forgive myself that negligence . 



Luc.   Call it not so , 't was but a casualty , though , I confess , the consequence is dangerous ; and therefore have not both of us reason to defy Love , when we see a little Gallantry is able to produce so much mischief . 



Fred.   aside . Now cannot I , for my heart , bring out one word against this Love.  



Luc.   Come , you are mute , upon a Subject that is both easy and pleasant . A man in Love is so ridiculous a creature — 



Fred.   Especially to those that are not . 



Luc.   True ; for to those that are , he cannot be so : they are like the Citizens of Bethlehem , who never find out one another's Maddess , because they are all tainted . But for such ancient Fops , as ( with reverence ) your Father is , What reason can they have to be in Love ? 



Fred.   Nay , your old Fop's unpardonable , that 's certain — But — 



Luc.   But What ? Come , laugh at him . 



Fred.   But , I consider , he is my Father , I can't laugh at him . 



Luc.   But , if it were another , we should see how you would insult over him . 



Fred.   Aye , if it were another — And yet I don't know neither , 't is no part of good nature to insult : a man may be overtaken with a passion , or so , I know it by myself . 



Luc.   How , by yourself ? you are not in love , I hope ? 
O that he would confess first now ! Aside . 


Fred.   But , if I were , I should be loath to be laughed at . 


Luc.   Since you are not in Love , you may the better counsel me : What shall I do with this same troublesome Father of yours ? 



Fred.   Any thing , but love him . 



Luc.   But you know he has me at a Bay ; my Letter is in his possession , and he may produce it to my ruin : therefore if I did allow him some little favour , to mollify him — 



Fred.   How , Madam ? would you allow him Favours ? I can never consent to it : not the least look or smile ; they are all too precious , though they were to save his life . 



Luc.   What , Not your Father ? O that he would confess he loved me first ! Aside . 



Fred.   What have I done ? I shall betray myself , and confess my love , to be laughed at , by this hardhearted Woman . Aside . 't is true , Madam , I had forgot ; he is , indeed , my Father , and therefore you may use him as kindly as you please . 



Luc.   he 's insensible : now he enrages me . Aside . What if he proposes to Mary me ? I am not yet professed , and 't would be much to my advantage . 



Fred.   Mary you ! I had rather die a thousand deaths , than suffer it . 



Luc.   This begins to please me . Aside . 
But , Why should you be so much my enemy ? 


Fred.   Your enemy , Madam ? Why , Do you desire it ? 


Luc.   Perhaps I do , 


Fred.   Do it , Madam , since it pleases you so well . 


Luc.   But you had rather die , than suffer it . 


Fred.   no , I have changed my mind : I 'll live , and not be concerned at it . 



Luc.   Do you contradict yourself so soon ? then know , Sir , I did intend to do it ; and I am glad you have given me advice so agreeable to my inclinations . 



Fred.   Heaven ! that you should not find it out ! I delivered your Letter on purpose to my Father , and 't was my business , now , to come and mediate for him . 



Luc.   Pray , then , carry him the news of his good success . 
Adieu , sweet Prince . 


Fred.   Adieu , dear Madam . 


Asca.   Hey day ! What will this come to ? they have cozened one another into a quarrel ; just like friends in Fencing , a chance thrust comes , and then they fall to 't in earnest . 



Hip.   You and I , Brother , shall never meet upon even terms , if this be not pieced . Faces about , Madam , turn quickly to your Man , or by all that 's virtuous , I 'll call the Abbess . 



Asca.   I must not be so bold with you , Sir ; but , if you please , you may turn towards the Lady , and I suppose you would be glad I durst speak to you with more authority , to save the credit of your willingness . 



Fred.   Well , I 'll show her I dare stay , if it be but to confront her Malice . 



Luc.   I am sure I have done nothing to be ashamed of , that I should need to run away . 



Asca.   Pray give me leave , Sir , to ask you but one question ; Why were you so unwilling that she should be Married to your Father ? 



Fred.   Because then , her Friendship must wholly cease . 



Asca.   But , you may have her Friendship , when she is Married to him . 



Fred.   What , when another had enjoyed her ? 



Asca.   Victoria , Victoria , he love's you , Madam ; let him deny it if he can . 



Luc.   Fie , fie , love me , Ascanio ! I hope he would not forswear himself , when he has railed so much against it . 



Fred.   I hope I may love your mind , Madam ; I may Love Spiritually . 



Hip.   that 's enough , that 's enough : let him love the mind without the body if he can . 



Asca.   Aye , aye , when the love is once come so far , that Spiritual Mind will never leave pulling , and pulling , till it has drawn the beastly body after it . 



Fred.   Well , Madam , since I must confess it , ( though I expect to be laughed at , after my railing against Love ) I do love you all over , both Soul and Body . 



Asca.   Lord , Sir , What a Tygress have you provoked ! you may see she takes it to the death that you have made this declaration . 



Hip.   I thought where all her anger was : Why do you not rail , Madam ? Why do you not banish him ? the Prince expects it ; he has dealt honestly , he has told you his Mind , and you make your worst on 't . 



Luc.   Because he does expect it , I am resolved I 'll neither satisfy him nor you ; I will neither rail nor laugh : let him make his worst of that , now . 



Fred.   If I understand you right , Madam , I am happy beyond either my deserts or expectation . 



Luc.   You may give my words what interpretation you please , Sir , I shall not envy you their meaning in the kindest sense . But we are near the Jessamine-walk , there we may talk with greater freedom , because 't is farther from the House . 



Fred.   I wait you , Madam . Exeunt . 



SCENE . v.  

Aurelian with a dark Lantern , Camillo and Benito . Cam.   So , we are safe got over into the Nunnery-garden ; for what 's to come , trust Love and Fortune . 



Aur.   This must needs be the walk she mentioned ; yet , to be sure , I 'll hold the Lantern while you read the Ticket . 



Cam.   reads . I prepared this Ticket , hoping to see you in the Chapel : come this evening over the Garden-wall , on the right hand , next the Tiber.  



Aur.   ( We are right , I see . ) 



Cam.   Bring only your discreet Benito with you , and I will meet you , attended by my faithful Beatrix . Violetta . 



Ben.   Discreet Benito ! Did you hear that , Sir ? 



Aur.   Mortify thyself for that vain thought ; and , without enquiring into the mystery of these words , which I assure thee were not meant to thee , plant thyself by that Ladder without motion , to secure our retreat ; and be sure to make no noise . 



Ben.   But , Sir , in case that — 



Aur.   Honest Benito , no more questions : Basta is the word . Remember , thou art only taken with us , because thou hast a certain evil Daemon who conducts thy actions , and would have been sure , by some damned accident or other , to have brought thee hither to disturb us . 



Cam.   I hear whispering not far from us , and I think 't is Violetta's voice . 



Aur.   to Benito . Retire to your Post ; avoid , good Satan . 



Exit Benito . Enter Laura with a dark Lantern hid , and Violetta . Cam.   Ours is the honour of the Field , Madam ; we are here before you . 



Vio.   Softly , dear friend , I think I hear some walking in the Garden . 



Cam.   Rather , let us take this opportunity for your escape from hence ; all things are here in readiness . 



Vio.   This is the second time we ever have met ; let us discourse , and know each other better first : that 's the way to make sure of some love beforehand ; for , as the world goes , we know not how little we may have when we are Married . 



Cam.   Losses of opportunity are fatal , in war , you know , and love 's a kind of warfare . 



Vio.   I shall keep you yet a while from close fight . 



Cam.   But , Do you know what an hour in Love is worth ? 't is more precious than an Age of ordinary life ; 't is the very Quintessence and Extract of it . 



Vio.   I do not like your Chemical preparation of love ; yours is all Spirit , and will fly too soon : I must see it fixed , before I trust you . But we are near the Arbour ; now our out guards are set , let us retire a little , if you please ; there we may talk more freely . 



Exeunt . Aur.   to Laura . My Lady's Woman , methinks you are very reserved to night : pray advance into the Lists ; though I have seen your countenance by day , I can endure to hear you talk by night . Be cunning , and set your wit to show which is your best commodity : it will help the better to put off that drug , your Face . 



Lau.   The coursest ware will serve such customers as you are : let it suffice , Mr. Servingman , that I have seen you too . Your face is the original of the ugliest Vizors about Town ; and for wit , I would advice you to speak reverently of it , as a thing you are never like to understand . 



Aur.   Sure , Beatrix , you came lately from looking in your Glass , and that has given you a bad opinion of all faces . But since when am I become so notorious a fool ? 



Lau.   Since yesterday ; for tother night you talked like a man of sense : I think your wit comes to you , as the sight of Owls does , only in the dark . 



Aur.   Why , When did you discourse by day with me ? 



Lau.   You have a short memory . This afternoon , in the great street . Do you not remember when you talked with Laura ? 



Aur.   But what was that to Beatrix ? 



Lau.   aside . ' 'Slife , I had forgot that I am Beatrix . 
But , pray , When did you find me out to be so ugly ? 


Aur.   This afternoon , in the Chapel . 


Lau.   That cannot be , for I well remember you were not there , Benito : I saw none but Camillo , and his friend the handsome stranger . 



Aur.   aside . Curse on 't , I have betrayed myself . 



Lau.   I find you are an Impostor ; you are not the same Benito : your language has nothing of the Servingman . 



Aur.   And yours , methinks , has not much of the Waiting-woman . 



Lau.   My Lady is abused , and betrayed by you : but I am resolved 
I 'll discover who you are . Holds out a Lantern to him . 
How ? the Stranger ! 


Aur.   Nay , Madam , if you are good at that , I 'll match you there too . Holds out his Lantern . OH prodigy ! Is Beatrix turned to Laura ? 



Lau.   Now the question is , which of us two is the greatest cheat ? 



Aur.   that 's hardly to be tried , at so short warning : Let 's Mary one another , and then , twenty to one , in a Twelve Month we shall know . 



Lau.   Mary ! Are you at that so soon , Signior ? Benito and Beatrix , I confess , had some acquaintance ; but Aurelian and Laura are mere strangers . 



Aur.   That ground I have gotten as Benito , I am resolved I 'll keep as Aurelian . If you will take State upon you , I have treated you with Ceremony already ; for I have wooed you by Proxy . 



Lau.   But you would not be contented to bed me so ; or give me leave to put the Sword betwixt us . 



Aur.   Yes , upon condition you 'll remove it . 



Lau.   Pray let our Friends be judge of it ; if you please , we 'll find 'em in the Arbour . 



Aur.   Content ; I am then sure of the Verdict , because the Jury is bribed already . Exeunt . 



SCENE VI.  

Benito meeting Frederick , Ascanio , Lucreria and Hippolita . Ben.   Knowing my own merits , as I do , 't is not impossible but some of these Harlotry Nuns may love me : O , here 's my Master ! now if I could but put this into civil terms , so as to ask his leave , and not displease him — 



Asca.   I hear one talking , Sir , just by us . 



Ben.   I am stolen from my post , Sir , but for one minute only , to demand permission of you , since it is not in our Articles , that if any of these Nuns should cast an eye or so — 



Fred.   ' 'Slife , we are betrayed ; but I 'll make this Rascal sure . 

Draws and runs at him . 

Ben.   Help , Murder , Murder . Runs off . 



Enter Aurelian and Camillo ; Laura and Violetta after them . Aur.   That was Benito's voice : we are ruined . 



Cam.   O , here they are ; we must make our way . 



Aur. and the Prince make a Pass or two confusedly , and fight off the Stage . The Women Schreek . Asca.   Never fear , Ladies . Come on , Sir ; I am your Man  



Cam.   stepping back . This is the Prince's Page , I know his voice , Ascanio ? 



Asca.   Signior Camillo ! 



Cam.   If the Prince be here , 't is Aurelian is engaged with him . Let us run in quickly , and prevent the mischief . 



All go off . A little Clashing within . After which they all re-enter . Fred.   to Aur.  I hope you are not wounded . 



Aur.   no , Sir ; but infinitely grieved that — 



Fred.   no more ; 't was a mistake : but which way can we escape , the Abbess is coming , I see the Lights . 



Luc.   You cannot go by the Gate then . Ah me , unfortunate ! 



Cam.   But over the Wall you may : we have a Ladder ready . Adieu , Ladies . Curse on this ill luck , where we had just persuaded 'em to go with us ! 



Fred.   Farewell , sweet Lucretia . 



Lau.   Good-night , Aurelian . 



Aur.   ay , it might have proved a good one : Faith , shall I stay , yet , and make it one , in spite of the Abbess , and all her Works ? 



Lau.   The Abbess is just here ; you will be caught 
In the Spiritual Trap , if you should tarry . 


Aur.   That will be time enough when we two Mary . 


Exeunt severally . ACT. v. SCENE I  

Enter Sophronia , Lucretia , Laura , Violetta . Soph.   BY this , then , it appears you all are guilty ; 
Only your ignorance of each others crimes 
Caused first that tumult , and this discovery . 
Good Heavens , that I should live to see this day ! 
Methinks these Holy Walls , the Cells , the Cloisters , 
Should all have struck a secret horror on you : 
And when , with unchaste thoughts , 
You trod these lonely walks , you should have looked 
The venerable Ghost of our first Foundress 
Should with spread arms have met you in her Shroud , 
And frighted you from Sin.  


Luc.   Alas , you need not aggravate our crimes , 
We know them to be great beyond excuse , 
And have no hope , but only from your mercy . 


Lau.   Love is , indeed , no plea within these Walls ; 
But , since we brought it hither , and were forced , 
Not led by our own choice , to this strict life — 


Vio.   Too hard for our soft youth , and bands of love , 
Which we before had knit . 


Lau.   — Pity your blood , 
Which runs within our veins , and since Heaven puts it 
In your sole power to ruin or to save , 
Protect us from the sordid avarice 
Of our domestic Tyrant , who deserves not 
That we should call him Uncle , or you Brother . 


Soph.   If , as I might , with Justice I should punish , 
no penance could be rigorous enough ; 
But I am willing to be more indulgent . 
None of you are Professed : and since I see 
You are not fit for higher happiness , 
You may have what you think the world can give you . 


Luc.   Let us adore you , Madam . 


Soph.   — You , Lucretia , 
I shall advice within . 


Vio.   — But for us , Madam ? 


Soph.   For you , dear Nieces , I have long considered 
The injuries you suffer from my Brother , 
And I rejoice it is in me to help you : 
I will endeavour , from this very hour , 
To put you both into your Lover's hands , 
Who , by your own confession , have deserved you ; 
But so as ( though 't is done by my connivance ) 
It shall not seem to be with my consent . 


Lau.   You do an act of noble charity , 
And may just heaven reward it . 


Enter Hippolita and whispers Lucretia . Soph.   O , you 're a faithful Portress of a Cloister . 
What is 't you whisper to Lucretia ? 
On your Obedience tell me . 


Luc.   — Since you must know , Madam , 
I have received a Courtship from the Prince 
Of Mantova . The rest Hippolita may speak . 


Hip.   His Page Ascanio is at the grate , 
To know from him , how you had scaped this danger ; 
And brings with him those Habits — 


Soph.   I find that here has been a long commerce . 
What Habits ? 


Luc.   I blush to tell you , Madam . They were Masking Habits , in which we went abroad . 



Soph.   OH strange Impiety ! Well , I conclude 
You are no longer for Religious clothing : 
You would infect our Order . 


Luc.   kneeling . Madam , you promised us forgiveness . 


Soph.   I have done ; for 't is indeed too late to chide . 


Hip.   With Ascanio , there are two Gentlemen ; Aurelian and Camillo I think they call themselves , who came to me , recommended from the Prince , and desired to speak with Laura and Violetta . 



Soph.   I think they are your Lovers , Nieces . 



Vio.   Madam , they are . 



Hip.   But , for fear of discovery from your Uncle Mario , whose House you know , joins to the Monastery , are both in Masquerade . 



Soph.   to Laura and Violetta . This opportunity must not be lost . 
You two shall take the Masking-habits instantly , 
And , in them , scape your jealous Unckle's eyes . 
When you are happy , make me so , by hearing your success . 


Kisses them . Exeunt Lau. and Vio.  Luc.   A sudden thought is sprung within my mind , 
Which , by the same indulgence you have shown , 
May make me happy too . I have not time 
To tell you now , for fear I loose this opportunity . 
When I return from speaking with Ascanio , 
I shall declare the secrets of my Love , 
And crave your farther help . 


Soph.   In all that virtue will permit you shall not fail to find it . 



Exit Lucretia . Hip.   Madam , the foolish Fellow whom we took grows troublesome ; What shall we do with him ? 



Soph.   send for the Magistrate ; he must be punished — 
Yet hold ; that would betray the other secret . 
Let him be straight turned out , on this Condition , 
That he presume not ever to disclose 
He was within these walls . I 'll speak with him : 
Come , and attend me to him . Exit Sophronia . 


Hip.   You fit to be an Abbess ? We that live out of the World , should at least have the common sense of those that live far from Town ; if a Pedlar comes by 'em once a year , they will not let him go without providing themselves with what they want . 



Exit after Sophronia . SCENE II  

The Street . Aurelian , Camillo , Laura , Violetta : all in Masking habits . Cam.   This generosity of the Abbess is never to be forgot ; and it is the more to be esteemed because it was the lesle to be expected . 



Vio.   At length , my Camillo , I see myself safe within your Arms ; and yet , methinks , I can never be enough secure of you : for , now I have nothing else to fear , I am afraid of you ; I fear your constancy : they say possession is so dangerous to Lovers , that more of them die of Surfeits than of Fasting . 



Lau.   you 'll be rambling too , Aurelian , I do not doubt it , if I would let you ; but I 'll take care to be as little a Wife , and as much a Mistress to you , as is possible : I 'll be sure to be always pleasant , and never suffer you to be cloyed . 



Aur.   You are certainly in the right : pleasantness of humour makes a Wife last in the sweet meat , when it will no longer in the Fruit. But pray let 's make haste to the next honest Priest , that can say Grace to us , and take our appetites while they are coming . 



Cam.   That way leads to the Austin-friars-s , there life's a Father of my acquaintance . 



Lau.   I have heard of him ; he has a mighty stroke at Matrimonies , and mumbles 'em over as fast , as if he were teaching us to forget 'em all the while . 



Enter Benito , and overhears the last speech . Ben.   Cappari ; that 's the voice of Madam Laura . Now , Benito , is the time to repair the lost honour of thy wit , and to blot out the last adventure of the Nunnery . 



Vio.   That way I hear company ; let 's go about by this other street , and eat eat 'em . 



Ben.   That voice I know too ; 't is the younger Sister , Violetta's . Now have these two most treacherously conveyed themselves out of the Nunnery , for my Master and Camillo , and given up their persons to those lewd Rascals in Masquerade ; but I 'll prevent ' 'em . Help there , Thief's and Ravishers , villainous Maskers , stop Robbers , stop Ravishers . 



Cam.   We are pursued that way , let 's take this street . 



Lau.   Save yourselves , and leave us . 



Cam.   we 'll rather die than leave you . 



Enter at several doors Duke of Mantova and Guards , and Don Mario and Servants , with Torch's . Aur.   So , now the way is shut up on both sides . we 'll die merrily however : — have at the fairest . 



Aurelian and Camillo fall upon the Duke's Guards , and are seized behind by Mario is Servants . At the drawing of Swords , Benito runs off . Duke .  Are these insolences usually committed in Rome by night ? it has the fame of a well-governed City ; and methinks , Don Mario , it does somewhat reflect on you to suffer these Disorders . 



Mar.   They are not to be hindered in the Carnival : you see , Sir , they have assumed the Privilege of Maskers . 



Lau.   to Au.  If my Uncle know us , we are ruined ; therefore be sure you do not speak . 



Duke .  How then can we be satisfied this was not a device of Masking , rather than a design of Ravishing ? 



Mar.   Their accuser is fled , I saw him run at the beginning of the scuffle ; but I 'll examine the Ladies . 



Vio.   Now we are lost . 



Duke coming near Laura takes notice of her Habit.  Duke   aside . 't is the same , 't is the same ; I know Lucretia by her Habit : I 'm sure I am not mistaken . Now , Sir , you may cease your examination , I know the Ladies . 



Aur.   to Cam.  How the Devil does he know ' 'em ? 



Cam.   't is alike to us ; they are lost both ways . 



Duke   taking Laura aside . Madam , you may confess yourself to me . Whatever your design was in leaving the Nunnery , your reputation shall be safe . I 'll not discover you , provided you grant me the happiness I last requested . 



Lau.   I know not , Sir , how you could possibly come to know me , or of my design in quitting the Nunnery ; but this I know , that my Sister and myself are both unfortunate , except your Highness be pleased to protect us from our Uncle ; at least , not to discover us . 



Duke .  His Holiness your Uncle , shall never be acquainted with your flight , on Condition you will wholly renounce my Son , and give yourself to me . 



Lau.   Alas , Sir , For whom do you mistake me ? 



Duke .  I mistake you not , Madam : I know you for Lucretia . You forget that your Disguise betrays you . 



Lau.   then , Sir , I perceive I must disabuse you : if you please to withdraw a little , that I may not be seen by others , I will pull off my Mask , and discover to you that Lucretia and I have no resemblance , but only in our misfortunes . 



Duke .  't is in vain , Madam , this dissembling : I protest if you pull off your Mask , I will hide my Face , and not look upon you , to convince you that I know you . 



Enter Benito . Ben.   So , now the fray is over , a man may appear again with safety . O , the Rogues are caught I see , and the Damsels delivered . This was the effect of my valour at the second hand . 



Aur.   Look , look , Camillo , it was my perpetual Fool that caused all this , and now he stands yonder , laughing at his mischief , as the Devil is pictured , grinning behind the Witch upon the Gallows . 



Ben.   to Mario . I see , Sir , you have got your Women , and I am glad on 't : I took 'em just flying from the Nunnery . 



Duke   to Lau.  You see that Fellow knows you too . 



Mar.   Were these Women flying from a Nunnery ? 



Ben.   These Women ? Hey day ! then , it seems , you do not know they are your Nieces . 



Duke .  His Nieces , say you ? Take heed , Fellow , you shall be punished severely if you mistake . 



Cam.   Speak to Benito in time , Aurelian . 



Aur.   The devil 's in him , he 's running downhill full speed , and there is no stopping him . 



Mar.   My Nieces ? 



Ben.   Your Nieces ? Why , Do you doubt it ? I praise Heaven I never met but with two half-wits in my life , and my master 's one of 'em ; I will not name the other , at this time . 



Duke .  I say they are not they . 



Ben.   I am sure they are Laura and Violetta , and that those two Rogues were running away with 'em , and that I believe with their consent . 



Vio.   Sister , 't is in vain to deny ourselves ; you see our ill fortune pursues us avoidable . Turning up her Masque . Yes , Sir , we are Laura and Violetta , whom you have made unhappy by your Tyranny . 



Lau.   turning up her Mask . And these two Gentlemen are no Ravishers , but — 



Ben.   How , no Ravishers ? yes , to my knowledge , they are — As he speaks , Aurelian pulls off his Mask . no Ravishers , as Madam Laura was saying ; but two as honest Gentlemen as ever broke bread : My own dear Master , and so forth ! 



Runs to Aurelian , who thrusts him back . Enter Valerio , and whispers the Duke , giving him a Paper , which he reads , and seems pleased . Mar.   Aurelian and Camillo ! I 'll see you in safe custody , and , for , these Fugitives , go , carry 'em to my Sister , and desire her to have a better care of her Kinswomen . 



Vio.   We shall live yet to make you refund our Portions . Farewell Camillo ; comfort yourself ; remember there 's but a Wall betwixt us . 



Lau.   And I 'll cut through that Wall with Vinegar , but I 'll come to you , Aurelian . 



Aur.   I 'll cut through the Grates with Aqua-sortis , but I 'll meet you . Think of these things , and despair and die , old Gentleman . 



Aurelian and Camillo are carried off on one side , and Laura and Violetta on the other . Ben.   All things go cross to men of sense : would I had been born with the brains of a Shopkeeper , that I might have thriven without knowing why I did so . Now must I follow my Master to the Prison , and , like an ignorant Customer that comes to buy , must offer him my backside , tell him I trust to his honesty , and desire him to please himself , and so be satisfied . Exit . 



Duke   to Valerio . I am overjoyed , I 'll see her immediately : now my business with Don Mario is at an end , I need not desire his company to introduce me to the Abbess , this Assignation from Lucretia shows me a nearer way . Noble Don Mario , it was my business when this accident happened in the street to have made you a visit ; but now I am prevented by an occasion which calls me another way . 



Mar.   I receive the intention of that honour as the greatest happiness that could befall me : in the mean time , if my attendance — 



Duke .  By no means , Sir , I must of necessity go in private , and therefore , if you please , you shall omit the ceremony . 



Mar.   A happy even to your Highness . Now will I go to my Sister the Abbess , before I sleep , and desire her to take more care of her Flock , or , for all our Relation , I shall make complaint , and endeavour to ease her of her charge . Exit . 



Duke .  So , now we are alone , What said Lucretia ? 



Val.   When first I pressed her to this Assignation , 
She spoke like one in doubt what she should do ; 
She demured much upon the decency of it , 
And somewhat too she seemed to urge , of her 
Engagement to the Prince : in short , Sir , 
I perceived her wavering ; and closed with the opportunity . 


Duke .  OH , when women are once irresolute , betwixt the former love and the new one , they are sure to come over to the latter : the wind , their nearest likeness , seldom chaps about to return into the old corner . 



Val.   In conclusion , she consented to the interview , and for the rest , I urged it not , for I suppose she will hear reason sooner from your mouth than mine . 



Duke .  Her Letter is of the same tenor with her Discourse ; full of doubts and doubles , like a hunted Hare when she 's near tired . The Garden , you say , is the place appointed ? 



Val.   It is , Sir ; and the next half hour the time : but , Sir , I fear the Prince your Son will never bear the loss of her with patience . 



Duke .  't is no matter ; let the young Gallant storm to night , to morrow he departs from Rome . 



Val.   That , Sir , will be severe . 



Duke .  He has already received my commands to travel into Germany : I know it stung him to the quick ; but he 's too dangerous a Rival : the Soldiers love him too ; when he 's absent they will respect me more . Exeunt Guards . 

But I defer my happiness too long ; dismiss my Guards there . 
The pleasures of old age brook no delay : 
Seldom they come , and soon they fly away . Exeunt . 


SCENE III  

Prince and Ascanio . Fred.   't is true , he is my Father ; but when Nature 
Is dead in him , Why should it live in me ? 
What have I done , that I am banished Rome , 
The World's delight , and my Souls joy Lucretia , 
And sent to reel with midnight Beasts in Almain ? 
I cannot , will not bear it . 


Asca.   I 'm sure you need not , Sir : the Army is all yours ; they wish a youthful Monarch , and will resent your injuries . 



Fred.   Heaven forbid it . And yet I cannot lose Lucretia . 
there 's something I would do , and yet would eat 
The ill that must attend it . 


Asca.   You must resolve , for the time presses . She told me , this hour , she had sent for your Father : what she means I know not , for she seemed doubtful , and would not tell me her intention . 



Fred.   If she be false ; — yet , Why should I suspect her ? yet , Why should I not ? she 's a Woman ; that includes ambition , and inconstancy : then , she 's tempted high : 't were unreasonable to expect she should be faithful : well , something I have resolved and will about it instantly : and if my Friends prove faithful I shall prevent the worst . 

Enter Aurelian and Camillo guarded . Aurelian and Camillo ? How came you thus attended ? 



Cam.   You may guests at the occasion , Sir ; pursuing the adventure which brought us to meet you in the Garden , we were taken by Don Mario . 



Aur.   And , as the Devil would have it , when both we and our Mistresses were in expectation of a more pleasant lodging . 



Fred.   Faith , that 's very hard , when a man has charged and primed , and taken aim , to be hindered of his shoot — Soldiers , release these Gentlemen ; I 'll answer it . 



Cap.   Sir , we dare not disobey our Orders . 



Fred.   I 'll stand betwixt you and danger . In the mean time take this , as an acknowledgement of the kindness you do me . 



Cap.   Aye , marry , there 's Rhetoric in Gold : Who can deny these arguments ? Sir , you may dispose of our prisoners as you please ; we 'll use your name if we are called in question . 



Fred.   Do so . Good-night good Soldiers . Exeunt Soldiers . Now , Gentlemen , no thanks , you 'll find occasion instantly to reimburse me of my kindness . 



Cam.   Nothing but want of liberty could have hindered us from serving you . 



Fred.   Meet me , within this half hour , at our Monastery ; and if , in the mean time , you can pick up a dozen of good Fellows , who dare venture their lives bravely , bring them with you . 



Aur.   I hope the Cause is bad too , otherwise we shall not deserve your thanks : may it be for demolishing that cursed Monastery . 



Fred.   Come , Ascanio , follow me . Exeunt severally . 



SCENE IU.  

The Nunnery-garden . Duke , Lucretia . Luc.   In making this appointment , 
I go too far , for one of my profession ; 
But I have a divining Soul within me , 
Which tells me , trust reposed in noble natures 
Obliges them the more . 


Duke .  I come to be commanded , not to govern , 
Those few soft words you sent me , have quite altered 
My rugged nature ; if it still be violent , 
't is only fierce and eager to obey you , 
Like some impetuous flood , which Mastered once , 
With double force bends backward . 
The place of Treaty shows you strongest here ; 
For still the vanquished sues for peace abroad , 
While the proud Victor makes his terms at home . 


Luc.   That peace , I see , will not be hard to make 
When either side shows confidence of noble dealing 
From the other . 


Duke .  And this , sure , is our case , since both are met alone . 


Luc.   't is mine , Sir , more than yours . 
To meet you single , shows I trust your virtue ; 
But you appear distrustful of my Love.  


Duke .  You wrong me much , I am not . 


Luc.   Excuse me , Sir , you keep a curb upon me : 
You awe me with a Letter , which you hold 
As Hostage of my Love ; and Hostages 
Are ne'er required but from suspected Faith.  


Duke   We are not yet in terms of perfect peace ; 
When ever you please to seal the Articles , 
Your pledge shall be restored . 


Luc.   That were the way to keep us still at distance ; 
For what we fear , we cannot truly love . 


Duke .  But how can I be then secure , that when 
Your fear is o'er your love will still continue ? 


Luc.   Make trial of my gratitude ; you 'll find 
I can acknowledge kindness . 


Duke .  But that were to forego the faster hold 
To take a loose , and weaker . 
Would you not judge him mad who held a Lion 
In chains of Steel , and changed 'em for a twine ? 


Luc.   But love is soft , 
Not of the Lion's nature , but the dove 's ; 
An Iron chain would hang too heavy on a tender neck . 


Duke .  Since on one side there must be confidence , 
Why may not I expect , as well as you , 
To have it placed in me ? Repose your trust 
Upon my Royal word . 


Luc.   As 't is the privilege of womankind 
That men should court our Love , 
And make the first advances ; so it follows 
That you should first oblige ; for 't is our weakness 
Gives us more cause of fear , and therefore you , 
Who are the stronger Sex , should first secure it . 


Duke .  But , Madam , as you talk of fear from me , 
I may as well suspect design from you , 


Luc.   Design ▪ of giving you my Love more freely , 
Of making you a Title to my heart , 
Where you by force would reign . 


Duke .  OH that I could believe you ! but your words 
Are not enough disordered for true love ; 
They are not plain , and hearty , as are mine ; 
But full of art , and close insinuation : 
You promise all , but give me not one proof 
Of love before ; not the least earnest of it . 


Luc.   And , What is then this midnight conversation ? 
These silent hours divided from my sleep ? 
Nay , more ; stolen from my Prayers with Sacrilege , 
And here transferred to you ? This guilty hand , 
Which should be used in dropping holy Beads , 
But now , bequeathed to yours ? This heaving heart , 
Which only should be throbing for my sins , 
But which now beats uneven time for you ? 
These are my arts ! and these are my designs ! 


Duke .  I love you more , Lucretia , than my Soul ; 
Nay , than yours too , for I would venture both 
That I might now enjoy you ; and if what 
You ask me did not make me fear to lose you , 
Though it were even my life , you should not be denied it . 


Luc.   then I will ask no more . 
Keep my Letter , to upbraid me with it ; 
To Say , when I am sullied with your Lust , 
And fit to be forsaken , Go , Lucretia , 
To your first love ; for this , for this , I leave you . 


Duke .  O , Madam , never think that day can come ! 


Luc.   It must , it will , I read it in your looks ; 
You will betray me when I 'm once engaged . 


Duke .  If not my Faith , your Beauty will secure you . 


Luc.   My Beauty is a Flower upon the stalk , 
Goodly to see ; but , gathered for the scent , 
And once with eagerness pressed to your nostrils , 
The sweets drawn out , 't is thrown with scorn away . 
But I am glad I find you out so soon : 
I simply loved , and meant ( with shame I own it ) 
To trust my Virgin-honour in your hands ; 
I asked not wealth , for hire ; and , but by chance , 
( I wonder that I thought on 't ) begged one trial , 
And , but for form , to have pretence to yield , 
And that you have denied me . Farewell : I could 
Have loved you , and yet , perhaps , I — 


Duke .  OH speak , speak out , and do not drown that word , 
It seemed as if it would have been a kind one , 
And yours are much too precious to be lost . 


Luc.   Perhaps — I cannot yet leave loving you . 
There ' ' was . But I recalled it in my mind , 
And made it false before I gave it Ayr. 
Once more , farewell — I wonot ; 
Now I can say I wonot , wonot love you ▪ Going . 


Duke .  You shall ; and this shall be the Seal of my affection . 
Gives the Letter . There , take it , my Lucretia ; I give it with more joy , 
Than I with grief received it . 


Luc.   Good night ; I 'll thank you for 't some other time . 


Duke .  you 'll not abuse my love ? 


Luc.   no ; but secure my Honour . 


Duke .  I 'll force it from your hands . Lucretia runs . 


Luc.   Help , help , or I am ravished ; help , for heaven's sake . 
Hippolita , Laura , and Violetta within , in several places . Within . Help , help Lucretia ; they bear away Lucretia by force . 


Duke .  I think there is a Devil in every corner . 


Enter Valerio . Val.   Sir , the design was laid on purpose for you , and all the women placed to cry . Make haste away ; avoid the shame for heaven's sake . 



Duke   going . OH , I could fire this Monastery ! 



Enter Frederick and Ascanio . ( Frederick entering speaks as to some behind him ) Fred.   Pain of your lives , let none of you presume to enter but myself . 



Duke .  My Son ! OH , I could burst with spite , and die with shame , to be thus apprehended ! this is the baseness and cowardice of guilt : an Army now were not so dreadful to me as that Son , o'er whom the right of Nature gives me power . 



Fred.   Sir , I am come — 


Duke .  To laugh at first , and then to blaze abroad 
The weakness , and the follies of your Father . 


Val.   Sir , he has Men in Arms attending him . 


Duke .  I know my doom then . You have taken a popular occasion ; I am now a ravisher of chastity , fit to be made prisoner first , and then deposed . 



Fred.   You will not hear me , Sir.  


Duke .  no , I confess I have deserved my fate ; 
For , What had these grey hairs to do with Love ? 
Or , if th' unseemly folly would possess me , 
Why should I choose to make my Son my Rival : 


Fred.   Sir , you may add you banished me from Rome , 
And from the light of it , Lucretia's eyes . 


Duke .  Nay , if thou aggravat'st my crimes , thou giv'st 
Me right to justify'em : thou doubly art my slave , 
Both Son and Subject . I can do thee no wrong , 
Nor hast thou right t'arraign or punish me : 
But thou inquirest into thy Father's years ; 
Thy swift ambition could not stay my death , 
But must ride post to Empire . Led me now : 
Thy crimes have made me guiltless to myself , 
And given me face to bear the public scorn . 
You have a guard without ? 


Fred.   I have some friends . 


Duke .  Speak plainly your intent . 
I love not a sophisticated truth , 
With an allay of lie in 't . 


Fred.   kneeling . This is not , Sir , the posture of a Rebel , 
But of a suppliant , if the Name of Son 
Be too much honour to me . 
What first I purposed , I scarce know myself . 
Love , Anger , and Revenge then rolled within me , 
And yet , even then , I was not hurried farther 
Than to preserve my own . 


Duke .  — Your own ! What mean you ? 


Fred.   My Love , and my Lucretia ; which I thought 
In my then boiling passion , you pursued 
With some injustice , and much violence ; 
This led me to repel that force by force . 
'T was easy to surprise you , when I knew 
Of your intended visit . 


Duke .  — Thank my folly . 


Fred.   But reason now has reassumed its place , 
And makes me see how black a crime it is 
To use a force upon my Prince and Father . 


Duke .  You give me hope you will resign Lucretia . 


Fred.   Ah no : I never can resign her to you ; 
But , Sir , I can my life : which , on my knees , 
I tender , as th'attoning Sacrifice . 
Or if your hand ( because you are a Father ) 
Be loath to take away that life you gave , 
I will redeem your crime , by making it 
My own : So you shall still be innocent , and I 
Die blessed , and unindebted for my being . 


Duke   embracing him . OH Frederick , you are too much a Son , 
And I too little am a Father : You , 
And you alone , have merited Lucretia . 
't is now my only grief , 
I can do nothing to requite this virtue ; 
For to restore her to you 
Is not an act of generosity , 
But a scant , niggard Justice ; yet I love her 
So much , that even this little which I do 
Is like the bounty of an Usurer ; 
High to be prized from me , 
Because 't is drawn from such a wretched mind . 


Fred.   kissing his hands . You give me now a second , better life ; 
But , that the gift may be more easy to you , 
Consider , Sir , Lucretia did not Love you : 
I fear to say ne'er would . 


Duke .  You do well , to help me to o'ercome that difficulty : 
I 'll weigh that , too , hereafter . For a love , 
So violent as mine , will ask long time , 
And much of reason , to effect the cure . 
My present care shall be to make you happy ; 
For that will make my wish impossible , 
And then the remedies will be more easy . 


Enter Sophronia , Lucretia , Violetta , Laura , Hippolita . Soph.   I have , with joy , o'erheard this happy change , 
And come , with blessings , to applaud your conquest , 
Over the greatest of Mankind , yourself . 


Duke .  I hope 't will be a full , and lasting one . 


Luc.   kneeling . Thus , let me kneel , and pay my thanks and duty . 
Both to my Prince , and Father ? 


Duke .  Rise , rise , too charming Maid ; for yet I cannot 
Call you Daughter : that first name , Lucretia , 
Hangs on my lips , and would be still pronounced . 
Look not too kindly on me ; one sweet glance , 
Perhaps , would ruin both : therefore , I 'll go 
And try to get new strength to bear your eyes . 
Till then , Farewell . Be sure you love my Frederick , 
And do not hate his Father . Exeunt Duke and Valerio . 


Fred.   at the door . Now , friends , you may appear . 
Enter Aurelian , Camillo , Benito . Your pardon . Madam , that we thus intrude 
On holy ground : yourself best know it could not 
Be avoided , and it shall be my care it be excused . 


Soph.   Though Sovereign Princes bear a privilege , 
Of entering when they please within our walls , 
In others , 't is a crime past dispensation : 
And therefore , to avoid a public scandal , 
Be pleased , Sir , to retire , and quit this Garden . 


Aur.   We shall obey you , Madam : But , that we may do it with lesle regret , we hope you will give these Ladies leave to accompany us . 



Soph.   They shall . 
And Nieces , for myself , I only ask you 
To justify my conduct to the world , 
That none may think I have betrayed a trust , 
But freed you from a Tyranny . 


Lau.   Our duty binds us to acknowledge it . 


Cam.   And our gratitude , to witness it . 


Vio.   With a holy , and lasting remembrance of your favour . 


Fred.   And it shall be my care , either by reason to bend your Unckle's will , or , by my Father's interest , to force your Dowry from his hands . 



Ben.   to Aur.  Pray , Sir , let us make haste over these Walls again , these Gardens are unlucky to me : I have lost my reputation of Music in the one of 'em , and of wit in the other . 



Aur.   to Lau.  Now , Laura , you may take your choice betwixt the two Benitoes , and consider whether you had rather he should Serenade you in the Garden , or I in Bed to night . 



Lau.   You may be sure I shall give Sentence for Benito ; for , the effect of your Serenading would be to make me pay the Music nine Months hence . 



Hip.   to Asca.  You see , Brother , here 's a General Jayle-delivery : there has been a great deal of bustle and disturbance in the Cloister to night ; enough to distract a Soul which is given up , like me , to contemplation : and therefore , if you think fit , I could e'en be content to retire , with you , into the World ; and , by way of Penance , to Mary you ; which , as Husbands and Wives go now , is a greater Mortification than a Nunnery . 



Asca.   no , Sister , if you love me , keep to your Monastery : I 'll come now and then to the Grate and beg you a Recreation . But I know myself so well , that , if I had you one twelve Month in the world , I should run myself into a Cloister , to be rid of you . 



Soph.   Nieces , once more farewell . Adieu , Lucretia : 
My wishes and my prayers attend you all . 


Luc.   to Fred.  I am so fearful , 
That , though I gladly run to your embraces , 
Yet , venturing in the World a second time , 
Methinks I put to Sea in a rough storm , 
With shipwrecks round about me . 


Fred.   My Dear , be kinder to yourself , and me , 
And let not fear fright back our coming joys ; 
For we , at length , stand reconciled to far : 
And now to fear , when to such bliss we move , 
Were not to doubt our Fortune , but our Love.  


Epilogue . 

Some have expected from our Bills to day 
To find a Satire in our Poet's Play. 
The Zealous Rout from Coleman-street did run , 
To see the Story of the Friar and Nun. 
Or Tales , yet more Ridiculous to hear , 
Vouched by their Vicar of Ten pounds a year ; 
Of Nuns , who did against Temptation Pray , 
And Discipline laid on the Pleasant way : 
Or that to please the Malice of the Town , 
Our Poet should in some close Cell have shown 
Some Sister , Playing at Content alone : 
This they did hope ; the other side did fear , 
And both you see alike are Cozened here . 
Some thought the Title of our Play to blame , 
They liked the thing , but yet abhorred the Name : 
Like Modest Punks , who all you ask afford , 
But , for the World , they would not name that word . 
Yet , if you 'll credit what I heard him say , 
Our Poet meant no Scandal in his Play ; 
His Nuns are good which on the Stage are shown , 
And , sure , behind our Scenes you 'll look for none . 
FINIS . 

