TROILUS AND CRESSIDA , OR , TRUTH Found too Late . A TRAGEDY As it is Acted at the Duke's Theatre . 

To which is Prefixed , A Preface Containing the Grounds of Criticism in Tragedy . 

Written By JOHN DRYDEN Servant to his Majesty . 

Rectius , Iliacum carmen deducis in actus , 
Quam si proferres ignota indictaque primus , 


Hor.  

London , Printed for Abel Swall at the Unicorn at the West-end of S. Paul's . and Jacob Tonson at the Judge's Head in Chancery lane near Fleet street , 1679.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE ROBERT EARL OF Sunderland , Principal Secretary of State , One of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council , etc.  

My Lord , 

Since I cannot promise you much of Poetry in my Play , 't is but reasonable that I should secure you from any part of it in my Dedication . And indeed I cannot better distinguish the exactness of your taste from that of other men , than by the plainness and sincerity of my Address . I must keep my Hyperboles in reserve for men of other understandings : An hungry Appetite after praise : and a strong digestion of it , will bear the grossness of that diet : But one of so critical a judgement as your Lordship , who can set the bounds of just and proper in every subject , would give me small encouragement for so bold an undertaking . I more than suspect , my Lord , that you would not do common Justice to yourself : and therefore , were I to give that Character of you , which I think you truly merit , I would make my appeal from your Lordship to the Reader , and would justify myself from flattery by the public voice , whatever protestation you might enter to the contrary . But ● find I am to take other measures with your Lordship ; I am to stand upon my guard with you , and to approach you as warily as Horace did Augustus . 

Cui male si palpere , recalcitrat undique tutus . 

An ill timed , or an extravagant commendation , would not pass upon you : but you would keep off such a Dedicator at arms end ; and send him back with his Encomiums , to this Lord , or that Lady , who stood in need of such trifling merchandise . You see , my Lord , what an awe you have upon me , when I dare not offer you that incense , which would be acceptable to other Patrons : but am forced to kerb myself , from ascribing to you those honours , which even an Enemy could not deny you . Yet I must confess I never practised that virtue of moderation ( which is properly your Character ) with so much reluctancy as now . For it hinders me from being true to my own knowledge , in not witnessing your worth ; and deprives me of the only means which I had left to show the world that true honour and uninteressed respect which I have always paid you . I would say somewhat , if it were possible , which might distinguish that veneration have for you , from the flatteries of those who adore your fortune . But the eminence of your condition , in this particular , is my unhappiness : for it renders whatever I would say suspected . Professions of Service , submissions , and attendance , are the practice of all men to the great : and commonly they who have the least sincerity , perform them best ; as they who are least engaged in love , have their tongues the freest to sergeant a passion : for my own part , I never could shake off the rustic bashfulness which hangs upon my nature ; but valluing myself , at as little as I am worth , have been afraid to render even the common duties of respect to those who are in power . The Ceremonious visits which are generally paid on such occasions , are not my talent . They may be real even in Courtiers ; but they appear with such a face of interest , that a modest man would think himself in danger of having his sincerity mistaken for his design . My congratulationss keep their distance , and pass no farther than my heart . There it is , that I have all the joy imaginable when I see true worth rewarded ; and virtue uppermost in the world . 

If therefore there were one to whom I had the honour to be known ; and to know him so perfectly , that I could say without flattery , he had all the depth of understanding that was requisite in any able Statesman , and all that honesty which commonly is wanting ; that he was brave without vanity , and knowing without positiveness : that he was loyal to his Prince , and a lover of his Country ; that his principles were full of moderation , and all his Councils such as tended to heal and not to widen the breaches of the Nation : that in all his conversation there appeared a native candour , and a desire of doing good in all his actions ; if such an one whom I have described ; were at the helm , if he had risen by his merits , and were chosen out in the necessity and pressure of affairs , to remedy our confusions by the seasonableness of his advice , and to put a stop to our ruin , when we were just rolling downward to the precipice , I should then congratulate the Age in which I lived , for the common safety ; I should not despair of the Republic though Hannibal were at the gates ; I should send up my vows for the success of such an action as Virgil did on the like occasion for his Patron , when he was raising up his country from the desolations of a civil war.  

Hunc saltem everso juvenem succurrere seclo , 
Ne superi prohibete . 


I know not whether I am running , in this ecstasy which is now upon me : I am almost ready to reassume the ancient rights of Poetry ; to point out , and Prophecy the man , who was born for no less an undertaking ▪ and whom posterity shall bless for its accomplishment . Methinks I am already taking fire from such a Character , and making room for him , under a borrowed name amongst the Heroes of an Epique Poem . Neither could mine , or some more happy Genius , want encouragement under such a Patron . 

Pollio amat nostram , quamvis sit rustica Musam . 

But these are considerations afar off my Lord : the former part of the Prophecy must be first accomplished : the quiet of the ●ation must be secured ; and a mutual trust , betwixt Prince and people be renewed : and then this great and good man will have leisure for the ornaments of peace : and make our language as much indebted to his care , as the French is to the memory of their famous Richelieu . You know My Lord , how low he laid the foundations of so great a work : That he began it with a Grammar and a Dictionary ; without which all those Remarks and Observations , which have since been made , had been performed to as little purpose as it would be to consider the furniture of the Rooms before the contrivance of the House . Propriety must first be stated , ere any measures of elegance can be taken . Neither is one Vaugelas sufficient for such a work . 'T was the employment of the whole Academy for many years , for the perfect knowledge of a Tongue , was never attained by any single person . The Court , the College , and the Town , must be joined in it . And as our English is a composition of the dead and living Tongues , there is required a perfect knowledge , not only of the Greek and Latin , but of the Old Germane , the French and the Italian : and to help all these , a conversation with those Authors of our own , who have written with the fewest faults in prose and verse . But how barbarously we yet write and speak , your Lordship knows , and I am sufficiently sensible in my own English. For I am often put to a stand , in considering whether what I write be the Idiom of the Tongue , or false Grammar , and nonsense couched beneath that specious Name of Anglieisme . And have no other way to clear my doubts , but by translating my English into Latin , and thereby trying what sense the words will bear in a more stable language . I am desirous if it were possible , that we might all write with the same certainty of words and purity of phrase , to which the Italians first arrived , and after them the French : At least that we might advance so far , as our Tongue is capable of such a standard . It would mortify an English man to consider , that from the time of Boccace and of Petrarche , the Italian has varied very little : And that the English of Chaucer their contemporary is not to be understood without the help of an Old Dictionary . But their Goth and Vandal had the fortune to be graffed on a Roman stock : Ours has the disadvantage , to be founded on the Dutch. We are full of Monosyllables , and those clogged with consonants , and our pronunciation is effeminate . All which are enemies to a sonnding language : 't is true that to supply our poverty , we have trafficqued with our Neighbour Nations ; by which means we abound as much in words , as Amsterdam does in Religions ; but to order them , and make them useful after their admission is the difficulty . A greater progress has been made in this , since his Majesty's return , than perhaps since the conquest to his time . But the better part of the work remains unfinished : And that which has been done already , since it has only been in the practice of some few writers , must be digested into Rules and Method ; before it can be profitable to the General . Will your Lordship give me leave to speak out at last ? and to acquaint the world , that from your encouragement and patronage , we may one day expect to speak and write a language , worthy of the English wit , and which foreigners may not disdain to learn. Your birth , your Education , your natural endowments , the former Employments which you have had abroad , and that which to the joy of good men you now exercise at home , seem all to conspire to this design : the Genius of the Nation seems to call you out as it were by name , to polish and adorn your native language , and to take from it the reproach of its barbarity . 't is upon this encouragement that I have adventured on the following Critic , which I humbly present you together with the Play : In which , though I have not had the leisure , nor indeed the encouragement to proceed to the Principal Subject of it , which is the words and thoughts that are suitable to Tragedy ; yet the whole discourse has a tendency that way , and is preliminary to it . In what I have already done , I doubt not but I have contradicted some of my former opinions , in my loose Essays of the like nature : but of this , I dare affirm , that it is the fruit of my riper age and experience , and that self-love , or envy have no part in it . The application to English Authors is my own , and therein perhaps I may have erred unknowingly : But the foundation of the rules is reason , and the authority of those living Critics who have had the honour to be known to you abroad , as well as of the Ancients , who are not less of your acquaintance . Whatsoever it be , I submit it to your Lordship's Judgement , from which I never will appeal , unless it be to your good nature , and your candour . If you can allow an hour of leisure to the perusal of it , I shall be fortunate that I could so long entertain you ; if not , I shall at least have the satisfaction to know , that your time was more usefully employed upon the public . I am , 

My Lord , Your Lordship's most Obedient Humble Servant , John Dryden . 

The PREFACE to the Play.  

The Poet Aeschylus was held in the same veneration by the Athenians of after Ages as Shakespeare is by us ; and Longinus has judged , in favour of him , that he had a noble boldness of expression , and that his imaginations were lofty and Heroic : but on the other side Quintilian affirms , that he was daring to extravagance . 't is certain , that he affected pompous words , and that his sense too often was obscured by Figures ▪ Notwithstanding these imperfections , the value of his writings after his decease was such , that his Countrymen ordained an equal reward to those Poets who could alter his Plays to be Acted on the Theatre , with those whose productions were wholly new , and of their own . The case is not the same in England ; though the difficulties of altering are greater , and our reverence for Shakespeare much more just , then that of the Grecians for Aeschylus . In the Age of that Poet , the Greek tongue was arrived to its full perfection ; they had then amongst them an exact Standard of Writing , and of Speaking : The English Language is not capable of such a certainty ; and we are at present so far from it , that we are wanting in the very Foundation of it , a perfect Grammar . Yet it must be allowed to the present Age , that the tongue in general is so much refined since Shakespear's time , that many of his words , and more of his Phrases , are scarce intelligible . And of those which we understand some are ungrammatical , others course ; and his whole stile is so pestered with Figurative expressions , that it is as affected as it is obscure . 't is true , that in his later Plays he had worn off somewhat of the rust ; but the Tragedy which I have undertaken to correct , was , in all prrbability , one of his first endeavours on the Stage . 

The Original story was Written by one Lollius a Lombard , in Latin verse , and Translated by Chaucer into English : intended I suppose a Satyr on the Inconstancy of Women : I find nothing of it among the Ancients ; not so much as the name once Cressida mentioned . Shakespeare , ( as I hinted ) in the Aprenticeship of his Writing , modelled it into that Play , which is now called by the name of Troilus and Cressida ; but so lamely is it left to us , that it is not divided into Acts : which fault I ascribe to the Actors , who printed it after Shakespear's death ; and that too , so carelessly , that a more uncorrect Copy I never saw . For the Play itself , the Author seems to have begun it with some fire ; the Characters of Pandarus and Thersites , are promising enough ; but as if he grew weary of his task , after an Entrance or two , he let's 'em fall : and the later part of the Tragedy is nothing but a confusion of Drums and Trumpets , Excursions and Alarms . The chief persons , who give name to the Tragedy , are left alive : Cressida is false , and is not punished . Yet after all , because the Play was Shakespear's , and that there appeared in some places of it , the admirable Genius of the Author ; I undertaken to remove that heap of Rubbish , under which many excellent thoughts lay wholly buried . Accordingly , I new modelled the Plot ; threw out many unnecessary persons ; improved those Characters which were begun , and left unfinished : as Hector , Troilus , Pandarus and Thersites ; and added that of Andromache . After this , I made with no small trouble , an Order and Connexion of all the Scenes ; removing them from the places where they were inartificially set : and though it was impossible to keep 'em all unbroken , because the Scene must be sometimes in the City , and sometimes in the Camp , yet I have so ordered them that there is a coherence of 'em with one another , and a dependence on the main design : no leaping from Troy to the Graecian Tents , and thence back again in the same Act ; but a due proportion of time allowed for every motion . I need not say that I have refined his Language , which before was obsolete ; but I am willing to acknowledge , that as I have often drawn his English nearer to our times So I have sometimes conformed my own to his : & consequently , the Language is not altogether so pure , as it is significant . The Scenes of Pandarus and Cressida , of Troilus and Pandarus , of Andromache with Hector and the Trojans , in the second Act , are wholly New : together with that of Nestor and Ulysses with Thersites ; and that of Thersites , with Ajax and Achilles . I will not weary my Reader with the Scenes which are added of Pandarus and the Lovers , in the Third ; and those of Thersites , which are wholly altered : but I cannot omit the last Scene in it , which is almost half the Act , betwixt Troilus and Hector . The occasion of raising it was hinted to me by Mr. Betterton : the contrivance and working of it was my own . They who think to do me an injury , by saying that it is an imitation of the Scene betwixt Brutus and Cassius , do me an honour , by supposing I could imitate the incomparable Shakespeare : but let me add , that if Shakespears Scene , or that faulty Copy of it in Amintor and Melantius had never been , yet Euripides had furnished me with an excellent example in his Iphigenia , between Agamemnon and Menelaus : and from thence indeed , the last turn of it is borrowed . The occasion which Shakespeare , Euripides , and Fletcher , have all taken , is the same ; grounded upon Friendship : and the quarrel of two virtuous men , raised by natural degrees , to the extremity of passion , is conducted in all three , to the declination of the same passion ; and concludes with a warm renewing of their Friendship . But the particular groundwork which Shakespeare has taken , is incomparably the best : Because he has not only chosen two the greatest Heroes of their Age ; but has likewise interested the Liberty of Rome , and their own honours , who were the redeemers of it , in this debate . And if he has made Brutus who was naturally a patient man , to fly into excess at first ; let it be remembered in his defence , that just before , he has received the news of Portia's death : whom the Poet on purpose neglecting a little Chronology , supposes to have died before Brutus , only to give him an occasion of being more easily exasperated . Add to this , that the injury he had received from Cassius , had long been brooding in his mind ; and that a melancholy man , upon consideration of an affront , especially from a Friend , would be more eager in his passion , than he who had given it , though naturally more choleric ▪ Euripides whom I have followed , has raised the quarrel betwixt two Brothers who were friends . The foundation of the Scene was this : The Grecians were wind-bound at the Port of Aulis , and the Oracle had said , that they could not Sail , unless Agamemnon delivered up his Daughter to be Sacrificed : he refuses ; his Brother Menelaus urges the public safety , the Father defends himself , by arguments of natural affection , and hereupon they quarrel . Agamemnon is at last convinced , and promises to deliver up Iphigenia , but so passionately laments his loss , that Menelaus is grieved to have been the occasion of it , and by a return of kindness , offers to intercede for him with the Grecians , that his Daughter might not be sacrificed . But my friend Mr. Rymer has so largely , and with so much judgement described this Scene , in comparing it with that of Melantius and Amintor , that it is superfluous to say more of it : I only named the heads of it , that any reasonable man might judge it was from thence I modelled my Scene betwixt Troilus and Hector . I will conclude my reflections on it , with a passage of Longinus , concerning Plato's imitation of Homer : We ought not to regard a good imitation as a theft ; but as a beautiful Idea of him who undertakes to imitate , by forming himself on the invention and the work of another man ; for he enters into the lists like a new wrestler , to dispute the prize with the former Champion . This sort of emulation says Hesiod , is honourable 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 — When we combat for Victory with a Hero , and are not without glory even in our overthrow . Those great men whom we propose to ourselves as patterns of our imitation , serve us as a Torch , which is lifted up before us , to enlighten our passage ; and often elevate our thoughts as high , as the conception we have of our Author's Genius . 



I have been so tedious in three Acts , that I shall contract myself in the two last . The beginning Scenes of the fourth Act are either added , or changed wholly by me ; the middle of it is Shakespeare altered , and mingled with my own , three or four of the last Scenes are altogether new . And the whole Fifth Act , both the Plot and the Writing are my own Additions . 

But having written so much for imitation of what is excellent , in that part of the Preface which related only to myself ; methinks it would neither be unprofitable nor unpleasant to inquire how far we ought to imitate our own Poets , Shakespeare and Fletcher in their Tragedies : And this will occasion another enquiry , how those two Writers differ between themselves : but since neither of these questions can be solved unless some measures be first taken , by which we may be enabled to judge truly of their writings : I shall endeavour as briefly as I can , to discover the grounds and reason of all Criticism , applying them in this place only to Tragedy . Aristotle with his Interpreters , and Horace , and Longinus , are the Authors to whom I owe my lights ; and what part soever of my own Plays , or of this , which no mending could make regular , shall fall under the condemnation of such judges , it would be impudence in me to defend . I think it no shame to retract my errors , and am well pleased to suffer in the cause , if the Art may be improved at my expense : I therefore proceed to , 

The Grounds of Criticism in Tragedy . 

Tragedy is thus defined by Aristotle , ( omitting what I thought unnecessary in his Definition . ) 't is an imitation of one entire , great , and probable action ; not told but represented , which by moving in us fear and pity , is conducive to the purging of these two passions in our minds . more largely thus , Tragedy describes or paints 〈◊〉 Action , which Action must have all the proprieties above named . First , it must be one or single , that is , it must not be a History of one Man's life : Suppose of Alexander the Great , or Julius Caesar , but one single action of theirs . This condemns all Shakespears Historical Plays , which are rather Chronicles represented , than Tragedies , and all double action of Plays . As to avoid a Satyr upon others , I will make bold with my own Marriage-a-la-mode , where there are manifestly two Actions , not depending on one another : but in Oedipus there cannot properly be said to be two Actions , because the love of Adrastus and Eurydice has a necessary dependence on the principal design , into which it is woven . The natural reason of this Rule is plain , for two different independent actions , distracted the attention and concernment of the Audience , and consequently destroy the intention of the Poet : If his business be to move terror and pity , and one of his Actions be Comical , the other Tragical , the former will divert the people , and utterly make void his greater purpose . Therefore as in Perspective , so in Tragedy , there must be a point of sight in which all the lines terminate : Otherwise the eye wanders , and the work is false . This was the practice of the Graecian Stage . But Terence made an innovation in the Roman : all his Plays have double Actions ; for it was his custom to Translate two Greek Comedies , and to wove them into one of his , yet so , that both the Actions were Comical ; and one was principal , the other but secondary or subservient . And this has obtained on the English Stage , to give us the pleasure of variety . 

As the Action ought to be one , it ought as such , to have Order in it , that is , to have a natural beginning , a middle , and an end : A natural beginning says Aristotle , is that which could not necessarily have been placed after another thing , and so of the rest . This consideration will arraign all Plays after the new model of Spanish Plots , where accident is heaped upon accident , and that which is first might as reasonably be last : an inconvenience not to be remedied , but by making one accident naturally produce another , otherwise 't is a Farce , and not a Play. Of this nature , is the Slighted Maid ; where there is no Scene in the first Act , which might not by as good reason be in the fifth . And if the Action ought to be one , the Tragedy ought likewise to conclude with the Action of it . Thus in Mustapha , the Play should naturally have ended with the death of Zanger , and not have given us the grace Cup after Dinner , of Solyman's divorce from Roxolana . 

The following properties of the Action are so easy , that they need not my explaining . It ought to be great , and to consist of great persons , to distinguish it from Comedy ; where the Action is trivial , and the persons of inferior rank . The last quality of the action is , that it ought to be probable , as well as admirable and great . 't is not necessary that there should be Historical truth in it ; but always necessary that there should be a likeness of truth , something that is more than barely possible , probable being that which succeeds or happens oftener than it mi●●es . To invent therefore a probability , and to make it wonderful , is the most difficult undertaking in the Art of Poetry : for that which is not wonderful , is not great , and that which is not probable , will not delight a reasonable Audience . This action thus described , must be represented and not told , to distinguish Dramatic Poetry from Epic : but I hasten to the end , or scope of Tragedy ; which is to rectify or purge our passions , fear and pity . 

To instruct delightfully is the general end of all Poetry : Philosophy instructs , but it performs its work by precept : which is not delightful , or not so delightful as Example . To purge the passions by Example , is therefore the particular instruction which belongs to Tragedy . Rapine a judicious Critic , has observed from Aristotle , that pride and want of commiseration are the most predominant vices in Mankind : therefore to cure us of these two , the inventors of Tragedy , have chosen to work upon two other passions , which are fear and pity . We are wrought to fear , by their setting before our eyes some terrible example of misfortune , which happened to persons of the highest Quality ; for such an action demonstrates to us , that no condition is privileged from the turns of Fortune : this must of necessity cause terror in us , and consequently abate our pride . But when we see that the most virtuous , as well as the greatest , are not exempt from such misfortunes , that consideration moves pity in us : and insensibly works us to be helpful to , and tender over the distressed , which is the noblest and most Godlike of moral virtues . Here 't is observable , that it is absolutely necessary to make a man virtuous , if we desire he should be pitied : We lament not , but detest a wicked man , we are glad when we behold his crimes are punished , and that Poetical justice is done upon him . Euripides was censured by the Critics of his time , for making his chief characters too wicked : for example , Phaedra though she loved her Son-in-law with reluctancy , and that it was acurse upon her Family for offending Venus ; yet was thought too ill a pattern for the Stage . Shall we therefore banish all characters of villainy ? I confess I am not of that opinion ; but it is necessary that the Hero of the Play be not a Villain : that is , the characters which should move our pity ought to have virtuous inclinations , and degrees of moral goodness in them . As for a perfect character of virtue , it never was in Nature ; and therefore there can be no imitation of it : but there are allays of frailty to be allowed for the chief persons , yet so that the good which is in them , shall outweigh the bad ; and consequently leave room for punishment on the one side , and pity on the other . 

After all , if any one will ask me , whether a Tragedy cannot be made upon any other grounds , than those of exciting pity and terror in us ▪ Bossu , the best of modern Critics , answers thus in general : That all excellent Arts , and particularly that of Poetry , have been invented and brought to perfection by men of a transcendent Genius ; and that therefore they who practice afterwards the same Arts , are obliged to tread in their footsteps , and to search in their writings the foundation of them : for it is not just that new Rules should destroy the authority of the old . But Rapine writes more particularly thus : That no passions in a story are so proper to move our concernment as Fear and pity ; and that it is from our concernment we receive our pleasure , is undoubted ; when the Soul becomes agitated with fear for one character , or hope for another ; than it is that we are pleased in Tragedy , by the interest which we take in their adventures . 

Here therefore the general answer may be given to the first question , how far we ought to imitate Shakespeare and Fletcher in their Plots ; namely that we ought to follow them so far only , as they have Copied the excellencies of those who invented and brought to perfection Dramatic Poetry : those things only excepted which Religion , customs of Countries , Idioms of Languages , etc. have altered in the Superstructures , but not in the foundation of the design . 

How defcctive Shakespeare and Fletcher have been in all their Plots , Mr. Rymer has discovered in his Criticisms : neither can we , who follow them , be excused from the same or greater errors ; which are the more unpardonable in us , because we want their beauties to counterveil our faults . The best of their designs , the most approaching to Antiquity , and the most conducing to move pity , is the King and no King ; which if the Farce of Bessus were thrown away , is of that inferior sort of Tragedies , which end with a prosperous event . 't is probably derived from the story of Oedipus , with the character of Alexander the Great , in his extravagancies , given to Arbaces . The taking of this Play , amongst many others , I cannot wholly ascribe to the excellency of the action ; for I find it moving when it is read : 't is true , the faults of the Plot are so evidently proved , that they can no longer be denied . The beauties of it must therefore lie either in the livel touches of the passions : or we must conclude , as I think we may , that even in imperfect Plots , there are lesle degrees of Nature , by which some faint emotions of pity and terror are raised in us : as a lesle Engine will raise a lesle proportion of weight , though not so much as one of Archimedes making ; for nothing can move our nature , but by some natural reason , which works upon passions . And since we acknowledge the effect , there must be something in the cause . 

The difference between Shakespeare and Fletcher in their Plotting seems to be this , that Shakespeare generally moves more terror , and Fletcher more compassion : For the first had a more Masculine , a bolder and more fiery Genius ; the Second a more soft and Womanish . In the mechanic beauties of the Plot , which are the Observation of the three Unities , Time , Place , and Action , they are both deficient ; but Shakespeare most . Ben. Johnson reformed those errors in his Comedies , yet one of Shakespear's was Regular before him : which is , The Merry Wives of Windsor . For what remains concerning the design , you are to be referred to our English Critic . That method which he has prescribed to raise it from mistake , or ignorance of the crime , is certainly the best though 't is not the only : for amongst all the Tragedies of Sophocles , there ▪ is but one , Oedipus , which is wholly built after that model . 

After the Plot , which is the foundation of the Play , the next thing to which we ought to apply our judgement is the manners , for now the Poet comes to work above ground : the groundwork indeed is that which is most necessary , as that upon which depends the firmness of the whole Fabric ; yet it strikes not the eye so much , as the beauties or imperfections of the manners , the thoughts and the expressions . 

The first Rule which Bossu , prescribes to the Writer of an Heroic poem , and which holds too by the same reason in all Dramatic Poetry , is to make the moral of the work ; that is , to lay down to yourself what that precept of morality shall be , which you would insinuate into the people : as namely , Homer's , ( which I have Copied in my Conquest of Granada ) was , that Union preserves a Commonwealth , and discord destroys it . Sophocles , in his Oedipus , that no man is to be accounted happy before his death . 't is the Moral that directs the whole action of the Play to one centre ; and that action or Fable , is the example built upon the moral , which confirms the truth of it to our experience : when the Fable is designed , then and not before , the persons are to be introduced with their manners , characters and passions . 

The manners in a Poem , are understood to be those inclinations , whether natural or acquired , which move and carry us to actions , good , bad , or indifferent in a Play ; or which incline the persons to such , or such actions : I have anticipated part of this discourse already , in declaring that a Poet ought not to make the manners perfectly good in his best persons , but neither are they to be more wicked in any of his characters , than necessity requires . To produce a Villain , without other reason than a natural inclination to villainy , is in Poetry to produce an effect without a cause : and to make him more a Villain than he has just reason to be , is to make an effect which is stronger than the cause . 

The manners arise from many causes : and are either distinguished by complexion , as choleric and phlegmatic , or by the differences of Age or Sex , of Climates , or Quality of the persons , or their present condition : they are likewise to be gathered from the several Virtues , Vices , or Passions , and many other common-places which a Poet must be supposed to have learned from natural Philosophy , Ethics , and History ; of all which whosoever is ignorant , does not deserve the Name of Poet.  

But as the manners are useful in this Art , they may be all comprised under these general heads : First , they must be apparent , that is in every character of the Play , some inclinations of the Person must appear : and these are shown in the actions and discourse . Secondly the manners must be suitable or agreeing to the persons ; that is , to the Age , Sex , dignity , and the other general heads of Manners : thus when a Poet has given the Dignity of a King to one of his persons , in all his actions and speeches , that person must discover Majesty , Magnanimity , and jealousy of power ; because these are suitable to the general manners of a King. The third property of manners is resemblance ; and this is founded upon the particular characters of men , as we have them delivered to us by relation or History : that is , when a Poet has the known character of this or that man before him , he is bound to represent him such , at least not contrary to that which Fame has reported him to have been : thus it is not a Poet's choice to make Ulysses choleric , or Achilles' patient , because Homer has described 'em quite otherwise . Yet this is a Rock , on which ignorant Writers daily split : and the absurdity is as monstrous , as if a Painter should draw a Coward running from a Battle , and tell us it was the Picture of Alexander the Great . 

The last property of manners is , that they be constant , and equal , that is , maintained the same through the whole design : thus when Virgil had once given the name of Pious to Aeneas , he was bound to show him such , in all his words and actions through the whole Poem . All these properties Horace has hinted to a judicious observer . 1.  Notandi sunt tibi mores , 2. aut famam sequere , 3. aut sibi convenientia ●inge . 4.  Servetur ad imum , qualis ab incaepto processerat , & sibi constet . 

From the manners , the Characters of persons are derived , for indeed the characters are no other than the inclinations , as they appear in the several persons of the Poem . A character being thus defined , that which distinguishes one man from another . Not to repeat the same things over again which have been said of the manners , I will only add what is necessary here . A character , or that which distinguishes one man from all others , cannot be supposed to consist of one particular Virtue , or Vice , or passion only ; but 't is a composition of qualities which are not contrary to one another in the same person : thus the same man may be liberal and valiant , but not liberal and convetous ; so in a Comical character , or humour , ( which is an inclination to this , or that particular folly ) Falstaff is a liar , and a coward , a Glutton , and a Buffoon , because all these qualities may agree in the same man ; yet it is still to be observed , that one virtue , vice , and passion , aught to be shown in every man , as predominant over all the rest : as covetousness in Crassus , love of his Country in Brutus ; and the same in characters which are feigned . 

The chief character or Hero in a Tragedy , as I have already shown , ought in prudence to be such a man , who has so much more in him of Virtue than of Vice , that he may be left amiable to the Audience , which otherwise cannot have any concernment for his sufferings : and 't is on this one character that the pity and terror must be principally , if not wholly founded . A Rule which is extremely necessary , and which none of the Critics that I know , have fully enough discovered to us . For terror and compassion work but weakly , when they are divided into many persons . If Creon had been the chief character in Oedipus , there had neither been terror nor compassion moved ; but only detestation of the man and joy for his punishment ; if Adrastus and Eurydice had been made more appearing characters , than the pity had been divided , and lessened on the part of Oedipus : but making Oedipus the best and bravest person , and even Jocasta but an underpart to him ; his virtues and the punishment of his fatal crime , drew both the pity , and the terror to himself . 

By what had been said of the manners , it will be easy for a reasonable man to judge , whether the characters be truly or falsely drawn in a Tragedy ; for if there be no manners appearing in the characters , no concernment for the persons can he raised : no pity or horror can be moved , but by vice or virtue , therefore without them , no person can have any business in the Play. If the inclinations be obscure , 't is a sign the Poet is in the dark , and knows not what manner of man be presents to you ; and consequently you can have no Idea , or very imperfect , of that man : nor can judge what resolutions he ought to take ; or what words or actions are proper for him : Most Comedies made up of accidents , or adventures , are liable to fall into this error : and Tragedies with many turns are subject to it : for the manners never can be evident , where the surprises of Fortune take up all the business of the Stage ; and where the Poet is more in pain , to tell you that happened to such a man , than what he was . 't is one of the excellencies of Shakespeare , that the manners of his persons are generally apparent ; and you see their bent and inclinations . Fletcher comes far short of him in this , as indeed he does almost in every thing : there are but glimmerings of manners in most of his Comedies , which run upon adventures : and in his Tragedies , Rollo , Otto , the King and no King , Melantius , and many others of his best , are but Pictures shown you in the twilight ; you know not whether they resemble vice , or virtue , and they are either good bad , or indifferent , as the present Scene requires it . But of all Poets , this commendation is to be given to Ben. Johnson , that the manners even of the most inconsiderable persons in his Plays are every where apparent . 

By considering the Second quality of manners , which is that they be suitable to the Age , Quality , Country , Dignity , etc. of the character , we may likewise judge whether a Poet has followed Nature . In this kind Sophocles and Euripides , have more excelled among the Greeks than Aeschylus : and Terence , more than Plautus among the Romans : Thus Sophocles gives to Oedipus the true qualities of a King , in both those Plays which bear his Name : but in the latter which is the Oedipus Colonoeus , he let's fall on purpose his Tragic Style , his Hero speaks not in the Arbitrary tone ; but remembers in the softness of his complaints , that he is an unfortunate blind Old-man , that he is banished from his Country , and persecuted by his next Relations . The present French Poets are generally accused , that wheresoever they lay the Scene , or in whatsoever Age , the manners of their Heroes are wholly French : Racin's Bajazet is bred at Constantinople ; but his civilities are conveyed to him by some secret passage , from Versailles into the Seraglio . But our Shakespeare , having ascribed to Henry the Fourth the character of a King , and of a Father , gives him the perfect manners of each Relation , when either he transacts with his Son , or with his Subjects . Fletcher , on the other side gives neither to Arbaces , nor to his King in the Maid's Tragedy , the qualities which are suitable to a Monarch : though he may be excused a little in the latter ; for the King there is not uppermost in the character ; 't is the Lover of Evadne , who is King only , in a second consideration ; and though he be unjust , and has other faults which shall be nameless , yet he is not the Hero of the Play : 't is true we find him a lawful Prince , ( though I never heard of any King that was in Rhodes ) and therefore Mr. Rymers Criticism stands good ; that he should not be shown in so vicious a character . Sophocles has been more judicious in his Antigona for though he represent in Creon a bloody Prince , yet he makes him not a lawful King , but an Usurper , and Antigona herself is the Heroine of the Tragedy : But when Philaster wounds Arethusa and the Boy ; and Perigot his Mistress , in the faithful Sheperdess , both these are contrary to the character of Manhood : Nor is Valentinian managed much better , for though Fletcher has taken his Picture truly , and shown him as he was , an effeminate voluptuous man , yet he has forgotten that he was an Emperor , and has given him none of those Royal marks , which ought to appear in a lawful Successor of the Throne . If it be enquired , what Fletcher should have done on this occasion ; ought he not to have represented Valentinian as he was ? Bossu shall answer this question for me , by an instance of the like nature : Mauritius the Greek Emperor , was a Prince far surpassing Valentinian , for he was endued with many Kingly virtues ; he was Religious , Merciful , and Valiant , but withal he was noted of extreme covetousness , a vice which is contrary to the character of a Hero , or a Prince : therefore says the Critic , that Emperor was no fit person to be represented in a Tragedy , unless his good qualities were only to be shown , and his covetousness ( which sullied them all ) were slured over by the artifice of the Poet. To return once more to Shakespeare ; no man ever drew so many characters , or generally distinguished 'em better from one another , excepting only Johnson : I will instance but in one , to show the copiousnesls of his Invention ; 't is that of Calyban , or the Monster in the Tempest . He seems there to have created a person which was not in Nature , a boldness which at first sight would appear intolerable : for he makes him a Species of himself , begotten by an Incubus on a Witch ; but this as I have elsewhere proved , is not wholly beyond the bounds of credibility , at least the vulgar stile believe it . We have the separated notions of a spirit , and of a Witch ; ( and Spirits according to Plato , are vested with a subtle body ; according to some of his followers ; have different Sexes ) therefore as from the distinct apprehensions of a Horse , and of a Man , Imagination has formed a Centaur , so from those of an Incubus and a Sorceress , Shakespeare has produced his Monster . Whether or no his Generation can be defended , I leave to Philosophy ; but of this I am certain , that the Poet has most judiciously furnished him with a person , a Language , and a character , which will suit him , both by Fathers and Mother's side : he has all the discontents , and malice of a Witch , and of a Devil ; besides a convenient proportion of the deadly sins ; Gluttony , Sloth , and Lust , are manifest ; the dejectedness of a slave is likewise given him , and the ignorance of one bred up in a Desert Island . His person is monstrous , as he is the product of unnatural Lust ; and his language is as hobgoblin as his person : in all things he is distinguished from other mortals . The characters of Fletcher are poor & narrow , in comparison of Shakespears ; I remember not one which is not borrowed from him ; unless you will except that strange mixture of a man in the King and no King : So that in this part Shakespeare is generally worth our Imitation ; and to imitate Fletcher is but to Copy after him who was a Copyer . 

Under this general head of Manners , the passions are naturally included , as belonging to the Characters . I speak not of pity and of terror , which are to be moved in the Audience by the Plot ; but of Anger , Hatred , Love , Ambition , jealousy , Revenge , etc. as they are shown in this or that person of the Play. To describe these naturally , and to move then artfully , is one of the greatest commendations which can be given to a Poet : to write pathetically , says Longinus , cannot proceed but for a lofty Genius . A Poet must be born with this quality ; yet , unless he help himself by an acquired knowledge of the Passions , what they are in their own nature , and by what spring's they are to be moved , he will be subject either to raise them where they ought not to be raised , or not to raise them by the just degrees of Nature , or to amplify them beyond the natural bounds , or not to observe the crisis and turns of them , in their 〈◊〉 and decay : all which errors proceed from want of Judgement in the Poet , and from being unskilled in the Principles of Moral Philosophy . Nothing is more frequent in a Fanciful Writer , than to foil himself by not managing his strength : therefore , as in a Wrestler , there is first required some measure of force , a well-knit body , and active Limbs , without which all instruction would be vain ; yet , these being granted , if he want the skill which is necessary to a Wrestler , he shall make but small advantage of his natural robustuousness : So in a Poet , his inborn vehemence and force of spirit , will only run him out of breath the sooner , if it be not supported by the help of Art The roar of passion indeed may please an Audience , three parts of which are ignorant enough to think all is moving which is noise , and it may stretch the lungs of an ambitious Actor , who will die upon the spot for a thundering clap ; but it will move no other passion than indignation and contempt from judicious men . Longinus , whom I have hitherto followed , continues thus : If the passions be Artfully employed , the discourse becomes vehement and lofty ; if otherwise , there is nothing more ridiculous than a great passion out of season : And to this purpose he animadverts severely upon Aeschylus , who written nothing in cold blood , but was always in arapture , and in fury with his Audience : the Inspiration was still upon him , he was ever tearing it upon the Tripos ; or ( to run off as madly as he does , from one similitude to another ) he was always at high flood of Passion , even in the dead Ebb , and lowest Water-mark of the Scene . He who would raise the passion of a judicious Audience , says a Learned Critic , must be sure to take his hearers along with him ; if they be in a Calm , 't is in vain for him to be in a huff : he must move them by degrees , and kindle with 'em ; otherwise he will be in danger of setting his own heap of Stubble on a fire , and of burning out by himself without warming the company that stand about him . They who would justify the madness of Poetry from the Authority of Aristotle , have mistaken the text , & consequently the Interpretation : I imagine it to be false read , where he says of Poetry , that it is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , that it had always somewhat in it either of a genius , or of a madman . 't is more probable that the Original ran thus , that Poetry was 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , That it belongs to a Witty man , but not to a madman . Thus than the Passions , as they are considered simply and in themselves , suffer violence when they are perpetually maintained at the same height ; for what melody can be made on that Instrument all whose strings are screwed up at first to their utmost stretch , and to the same sound ? But this is not the worst ; for the Characters likewise bear a part in the general calamity , if you consider the Passions as embodied in them : for it follows of necessity , that no man can be distinguished from another by his discourse , when every man is ranting , swaggering , and exclaiming with the same excess : as if it were the only business of all the Characters to contend with each other for the prize at Billingsgate ; or that the Scene of the Tragedy lay in Bedlam . Suppose the Poet should intend this man to be Choleric , and that man to be patient ; yet when they are confounded in the Writing , you cannot distinguish them from one another : for the man who was called patient and tame , is only so before he speaks ; but let his clack be set a going , and he shall tongue it as impetuously , and as loudly the arrantest Hero in the Play. By this means , the characters are only distinct in name ; but in reality , all the men and women in the Play are the same person . no man should pretend to write , who cannot temper his fancy with his judgement : nothing is more dangerous to a raw horseman , than a hot-mouthed Jade without a curb . 

't is necessary therefore for a Poet , who would concern an Audience by describing of a Passion , first to prepare it , and not to rush upon it all at once . Ovid has judiciously shown the difference of these two ways , in the speeches of Ajax and Ulysses : Ajax from the very beginning breaks out into his exclamations , and is swearing by his Maker . — Agimus proh Jupiter inquit . Ulysses on the contrary , prepares his Audience with all the submissiveness he can practise , & all the calmness of a reasonable man ; he found his judges in a tranquillity of spirit , and therefore set out leisurely and softly with 'em , till he had warmed 'em by degrees ; and then he began to mend his pace , and to draw them along with his own impetuousness : yet so managing his breath , that it might not fail him at his need , and reserving his utmost proofs of ability even to the last . The success you see was answerable ; for the crowd only applauded the speech of Ajax ; — Vulgique secutum ultima murmur erat : — 


But the judges awarded the prize for which they contended to Ulysses . 

Mota manus Procerum est , et quid facundia possit 
Tum patuit , fortisque viri and arma Disertus . 


The next necessary rule is to put nothing into the discourse which may hinder your moving of the passions . Too many accidents as I have said , encumber the Poet , as much as the Arms of Saul did David ; for the variety of passions which they produce , are ever crossing and justling each other out of the way . He who treats of joy and grief together , is in a fair way of causing neither of those effects . There is yet another obstacle to be removed , which is pointed Wit , and Sentences affected out of season ; these are nothing of kin to the violence of passion : no man is at leisure to make sentences and similes , when his soul is in an Agony . I the rather name this fault , that it may serve to mind me of my former errors ; neither will I spare myself , but give an example of this kind from my Indian Emperor : Montezuma , pursued by his enemies , and seeking Sanctuary , stands parlying without the Fort , and describing his danger to Cydaria , in a simile of six lines ; As on the sands the frighted Traveller 
sees the high Seas come rolling from afar , etc.  




My Indian Potent ate was well skilled in the Sea for an Inland Prince , and well improved since the first Act , when he sent his son to discover it . The Image had not been amiss from another man , at another time : Sed nunc non erat hisce locus : he destroyed the concernment which the Audience might other wise have had for him ; for they could not think the danger near , when he had the leisure to invent a Simile . 

If Shakespeare be allowed , as I think be must , to have made his Characters distinct , it will easily be inferred that he understood the nature of the Passions : because it has been proved already , that confused passions make undistinguishable Characters : yet I cannot deny that he has his failing ; but they are not so much in the passions themselves , as in his manner of expression : he often obscures his meaning by his words , and sometimes makes it unintelligible . I will not say of so great a Poet , that he distinguished not the blown puffy stile , from true sublimity ; but I may venture to maintain that the fury of his fancy often transported him , beyond the bounds of judgement , either in coining of new words and phrases , or racking words which were in use , into the violence of a Catachresis : 't is not that I would explode the use of Metaphors from passions , for Longinus thinks 'em necessary to raise it ; but to use 'em at every word , to say nothing without a Metaphor , a Simile , an Image , or description , is I doubt to smell a little too strongly of the Buskin . I must be forced to give an example of expressing passion figuratively ▪ but that I may do it with respect to Shakespeare , it shall not be taken from any thing of his : 't is an exclamation against Fortune , quoted in his Hamlet , but written by some other Poet.  Out , out , thou strumpet fortune ; all you Gods , 
In general Synod , take away her Power , 
Break all the spokes and fallyes from her Wheel , 
And bowl the round Nave down the hill of Heaven 
As low as to the Fiends . 


And immediately after , speaking of Hecuba , when Priam was killed before her eyes : The mobbled Queen ran up and down , 
Threatening the flame with bisson rheum : a clout about that head , 
Where late the Diadem stood ; and for a Robe 
About her lank and all or'e-teemed loins , 
A blanket in th' alarm of fear caught up . 
Who this had seen , with tongue in venom steeped 
Against Fortune's state would Treason have pronounced ; 
But if the Gods themselves did see her then , 
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport 
In mincing with his sword her Husband's Limbs , 
The instant burst of clamour that she made 
( Unless things mortal meant them not at all ) 
Would have made milch the burning eyes of Heaven , 
And passion in the Gods.  




What a pother is here kept in raising the expression of trifling thoughts . Would not a man have thought that the Poet had been bound Apprentice to a Wheel-wright , for his first Rant ? and had followed a Ragman , for the clout and blanket , in the second ? Fortune is painted on a wheet ; and therefore the writer in a rage , will have Poetical justice done upon every member of that Engine : after this execution , he bowls the Nave downhill , from Heaven , to the Fiends : ( an unreasonable long mark a man would think ; ) 't is well there are no solid Orbs to stop it in the way , or no Element of fire to consume it : but when it came to the earth , it must be monstrous heavy , to break ground as low as to the Centre . His making milch the burning eyes of Heaven ▪ was a pretty tolerable flight too ; and I think no man ever drew milk out of eyes before him : yet to make the wonder greater , these eyes were burning . Such a sight indeed were enough to have raise ' d passion in the Gods , but to excuse the effects of it , he tells you perhaps they did not see it . Wise men would be glad to find a little sense couched under all those pompous words ; for Bombast is commonly the delight of that Audience , which love's Poetry , but under stands it not : and as commonly has been the practice of those Writers , who not being able to infuse a natural passion into the mind , have made it their business to ply the ears , and to st●● their judges by the noise . But Shakespeare does not often thus ; for the passions in his Scene between Brutus and Cassius are extremely natural , the thoughts are such as arise from the matter , and the expression of 'em not viciously figurative . I cannot leave this Subject before I do justce to that Divine Poet , by giving you one of his passionate descriptions : 't is of Richard the Second when he was deposed , and led in Triumph through the Streets of London by Henry of Bullingbrook : the painting of it is so lively , and the words so moving , that I have scarce read any thing comparable to it , in any other language , Suppose you have seen already the fortunate Usurper passing through the crowd , and followed by the shouts and acclamations of the people ; and now behold King Richard entering upon the Scene : consider the wretchedness of his condition , and his carriage in it ; and refrain from pity if you can . 

As in a Theatre , the eyes of men 
After a well-graced Actor leaves the Stage , 
Are idly bend on him that enters next , 
Thinking his prattle to be tedious : 
Even so , or with much more contempt , men's eyes ▪ 
Did scowl on Richard : no man cried God save him : 
no joyful tongue gave him His welcome home , 
But dust was thrown upon his Sacred head , 
Which with such gentle sorrow he shaken off , 
His face still combating with tears and smiles 
( The badges of his grief and patience ) 
That had not God ( for some strong purpose ) 〈◊〉 
The hearts of men , they must 〈…〉 
And Barbarism itself have 〈…〉 


To speak justly of this whole matter ; 〈…〉 that is discommended , 〈…〉 expression in its proper place ; but 't is a false measure of all these , something which is like 'em ▪ and is not them : 't is the Bristol-stone , which appears like a Diamond ; 't is an extravagant thought , instead of a sublime one ; 't is roaring madness instead of vehemence ; and a sound of words , instead of sense . If Shakespeare were stripped of all the Bombast in the passions , and dressed in the most vulgar words , we should find the beauties of his thoughts remaining ; if his embroideries were burned down , there would still be silver at the bottom of the melting-pot : but I fear ( at least , let me fear it for myself ) that we who Ape his sounding words , have nothing of his thought , but are all outside ; there is not so much as a dwarf within our Giants clotheses . Therefore , let not Shakespeare suffer for our sakes ; 't is our fault , who succeed him in an Age which is more refined , if we imitate him so ill , that we copy his failing only , and make a virtue of that in our writings , which in his was an imperfection . 

For what remains , the excellency of that Poet was , as I have said , in the more manly passions ; Fletcher's in the softer : Shakespeare written better betwixt man and man ; Fletcher , betwixt man and woman : consequently , the one described friendship better ; the other love : yet Shakespeare taught Fletcher to write love ; and Juliet , and Desdemona , are Originals . 't is true , the Scholar had the softer soul ; but the Master had the kinder . Friendship is both a virtue , and a Passion essentially ; love is a passion only in its nature , and is not a virtue but by Accident : good nature makes Friendship ; but effeminacy Love. Shakespeare had an Universal mind , which comprehended all Characters and Passions ; Fletcher a more confined , and limited : for though be treated love in perfection , yet Honour , Ambition , Revenge , and generally all the stronger Passions , he either touched not , or not Masterly . To conclude all ; he was a Limb of Shakespeare . 

I had intended to have proceeded to the last property of manners , which is , that they must be constant ; and the characters maintained the same from the beginning to the end ; and from thence to have proceeded to the thoughts and expressions suitable to a Tragedy : but I will first see how this will relish with the Age. 't is I confess but cursorily written ; yet the Judgement which is given here , is generally founded upon Experience : But because many men are shocked at the name of Rules , as if they were a kind of Magisterial prescription upon Poets , I will conclude with the words of Rapine , in his reflections on Arisotles' work of Poetry : If the Rules be well considered : we shall find them to be made only to reduce Nature into Method , to trace her step by step , and not to suffer the least mark of her to escape us : 't is only by these , that probability in Fiction is maintained , which is the Soul of Poetry : they are founded upon good Sense , and Sound Reason , rather than on Authority ; for , though Aristotle and Horace are produced , yet no man must argue , that what they write is true , because they written it ; but 't is evident , by the ridiculous mistakes and gross absurdities , which have been made by those Poets who have taken their Fancy only for their guide , that if this Fancy be not regulated , 't is a mere caprice , and utterly incapable to produce a reasonable and judicious Poem . 

The Prologue Spoken by Mr. Betterton , Representing the Ghost of Shakespeare . 

SEE , my loved Britons , see your Shakespeare rise , 
An awful ghost confessed to human eyes ! 
Unnamed , methinks , distinguished I had been 
From other shades , by this eternal green , 
About whose wreaths the vulgar Poets strive , 
And with a touch , their withered Bays revive . 
Untaught , unpractised , in a barbarous Age , 
I found not , but created first the Stage . 
And , if I drained no Greek or Latin store , 
'T was , that my own abundance gave me more . 
On foreign trade I needed not rely 
Like fruitful Britain , rich without supply . 
In this my rough-drawn Play , you shall behold 
Some Master-strokes , so manly and so bold 
That he , who meant to alter , found 'em such 
He shaken ; and thought it Sacrilege to touch . 
Now , where are the Successors to my name ? 
What bring they to fill out a Poet's fame ? 
Weak , short-lived issues of a feeble Age ; 
Scarce living to be Christened on the Stage ! 
For Humour farce , for love they rhyme dispense , 
That tolls the knell , for their departed sense . 
Dulness might thrive in any trade but this : 
't would recommend to some fat Benefice . 
Dulness , that in a Playhouse meets disgrace 
Might meet with Reverence , in its proper place . 
The fulsome clench that nauseats the Town 
Would from a judge or Alderman go down ! 
Such virtue is there in a Robe and gown ! 
And that insipid stuff which here you hate 
Might somewhere else be called a grave debate : 
Dulness is decent in the Church and State. 
But I forget that still 't is understood 
Bad Plays are best decried by showing good : 
Sat silent then , that my pleased Soul may see 
A judging Audience once , and worthy me : 
My faithful Scene from true Records shall tell 
How Trojan valour did the Greek excel ; 
Your great forefathers shall their fame regain , 
And Homer's angry Ghost repine in vain . 
persons Represented , By 

Hector . Mr. Smith . 
Troilus . Mr. Betterton . 
Priam. Mr. Percivall . 
Aeneas . Mr. joseph Williams . 
Pandarus . Mr. Leigh . 
Calchas . Mr. Percivall . 
Agamemnon . Mr. Gillo . 
Ulysses . Mr. Harris . 
Achilles . Mr. David Williams . 
Ajax . Mr. Bright . 
Nestor . Mr. Norris . 
Diomedes . Mr. Crosby . 
Patroclus . Mr. Boman . 
Menelaus . Mr. Richards . 
Thersites . Mr. Underhill . 
Cressida , Mrs. Mary Lee.  
Andromache . Mrs. Betterton . 
TRUTH found too late . A TRAGEDY . 

ACT I SCENE I A Camp.  

Enter Agamemnon , Menelaus , Ulysses , Diomedes , Nestor . Agam.   Princes , it seems not strange to us nor new , 
That after Nine year's Siege Troy makes defence , 
Since every Action of Recorded Fame 
Has with long difficulties been involved , 
Not Answering that Idea of the thought 
Which gave it Birth , why then you Graecian Chiefs , 
With sickly Eyes do you behold our labours , 
And think 'em our dishonour , which indeed , 
Are the protractive Trials of the Gods , 
To prove heroic Constancy in Men ? 


Nestor .  With due observance of thy Sovereign Seat 
Great Agamemnon , Nestor shall apply , 
Thy well-weighed words : In struggling with misfortunes , 
Lies the true proof of Virtue : on smooth Seas , 
How many bauble Boats dare set their Sails , 
And make an equal way with firmer Vessels ! 
But let the Tempest once enrage that Sea , 
And then behold the strong ribbed Argosy , 
Bounding between the Ocean and the Air 
Like Perseus mounted on his Pegasus . 
then where are those weak Rivals of the Main ? 
Or to avoid the Tempest fled to Port , 
Or made a Prey to Neptune : even thus 
Do empty show and true prized worth divide 
In storms of Fortune . 


Ulysses .  Mighty Agamemnon ! 
Heart of our Body , Soul of our designs , 
In whom the tempers , and the minds of all 
Should be enclosed : hear what Ulysses speaks . 


Agam.   — You have free leave . 


Ulysses .  Troy had been down ere this , and Hector's Sword 
Wanted a Master but for our disorders : 
The observance due to rule has been neglected ; 
Observe how many Graecian Tents stand void 
Upon this plain ; so many hollow factions 
For when the General is not like the Hive 
To whom the Foragers should all repair , 
What Honey can our empty Combs expect ? 
OH when Supremacy of Kings is shaken , 
What can succeed : How could communities 
Or peaceful traffic from divided shores , 
Prerogative of Age , Crowns , Sceptres , Laurels , 
But by degree stand on their solid base ▪ 
then every thing resolves to brutal force 
And headlong force is led by hoodwinked will , 
For wild Ambition , like a ravenous Wolf , 
Spurred on by will and seconded by power , 
Must make an universal prey of all , 
And last devour itself . 


Nest.   Most prudently Ulysses has discovered 
The Malady whereof our state is sick . 


Diom.   't is truth he speaks , the general 's disdained 
By him one step beneath , he by the next : 
That next by him below : so each degree 
Spurns upward at Superior eminence : 
Thus our distempers are their sole support ; 
Troy in our weakness life's , not in her strength . 


Agam.   The Nature of this sickness found , inform us 
From whence it draws its birth ? 


Ulysses .  The great Achilles whom opinion crowns 
The chief of all our Host — 
Having his ears buzzed with his noisy Fame 
Disdains thy Sovereign charge , and in his Tent , 
Lies mocking our designs , with him Patrocius 
Upon a lazy Bed , breaks scurvil Jests 
And with ridiculous and awkard action , 
Which , slanderer , he limitation calls 
Mimics the Greclan chiefs . 


Agam.   As how Ulysses ? 


Ulysses .  Even thee the King of men he does not spare 
( The monkey Author ) but thy greatness Pageants 
And makes of it Rehearsals : like a Player 
Bellowing his Passion till he break the spring 
And his racked Voice jar to his Audience ; 
So represents he Thee , though more unlike 
Than Vulcan is to Venus . 
And at this fulsome stuff , this wit of Apes , 
The large Achilles on his pressed Bed lolling , 
From his deep Chest roars out a loud Applause , 
Tickling his spleen , and laughing till he wheeze . 


Nestor .  Nor are you spared Ulysses , but as you speak in Council 
He hems ere he begins , then strokes his Beard , 
Casts down his looks , and winks with half an Eye ; 
' Has every action , cadence , motion , tone , 
All of you but the sense . 


Agam.   Fortune was merry 
When he was born , and played a trick on Nature 
To make a mimic Prince : he never acts ill 
But when he would seem wise : 
For all he says or does from serious thought 
Appears so wretched that he mocks his title 
And is his own Buffoo . 


Ulysses .  In imitation of this scurril fool 
Ajax is grown self-willed as broad Achilles , 
He keeps a Table too , makes Factious Feasts , 
Rails on our State of War , and sets Thirsites 
( A slanderous slave of an o'erflowing gall ) 
To levelly us with low Comparisons : 
They tax our Policy with Cowardice 
Count Wisdom of no moment in the War , 
In brief , esteem no Act , but that of hand ; 
The still and thoughtful parts which move those hands 
With them are but the tasks cut out by fear 
To be performed by Valour . 


Agam.   Let this be granted , and Achilles' horse 
Is more of use than he : but you grave pair 
Like time and wisdom marching hand in hand 
Must put a stop to these encroaching Ills : 
To you we leave the ear : 
You who could show whence the distemper springs 
Must vindicate the Dignity of Kings . 


Exeunt . SCENE II Troy.  

Enter Pandarus , and Troilus . Troil.   Why should I fight without the Trojan walls 
Who , without fight , am o'er o'er thrown within : 
The Trojan who is Master of a Soul 
Let him to battle , Troilus has none . 


Pand.   Will this never be at an end with you ? 


Troil.   The Greeks are strong and skilful to their strength 
Fierce to their skill , and to their feirceness wary ; 
But I am weaker than a Woman's tear , 
Tamer than sleep , fonder than Ignorance : 
And Artless as unpractised Infancy . 


Pand.   Well , I have told you enough of this ; for my part I 'll not meddle nor make any further in your Love : He that will eat of the Roastmeat , must stay for the kindling of the fire . 



Troil.   Have I not stayed ? 



Pand.   ay , the kindling : but you must stay the spitting of the meat . 



Troil.   Have I not stayed ? 



Pand.   ay , the spitting : but there 's two words to a bargain : you must stay the roasting too . 



Troil.   Still have I stayed : and still the farther off . 



Pand.   that 's but the roasting , but there 's more in this word stay ; there 's the taking off the Spit , the making of the sauce , the dishing , the setting on the Table , and the saying Grace ; nay you must stay the cooling too , or you may chance to burn your chaps . 



Troil.   At Priam's table pensive do I sit , And when fair Cressida comes into my thoughts ( Can she be said to come , who never was absent ! ) 



Pand.   Well , she 's a most ravishing creature ; and she looked Yesterday most killingly , she had such a stroke with her eyes , she cut to the quick with every glance of 'em . 



Troil.   I was about to tell thee , when my heart 
Was ready with a sigh to cleave in two 
lest Hector , or my Father should perceive me , 
I have with mighty anguish of my Soul 
Just at the Birth stifled this still-born-sigh 
And forced my face into a painful smile . 


Pand.   I measured her with my girdle Yesterday , she 's not half a yard about the waste , but so taper a shape did I never see , but when I had her in my arms , Lord thought I , and by my troth I could not forbear sighing , if Prince Troilus had her at this advantage , and I were holding of the door . — And she were a thought taller , but as she is , she wants not an Inch of Helen neither ; but there 's no more comparison between the Women — there was wit , there was a sweet tongue : How her words melteth in her mouth ! Mercury would have been glad to have had such a tongue in his mouth I warrant him . 

I would some body had heard her talk Yesterday , as I did : 


Troil.   O Pandarus , when I tell thee I am mad 
In Cressid's Love , thou answerest she is fair ; 
Praisest her eyes , her stature and her wit ; 
But praising thus , instead of oil and balm , 
thou layest in every wound her Love has given me 
The Sword that made it . 


Pand.   I give her but her due . 


Troil.   thou give'st her not so much . 


Pand.   Faith I 'll speak no more of her , let her be as she is : 
If she be a beauty 't is the better for her , and she be not 
She has the mends in her own hands for Pandarus . 


Troil.   In spite of me thou wilt mistake my meaning . 


Pand.   I have had but my labour for my pains , 
Ill thought on of her , and ill thought on of you : 
gone between and between , and am ground in the Millstones 
For my Labour . 


Troil.   What art thou angry Pandarus with thy friend ? 


Pand.   Because she 's my Niece , therefore she 's not so fair as Helen , and she were not my Niece , show me such another piece of Woman's flesh ; take her limb by limb , I say no more , but if Paris had seen her first , Menelaus' had been no Cuckold : but what care I if she were a Blackamoor , what am I the better for her face . 



Troil.   Said I she was not beautiful . 



Pand.   I care not if you did , she 's a fool to stay behind her Father Calchas , let her to the Greeks ; and so I 'll tell her : for my part I am resolute , I 'll meddle no more in your affairs . 



Troil.   But hear me ! 



Pand.   Not I  



Troil.   Dear Pandarus — 



Pand.   Pray speak no more on 't , I 'll not burn my fingers in another body's business , I 'll leave it as I found it , & there 's an end . 

[ Exit Pandarus . 

Troil.   OH Gods , how do you torture me ? 
I cannot come to Cressida but by him , 
And he 's as peevish to be wooed to woo , 
As she is to be wone . 


Enter Aeneas . Aeneas .  How now , Prince Troilus ; why not in the battle ? 


Troil.   Because not there , this Woman's answer suits me ; 
For Womanish it is to be from thence ▪ 
What news Aeneas from the field to day ? 


Aen.   Paris is hurt . 


Troil.   By whom ? 


Aen.   By Menelaus . Hark what good sport 
Alarm within ▪ Is out of Town to day , when I hear such Music 
I cannot hold from dancing . 


Troil.   I 'll make one , 
And try to lose an anxious thought or two 
In heat of action . 
[ Aside ] Thus Cowardlike from love to War I run , 
Seek the lesle dangers , and the greater eat . 
[ Exit Troil.  

Enter Cressida . Cressida .  My Lord Aeneas , who were those went by ? I mean the Ladies ! 


Aen.   Queen Hecuba , and Helien . 


Cressi .  And whither go they ? 


Aen.   Up to the Western Tower. 
who 's height commands as subject , all the vale ; 
To see the battle , Hector whose patience 
Is fixed like that of Heaven , to day was moved : 
He chid Andromache , and struck his Armourer , 
And as there were good Husbandry in War , 
Before the Sun was up he went to field ; 
Your pardon Lady that 's my business too . 
Exit Aeneas . 

Cressi .  Hector's a gallant Wariour . 


Enter Pandarus . Pand.   what 's that , what 's that ! 


Cressi .  Good morrow Uncle Pandarus . 


Pand.   Good morrow Cousin Cressida : when were you at Court ? 


Cressi .  This morning Uncle ! 


Pand.   What were you a talking when I came ? was Hector armed , 
And gone ere ye came ? Hector was stirring early . 


Cressi .  That I was talking of ; and of his anger ! 


Pand.   Was he angry say you ? true he was so , and I know the cause : He was struck down yesterday in the battle , but he 'll lay about him ; he 'll cry quittance with 'em to day I 'll answer for him : and there 's Bacchanalss will not come far behind him ; let 'em take heed of Troilus , I can tell 'em that too . 



Cressi .  What was he struck down too ? 



Pand.   Who , Troilus ? Troilus is the betterman of the two . 



Cressi .  O jupiter ! there 's no comparison , Troilus the better man ! 



Pand.   What ▪ no comparison between Hector and Troilus ? do you know a man if you see him ? 



Cressi .  no , for he may look like a man , and not be one . 



Pand.   Well , I say Troilus is Troilus . 



Cressi .  that 's what I say , for I am sure he is not Hector . 



Pand.   no , nor Hector is not Troilus , make your best of that Niece ! 



Cressi .  't is true , for each of 'em is himself . 



Pand.   Himself ! alas poor Troilus ! I would he were himself , welk the Gods are all sufficient , and time must mend or end : I would he were himself , and would I were a Lady for his sake . I would not answer for my Maidenhead , — no , Hector is not a better man than Troilus . 



Cressi .  Excuse me . 



Pand.   Pardon me : Troilus is in the bud ; 't is early day with him , you shall tell me another tale when Troilus is come to bearing : and yet he 'll not bear neither is some sense . no , Hector shall never have his virtues . 



Cressi .  no matter . 



Pand.   Nor his beauty , nor his fashion , nor his wit , he shall have nothing of him . 



Cressi .  They would not become him , his own are better . 



Pand.   How , his own better ! you have no judgement Niece , Helen herself swore t'other day , that Troilus for a manly brown complexion , ( for so it is , I must confess ; ) not brown neither . 



Cressi .  no , but very brown . 



Phnd.   Faith to say truth , brown and not brown : come I swear to you , I think Helen love's him better than Paris : Nay I 'm sure she does , she comes me to him t'other day , into the bow window , and you know Troilus has not above three or four hairs on his chin . 



Cressi .  that 's but a bare commendation . 



Pand.   But to prove to you that Helen love's him , she comes , and puts me her white hand to his cloven chin ! 



Cressi .  Has he been fight then , how came it cloven ? 



Pand.   Why , you know it is dimpled . I cannot choose but laugh to think how she tickled his cloven chin : She has a marvellous white hand I must needs confess . 

But let that pass , for I know who has a whiter : Well Cousin I told you a thing yesterday , think on 't , think on 't . 



Cressi .  So I do Uncle . 



Pand.   I 'll besworn 't is true ; he will weep ye , and 't were a man born in April . [ A Retreat sounded . Hark , they are returning from the field ; shall we stay and see 'em as they come by , sweet Niece do , sweet Niece Cressida . 



Cressi .  For once you shall command me . 



Pand.   Here , here , here 's an excellent place ; we may see 'em here most bravely , and I 'll tell you all their names as they pass by : but mark Troilus above the rest , mark Troilus , he 's worth your marking . 



Aeneas passes over the Stage . Cressi .  Speak not so loud then . 



Pand.   that 's Aeneas , Is 't not a brave man that , he 's a swinger , many a Graecian he has laid with his face upward ; but mark Troilus , you shall see anon . 

Enter Antenor , passing . that 's Antenor , he has a notable head-piece I can tell you , and he 's the ablest man for judgement in all Troy , you may turn him lose i faith , and by my troth a proper person : When comes Troilus ? I 'll show you Troilus anon , if he see me , you shall see him nod at me . 

Hector passes over . that 's Hector , that , that , look you that , there 's a fellow , go thy way Hector , there 's a brave man Niece : OH brave Hector , look how he looks ! there 's a countenance ! is 't not a brave man Niece ? 



Cressi .  I always told you so . 



Pand.   Is a not ? it does a man's heart good to look on him , look you , look you there , what hacks are on his Helmet ! this was no boys play i'faith , he laid it on with a vengeance , take it off whose who 's will as they say ! there are hacks Niece ! 



Cressi .  Were those with Swords . 



Pand.   Swords , or Bucklers , Falchions , Darts , and Lances ! any thing he cares not ! and the devil come 't is all one to him , by Jupiter he looks so terribly that I am half afraid to praise him . 

Enter Paris . Yonder comes Paris , yonder comes Paris , lookye yonder Niece ; is 't not a brave young Prince too ! He draws the best bow in all Troy , he hits you to a span twelvescore levelly ; who said he came home hurt to day : why this will do Helen's heart good now ! Ha! that I could see Troilus now ! 



Enter Helenus' . Cressi .  who 's that black man Uncle ? 



Pand.   that 's Helenus , I marvel where Troilus is all this while ? that 's Helenus , I think Troilus went not forth to day ; that 's Helenus . 



Cressi .  Can Helenus fight Uncle ? 



Pand.   Helenus ! no , yes , he 'll fight indifferently well , I marvel in my heart what 's become of Troilus ? Hark! do you not hear the people cry Troilus ? Helenus is a Priest and keeps a whore ; he 'll fight for 's whore , or he 's no true Priest I warrant him . 



Enter Troilus passing over . Cressi .  What sneaking fellow comes yonder ? 



Pand.   Where , yonder ! that 's Deiphobus : no I lie , I lie , that 's Troilus , there 's a man Niece ! him ! OH brave Troilus ! the Prince of chivalry , and flower of fidelity ! 



Cressi .  Peace , for shame peace . 



Pand.   Nay but mark him then ! OH brave Troilus ! there 's a man of men Niece ! look you how his Sword is bloody , and his Helmet more hacked than Hector's , and how he looks , and how he goes ! OH admirable youth ! he ne'er saw two and twenty . Go thy way Troilus , go thy way ! had I a sister were a grace , and a daughter a Goddess , he should take his choice of 'em , OH admirable man ! Paris ! Paris is dirt to him , and I warrant Helen to change , would give all the shoes in her shop to boot . 



Enter Common Soldiers passing over . Cressi .  Here come more . 



Pand.   Asses , fools dolts , dirt and dung , stuff and lumber : porredg after meat ? but I could live and die with Troilus . Near look Niece , ne'er look , the Lions are gone ; Apes and Monkeys , the fag end of the creation . I had rather be such a man as Troilus , than Agamemnon and all Greece . 



Cressi .  there 's Achilles among the Greeks , he 's braveman ! 



Pand.   Achilles ! a Carman , a beast of burden ; a very Camel , have you any eyes Niece , do you know a man ! is he to be compared with Troilus ! 



Enter Page . Page .  Sir , my Lord Troilus would instantly speak with you . 



Pand.   Where boy , where ! 



Page .  At his own house , if you think convenient . 



Pand.   Good boy tell him I come instantly , I doubt he 's wounded , farewell good Niece : But I 'll be with you by and by . 



Cressi .  To bring me Uncle ! 



Pand.   ay , a token from Prince Troilus . 



Cressi .  By the same token you are a procurer Uncle . 

[ Exit Pandarus . Cressida alone . A strange dissembling Sex we Women are , 
Well may we men , when we ourselves deceive . 
Long has my secret Soul loved Troilus . 
I drunk his praises from my Uncle's mouth , 
As if my ears could ne'er be satisfied ; 
Why then , why said I not , I love this Prince ? 
How could my tongue conspire against my heart , 
To say I loved him not , OH childish love ! 
't is like an Infant froward in his play ▪ 
And what he most desires , he throws away . 
[ Exit Cressida . 

ACT II SCENE I Troy.  

Priam , Hector , Troilus , Aeneas . Priam.   After th' expense of so much time and blood , 
Thus once again the Grecians send to Troy. 
Deliver Helen , and all other loss 
Shall be forgotten Hector , what say you to 't ? 


Hect.   Though no man lesle can fear the Greeks than I , 
Yet there 's no Virgin of more tender heart 
more ready to cry out , who knows the consequence , 
then Hector is ; for modest doubt is mixed 
With manly courage best , let Helen go . 
If we have lost so many lives of ours , 
To keep a thing not ours ; not worth to us 
The value of a man , what reason is there 
Still to retain the cause of so much ill ? 


Troil.   Fie , fie , my noble Brother ! 
Weigh you the worth and honour of a King , 
So great as Asia's Monarch in a scale 
Of common ounces thus ? 
Are fears and reasons fit to be considered , 
When a King's fame is questioned ? 


Hect.   Brother , she 's not worth 
What her defence has cost us . 


Troil.   what 's aught but as 't is valued ? 


Hect.   But value dwells not in opinion only : 
It holds the dignity and estimation , 
As well , wherein 't is precious of itself . 
As in the prizer , 't is Idolatry 
To make the Service greater than the God.  


Troil.   We turn not back the Silks upon the Merchant 
When we have worn 'em : the remaining food 
Throw not away because we now are full . 
If you confess 't was wisdom Paris went , 
As you must needs ; for you all cried go , go , 
If you 'll confess he brought home noble prize 
As you must needs , for you all clapped your hands , 
And cried inestimable : why do you now 
So underrate the value of your purchase ? 
For let me tell you 't is unmanly theft 
When we have taken what we fear to keep ! 


Aene.   there 's not the meanest Spirit in our party 
Without a heart to dare , or Sword to draw , 
When Helen is defended : none so noble 
Whose life were ill bestowed , or death unfamed , 
When Helleu is the Subject . 


Priam.   So says Paris . 
Like one besotted on effeminate joys , 
He has the honey still , but these the gall . 


Aeneas .  He not proposes merely to himself 
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it : 
But he would have the stain of Helen's rape 
Wiped off in honourable keeping her . 


Hect.   Troilus and Aeneas you have said : 
If saying superficial things be reason . 
But if this Helen be another's wife , 
The Moral laws of Nature and of nation 's 
Speak loud she be restored : thus to persist 
In doing wrong , extenuates not wrong , 
But makes it much more so : Hector's opinion 
Is this , is in way of truth : yet ne'retheless 
My sprightly Brother I incline to you 
In resolution to defend her still : 
For 't is cause on which our Trojan honour 
And common reputation will depend . 


Troil.   Why there you touched the life of our design : 
Were it not glory that we covet more 
Than war and vengeance ( beasts and woman's pleasure ) 
I wou●d not wish a drop of Trojan blood 
Spent more in her defence : But o my Brother 
She is a subject of renoun and honour , 
And I presume brave Hector would not lose 
The rich advantage of his future fame 
For the wide world's revenue : — I have business ; 
But glad I am to leave you thus resolved . 
When such arms strike , never doubt of the success . 


Aeneas .  May we not guess ? 


Troil.   You may , and be deceived . 
[ Exit . Troil.  

Hect.   A woman on my life : even so it happens , 
Religion , state affairs , whater'es the theme 
It ends in women still . 


Enter Andromache . Priam.   See here 's your wife 
To make that maxim good . 


Hect.   Welcome Andromache : your looks are cheerful ; 
You bring some pleasing news . 


Andro.   Nothing that 's serious . 
Your little Son Astyanax has employed me 
As his Ambassadresse . 


Hect.   Upon what errand ? 


Andro.   no lesle than that his Grandfather this day 
Would make him , Knight : he longs to kill a Graecian : 
For should he stay to be a man , he thinks 
you 'll kill 'em all ; and leave no work for him . 


Priam.   Your own blood , Hector . 


Andro.   And therefore he designs to send a challenge 
To Agamemnon , Ajax , or Achilles 
To prove they do not well to burn our fields ; 
And keep us cooped like prisner's in a Town : 
To lead this lazy life . 


Hect.   What sparks of honour 
Fly from this child ! the god 's speak in him sure : 
— It shall be so — I 'll do 't . 


Priam.   What means my Son ? 


Hect.   To send a challenge to the boldest Greek ; 
Is not that Country ours ? those fruitful Fields 
Washed by yo● Silver flood , are they not ours ? 
Those teeming Vines that tempt our longing eyes , 
Shall we behold 'em ? shall we call 'em ours 
And date not make 'em so ? by Heavens I 'll know 
Which of these haughty Grecians , dares to think 
He can keep Hector prisoner here in Troy.  


Priam.   If Hector only were a private Man , 
This would be courage , but in him 't is madness . 
The general safety on your life depends ; 
And sho●ed you perish in this rash attempt 


Troy   with a groan , would feel her Soul go out : 
And breathe her last in you . 


Aeneas .  The task you undertake is hazardous : 
Suppose you win , what would the profit be ? 
If Ajax or Achilles fell beneath 
Your thundering Arm , would all the rest depart ? 
Would Agamemnon , or his injured Brother 
Set sail for this ? then it were worth your danger : 
But , as it is , we throw our utmost stake 
Against whole heaps of theirs . 


Priam.   He tells you true . 


Aeneas .  Suppose one , Ajax , or Achilles lost . 
They can repair with more that single lose : 


Troy   has but one , one Hector . 


Hect.   no Aeneas ? 
What then art thou ; and what is Troilus ? 
What will Astyanax be ? 


Priam.   An Hector one day . 
But you must let him live to be a Hector . 
And who shall make him such when you are gone ? 
Who shall instinct his tenderness in arms , 
Or give his childhood lessons of the war ? 
Who shall defend the promise of his youth 
And make it bear in Manhood ? the young Sappling 
Is shrouded long beneath the Mother tree 
Before it be transplanted from its Earth , 
And trust itself for growth . 


Hect.   Alas , my Father ! 
You have not drawn one reason from yourself , 
But public safety , and my Sons green years : 
In this neglecting that main argument 
Trust me you chide my filial piety : 
As if I could be wone from my resolves 
By Troy , or by my Son , or any name 
more dear to me than yours . 


Praim .  I did not name myself ; because I know 
When thou art gone , I need no Graecian Sword , 
To help me die , but only Hector's loss . 
Daughter , why speak not you ? why stand you silent ? 
Have you no right in Hector , as a wife ? 


Andro.   I would be worthy to be Hector's wife : 
And had I been a Man , as my Soul's one 
I had aspired a nobler name , his friend . 
How I love Hector , ( need I say I love him ? ) 
I am not but in him : 
But when I see him arming for his Honour , 
His Country and his Gods , that martial fire 
That mounts his courage , kindles even to me ▪ 
And when the Trojan Matrons wait him out 
With prayers , and meet with blessings his return ; 
The pride of Virtue , beats within my breast , 
To wipe away the sweat and dust of War : 
And dress my Hero , glorious in his wounds . 


Hect.   Come to my Arms , thou manlier Virtue come ; 
thou better Name than wife ! wouldst thou not blush 
[ Embrace . To hug a coward thus ? 


Priam.   Yet still I fear ! 


Andro.   There spoke a woman , pardon Royal Sir ; 
Has he not met a thousand lifted Swords , 
Of thick ranked Grecians , and shall one affright him ? 
there 's not a day but he encounters Armles ; 
And yet as safe , as if the broad brimmed Shield 
That Pallas wears , were held betwixt him and death . 


Hect.   thou know'st me well ; and thou shalt praise me more , 
Gods make me worthy of thee ! 


Andro.   You shall be 
My Knight this day , you fhall not wear a cause 
So black as Helen's rape upon your breast , 
Let Paris fight for Helen ; guilt for guilt , 
But when you fight for Honour and for me , 
then let our equal Gods behold an Act , 
They may not blush to Crown . 


Hect.   Aeneas go . 
And bear my Challenge to the Graecian Camp , 
If there be one amongst the best of Greece , 
Who holds his honour higher than his ea●e , 
Who knows his valour , and knows not his fear ; 
Who love's his Mistress more than in confession : 
And dares avow her beauty and her worth , 
In other Arms than hers ; to him this Challenge . 
I have a Lady of more truth and beauty , 
then ever Greek did compass in his arms : 
And will to morrow , with the Trumpets call , 
Midway , between their Tents , and these our Walls , 
Maintains what I have said , if any come 
My Sword shall honour him , if none shall dare , 
then shall I say at my return to Troy , 
The Graecian dames , are Sunburnt , and not worth 
The splinter of a Lance.  


Aeneas .  It shall be told 'em , 
As boldly as you gave it . 


Priam.   Heaven protect thee . 


[ Exeunt Omnes . SCENE II  

Pandarus , Cressida . Pand.   Yonder he stands poor wretch ! there stands he , with such a look , and such a face , and such begging eyes ; there he stands poor prisoner . 



Cressi .  What a deluge of words do you pour out Uncle , to say just nothing ? 



Pand.   Nothing do you call it , is that nothing , do you call it nothing ? why he looks for all the World , like one of your rascally Malefactors , just thrown off the Gibbet , with his cap down , his arms tied down , his feet sprunting , his body swinging , nothing do you call it ? this is nothing with a vengeance . 



Cressi .  Or , what think you of a hurt bird , that flutters about with a broken wing ? 



Pand.   Why go to then , he cannot fly away then , then , that 's certain , that 's undoubted : there he lies to be taken up : but if you had seen him , when I said to him , take a good heart man , and follow me : and fear no colours , and speak , your mind man : she can never stand you : she will fall , and 't were a leaf in Autumn . 



Cress.   Did you tell him all this without my consent ? 



Pand.   Why you did consent , your eyes consented ; they blabbed , they leered , their very corners blabbed . But you 'll say your tongue said nothing . no I warrant it : your tongue was wiser ; your tongue was better bred : your tongue kept its own counsel : Nay , I 'll say that for you , your tongue said nothing . Well such a shamefaced couple did I never see days o my life : so afraid of one another ; such ado to bring you to the business : well if this job were well over , if ever I loose my pains again wtth an awkard couple , let me be painted in the signpost for the Labour in vain : fie upon 't , fie upon 't ; there 's no conscience in 't : all honest people will cry shame on 't . 



Cress.   Where is this Monster to be shown ? what 's to be given for a Sight of him ? 



Pand   Why ready money , ready money ; you carry it about you : give and take is square-dealing ; for in my conscience he 's as errand a maid as you are : ● was fain to use violence to him , to pull him hither : and he pulled and I pulled : for you must know he 's absolutely the strongest youth in Troy : tother day he took Helen is one hand , and Parish in tother , and danced 'em at one another at arms-end , and 't were two Moppets : there was a back , there were bone and Sinews : there was a back for you . 



Cressi .  For these good procuring Offices you 'll be damned one day Uncle . 



Pand.   Who I damned ? faith I doubt I shall : by my troth I think I shall , nay if a man be damned for doing good , as thou sayest , it may go hard with me . 



Cressi .  then I 'll not see Prince Troilus ? ●e not be accessary to your damnation . 



Pand.   How , not see Prince Troilus ? why I have engaged , I have promised , I have past my word , I care not for damning , let me alone for damning ; I value not damning in comparison with my word . If I am damned it shall be a good damning to thee girl , thou shalt be my heir , come 't is a virtuous girl , thou shalt help me t● keep my word , thou shalt see Prince Troilus . 



Cressi .  The ventures great . 



Pand.   no venture in the World , thy Mother ventured it for thee , and thou shalt venture it for my little Cousin that must be . 



Cressi .  Weigh but my fears , Prince Troilus is young . — 



Pand.   Mary is he , there 's no fear in that I hope , the fear were if he were old and feeble . 



Cressi .  And I a woman . 



Pand.   no fear yet , thovart a Woman , and he 's a Man , put them two together , put 'em together . 



Cressi .  And if I should be frail . — 



Pand.   there 's all my fear that thou art not frail : thou shouldst be frail , all flesh is frail . 



Cressi .  Are you my Uncle , and can give this counsel to your own Brother's daughter . 



Pand.   If thou wert my own daughter a thousand times over , I could do no better for thee ; what wouldst thou have girl , he 's a Prince and a young Prince , and a loving young Prince ! an Uncle dost thou call me , by Cupid I am a father to thee ; get thee in , get thee in girl , I hear him coming . And do you hear Niece ! I give you leave , [ Eeit Cressida . to deny a little 't will be decent : but take heed of obstinacy , that 's a vice ; no obstinacy my dear Niece . 



Enter Troilus . Troil.   Now Pandarus . 



Pand.   Now , my sweet Prince ! have you seen my Niece ? no I know you have not . 



Troilus :  no Pandarus ; I stalk about your doors 
Like a strange Soul upon the stygian banks 
Staying for waftage : OH be thou my Charon , 
And give me a swift transportanee to Elysium , 
And fly with me to Cressida . 


Pand.   Walk here a moment more : I 'll bring her strait . 



Troil.   I fear she will not come : most sure she will not . 



Pand.   How not come , and I her Uncle ! why I tell you Prince , she twitters at you . Ah poor sweet Rogue , ah little Rogue , now does she think , and think , and think again of what must be betwixt you two . O sweet , — o sweet — OH — what not come , and I her Uncle ? 



Troil.   Still thou flatterest me ; but prithee flatter still ; for I would hope ; I would not wake out of my pleasing dream : o hope how sweet thou art ! but to hope always , and have no effect of what we hope ! 



Pand.   O faint heart , faint heart ! well there 's much good matter in these old proverbs ! no , she 'll not come I warrant her ; she has no blood of mine in her , not so much as will fill a flea : but if she does not come , and come , and come with a swing into your arms , I say no more , but she has renounced all grace , and there 's an end . 



Troil.   I will believe thee : go then , but be sure : 



Pand.   no , you would not have me go ; you are indifferent : shall I go say you : speak the word then : — yet I care not : you may stand in your own light ; and loose a sweet young Lady's heart : well , I shall not go then ! 



Troil.   Fly , fly , thou torturest me . 



Pand.   Do I so , do I so ! do I torture you indeed ! well I will go . 



Troil.   But yet thou dost not go ? 



Pand.   I go immediately , directly , in a twinkling , with a thought . yet you think a man never does enough for you : I have been labouring in your business like any Moil . I was with Prince Paris this morning , to make your excuse at night for not supping at Court : and I found him , faith how do you think I found him ; it does my heart good to think how I found him : yet you think a man never does enough for you . 



Troil.   Will you go then , what 's this to Cressida ? 



Pand.   Why you will not hear a Man ; what 's this to Cressida ? why I found him a-bed , a-bed with Helena by my troth : 't is a sweet Queen , a sweet Queen , a very sweet Queen ; — but she 's nothing to my Cousin Cressida ; she 's a blowse , a gipsy , a Tawney-moor to my Cousin Cressida : And she lay with one white arm underneath the whoresons neck : o such a white , lily white , round , plump arm it was — and you must know it was stripped up to th'elbows : and she did so kiss him , and so huggle him : — as who should say — 



Troil.   But still thou stayest : what 's this to Cressida ? 



Pand.   Why I made your excuse to your Brother Paris ; that I think 's to Cressida ; but such an arm , such a hand , such taper fingers , t'other hand was under the bedclothes , that I saw not , I confess , that hand I saw not . 



Troil.   Again thou torturest me . 



Pand.   Nay I was tortured too ; old as I am , I was tortured too : but for all that , I could make a shift , to make him , to make your excuse , to make your father ; — by Jove when I think of that hand , I am so ravished , that I know not what I say : I was tortured too . 

[ Troilus turns away discontented . Well I go , I go ; I fetch her , I bring her , I conduct her : not come quoth a , and I her Uncle ! 

Exit Pandarus . 

Troilus .  I 'm giddy ; expectation whirls me round : 
The imaginary relish is so sweet , 
That it enchants my sense ; what will it be 
When I shall taste that Nectar ? 
It must be either death , or joy too fine 
For the capacity of human powers . 
I fear it much : and I do fear beside , 
That I shall lose distinction in my joys : 
As does a battle , when they charge on heaps 
A flying Enemy . 


Re-enter Pandarus . Pand.   she 's making her ready : she 'll come strait , you must be witty now ; she does so blush , and fetches her breath so short , as if she were frighted with a spirit : 't is the prettiest villain , she fetches her breath so short , as 't were a new ta'en Sparrow . 



Troil.   Just such a passion , does heave up my breast ! 
My heart beats thicker than a feavourish pulse : 
I know not where I am , nor what I do : 
Just like a slave , at unawares encountering 
The eye of Majesty : — Lead on , I 'll follow . 


Exeunt together . SCENE III The Camp.  

Nestor , Ulysses . Vlyss.   I have conceived an embryo in my brain : 
Be you my time to bring it to some shape . 


Nest.   What is 't , Ulysses ? 


Ulyss.   The ●eeded pride , 
That has to this maturity ▪ blow● up 
In rank Achilles , must or now be dropped , 
Or shedding , breed a nursery of ●ike ill , 
To overtop us all . 


Nest.   that 's my opinion . 


Vlyss.   This challenge which 〈◊〉 as brings from Hector , 
However it be spread in general terms , 
Relates in purpose only to Achilles . 
And will it wake him to the answer think you ? 


Nest.   It ought to do : whom can we else oppose 
Who do●ed from Hector bring his honour off , 
If not Achilles the Success of this 
Although particular , will give an Omen 
Of good or bad , even to the general cause . 


〈◊〉   Pardon me Nestor , if I contradict you . 
Therefore 't is fit Achilles meet not 〈◊〉 . 
Let us like Merchants show our coursest 〈◊〉 , 
And think perchance 〈…〉 
The lustre of our better yet unshown 
Will show the better ; let us not 〈◊〉 
Our greatest warrior should be matched with Hector . 
For both our honour and our shame in this , 
Shall be attended with strange followers . 


Nest.   I see 'em not with my old eyes ; what are they ? 


Vlyss.   What glory our Achilles gains from Hector . 
Were he not proud we all should share with him : 
But he already is too insolent : 
And we had better parch in A●●rick Sun 
Than in his pride , should he scape Hector fair . 
But grant he should be foiled 
Why then our common reputation suffers , 
In that of our best Man : no , make a Lottery ; 
And by device let blockish Ajax draw 
The chance to fight with Hector : among ourselves 
Give him allowance as the braver Man ; 
For that will physic the great Myrmidon , 
Who swells with loud applause ; and make him fall 
His Crest , if brainless Ajax come safe off . 
If not , we yet preserve a fair opinion , 
That we have better men . 


Nest.   Now I begin to relish thy advice : 
Come let us go to Agamemnon strait , 
T' inform him of our project . 


Vlyss.   't is not ripe . 
The skilful Surgeon will not launch a sore 
Till Nature has digested and prepared 
The growing humours to his healing purpose . 
Else must he often grieve the patient's sense , 
When one incision once well-timeed would serve : 
Are not Achilles , and dull Ajax friends ? 


Nest.   As much as fools can be . 


Vlyss.   That knot of friendsip first must be untied 
E'er we can reach our ends ; for while they love each other 
Both hating us , will draw too strong a bias , 
And all the Camp will lean that way they draw : 
For brutal courage is the Soldiers Idol : 
So , if one prove contemptuous , backed by tother , 
'T will give the law to cool and sober sense , 
And place the power of war in Madman's hands . 


Nest.   Now I conceive you ; were they once divided , 
And one of them made ours , that one would check 
The others towering growth : and keep both low , 
As Instruments , and not as Lords of war. 
And this must be by secret coals of envy , 
Blown in their breast : comparisons of worth ; 
Great actions weighed of each : and each the best , 
As we shall give him voice . 


Vlyss.   Here comes Thersites . 
Enter Thersites . Who feeds on Ajax : yet love's him not , because he cannot love . 
But as a Species , differing from mankind , 
Hatss' all he sees ; and rails at all he knows ; 
But hate's them most , from whom he most receives . 
Disdaining that his lot should be so low . 
That he should want the kindness which he takes . 


Nest.   there 's none so fit an Engine : Save ye Thersites . 


Vlyss.   Hail noble Graecian , thou relief of toils , 
Soul of our mirth , and joy of sullen war. 
In whose converse our winter-nights are short , 
And Summer-days not tedious . 


there 's .  hang you both . 


Nest.   How hang us both ! 


there 's .  But hang thee first , thou very reverend fool ! 
thou sapless Oak , that liv'st by wanting thought . 
And now in thy three hundreth year repinest 
thou shouldst be felled : hangings a civil death , 
The death of men : thou canst not hang : thy trunk 
Is only fit for gallows to hang others . 


Nest.   A fine greeting . 


there 's .  A fine old Dotard , to repine at hanging 
At such an Age ! what saw the Gods in thee 
That a Cock-sparrow should but live three years , 
And thou shouldst last three Ages ! he 's thy better ; 
He uses life : he treads himself to death . 
thou hast forgot thy use some hundred years : 
thou stump of Man , thou worn-out broom : thou lumber . 


Nest.   I 'll hear no more of him , his poison works ; 
What curse me for my age ! 


Vlyss.   Hold , you mistake him , Nestor ; 't is his custom : 
What malice is there in a mirthful scene ! 
't is but a keen-edged Sword , spread o'er with blame 
To heal the wound it makes : 


there 's .  thou beg'st a curse ! 
May'st thou quit scores then , and be hanged on Nestor , 
Who hangs on thee : thou leadest him by the nose : 
thou paly'st him like a puppet ; speakest within him , 
And when thou hast contirved some dark design 
To lose a thousand Greeks ; make dogs meat of us , 
thou layst thy Cuckoos egg within his nest , 
And mak'st him hatch it : teachest his remembrance 
To lie ; and say , the like of it was practised 
Two hundred years ago ; thou bring'st the brain ; 
And he brings only beard to vouch thy plots ; 


Nest ▪   I 'm no man's fool . 


there 's .  then be thy own , that 's worse . 


Nest.   he 'll rail all day . 


Vlyss.   then we shall learn all day . 
Who forms the body to a graceful carriage 
Must imitate our awkard motion's first ; 
The same prescription does the wise Thersites 
Apply to mend our minds . The same he uses 
To Ajax , to Achilles' ; to the rest ; 
His Satyrs are the phyfick of the Camp.  


there 's .  Would they were poison to 't , Ratsbane and Hemlock : 
Nothing else can mend you ; and those two brawny fools . 


Vlyss.   He hits 'em right : 
Are they not such my Nestor ? 


there 's .  Dolt-heads , Asses . 
And beasts of burden ; Ajax and Achilles ! 
The pillars , no , the porters of the war. 
Hard-headed Rogues ! Engines , mere wooden Engines , 
Pushed on to do your work . 


Nest.   They are indeed . 


there 's .  But what a Rogue art thou 
To say they are indeed : Heaven made e , m horses 
And thou puttest on their harness : rid'st and spur'st 'em : 
Usurpest upon heaven's fools , and mak'st 'em thine . 


Nest.   no : they are headstrong fools to be corrected 
By none but by Thersites : thou alone 
Canst tame , and train 'em to their proper use ; 
And doing this master claim a just reward 
From Greece , and Royal Agamemnon's , hands . 


there 's .  Aye , when you need a man , you talk of giving ; 
For wit 's a dear commodity among you : 
But when you do not want him , then stale porridge , 
A starved dog would not lap ; and furrow water 
Is all the wine we taste , give drabs and pimps : 
He have no gifts with hooks at end of 'em . 


Vlyss.   Is this a Man , OH Nestor to be bought ! 
Asia's not price enough ! bid the world for him . 
And shall this man , this Hermes , this Apollo , 
Sat lag of Ajax table ? almost minstrel , 
And with his presence grace a brainless feast ? 
Why they con sense from him grow wits by rote , 
And yet , by ill repeating , libel hi●● ▪ 
Making his wit their nonsense : nay they scorn him ; 
Call him bought railer , 〈◊〉 tongue ! 
Play him for sport at meals ▪ and kick him off . 


there 's .  Yes they can kick ; my buttocks feel they can : 
They have their Ass' tricks : but I 'll eat pebbles , 
I 'll starve ; 't is brave to starve , 't is like a Soldier ; 
Before I 'll feed those wit-starved rogues with sense ▪ 
They shall eat dry , and choke for want of wit , 
E'er they be moistened with one drop of mine . 
Ajax , and Achilles , two muddwalls of fool , 
That only differ in degrees of thickness . 


Vlyss.   I 'd be revenged of both , when wine ●umes high , 
Set 'em to prate , to boast their brutal strength , 
To vie their stupid courage , till they quarrel 
And play at hard-head with their empty Skulls . 


there 's .  Yes ; they shall but and kick ; and all the while 
I 'll think they kick for me : they shall fallen timber 
On both sides ; and then log-wood will be cheap . 


Nest.   And Agamemnon — 


there 's .  Pox of Agamemnon ; 
Cannot I do a mischief for myself 
But he must thank me for 't ! 
Vlyss. to Nestor . Away ; our work is done . 


Exeunt Ulysses , Nestor . Th●rss .  This Agamemnon is a King of clouts : 
A chip in porridge . 


Enter Ajax . Ajax .  Thersites ! 


there 's .  Set up to frighten Daws from Cherry trees . 


Ajax .  Dog ! 


there 's .  A standard to march under ! 


Ajax .  thou bitch-woolf ! canst thou not hear ! feel then . 


Strikes him . there 's .  The plague of Greece , and Helen's Pox light on thee , 
thou mongrel mastiff ; thou beef-witted Lord  


Ajax .  Speak then , thou mouldy leaven of the Camp. 
Speak or I 'll beaten thee into handsomeness . 


Thirs .  I shall sooner rail thee into wit : thou canst kick , can't thou ? 
A red murrayn on thy Jades tricks ! 


Ajax .  Tell me the Proclamation : 


there 's .  thou art proclaimed a fool I think . 


Ajax .  You whoreson Cur take that . 


[ Strikes him . there 's .  thou Scurvy valiant Ass . 


Ajax .  thou slave . 


there 's .  thou Lord ! — I , do , do , — would my buttocks were Iron for thy sake . 



Enter Achilles . Patroclus . Achilles .  Why how now Ajax ! wherefore do you this ? 
How now Thersites , what 's the matter man ! 


there 's .  I say this Ajax wears his wit in 's belly , and his guts in brains . 



Achilles .  Peace fool . 



there 's .  I would have peace ; but the fool will not . 



Prtrocl .  But what 's the quarrel ! 



Ajax .  I bade him tell me the proclamation , and he rails upon me . 



there 's .  I serve thee not : 



Ajax .  I shall cut out your tongue ! 



there 's .  't is no matter ; I shall speak as much sense as thou afterwards : I 'll see you hanged ere I come any more to your Tent : I 'll keep where there 's wit stirring , and leave the faction of fools . — 



[ going . Achilles .  Nay , thou shalt not go Thersites , till we have squeezed the venom out of thee : prithee inform us of this Proclamation . 



there 's .  Why you empty ●uz-ballss , your heads are full of nothing else but Proclamatio●ss . 



Ajax .  Tell us the news I say . 



Thirs .  You say ! why you never said any thing in all your life ! But since you will know , 't is proclaimed through the Army , that Hector is to cudgel you to morrow . 



Achilles .  How cudgel him , Thersites ! 



there 's .  Nay , you may take a child's part on 't if you have so much courage , for Hector has challenged the toughest of the Greeks : and ●tis in dispute which of your two heads is the sonndest timber . 

A knotty piece of work he'●l have betwixt your noddles , 


Achilles .  If Hector be to fight with any Greeks , 
He knows his Man  


Ajax .  Yes ; he may know his man , without Art Magic . 



there 's .  So he had need : ●or to my certain knowledge neither of you two are conjurers to inform him . 



Achilles .  to Ajax . You do not mean yourself , sure . 



Ajax .  I mean nothing 



there 's .  thou meanest so always . 



Achilles .  Umh ! mean nothing ! 



there 's ,  aside . Jove if it be thy will , let 〈◊〉 two fools quarrel about nothing : 't is a cause that 's worthy of 'em . 



Ajax .  You say●d he knew his Man : is there 〈◊〉 one ? 
One Man amongst the Greeks ! 


Achilles .  Since you will have it , 
but one to fight with 〈◊〉 . 


Ajax .  then I am he ; 


Achilles .  Weak Ajax . 



Ajax .  Weak Achilles . 



there 's .  Weak indeed : God help you both ! 



Patroc .  Come , this must be no quarrel . 



there 's ▪   there 's no cause for 't . 



Patroc .  He tells you true ; you are both equal 



there 's .  Fools . 



Achilles .  I can brook no comparisons . 



Ajax .  Nor 1  



Achilles .  Well Ajax . 



Ajax .  Well Achilles . 



there 's .  So now they quarrel in Monosyllables : A word and a blow , an 't be thy william  



Achilles .  You may hear more . 



Ajax .  I would . 



Achilles .  Expect , 



Ajax .  Farewell . 



Exeunt severally . there 's .  Curse on them , they want wine : your tr●e fool will never fight without it . Or a drab a drab : O for a commodious Drab betwixt ' 'em ! would Hell●n had been here ! then it had come to something . 

Dogs , Lions , Bulls , for Females tear and gore : 
And the Beast Man , is valiant for his whore . 
Exit Thersites . 

ACT III SCENE I  

Enter Thersites . there 's .  Shall the Idiot Ajax use me thus ! he beats me and I rail at him : OH worthy satisfaction ! would I could beaten him , and he railed at me ! then there 's Achilles , a rare Engineer : if Troy be not taken till these two undermine it , the walls will stand till they fall of themselves : Now the Plague on the whole Camp , or rather the Pox : for that 's a curse dependant on those that sight as we do for a Cuckold's queen . — What ho , my Lord Achilles . 



Enter Patroclus' . Patroc .  who 's there , Thersites ! Good Thersites come in and rail . 



there 's .  aside . If I could have remembered an Ass with gilt trappingss , thou hadst not slipped out of my contemplation . But 't is no matter ; thyself upon thyself : the common curse of mankind , folly and ignorance be thine in great abundance : Heavens belsse thee from a Tutor ; and discipline come not near thee . 

I have said my prayers ; and the devil Envy say Amen . 
where 's Achilles ! 
Enter Achilles . who 's there Thersites ! why my digestion , why hast thou not served thyself to my table , so many meals ! come begin what 's Agamemnon ? 



there 's .  Thy Commander , Achilles : then tell me Pauroclus , what 's Achilles ? 



Patro.   Thy Benefactor Thersites ; then tell me prithee what 's thyself ? 



there 's .  Thy knower , Patrcolus ; then tell me , Patroclus' , what art thou ? 



Patroc .  thou mayst tell that knowest . 



Achilles .  OH , tell , tell . This must be very foolish : and I die to have my spleen tickled . 



there 's .  I 'll decline the whole question . Agamemnon commands Achilles , Achilles is my Benefactor , I am Patroclus knower ; and Patroclus is a fool . 



Patroc .  You Rascal ? 



Achilles .  he 's a priviledgeed man , proceed Thersites . Ha! ha ! ha ! prithee proceed while I am in the vein of laughing . 



Thersit .  And all thses foresaid men are fools : Agamemnon's a fool to offer to command Achilles : Achilles is a fool to be commanded by him , I am a fool to serve such a fool , and Patroclus is a fool positive . 



Patroc .  Why am I a fool ? 



Thersi .  Make that demand to Heaven , it suffices me thou art one . 



Achilles .  ha , ha , ha ! OH give me ribs of steel , or I shall split with pleasure : now play me Nestor at a Night alarm : Mimic him rarely , make him cough and spit , and fumble with his gorget , and shake the rivits with his palsy hand ; in and out , in and out , gad that 's exceeding foolish . 



Patroc .  Nestor shall not scape so , he has told us what we are ; come what 's Nestor ? 



Thersi .  Why he 's an old wooden top , set up by father Time three hundred years ago , that hums to Agamemnon and Ulysses , and sleeps to all the world besides . 



Achilles .  So let him sleep for I 'll no more of him : OH my Patroclus , I but force a smile , Ajax has drawn the lot , and all the praise of Hector mu●t be his . 



Thersi .  I hope to see his praise upon his shoulders , in blows and bruises , his arms , thighs , and body , all full of fame ; such fame as he gave me , and a wide hole at last full in his bosom , to let in day upon him , and discover the inside of a fool . 



Patroc .  How he struts in expectation of honour ! he knows not what he does . 



Thersi .  Nay that 's no wonder , for he never did . 



Achilles .  Prithee say how he behaves himself ? 



Thersi .  OH you would be learning to practice , against such another time . — Why he tosses up his head as he had built Castles i' th' air ; and he treads upward to 'em , stalks into th' element , he surveys himself , as 't were to look for Ajax : he would be cried , for he has lost himself , nay he knows no body ; I said good morrow Ajax , and he replied thanks Agamemnon . 



Achilles .  thou shalt be my Ambassador to him Thersites . 



Thersi .  no , I 'll put on his person , let Patroclus make his demands to me , and you shall see the pageant of Ajax . 



Achilles .  To him Patroclus , tell him ! humbly desire the valiant Ajax to invite the Noble Hector to my Tent : and to procure safe conduct for him from our Captain General Agamemnon . 



Patroc .  Jove bless the mighty Ajax ! 



Thersi .  Humh ! 



Patroc .  I ●ome from the great Achilles . 



Thersi .  Ha!  



Patroc .  Who most humbly desire's you to invite Hector to his Tent.  



Thersi .  Humh ! 



Patroc .  And to procure him safe conduct from Agamemnon . 



Thersi .  Agamemnon ? 



Patroc .  ay , my Lord  



Thersi .  Ha!  



Patro.   What say you to 't ? 



Therst .  Farewell with all my heart . 



Patroc .  Your answer Sir ! 



Thersi .  If to morrow be a fair day , by eleven a clock it will go one way or tother , however he shall buy me dearly , fare you well with all my heart . 



Achilles .  Why but he is not in this tune is he ? 



Thersi .  no , but he 's thus out of tune , what Music will be in him when Hector has knocked out his brains I know not , nor I care not , but if emptiness makes noise , his head will make melody . 



Achilles .  My mind is troubled like a Fountain stirred : 
And I myself see not the bottom on 't . 


Thersi .  Would the Fountain of his mind were clear ; that he might see an Ass in 't . [ Aside . ] I had rather be a tick in a sheep , than such a valiant ignorance . 



Enter Agamemnon , Ajax , Diomedes , Menelaus . Patroc .  Look who comes here . 



Achilles .  Patroclus' , I 'll speak with no body , come in after me Thersites . 



Agam.   where 's Achilles ! 



[ Exeunt Achilles . Thersites . Patro.   Within , but ill disposed my Lord  



Menel .  We saw him at the opening of his Tent.  



Agam.   Let it be known to him that we are here . 



Patroc .  I shall say so to him . 

[ Exit Patroclus . 

Diom.   I know he is not ●ick . 



Ajax .  Yes , Lion sick , sick of a proud heart , you may call it melancholy ; if you 'll humour him : but on my honour ' 't is no more than pride : a●d why should he be proud ? 



Menel .  Here comes Patroclus ; but no Achilles with him . 


Enter Patroclus' . Patroc .  Achilles bids me tell you he is sorry 
If any thing more than your sport and pleasure 
Did move you to this visit : he 's not well , 
And begs you would excuse him , as unfit 
For present business . 


Agam.   How ! how 's this Patroclus ? 
We are too well acquainted with these answers . 
Though he has much desert , yet all his virtues 
Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss . 
We came to speak with him ; you shall not err 
If you return we think him over-proud 
And under-honest . Tell him this ; and add , 
That if he over-hold his price so much 
we 'll none of him : but let him like an Engine 
Not portable , lie lag of all the Camp. 
A stirring Dwarf is of more use to us 
then is a sleeping Giant ; tell him so . 


Patroc .  I shall ; and bring his answer presently . 


Agam.   I 'll not be satisfied but by himself . 
So tell him , Menelaus' . 


Exeunt Menelaus . Patroclus . Ajax .  what 's he more than another ? 


Agam.   no more than what he thinks himself . 


Ajax .  ●s he so much ! do you not think he thinks himself a better Man than me ? 



Diom.   no doubt he does . 



Ajax .  Do you think so ? 



Agam.   no , noble Ajax ; you are as strong , as valiant ; but much more courteous . 



Ajax .  Why should a man be proud ? I know not what pride is : I hate a proud man as I hate the engendering of toads . 



Diom.   Aside . 't is strange he should ; and love himself so well . 


Re-enter Menel . Men.   Achilles will not to the field to morrow . 


Agam.   what 's his excuse ? 


Men.   Why he relies on none 
But his own will ; possessed he is with vanity : 
What should I say , he is so plaguy proud 
That the death tokens of it are upon him ; 
And bided there 's no recovery . 


Enter Ulysses , Nectar . Agam.   Let Ajax go to him . 


Vlyss.   OH Agamemnon , let it not be so . 
we 'll consecrate the steps that Ajax makes 
When they go from Achill●ss : shall that proud man 
Be worshipped by a greater than himself , 
One whom we hold our Idol ; 
Shall Ajax go to him ? no , Jove forbid , 
And say in thunder , go to him Achilles . 


Nest.   [ Aside . ] OH , this is well ; he rubs him where it itches . 


Ajax .  If I go to him with my Gauntlet clenched , 
I 'll dash him o'er the face . 


Agam.   OH no , you shall not go . 


Ajax .  And'he ●e proud with me I 'll cure his pride : a paltry 
Insolent fellow ! 


Nest.   How he describes himself ? 


Vliss.   Aside . The crow chides blackness . — here is a man , but 't is before his face , and therefore I am silent . 



Nest.   wherefore are you ? He is not envious as Achilles is . 


Vlyss.   Know all the world he is as valiant . 


Ajax .  A ●horson dog that shall palter thus with us ! would a were a Trojan . 



Vlyss.   Thank Heaven my Lord , you 're of a gentle nature , 
Praise him that got you , her that brought you forth ; 
But he who taught you first the use of Arms , 
Let Mars divide Eternity ; in two , 
And give him half . I will not praise your wisdom . 
Nestor shall do 't ; but pardon father Nestor , 
Were you as green as Ajax , and your brain 
Tempered like his , you never should excel him ; 
But be as Ajax is . 


Ajax .  Shall I call you father ? 


Vlyss.   ay , my good Son.  


Diom.   Be ruled by him Lord Ajax . 


Vlyss.   There is no staying here ; the Hart Achilles 
Keeps thicket , please it our great General . 
I shall impart a counsel , which observed 
May cure this Madmans' pride . 


Agam.   In my own tent our talk will be more private ▪ 


Vlyss.   But nothing without Ajax : 
He is the soul and substance of my counsels 
And I am but his shadow . 


Ajax .  You shall see 
I am not like Achilles , 
Let us confer ; and I 'll give counsel too . 


[ Exeunt Omnes . SCENE II  

Pandarus , Troilus , Cressida . Pand.   Come , come , what need you blush ? shame 's a baby ; swear the oaths now to her , that you swore to me : what are you gone again ? you must be watched ere you are made tame must you ? why don't you speak to her first ! — Come draw this Curtain , and le 's see your picture : alas a day , how loath you are to offend daylight ! — ( they kiss ) that 's well , that 's well , nay you shall fight your hearts out ere I part you . — so so — so so — 



Troil.   You have bereft me of all words , fair Cressida . 



Pand.   Words , pay no debts ; give her deeds ; — what billing again ! here 's in witness whereof the parties interchangeably — come in , come in , you loose time both . 



Troil.   OH Cressida , how often have I wished me here ? 



Cressi .  Wished my Lord ! — the Gods grant ! OH my Lord — 



Troil.   What should they grant ? what makes this pretty interruption in thy words ? 



Cressi .  speak I know not what ! 



Troil.   Speak ever so ; and if I answer you 
I know not what , it shows the more of love . 
Love is a child that talks in broken language , 
Yet than he speaks most plain . 


Cress.   I find it true , that to be wise and love 
Are inconsistent things . 


Pand.   what blushing still , have you not done talking vet ! 


Cress.   Well Uncle , what folly I commit , ● detdcate to you . 


Pand.   I thank you for that : if my Lord get a boy of you , you 'll give him me . Be true to my Lord , if he flinch I 'll be hanged for him — ( Now am I in my kingdom ! 



[ aside ] Troil.   You know your pledges now , your Uncle's word and my firm faith . 



Pand.   Nay I 'll give my word for her too : our kindred are constant : they are burrs I can assure you , they 'll stick where they are thrown . 



Cress.   Boldness comes to me now , and I can speak : 
Prince Troilus , I have loved you long . 


Troil.   Why was my Cressida then so hard to win ? 


Cress.   Hard to seem won ; but I was won my Lord 
What have I blabbed , who will be true to us , 
When we are so unfaithful to ourselves ! 
OH bid me hold my tongue ? for in this rapture . 
Sure I shall speak what I should soon repent . 
But stop my mouth . 


Troil.   A sweet command ; and willingly obeyed . 


[ Kisses ] Pand.   Pretty I faith ! 


Cress.   My Lord I do beseech you pardon me , 
'T was not my purpose thus to beg a kiss . 
I am ashamed : OH heavens what have I done ! 
For thts' time let me take my leave , my Lord  


Pand.   Leave ! and you take leave till to morrow morning , call me Cut.  



Cress.   Pray let me go . 


Troil ,  Why what offends you , Madam ? 


Cress.   My own company . 


Troil.   You cannot snun you self . 


Cress.   Let me go and try : 
I have a kind of self resides in you . 


Troil.   O that I thought truth could be in a woman ! 
( As if it can , I will presume in you ) 
That my integrity and faith might meet 
The same return form her who has my heart . 
How should I be exaltted ! but alas 
I am more plain than dull simplicity ! 
And art lesle , as the infancy of truth . 


Cress.   In that I must not yield to you my Lord  


Troil.   All constant Lovers shall , in future Ages , 
Approve their truth by Troilus : when their verse 
Wants similes as turtles to their mates : 
Or true as flowing tides are to the Moon ; 
Earth to the Centre : Iron to Adamant : 
At last when truth is tired with repetition ; 
As true as Troilus shall crown up the verse , 
And sanctify the Numbers . 


Cress.   Prophet my you be ! 
If I am false , or swerve from truth of love , 
When time is old , and has forgot itself , 
In all things else , let it remember me ; 
And after all comparisons of falsehood 
To stab the heart of perjury in Maids ; 
Let it be said as false as Cressida . 


Pand.   Go to , little ones : a bargain made : here I hold your hand , and here my Cousins : if ever you prove false to one another , after I have taken such pains to bring you together : let all pitiful goers between , be called to the world's end after my name , Panders . 



Cress.   And will you promise that the holy Priest 
Shall make us one for ever ! 


Pand.   Priests ! marry hang hang 'em ! they make you one ! go in , go in , and make yourselves one without a priest : I 'll have no priests work in my house . 



Cress.   I 'll not consent unless you swear . 



Pand.   ay , do , do , swear ; a pretty woman's worth an oath at any time . Keep or break as time shall try ; but 't is good to swear , for the saving of her credit : hang 'em sweet Rogues they never expect a Man should keep it . Let him but swear , and that 's all they care for . 



Troil.   Heavens prospero me as I devoutly swear , 
Never to be but yours . 


Pand.   Whereupon I will lead you into a chamber : and suppose there be a bed in 't ; as I fack , I know not : but you 'll forgive me , if there be : away , away , you naughty hildings : get ye together , get you together . Ah you wags , do you l●er indeed at one another ! do the neyes twinkle at him ! get you together , get you together . 



[ Leads them out . Enoter at one door Aeneas with a Torch , at another Hector , Diomedes with Torches , Hect.   So ho ; who goes there ? Aeneas ! 


Aeneas .  Prince Hector ! 


Diom.   Good morrow Lord Aeneas . 


Hect.   A valiant Greek , Aeneas ; take his hand ; 
Witness the process of your speech within ; 
You told how Diomedes a whole week by days 
Did haunt you in the field . 


Aeneas .  Health to you , valiant Sir , 
During all business of the gentle truce ; 
But when I meet you armed , as black defiance 
As heart can think , or courage execute . 


Diom.   Both one and to there , Diomedes embraces . 
Our bloods are now in clam ; and so , long health ; 
But when contention , and occasion meets , 
By Jove I 'll play the hunter for thy life , 


Aeneas .  And thou shalt hunt a Lyou that will fly 
With his face backward : welcome Diomedes 
Welcome to Troy : now by Anchises Soul 
no man alive can love in such a sort 
The thing he means to kill , more excellently . 


Diom.   We know eath other well . 


Aene.   We do ; and long to know each other worse 
To Hect. my Lord , the King has sent for me in haste : 
Know you the reason ? 


Hect.   Yes : his purpose meets you , 
It was to bring this Greek to Colchas' house . 
Where Pandarus his Brother , and his Daughter 
Fair Cressida reside : and there to render 
For our Antenor , now redeemed from prison , 
The Lady Cressida : 


Aene.   What! Has the King resolved to gratify 
That Traitor Colchos ; who forsaken his Country , 
And turned to them , by giving up this pledge ? 


Hect.   The bitter disposition of the time 
Is such , though Colchos as a fugitive 
Deserve it not , that we must free Antenor 
On whose wise Counsels , we can most rely : 
And therefore Cressida must be returned . 


Aene.   A word my Lord — ( Your pardon Diomedes ) 
Your Brother Troilus , to my certain knowledge , 
Does lodge this night in Paudarus his house : 


Hect.   Go you before : tell him of our approach 
Which will I fear be much 
Unwelcome to him . 


Aene.   I assure you 
Troilus had rather Troy were born to Greece 
Than Cressida from Troy.  


Hect.   I know it well : and how he is beside , 
Of hasty blood : 


Aene.   He will not hear me speak : 
But I have noted long betwixt you two 
A more than Brother's love : an awful homage 
The ●iery youth pays to your elder virtue . 


Hect.   Leave it to me ; I 'll manage him alone : 
Attend you Diomedes ; My Lord good morrow : 
[ to Diomed.  An urgent business takes me from the pleasure 
Your company affords me ; but Aeneas 
With joy will undertake to serve you here , 
And to supply my room . 


Aeneas .  to Diomed.  My Lord I wait you . 


Exeunt severally . [ Diomedes with Aeneas ; Hector at another door . Enter Pandarus : a Servant : Music . Pand.   Softly , villain , softly ; I would not for half Troy the Lovers should be disturbed under my roof ; listen rogue , listen , do they breathe ? 



Seru.   Yes , Sir , I hear by some certain signs , the are both awaken . 



Pand.   that 's as it should be that 's well aboth sides . [ listens ] Yes faith they are both alive : — there was a creak ! there was a creak : they are both alive and alive like ; there was a creak : a ha' boys ! — Is the music ready ? 



Seru.   Shall they strike up Sir ! 



Pand.   Art thou sure they do not know the Parties ? 



Seru.   They play to the Man in the Moon for aught they know . 



Pand.   To the Man in the Moon , ah Rogue ! do they so indeed Rogue ! I understand , thee : thou art a wag ; thou art a wag . Come touse rouse ! in the name of love , strike up boys ! 



Music . and then Song : during which Pandarus listens . Song . 

Can life be a blessing , 
Or worth the possessing , 
Can life be a blessing if love were away ? 
Ah no! though our love all night keep us waking , 
And though he torment us with cares all the day , 
yet he sweetens he sweetens our pains in the taking , 
there 's an hour at the last , there 's an hour to repay . 
2.  

In every possessing , 
The ravishing blessing , 
In every possessing the fruit of our pain , 
Poor lovers forget long ages of anguish , 
Whatever they have suffered and done to obtain ; 
't is a pleasure , a pleasure to sigh and to languish , 
When we hope , when we hope to be happy again . 


Pand.   Put up , and vanish ; they are coming out ; what a ferrup , will you play when the dance is done ? I say vanish . 



Exit Music . Peeping .  Good I'faith ; good ifarth ! what hand in hand ! — a fair quarrel , well ended ! do , do , walk him , walk him ; A good girl , a discreet girl : I see she 'll make the most of him . 



Enter Troil. and Cressida . Troil.   Farewell , my life ! leave me and back to bed : 
Sleep ●eal those pretty eyes ; 
And tie thy senses in as soft a band 
As Infants void of thought . 


Pandarus .  showing himself . How now , how now , how go matters ! hear you Maid , hear you ; where 's my Cousin Cressida ? 



Cress.   Go hang yourself you naughty mocking Uncle : 
You bring me to do ill and then you jeer me ! 


Pand.   What ill have I brought you to do ? say what if you dare now ! 
My Lord have I brought her to do ill ? 


Cress.   Come , come , beshrew your heart ; you 'll neither be good yourself , nor suffer others . 



Pand.   Alas poor wench ; alas poor Devil ; 〈…〉 ? would anot ( a naughty Man ) let it sleep one 〈…〉 take him ! 



Knock. within . Cress.   who 's that at door ? good Uncle go and see : 
My Lord come you again into my chamber ! 
You smile and mock as if I meant naughtily ! 


Troil.   Indeed , indeed ! 


Cress.   Come y' are deceived ; I think of no such thing : 
Knock again . How earnestly they knock , pray come in : 
I would not for all Troy , you were seen here . 


[ Exeunt Troil. Cressida . Pand.   who 's there ! what 's the matter ! 
Will you beaten down the house there ! 


Enter Hector . Hect.   Good morrow my Lord Pandarus ; good morrow ! 


Pand.   who 's there , Prince Hector ! what news with you so early ? 


Hect.   Is not my Brother Troilus here ? 


Pand.   Here ! what should he do her● ? 


Hect.   Come he is here my Lord , do not deny him : 
It does import him much to speak with me . 


Pand.   Is he here say you ? 't is more than I know , I 'll be sworn ! 
For my own part I came in late ! — what should he do here ? 


Hect.   Come , come you do him wrong ere y' are aware ; you 'll be so true to him , that you 'll be false to him : you shall not know he 's here ; but yet go fetch him hither : — go . 

[ Exit Pandarus . Enter Troilus . I bring you Brother , most unwelcome news ; 
But since of force you are to hear it told , 
I thought a friend and Brother best might tell it : 
Therefore , befroe I speak , arm well your mind 
And think y' are to be touched dev'n to the quick ; 
That so , prepared for ill you may be lesle 
Surprised to hear the worst . 


Troil.   See Hector , what it is to be your Brother , 
I stand prepared already . 


Hect.   Come , you are not , 
I know you Troilus , you are hot and fiery : 
You kindle at a wrong ; and catch it quick 
As stubble does the flame . 


Troil.   't is heat of blood 
And rashness of my youth . I 'll mend that error : 
Begin and try my temper . 


Hect.   Can you think 
Of that one thing which most could urge your anger 
Drive you to madness , plunge you in despair , 
And make you hate even me ? 


Troil.   There can be nothing . 
I love you Brother , with that awful love 
I bear to Heaven , and to superior vert●e , 
And when I quit this love you must be that 
Which Hector near can be . 


Hect.   Remember well 
What you have said : for when I claim your promise 
I shall expect performance . 


Troil.   I am taught : 
I will not rage . 


Hect.   Nor grieve beyond a man  


Troil.   I won not be a woamn . 


Hect.   Do not Brother : 
And I will tell my news , in terms so mild , 
So tender , and so fearful to offend 
As Mother's use to soothe their froward Babes ; 
Nay I will swear as you hve sworn to me , 
That if some gust of passion swell your soul 
To words intemperate , I will bear with you . 


Troil.   What would this pomp of preparation mean ? 
Come you to bring me news of Priam's death 
Or Hecuba's 


Hect.   The Gods forbid I should : 
But what I bring is nearer you , more close , 
An ill more yours , 


Troil.   There is but one that can be . 


Hect.   Perhaps 't is that . 


Troil.   I 'll not suspect my fate 
So far , I know I stand possessed of that . 


Hect.   't is well : consider at whose house I find you . 


Troil.   Ha!  


Hect.   Does it start you ! I must wake you more : 
Antenor is exchanged . 


Troil.   For whom . 


Hect.   Imagine . 


Troil.   It comes like thunder grumbling in a cloud , 
Before the dreadful break : if here it fall , 
The subtle flame will lick up all my blood , 
And in a moment turn my heart to ashes . 


Hect.   That Cressida for 〈◊〉 is exchanged 
Because I knew 't was harsh I would not tell ; 
Not all at once ; but by degrees and glimpses 
I let it in , lest it might rush upon you 
And quite orepower your Soul : in this I think 
I showed a friend : your part must follow next : 
Which is , to kerb your choler , tame your grie● , 
And bear it like a man  


Troil.   I think I do 
That I yet live to hear you : but no more : 
Hope for no more : for should some Goddess offer 
To give herself and all her Heaven in change , 
I would not part with Cressida : so return 
This answer as my last . 


Hect.   'T will not be taken : 
Nor will I bear such news . 


Troil.   You bore me worse . 


Hect.   Worse for yourself ; not for the general state , 
And all our common safety , which depends 
On freed Anthenors' wisdom . 


Troil.   You would say 
That I 'm the Man marked out to be unhappy ; 
And made the public Sacrifice for Troy.  


Hect.   I would say so indeed : for can you find 
A fate more glorious than to be that victim ? 
If parting from a Mistress can procure 
A Nations happiness , show me that Prince 
Who dares to trust his future ●ame so far 
To stand the shock of Annals , blotted thus 
He sold his Country for a woman's love ? 


Troil.   OH , she 's my life , my being , and my Soul ! 


Hect.   Suppose she were , which yet I will not grant , 
You ought to give her up . 


Troil.   For whom ! 


Hect.   The public . 


Troil.   And what are they that I should give up her 
To make them happy ? let me tell ●ou Brother , 
The public , is the lees of vulgar slaves : 
Slaves , with the minds of slaves : so born , so bred : 
Yet such as these united in a herd 
Are called the public : Million of such Ciphers 
Make up the public sum : an eagle life 
Is worth a world of Crows : are Princes made 
For such as these , who , were one Soul extracted 
From all their beings , could not raise a Man — 


Hect.   And what are we , but for such men as these ? 
't is adoration , some say makes a God : 
And who should pay it , where would be their Altars 
Were no inferior creatures here on Earth ? 
Even those who serve have their expectances ; 
Degrees of happiness , which they must share , 
Or they 'll refuse to serve us . 


Troil.   Let 'em have it . 
Let 'em eat , drink and sleep ; the only use 
They have of life : 


Hect.   You take all these away , 
Unless you give up Cressida . 


Troil.   Forbear ; 
Let Paris give up Helen : ●he's the cause , 
And root of all this mischief . 


Hect.   Your own suffrage 
Condemns you there : you voted for her stay . 


Troil.   If one must stay , the other sha'not go . 


Hect.   She sha'not ? 


Troil.   Once again , I say she shall not . 


Hect.   Our Father has decreed it otherwise . 


Troil.   no matter . 


Hect.   How ! no matter Troilus ? 
A King , and father's will ! 


Troil.   When 't is unjust . 


Hect.   Come she shall go . 


Troil.   She shall ? then I am dared . 


Hect.   If nothing else will do . 


Troil.   Answer me first ; 
And then I 'll answer that : be sure I will ; 
Whose hand sealed this exchange ? 


Hect.   My Father's first ; 
then all the Council's after . 


Troil.   Was yours there ? 


Hect.   Mine was there too . 


Troil.   then you 're no more my friend : 
And for your sake now mark me what I say , 
She shall not go . 


Hect.   Go to , you are a boy , 


Troil.   A Boy ! I 'm glad I am not such a Man , 
Not such as thou ; a traitor to thy Brother : 
Nay more , thy friend : but friend 's a Sacred name , 
Which none but brave and honest men should wear ; 
In thee 't is vile ; 't is prostitute : 't is Air ; 
And thus I puff it from me . 


Hect.   Well , young Man , 
Since I 'm no friend ( and o that ere I was 
To one so far unworthy ) bring her out , 
Or by our Father's Soul , of which no part 
Did ere descend to thee , I 'll force her hence . 


Troil.   I laugh at thee . 


Hect.   thou dar'st not . 


Troil.   I dare more , 
If urged beyond my temper : prove my daring , 
And see which of us has the larger share 
Of our great Fathers Soul.  


Hect.   no more , thou know'st me . 


Troil.   I do ; and know myself . 


Hect.   All this ye Gods , 
And for the Daughter of a fugitive , 
A Traitor to his Country ! 


Troil.   't is too much . 


Hect.   By Heaven too little ; for I think her common , 


Troil.   How , Common ! 


Hect.   Common as the tainted shambles , 
Or as the dust we tread . 


Troil.   By Heaven as chaste as thy Andromache . 


Hector lays his hand on Troilus his A●m ; and Troilus does the same to him . Hect.   What! namest thou them together ! 


Troil.   no ; I do not : 
For Cressida is first : as chaste as she , 
But much more fair . 


Hect.   OH patience , patience , Heaven ! 
thou temptest me strangely : should I kill thee now , 
I know not if the Gods can be offended 
Or think I slew a Brother ; but be gone , 
Be gone , or I shall shake thee into Atoms : 
thou knowest I can . 


Troil.   I care not if you could . 


Hect.   walking off . I thank ye Gods for calling to my mind 
My promise that no words of thine should urge me , 
Beyond the bounds of reason : But in thee 
'T was brutal baseness , so forewa●●ed to fall 
Beneath the name of man : to spurn my kindness ; 
And when I offered thee ( thou know'st how loath ! ) 
The wholesome bitter cup o friendly counsel . 
To dash it in my face : farewel , farewell . 
Ungrateful as thou art : hereafter use 
The name of Brother ; but of friend no mo●e . 


[ going 〈◊〉 . Troil.   wilt thou not break yet heart ? stay Brother , stay ▪ 
I promised too , but I have broke my vow , 
And you keep yours too well ▪ 


Hect.   What wouldst thou more ? 
Take heed , young man how you too 〈…〉 
For Heaven can witness'tis with much 〈◊〉 
That I preserve my faith . 


Troil.   Else you would kill me ; 


Hect.   By all the Gods I would . 


Troil.   I 'm satisfied . 
You have condemned me , and I 'll do 't myself ; 
what 's life to him , who has no use of life ? 
A barren purchase , held upon hard terms ! 
For I have lost ( o what have I not lost ! ) 
The fairest , dearest , kindest of her Sex , 
And lost her even by him , by him , ye Gods , 
Who only could , and only should protect me ! 
And if I had a joy beyond that love , 
A friend , have lost him too ! 


Hect.   Speak that again : 
( For I could hear it ever : ) ●aidst tho● not 
That if thou hadst a joy beyond that love 
It was a friend ? OH saidst thou not a friend ! 
That doubting if was kind : then thou 'rt divided ; 
And I have still some part , 


Troil.   If still you have 
You do not care to have it . 


Hect.   How , not care ! 


Troil.   no , Brother , ca●e not . 


Hect.   am I but thy Brother ! 


Troil.   You told me I 〈◊〉 call you friend no more . 


Hect.   How far my words were distant from my heart ! 
Know when I told thee so I loved thee most . 
Alas ! it is the use of human frailty 
To fly to worst extremities with those 
To whom we most are kind . 


Troil.   Is 't possible ! 
then you are still my friend ! 


Hect.   Heaven knows I am ! 


Troil.   And can forgive the Sallies of my passion ? 
For I have been too blame : o much too blame : 
Have said such words , nay done such actions too , 
( Base as I am ) that my awed , conscious Soul 
〈◊〉 in my breast , nor dare I lift an eye 
On him I have offended . 


Hect.   Peace be to thee 
And calmness ever there . I blame thee not : 
I know thou lov'st ; and what can love not do ! 
I cast the wild disorderly account 
Of all thy words and deeds on that mad passion ; 
I pity thee , indeed I pity thee : 


Troil.   Do ; for I need it : let me lean my head 
Upon thy bosom ; all my peace dwells there ; 
thou art some God , or much much more than man ! 


Hect.   Alas ! to lose the joys of all thy youth , 
One who deserved thy love ! 


Troil.   Did she deserve ? 


Hect.   She did . 


Troil.   then sure she was no common creature . 


Hect.   I said it in my rage , I thought not so . 


Troil.   That thought has blessed me ! but to lose this love . 
After long pains , and after short possession . 


Hect.   I feel it for thee : Let me go to Priam , 
I 'll break this treaty off ; or let me fight ; 
I 'll be thy champion ; and secure both her 
And thee , and Troy.  


Troil.   It must not be , my Brother ! 
For than your error would be more than mine : 
I 'll bring her forth , and you shall bear her hence ; 
That you have pitied me is my reward . 


Hect.   Go then ; and the good gods restore her to thee , 
And with her all the quiet of thy mind ; 
The triumph of this kindness be thy own ; 
And heaven and earth this testimony yield , 
That Friendship never gained a nobler field . 


Exeunt severally . ACT iv. SCENE I  

Enter Pandarus , Cressida meeting . Pand.   Is (null) possible ! no sooner got but lost ! 
The devil take Antenor : the young Prince will go mad : 
A plague upon Antenor ! would they had broke's neck . 


Cressi .  How now ! what 's the matter ! who was here ! 


Pand.   O , o ! 


Cressi .  Why sigh you so ! OH where 's my Troilus ? tell me sweet 
Uncle what 's the matter ? 


Pand.   Would I were as deep under the earth , as I am above it ! 


Cressi .  O the Gods , what 's the matter ? 


Pand.   Prithee get thee in , would thou hadst never been born ! 
I knew thou wouldst be his death ; o poor Gentleman ! 
A plague upon Antenor ? 


Cressi .  Good Uncle , I beseech you on my knees , tell me what 's the matter ? 



Pand.   thou must be gone girl ; thou must be gone , to the fugitive Rogue Priest thy father , ( and he 's my brohter too , but that 's all one at this time : ) a pox upon Antenor . ? 



Cressi .  OH ye immortal Gods , I will not go . 


Pand.   thou must , thou must ? 


Cressi .  I will not : I have quite forgot my father ; 
I have no touch of birth ; no spark of Nature : 
no kin , no blood , no life ; nothing so near me 
As my dear Troilus ? 


Enter Troilus . Pand.   Here , here , here , he comes sweet Duck ! 


Cressi .  OH Troilus , Troilus ! 


[ They both weep over each other , she running into ●is arms . Pand.   What a pair of Spectacles is here ! let me embrace too : O heart , sings ( as the saying is ) OH heart , heavy heart , why sighest thou without breaking ( where he answers again ) because thou canst not ease thy smart , by friendship nor by speaking , there was never a truer rhyme ; let us cast away nothing ; for we may live to have need of such a verse : we see it ; we see it , how now lambs ? 



Troil.   Cressida , I love thee with so strange a purity 
That the blessed Gods , angry with my devotions 
more bright in zeal , than that I pay their Altars , 
Will take thee from my sight ? 


Cressi .  Have the God's envy ? 


Pa●d ▪   ay , I , I , 't is too plain a case ! 


Cressi .  And is it true , that I must go from Troy ? 


Troil.   A hastefull truth ? 


Cressi .  What , and from Troilus too ? 


Troil.   From Troy and Troilus : and suddenly . 
So suddenly 't is counted but by minutes . 


Cressi .  What not an hour allowed for taking leave ? 


Troil.   Even that 's bereft us too : our envious fates 
Justle betwixt , and part the dear adieus 
Of meeting lips , clasped hands , and locked embraces . 
Aeneas within . My Lord , is the Lady ready yet ? 


Troil.   Hark , you are called : some say the Genius so 
Cries come , to him who instantly must die . 


Pand.   Where are my tears ! some rain to'lay this wind : 
Or my heart will be blown up by th' roots ! 


Troil.   Hear me my Love ! be thou but true like me . 


Cressi .  I true ! how now , what wicked thought is this ? 


Troil.   Nay , we must use expostulation kindly , 
For it is parting from us : 
I spoke not , be thou true , as fearing thee ; 
But be thou true , I said to introduce 
My following protestation : be thou true , 
And I will see thee . 


Cressi .  you 'll be exposed to dangers . 


Troil.   I care not : but be true . 


Cressi .  Be true again ? 


Troil.   Hear why I speak it love . 
The Graecian Youths are full of Graecian Arts : 
Alas a kind of holy jealousy 
Which I beseech you call a virtuous sin , 
Makes me afraid how far you may be tempted . 


Cressi .  OH Heavens , you love me not ! 


Troil   Die I , a villain then ! 
In this I do not call your faith in question 
But my own merit . 


Cressi .  Fear not ; I 'll be true 


Troil.   then fate thy worst ; for I will see thee love 
Not all the Graecian host shall keep me out , 
Nor Troy , though walled with fire , should hold me in . 
Aeneas within . My Lord , my Lord Troilus : I must call you . 


Pand.   A mischief call him : nothing but Schreechowls ? do , do , call again ; you had best part 'em now in the sweetness of their love ! I 'll be hanged if this Aeneas be the Son of 〈◊〉 , sor all his bragging . Honest Venu● was a Punk : would she have parted Lovers : no he has not a drop of Venus' blood in him : honest Ve●us' was a Punk . 



Troil.   To Pand.  Prithee go out ; and gain one minute more . 


Pand.   Mary and I will : follow you your business ; loose no time , 't is very precious ; go , Bill again : I 'll tell the Rogue his own I warrant him . 

Exit Pandarus . 

Cressi .  What have we gained by this one minute more ? 


Troil.   Only to wish another , and another 
A longer struggling with the pangs of death . 


Cressi .  OH those who do not know what parting is 
Can never learn to die ! 


Troil.   When I but think this sight may be our last , 
If Jove could set me in th● place of A●las 
And lay the weight of Heaven and Gods upon me 
He could not press me more . 


Cressi .  O let me go that I may know my grief ; 
Grief is but guessed , while thou art standing by : 
But I too soon shall know what absence is . 


Troil.   Why 't is to be no more : another name for death . 
't is the Sun parting from the frozen North ; 
And I , me thinks , stand on some cey cliff , 
To watch the last low circles that he makes ; 
Till he sink down from Heaven ! OH only Cressida , 
If thou departed from me , I cannot live : 
I have not soul enough to last for grief , 
But thou shalt hear what grief has done with me . 


Cressi .  If I could live to hear it , I were false , 
But as a careful traveller who fearing 
Assaults of Robbers , leaves his wealth behind , 
I trust my heart with thee ; and to the Greeks 
Bear but an empty Casket . 


Troil.   then , I will live ; that I may keep that treasure : 
And armed with this assurance , let thee go 
loose , yet secure as is the gentle Hawk 
When whistled off she mounts into the wind , 
Our love's , like Mountains high above the clouds , 
Though winds and tempests beaten their aged feet , 
Their peaceful heads nor storm nor thunder know , 
But scorn the threating rack that rolls below , 


Exeunt Ambo.  SCENE II  

Achilles and Patroclus , standing in their Tent.  Ulysses , Agamemnon , Menelaus , Nestor , Ajax , passing over the Stage . Vlyss.   Achilles' stands in th'entrance of his Tent : 
Please it our General to pass strangely by him , 
As if he were forgot , and Princes all 
Look on him with neglectful eyes and scorn : 
Pride must be cured by pride . 


Agam.   we 'll execute your purpose , and put on 
A form of strangeness as we pass along 
So do each Prince either salute him not 
Or else disdainfully , which will shake him more 
Than if not looked on : I will lead the way . 


Achilles .  What , comes the General to speak with me ! 
You know my mind ; I 'll fight no more with Troy.  


Agam.   What says Achilles , would he ought with us ? 


Nest.   Would you , my Lord , aught with the General ! 


Achilles .  No.  


Nest.   Nothing my Lord  


Agam.   The better . 


Menel .  How do you , how do you ! 


Achilles .  What does the Cuckold scorn me ! 


Ajax .  How now Patroclus ! 


Achilles .  Good morrow Ajax ▪ 


Ajax .  Ha!  


Achilles .  Good morrow . 


Ajax .  I ; and good next day too . 


[ Exeunt all but Achilles , and Patroclns . Achilles .  What mean these fellows ! know they not Achilles ? 


Patroc .  They pass by strangely ; they were used to bow ; 
And send their smiles before 'em to Achilles , 
To come as humbly as they used to creep , to holy Altars . 


Achilles .  am I poor of late ! 
't is certain , greatness once fallen out with fortune 
Must fall out with men too ! what the declind is 
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others 
As feel in his own fall : for men like butterflies , 
Show not their mealy wings but to the Summer . 


Patroc .  't is known you are in love with Hector's Sister , 
And therefore will not fight : and your not fight 
Draws on you this contempt : I oft have told you 
A woman impudent and mannish grown 
Is not more loathed than an effeminate man , 
In time of action : I 'm condemned for this : 
They think my little appetite to war 
Deads' all the fire in you : but rouse yourself , 
And love shall from your neck unloose his folds ; 
Or like a dew drop from a Lion's Mane 
Be shaken into air . 


Achilles .  Shall Ajax fight with Hector ? 


Patrocl .  Yes , and perhaps shall gain much honour by him . 


Achilles .  I see my reputation is at stake . 


Patroc .  OH then beware , those wounds heal ill that men have given themselves , because they give 'em deepest . 



Achilles .  I 'll do something : 
But what I know not yet , — no more our Champion . 


Re-enter Ajax , Agamemnon , Menelaus , Ulysses , Nest. Diomedes , Trumpet Agamemnon   Here art thou daring combat , valiant Ajax . 
Give with thy Trumpet , a loud note to Troy , 
thou Noble Champion , that the sounding air 
May pierce the ears of the great challenger , 
And call him hither . 


Ajax .  Trumpet take that purse : 
Now crack thy lungs , and split the sounding brass ; 
thou blowest for Hector . 


[ Trumpet sounds , and is answered from within . Enter Hector , Aeneas , and other Trojans . Agam.   Yonder comes the Troop . 
Aeneas , coming to the Greeks . Health to the Graecian Lords ; what shall be done 
To him that shall be vanquished ? or do you purpose , 
A Victor should be known ! will you the Knights , 
Shall to the edge of all extremity , 
Pursue each other , or shall be divided 
By any voice or order of the ●ield ; 
Hector bade ask . 


Agam.   Which way woned Hector have it ? 


Aene.   He cares not , he 'll obey conditions . 


Achilles .  't is done like Hector but securely done ; 
A little proudly , and too much despising 
The Knight opposed , he might have found his match . 


Aene.   If not Achilles , Sir , what is your name ! 


Achilles .  If not Achill● nothing ▪ 


Aene.   Therefore Achilles , but who ere know this ; 
Great Hector knows no pride , weigh him but well , 
And that which looks like pride is courtesy . 
This Ajax is half made of Hector's blood , 
In love whereof half Hector stays at home ; 


Achilles .  A Maiden battle ! I perceive you then . 


Agam.   Go Diomedes , and stand by valiant Ajax : 
As you and Lord Aeneas shall consent , 
So let the fight proceed or terminate . 


[ The Trumpets sound on both sides , while Aeneas and Diomedes take their places , as judges of the Field : The Trojans and Grecians rank themselves on either side . Vlyss.   They are opposed already . 
[ Fight equal at fi●st , than Ajax has Hector at disadvantage : at last Hector closes , Ajax falls on one knee , Hector stands over him but strikes not , and Ajax rises . Aeneas throwing his Gauntlet betwixt them . Princes enough , you both have shown much valour . 


Diomedes .  And we as Judges of the Field declare ; 
The combat here shall cease . 


Ajax .  I am not warm yet , let us fight again . 


Aene.   then let it be as Hector shall determine . 


Hect.   If it be left to me , I will no more . 


Ajax ,  thou art my Aunt Hesion's Son ; 
The Obligation of our blood forbids us . 
But were thy mixture Greek and Trojan so , 
That thou couldst say , this part is Graecian all 
And this is Trojan , hence thou shouldst not bear 
One Graecian limb , wherein my pointed Sword 
Had not impression made , but Heaven forbid 
That any drop thou borrowst from my Mother , 
Should ere be drained by me , let me embrace thee Cousin : 
By him who thunders thou hast sinnewy arms , 
Hector would have 'em fall upon him thus : — 
[ Embrace ] thine be the honour , Ajax . 


Ajax .  I thank thee Hector , 
thou art too gentle , and too free a Man : 
I came to kill thee Cousin , and to gain 
A great addition from that glorious act : 
But thou hast quite disarmed me . 


Hect.   I am glad . 
For 't is the only way I could 〈◊〉 thee . 


Ajax .  If I might in entreaty find success , 
I would desire to see thee at my Tent.  


Diom.   't is Agamemnon's wish , and great Achilles , 
Both long to see the valiant Hector there . 


Hect.   Aeneas , call my Brother Troil●s to me ; 
And you two sign this friendly interview . 


[ Agamemnon , and the chief of both sides approach . Agam.   to Hect.  Worthy of Arms , as welcome as to one 
Who would be rid of such an Enemy . 
To Troil.  My well famed Lord of Troy , no lesle to you . 


Nest.   I have , thou gallant Trojan seen thee often 
Labouring for destiny , make cruel way , 
Through ranks of Graecian youth , and I have seen thee 
As swift as lightning spur thy Phrygian Steed , 
And seen thee scorning many forfeit lives , 
When thou hast hung thy advanced Sword i' th' air , 
Not letting it decline , on prostrate foes : 
That I have said to all the standers by 
Lo Jove is yonder , distributing life . 


Hect.   Let me embrace thee , good old Chroni le , 
Who hast so long walked hand in hand with time : 
Most Reverend Nestor , I am glad to clasp thee . 


Vlyss.   I wonder now , how yonder City stands , 
When we have here , her base and pillar by us . 


Hect.   I know your countenance , Lord Ulysses well ; 
Ah Sir , there 's many a Greek and Trojan dead , 
Since first I saw yourself and Di●mede , 
In Ilium , on your Greekish Embassy . 


Achilles .  Now Hector , I have fed mine eyes on thee ; 
I have with exact view perused thee Hector , 
And quoted joint by joint . 


Hect.   Is this Achilles ! 


Achilles .  I am Achilles . 


Hect.   Stand fair , I prithee let me look on thee . 


Achilles .  Behold thy fill . 


Hect.   Nay , ● have done already . 


Achilles .  thou art too brief , I will the second time 
As I would buy thee , view thee limb by limb . 


Hect.   OH , like a Book of sport thou readest me o'er ; 
But there 's more in me then thou understandest . 


Achilles .  Tell me ye Heavens' , in which part of his body 
Shall ● destroy him ? there , or there , or there ! 
That I may give th' imagined wound a name , 
And make distinct the very breach , whereout ▪ 
Hector's great spirit flew ! answer me Heavens ! 


Hect.   Wert thou an Oracle to tell me this ! 
I 'd not believe thee , henceforth guard thee well , 
I 'll kill the every where : 
ye Noble Grecians pardon me this boast , 
His insolence draws folly from my lips , 
But I 'll endeavour deeds to match these words ; 
Else may ● never . — 


Ajax .  Do not cha●e thee Cousin , 
And you Achilles let these threats alone : 
You may have every day enough of Hector , 
If you have stomach , the General State I fear 
Can scarce entreat you to perform your boast . 


Hect.   I pray you let us see you in the field ; 
We have had paltry Wars , since you refused 
The Graecian cause . 


Ach●ll .  Dost thou entreat me Hector ! 
To morrow will ● meet thee fierce as death ; 
To Night all peace . 


Hect.   Thy hand upon that match . 


Agam.   First all you Graecian Princes go with me , 
And entertain great Hector , afterwards , 
As his own leisure , shall concur with yours , 
You may invite him to your several Tents . 


[ Exeunt Agam. Hect. Menel . Nestor , Diomedes , together . Troil.   My Lord Ulysses . 


Tell me I beseech you ; 
In what part of the field does Calehas lodge ! 
Vlyss.   At Menelaus' Tent ; 
There Diomedes does feast with him to Night : 
Who neither looks on Heaven or on Earth , 
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view , 
On C●essi●a alone . 


Troil.   Shall I , brave Lord be bound to you so much 
After we part from Agamemnon's Tent. 
To bring me thither ! 


Vlyss.   I shall want on you . 
As freely tell me , of what honour was 
This Cressida in Troy ? had she no Lovers there 
Who mourn her absence ? 


Troil.   OH Sir , to such as boasting show their scars , 
Reproof is due , she loved and was beloved : 
that 's all I must impart . Led on my Lord  


Exeunt Ulysses Troilus . Achilles .  to Patro.  I 'll heat his blood with Greckish wine to Night , 
Which with my Sword I mean to cool to morrow . 
Patroclus' , let us feast him to the height . 


Enter Thersites . Patro.   Here comes Thersites . 


Achilles .  How now thou core of envy , 
thou crusty batch of Nature , what 's the news ? 


there 's .  Why thou picture of what thou seemest , thou Idol of 
Idiot worshippers , there 's a Letter for thee . 


Achilles .  From whence fragment ? 


there 's .  Why thou full dish of fool , from Troy.  


Patroc .  Well said adversity ! what makes thee so keen to day ? 


there 's .  Because a fool 's my whetstone . 


Patro.   Meaning me ? 


there 's .  Yes meaning thy no meaning ; prithee be silent , boy , I profit not by thy talk : Now the rotten diseases of the South , gut gripe , ruptures , Catarrhs ; loads of gravel in the back , Lethargies , cold palsies , and the like , take thee , and take thee again ; thou green Sarsenet flap for a sore eye , thou tassel of a prodigals purse , thou : Ah how the poor world is pestered with such water-flys : such diminitives of nature . 



Achilles .  My dear Patroclus , I am quite prevented 
From my great purpose , bend on Hector's life : 
Here is a Letter from my love Polixena , 
Both taxing , and engaging me to keep 
An Oath that ● have sworn : and will not break it 
To save all Greece : let honour go or stay , 
there 's more Religion in my love than fame : 


Exeunt Achilles , Patroclus' . there 's .  With too much blood , and too little brain , these two are running mad before the dog-days . there 's Agamemnon too , an honest fellow enough , and love's a brimmer heartily ; but he has not so much brains as an old gander . But his brother Menelaus , there 's a fellow : the goodly transformation of Jupiter when he loved Europa : the primitive Cuckold : A vile Monkey tied eternally to his brother's table . To be a Dog , a Mule , a Cat , a toad , an Owl , a Lizard , a Herring without a roe , I would not care : but to be Menelaus I would conspire against destiny — Hey day ! will with a wisp , and Jack a lantern ! 



Hector , Ajax , Agamemnon , Diomedes , Ulysses , Troilus , going with torches over the stage . Agam.   We go wrong ; we go wrong . 


Ajax .  no , yonder 't is ; there where see the light . 


Hect.   I touble you . 


Ajax .  Not at all Cousin : Here comes Achilles himself to guide us . 


Enter Achilles . Achilles .  Welcome brave Hector , welcome princes all : 


Agam.   So now , brave Prince of Tray , I take my leave ; 
Ajax commands the guard , to wait on you . 


Men.   Good night my Lord ! 


Hect.   Good night Sweet Lord Menelaus ▪ 


there 's .  aside . Sweet quoth a ! sweet Sink , sweet shore , sweet Jakes ! 



Achilles .  Nestor will stay ; and you Lord Diomedes . 
Keep Hector company an hour or two . 


Diom.   I cannot Sir : I have important business . 


Achilles .  Enter my Lords . 


Vliss.   to Troil.  follow his torch : he goes to Calchas' tent . 


[ Exeunt Achilles . Hect. Ajax at one way , Diomedes , another ; and after him Ulyss , Troilus . there 's .  This Diomede's a most falsehearted rogue , an unjust Knave : I will no more trust him when he winks with one eye , than I will a Serpent when he hisses . He will spend his mouth and promise , like Brabbler the Hound : but when he performs , Astronomers set it down for a prodigy ; Though I long to see Hector , I cannot forbear dogging him . They say a keeps a Trojan Drab : and uses Calchas tent , that fugitive Priest of Troy ; that Canonical Rogue of our side . I 'll after him : nothing but whoring in this Age : all incontinent Rascals ! 

Exit Thersites . 

Entere Calchas , Cressida . Calch .  OH , what a blessing is a virtuous child ! 
thou hast reclaimed my mind , and calmed my passions 
Of anger and revenge : my love to Troy 
Revives within me , and my lost Tiara 
no more disturbs my mind : 


Cress.   A virtuous conquest . 


Calch .  I have a woman's longing to return 
But yet which way without your aid I know not . 


Cress.   Time must instruct us how . 


Calch .  You must dissemble love to Diomedes still 
False Diomedes , bred in Ulysses' School 
Can never be deceived , 
But by strong Arts and blandishments of love : 
Put 'em in practice all : seem lost and wone , 
And draw him on , and give him line again . 
This Argus then may close his hundred eyes 
And leave our flight more easy . 


Cress.   How can I answer this to love and Troilus ? 


Calch .  Why 't is for him you do it : promise largely ▪ 
That Ring he saw you wear , he much s●spectss ▪ 
Was given you by a Lover ; let him have it . 


Diom.   within . Hoa ; Calchas , Calchas ! 


Calch .  Hark! I hear his voice . 
Pursue your project : doubt not the success . 


Cress.   Heaven knows against my will : and yet my hopes 
This night to meet my Triolus , while 't is truce 
Afford my mind some ease . 


Calch .  no more : retire . 


Exit Cressida . Enter Diomedes ; Troilus and Ulysses appear listening at one door , and Thersites watching at another . Diom.   I came to see your Daughter , worthy Calchas . 


Calch .  My Lord I 'll call her to you . 
Exit Calchas . 

Ulysses   to Troil.  Stand where the torch may not discover us . 


Enter Cressida . Troil.   Cressida comes forth to him ! 


Diom.   How now my charge ? 


Cress.   Now my sweet Guardian : hark a word with you . 


Whisper . Troil.   ay , so familiar ! 


Diom.   Will you remember ? 


Cress.   Remember : yes . 


Troil.   Heavens' ! what should she remember ! plague and madness ! 


Ulysses .  Prince , you are moved : let us depart in time 
lest your displeasure should enlarge itself 
To wrathful terms : this place is dangerous ; 
The time unfit : ' beseech you let us go . 


Troil.   I pray you stay ; by Hell , and by Hell torment's 
I will not speak a word . 


Diom.   I 'll hear no more : good night . 


Cress.   Nay , but you part in anger ! 


Troil.   Does that grieve thee ! OH withered truth ! 


Diom.   Farewell Cozener . 


Cress.   Indeed I am not : pray come back again . 


Vlyss.   You shake my Lord , at something : will you go ? 
You will break out . 


Troil.   By all the Gods I will not . 
There is between my will and all my actions , 
A guard of patience ! stay a little while . 


there 's .  aside . How the devil luxury with his fat rump , and potato finger , tickles these together ! put him off a little , you foolish Harlot ! 't will sharpen him the more . 



D●om .  But will you then ? 


Cressi .  I will as soon as ere the war 's concluded . 


Diom.   Give me some token , for the surety of it : 
The Ring I saw you wear . 


Cressi .  Giving it . If you must have it . 


Troil.   The Ring ! nay then 't is plain ! OH beauty where 's thy faith ! 


Vlyss.   You have sworn patience . 


Thersi .  that 's well , that 's well , the pledge is given , hold her to her word good Devil and her soul 's thy I warrant thee . 



Diom.   who 's waist ? 


Cressi .  By all Diana's waiting train of stars , 
And by herself , I will not tell you whose . 


Diom.   Why then thou lov'st him still , farewell for ever : 
thou never shalt mock Diomedes again . 


Cressi .  You shall not go , one cannot speak a word 
But strait it starts you . 


Diom.   I do not like this fooling . 


Thersi .  Nor I by ●luto : but that which likes not me , pleases me best . 


Diom.   I shall expect your promise . 


Cressi .  I 'll perform it . 
Not a word more , good night — - I hope for ever : 
[ aside . Thus to deceive deceivers is no fraud . 


Exeunt Diomedes Cressida severally . Vlyss.   all 's done my Lord  


Troil.   Is it ? 


ulyss .  Pray let us go . 


Troil.   Was Cressida here ? 


Vlyss.   I cannot conjure Trojan . 


Troil.   She was not sure ! she was not . 
Let it not be believed for womanhood : 
Think we had Mothers , do not give advantage , 
To biting Satyr , apt without a theme , 
For defamation , to square a●l the sex 
By Cressid's rule rather think this not Cressida . 


Thersi .  Will he swagger himself out on●s own eyes ! 


Troil.   This she ! no this was Diomedes Cessida . 
If beauty have a Soul , this is not she : 
I cannot speak for rage , that Ring was mine , 
By Heaven I gave it , in that point of time 
When both our joys were fullest ! — if he keeps it 
Let dogs eat Troilus . 


Thersi .  he 'll tickle it for his Concupy : this will be sport to see ! 

Patroclus' will give me any thing for the intelligence of this whore ; a parrot will not do more for an almond , than he will for a commodious drab : I would I could meet with this Rogue Diomedes too ; I would croak like a Raven to him ; I would bided : it shall go hard but ●'le ●●nd him out . 

Exit Thesites 

Enter Aeneas . Aen.   I have been seeking you this hour , my Lord : 
Hector by this is arming him in Troy.  


Vlyss.   Commend me gallant Troilus to your Brother : 
Tell him I hope he shall not need to arm : 
The fair Polixena has by a letter 
Disarmed our great Achilles of his rage . 


Troil.   This I shall say to Hector . 


Vlyss.   So I hope ! 
Pray Heaven Thersites have informed me true , — 


[ aside . Troil.   Good night , my Lord ; accept distracted thanks . 


[ Exit Ulysses . Enter Pandarus . Pand.   Hear ye , my Lord , hear ye ; I have been seeing yond poor girl . 
There have been old doings there i'faith . 


Troil.   aside . Hold yet , my Spirits ; let him power it in : 
The poison's kind : the more I drink of it 
The sooner 't will dispatch me . 


Aene.   to Pand.  Peace you babbler ! 


Pand.   She has been mightily made on by the Greeks : she takes most wonderfully among 'em : Achilles kissed her , and Patroclus Kissed her : Nay and old Nestor put aside his grey beard and brushed her with his whiskers . then comes me Agamemnon with his General's Staff , diving with a low bow even to the ground , and rising again , just at her lips : And after him came Ulysses , and Ajax , and Menelaus' : and they so pelted her i'faith : pitter patter , pitter patter , as thick as hailstones . And after that a whole rout of 'em : Never was woman in Phrygia better kissed . 



Troil.   aside . Hector said true : I find , I find it now ! 



Pand.   And last of all comes me Diomedes so demurely : that 's a notable sly Rogue I warrant him ! mercy upon us , how he laid her on upon the lips ! for as I told you , she 's most mightily made on among the greeks . What , cheer up I say Man ! she has every ones good word . I think in my conscience , she was born with a cawl upon her head . 



Troil.   aside . Hell , death , confusion , how he tortures me ! 


Pand.   And that Rogue-priest my Brother , is so courted and treated for her sake : the young Sparks do so pull him about , and hall him by the Cassock : nothing but invitations to his Tent , and his Tent , and this Tent. Nay and one of 'em was so bold , as to ask him if she were a Virgin , and with that the Rogue my Brother , takes me up a little God in his hand , and kisses it ; and swears devoutly that she was , then was I ready to burst my sides with laughing , to think what had passed betwixt you two . 



Troil.   OH I can bear no more : she 's falsehood all : 
False by both kinds ; for with her mother's milk 
She ●ucked th'infusion of her Fathers Soul. 
She only wants an opportunity , 
Her soul 's a whore already . 


Pand.   What would you make a Monopoly of a woman's lips : a little consolation or so , might be allowed one would think in a lover's absence ! 



Troil.   Hence from my sight : let ignominy brand thy hated name : 
Let Modest Matrons at thy mention start ; 
And blushing Virgins , when they read our Annals , 
Skipo're the guilty page that holds thy Legend , 
And blots the noble work . 


Pand.   OH world , world ; thou art an ungrateful patch of Earth ! 

Thus the poor Agent is despised ! he labour's painfully in his calling , and trudges between parties : but when their turns are served , come out 's too good for him . I am mighty melancholy : I 'll even go home , and shut up my doors ; and die o' th' sullenss like an old bird in a Cage ! 

Exit Pandarus . 

Enter Diomedes and Thersites . there 's .  aside . There ; there he is : now let it work : now play thy part jealousy , and twinge 'em : put 'em between thy millstones , and grind the Rogues together . 



Diom.   My Lord I am by Ajax sent to infrom you 
This hour muft end the truce . 


Aeneas   to Troil.  Contain yourself ; 
Think where we are . 


Diom.   Your stay will be unsafe . 


Troil.   It may for those I hate . 


there 's .  aside . Well said Trojan : there 's the frrst hit . 


Diom.   Beseech you Sir make haste , my own affairs 
Call me another way . 


there 's .  aside . What affairs ; what affairs ; demand that , Dolthead ! the Rogue will lose a quarrel for want of wit to ask that question . 



Troil.   May I inquire where your affairs conduct you ? 


there 's .  aside . Well said again ; I beg thy pardon . 


Diom.   O , it concerns you not . 


Troil.   Perhaps it does . 


Diom.   You are too inquisitive : nor am I bound 
To satisfy and Enemy's request . 


Troil.   You have a Ring upon your finger Diomedes , 
And given you by a Lady , 


Diom.   If it were ; 'T was given to one who can defend her gift . 


there 's .  aside . So , so ; the boarss begin to gruntle at one another : set up your bristles now a'both sides : whet and foam Rogues . 



Troil.   You must restore it Greek , by Heaven you must : 
no spoil of mine shall grace a Traitor's hand . 
And , with it , give me back the broken vows 
Of my false fair ; which , perjured as she is , 
I never will resign , but with my Soul.  


Diom.   then thou it seems art that for saken fool 
Who wanting merit to preserve her heart , 
Repines in vain to see it better placed ; 
But know , ( for now I take a pride to grieve thee ) 
thou art so lost a thing in her esteem 
I never heard thee named ; but some scorn followed : 
thou wert our table take for laughing meals : 
Thy name our sportful theme for Evening walks : 
And intermissive hours of cooler Love : 
When hand in hand we went. [ Troil. ] Hell and furies ! 


Thersi .  Aside . OH well stung Scorpion ! 
Now Menclaus his Greek horns are out o doors , there 's a new Cuckold start up on the Trojan side . 



Troil.   Yet this was she , ye Gods that very she , 
Who in my arms lay melting all the Night ; 
Who kissed and sighed , and sighed , and kissed again , 
As if her Soul flew upward to her lips , 
To meet mine there , and panted at the passage . 
Who loathe to find the breaking day , looked out , 
And shrunk into my bosom , there to make 
A little longer darkness . 


Diom.   Plagues and tortures ! 


Thersi .  Good , good , by Pluto ! their fool 's mad to lose his harlot ; and our fools mad , that t'other fool had her first : if I sought peace now , I could tell 'em there 's punk enough to satisfy 'em both : whore sufficient ! but let 'em worry one another , the foolish curs ; they think they can never have enough of carrion . 



Aeneas .  My Lords , this sury is not proper here , 
In time of truce ; if either side be injured 
To morrow's Sun will rise apace , and then — 


Troil.   And then ! but why should I defer till then ? 
My blood calls now , there is no truce for Traitors . 
My vengeance rowls within my breast , it must 
It will have vent ▪ — 


[ Draws . Diom   Hinder us not Aeneas , 
My blood rides high as his , I trust thy honour ; 
And know thou art too brave a foe to break it . — 


[ Draws . Thersi .  Now Moon ! now shine sweet Moon ! let 'em have just light enough to make their passes : and not light enough to ward 'em 



Aene.   Drawing too . By Heaven he comes on this who strikes the first , 
You both are mad , is this like gallant men 
To fight at midnight ; at the Murderer's hour ? 
When only guilt and rapine draws a Sword ? 
Let night enjoy her deuce of soft repose ; 
But let the Sun behold the brave man's courage . 
And this I dare engage for Diomedes 
Foe though I am , he shall not hide his head , 
But meet you in the very face of danger . 


Diom.   putting up . Be 't so : and were it on some precipice 
High as Olympus , and a Sea beneath 
Call when thou dar'st , just on the sharpest point 
I 'll meet , and tumble with thee to destruction . 


Troil.   A gnawing conscience haunts not guilty men 
As I 'll haunt thee , to summon thee to this , 
Nay , shouldst thou take the Stygian lake for refuge 
I 'll plunge in after , through the boiling flames 
To push thee hissing down the vast Abyss . 


Diom.   Where shall we meet ? 


Troil.   Before the Tent of Calchas : 
Thither , through all your Troops , I 'll fight my way ; 
And in the sight of perjured Cressida 
Give death to her through thee . 


Diom.   't is largely promised . 
But I disdain to answer with a boast ; 
Be sure thou shalt be met . 


Troil.   And thou be found . 


[ Exeunt Troilus Aeneas , one way : Diomedes the other . there 's .  Now the furies take Aeneas , for letting 'em sleep upon their quarrel : who knows but rest may cool their brains , and make 'em rise maukish to mischief upon consideration ? May each of 'em dream he sees his Cockatrice in to ' there 's arms : and be stabbing one another in their sleep , to remember 'em of their business when they wake : let 'em be punctual to the point of honour ; and if it were possible let both be first at the place of Execution . Let neither of 'em have cogitation enough , to consider 't is a whore they fight for : and let 'em value their lives at as little as they are worth . And lastly let no succeeding fools take warning by 'em ; but in imitation of them when a Strumpet is in question , 

Let 'em beneath their feet all reason trample ; 
And think it great to perish by Example . 
Exit . 

ACT v. SCENE I  

Hector , Trojans , Andromache . Hect.   The blue mists rise from off the nether grounds , 
And the Sun mounts apace : to arms , to arms ; 
I am resolved to put to th' utmost proof 
The fate of Troy this day . 


Andro.   aside . O , wretched woman , o ! 


Hect.   Methought heard you sigh , Andromache ! 


Andro.   Did you my Lord ? 


Hect.   Did you my Lord ? You answer indirectly , 
Just when I said that I would put our fate 
Upon th' extremest proof , you fetched a groan ; 
And , as you checked yourself , for what you did 
You stifled it , and stopped . Come you are sad . 


Andro.   The Gods forbid . 


Hect.   What should the Gods forbid ? 


Andro.   That I should give you cause of just offence . 


Hect.   You say well : but you look not cheerfully . 
I mean this day to waste the stock of war , 
And lay it prodigally out in blows : 
Come gird my sword , and smile upon me , love ; 
Like victory come flying to my arms ; 
And give me earnest of desired success . 


Andro.   The Gods protect you ; and restore you to me . 


Hect.   What , grown a Coward ! thou wert used Andromache , 
To give my courage , courage : thou wouldst cry 
God Hector ; day grows old ; and part of Fame 
Is ravished from thee , by thy slothful stay . 


Andro.   aside . What shall I do , to seem the same I was ! 
Come let me gird thy fortune to thy side : 
And conquest sit as close , and sure as this . 
[ She goes to gird his Sword ; and it falls . ] Now mercy , Heaven ! the Gods avert this omen ! 


Hect.   A foolish omen ! take it up again ; 
And mend thy error . 


Andro.   I cannot : for my hand obeys me not . 
But as in slumbers , when we fain would run 
From our imagined fears , our idle feet 
Grow to the ground , our struggling voice dies inward , 
So now , when would force myself to cheer you 
My faltering tongue can give no glad presage ; 
Alas , I am no more Andromache . 


Hect.   Why then thy former Soul is flown to me : 
For I , me thinks , am lifted into air : 
As if my mind , mastering my mortal part 
Would bear my exalted body to the Gods. 
Last night I dreamt Jove sat on Ida's top 
And beckoning with his hand divine from far , 
He pointed to a choir of Demi - gods , 
Bacch●s' , and Hercules , and all the rest 
Who free from human toils had gained the pitch 
Of blessed eternity : lo there he said ; 
Lo there 's a place for Hector . 


Andro.   Be to thy Enemies this boding dream ! 


Hect.   Why it portends me honour and renoun . 


Andro.   Such honour , as the Brave gain after death . 
For I have dreamt all night of horrid slaughters , 
Of trampling horses , and of Chariot wheels 
Wading in blood up to their Axeltrees . 
Of fiery Demons gliding down the Skies , 
And Ilium brightened with a midnight blaze ; 
OH therefore , if thou lov'st me , go not forth . 


Hect.   Go to thy bed again ; and there dream better . 
Ho bid my Trumpet Sound . 


Andro.   no notes of sally for the heaven 's sweet sake . 
't is not for nothing when my Spirits droop : 
This is a day when thy ill Stars are strong 
When they have driven thy helpless genius down 
The steep of Heaven to some obscure retreat . 


Hect.   no more ; even as thou lov saint my fame no more : 
My honour stands engaged to meet Achilles : 
What will the Grecians think ; or what will he , 
Or what will Troy ; or what wilt thou thyself 
When once this ague fit of fear is o'er ; 
If I should lose my honour for ▪ a dream . 


Andro.   Your Enemies too well your courage know , 
And Heaven abhors the forfeit of rash vows 
Like spotted livers in a Sacrifice . 
I cannot ; OH I dare not let you go : 
For when you leave me , my presaging mind 
Says , I shall never , never see you more . 


Hect.   thou excellently good , but o too soft , 
Let me not scape the danger of this day , 
But I have struggling in my manly Soul 
To see those modest tears , ashamed to fall , 
And witness any part of woman in thee ! 
And now I fear , lest thou shouldst think it fear , 
If thus dissuaded , I refuse to fight , 
And stay inglorious in thy arms at home . 


Andro.   O could I have that thought I should not love thee ; 
Thy soul is proof to all things but to kindness . 
And therefore 't was that I forebore to tell thee 
How mad Cassandra , full of prophecy 
ran round the streets , and like a Bacchanal 
Cried hold him Priam , 't is an ominous day , 
Let him not go ; for Hector is no more . 


Hect.   Our life is short but to extend that span 
To vast Eternity is virtues work . 
Therefore to thee , and not to fear of fate 
Which once must come to all , give I this day 
But see thou move no more the like request : 
For rest assured that to regain this hour 
To morrow will I tempt a double danger : 
Mean time , let Destiny attend thy leisure . 
I reckon this one day a blank of of life . 


Enter Troilus . Troil.   Where are you Brother ? now in honour's name , 
What do you mean to be thus long nnarmed ? 
th' embattled Soldiers throug about the gates : 
The Matrous to the turret's tops ascend 
Holding their helpless children in their arms , 
To make you early known to their young eyes , 
And Hector is the universal shout . 


Hect.   Bid all unarm , I will not fight to day . 


Troil.   Employ some coward to bear back this news , 
And let the children hoot him for his pains ; 
By all the gods and by my just revenge , 
This sun shall shine the last for them or us : 
These noisy streets or yonder echoing plains 
Shall be to morrow silent as the grave . 


Andro.   OH Brother do not urge a brother's fate , 
But let this rack of heaven ▪ and earth roll o'er , 
And when the storm is passed put out to sea . 


Troil.   O now I know from whence his change proceeds , 
Some frantic Augur has observed the skies ; 
Some victim wants a heart , or crow flies wrong ; 
By heaven 't was never well since saucy Priests 
Grew to be Masters of the listening herd ; 
And into Mitres cleft the Regal Crown . 
then as the Earth were scanty for their power , 
They drew the pomp of Heaven to wait on them ; 
Shall I go publish Hector dares not sight 
Because a madman dreamt he talked with Jove ? 
What could the God see in a brainsick Priest 
That he should sooner talk to him then me ? 


Hect.   You know my name 's not liable to fear . 


Troil.   Yes , to the worst of fear , to superstition . 
But whether that or fondness of a wife , 
( The more unpardonabl● ill ) has seized you , 
Know this , the Grecians think you fear Achilles , 
And that Polixena has begged your life . 


Hect.   How ! that my life is begged , and by my sister ? 


Troil.   Ulysses so informed me at our parting , 
With a malicious and disdainful smile : 
't is true , he said not in broad words you feared , 
But in well-mannered terms 't was so agreed 
Achilles should avoid to meet with Hector . 


Hect.   He thinks my Sister's treason , my petition , 
That largely vaunting in my heat of blood 
more than I could , it seems , or durst perform , 
I sought evasion . 


Troil.   And in private prayed . 


Hect.   OH yes , Polixena , to beg my life . 


Andro.   He cannot think so , do not urge him thus . 


Hect.   Not urge me ! then thou think'st I need his urging . 
By all the Gods should Jove himself descend , 
And tell me Hector thou deservest not life 
But take it as a boon ; I would not live . 
But that a Mortal man , and he of all men 
Should think my life were in his power to give , 
I will not rest , till prostrate on the ground 
I make him Atheist - like , implore his breath 
Of me and not of Heaven . 


Troil.   then you'i refuse no more to fight . 


Hect.   Refuse ! I 'll not be hindered , Brother . 
I 'll through and through 'em , even their hindmost ranks . 
Till I have found that large sized boasting fool 
Who dare presume my life is in his gift . 


Andro.   Farewell , farewell : 't is vain to strive with fate : 
Cassandra's raging God inspires my breast , 
With truths that must be told and not believed . 
Look how he dies ! look how his eye turns pale ! 
Look how his blood bursts out at many vents ! 
Hark how Troy roars , how Hecuba cries out 
And widowed fill all the streets with screams ! 
Behold distraction , frenzy and amazement , 
Like Antiques meet , and tumble upon heaps ! 
And all cry Hector ; Hector's dead ! o Hector ! 
[ Exit Andromache . ] 

Hect.   What sport will be when we return at Evening , 
To laugh her out of countenance for her dreams ! 


Troil.   I have not quenched my eyes with dewy sleep this Night ; 
But fiery fumes mount upward to my brains , 
And when I breathe , methinks my nostrils hiss ! 
I shall turn Basilisk ! and with my sight 
Do my hands work , on Diomedes this day . 


Hect.   To Arms , to Arms , the vantguards are engaged : 
Let us not leave one Man to guard the Walls , 
Both Old and young , the coward and the brave , 
Be Summoned all , our utmost fate to try ; 
And as one body move , whose Soul am I  


[ Exeunt . SCENE II The Camp.  

Alarm within . Enter Agamemnon , Ulysses , Menelaus , Soldiers . Agam.   Thus far the promise of the day is fair : 
Aeneas rather loses ground than gains , 
I saw him overlaboured , taking breath ; 
And leaning on his spear , behold our Trenches 
Like a fierce Lion looking up to toils , 
Which yet he durst not leap . 


Vlyss.   And therefore distant death does all the work : 
The flights of whistling darts make brown the sky , 
Whose clashing points strike fire , and gild the dusk : 
Those that reach home , from neither host are vain , 
So thick the press ; so lusty are their arms , 
That death seemed never sent with better will ! 
Nor was with lesle concernment entertained . 


Enter Nestor . Agam.   Now Nestor , what 's the news ? 


Nestor .  I have descried , 
A clowed of dust that mounts in pillars upwards ; 
Expanding as it travels to our Camp , 
And from the midst ● heard a bursting shout , 
That rend the Heavens ! as if all Troy were swarmed , 
And on the wing this way . 


Menel .  Let 'em come , let 'em come . 


Agam.   where 's great Achilles ! 


Vlyss.   Think not on Achilles : 
Till Hector drag him from his Tent to fight , 
( Which sure he will , for I have laid the train . ) 


Nest.   But young Patroclus leads his Myrmidons ; 
And in their front , even in the face of Hector , 
Resolves to dare the Trojans . 


Agam.   Haste Ulysses , bid Ajax issue forth , and second hi● . 


Vlyss.   O Noble General , let it not be so . 
Oppose not rage , while rage is in its force ; 
But give it way awhile ; and let it waste : 
The rising deluge is not stopped with dams , 
Those it orebears , and drowns the hopes of harvest . 
But wisely managed its divided strength 
Is sluiced in channels , and securely drained : 
First , let small parties da●●y with their fury . 
But when their force is spent and unsupplyed 
The residue with mounds may be restrained , 
And dryshod , we may pass the naked ford . 


Enter Thersites . there 's .  Ho , ho , ho ! 



Menel .  Why dost thou laugh , unseasonable fool ! 



there 's .  Why thou fool in season , cannot a man laugh , but thou thinkst he makes horns at thee ! thou Prince of the Herd , what hast thou to do with laughing ! 't is the prerogative of man to laugh ! thou Risibility without Reason : thou subject of laughter ; thou fool Royal : 



Vlyss.   But tell us the occasion of thy mirth ? 



there 's .  Now a man asks me , I care not if I answer to my own kind : why the Enemies are broken into our Trenches : Fools like Menelaus fall by thousands ; yet not a human Soul departs on either side . Troilus and Ajax have almost beaten one another's heads off ; but are both immortal for want of brains . Patroclus has killed Sarpedon ; and Hector Patroclus : So there 's a towardly springing fop gone off : He might have made a Prince one day : But now he 's nipped in the very bud and promise of a most prodigious Coxcomb . 



Agam.   Bear off Patroclus' body to Achilles : 
Revenge will arm him now , and bring us aid . 
th' alarm Sounds near ; an shouts are driven upon us , 
As of a crowd confused in their retreat . 


Vlyss.   Open your Ranks , and make these mad men way : 
then close again , to charge upon their backs : 
And quite consume the Relics of the war . 


[ Exeunt all but Thersites . there 's .  What shoals of fools one battle sweeps away ! 

How it purges families of younger Brothers ! Highways of Robbers , and Cities of Cuckold-makers ! there 's nothing like a pitched Battle , for these brisk Addle-heads ! Your Physician is a pretty fellow ; but his fees make him tedious ; he rids not fast enough ; the fools grow upon him , and their horse bodies are poison proof . Your pestilence is a quicker Remedy ; but it has not the grace to make distinction ; it huddles up honest men and Rogues together . But your battle has discretion ; it picks out all the forward fools . And sowses 'em together into Immortality . [ Shouts and alarm within . Plague upon these drums and trumpets ! these sharp sauces of the War , to get fools●an Appetite to fight ! what do I among ' 'em ? I ●hall be miscaken for some valiant Ass , and die a Martyr , in a wrong Religion ! 



Hear Grecians fly over the stage , pursued by Trojans : One Trojan turns back upon Thersites who is flying too . Trojan .  Turn slave and fight . 



there 's .  turning . What art thou ! 



Troj .  A Bastard Son of Priam's . 



there 's .  I am a Bastard too : I love Bastards : I am Bastard in body , Bastard in mind , Bastard in valour ; in every thing illegitimate . A Bear will not fasten upon a Bear ; why should one Bastard offend another ! let us part fair , like true Sons of Whores ; and have the fear of our Mothers before our eyes . 



Troj .  The Devil take thee Coward . 

Exit Trojan 

there 's .  Now would I were either invisible , or invulnerable ? these Gods have a fine time on 't ; they can see and make mischief , and never feel it . [ Clattering of swords at both doors ; he runs each way , and meets the noise . A pox clatter you ; I am compassed in ! Now would I were that blockhead Ajax for a minute : some sturdy Trojan will poach me up with a long pole ! and then the Rogues may kill one another upon free cost , and have no body lest to laugh at 'em : 

Now Destruction ! now Destruction ! 


Enter Hector and Troilus driving in the Greeks . Hect.   to Ther.  Speak what part thou mightst on ! 


there 's .  I fight not at all : I am for neither side . 


Hect.   thou art a Greek : art thou a match for Hector . 
Art thou of blood and honour ? 


there 's .  no , I am a rescall : a scurvy railing knave ; a very filthy Rogue . 



Hect.   I do believe thee ; live . 



there 's .  God a mercy , that thou wilt believe me : but the Devil break thy neck for frighting me : 



[ aside . Troilus .  returning . What Prisoner have you there ? 



Hect.   A gleaning of the war : a Rogue he says . 



Troil.   Dispatch him and away . 



[ going to kill him . there 's .  Hold , hold : what is 't no more but dispatch a man and away ! I am in no such haste : I will not die for Greece ; I hate Greece , and by my good will would ne'er have been born there ; I was mistaken into that Country , and betrayed my parents to be born there . And besides I have a mortal Enemy amongst the Grecians , one Diomedes a damned villain , and cannot die with a safe conscience till I have first murdered him . 



Troil.   Show me thrt Diomedes and thou shalt live . 



there 's .  Come along with me and I 'll conduct thee to Calchas his Tent , where I believe he 's now making were with the Priest's daughter . 



Hect.   Here we must part , our destinies divide us ; 
Brother and friend , farewell . 


Troil.   When shall we meet ? 


Hect.   When the Gods please : if not , we once must part . 
Look ; on you hill their squandered Troops unite ; 


Troil.   If I mistake not , 't is their last Reserve : 
The storm 's blown o'er ; and those but after drops . 


Hect.   I wish our Men be not too far engaged : 
●or few we are and spent ; as having born 
The burden of the Day : but hap what can 
They shall be charged : Achilles must be there ; 
And him I seek , or death . 
Divide 〈◊〉 Troops ; and take the fresher half . 


Troil.   OH Brother , 


Hect.   no dispute of Ceremony ! 
These are enough for me ; in faith enough : 
There bodies shall not flag while I can lead ; 
Not wearied limbs confess mortality , 
Before those ants that blacken all you hill 
Are crept into their Earth : Farewell . 
Exit Hector . 

Troil.   Farewell ; come Greek : 


there 's .  Now these Rival-rogues will clapperclaw one another , and I shall have the sport on 't . 

Exit Troil. with Thersites . 

Enter Achilles and Myrmidons . Achil.   Which way went Hector ? 


Myrmyd .  Up you sandy hill : 
You may discern 'em by their smoking tract ; 
A wavering body working with bend hams 
Against the rising , spent with painful march , 
And by loose-footing cast on heaps together . 


Achilles .  OH thou art gone ! thou sweetest , both of friends ▪ 
Why did I let thee tempt the shock of war 
E'er yet thy tender nerves had strung thy limbs , 
And knotted into strength . Yet , though too late , 
I will , I will revenge the , my Patroclus ! 
Nor shall thy Ghost thy Murtherer's long attend , 
But thou shalt hear him calling Charon back , 
E'er thou art wa●ted to the farther shore . 
Make haste , my Soldiers : give me this days pains . 
For my dead friend : strike every hand with mine , 
Till Hector breathless , on the ground we lay ! 
Revenge is honour , the securest way . 


Exit with Myrmidons . [ Enter Thersites , Troilus , Trojans . ] there 's .  that 's Calcha's tent . 


Troil.   then that one spot of Earth contains more falsehood 
Than all the Sun sees in his race beside . 
That I should trust the Daughter of Priest ! 
Priesthood , that makes a merchandise of Heaven ! 
Priesthood that sells eve'n to their prayr's and blessing's ! 
And forces us to pay for our own cousnage ! 


there 's .  Nay cheats Heaven too with entrails and with offals ; 
Gives it the garbage of a Sacrifice 
And keeps the best of private Luxury . 


Troil.   thou hast deserved thy life , for cursing Priests : 
That back , that nose ; those eyes are beautiful : 
Live thou , art honest ; for thou hat'st a Priest.  


there 's .  aside . Farewell Trojan ; if I scape with life , as I hope ; and thou art knocked o' th' head , as I hope too ; I shall be the first that ever scaped the revenge of a Priest , after cursing him ; and thou wilt not be the ●ast , I prophesy that a Priest will bring to ruin . 

[ Exit Ther.  

Troil.   Me thinks my soul is roused to her last work : 
Has much to do , and little time to spare . 
She starts within me , like a Traveller 
Who sluggishly outslept his morning hour 
And mends his pace , to reach his Inn betimes . 
Noise within , ●ollow , follow . A Noise of Arms ! the Traitor may be there : 
Or else , perhaps , that conscious scene of Love , 
The Tent may hold him , yet I dare not search 
For O I fear to find him in that place . 
[ Exit . Troilus . 

Enter Calchas , Cressida . Ceess .  Where is he ? I 'll be justified or die . 


Calch .  So quickly vanished ! he was here but now : 
He must be gone to search for Diomedes , 
For Diomedes told me , here they were to fight . 


Cress.   Alas ! ( Calch . ) you must prevent , and not complain . 


Cress.   If Troilus die , I have no share in life . 


Calch .  If Diomedes sink beneath the sword of Troilus , 
We loose not only a Protector here , 
But are debarred all future means of flight . 


Cressi .  What then remains ! 


Calch .  To interpose betimes 
Betwixt their swords ; or if that cannot be 
To intercede for him , who shall be vanquished , 
Fate leaves no middle course . — 
Exit . Calchas . 

Clashing within . Cressi .  Ah me I hear 'em ; 
And fear 't is past prevention . 


Enter Diomedes , retiring before Troilus , and falling as he enters . Troil.   Now beg thy life , or die . 


Diom.   no : use thy fortune : 
I loathe the life , which thou canst give , or take . 


Troil.   Scorn'st thou my mercy villain ! — take thy wish . — 


Cressi .  Hold , hold your hand my Lord , and hear me speak . 


Troilus turns back : in which time Diomedes rises ; Trojans and Greeks enter , and rank themselves on both sides of their Captains . Troil.   Did I not hear the voice of perjured Cressida ? 
Comest thou to give the last stab to my heart ? 
As if the proofs of all thy former falsehood 
Were not enough convincing , comest thou now 
to beg my Rival's life ! 
Whom , O , if any spark of truth remained , 
thou couldst not thus , even to my face prefer ! 


Cressi .  What shall I say ! that you suspect me false 
Has struck me dumb ! but let him live my Troilus , 
By all our loves , by all our past endearments 
I do adjure thee spare him . 


Troil.   Hell , and death ! 


Cressi .  If ever I had power to bend your mind , 
Believe me still your faithful Cressida : 
And though my innocence appear like guilt , 
Because I make his forfeit life my suit , 
't is but for this , that my return to you 
Would be cut off for ever by his death . 
My father , treated like a slave and scorned , 
Myself in hated bonds a Captive held . 


Troil   Could I believe thee , could I think thee true 
In triumph would I bear thee back to Troy , 
Though Greece could rally all her shattered troops , 
And stand embatteld to oppose my way . 
But , O , thou Siren , I will stop my ears 
To thy enchanting notes ; the winds shall bear 
Upon their wings , thy words more light than they . 


Cressi .  Alas I but dissembled love to him ; 
If ever he had any proof beyond 
What modesty might give . — 


Diom.   No! witness this — 
( the Ring shown . ) There , take her Trojan ; thou deservest her best , 
You good , kind-natured , well-believing fools 
Are treasures to a woman . 
I was a jealous , hard vexatious Lover 
And doubted even this pledge till full possession : 
But she was honourable to her word ; 
And I have no just reason to complain . 


Cressi .  OH , unexampled , frontless impudence ! 


Troil.   Hell show me such another tortured wretch , as Troilus ! 


Diom.   Nay , dare grieve not : I resign her freely up : 
I 'm satisfied : and dare engage for Cressida , 
That if you have a promise of her person , 
She shall be willing to come out of debt . 


Cressi .  [ kneeling . ] My only Lord : by all those holy vows 
Which if there be a power above are binding , 
Or , if there be a Hell below , are fearful , 
May every imprecation , which your rage 
Can wish on me , take place , if I am false . 


Diom.   Nay , since you 're so concerned to be believed , 
I 'm sorry I have pressed my charge so far ; 
Be what you would be thought : I can be grateful . 


Troil.   Grateful ! O torment ! now hell's blewest flames 
Receive her quick ; with all her crimes upon her . 
Let her sink spotted down . Let the dark host 
Make room ; and point : and hisse her , as she goes . 
Let the most branded Ghosts of all her Sex 
Rejoice , and cry , here comes a blacker fiend . 
Let her — 


Cressi .  Enough my Lord ;   said enough : 
This faithless , perjured , hated Cressida , 
Shall be no more , the subject of your Curses : 
Some few hours hence , and grief had done your work ; 
But the your eyes had missed the satisfaction 
Which thus I give you — thus — 


[ She stabs herself they both run to her . Diom.   Help ; save her , help . 


Cressi .  Stand off ; and touch me not , thou Traitor , Diomedes : 
But you , my only Troilus come near : 
Trust me the wound which I have given this breast 
Is far less painful , than the wound you gave it . 
O , can you yet believe , that I am true ! 


Troil.   This were too much , even if thou hadst been false ! 
But , O , thou purest , whitest innocence , 
( For such I know thee now ) too late I know it ! 
May all my curses , and ten thousand more 
Heavier than they , fall back upon my head , 
Pelion and Ossa from the Giant's graves , 
Be torn by some avenging Deity , 
And hurled at me , a bolder wretch than they , 
Who durst invade the Skies ! 


Cressi .  Hear him not Heavens ! 
But hear me bless him with my latest breath : 
And since I question not your hard decree , 
That doomed my days unfortunate and few , 
Add all to him , you take away from me ; 
And I die happy that he thinks me true . 


[ Dies . Troil.   she 's gone for ever , and she blessed me dying ! 
Could she have cursed me worse ! she died for me ; 
And like a woman , I lament for her : 
Distraction pulls me several ways at once , 
Here pity calls me to weep out my eyes ; 
Despair then turns me back upon myself , 
And bids me seek no more , but finish here : 
[ Sword to his breast . ha , smil'st thou Traitor , thou instruct'st me best , 
And turnest my just revenge to punish thee . 


Diom.   Thy worst , for mine has been before hand with thee , 
I triumph in thy vain credulity , 
Which levels thy despairing state to mine : 
But yet thy folly to believe a foe ; 
Makes thine the sharper , and more shameful loss . 


Troil.   By my few moments of remaining life ; 
I did not hope for any future joy , 
But thou hast given me pleasure ere I die : 
To punish such a Villain . — Fight a part . 
[ To his Soldiers . For Heaven and hell have marked him out for me , 
And I should grudge even his least drop of blood , 
To any other hand . — 


[ Troilus and Diomedes fight , and both parties engage at the same time : The Trojans make the Greeks retire , and Troilus makes Diomedes give ground and hurts him , Trumpet's sound , Achilles Enters with his Myrmidons , on the backs of the Trojans , who fight in a Ring encompassed round : Troilus singling Diomedes gets him down and kills him : and Achilles kills Troilus upon him . All the Trojans die upon the place , Troilus last . Enter Agamemnon , Menelaus , Ulysses , Nestor , Ajax , and Attendants . Achilles .  Our toils are done , and those aspiring Walls 
( The work of Gods , and almost mateing Heaven , ) 
Must crumble into rubbish on the plain . 


Agam.   When mighty Hector fell beneath thy Sword , 
Their Old foundations shaken , their nodding Towers 
Threatened from high , the amazed Inhabitants : 
And Guardian Gods for fear forsaken their fanes . 


Achilles .  Patroclus' , now be quiet : Hector's dead : 
And as a second offering to thy Ghost , 
Lies Troilus high upon a heap of slain : 
And noble Diomedes beneath ; whose death 
This hand of mine revenged . 


Ajax .  Revenged it basely . 
For Troilus fell by multitudes oppressed ; 
And so fell Hector , but 't is vain to talk . 


Vlyss.   Hail Agamemnon ! truly Victor now ! 
While secret envy , and while open pride , 
Among thy factious Nobles discord threw ; 
While public good was urged for private ends , 
And those thought Patriots , who disturbed it most ; 
then like the headstrong horses of the Sun , 
That light which should have cheered the World , consumed it : 
Now peaceful order has resumed the reinss , 
Old time looks young , and Nature seems renewed : 
then , since from homebred Factions ruin springs , 
Let Subjects learn obedience to their Kings . 


[ Exeunt Omnes . The Epilogue . 

Spoken by Thersites . These cruel Critics put me into passion ; 
For in their lowering looks I read damnation : 
ye expect a Satyr , and I seldom fail , 
When I 'm first beaten , 't is my part to rail . 
You British fools , of the Old Trojan stock , 
That stand so thick one cannot miss the flock , 
Poets have cause to dread a keeping Pit , 
When Woman's Cullyes come to judge of Wit. 
As we strew Ratsbane when we vermin fear , 
'T were worth our cost to scatter fool-bane here . 
And after all our judging Fops were served , 
Dull Poets too should have a dose reserved , 
Such Reprobates , as past all sense of shaming 
write on , and ne'er are satisfied with damning , 
Next , those , to whom the Stage does not belong 
Such whose Vocation only is to Song ; 
At most to Prologue , when for want of time 
Poets take in for journywork in Rhyme . 
But I want curses for those mighty shoals , 
Of scribbling Chlorisses , and Phillis fools , 
Those Ophs should be restrained , during their lives , 
From Pen and Ink , as Madmen are from knives : 
I could rail on , but 't were a task as vain 
As preaching truth at Rome , or wit in Spain , 
Yet to huff out our Play was worth my trying , 
John Lilbourn scaped his judges by defying : 
If guilty , yet I 'm sure o' th' Church's blessing , 
By suffering for the Plot , without confessing . 
FINIS . 

Books Lately Printed . 

Contemplation's upon the remarkable Passages in the New Testament , Consisting in Divine Meditations upon ; the Life of the Holy Jesus . Written by the Bishop of Exeter . 

Ten Tragical Histories , Containing God's Revenge against the Sin of Adultery , Illustrated with Cuts . 

Plays . 

The Feigned Courtesans , Or , A Night's Intrigue . 

Sir patient Fancy . 

The Counterfeit . 

Brutus of Alba , a Tragedy , By M. Tate . Acted at the Duke's Theatre . 

All These Printed for Jacob Tonson at the judge's Head at Chancery-lane-end next Fleetstreet . 

Medulla Historiae Anglicanae , Being a comprehensive History ; of the Lives and Reigns of the Monarches of England , From the time of the Conquest thereof by Julius Caesar to this present Year , 1679.  With an Abstract of the Lives of the Roman Emperors Commanding in Britain . To which is added , A List of the Names of the Present Members of Parliament . 

Printed for Abel Swall at the Unicorn at the West End of S. Pnuls . 

