june the 19th . 1688 . 

Let this be PRINTED . 

Middleton . 

Britannia Rediviva : A POEM ON THE BIRTH OF THE PRINCE . 

Written by Mr. DRYDEN . 

Dii Patrii Indigetes , & Romule , Vestaque Mater , 
Quae Tuscum Tiberim , & Romana Palatia servas , 
Hunc saltem everso Puerum succurrere saeclo 
Ne prohibete : satis jampridem sanguine nostro 
Laomedonteae luimus Perjuria Trojae . 
Virg. Georg. I  



LONDON , Printed for I Tonson , at the judges-head in Chancery-lane , near Fleetstreet . 1688.  

Britannia Rediviva : A POEM ON THE PRINCE , Born on the 10th . of june , 1688.  

Our Vows are heard betimes ! and Heaven takes care 
To grant , before we can conclude the Prayer : 
Preventing Angels met it half the way , 
And sent us back to Praise , who came to Pray . 
Just on the Day , when the high mounted Sun 
Did farthest in his Northern Progress run , 
He bent forward and even stretched the Sphere 
Beyond the limits of the lengthened year ; 
To view a Brighter Sun in Britain Born ; 
That was the Business of his longest Morn , 
The Glorious Object seen 't was time to turn . 
Departing Spring could only stay to shed 
Her bloomy beauties on the Genial Bed , 
But left the manly Summer in her stead , 
With timely Fruit the longing Land to cheer , 
And to fulfil the promise of the year . 
Betwixt two Seasons comes th' Auspicious Heir , 
This Age to blossom , and the next to bear . 
Last solemn Sabbath saw the Church attend ; 
The Paraclete in fiery Pomp descend ; 
But when his Wondrous Octave rolled again , 
He brought a Royal Infant in his Train . 
So great a Blessing to so good a King 
None but th' Eternal Comforter could bring . 
Or did the Mighty Trinty conspire , 
As once , in Council to create our Sire ? 
It seems as if they sent the Newborn Guest 
To wait on the Procession of their Feast ; 
And on their Sacred Anniverse decreed 
To stamp their Image on the promised Seed . 
Three Realms united , and on One bestowed , 
An Emblem of their Mystic Union showed : 
The Mighty Trine the Triple Empire shared , 
As every Person would have One to guard . 
Hail Son of Prayers ! by holy Violence 
Drawn down from Heaven ; but long be banished thence , 
And late to thy Paternal Skies retire : 
To mend our Crimes whole Ages would require : 
To change th' inveterate habit of our Sins , 
And finish what thy Godlike Sire begins . 
Kind Heaven , to make us Englishmen again , 
no lesle can give us than a Patriarches Reign . 
The Sacred Cradle to your Charge receive 
ye Seraphs , and by turns the Guard relieve ; 
Thy Father's Angel and Thy Father join 
To keep Possession , and secure the Line ; 
But long defer the Honours of thy Fate , 
Great may they be like his , like his be late . 
That james this running Century may view , 
And give his Son an Auspice to the New.  
Our wants exact at least that moderate stay : 
For see the Dragon winged on his way , 
To watch the Travail , and devour the Prey . 
Or , if Allusions may not rise so high , 
Thus , when Alcides raised his Infant Cry , 
The Snakes besieged his Young Divinity : 
But vainly with their forked Tongues they threat ; 
For Opposition makes a Hero Great . 
To needful Succour all the Good will run ; 
And jove assert the Godhead of his Son.  
OH still repining at your present state , 
Grudging yourselves the Benefits of Fate , 
Look up , and read in Characters of Light 
A Blessing sent you in your own Despite . 
The Manna falls , yet that Celestial Bread 
Like jews you munch , and murmur while you feed . 
May not your Fortune be like theirs , Exiled , 
Yet forty Years to wander in the Wild : 
Or if it be , may Moses live at least 
To lead you to the Verge of promised Rest.  
Thou Poets are not Prophets , to foreknow 
What Plants will take the Blite , and what will grow , 
By tracing Heaven his Footsteps may be found : 
Behold ! how awfully He walks the round ! 
God is abroad , and wondrous in his ways , 
The Rise of Empires , and their Fall surveys ; 
More ( might I say ) than with an usual Eye , 
He sees his bleeding Church in Ruin lie , 
And hears the Souls of Saints beneath his Altar cry . 
Already has he lifted high , the Sign 
Which Crowned the Conquering Arms of Constantine : 
The Moon grows pale at that presaging sight , 
And half her Train of Stars have lost their Light.  
Behold another Sylvester , to bless 
The Sacred Standard and secure Success ; 
Large of his Treasures , of a Soul so great , 
As fills and crowds his Universal Seat.  
Now view at home a second Constantine ; 
( The former too , was of the British Line ) 
Has not his healing Balm your Breaches closed , 
Whose Exile many sought , and few opposed ? 
Or , did not Heaven by its Eternal Doom 
Permit those Evils , that this Good might come ? 
So manifest , that even the Moon-eyed Sects 
See Whom and What this Providence protects . 
Methinks , had we within our Minds no more 
Than that One Shipwreck on the Fatal Ore , 
That only thought may make us think again , 
What Wonders God reserves for such a Reign . 
To dream that Chance his Preservation wrought ; 
Were to think Noah was preserved for naught ; 
Or the Surviving Eight were not designed 
To people Earth , and to restore their Kind . 
When humbly on the Royal Babe we gaze , 
The Manly Lines of a Majestic face 
Give awful joy : 't is Paradise to look 
On the fair Frontispiece of Nature's Book ; 
If the first opening Page so charms the sight , 
Think how th' unfolded Volume will delight ! 
See how the Venerable Infant lies 
In early Pomp ; how through the Mother's Eyes 
The Father's Soul , with an undaunted view 
Looks out , and takes our Homage as his due . 
See on his future Subjects how He smiles , 
Nor meanly flatters , nor with craft beguiles ; 
But with an open face , as on his Throne , 
Assures our Birthrights , and assumes his own . 
Born in broad Daylight , that th' ungrateful Rout 
May find no room for a remaining doubt : 
Truth , which itself is light , does darkness eat , 
And the true Eaglet safely dares the Sun.  
fain would the Fiends have made a dubious birth , 
Loath to confess the Godhead clothed in Earth . 
But sickened after all their baffled lies , 
To find an Heir apparent of the Skies : 
Abandoned to despair , still may they grudge , 
And owning not the Saviour , prove the Judge . 
Not Great Aeneas stood in plainer Day , 
When , the dark mantling Missed dissolved away , 
He to the Tyrians showed his sudden face , 
Shining with all his Goddess Mother's Grace : 
For She herself had made his Countenance bright , 
Breathed honour on his eyes , and her own Purple Light.  
If our Victorious Edward , as they say , 
Gave Wales a Prince on that Propitious Day , 
Why may not Years revolving with his Fate 
Produce his Like , but with a longer Date ? 
One who may carry to a distant shore 
The Terror that his Famed Forefather bore . 
But why should james or his Young Hero stay 
For slight Presages of a Name or Day ▪ 
We need no Edward's Fortune to adorn 
That happy moment when our Prince was born : 
Our Prince adorns his Day , and Ages hence 
Shall with his Birthday for some future Prince . 
Great Michael , Prince of all th' Aetherial Hosts , 
And what ever Inborn Saints our Britain boasts ; 
And thou , th' adopted Patron of our Isle , 
With cheerful Aspects on this Infant smile : 
The Pledge of Heaven , which dropping from above , 
Secures our Bliss , and reconciles his Love.  
Enough of Ills our dire Rebellion wrought , 
When , to the Dregss , we drank the bitter draught ; 
then airy Atoms did in Plagues conspire , 
Nor did th' avenging Angel yet retire , 
But purged our still increasing Crimes with Fire . 
then perjured Plots , the still impending Test , 
And worse ; but Charity conceals the Rest : 
Here stop the Current of the sanguine flood , 
Require not , Gracious God , thy Martyr's Blood ; 
But let their dying pangs , their living toil , 
Spread a Rich Harvest through their Native Soil : 
A Harvest ripening for another Reign , 
Of which this Royal Babe may reap the Grain . 
Enough of Early Saints one Womb has given ; 
Enough increased the Family of Heaven : 
Let them for his , and our Atonement go ; 
And Reigning blessed above , leave him to Rule below . 
Enough already has the Year foreslowed 
His wont Course , the Seas have overflowed , 
The Meads were floated with a weeping Spring , 
And frightened birds in Woods forgot to sing ; 
The Strong-limbed Steed beneath his harness faints , 
And the same shiv'ring sweat his Lord attaints . 
When will the Minister of Wrath give o'er ? 
Behold him ; at Araunah's threshing-floor . 
He stops , and seems to sheathe his flaming brand ; 
Pleased with burned Incense , from our David's hand . 
David has bought the jebusites abode , 
And raised an Altar to the Living God.  
Heaven , to reward him , make his Joys sincere ; 
no future Ills , nor Accidents appear 
To sully and pollute the Sacred infant 's Year . 
Five Months to Discord and Debate were given : 
He sanctifies the yet remaining Sev'n . 
Sabbath of Months ! henceforth in Him be blessed , 
And prelude to the Realms perpetual Rest ! 
Let his Baptismal Drops for us atone ; 
Lustrations for Offences not his own . 
Let Conscience , which is Interest ill disguised , 
In the same Font be cleansed , and all the Land Baptised . 
Un named as yet ; at least unknown to Fame : 
Is there a strife in Heaven about his Name ? 
Where every Famous Predecessor vies , 
And makes a Faction for it in the Skies ? 
Or must it be reserved to thought alone ? 
Such was the Sacred Tetragrammation . 
Things worthy silence must not be revealed ▪ 
Thus the true Name of Rome was kept concealed , 
To eat the Spells , and Sorceries of those 
Who durst her Infant Majesty oppose . 
But when his tender strength in time shall rise 
To dare ill Tongues , and fascinating Eyes ; 
This Isle , which hides the little Thund'rer's Fame , 
Shall be too narrow to contain his Name : 
th' Artillery of Heaven shall make him known ; 
Crete could not hold the God , when jove was grown . 
As joves' Increase , who from his Brain was born , 
Whom Arms and Arts did equally adorn , 
Free of the Breast was bred , whose milky taste 
Minerva's Name to Venus had debased ; 
So this Imperial Babe rejects the Food 
That mixes Monarches with Plebeian blood : 
Food that his inborn Courage might control , 
Extinguish all the Father in his Soul , 
And , for his Estian Race , and Saxon Strain , 
Might re-produce some second Richard's Reign . 
Mildness he shares from both his Parent's blood , 
But Kings too tame are despicably good : 
Be this the Mixture of this Regal Child , 
By Nature Manly , but by Virtue Mild.  
Thus far the Furious Transport of the News , 
Had to Prophetic Madness fired the Muse ; 
Madness ungovernable , uninspired , 
Swift to foretell whatever she desired ; 
Was it for me the dark Abyss to tread , 
And read the Book which Angels cannot read ? 
How was I punished when the sudden blast , 
The Face of Heaven , and our young Sun o'recast ! 
Fame , the swift Ill , increasing as she rolled , 
Disease , Despair , and Death , at three reprises told : 
At three insulting strides she stalked the Town , 
And , like Contagion , struck the Loyal down . 
Down fell the winnowed Wheat ; but mounted high , 
The Whirlwind bore the Chaff , and hid the Sky . 
Here black Rebellion shooting from below 
( As Earth's Gigantic brood by moments grow ) 
And here the Sons of God are petrified with Woe : 
An Appoplex of Grief ! so low were driven 
The Saints , as hardly to defend their Heaven . 
As , when penned Vapours run their hollow round , 
Earthquakes , which are Convulsions of the ground , 
Break bellowing forth , and no Confinement brook , 
Till the Third settles , what the Former shakes ; 
Such heave had our Souls ; till slow and late , 
Our life with his returns , and Faith prevailed on Fate . 
By Prayers the mighty Blessing was implored , 
To Prayers was granted ▪ and by Prayers restored . 
So ever the Shunamite a Son conceived , 
The Prophet promised , and the Wife believed , 
A Son was sent , the Son so much desired , 
But soon upon the Mother's Knees expired . 
The troubled Seer approached the mournful Door , 
Ran , prayed , and sent his Past'ral-staff before , 
then stretched his Limbs upon the Child , and mourned , 
Till Warmth , and breath , and a new Soul returned . 
Thus Mercy stretches out her hand , and saves 
Desponding Peter sinking in the Waves . 
As when a sudden Storm of Hail and Rain 
Beats to the ground the yet unbearded Grain , 
Think not the hopes of Harvest are destroyed 
On the flat Field , and on the naked void ; 
The light , unloaded stem , from tempest freed , 
Will raise the youthful honours of his head ; 
And , soon restored by native vigour , bear 
The timely product of the bounteous Year . 
Nor yet conclude all fiery Trials passed , 
For Heaven will exercise us to the last ; 
Sometimes will check us in our full career , 
With doubtful blessings , and with mingled fear ; 
That , still depending on his daily Grace , 
His every mercy for an alms may pass . 
With sparing hands will Diet us to good ; 
Preventing Surfeits of our pampered blood . 
So feeds the Mother-bird her craving young , 
With little Morsels , and delays 'em long . 
True , this last blessing was a Royal Feast , 
But , where 's the Wedding Garment on the Guest ? 
Our Manners , as Religion were a Dream , 
Are such as teach the Nations to Blaspheme . 
In Lusts we wallow , and with Pride we swell , 
And Injuries , with Injuries repel ; 
Prompt to Revenge , not daring to forgive , 
Our Lives unteach the Doctrine we believe ; 
Thus Israel Sinned , impenitently hard , 
And vainly thought the present Ark their Guard ; 
But when the haughty Philistines appear , 
They fled abandoned , to their Foes , and fear ; 
Their God was absent , though his Ark was there . 
Ah! left our Crimes should snatch this Pledge away , 
And make our Joys the blessing of a day ! 
For we have sinned him hence , and that he life's , 
God to his promise , not our practice gives . 
Our Crimes would soon weigh down the guilty Scale , 
But james , and Mary , and the Church prevail . 
Nor Amaleck can rout the chosen Bands , 
While Her and Aaron hold up Moses hands . 
By living well , let us secure his days , 
Moderate in hopes , and humble in our ways . 
no force the Freeborn Spirit can constrain , 
But Charity , and great Examples gain . 
Forgiveness is our thanks , for such a day ; 
't is Godlike , God in his own Coin to pay . 
But you , Propitious Queen , translated here , 
From your mild Heaven , to rule our rugged Sphere , 
Beyond the Sunny walks , and circling Year . 
You , who your Native Climate have berest 
Of all the Virtues , and the Vices left ; 
Whom Piety , and Beauty make their boast , 
Though Beautiful is well in Pious lost ; 
So lost , as Starlight is dissolved away , 
And melts into the brightness of the day ; 
Or Gold about the Regal Diadem , 
Lost to improve the lustre of the Gem. 
What can we add to your Triumphant Day ? 
Let the Great Gift the beauteous Giver pay . 
For should our thanks awake the rising Sun , 
And lengthen , as his latest shadows run , 
That , though the longest day , would soon , too soon be done 
Let Angels voices , with their harps conspire , 
But keep th' auspicious Infant from the Choir ; 
Late let him sing above , and let us know 
no sweeter Music , than his Cries below . 
Nor can I wish to you , Great Monarch more 
Than such an annual Income to your store , 
The Day , which gave this Vnit , did not shine 
For a lesle Omen , than to fill the Trine . 
After a Prince , an Admiral beget , 
The Royal Sov'raign wants an Anchor yet . 
Our Isle has younger Titles still in store , 
And when th' exhausted Land can yield no more , 
Your Line can force them from a Foreign shore . 
The Name of Great , your Martial mind will suit , 
But Justice , is your Darling Attribute : 
Of all the Greeks , 't was but one Heroes due , 
And , in him , Plutarch Prophesied of you . 
A Prince's favours but on few can fall , 
But Justice is a Virtue shared by all . 
Some Kings the name of Conq'rours have assumed , 
Some to be Great , some to be Gods presumed ; 
But boundless power , and arbitrary Lust 
Made Tyrants still abhor the Name of Just ; 
They shunned the praise this Godlike Virtue gives , 
And feared a Title , that reproached their Lives . 
The Power from which all Kings derive their state , 
Whom they pretend , at least , to imitate , 
Is equal both to punish and reward ; 
For few would love their God , unless they feared . 
Resistless Force and Immortality 
Make but a Lame , Imperfect Deity : 
Tempests have force unbounded to destroy , 
And Deathless Being even the Damned enjoy , 
And yet Heavens' Attributes , both last and first , 
One without life , and one with life accursed ; 
But Justice is Heavens' self , so strictly He , 
That could it fail , the Godhead could not be . 
This Virtue is your own : but Life and State 
Are One to Fortune subject , One to Fate : 
Equal to all , you justly frown or smile , 
Nor Hopes , nor Fears your steady Hand beguile ; 
Yourself our Balance hold , the Worlds , our Isle . 
FINIS . 





 Whit-sunday .  Trinity-sunday .  Alluding only to the Commonwealth Party , here and in other places of the Poem .  rev. 12. v. 4.   The Cross.   The Crescent , which the Turks bear for their Arms.   The Pope in the time of Constantine the Great , alluding to the present Pope .  K. James the Second .  The Lemon Ore.   Alluding to the Temptations in the Wilderness .  Virg. Aeneid . I   Edw. the black Prince , Born on Trinity-sunday .  The Motto of the Poem explained .  St. George .  Alluding to the passage in the 1.  Book of Kings , Ch. 24. v. 20th .  Original Sin.   The Prince Christened , but not named .  Jehovah , or the name of God unlawful to be pronounced by the Jews .  Some Authors say , That the true name of Rome was kept a secret ; ne hosts incantamentis Deos elicerent .  Candie where Jupiter was born and bred secretly .  Pallas , or Minerva ; said by the Poets , to have been bred up by Hand .  The sudden false Report of the Prince's Death .  Those Giants are feigned to have grown 15 Ells every day .  In the second Book of Kings , Chap. 4th .  Sam. 4th . v. 10th .  Exod. 17. v. 8th .  Aristides , see his Life in Plutarch . 