Mr john Dryden 



ANNUS MIRABILIS : The Year of WONDERS , 1666.  

AN HISTORICAL POEM : CONTAINING The Progress and various Successes of our Naval War with Holland , under the Conduct of His Highness' Prince RUPERT , and His Grace the Duke of ALBEMAR● . 

And describing THE FIRE OF LONDON . 

By JOHN DRYDEN , Esq 

〈…〉 , an homines latius impera●● 〈◊〉 . 
Trajan . Imperator . ad Pl●n . 




V●rg  



London , Printed for Henry Herringman , at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the N●● Exchange . 1667.  

TO THE METROPOLIS OF GREAT BRITAIN , The most Renowned and late Flourishing CITY of LONDON , I● its REPRESENTATIVES The LORD MAYOR and Court of ALDERMEN , the SHERIFFS and COMMON COUNCIL of it . 

AS perhaps I am the first who ever presented a work of this nature to the Metropolis of any Nation , so is it likewise consonant to Justice , that he who was to give the first Example of such a Dedication should begin it with that City , which has set a pattern to all others of true Loyalty , invincible Courage and unshaken Constancy . Other Cities have been praised for the same Virtues , but I am much deceived if any have so dearly purchased their reputation ; their fame has been wone them by cheaper trials than an expensive , though necessary , War , a consuming Pestilence , and a more consuming Fire . To submit yourselves with that humility to the Judgements of Heaven , and at the same time to raise yourselves with that vigour above all human Enemies ; to be combated at once from above and from below , to be struck down and to triumph ; I know not whether such trials have been ever paralleled in any Nation , the resolution and successes of them never can be . Never had Prince or People more mutual reason to love each other , if suffering for each other can endear affection . You have come together a pair of matchless Lovers , through many difficulties ; He , through a long Exile , various traverses of Fortune , and the interposition of many Rivals , who violently ravished and withheld You from Him : And certainly you have had your share in sufferings . But Providence has cast upon you want of Trade , that you might appear bountiful to your Country's necessities ; and the rest of your afflictions are not more the effects of God's displeasure , ( frequent examples of them having been in the Reign of the most excellent Princes ) than occasions for the manifesting of your Christian and Civil virtues . To you therefore this Year of Wonders is justly dedicated , because you have made it so . You who are to stand a wonder to all Years and Ages , and who have built yourselves an immortal Monument on your own ruins . You are now a Phoenix in her ashes , and , as far as Humanity can approach , a great Emblem of the suffering Deity . But Heaven never made so much Piety and Virtue to leave it miserable . I have heard indeed of some virtuous persons who have ended unfortunately , but never of any virtuous Nation : Providence is engaged too deeply , when the cause becomes so general . And I cannot imagine it has resolved the ruin of that people at home , which it has blessed abroad with such successes . I am therefore to conclude , that your sufferings are at an end ; and that one part of my Poem has not been more an History of your destruction , than the other a Prophecy of your restoration . The accomplishment of which happiness , as it is the wish of all true Englishmen , so is by none more passionately desired then by 

The greatest of your Admirers , and most humble of your Servants , JOHN DRYDEN . 

An account of the ensuing Poem , in a LETTER to th● Honourable , Sir ROBERT HOWARD . 

SIR , 

I am so many ways obliged to you , and so little able to return your favours , that , like those who owe too much , I can only live by getting farther into your debt . You have not only been careful of my Fortune , which was the effect of your Nobleness , but you have been solicitous of my Reputation , which is that of your Kindness . It is not long since I gave you the trouble of perusing a Play for me , and now , instead of an acknowledgement , I have given you a greater , in the correction of a Poem . But since you are to bear this persecution , I will at least give you the encouragement of a Martyr , you could never suffer in a nobler cause . For I have chosen the most heroic Subject which any Poet could desire : I have t●ken upon me to d●scribe the motives , the beginning , progress and successes of a most just and necessary War ; in it , the care , management and prudence of our King ; the conduct and valour of a Royal Admiral , and of two incomparable Generals ; the invincible courage of our Captains and Sea men , and three glorious Victories , the result of all . After this I have , in the Fire , the most deplorable , but withal the greatest Argument that can be imagined : the destruction being so swift , so sudden , to vast and miserable , as nothing can parallel in Story . The former part of this Poem , relating to the War , is but a due expiation for my not serving my King and Country in it . All Gentlemen are almost obliged to it : And I know no reason we should give that advantage to the Commonalty of England to be for most in brave actions , which the Noblesse of France would never suffer in their Peasants . I should not have written this but to a Person , who has been ever forward to appear in all employments , whither his Honour and Generosity have called him . The latter part of my Poem , which describes the Fire , I owe first to the Piety and Fatherly Affection of our Monarch to his suffering Subjects ; an● , in the second place , to the courage , loyalty and magnanimity of the City : both which were so conspicuous , that I have wanted words to celebrate them as they deserve . I have called my Poem Historical , not Epic , though both the Actions and Actors are as much Heroic , as any Poem can contain . But since the Action is not properly one , nor that accomplished in the last successes , I have judged it too bold a Title for a few Stanza's , which are little more in number then a single Iliad , or the longest of the Aen●idss . For this reason , ( I mean not of length , but broken action , tied too severely to the Laws of History ) I am apt to agree with those who rank Lucan rather among Historians in Verse , than Epique Poets : In whose room , if I am not deceived , Silius Italicus , though a worse Writer , may more justly be admitted . I have chosen to write my Poem in Quatrains or Stanza's of four in alternate rhyme , because I have ever judged them more noble , and of greater dignity , both from the sound and number , than any other Verse in use amongst us ; in which I am sure I have your approbation . The learned Languages have , certainly , a great advantage of us , in not being tied to the slavery of any Rhyme ; and were lesle constrained in the quantity of every syllable , which they might vary with Spondaees or Dactiles , besides so many other helps of Grammatical Figures , for the lengthening or abbreviation of them , than the Modern are in the close of that one Syllable , which often confines , and more often corrup●s the sense of all the rest . But in this necessity of our Rhymes , I have always found the couplet Verse most easy , ( though not so proper for this occasion ) for there the work is sooner at an end , every two lines concluding the labour of the Poet : but in Quattrains he is to carry it farther on ; and not only so , but to bear along in his head the troublesome sense of four lines together . For those who write correctly in this kind must needs acknowledge , that the last line of the Stanza is to be considered in the composition of the first . Neither can we give our s●lveses the liberty of making any part of a Verse for the sake of Rhyme , or concluding with a word which is not currant English , or using the variety of Female Rhymes , all which our Fathers practised ; and for the Female Rhymes , they are still in use amongst other Nations : with the Italian in every line , with the Spaniard promiscuously , with the French alternately , as those who have read the Alarique , the Pucelle , or any of their latter Poems , will agree with me . And besides this , they write in Alexandrins , or Verses of six feet , such as amongst us is the old Translation of Homer , by Chapman ; all which , by lengthening of their Chain , makes the sphere of their activity the larger . I have dwelled too long upon the choice of my Stanza , which you may remember is much better defended in the Preface to Gondibert , and therefore I will hasten to acquaint you with my endeavours in the writing . In general I will only say , I have never yet seen the description of any Naval Fight in the proper terms which are used at Sea ; and if there be any such in another Language , as that of Lucan in the third of his Pharsalia , yet I could not prevail myself of it in the English ; the terms of Arts in every ●ongue bearing more of the Idiom of it then any other words . We hear , indeed , among our Poets , of the thundering of Guns , the smoke , the disorder and the slaughter ; but all these are common notions . And certainly as those who , in a Logical dispute , keep in general terms , would hide a fallacy , so those who do it in any Poetical description would veil their ignorance . Descriptas servare vices operumque colores 
Cur ego , si nequeo ignoroque , poeta salutor ? 


For my own part , if I had little knowledge of the Sea , yet I have thought it no shame to learn : and if I have made some few mistakes , 't is only , as you can bear me witness , because I have wanted opportunity to correct them , the whole Poem being first written , and now sent you from a place , where I have not so much as the converse of any Seaman . Yet , though the trouble I had in writing it was great , it was more than recompensed by the pleasure ; I found myself so warm in celebrating the praises of military men , two such especially as the Prince and General , that it is no wonder ●f they inspired me with thoughts above my ordinary ●evel . And I am well satisfied , that as they are incomparably the best subject I have ever had , excepting only the Royal Family ; so also , that this I have written of them is much better than what I have performed on any other . I have been forced to help out other Arguments , but this has been bountiful to me ; ●hey have been low and barren of praise , and I have exalted them , and made them fruitful : but here — Omnia Sponte suâ reddit justissima tellus . I have had a large , a fair and a pleasant field , so fertile , that , without my cultivating , it has given me two Harvests in a S●mmer , and in both oppressed the Reaper . All other greatness in subjects is only counterfeit , it will not endure the test of danger ; the greatness of Arms is only real : other greatness burdens a Nation with 〈◊〉 weight , this supports it with its strength . And as it is the happiness of the Age , so is it the peculiar goodness of the best of Kings , that we may praise his Subjects without offending him : doubtless it proceeds from a just confidence of his own virtue , which the lustre of no other can be so great as to darken in him : for the Good or the Valiant are never safely praised under a ●ad or a degenerate Prince . But to return from this digression to a farther account of my Poem , I must crave leave to tell you , that as I have endeavoured to adorn it with noble thoughts , so much more to express those thoughts with elocution . The composition of all Poems is or aught to be of wit , and wit in the Poet , or wit writing , ( if you will give me leave to use a Schoo● distinction ) is no other than the faculty of imagination in the writer , which , like a nimble Spaniel , beats ove● and ranges through the field of Memory , till i● spring's the Quarry it hunted after ; or , without metaphor , which searches over all the memory for the species or Ideas of those things which it designs to represent ▪ Wit written , is that which is well defined , the happy result of thought , or product of that imagination . But to proceed from wit in the general notion of it , to the proper wit of an Heroic or Historical Poem , I judge it chiefly to consist in the delightful imaging of persons , actions , passion's , or things . 't is not the jerk o● sting of an Epigram , nor the seeming contradiction of a poor Antithesis , ( the delight of an ill judging Audience in a Play of Rhyme ) nor the jingle of a more poor Paranomasia : neither is it so much the morality of a grave sentence , affected by Lucan , but more sparingly used by Virgil ; but it is some lively and apt description , dressed in such colours of speech , that it sets before your eyes the absent object , as perfectly and more delightfully than nature . So then , the first happiness of the Poet's imagination is properly Invention , or finding of the thought ; the second is Fancy , or the variation , driving or moulding of that thought , as the judgement represents it proper to the subject ; the third is Elocution , or the Art of clothing and adorning that thought so found and varied , in apt , significant and sounding words : the quickness of the Imagination is seen in the Invention , the fertility in the Fancy , and the accuracy in the Expression . For the two first of these Ovid is famous amongst the Poets , for the latter Virgil. Ovid images more often the movements and affections of the mind , either combating between two contrary passions , or extremely discomposed by one : his words therefore are the least part of his care , for he pictures Nature in disorder , with which the study and choice of words is inconsistent . This is the proper wit of Dialogue or Discourse , and , consequently , of the Drama , where all that is said is to be supposed the effect of sudden thought ; which , though it excludes not the quickness of wit in repartees , yet admits not a too curious election of words , too frequent allusions , or use of Tropes , or , in fine , any thing that shows remoteness of thought , or labour in the Writer . On the other side , Virgil speaks not so often to us in the person of another , like Ovid , but in his own , he relates almost all things as from himself , and thereby gains more liberty than the other , to express his thoughts with all the graces of elocution , to write more figuratively , and to confess , as well the labour as the force of his imagination . Though he describes his Dido well and naturally , in the violence of her passions , yet he must yield in that to the Myrrah , the Biblis , the Althaea , of Ovid ; for , as great an admirer of him as I am , I must acknowledge , that , if I see not more of their Souls then I see of Dido's , at least I have a greater concernment for them : and that convinces me that Ovid has touched those tender strokes more delicately than Virgil could . But when Action or persons are to be described , when any such Image is to beset before u● , how bold , how masterly are the strokes of Virgil ! we see the objects he represents us with in their native figures , in their proper motion's ; but we so see them , as our own eyes could never have beheld them so beautiful in themselves . We see the Soul of the Poet , like that universal one of which he speaks , informing and moving through all his pictures , Totamque in●usa per artus mens agitat motem , & magno se corpore miscet ; we behold him embellishing his Images , as he makes Venus breathing beauty upon her son . Aeneas . 

— lumenque juventae 
Purpureum , & laetos oculis afflârat honores : 
Quale manus addunt Ebori decus , aut ubi flavo 
Argentum , pariusve lapis circundatur auro . 


See his tempest , his Funeral sport's , his Combat of Turnus and Aeneas , and in his Georgics , which I esteem the Divinest part of all this writings , the Plague , the Country , the Battle of Bulls , the labour of the Bees , and those many other excellent Images of Nature , most of which are neither great in themselves , nor have any natural ornament to bear them● up : but the words wherewith he describes them are so excellent , that it might be well applied to him which was said by Ovid , Materiam superabat● opus : the very sound of his words has often somewhat that i● connatural to the subject , and while we read him , we sit , as in a ●lay , beholding the Scenes of what he represents . To perform this , he made frequent use of Tropes which you know change the nature of a known word , by applying it to some other signification : and this is it which Horace means in this Epistle to the Pisos . Dixeris egregie notum si callida verbum 
Reddiderit junctura novum — 


But I am sensible I have presumed too far , to entertain you with a rude discourse of that Art , which you both know so well , and put into practice with so much happiness . Yet before I leave Virgil , I must own the vanity to tell you , and by you the world , that he has been my Master in this Poem : I have followed him every where , I know not with what success , but I am sure with diligence enough : my Images are many of them copied from him , and the rest are imitations of him . My expressions also are as near as the Idioms of the two Languages would admit of in translation . And this , Sir , I have done with that boldness , for which I will stand accountable to any of our little Critics , who , perhaps , are not better acquainted with him than I am . Upon your first perusal of this Poem , you have taken notice of some words which I have innovated ( if it be too bold for me to say re●ined ) upon his Latin ; which , as I offer not to introduce into English prose , so I hope they are neither improper , nor altogether unelegant in Verse ; and , in this , Horace will again defend me . Et nova , ●fictaque nuper habebunt verba fidem , si 
Graeco fonte cadant , parcè detorta — 


The inference is exceeding plain ; for if a Roman Poet might have liberty to coin a word , supposing only that it was derived from the Greek , we put into a Latin termination , and that he used this liberty but seldom , and with modesty : How much more justly may I challenge that privilege to do it with the same praerequisits , from the best and most judicious of Latin Writers ? In some places , where either the fancy , or the words , were his , or any others , I have noted it in the Margin , that I might not seem a Plagiary : in others I have neglected it , to avoid as well the tediousness , as the affectation of doing it t●o often . Such descriptions or images , well wrought , which I promise no● for mine , are , as I have said , the adequate delight of heroic Poesy , for they beget admiration , which is its proper object ; as the images of the Burlesque , which is contrary to this , by the same reason beget laughter ; for the one shows Nature beautified , as in the picture of a fair Woman , which we all admire ; the other shows her deformed , as in that of a Lazar , or of a fool with distorted face and antique gestures , at which we cannot forbear to laugh , because it is a deviation from Nature . But though the same images serve equally for the Epique Poesy , and for the Historique and Panegyrique , which are branches of it , yet a several sort of Sculpture is to be used in them : if some of them are to be like those of Juvenal , Stantes in curribus Aemiliani , Heroes drawn in their triumphal Chariots , and in their full proportion ; others are to be like that of Virgil , Spi●antia mollius aera : there is somewhat more of softness and tenderness to be shown in them . You will soon find I write not this without concern . Some who have seen a paper of Verses which I wrote last year to her Highness the Duchess , have accused them of that only thing I could defend in them ; they have said I did humi serpere , that I wa●ted not only height of fancy , but dignity of words to set it off ; I might well answer with that of Horace , Nunc non erat his locus , I knew I addressed them to a Lady , and accordingly I affected the softness of expression , and the smoothness of measure , rather than the height of thought ; and in what I did endeavour , it is no vanity to say , I have succeeded , I detest arrogance , but there is some difference betwixt that and a just defence . But I will not farther bribe your candour , or the Readers . I leave them to speak for me , and , if they can , to make out that character , not pretending to a greater , which I have given them . 

Verses to her Highness the DUCHESS , on the memorable Victory gained by the DUKE against the Hollanders , June the 3. 1665. and on Her journey afterwards into the North.  

MADAM , 

When , for our ●akess , your Hero you resigned 
To swelling Seas , and every faithless wind ; 
When you released his courage , and set free 
A valour fatal to the Enemy , 
You lodged your Countries carès within your breast ; 
( The mansion where soft Love should only rest : ) 
And ere our foes abroad were overcome , 
The noblest conquest you had gained at home . 
Ah , what concerns did both your Souls divide ! 
Your Honour gave us what your Love denied : 
And 't was for him much easier to subdue 
Those foes he fought with , then to part from you . 
That glorious day , which two such Navies saw , 
As each , unmatched , might to the world give Law. 
Neptune , yet doubtful whom he should obey , 
Held to them both the Trident of the Sea : 
The winds were hushed , the waves in ranks were cast , 
As awfully as when God's people past : 
Those , yet uncertain on whose sails to blow , 
These , where the wealth of Nations ought to flow . 
then with the Duke your Highness ruled the day : 
While all the brave did his command obey . 
The fair and pious under you did pray . 
How powerful are chaste vows ! the wind and tide 
You bribed to combat on the English side . 
Thus to your much loved Lord you did convey 
An unknown succour , sent the nearest way . 
New vigour to his wearied arms you brought ; 
( So Moses was upheld while Israel fought . ) 
While , from afar , we heard the Canon play , 
Like distant Thunder on a shiny day , 
For absent friends we were ashamed to fear , 
When we considered what you ventured there . 
Ships , Men and Arms our Country might restore , 
But such a Leader could supply no more . 
With generous thoughts of conquest he did burn , 
Yet fought not more to vanquish then return . 
Fortune and victory he did pursue , 
To bring them , as his Slaves , to wait on you . 
Thus Beauty ravished the rewards of Fame , 
And the Fair triumphed when the Brave o'rcame . 
then , as you meant to spread another way 
By Land your Conquests far as his by Sea , 
Leaving our Southern Clime , you marched along 
The stubborn North , ten thousand Cupid's strong . 
Like Commons the Nobility resort 
In crowding heaps , to fill your moving Court : 
To welcome your approach the Vulgar run , 
Like some new Envoy● from the distant Sun. 
And Country Beauties by their Lovers go , 
Blessing themselves , and wondering at the show . 
So when the newborn Phoenix first is seen , 
Her feathered Subjects all adore their Queen . 
And , while she makes her progress through the East , 
From every grove her numerous train's increased : 
Each Poet of the air her glory sings , 
And round him the pleased Audience clap their wings . 
And now , Sir , 't is time I should relieve you from the tedious length of this account . You have better and more profitable employment for your hours , and I wrong the Public to de●ain you longer . In conclusion , I must leave my Poem to you with all its faults , which hope to find fewer in the printing by your emendations I know you are not of the number of those , of whom th● younger Pliny speaks , Nec sunt parum multi qu● carpere amicos suos judicium vocant ; I am rathe● too secure of you on that side . Your candour in pardoning my errors may make you more remiss in correcting them ; if you will not withal consider that they come into the world with your approbation , and through you● hands . I beg from you the greatest favour you can con●e●● upon an absent person , since I repose upon your management what is dearest to me , my Fame and Reputation & therefore I hope it will stir you up to make my Poem fairer by many of your blots ; if not , you know the stor● of the Gamester who married the rich man's daughter● and when her father denied the portion , christened 〈◊〉 the children by his surname , that if , in conclusion , the must beg , they should do so by one name , as well as 〈◊〉 the other . But since the reproach of my faults wi●● light on you , 't is but reason I should do you that justic● to the Readers , to let them know that if there be an● thing tolerable in this Poem , they owe the Argument to your choice , the writing to your encouragement , th● correction to your judgement , and the care of it to you● friendship , to which he must ever acknowledge himself to own all things , who is , 

SIR , The most obedient and most faithful of your Servants , JOHN DRYDEN . From Charleton in Wiltshire , Novem. 10. 1666.  

To the Readers . 

Notwithstanding the diligence which has been used in my absence , some faults have escaped the Pr●ss : and I have so many 〈◊〉 my own to answer for , that I am not willing to be charged with those ●f the 〈◊〉 . I have only noted the grossest of them , not such as by 〈…〉 have consou●ded the se●se , but such as by mistaken wo●dss ●ave corrupted it . 

ERRATA . 

Page 4. line 3. for an read 〈◊〉 page 5. in the Not●ss , read thus , ponti armenta & mag●as pascit , etc. page 8. line 2. for under●ook ▪ read 〈◊〉 ▪ page 10. in the 〈◊〉 , for nau●●agiunt est read 〈…〉 page 15. line 3. 〈◊〉 read a loud . ibid. line 10. ●or in distant order read in dreadful ●●der . page 33. line 3. for own●ead ●ead one . ibid. line 16. read , and as the Surgeons . page 41. in the ●ote to the second S●anza , for 〈◊〉 vicis , read solisque vias . page 47. line 3. for flots read flats . page 49. line 15. for Ʋerro read Va●ro . page 53. line 5. for smiles read smile . ibid. line 11. for falling 〈◊〉 p●●ling . ibid. line 7. for open read tender . ibid. in the note , for ac●rude●et read accenderet . page 63 line 2. for night has read night-●agss . 

Imprimatur . 

Roger L'estrange Novem. 22. 1666.  

ANNUS MIRABILIS : The YEAR of WONDERS , MDCLXVI . 

1.  

IN thriving Arts long time had Holland grown , 
Crouching at home , and cruel when abroad : 
Scarce leaving us the means to claim our own . 
Our King they courted , & our Merchants awed . 
2.  

Trade , which like blood should circularly flow , 
Stopped in their Channels , found its freedom lost : 
Thither the wealth of all the world did go , 
And seemed but shipwrecked on so base a Coast.  
3.  

For them alone the Heavens' had kindly heat , 
In Eastern Quarries ripening precious Dew : 
For them the Idumaean Balm did sweated , 
A●d in hot Ceilon Spicy Forests grew . 
4.  

The Sun but seemed the Lab'rer of their Year ; 
Each waxing Moon supplied her watery store , 
To swell those Tides , which from the Line did bear 
Their brimful Vessels to the Belg'an shore . 
5.  

Thus mighty in her Ships , stood Carthage long , 
And swept the riches of the world from far ; 
Yet stooped to Rome , lesle wealth , but more strong : 
And this may prove our second Punic War.  
6.  

What peace can be where both to one pretend ? 
( But they more diligent , and we more strong ) 
Or if a peace , it soon must have an end 
For they would grow too powerful were it long . 
7.  

Behold two Nations then , engaged so far , 
That each seav'n years the fit must shake each Land 
Where France will side to weaken us by War , 
Who only can his vast designs withstand . 
8.  

See how he feeds th' Iberian with delays , 
To render us his timely friendship vain ; 
And , while his secret Soul on Flanders preys , 
He rocks the Cradle of the Babe of Spain . 
9  

Such deep designs of Empire does he lay , 
O'er them whose cause he seems to take in hand . 
And , prudently , would make them Lords at Sea , 
To whom with ease he can give Laws by land  
10.  

This saw our King ; and long within his breast 
His pensive counsels balanced too and from ; 
He grieved the Land he freed should be oppressed , 
And he lesle for it then Usurpers do . 
11.  

His generous mind the fair Ideas drew 
Of Fame and Honour which in dangers lay ; 
Where wealth , like fruit an precipices , grew , 
Not to be gathered but by Birds of prey . 
12.  

The loss and gain each fatally were great ; 
And still his Subjects called aloud for war : 
But peaceful Kings o'er martial people set , 
Each others poise and counterbalance are . 
13.  

He , first , surveyed the charge with careful eyes , 
Which none but mighty Monarches could maintain ; 
Yet judged , like vapours that from Limbecks rise , 
It would in richer showers descend again . 
14.  

At length resolved t'assert the watery Ball , 
He in himself did whole Armadoes bring : 
Him , aged Seamen might their Master call , 
And choose for General were he not their King.  
15.  

It seems as every Ship their Sovereign knows , 
His awful summons they so soon obey ; 
So here the skaly Herd when Proteus blows , 
And so to pasture follow through the Sea.  
16.  

To see this Fleet upon the Ocean move 
Angels drew wide the Curtains of the skies : 
And Heaven , as if their wanted Lights above , 
For Tapers made two glareing Comets rise . 
17.  

Whether they unctuous Exhalations are , 
Fired by the Sun , or seeming so alone , 
Or each some more remote and slippery Star , 
Which loses footing when to Mortals shown . 
18.  

Or one that bright companion of the Sun , 
Whose glorious aspect sealed our newborn King ; 
And now a round of greater years begun , 
New influence from his walks of light did bring . 
19  

Victorious York did , first , with famed success , 
To his known valour make the Dutch give place : 
Thus Heaven our Monarch's fortune did confess , 
Beginning conquest from his Royal Race . 
20.  

But since it was decreed , Auspicious King , 
In Britain's right that thou shouldst wed the Main , 
Heaven , as a gage , would cast some precious thing 
And therefore doomed that Lawson should be slain . 
21.  

Lawson amongst the foremost met his fate , 
Whom Sea-green Sirens from the Rocks lament : 
Thus as an offering for the Graecian State , 
He first was killed who first to Battle went.  
22.  

Their Chief blown up , in air , not waves expired , 
To which his pride presumed to give the Law : 
The Dutch confessed Heaven present , and retired , 
And all was Britain the wide Ocean saw . 
23.  

To nearest Ports their shattered Ships repair , 
Where by our dreadful Canon they lay awed : 
So reverently men quit the open air 
When thunder speaks the angry Gods abroad . 
24.  

And now approached their Fleet from India , fraught 
With all the riches of the rising Sun : 
And precious Sand from Southern Climates brought , 
( The fatal Regions where the War begun . ) 
25.  

Like hunted Castor's , conscious of their store , 
Their waylaid wealth to Norway's coasts they bring : 
There first the North's cold bosom Spices bore , 
And Winter brooded on the Eastern Spring . 
26.  

By the rich scent we found our perfumed prey , 
Which flanked with Rocks did close in covert lie : 
And round about their murdering Canon lay , 
At once to threaten and invi●e the eye . 
27.  

Fiercer than Canon , and then Rocks more hard , 
The English undertaken th' unequal War : 
Seven Ships alone , by which the Port is barred , 
Besiege the indies , and all Denmark dare . 
28.  

These fight like Husbands , but like Lovers those : 
These fain would keep , and those more fain enjoy ▪ 
And to such height their frantic passion grows , 
That what both love , both hazard to destroy . 
29.  

Amid whole heaps of Spices lights a Ball , 
And now their Odours armed against them fly : 
Some preciously by shattered Porc'lain fall , 
And some by Aromatic splinters die . 
30.  

An though by Tempests of the prize bere●t , 
In Heaven's inclemency some ease we find : 
Our foes we vanquished by our valour left , 
And only yielded to the Seas and Wind.  
31.  

Nor wholly lost we so deserved a prey ; 
For storms , repenting , part of it restored : 
Which , as a tribute from the Balthick Sea , 
The British Ocean sent her mighty Lord  
32.  

Go , Mortals , now , and vex yourselves in vain 
For wealth , which so uncertainly must come : 
When what was brought so far , and with such pain , 
Was only kept to lose it nearer home . 
33.  

The Son , who , twice three month 's on th' Ocean tossed , 
Prepared to tell what he had passed before , 
Now sees , in English Ships the Holland Coast , 
And Parents arms in vain stretched from the shore . 
34.  

This careful Husband had been long away , 
Whom his chaste wife and little children mourn ; 
Who on their fingers learned to tell the day 
On which their Father promised to return . 
35.  

Such are the proud designs of human kind , 
And so we suffer Shipwreck every where ! 
Alas , what Port can such a Pilot find , 
Who in the night of Fate must blindly steer ! 
36.  

The undistinguished seeds of good and ill 
Heaven , in his bosom , from our knowledge hides ; 
And draws them in contempt of human skill , 
Which oft , for friends , mistaken foes provides . 
37.  

Let Munster's Prelate ever be accursed , 
In whom we seek the Germane faith in vain : 
Alas , that he should teach the English first 
That fraud and avarice in the Church could reign ! 
38.  

Happy who never trust a Strangers will , 
Whose friendship 's in his interest understood ! 
Since money given but tempts him to be ill 
When power is too remote to make him good . 
39  

●ill now , alone the Mighty Nations striven : 
The rest , at gaze , without the Lists did stand : 
●nd threatening France , placed like a painted ●ove , 
Kept idle thunder in his lifted hand . 
40.  

That Eunuch Guardian of rich Holl●●● trade , 
Who envies us what he wants 〈◊〉 enjoy ! 
Whose noisefull valour does no foe invade , 
And weak assistance will his friends destroy . 
41.  

Offended that we fought without hi● 〈◊〉 , 
He takes this time his secret ha●e to show : 
Which Charles does with a mind so calm receive ▪ 
As one that neither seeks , nor 〈◊〉 his foe . 
42.  

With France , to aid the Dutch , the Danes unite : 
France as their Tyrant , Denmark as their Slave . 
But when with one three Nations join to fight , 
They silently confess that one more brave . 
43.  

Lewis had chased the English from his shore ; 
But Charles the French as Subjects does invite . 
Would Heaven for each some Solomon restore , 
Who , by their mercy , may decide their right 
44.  

Were Subjects so but only buy their choice , 
And not from Birth did forced Dominion take , 
Our Prince alone would have the public voice ▪ 
And all his Neighbours Realms would deserts make . 
45.  

He without fear a dangerous War pursues , 
Which without rashness he began before . 
As Honour made him first the danger choose , 
So still he makes it good on virtues score . 
46.  

The doubled charge his Subjects love supplies , 
Who , in that bounty , to themselves are kind : 
So glad Egyptians see their Nilus rise , 
And in his plenty their abundance find . 
47.  

With equal power he does two Chiefs create , 
Two such , as each seemed worthiest when alone : 
●ach able to sustain a Nations fate , 
Since both had found a greater in their own . 
48.  

●oth great in courage , Conduct and in Fame , 
Yet neither envious of the others praise . 
Their duty , faith , and interest too the same . 
●ike mighty Partners equally they raise . 
49.  

The Prince long time had courted Fortune's love , 
But once possessed did absolutely reign ; 
●hus with their Amazons the Heroes striven , 
And conquered first those Beauties they would gain . 
50.  

●he Duke , beheld , like Scipio , with disdain 
That Carthage , which he ruined , rise once more : 
And shaken aloft the Fasces of the Main , 
To fright those Slaves with what they felt before . 
51.  

Together to the watery Camp they haste , 
Whom Matrons passing , to their children sho● 
Infants first vows for them to Heaven are cast , 
And future people bless them as they go . 
52.  

With them no riotous pomp , nor As●an train , 
TO infect a Navy with their gaudy fears : 
To make flow fights , and victories but vain ; 
But war ; severely , like itself , appears . 
53.  

Diffusive of themselves , where e'er they pass , 
They make that warmth in others they expect 
Their valour works like bodies on a glass , 
And does its Image on their men project . 
54.  

Our Fleet divides , and strait the Dutch appea● 
In number , and a famed Commander , bold : 
The Narrow Seas can scarce their Navy bear , 
Or crowded Vessels can their Soldiers hold . 
55.  

The Duke , lesle numerous , but in courage more , 
On wings of all the winds to combat fly's : 
His murdering Guns aloud defiance roar , 
And bloody Crosses on his Flag-staffs rise . 
56.  

Both furl their sails , and strip them for the fight , 
Their folded sheets dismiss the useless air : 
th' Elean Plains could boast no nobler sight , 
When struggling Champions did their bodies bare . 
57  

Born each by other in a distant Line , 
The Sea-built Forts in distant order move : 
So vast the noise , as if not Fleets did join , 
But Lands unfixed , and floating Nations , striven . 
58.  

Now passed , on either side they nimbly tack , 
Both strive to intercept and guide the wind : 
And , in its eye , more closely they come back 
To finish all the deaths they left behind . 
59  

On high-raised Decks the haughty Belgians ride , 
Beneath whose shade our humble Frigates go : 
Such port the Elephant bears , and so defied 
By the Rhinocero's her unequal foe . 
60.  

And as the built , so different is the fight ; 
Their mounting shot is on our sails designed : 
Deep in their hulls our deadly bullets light , 
And through the yielding planks a passage find ▪ 
61.  

Our dreaded Admiral from far they threat , 
Whose battered rigging their whole wa● receives ▪ 
All bare , like some old Oak which tempests beaten , 
He stands , and sees below his scattered leaves . 
62.  

Heroes of old , when wounded , shelter sought , 
But he , who meets all danger with disdain , 
Even in their face his ship to Anchor brought , 
And Steeple high stood propped upon the Main . 
63.  

At this excess of courage , all amazed , 
The foremost of his foes a while withdraw . 
With such respect in entered Rome they gazed , 
Who on high Chairs the Godlike Fathers saw . 
64.  

And now , as where Patroclus' body lay , 
Here trojan Chiefs advanced , & there the Greek : 
Ours o●r the Duke their pious wings display , 
And theirs the noblest spoils of Britain seek . 
65.  

Mean time , his busy Mariners he hasts ; 
His shattered sails with rigging to restore : 
And willing Pines ascend his broken Masts , 
Whose lofty heads rise higher than before . 
66.  

Strait to the Dutch he turns his dreadful prow , 
more fierce th'important quarrel to decide . 
Like Swans , in long array his Vessels show , 
Whose crests , advancing , do the waves divide . 
67.  

They charge , re-charge , and all along the Sea 
They drive , and squander the huge belgian Fleet. 
Berkley alone who nearest Danger lay , 
Did a like fate with lost Creusa meet . 
68  

The night comes on , we , eager to pursue 
The Combat still , and they ashamed to leave : 
Till the last streaks of dying day withdrew , 
And doubtful Moonlight did our rage deceive . 
69.  

In th' English Fleet each ship resounds with joy , 
And loud applause of their great Lead'rs fame . 
In fiery dreams the Dutch they still destroy , 
And , slumbering , smile at the imagined flame . 
70.  

Not so the Holland Fleet , who tired and done , 
Stretched on their decks like weary Oxen lie : 
Faint swea●ss all down their mighty members run , 
( Vast bulks which little souls but ill supply . ) 
71.  

In dreams they fearful precipices tread , 
Or , shipwrecked , labour to some distant shore : 
Or in dark Churches walk among the dead : 
They wake with horror , & dare sleep no more . 
72.  

The morn they look on with unwilling eyes , 
Till , from their Maintop , joyful news they hear 
Of ships , which by their mould bring new supplies , 
And in their colours Belgian Lions bear . 
73.  

Our watchful General had discerned , from far , 
This mighty succour which made glad the foe . 
He sighed , but , like a Father of the War , 
His face spoke hope , while deep his sorrows flow . 
74.  

His wounded men he first sends off to shore : 
( Never , till now , unwilling to obey . ) 
They , not their wounds but want of strength deplore , 
And think them happy who with him can stay . 
75.  

then , to the rest , Rejoice , ( said he ) to day 
In you the fortune of Great Britain lies : 
Among so brave a people you are they 
Whom Heaven has chose to fight for such a Prize . 
76.  

If number English courages could quell , 
We should at first have shunned , not met our foes ; 
Whose numerous sails the fearful only tell : 
Courage from hearts , and not from numbers grows . 
77.  

He said ; nor needed more to say : with haste 
To their known stations cheerfully they go : 
And all at once , disdaining to be last , 
Solicit every gale to meet the foe . 
78.  

Nor did th'incouraged Belgians long delay , 
But , bold in others , not themselves , they stood : 
So thick , our Navy scarce could sheer their way , 
But seemed to wander in a moving wood . 
79.  

Our little Fleet was now engaged so far , 
That , like the Swordfish in the Whale , they fought . 
The Combat only seemed a Civil War , 
Till through their bowels we our passage wrought . 
80.  

Never had valour , no not ours before , 
Done aught like this upon the Land or Main : 
Where not to be overcome was to do more 
Than all the Conquests former Kings did gain . 
81.  

The mighty Ghosts of our great Harry's rose , 
And armed Edward's looked , with anxious eyes , 
To see this Fleet among unequal foes , 
By which fate promised them their Charles should rise . 
82.  

Mean time the Belgians tack upon our Rear , 
And raking Chace-guns through our sterns they send : 
Close by , their Fireships , like jackals , appear , 
Who on their Lions for the prey attend . 
83.  

Silent in smoke of Canons they come on : 
( Such vapours once did fiery Cacus hide . ) 
In these the height of pleased revenge is shown , 
Who burn contented by another's side . 
84.  

Sometimes , from fight Squadrons of each Fleet , 
( Deceived themselves , or to preserve some friend ) 
Two grappling Aetna's on the Ocean meet , 
And English fires with Belgian flames contend . 
85.  

Now , at each Tack , our little Fleet grows lesle ; 
And , like maimed fowl , swim lagging on the Main . 
Their greater loss their numbers scarce confess 
While they loose cheaper than the English gain . 
86.  

Have you not seen when , whistled from the fist , 
Some Falcon stoops at what her eye designed , 
And , with her eagerness , the quarry missed , 
Strait fly's at check , and eclipse it down the wind . 
87.  

The dastard Crow , that to the wood made wing , 
And sees the Groves no shelter can afford , 
With her loud Kaws her Craven kind does bring , 
Who , safe in numbers cuff the noble Bird.  
88  

Among the Dutch thus Albemarl did far : 
He could not conquer , and disdained to fly . 
Past hope of safety , 't was his latest care , 
Like falling Cesar , decently to die . 
89.  

Yet pity did his manly spirit move 
To see those perish who so well had fought : 
And , generously , with his despair he striven , 
Resolved to live till he their safety wrought . 
90.  

Let other Muses write his prosperous fate , 
Of conquered Nations tell , and Kings restored : 
But mine shall sing of his eclipsed estate , 
Which , like the Sun's , more wonders does afford . 
91.  

He drew his mighty Frigates all before , 
On which the foe his fruitless force employs : 
His weak ones deep into his Ree● he bore , 
Remote from Guns as sick men are from noise . 
92.  

His fiery Canon did their passage guide , 
And foll'wing smoke obscured them from the foe . 
Thus Israel safe from the Egyptia●'s' pride , 
By flaming pillars , and by clouds did go . 
93.  

Elsewhere the Belgian force we did defeat , 
But here our courages did theirs subdue : 
So Xenophon once led that famed retreat , 
Which first the Asian Empire overthrew . 
94.  

The foe approached : and one , for his bold sin , 
Was sunk , ( as he that touched the Ark was ●lain ; ) 
The wild waves mastered him , and sucked him in , 
And smiling Eddies dimpled on the Main . 
95.  

This seen , the rest at awful distance stood ; 
As if they had been there as servants set , 
To stay , or to go on , as he thought good , 
And not pursue , but wait on his retreat . 
96.  

So Lybian Huntsmen , on some sandy plain , 
From shady coverts roused , the Lion chase : 
The Kingly beast roars out with loud disdain , 
And slowly moves , unknowing to give place . 
97.  

But if some one approach to dare his force , 
He swings his tail , and swiftly turns him round : 
With one paw seizes on his trembling Horse , 
And with the other tears him to the ground . 
98.  

Amid these toils succeeds the balmy night , 
Now hissing waters the quenched guns restore ; 
And weary waves , withdrawing from the fight , 
Lie lulled and panting on the silent shore . 
99  

The Moon shone clear on the becalmed flood , 
Where , while her beams like glittering silver play , 
Upon the Deck our careful General stood , 
And deeply mused on the succeeding day . 
100  

That happy Sun , said he , will rise again , 
Who twice victorious did our Navy see : 
And I alone must view him rise in vain , 
Without one ray of all his Star for me . 
101.  

Yet , like an English General will I die , 
And all the Ocean make my spacious grave . 
Women and Cowards on the Land may lie , 
The sea 's a Tomb that 's proper for the brave . 
102.  

Restless he passed the remnants of the night , 
Till the fresh air proclaimed the morning nigh , 
And burning ships , the Martyrs of the fight , 
With paler fires beheld the Eastern sky . 
103.  

But now , his Stores of Ammunition spent , 
His naked valour is his only guard : 
Rare thunders are from his dumb Cannon sent , 
And solitary Guns are scarcely heard . 
104.  

Thus far had Fortune power , here forced to stay , 
Nor longer durst with virtue be at strife : 
This , as a Ransom Albemarl did pay 
For all the glories of so great a life . 
105.  

For now brave Rupert from afar appears , 
Whose waving Streamers the glad General knows : 
With full spread Sails his eager Navy steers , 
And every Ship in swift proportion grows . 
106.  

The anxious Prince had heard the Cannon long , 
And from that length of time dire Omens drew 
Of English overmatched , and Dutch too strong , 
Who never fought three days but to pursue . 
107.  

then , as an Eagle , ( who , with pious care , 
Was beating widely on the wing for prey ) 
To her now silent Eiry does repair , 
And finds her callow Infants forced away . 
108.  

Stung with her love she stoops upon the plain , 
The broken air loud whistling as she fly's : 
She stops , and listens , and shoots forth again , 
And guide's her pinions by her young ones cries . 
109.  

With such kind passion hastes the Prince to fight , 
And spreads his flying canvas to the sound : 
Him , whom no danger , were he there , could fright , 
Now , absent , every little noise can wound . 
110.  

As , in a drought , the thirsty creatures cry , 
And gape upon the gathered clouds for rain , 
And first the Martlet meets it in the sky , 
And , with wet wings , joys all the feathered train ▪ 
111.  

With such glad hearts did our despairing men 
Salute th' appearance of the Prince's Fleet ▪ 
And each ambitiously would claim the Ken 
That with first eyes did distant safety meet . 
112.  

The Dutch , who came like greedy Hinds before , 
To reap the harvest their ripe ears did yield , 
Now look like those , when rolling thunders roar , 
And sheets of Lightning blast the standing field . 
113.  

Full in the Prince's passage , hills of sand 
And dangerous flats in secret ambush lay , 
Where the false tides skim o'er the covered Land , 
And Seamen with dissembled depths betray : 
114.  

The wily Dutch , who , like fallen Angels , feared 
This new Messiah's coming , there did wait , 
And round the verge their braving Vessels steered , 
To tempt his courage with so fair a bait . 
115.  

But he , unmoved , contemns their idle threat , 
Secure of fame when ere he please to fight : 
His cold experience tempers all his heat , 
And inbred worth does boasting valour ●light . 
116.  

Heroic virtue did his actions guide , 
And he the substance not th' appearance choose : 
To rescue one such friend he took more pride 
Than to destroy whole thousands of such foes . 
117.  

But , when approached , in strict embraces bound , 
Rupert and Albemarl together grow : 
He joys to have his friend in safety found , 
Which he to none but to that friend would owe.  
118.  

The cheerful Soldiers , with new stores supplied , 
Now long to execute their spleenful will ; 
And , in revenge for those three days they tried , 
Wish one , like Ioshuah's , when the Sun stood still . 
119.  

Thus reinforced , against the adverse Fleet 
Still doubling ours , brave Rupert leads the way . 
With the first blushes of the Morn they meet , 
And bring night back upon the newborn day . 
120.  

His presence soon blows up the kindling fight , 
And his loud Guns speak thick like angry men : 
It seemed as slaughter had been breathed all night , 
And death new pointed his dull dart again . 
121.  

The Dutch , too well his mighty Conduct knew , 
And matchless Courage since the former ●ight : 
Whose Navy like a stiff stretched cord did show 
Till he bore in , and bend them into flight . 
122.  

The wind he shares while half their Fleet offends 
His open side , and high above him shows , 
Upon the rest at pleasure he descends , 
And , doubly harmed , he double harms bestows . 
123.  

Behind , the General mends his weary pace , 
And sullenly to his revenge he sails : 
So glides some trodden Serpent on the grass , 
And long behind his wounded volume trails . 
124.  

th' increasing sound is born to either shore , 
And for their stakes the throwing Nations fear . 
Their passion , double with the Cannons roar , 
And with warm wishes each man combats there . 
125.  

Plied thick and close as when the fight begun , 
Their huge unwieldy Navy wastes away : 
So sicken waning Moons too near the Sun , 
And blunt their crescents on the edge of day . 
126.  

And now reduced on equal terms to fight , 
Their Ships like wasted Patrimonies show : 
Where the thin scattering Trees admit the light , 
And eat each others shadows as they grow . 
127.  

The warlike Prince had severed from the rest 
Two giant ships , the pride of all the Main ; 
Which , with his own , so vigorously he pressed , 
And flew so home they could not rise again . 
128.  

Already battered , by his Lee they lay , 
In vain upon the passing winds they call : 
The passing winds through their torn canvas play , 
And flagging sails on heartless Sailors fall . 
129.  

Their opened sides receive a gloomy light , 
Dreadful as day let in to shades below : 
Without , grim death rides barefaced in their sight , 
And urges entering billows as they flow . 
130.  

When one dire shot , the last they could supply , 
Close by the bored the Prince's Mainmast bore : 
All three now , helpless , by each other lie , 
And this offends not , and those fear no more . 
131.  

So have I seen some fearful Hare maintain 
A Course , till tired before the Dog she lay : 
Who , stretched behind her , pants upon the plain , 
Past power to kill as she to get away . 
132.  

With his lolled tongue he faintly licks his prey , 
His warm breath blows her flix up as she lies : 
She , trembling , creeps upon the ground away , 
And looks back to him with beseeching eyes . 
133.  

The Prince unjustly does his Stars accuse , 
Which hindered him to push his fortune on : 
For what they to his courage did refuse , 
By mortal valour never must be done . 
134.  

This lucky hour the wise Batavian takes , 
And warns his tattered Fleet to follow home : 
Proud to have so got off with equal stakes , 
Where 't was a triumph not to be overcome . 
135.  

The general 's force , as kept alive by fight , 
Now , not opposed , no longer can pursue : 
Lasting till Heaven had done his courage right , 
When he had conquered he his weakness knew . 
136.  

He casts a frown on the departing foe , 
And sighs to see him quit the watery field : 
His stern fixed eyes no satisfaction show , 
For all the glories which the Fight did yield . 
137.  

Though , as when Fiends did Miracles avow , 
He stands confessed even by the boastful Dutch , 
He only does his conquest disavow , 
And thinks too little what they found too much . 
138.  

Returned , he with the Fleet resolved to stay , 
no tender thoughts of home his heart divide : 
Domestic joys and cares he puts away , 
For Realms are households which the Great must guide . 
139.  

As those who unripe veins in mines explore , 
On the rich bed again the warm turf lay , 
Till time digests the yet imperfect Ore , 
And know it will be Gold another day . 
140.  

So looks our Monarch on this early fight , 
th' essay , and rudiments of great success , 
Which all-maturing time must bring to light , 
While he , like Heaven , does each days labour bless ▪ 
141.  

Heaven ended not the first or second day , 
Yet each was perfect to the work designed : 
God and King's work , when they their work surveyed ▪ 
And passive aptness in all subjects find . 
142.  

In burdened Vessels , first , with speedy care , 
His plenteous Stores do seasoned timber send 
Thither the brawny Carpenters repair , 
And as the Chyrurg'ons of maimed ships attend 
143.  

With Cord and Canvas from rich Hamburgh sent , 
His Navies molted wings he imps once more : 
Tall Norway Fir , their Masts in Battle spent , 
And English Oak sprung leaks and planks restore . 
144.  

All hands employed , the Royal work grows warm , 
Like labouring Bees on a long Summer's day , 
Some sound the Trumpet for the rest to swarm , 
And some on bells of tasted Lilies play : 
145.  

With glewy wax some new foundation lay 
Of Virgin combs , which from the roof are hung : 
Some armed within doors , upon duty stay , 
Or tend the sick , or educate the young . 
146.  

So here , some pick out bullets from the sides , 
Some drive old Okum through each seam & rift : 
Their lefthand does the Calking-iron guide , 
The rattling Mallet with the right they lift . 
147.  

With boiling Pitch another near at hand 
( From friendly Sweden brought ) the seams in-stops ▪ 
Which well paid o'er the salt-sea waves withstand , 
And shakes them from the rising beak in drops . 
148.  

Some the galled ropes with dawby Marling bind , 
Or cerecloth Masts with strong Tarpawling coats : 
To try new shrouds one mounts into the wind , 
And one , below , their ease or stifness notes . 
149.  

Our careful Monarch stands in Person by , 
His new-cast Canon's firmness to explore : 
The strength of big-corned powder love's to try , 
And Ball and Cartrage sorts for every bore . 
150.  

Each day brings fresh supplies of Arms and Men , 
And Ships which all last Winter were abroad : 
And such as fitted since the Fight had been , 
Or new from Stocks were fallen into the Road.  
151.  

The goodly London in her gallant trim , 
( The Phoenix daughter of the vanished old : ) 
Like a rich Bride does to the Ocean swim , 
And on her shadow rides in floating gold . 
152.  

Her Flag aloft spread ruffling to the wind , 
And sanguine Streamers seem the flood to fire : 
The Weaver charmed with what his Loom designed , 
Goes on to Sea , and knows not to retire . 
153.  

With roomy decks , her Guns of mighty strength , 
( Whose low-laid mouths each mounting billow laves : ) 
Deep in her draught , and warlike in her length , 
She seems a Sea-wasp flying on the waves . 
154.  

This martial Present , piously designed , 
The Loyal City give their best-loved King : 
And with a bounty ample as the wind , 
Built , fitted and maintained to aid him bring . 
155.  

By viewing Nature , Nature's Handmaid , Art , 
Makes mighty things from small beginnings grow : 
Thus fishes first to shipping did impart 
Their tail the Rudder , and their head the Prow . 
156.  

Some Log , perhaps , upon the waters swum 
An useless drift , which , rudely cut within , 
And hollowed , first a floating trough became , 
And cross some Riv'let passage did begin . 
157.  

In shipping such as this the Irish Kern , 
And untaught Indian , on the stream did glide : 
E●e sharp-keeled Boats to stem the flood did learn , 
Or fin-like Oars did spread from either side . 
158.  

Add but a Sail , and Saturn so appeared , 
When , from lost Empire , he to Exile went , 
And with the Golden age to Tiber steered , 
Where Coin & first Commerce he did invent . 
159.  

Rude as their Ships was Navigation , then ; 
no useful Compass or Meridian known : 
Coasting , they kep● the Land within their ken , 
And knew no North but when the Polestar shone . 
160.  

Of all who since have used the open Sea , 
then ▪ the bold English none more fame have wone : 
Beyond the Year , and out of Heavens' highway , 
They make discoveries where they see no Sun.  
161.  

But what ●o long in vain , and yet unknown , 
By poor mankinds benighted ▪ wit is ●ought , 
Shall in this Age to Britain first ●e shown , 
And hence be to admiring Nations taught ▪ 
162.  

The Ebbs of Tides , and their mysterious flow , 
We , as Arts Elements shall understand : 
And as by Line upon the Ocean go , 
Whose paths shall be familiar as the land  
163.  

Instructed ships shall sail to quick Commerce ; 
By which remotest Regions are allied : 
Which makes one City of the Universe , 
Where some may gain , and all may be supplied . 
164.  

Their , we upon our Globes last verge shall go , 
And view the Ocean leaning on the sky : 
From thence our rolling Neighbours we shall know . 
And on the Lunar world securely pry . 
165.  

This I foretell , from your auspicious care , 
Who great in search of God and Nature grow : 
Who best your wise Creator's praise declar● , 
Since best to praise his works is best to know . 
166.  

OH truly Royal ! who behold the Law , 
And rule of beings in your Make●● mind , 
And thence , like Limbecks , 〈◊〉 Ideas draw , 
To fit the levelled use of human kind . 
167.  

But first the toils of war we must endure , 
And , from th' injurious Duchess redeem the Seas . 
War makes the valiant of his right ●ecure , 
And gives up fraud to be chastised with ●ase . 
168.  

Already were the Belgians on our coast , 
Whose Fleet more mighty every day became , 
By 〈◊〉 success , which they did falsely boast , 
And ●ow , by first appearing seemed to claim . 
169.  

Designing , subtle , diligent , and close , 
They knew to manage War with wise delay : 
Yet all those arts their vanity did cross , 
And , by their pride , their prudence did betray . 
170.  

Nor stayed the English long : but , well supplied , 
Appear as numerous as th' insulting foe . 
The Combat now by courage must be tried , 
And the success the braver Nation show . 
171.  

There was the Plymouth Squadron new come in , 
Which in the straits last Winter was abroad : 
Which twice on Biscay's working Bay had been , 
And on the Midland Sea the French had awed . 
172.  

Old expert Allen , loyal all along , 
Famed for his action on the Smirna Fleet , 
And Holmes , whose name shall live in Epique Song , 
While Music Numbers , or while Verse has Fleet.  
173.  

Holmes , the Achates of the Generals fight , 
Who first bewitched our eyes with Guinny Gold : 
As once old Cato in the Roman's sight 
The tempting fruits of Africa did unfold . 
174.  

With him went Sprag , as bountiful as brave , 
Whom his high courage to command had brought : 
Harm●n , who did the twice fired Harry save , 
And in his burning ship undaunted fought . 
175.  

Young Hollis , on a Muse by Mars begot , 
Born , Cesar-like , to write and act great deeds : 
Impatient to revenge his fatal shot , 
His right hand doubly to his left succeeds . 
176.  

thousands were there in darker fame that dwell , 
Whose deeds some nobler Poem shall adorn ▪ 
And , though to me unknown , they , sure , fought well , 
Whom Rupert led , and who were British born . 
177.  

Of every size an hundred fight Sail , 
So vast the Navy now at Anchor rides , 
That underneath it the pressed waters fail , 
And , with its weight , it shoulders off the Tides . 
178.  

Now Anchors weighed , the Seamen shout so shrill , 
That Heaven & Earth and the wide Ocean ring's : 
A breeze from Westward waits their sails to fill , 
And rests , in those high beds , his downy wings . 
179.  

The wary Dutch this gathering storm foresaw , 
And durst not bide it on the English coast : 
Behind their treacherous shallowss they withdraw , 
And their lay snares to catch the British Host . 
180.  

So the false Spider , when her Nets are spread , 
Deep ambushed in her silent den does lie : 
And feels , far off , the trembling of her thread , 
Whose filmy cord should bind the struggling Fly.  
181.  

then , if at last , she find him fast beset , 
She issue's forth , and runs along her Loom : 
She joys to touch the Captive in her Net , 
And drags the little wretch in triumph home . 
182.  

The Belgians hoped that , with disordered haste , 
Our deep-cut keels upon the sands might run : 
Or , if with caution leisurely were passed , 
Their numerous gross might charge us one by one . 
183.  

But , with a fore-wind pushing them above , 
And swelling tide that heaved them from below , 
O'er the blind flots our warlike Squadrons move , 
And , with spread sails , to welcome Battle go . 
184.  

It seemed as there the British Neptune stood , 
With all his host of waters at command , 
Beneath them to submit th'officious flood : 
And , with his Trident , shoved them off the sand . 
185.  

To the pale foes they suddenly draw near , 
And summon them to unexpected fight : 
They start like Murderers when Ghosts appear , 
And draw their Curtains in the dead of night . 
186.  

Now Van to Van the foremost Squadrons meet , 
The midmost Battles hasting up behind , 
Who view , far off , the storm of falling Sleet , 
And hear their thunder rattling in the wind . 
187.  

At length the adverse Admirals appear : 
( The two bold Champions of each Country's right ) 
Their eyes describe the lists as they come near , 
And draw the lines of death before they fight . 
188.  

The distance judged for shot of every size , 
The Linstocks touch , the pond'rous ball expires : 
The vig'rous Seaman every porthole plies , 
And adds his heart to every Gun he fire's . 
189.  

Fierce was the fight on the proud Belgians side , 
For honour , which they seldom sought before : 
But now they by their own vain boasts were tied , 
And forced , at least in show , to prise it more . 
190.  

But sharp remembrance on the English part , 
And shame of being matched by such a foe : 
Rouse conscious virtue up in every heart , 
And seeming to be stronger makes them so . 
191.  

Nor long the Belgians could that Fleet sustain , 
Which did two Generals fates , and Cesar's bear . 
Each several Ship a victory did gain , 
As Rupert or as Albemarl were there . 
192.  

Their battered Admiral too soon withdrew , 
Unthanked by ours for his unfinished ●ight : 
But he the minds of his Dutch Masters knew , 
Who called that providence which we called flight . 
193.  

Never did men more joyfully obey , 
Or sooner understood the sign to fly : 
With such alacrity they bore away , 
As if to praise them all the States stood by . 
194.  

OH famous Leader of the Belgian Fleet , 
Thy Monument inscribed such praise shall wear 
As Ʋerro , timely flying , once did meet , 
Because he did not of his Rome despair . 
195.  

Behold that Navy which a while before 
Provoked the tardy English to the fight , 
Now draw their beaten vessels close to shore , 
As Larks lie dared to eat the Hobbies flight . 
196.  

Who ere would English Monuments surveyed , 
In other records may our courage know : 
But let them hide the story of this day , 
Whose fame was blemished by too base a foe . 
197.  

Or if too busily they will inquire 
Into a victory which we disdain : 
then let them know , the Belgians did retire 
Before the Patron Saint of injured Spain . 
198.  

Repenting England this revengeful day 
To Philip's Manes did an offering bring . 
England , which first , by leading them astray , 
Hatched up Rebellion to destroy her King.  
199.  

Our Fathers bend their baneful industry 
To check a Monarchy that slowly grew : 
But did not France or Holland's fate foresee , 
Whose rising power to swift Dominion flew . 
200.  

In fortune's Empire blindly thus we go , 
And wander after pathless destiny : 
Whose dark resorts since prudence cannot know . 
In vain it would provide for what shall be . 
201.  

But what ere English to the blessed shall go , 
And the fourth Harry or first Orange me●t : 
find him disowning of a Bourbon foe , 
And him detesting a Batavian Fleet.  
202.  

Now on their coasts our conquering Navy rides , 
Way-lays their Merchants , and their Land besets ▪ 
Each day new wealth without their care provides , 
They lie asleep with prizes in their nets . 
203.  

So , close behind ●ome Promontory lie 
The ●uge Leviathans to attend their prey : 
And give no chase , but swallow in the fry , 
Which through their gaping jaws mistake the way . 
204.  

Nor was this all : in Ports and Roads remote , 
Destructive Fires among whole Fleets we send : 
Triumphant flames upon the water float , 
And out-bound ships at home their voyage end . 
205.  

Those various Squadrons , variously designed , 
Each vessel freighted with a several load : 
Each Squadron waiting for a several wind , 
All find but one , to burn them in the Road.  
206.  

Some bo●nd for Guinny , golden sand to find , 
bore all the gauds the simple Natives wear : 
Some for the pride of turkish Courts designed , 
●or folded Turbans finest Holland bear . 
207.  

Some English Wool , vexed in a Belgian Loom , 
And into Cloth of spongy softness made : 
Did into France or colder De●mark doom , 
To ruin with worse ware our staple Trade . 
208.  

Our greedy Seamen rummage every hold , 
Smiles on the booty of each wealthier Chest : 
And , as the Priests who with their gods make bold , 
Take what they like , and sacrifice the rest . 
209.  

But ha ! ●how , unsincere are all our joys ! 
Which , sent from Heaven , like Lightning make no stay : 
Their falling taste the journey's length destroys , 
Or grief , sent post , o'rtakes them on the way . 
210.  

Swelled with our ●ate successes on the Foe , 
Which France and Holland wanted power to cross : 
We urge an unseen Fate to lay us low , 
And feed their envious eyes with English loss . 
211.  

Each Element his dread command obeys , 
Who makes or ruins with a smile or frown ; 
Who as by one he did our Nation raise , 
So now he with another pulls us down . 
212.  

Yet , London , Empress of the Northern Clime , 
By an high fate thou greatly didst expire ; 
Great as the worlds , which at the death of time 
Must fall , and rise a nobler frame by fire . 
213.  

As when some dire Usurper Heaven provides , 
To scourge his Country with a lawless sway : 
His birth , perhaps , some petty Village hides , 
And sets his Cradle out of Fortune's way : 
214.  

Till fully ripe his swelling fate breaks out , 
And hurries him to mighty mischiefs on : 
His Prince surprised at first , no ill could doubt , 
And wants the power to meet it when 't is known . 
215.  

Such was the rise of this prodigious fire , 
Which in mean buildings first obscurely bred , 
From thence did soon to open streets aspire , 
And strait to Palaces and Temples spread . 
216.  

The diligence of Trades and noiseful gain , 
And luxury , more late , asleep were laid : 
All was the nights , and in her silent reign , 
no sound the rest of Nature did invade . 
217.  

In this deep quiet , from what scource unknown , 
Those seeds of fire their fatal birth disclose : 
And first , few scattering sparks about were blown , 
Big with the flames that to our ruin rose . 
218.  

then , in some close-pent room it crept along , 
And , smouldering as it went , in silence fed : 
Till th'infant monster , with devouring strong , 
Walked boldly upright with exalted head . 
219.  

Now , like some rich or mighty Murderer , 
To great for prison , which he breaks with gold ▪ 
Who fresher for new mischiefs does appear , 
And dares the world to tax him with the old . 
220.  

So escapes th' insulting fire his narrow Jail , 
And makes small outlets into open air : 
There the fierce winds his open force assail , 
And beaten him downward to his first repair . 
221.  

The winds , like crafty Courtesans , withheld 
His flames from burning , but to blow them more : 
And , every fresh attempt , he is repelled 
With faint denials , weaker than before . 
222.  

And now , no longer letted of his prey , 
He leaps up at it with enraged desire : 
O'r-looks the neighbours with a wide survey , 
And nods at ●very house his threatening fire . 
223.  

The Ghosts of Traitors , from the Bridge descend , 
With bold Fanatic Spectres to rejoice : 
About the fire into a Dance they bend , 
And sing their Sabbath Notes with feeble voice . 
224.  

Our Guardian Angel saw them where he sat 
Above the Palace of our slumbering King , 
He sighed , abandoning his charge to Fate , 
And , drooping , oft look back upon the wing . 
225.  

At length the cra●kling noise and dreadful blaze , 
Called up some waking Lover to the sight : 
And long it was ere he the rest could raise , 
Whose heavy eyelids yet were full of night . 
226.  

The next to danger , hot pursued by fate , 
Half clothed , half naked , hastily retire : 
And frighted Mother strike their breasts , too late , 
For helpless Infants left amid the fire . 
227.  

Their cries soon waken all the dwellers near : 
Now murmuring noises rise in every street ▪ 
The more remote run s●umbling with their fear , 
And , in the dark , men justle as they meet . 
228.  

So weary Bees in little Cells repose ▪ 
But if night-robbers lift the well-stored Hive , 
An humming through their waxen City grows , 
And out upon each others wings they drive . 
229.  

Now streets grow thronged and busy as by day : 
Some run for Buckets to the hallowed Choir : 
Some cut the Pipes , and some the Engines play , 
And some more bold mount Ladders to the fire . 
230.  

In vain : for , from the East , a Belgian wind , 
His hostile breath through the dry rafters sent : 
The flames impelled , soon left their foes behind , 
And forward , with a wanton fury went.  
231.  

A Key of fire ran all along the shore , 
And lightened all the River with the blaze : 
The wakened Tides began again to roar , 
And wondering Fish in shining waters gaze . 
231.  

Old Father Thames raised up his reverend head , 
But feared the fate of Simoeis would return : 
Deep in his Ooze he sought his sedgy bed , 
And shrunk his waters back into his Urn.  
233.  

The fire , mean time , walks in a broader gross , 
To either hand his wings he opens wide : 
He wades the streets , & strait he reaches cross , 
And plays his longing flames on th' other side . 
234.  

At first they warm , then scorch , and then they take : 
Now with long necks from side to side they feed : 
At length , grown strong , their Mother fire forsake , 
And a new Colony of flames succeed . 
235.  

To every nobler portion of the Town , 
The curling billows roll their restless side : 
In parties now they straggle up and down , 
As Armies , unopposed , for prey divide . 
236.  

One mighty Squadron , with a side wind sped , 
Through narrow lanes his cumbered fire does haste : 
By powerful charms of gold and silver led , 
The Lombard Bankers and the Change to waste . 
237.  

Another backward to the 〈◊〉 would go , 
And slowly ea●s his way against the wind ▪ 
But the main body of the marching foe : 
Against th' Imperial Palace is designed . 
238.  

Now day appears , and with the day the King , 
Whose early care had robbed him of his rest : 
Far off the cracks of falling houses ring , 
And shrieks of subjects pierce his tender breast . 
239.  

Near as he draws , thick harbingers of smoke , 
With gloomy pillars , cover all the place : 
Whose little intervals of night are broke 
By sparks that drive against his Sacred Face . 
240.  

more than his Guards his sorrows made him known , 
And pious tears which down his cheeks did shower : 
The wretched in his grief forgot their own : 
( So much the pity of a King has power . ) 
241.  

He wept the flames of what he loved so well , 
And what so well had merited his love . 
For never Prince in grace did more excel , 
Or Royal City more in duty striven . 
242.  

Nor with an idle care did he behold : 
( Subjects may grieve , but Monarches must redress . ) 
He cheers the fearful , and commends the bold , 
And makes despairers hope for good success . 
243.  

Himself directs what first is to be done , 
And orders all the succours which they bring . 
The helpful and the good about him run , 
And form an Army worthy such a King.  
244.  

He sees the dire contagion spread so fast , 
That where it seizes , all relief is vain : 
And therefore must unwillingly lay waste 
That Country which would , else , the foe maintain . 
245.  

The powder blows up all before the fire : 
th' amazed flames stand gathered on a heap ; 
And from the precipices brinck retire , 
Afraid to venture on so large a leap . 
246.  

Thus fight fires a while themselves consume , 
But strait , like Turks , forced on to win or die ▪ 
They first lay ●ender bridges of their fume , 
And o'er the breach in unctuous vapours fly . 
247.  

Part stays for passage till a gust of wind 
Ships o'er their forces in a shining sheet : 
Part , creeping under ground , their journey blind , 
And , climbing from below , their fellows meet . 
248.  

Thus , to some desert plain , or old wood side , 
Dire night has come from far to dance their round : 
And o'er broad Rivers on their fiends they ride , 
Or sweep in clouds above the blasted ground . 
249.  

no help avails : for , Hydra-like , the fire , 
Lists up his hundred heads to aim his way . 
And scarce the wealth can one half retire , 
Before he rushes in to share the prey . 
250.  

The rich grow suppliant , & the poor grow proud : 
Those offer mighty gain , and these ask more . 
So void of pity is th' ignoble crowd , 
When others ruin may increase their store . 
251.  

As those who live by shores with joy behold 
Some wealth vessel split or stranded nigh ; 
And , from the Rocks , leap down for shipwrecked Gold , 
And seek the Tempest which the others fly . 
252.  

So these but wait the Owners last despair , 
And what 's permitted to the flames invade : 
Even from their jaws they hungry morsels tear , 
And , on their backs , the spoils of Vulcan lad . 
253.  

The days were all in this lost labour spent ; 
And when the weary King gave place to night , 
His Beams he to his Royal Brother lent , 
And so shone still in his reflective light . 
254.  

Night came , but without darkness or repose , 
A dismal picture of the general doom : 
Where Souls distracted when the Trumpet blows 
And half unready with their bodies come . 
255.  

Those who have homes , when home they do repair 
To a last lodging call their wandering friends . 
Their short uneasy sleeps are broke with care , 
To look how near their own destruction tends . 
256.  

Those who have none sit round where once it was , 
And with full eyes each wont room require : 
Haunting the yet warm ashes of the place , 
As murdered men walk where they did expire . 
257.  

Some stir up coals and watch the Vestal fire , 
others in vain from sight of ruin run : 
And , while through burning Lab'rinths they retire , 
With loathing eyes repeat what they would eat . 
258.  

The most , in fields , like herded beasts lie down ; 
To dews obnoxious on the grassy floor : 
And while their tabes in sleep their sorrows drown , 
Sad Parents watch the 〈◊〉 of their store . 
259.  

While by the motion of the flames they guess 
What streets are burning now , & what are near : 
An Infant , waking , to the paps would press ▪ 
And meets , instead of milk , a falling tea● . 
260.  

no thought can ease them but their Sovereign's care , 
Whose praise th' afflicted as their comfort sing : 
Even those whom want might drive to just despair , 
Think life a blessing under such a King.  
261.  

Mean time he sadly suffers in their grief , 
Out-weeps an Hermit , and out-prays a Saint : 
All the long night he studies their relief , 
How they may be supplied , and he may want . 
262.  

OH God , said he , thou Patron of my days , 
Guide of my youth in exile and distress ! 
Who me unfriended , brought'st by wondrous ways 
The Kingdom of my Fathers to possess . 
263.  

Be thou my Judge , with what unwearied care 
I since have laboured for my People's good : 
To bind the bruises of a Civil Wa● , 
And stop the issues of their wasting blood . 
264.  

thou , who hast taught me to forgive the ill , 
And recompense , as friends the good , mis●ed ; 
If mercy be a Precept of thy will , 
Return that mercy on thy Servant's head . 
265.  

Or , if my heedless Youth has stepped astray , 
Too soon forgetful of thy gracious hand : 
On me alone thy just displeasure lay , 
But take thy judgements from this mourning land  
266.  

We all have sinned , and thou hast laid us low , 
As humble Earth from whence at first we came : 
Like flying shades before the clouds we show , 
And shrink like Parchment in consuming 〈◊〉 . 
267.  

OH let it be enough what thou hast done , 
When spotted deaths ran armed through every street , 
With poisoned darts , which not the good could eat . 
The speedy could outfly , or valiant meet . 
268.  

The living few , and frequent funerals then , 
Proclaimed thy wrath on this forsaken place : 
And now those few who are returned again 
Thy searching judgements to their dwellings trace . 
269.  

OH pass not , Lord , an absolute decree , 
Or bind thy sentence unconditional : 
But in thy sentence our remorse foresee , 
And , in that foresight , this thy doom recall . 
270.  

Thy threatenings , Lord , as thine , thou mayst revoke : 
But , if immutable and fixed they stand , 
continue still thyself to give the stroke , 
And let not foreign foes oppress thy land  
271.  

th' Eternal heard , and from the Heavenly Choir , 
Choose out the Cherub with the flaming sword : 
And bade him swiftly drive th' approaching fire 
From where our Naval Magazines were stored . 
272.  

The blessed Minister his wings displayed , 
And like a shooting Star he cloven the night : 
He charged the flames , and those that disobeyed , 
He lashed to duty with his sword of light . 
273.  

The fugitive flames , chastised , went forth to prey 
On pious Structures , by our Fathers reared : 
By which to Heaven they did affect the way , 
E'er Faith in Churchmen without Works was heard . 
274.  

The wanting Orphans saw , with watery eyes , 
Their Founder's charity in dust laid low : 
And sent to God their ever-answered cries , 
( For he protects the poor who made them so . ) 
275.  

Nor could thy Fabric , Paul's , defend thee long , 
Though thou wert Sacred to thy Maker's praise : 
Though made immortal by a Poet's Song ; 
And Poet's Songs the Theban walls could raise . 
276.  

The daring flames peep 't in and saw from far , 
The awful beauties of the Sacred Choir : 
But , since it was profaned by Civil War , 
Heaven thought it fit to have it purged by fire . 
277.  

Now down the narrow streets it swiftly came , 
And , widely opening , did on both sides prey . 
This benefit we sadly owe the flame , 
If only ruin must enlarge our way . 
278.  

And now four days the Sun had seen our woes , 
Four ●ightss the Moon beheld th' incessant fi●e : 
It seemed as if the Stars more sickly rose , 
And farther from the ●eav'rish North retire . 
279.  

In th' Empyrean Heaven , ( the blessed abode ) 
The Thrones and the Dominions prostrate lie , 
Not daring to behold their angry God : 
And an hushed silence damps the tuneful sky . 
280.  

At length th' Almighty cast a pitying eye , 
And mercy softly touched his melting breast : 
He saw the town 's one half in rubbish lie , 
And eager flames give on to storm the rest . 
281.  

An hollow crystal Pyramid he takes , 
In firmamental waters dipped above ; 
Of it a broad Extinguisher he makes , 
And hoods the flames that to their quarry striven . 
282.  

The vanquished fires withdraw from every place , 
Or full with feeding , sink into a sleep : 
Each household Genius shows again his face , 
And , from the hearths , the little Lar creep . 
283.  

Our King this more than natural change beholds ; 
With sober joy his heart and eyes abound : 
To the All-good his lifted hands he folds , 
And thanks him low on his redeemed ground . 
284.  

As when sharp frosts had long constrained the earth , 
A kindly thaw unlocks it with mild rain : 
And first the tender blade peeps up to birth , 
And strait the green fields laugh with promised grain : 
285.  

By such degrees , the spreading gladness grew 
In every heart , which fear had froze before : 
The standing streets with so much joy they view , 
That with lesle grief the perished they deplore . 
286.  

The Father of the people opened wide 
His stores , and all the poor with plenty fed : 
Thus God's Anointed God'● own place supplied , 
And filled the empty with his daily bread . 
287.  

This Royal bounty brought its own reward , 
And , in their minds , so deep did print the sense : 
That if their ruins sadly they regard , 
't is but with fear the sight might drive him thence . 
289.  

But so may he live long , that Town to sway , 
Which by his Auspice they will nobler make , 
As he will hatch their ashes by his sta● , 
And not their humble ruins now forsake . 
290.  

They have not lost their Loyalty by fire ; 
Nor is their courage or their wealth so low , 
That from his Wars they poorly would retire , 
Or beg the pity of a vanquished foe . 
291.  

Not with more constancy the jews of ol● , 
By ●yrus from rewarded Exile sent : 
Their Royal City did in dust behold , 
Or with more vigour to rebuild it went.  
292.  

The utmost malice of their Stars is passed , 
And two dire Comets which have scourged the Town , 
In their own Plague and Fire have breathed their last , 
Or , dimly , in their sinking sockets frown . 
293.  

Now frequent Trines the happier lights among , 
And high-raised jove from his dark prison freed : 
( Those weights took off that on his Planet hung ) 
Will gloriously the new laid work succeed . 
294.  

Methinks already , from this Chemic flame , 
I see a City of more precious mould ▪ 
Rich as the Town which g●ves the indies name , 
With Silver paved , and all divine with Gold.  
295.  

Already , Labouring with a mighty fate , 
She shakes the rubbish from her mounting brow , 
And seems to have renewed her Cha●ters' date , 
Which Heaven will to the death of time allow . 
296.  

more great than human , now , and more August , 
New deified she from her fires does rise : 
Her widening streets on new foundations trust , 
And , opening , into larger parts she fly's . 
297.  

Before , she like some Shepherdess did show , 
Who sat to bathe her by a River's side : 
Not answering to her fame , but rude and low , 
Nor taught the beauteous Arts of Modern pride . 
298.  

Now , like a Maiden Queen , she will behold , 
From her high Turrets , hourly Suitors come : 
The East with Incense , and the West with Gold , 
Will stand , like Suppliants , to receive her doom . 
299.  

The silver Thames , her own domestic Flood , 
Shall bear her Vessels , like a sweeping Train ; 
And often wind ( as of his Mistress proud ) 
With longing eyes to meet her face again . 
300.  

The wealth Tagus , and the wealthier Rhine , 
The glory of their Towns no more shall boast : 
And Sein , That would with Belgian Rivers join , 
Shall find her lustre stained , and Traffic lost . 
301.  

The vent'rous Merchant , who designed more far , 
And touches on our hospitable shore : 
Charmed with the splendour of this Northern Star , 
Shall here unlade him , and departed no more . 
302.  

Our powerful Navy shall no longer meet , 
The wealth of France or Holland to invade : 
The beauty of this Town , without a Fleet , 
From all the world shall vindicate her Trade . 
303.  

And , while this famed Emporium we prepare ▪ 
The British Ocean shall such triumphs boast , 
That those who now disdain our Trade to share , 
Shall rob like Pirates o● our wealth Coast.  
304.  

Already we have conquered half the War , 
And the lesle dangerous part is left behind : 
Our trouble now is but to make them dare , 
And not so great to vanquish as to find . 
305.  

Thus to the Eastern wealth through storms we go ; 
But now , the Cape once doubled , fear no more : 
A constant Trade-wind will securely blow , 
And gently lay us on the Spicy shore . 
FINIS . 





 In Eastern Quarries , etc. Precious Sto●eses at fi●st are Dew , condensed and ●ardeaed by the warmth of the Su● , or subterranean Fires .  Each waxing , etc according to their opinion , who think that great hea● of waters under the L●ne is depressed into Tides by the Moon , towards the Pol●ss .  th' Iberian , the Spaniard .  Wh●● Prote●s' blows , or Caeruleus Proteus immania pouti armenta , & magnas poscit sub gurg●te Pho●as . Vi●g .  The Admiral of Holland .  Southern Climates , Guinny . The attempt at Berghen .  Such are , etc , from Petronius . Si , bene calculum ponas ubique naufragiunt est .  The Germane saith . Tacitus saith of them . Nullos mortalium side aut armis ante Germanos ●sse . War declared by France . Prince Rupert and Duke Albemarl sent to sea .  Future people , Examine insant●um futurusque populus . Pl● Jun. in pan . ad Traj . Duke of Albemarl's Battle , first day .  th' Elean , etc.  Where the Olympic Games were celebrated .  Lands unfixed , from Virgil : Credas innare revultas Cycladas , etc.  S●cond days Battle .  His face , etc , Spem vultu simular premit alto c●rde dolor●m . Virg.   The simile is Virgil is , Vestigia re●ro improperata refert , etc.   Weary waves , Statius Sylu. Nec trucibus fluviis idem sonus : occidit hor●or aeq●oris , ac tennis maria acclinata quiescunt .  The third of June , famous for two ●ormer Victories . Third day . Fourth days B●ttel .  So glides , etc ●●om Virgil Quum medii nexus , ●xtremoequ● 〈…〉 solvuntur ; tar●osque trahit sinus ulti●us orbs , etc.   From Horace : Quos opinius fallere & effugere est triumpl●us . His Majesty repairs the Fleet.   Fervet opus : the same similitude in Virgil. Loyal London described . Digression concerning Shipping and Navigation .  Extra anni solisque vicis . Virg.  By a more exact knowledge of Longitudes . Apostrophe to the Royal Society .  Levat ipse Tridenti , & vastas aperit Syrteses , etc. Virg.  Second Battle .  Peasant quia p●sse videntur . 〈◊〉  Patron Saint : St. James , on whose day this victory was gained .  Philip's Maa●ss : Philip the second , of Spain , against whom the Hollanders rebelling , were aided by Queen Elizabeth . Burning of the Fleet in the Vly by Sir Robert Holmes . Transitum to the Fire of London .  Quum mare quum tellus correptaque regia Coeli , ardeat , etc. Ovid.  Like crafty , etc.  Haec arte tractaba● cupidum virum , ut 〈◊〉 animum i●opia accrud●ret .  Sigaea igni freta lata relucent . Virg. King's Prayer . City's request to the King not to leave them .  M●xico .  Augusta , the old name of London . 