ABSALON AND ACHITOPHEL . A POEM . 

— Si Propius stes 
Te Capiet Magis — 


The Second Editon ; Augmented and Revised . 

TO THE READER . 

't is not my intention to make an apology for my Poem : Some will think it needs no excuse : and others will receive none . The design , I am sure , is honest : but he who draws his Pen for one party , must expect to make enemies of the other . 〈◊〉 Wit and Fool are consequents of Whig and Tory ; and every man is a Knave or an Ass to the contrary side . there 's a treasury of Merits in the fanatic Church , as well as in the Papist ; and a Pennyworth to be had of Saintship , Honesty , and Poetry , for the Loud , the Factious , and the Blockheads : But the longest Chapter in Deuteronomy has 〈◊〉 Curses enough for an Anti - Bromingham . My comfort is , their manifest prejudice to my Cause , will render their judgement of lesle Authority against me . Yet if a Poem have a Genius , it will force its own reception in the World. For there 's a sweetness in good Verse , which tickles even while it hurts : And , no man can be heartily angry with him , who pleases him against his william The commendation of Adverversaries , is the greatest triumph of a Writer ; because it never comes unless extorted . But I can be satisfied on more easy terms : If I hap to please the more moderate sort , I shall be sure of an honest party ; and , in all probability , of the best Judges ; for , the least concerned , are commonly the least corrupt : And I confess I have laid in for those , by rebating the Satire , ( where Justice would allow it ) from carrying too sharp an edge . They who can criticise so weakly , as to imagine I have done my worst , may be convinced at their own cost , that I can write severely , with more ease than I can gently . I have but 〈◊〉 at 〈◊〉 men's Follies , when I could have declaimed against their 〈◊〉 ; and other men's Virtues I have commended , as freely as I have 〈◊〉 their 〈◊〉 . And now , if you are a malicious Reader , I expect 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 return upon me , that I affect to be thought more impartial than I am . But if men are not to be judged by their Professions , God 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Commonwealths-men , for professing so plausibly for the Government . 〈◊〉 cannot be so unconscionable , as to charge me for not 〈◊〉 of my name ; for that would reflect too grossly upon your own party , who never dare , though they have the advantage of a Jury to secure them 

If you like not my Poem , the fault may possibly be in my writing ( though 't is hard for an Author to judge against himself ; ) But , more probably , 't is in your Morals , which cannot bear the truth of it . The violent , on both sides , will condemn the character of Absalon , as either too favourably , or too hardly drawn . But they are not the violent whom I desire to please ; The fault , on the right hand , is to Extenuate , Palliate and Indulge ; and , to confess freely , I have endeavoured to commit it . Besides the respect which I owe his Birth , I have a greater for his Heroic Virtues ; and David himself could not be more tender of the Young man's Life , than I would be of his Reputation . But , since the most excellent Natures are always the most easy ; and , as being such , are the soon perverted by ill Counsels , especially when baited with Fame and Glory ; 't is no more a wonder that he withstood not the temptation of Achitophel , than it was for Adam not to have resisted the two Devils , the Serpent and the Woman . The conclusion of the Story I purposely forbore to prosecute , because I could not obtain from myself to show Absalon unfortunate . The Frame of it was cut out but for a Picture to the waist ; and if the Draught be so far true , 't is as much as I designed . 

Were I the Inventor , who an only the Historian , I should certainly conclude the Piece with the reconcilement of Absalon to David ; And who knows but this may come to pass ? Things were not brought to an extremity where I left the Story ; there seems yet to be room left for a Composure , hereafter there may only be for Pity . I have not so much as an uncharitable wish against Achitophel , but am content to be accused of a good natured Error ; and , to hope with Origen , that the Devil himself may at last be saved . For which reason , in this Poem , he is neither brought to set his House in order , nor to dispose of his Person afterwards , as he in wisdom shall think sit . God is infinitely merciful , and his Vicegerent is only not so , because he is not Infinite . 

The true end of Satire , is the amendment of Vices by correction ; And he who writes honestly , is no more an enemy to the Offender , than the Physician to the Patient , when he prescribes harsh Remedies to an inveterate Disease ; for those are only in order to prevent the Surgeon's work of an Ense Rescindendum , which I wish not to my very enemies . To conclude all , If the Body Politic have any Analogy to the Natural , in my weak judgement , an Act of Oblivion were as necessary in a Hot , distempered State , as an Opiate would be in a raging Fever . 

To the unknown Author of this Admirable Poem . 

I Thought , forgive my sin , the boasted fire 
Of Poet's Souls did long ago expire ; 
Of Folly or of Madness did accuse 
The Wretch that thought himself possessed with Muse ; 
Laughed at the God within , that did inspire 
With more than human thoughts , the tuneful Choir ; 
But sure 't is more than Fancy or the Dream 
Of Rhimers slumbering by the Muse's stream . 
Some livelier spark of Heaven , and more refined 
From earthly dross , fills the great Poet's mind . 
Witness these mighty and immortal lines , 
Thro' each of which th' informing Genius shines . 
Scarce a Diviner flame inspired the King , 
Of whom thy Muse does so sublimely sing . 
Not David's Self could in a Nobler Verse 
His gloriously offending Son rehearse , 
Thomas in his Breast the Prophet's fury met , 
The Father's Fondness , and the poet 's Witgood  
Here all consent in Wonder and in Praise , 
And to the unknown Poet Altars raise . 
Which thou must needs accept with equal joy , 
As when Aeoenas heard the Wars of Troy ; 
Wrapped up himself in darkness and unseen , 
Extolled with Wonder by the Tyrian Queen . 
Sure thou already art secure of Fame ; 
Nor want'st new Glories to exalt thy Name : 
What Father else would have refused to own 
So great a Son as Godlike Absalon ? 
To the unknown Author of this Excellent Poem . 

Take it as earnest of a Faith renewed , 
Your Theme is vast , your Verse divinely good ; 
Where though the Nine their beauteous strokes repeat , 
And the turned lines on golden Anvils beaten , 
It looks as if they struck 'em at a heat . 
So all serenely great , so just , refined , 
Like Angels love to human seed inclined , 
It starts a Giant , and exalts the kind . 
't is spirit seen , whose fiery Atoms roll 
So brightly fierce , each syllable's a Soul : 
't is minature of man , but he 's all heart ; 
't is what the World would be , but wants the art . 
To whom even the Fanatics Altars raise , 
Bow in their own despite , and grin your praise . 
As if a Milton from the dead arose , 
Filled off his rust , and the right party choose . 
Nor , Sir , be shocked at what the gloomy say , 
Turn not your feet too inward nor too splay ; 
't is gracious all , and great ; push on your Theme , 
Lean your grieved head on David's Diadem ; 
David , that Rebel Israel's envy moved , 
David , by God , and all good men beloved . 
The Beauties of your Absalon excel , 
But more the Charms of Charming Annabel ; 
Of Annabel , than May's first morn , more bright ; 
Cheerful as Summer's Noon , and chaste as Winter's Night . 
Of Annabel , the Muse's dearest Theme , 
Of Annabel , the Angel of my dream . 
Thus let a broken Eloquence attend , 
And to your Masterpiece these shadows send . 
ABSALON and ACHITOPHEL . 

A POEM 

IN pious times , e'er Priest-craft did begin , 
Before Polygamy was made a sin ; 
When Man , on many , multiplied his kind , 
E'er one to one was , cursedly , confined ; 
When Nature prompted , & no law denied 
Promiscuous Use of Concubine and Bride ; 
then , Israel's Monarch , after Heavens own heart , 
His vigorous warmth did , variously , impart 
To Wives and Slaves ; And , wide as his Command , 
Scattered his Maker's Image through the land 
Michal , of Royal blood , the Crown did wear ; 
A Soil ungrateful to the Tiller's care ; 
Not so the rest ; for several Mothers bore 
To Godlike David several Sons before . 
But since like slaves his bed they did ascend , 
no True Succession could their seed attend . 
Of all this Numerous Progeny was none 
So beautiful so brave as Absalon : 
Whether , inspired by some diviner Lust , 
His Father got him with a greater Gust ; 
Or that his Conscious destiny made way , 
By manly beauty to Imperial sway . 
Early in Foreign fields he wone Renown 
With Kings and States allied to Israel's Crown ; 
In Peace the thoughts of War he could remove , 
And seemed as he were only born for love . 
What e'er he did , was done with so much ease , 
In him alone , 't was Natural to please 
His motions all accompanied with grace ; 
And Paradise was opened in his face . 
With secret Joy , indulgent David viewed 
His Youthful Image in his Son renewed : 
To all his wishes Nothing he denied ; 
〈…〉 
What faults he had ( for who from faults is free ? 
His Father could not , or he would not see . 
Some warm excesses , which the Law forbore , 
Were construed Youth that purged by boiling o'er ; 
And Amnon's Murder , by a specious Name , 
Was called a Just Revenge for injured Fame . 
Thus Praised , and Loved , the Noble Youth remained , 
While David , undistutbed in Zion reigned . 
But Life can never be sincerely blessed ; 
Heaven punishes the bad , and proves the best . 
The jews , a Headstrong , Moody , Murmuring race , 
As ever tried th' extent and stretch of grace ; 
God's pampered people whom , debauched with ease , 
no King could govern , nor no God could please ; 
( Gods they tried of every shape and size 
That God-smiths could produce , or Priests device ; ) 
These Adam-wits , too fortunately free , 
began to dream they wanted liberty ; 
And when no rule , no precedent was found 
Of men , by Laws lesle circumscribed and bound ; 
They led their wild desires to woods and Caves ; 
And thought that all but Savages were Slaves . 
They who , when Saul was dead , without a blow , 
Made foolish Isbosheth the Crown forgo ; 
Who banished David did from Hebron bring , 
And , with a General Shout , Proclaimed him King : 
Those very jews , who , at their very best , 
Their Humour more than Loyalty expressed , 
Now , wondered why , so long , they had obeyed 
An Idol-monarch which their hands had made , 
Thought they might ruin him they could create ; 
Or melt him to that Golden Calf , a State. 
But these were random bolts , no formed Design , 
Nor Interest made the Factious Crowd to join : 
The sober part of Israel , free from stain , 
Well knew the value of a peaceful reign : 
And , looking backward with a wise affright , 
saw Seams of wounds , dishonest to the sight : 
In contemplation of whose ugly Scars , 
They Cursed the memory of Civil Wars . 
The moderate sort of men , thus qualified , 
Inclined the Balance to the better side : 
And , David's mildness managed it so well , 
The Bad found no occasion to rebel . 
But , when to Sin our biased Nature leans , 
The careful Devil is still at hand with means , 
And providently pimps for ill desires : 
The good Old Cause revived , a Plot requires . 
Plots , true or false , are necessary things , 
To raise up Commonwealths , and ruin Kings . 
th' Inhabitants of old jerusalem 
Were jebusites , the Town so called from them ; 
And there 's the Native Right — 
But when the chosen people grew more strong , 
The rightful Cause at length became the wrong : 
And every loss the men of jebus bore , 
They still were thought God's enemies the more : 
Thus , worn and weakened , well or ill content , 
Submit they must to David's Government : 
Impoverished , and deprived of all Command , 
Their Taxes doubled as they lost their Land ; 
And , what was harder yet to flesh and blood , 
Their Gods disgraced and burned like common wood : 
This set the Heathen Priesthood in a flame ; 
For Priests of all Religions are the same : 
Of whatsoever descent their Godhead be , 
Stock , Stone , or other homely Pedigree , 
In his defence his Servants are as bold , 
As if he had been born of beaten Gold. 
The jewish Rabbins tho' their enemies , 
In this conclude them honest men and wise . 
For 't was their duty , all the Learned think , 
TO espouse his Cause by whom they eat and drink . 
From hence began that Plot , the nation 's curse , 
Bad in itself , but represented worse . 
Raised in extremes , and in extremes decried ; 
With Oaths affirmed , with dying Vows denied . 
Not weighed , or winnowed by the multitude ; 
But swallowed in the mass , unchewed and crude . 
Some Truth there was , but dashed and brewed with Lies ; 
To 〈…〉 Fool● , and puzzle all the Wise , 
〈…〉 did equal folly call , 
〈…〉 , or believing all , 
〈…〉 Rites the ●ebusitess embraced ; 
〈…〉 were recommended by their taste . 
〈…〉 mus● needs be good , 
〈…〉 once for Worship and for Food . 
〈…〉 could not introduce these Gods ; 
〈…〉 , in former days was odds . 
So 〈◊〉 was used , ( the Sacri●icerss trade , ) 
Fools are more hard to conquer than persuade . 
Their busy 〈◊〉 mingled ●ith the jews ; 
And 〈◊〉 , for Converts , even the Court and Stews : 
Which Hebrew Priests the more unkindly took , 
Because the Fleece accompanies the Flock . 
Some thought they god 's Anointed meant to slay 
By Guns , invented since full many a day . 
Our Author swears it not ; b●t who can know 
How ●ar the Devil and jebusites may go ? 
This Plot , which failed ●or want of common sense , 
Had yet a deep and dangerous consequence : 
For , as when raging Fevers boil the blood , 
The standing Lake soon floats into a flood ; 
And every hostile humour , which before 
Slept quiet in its Channels , 〈◊〉 o'er ; 
So , several Factions 〈…〉 Ferment , 
Work up to 〈…〉 . 
Some ●y their friend's , 〈…〉 thought wise , 
Opposed the Power to 〈…〉 not rise . 
Some had in Courts 〈…〉 from thence , 
Like Fiends , were 〈…〉 
Some , by their 〈…〉 ●rown , 
●rom pardoned 〈…〉 Throne ; 
Were raised in 〈…〉 
Strong Bands , if 〈…〉 tie . 
Of these the 〈…〉 
A Name to 〈…〉 
For close 〈…〉 
Sagacious , 〈◊〉 , and 〈…〉 
Restless , unfixt in Principle and Place ; 
In Power unpleased , impatient of Disgrace . 
A fiery Soul , which working out its way , 
Fretted the Pig●y-body to decay ; 
And o'er informed the Tenement of Clay . 
A daring Pilot in extremity ; 
Pleased with the Danger , when the Waves went high 
He sought the Storms ; but for a Calm un●it , 
Would Steer to nigh the Sands , to boast his Wit , 
Great Wits are sure to Madness near allied ; 
And thin Partitions do their Bounds divide : 
Else , why should he , with Wealth and Honour blessed , 
Refuse his Age the needful hours of rest ? 
Punish a Body which he could not please ; 
Bankrupt of Life , yet Prodigal of ease ? 
And all to leave , what with his Toil he won , 
To that unfeathered , two legged thing , a Son : 
God , while his Soul did huddled Notions try ; 
And born a shapeless Lump , like Anarchy . 
In friendship false , implacable in hate : 
Resolved to ruin , or to Rule the State. 
To compass this , the Triple Bond he broke ; 
The Pillars of the public Safety shaken : 
And fitted Israel for a Foreign Yoke . 
then , seized with Fear , yet still affecting Fame , 
Usurped a Patriot's All-atoning Name . 
So easy still it proves in factious times , 
With public Zeal to cancel private crimes : 
How safe is Treason , and how sacred ill , 
Where none can sin against the people's will : 
Where Crowds can wink ; and no offence be known , 
Since in another's guilt they find their own . 
Yet , Fame deserved , no Enemy can grudge ; 
The Statesman we abhor , but praise the Judge . 
In Israel's Courts ne'er sat an Abbethdin 
With more discerning eyes , or hands more clean : 
Unbribed , unsought , the Wretched to redress ; 
Swi●t of Dispatch , and easy of Access . 
O , had he been content to serve the Crown , 
With virtues only proper to the Gown ; 
Or , had the rankness of the Soil been freed 
From Cockle , that oppressed the Noble seed : 
David , for him his tuneful Harp had strung , 
And Heaven had wanted one Immortal song . 
But wild Ambition love's to slide , not stand ; 
And Fortune's Ice prefers to Virtue's Land : 
Achitophel , grown weary to possess 
A lawful Fame , and lazy Happiness ; 
Disdained the Golden Fruit to gather free , 
And lent the Crowd his Arm to shake the Tree . 
Now , manifest of Crimes , contrived long since , 
He stood at bold Defiance with his Prince : 
Held up the Buckler of the people's Cause , 
Against the Crown ; and skulked behind the Laws . 
The wished occasion of the Plot he takes ; 
Some circumstances finds , but more he makes . 
By buzzing Emissaries , fills the ears 
Of listening Crowds , with jealousies and fears 
Of Arbitrary Counsels brought to light , 
And proves the King himself a jebusite : 
Weak Arguments ! which yet he knew full well , 
Were strong with People easy to Rebel . 
For , governed by the Moon , the giddy jews 
Tread the same tract when she the Prime renews ▪ 
And once in twenty years , their Scribes Record , 
By natural Instinct they change their Lord 
Achitophel still wants a Chief , and none 
Was found so fit as Warlike Absalon : 
Not , that he wished his Greatness to create , 
( For Politicians neither love nor hate : ) 
But , for he knew , his Title not allowed , 
Would keep him still depending on the Crowd , 
That Kingly power , thus ebbing out , might be 
Drawn to the dregss of a Democracy . 
Him he attempts , with studied Arts to please . 
And sheds his Venom , in such words as these 
Auspicious Prince ! at whose Nativity 
Some Royal Planet ruled the Southern Sky ; 
Thy longing Country's Darling and Desire ; 
Their cloudy Pillar , and their guardian Fire : 
Their second Moses , whose extended Wand 
Divides the Seas , and shows the promised Land : 
Whose dawning Day , in every distant age , 
Has exercised the Sacred Prophet's rage : 
The people's Prayer , the glad Diviners Theme , 
The young men's Vision , and the old men's Dream ! 
Thee , Saviour , Thee , the Nations Vows confess ; 
And , never satisfied with seeing , bless : 
Swift , unbespoken Pomps , thy steps proclaim , 
And stammering Babes are taught to lisp thy Name . 
How long wilt thou the general Joy detain ; 
Starve , and defraud the people of thy Reign ? 
Content ingloriously to pass thy days 
Like one of Virtue's Fools that feeds on praise ; 
Till thy fresh Glories , which now shine so bright , 
Grow stale and tarnish with our daily sight . 
Believe me , Royal Youth , thy Fruit must be , 
Or gathered ripe , or rot upon the Tree . 
Heaven , has to all allotted , soon or late , 
Some lucky Revolution of their Fate : 
Whose motions , if we watch and guide with skill , 
( For human good depends on human Will , ) 
Our Fortune rolls , as from a smooth descent , 
And , from the first Impression , takes the bent : 
But , if unseized , she glides away like wind ; 
And leaves repenting Folly far behind . 
Now , now she meets you , with a glorious prize , 
And spreads her Locks before her as she fly's . 
Had thus old David , from whose Loins you spring , 
Not dared , when Fortune called him , to be King , 
At Gath an Exile he might still remain , 
And Heavens Anointing Oil had been in vain . 
Let his successful Youth your hopes engage ; 
But eat th' example of Declining Age : 
Behold him setting in his Western Skies , 
The Shadows lengthening as the Vapours rise . 
He is not now , as when on Jordan's sand 
The joyful People thronged to see him Land , 
Covering the Beach , and ●lackning all the Strand 
But , like the Prince of Angels from his height , 
Comes tumbling downward with diminished light ; 
Betrayed by one poor Plot to public Scorn , 
( Our only blessing since his cursed Return . ) 
Those heaps of people which one Sheaf did bind , 
Blown off , and scattered by a puss of wind : 
What strength can he to your designs oppose , 
Naked of Friends , and round beset with Foes ? 
If Pharaoh's doubtful Succour he should use , 
A Foreign Aid would more incense the jews : 
Proudly Egypt would dissembled Friendship bring ▪ 
Foment the War , but not support the King : 
Nor would the Royal Party e'er ●nite 
With Pharoah's Arms , t' assist the jebusite ; 
Or if they should , their Interest soon would break , 
And , with such odious Aid , make David weak . 
All sorts of men , by my successful Arts , 
Abhorring Kings , estrange their altered Hearts 
〈…〉 And 't is the general Cry , 
〈◊〉 , Commonwealth , and Liberty : 
〈…〉 Champion of the public Good , 
A●d to their Arms a Chief of Royal Blood ; 
〈…〉 hope , and what applause 
〈…〉 gain by such a cause ? 
Not 〈…〉 alone , that gaudy Flower , 
〈…〉 but solid Power : 
〈…〉 limited command , 
〈…〉 Love of all your native Land , 
〈…〉 Tit'e , long , and dark , 
Drawn 〈◊〉 the mouldy Rolls of Noah's Ark. 
What c●nn●t ●raise effect in mighty Minds , 
〈…〉 ●ooths , and when Ambition blinds ! 
〈◊〉 of Power , on earth a vicious weed , 
〈…〉 from High , is of Celestial seed : 
〈…〉 And when men aspire , 
〈…〉 too much of Heavenly Fire . 
〈…〉 too covetous of Fame , 
〈…〉 of Angel's Metal in his frame ; 
〈◊〉 was led from Virtue's ways ; 
Made dr●nk with Honour , and debauched with praise . 
Half loath , and half consenting to the ill , 
( For Loyal B●ood within him struggled still ) 
He thus replied — And what pretence have I 
To take up Arms for public liberty ? 
My Father Governs with unquestioned right ; 
The Faith's Defender , and mankind's delight : 
Good , gracious , just , observant of the Laws ; 
And Heaven by wonder has espoused his cause . 
Whom has he wronged in all his Peaceful Reign ? 
Who sues for Justice to his Throne in vain ? 
What million has he pardoned of his Foes , 
Whom just revenge did to his wrath expose ? 
Mild , easy , humble , studious of our good ; 
Inclined to mercy , and averse from blood ; 
If mildness ill with stubborn Israel suit , 
His crime is God's beloved Attribute . 
What could he gain , his people to betray , 
Or change his right , for arbitrary sway ? 
Let haughty Pharaoh curse with such a Reign , 
His fruitful Nile , and yoke a servile Train . 
If David's Rule jerusalem displease , 
The Dog-star heats their brains to this disease . 
Why then should I , encouraging the bad , 
Turn Rebel , and run popularly mad ? 
Were he a Tyrant who , by lawless Might , 
Oppressed the Jews , and raised the jebusite , 
Well might I mourn ; but Nature's hely bands 
Would kerb my spirits , and restrain my hand : 
The people might assert their liberty ; 
But what was ●ight in them , were crime in me . 
His ●avour 〈◊〉 me nothing to require ; 
Prevents my wishes , and outruns desire . 
What 〈…〉 I expect while David life's ? 
All but 〈…〉 Diadem he gives ; 
And that : But there he paused ; then sighing , said , 
Is 〈…〉 for a worthier Head. 
For when my Father from his toils shall rest , 
And 〈…〉 the number of the blessed : 
〈…〉 shall the Throne ascend ; 
Of 〈…〉 Line where that shall end . 
His Brother , though oppressed with vulgar spite , 
Yet dauntless and secure of native right , 
Of every Royal Virtue stands possessed ; 
Still Dear to all the Bravest , and the Best . 
His Courage Foes , his Friends his Truth Proclaim ; 
His Loyalty the King , the World his Fame . 
His mercy even th'offending Crowd will find ; 
For sure he comes of a forgiving kind . 
Why should I then repine at Heaven's decree ; 
Which gives me no pretence to Royalty ? 
Yet o that Fate , propitiously inclined , 
Had raised my Birth , or had debased my mind ; 
To my large Soul , not all her treasure lent , 
And then betrayed it to a mean Descent . 
I find , I find my mounting spirits bold , 
And David's part disdains my Mother's mould . 
Why am I scanted by a niggard Birth ? 
My Soul disclaims the kindred of her Earth : 
And made for Empire , whispers me within ; 
Desire of Greatness is a Godlike sin . 
Him staggering so when Hells dire Agent found , 
While fainting Virtue scarce maintained her ground , 
He pours fresh Forces in , and thus replies : 
th' Eternal God , supremely good and wise , 
Imparts not these prodigious Gifts in vain ; 
What wonders are reserved to bless your Reign ? 
Against your will your Arguments have shown , 
Such virtue 's only given to guide a Throne . 
Not that your Father's mildness I contemn ? 
But manly force becomes the Diadem . 
't is true , he grants the people all they crave ; 
And more perhaps than Subjects ought to have : 
For lavish grants suppose a Monarch tame , 
And more his Goodness than his Wit proclaim . 
B●t when should people strive their Bonds to break , 
〈◊〉 not when Kings are negligent or weak ? 
〈◊〉 him give on till he can give no more , 
The thrifty Sanhedrin shall keep him poor : 
And every 〈◊〉 which he can receive , 
Shall cost a ●imb of his Prerogative . 
To ply him with new Plots , shall be my care ; 
Or plunge him deep in some expensive war ; 
Which , when his Treasure can no more supply ▪ 
He must , with the remains of Kingship , buy . 
His faithful Friends , our jealousies and fears , 
Call jebusites ; and Pharaoh's Pensioners : 
Whom , when our fury from his aid has torn , 
He shall be naked left to public scorn . 
The next Successor , whom I fear and hate , 
My arts have made obnoxious to the State ; 
Turned all his Virtues to his overthrow , 
And gained our Elders to pronounce a foe . 
His Right , for sums of necessary Gold , 
Shall first be pawned , and afterwards be sold : 
Till time shall ever-wanting David draw , 
To pass your doubtful Title into Law : 
If not ; the people have a Right supreme 
To make their Kings ; for Kings are made for them . 
All Empire is no more than Power in trust : 
Which when resumed , can be no longer just . 
Succession , for the general good designed , 
In its own wrong a Nation cannot bind : 
If altering that , the people can relieve , 
Better one suffer , than a Nation grieve . 
The jews well knew their power : e'er Saul they choose , 
God was their King , and God they durst depose . 
Urge now your Piety , your Filial Name , 
A Father's right , and fear of future Fame ; 
The public good , that universal call , 
To which even Heaven submitted , answers all . 
Nor let his Love enchant your generous mind ; 
't is Nature's trick to propagate her kind . 
Our fond Begetters , who would never die , 
Love but themselves in their posterity . 
Or let his kindness by th' effects be tried , 
Or let him lay his vain pretence aside . 
God said he loved your Father ; could he bring 
A better proof , than to Anoint him King ? 
It surely showed he loved the Shepherd well , 
Who gave so fair a Flock as Israel . 
Would David have you thought his Darling Son ? 
What means he then , to Alienate the Crown ? 
The name of Godly he may blush to bear : 
't is after God's own heart to cheat his Heir . 
He to his Brother gives Supreme Command ; 
To you a Legacy of Barren Land : 
Perhaps th' old Harp , on which he thrums his Lays : 
Or some dull Hebrew Ballad in your praise . 
then the next Heir , a Prince , severe and wise , 
Already looks on you with jealous eyes ; 
sees through the thin disguises of your arts , 
And marks your progress in the people's hearts . 
Though now his mighty Soul its grief contains ; 
He meditates revenge who least complains . 
And like a Lion , slumb'ring in the way , 
Or sleep-dissembling , while he waits his prey , 
His fearless Foes within his distance draws ; 
Constrains his roaring , and contracts his paws : 
Till at the last , his time for fury found , 
He shoots with sudden vengeance from the ground : 
The prostrate Vulgar , passes o'er , and spares ; 
But with a Lordly rage , his Hunter's tears . 
Your case no tame expedients will afford ; 
Resolve on death , or conquest by the Sword , 
Which for no lesle a Stake than Life , you draw ; 
And Self-defence is Nature's elder Law. 
Leave the warm people no considering time ; 
For then Rebellion may be thought a crime . 
Prevail yourself of what occasion gives , 
But try your Title while your Father life's : 
And that your Arms may have a fair pretence , 
Proclaim , you take them in the King's defence : 
Whose sacred Life each minute would expose , 
To Plots , from seeming friends , and secret foes . 
And who can sound the depth of David's Soul ? 
Perhaps his fear , his kindness may control . 
He fears his Brother , though he love's his Son , 
For plighted Vows too late to be undone . 
If so , by force he wishes' to be gained ; 
Like woman's lechery to seem constrained : 
Doubt not ; but when he most affects the Frown ; 
Commit a pleasing Rape upon the Crown . 
Secure his Person to secure your Cause ; 
They who possess the Prince , possess the Laws . 
He said , and this Advice above the rest , 
With Absalom's mild nature suited best ; 
Unblamed of Life ( Ambition set aside , ) 
Not stained with cruelty , nor puffed with pride . 
How happy had he been , if destiny 
Had higher placed his Birth , or not so high ! 
His Kingly Virtues might have claimed a Throne ; 
And blessed all other Country's but his own : 
But charming Greatness , since so few refuse ; 
't is juster to lament him , than accuse . 
Strong were his hopes a Rival to remove , 
With blandishments to gain the public love ; 
To head the Faction while their Zeal was hot , 
And popularly prosecute the Plot. 
To farther this , Achitophel unites 
The malcontents of all the Israelites : 
Whose differing Parties he could wisely join , 
For several ends , to serve the same design . 
The best , and of the Princes some were such , 
Who thought the power of Monarchy too much : 
Mistaken men , and Patriots in their hearts ; 
Not wicked , but seduced by impious arts . 
By these the springs of Property were bend , 
And would so high , they cracked the Government . 
The next for Interest sought t' embroil the State , 
To sell their duty at a dearer rate ; 
And make their jewish Markets of the Throne : 
Pretending public good , to serve their own . 
others thought Kings an useless heavy load , 
Who cost too much , and did too little good . 
These were for laying honest David by , 
On Principles of pure good Husbandry . 
With them joined all th' Haranguers of the throng , 
That thought to get Preferment by the ●o●gue . 
Who follow next , a double danger br●ng , 
Not only hating ●avid , but th● King ▪ 
The Solymaean Rout ; well versed of old , 
In godly Faction , and in Treason bold ; 
Cowering and quaking at a Conqu'ror's sword , 
But losty to a Lawful Prince restored ; 
saw with disdain an Ethnic Plot begun , 
And scorned by jebusites to be outdone . 
Hot Levites headed these ; who pulled before 
From th' Ark , which in the Judge's days they bore , 
Resumed their Cant , and with a zealous cry 
Pursued their old beloved Theocracy . 
Where Sanhedrin and Priest enslaved the Nation , 
And justified their spoils by inspiration : 
For who so fit for Reign as Aaron's Race , 
If once Dominion they could found in Grace ? 
These led the Pack ; the not of surest scent , 
Yet deepest mouthed against the Government . 
A numerous Host of dreaming Saints succeed ; 
Of the true old Enthusiastic breed : 
Against form and order they their Power employ ; 
Nothing to build , and all things to destroy . 
But far more numerous was the herd of such , 
Who think too little , and who talk too much . 
These , out of mere instinct , they knew not why , 
Adored their Father's God , and Property : 
And , by the same blind benefit of Fate , 
The Devil and the Jebusite did hate : 
Born to be saved , even in their own despite ; 
Because they could not help believing right . 
Such were the tools ; but a whole Hydra more 
Remains , of sprouting heads too long , to score . 
Some of their Chiefs were Princes of the Land : 
In the first rank of these did Zimri stand : 
A man so various , that he seemed to be 
Not one , but all mankind's epitome . 
Stiff in opinions , always in the wrong ; 
Was every thing by starts , and nothing long : 
But , in the course of one revolving Moon , 
Was Chemist , Fidler , Statesman , and Bussoon : 
then all for Women , Painting , Rhyming , Drinking ; 
Besides ten thousand freaks that died in thinking . 
Blessed Madman , who could every hour employ , 
With something new to wish , or to enjoy ! 
Railing and praising were his usual themes , 
And both ( to show his judgement ) in extremes : 
So over-violent , or over-civil , 
That every man , with him , was God or Devil . 
In squandring wealth was his peculiar art : 
Nothing went unrewarded , but desert . 
Beggared by fools , whom still he found too late : 
He had his Jest , and they had his Estate . 
He laughed himself from Court ; then sought relief 
By ●●rming parties , but could ne'er be Chief : 
Fo● ▪ spite of him , the weight of business fell 
On Absalon and wise Achitophel : 
Thus , wicked but in will , of means bereft , 
He left not Faction , but of that was left . 
Titles and Names 't were tedious to rehearse 
Of Lords , below the dignity of Verse . 
Wits , Warriors , Common-wealthsmen , were the best : 
Kind Husbands and mere Nobles all the rest . 
And , therefore in the name of dulness , be 
The well hung Balaam , and cold Caleb free . 
And canting Nadab let oblivion damn , 
Who made new Porridge for the Paschal Lam● . 
Let friendships holy band , some names assure : 
Some their own worth , and some let scorn secure . 
Nor shall the Rascal Rabble here have place , 
Whom Kings no Titles gave , and God no Grace : 
Not Bul●-faced jonas , who co●d Statutes draw 
To mean Rebellion , and make Treason Law. 
But he though bad , is followed by a worse , 
The wretch , who Heavens' Anointed dared to c●rse . 
Shimei , whose youth did early promise bring 
Of zeal to God , and hatred to his King ; 
Did wisely from expensive sins re●rain , 
And never broke the Sabbath , but for gain : 
Nor ever was he known an Oath to vent , 
Or curse , unless against the Government . 
Thus heaping wealth by the most ready way 
Among the Jews , which was to cheat and pray ; 
The City , to reward his pious Hate 
Against his Master , choose him Magistrate : 
His hand a Vare of Justice did uphold ; 
His Neck was loaded with a Chain of Gold. 
During his Office , Treason was no Crime ; 
The Sons of Belial had a glorious Time : 
For Shimei , though not prodigal of pelf , 
Yet loved his wicked Neighbour as himself : 
When to or three were gathered to declaim 
Against the Monarch of jerusalem , 
Shimei was always in the midst of them . 
And , if they Cursed the King when he was by , 
Would rather Curse , than break good Company . 
If any durst his Factious Friends accuse , 
He pact a Jury of dissenting jews : 
Whose fellow-feeling , in the godly Cause , 
Would free the suffering Saint from human Laws . 
For Laws are only made to punish those , 
Who serve the King , and to protect his Foes . 
If any leisure time he had from Power , 
( Because 't is Sin to misimploy an hour ; ) 
His business was , by writing , to Persuade , 
That Kings were Useless , and a Clog to Trade : 
And , that his noble Style he might refine , 
no Rechabite more shunned the fumes of Wine . 
chaste were his Cellars ; and his Shrieval Board 
The Grossness of a City Feast abhorred : 
His Cooks , with long disuse , their Trade forgot ; 
Cool was his Kitchen ; though his Brains were hot . 
Such frugal Virtue Malice may accuse ; 
But sure 't was necessary to the jews : 
For Towns one bur●t , s●ch Magistrates require 
As dare not tempt God's Providence by fire . 
With spiritual food he fed his servants well , 
But free from flesh that made the Jews Rebel : 
And Moses' Laws he held in more account , 
For forty days of F●sting in the Mount. 
To speak the rest , who better are forgot , 
Would tire a well breathed Witness of the Plot : 
Yet , Corah , thou shalt from oblivion pass ; 
Erect thyself thou Monumental Brass : 
High as the Serpent of thy metal made , 
While Nations stand secure beneath thy shade . 
What though his Birth were base , yet Comets rise 
From earthy vapours ere they shine in Skies . 
Prodigious Actions may as well be done 
By Weaver's Issue , as by Princes Son. 
This Arch-attestor for the public good , 
By that one Deed Ennobles all his Blood. 
Who ever asked the Witnesses high race , 
Whose Oath with Martyrdom did Stephen grace ? 
Ours was a Levite , and as times went then , 
His Tribe were Godalmighty's Gentlemen . 
Sunk were his eyes , his voice was harsh and loud , 
Sure signs he neither choleric was , nor proud : 
His long chin proved his wit ; his Saintlike grace 
A Church Vermilion , and a Moses' face ; 
His memory , miraculously great , 
could Plots , exceeding man's belief , repeat ; 
Which , therefore cannot be accounted lies , 
For human wit could never such devise . 
Some future Tr●thss are mingled in his Book ; 
But , where the witness failed , the Prophet spoke : 
Some things like visionary slights appear ; 
The Spirit caught him up , the Lord knows where : 
And gave him his Rabinical degree 
Unknown to Foreign University . 
His judgement yet his memory did excel ; 
Which pieced his wondrous Evidence so well : 
And suited to the temper of the times ; 
then groaning under Jebusitick crimes . 
Let Israel , foes suspect his heavenly call , 
And rashly judge his wit Apocryphal ; 
Our Laws for such affronts have forfeits made : 
He takes his li●e , who takes away his trade . 
Were I my sel● in witness Corahs' place , 
The wretch who did me such a dire disgrace , 
Should whet my memory , though once forgot , 
To make him an Appendix of my Plot. 
His zeal to Heaven , made him his Prince despise , 
And load his person with indignities : 
But zeal peculiar privilege affords ; 
Indulging latitude to deeds and words . 
And Corah might for Agag's murder call , 
In terms as course as Samuel used to Saul . 
What others in his Evidence did join , 
( The best that could be had for love or coin , ) 
In Corah's own predicament will fall : 
For witness is a common name to all . 
Surrounded thus with friends of every sort , 
Deluded Absalon , forsakes the Court : 
Impatient of high hopes , urged with renown : 
And fired with near possession of a Crown , 
th' admiring Crowd are dazzled with Surprise , 
And on his goodly person feed their eyes : 
His Joy Concealed , he sets himself to show : 
On each side bowing popularly low : 
His looks , his gestures , and his words he frams , 
And with familiar ease repeats their Names . 
Thus , formed by Nature , furnished out with Arts , 
He glides unfelt into their secret hearts : 
then , with a kind compassionating look , 
And sighs , bespeaking pity e'er he spoke : 
Few words he said ; but easy those and fit : 
more slow than Hybla drops , and far more sweet . 
I mourn , my Countrymen , your lost Estate ; 
Thomas far unable to prevent your sat : 
Behold a Banished man , for your dear cause 
Exposed a prey to Arbitrary Laws ! 
Yet o ! that I alone could be undone , 
Cut of from Empire , and no more a Son ! 
Now all your Liberties a spoil are made ; 
Egypt and Tyrus intercept your Trade , 
And jebusites your Sacred Rites invade . 
My Father , whom with reverence yet I Name , 
Charmed into Ease , is careless of his Fame : 
And , bribed with petty sums of Foreign Gold , 
Is grown in Batsheba's Embraces old : 
Exalts his Enemies , his Friends destroys : 
And all his power against himself employs . 
He gives , and let him give my right away : 
But why should he his own , and yours betray ? 
He only , he can make the Nation bleed , 
And he alone from my revenge is freed . 
Take then my tears ( with that he wiped his Eyes ) 
't is all the Aid my present power supplies : 
no Court Informer can these Arms accuse ; 
These Arms may Sons against their Father's use , 
And , 't is my wish , the next Successor's Reign 
May make no other Israelite complain . 
Youth , Beauty , Graceful Action , seldom fail : 
But Common Interest always will prevail : 
And pity never Ceases to be shown 
To him , who makes the people's wrongs his own . 
The Crowd , ( that still believe their Kings oppress ) 
With lifted hands their young Messiah bles● : 
Who now begins his Progress to ordain ; 
With Chariots , Horsemen , and a num'rous train : 
From East to West his Glories he displays : 
And , like the Sun , the promised Land survays . 
Fame runs before him as the morningstar ; 
And shouts of Joy salute him from afar : 
Each house receives him as a Guardian God ; 
And Consecrates the place of his abode ; 
But hospitable treats did most commend 
Wise Issachar , his wealth western friend . 
This moving Court , that caught the people's Eyes : 
And seemed but pomp , did other ends disguise . 
Achitophel had formed it with intent 
To sound the depth , and fathom where it went : 
The people's hearts , distinguish Friends from Foes ; 
And try their strength , before they come to blows 
Yet all was coloured with a smooth pretence 
Of specious love , and duty to their Prince . 
Religion , and Redress of Grievances , 
Two names , that always cheat and always please , 
Are often urged ; and good king David's li●e 
Endangered by a Brother and a Wife . 
Thus in a Pageant Show , a Plot is made ; 
And Peace itself is War in Masquerâde . 
O foolish Israel ! never warned by ill , 
Still the same bait , and circumvented still ! 
Did ever men forsake their present ease , 
In midst of health Imagine a disease ; 
Take pains Contingent mischiefs to foresee , 
Make Heirs for Monarches , and for God decree ? 
What shall we think ! can people give away 
Both for themselves and Sons , their Native sway ? 
then they are left Defensless , to the Sword 
Of each unbounded Arbitrary Lord : 
And Laws are vain , by which we Right enjoy , 
If Kings unquestioned can those laws destroy . 
Yet , if the Crowd be Judge of fit and Just , 
And Kings are only Officers in trust , 
then this resuming Covenant was declared 
When Kings were made , or is for ever barred : 
If those who gave the Sceptre , could not tie 
By their own deed their own Posterity , 
How then could Adam bind his future Race ? 
How could his forfeit on mankind take place ? 
Or how could heavenly Justice damn us all , 
Who ne'er consented to our Father's fall ? 
then Kings are slaves to those whom they Command , 
And Tenants to their People's pleasure stand . 
Add , that the Power for property allowed , 
Is mischeivously seated in the Crowd : 
For who can be secure of private Right , 
If Sovereign sway may be dissolved by might ? 
Nor is the People's Judgement always true : 
The most may err as grossly as the few . 
And faultless Kings run down , by Common Cry , 
For Vice , Oppression , and for Tyranny . 
What Standard is there in a ●ickle rout , 
Which , flowing to the mark , runs faster out ? 
Nor only Crowds , but Sanhedrins may be 
Infected with this public lunacy : 
And share the madness of rebellious times , 
To marther Monarches for imagined crimes . 
If they may give and take whn e'er they please , 
Not Kings alone , ( the Godheads Images , ) 
But Government itself at length must fall 
To Nature's state , where all have right to all . 
Yet , grant our Lords the people Kings can make , 
What prudent men a settled Throne would shake ? 
For whatsoever their sufferings were before , 
That change they covet makes them suffer more . 
All other Errors but disturb a State ; 
But Innovation is the blow of Fate . 
If ancient Fabrics nod , and threat to fall , 
To patch the flaws , and buttress up the wall , 
Thus far 't is duty ; but here fix the mark : 
For all beyond it is to touch our Ark. 
To change Foundations , cast the Frame anew , 
Is work for Rebels who base Ends pursue : 
At once Divine and Human Laws control ; 
And mend the parts by ruin of the whole . 
The Tampering World is subject to this Curse , 
To Physic their Disease into a worse . 
Now what relief can Righteous David bring ? 
How Fatal 't is to be too good a King ! 
Friends he has few , so high the Madness grows ; 
Who dare be such , must be the people's Foes , 
Yet some there were , even in the worst of days ; 
Some let me name , and Naming is to praise . 
In this short File Barzillai first appears ; 
Barzillai crowned with Honour and with Years , 
Long since , the rising Rebels he withstood 
In Regions waste , beyond the jordan's Flood , 
Unfortunately Brave to buoy the Sat ; 
But sinking underneath his Master's Fate , 
In exile with his Godlike Prince he mourned ; 
For him he Suffered , and with him Returned . 
The Court he practised , not the courtier 's art ; 
Large was his Wealth , but larger was his Heart ; 
Which , well the Noblest Objects knew to choose , 
The Fight Warrior , and Recording Muse. 
His bed could once a Fruitful Issue boast , 
Now more than half a Father's Name is lost . 
His elder hope , with every Grace adorned , 
By me ( so Heaven will have it ) always mourned , 
And always honoured , snatched in manhoods prim● 
B' unequal fates , and providences crime ; 
Yet not before the Goal of Honour wone , 
All parts fulfilled of Subject and of Son ; 
Swift was the Race , but short the time to run . 
O narrow circle , but of Power divine , 
Scanted in space , but perfect in thy Line ! 
By Sea , by Land , thy matchless worth was known ; 
Arms thy delight , and War was all thy own : 
Thy force , infused , the fainting Tyrians propped : 
And haughty Pharaoh found his Fortune stopped . 
O ancient Honour , o unconquered hand , 
Whom foes unpunished never could withstand ! 
But Israel was unworthy of thy Name ; 
Short is the date of all immoderate fame . 
It looks as Heaven our ruin had designed , 
And durst not trust thy fortune and thy mind . 
Now , free from earth , thy disencumbred Soul 
Mounts up , and leaves behind the Clouds and starry Pole : 
From thence thy kindred legions may'st thou bring 
To aid the guardian Angel of thy King. 
Here stop my Muse , here cease thy painful slight ; 
no pinions can pursue immortal height : 
Tell good Barzillai thou canst sing no more , 
And tell thy soul she should have ●●ed before ; 
Or fled she with his life , and left this Verse 
To hang on her departed Parton's Hearse ? 
Now take thy steepy flight from Heaven , and see 
If thou canst find on earth another He ; 
Another He would be too hard to find , 
See then whom thou canst see not far behind : 
Zadock the Priest , whom , shunning power and place , 
His lowly mind advanced to David's Grace : 
With him the Sagan of jerusalem , 
Of hospitable soul , and noble stem ; 
Him of the western doom , whose weighty sense 
Flows in fit words , and heavenly Eloquence . 
The Prophet's sons by such example led , 
To Learning and to Loyalty were bred : 
For Colleges on bounteous Kings depend , 
And never Rebel was to Arts a friend . 
To these succeed the Pillars of the Laws , 
Who best could pled , and best can judge a Cause . 
Next them a train of Loyal Peers ascend : 
Sharp judging Adriel , the Muse's friend , 
Himself a Muse ; — In Sanhedrins' debate 
True to his Prince ; but not a Slave of State. 
Whom David's love with Honours did adorn , 
That from his disobedient Son were torn . 
jotham of piercing wit , and pregnant thought , 
Endued by Nature , and by Learning taught 
To move Assemblies , who but only tried 
The worse awhile , then choose the better side ; 
Nor choose alone , but turned the balance too ; 
So much the weight of one brave man can do . 
Hushai the friend of David in distress , 
In public storms of manly steadfastness ; 
By foreign Treaties he informed his Youth ; 
And joined experience to his native truth . 
His frugal care supp'yed the wanting Throne , 
Frugal for that , but bounteous of his own : 
't is easy conduct when Exchequers flow , 
But hard the task to manage well the low : 
For Soverereign Power is too depressed or high , 
When Kings are forced to sell , or Crowds to buy . 
Indulge one labour more , my weary Muse , 
For Amiel , who can Amiel's praise refuse ? 
Of ancient Race by Birth , but Nobler yet 
In his own worth , and without Title great : 
The Sanhedrin-long time as Chief he ruled , 
Their Reason guided , and their Passion cooled ; 
So dextrous was he in the crown 's defence , 
So formed to speak a Loyal Nations sense , 
That as their Band was Israel's Tribes in small , 
So fit was he to represent them all . 
Now rasher Charioteers the Seat ascend , 
Whose loose Carriers his steady Skill commend : 
They , like th' unequal Ruler of the day , 
Misguide the seasons , and mistake the way ; 
While he withdrawn at their mad labour smiles , 
And safe enjoys the Sabbath of his toils . 
These were the chief , a small , but faithful Band 
Of Worthies , in the Breach who dared to stand , 
And tempt th' united Fury of the land 
With grief they viewed such powerful Engines bend , 
To batter down the lawful Government . 
A numerous Faction with pretended frights , 
In Sanhedrins to plume the Regal Rights . 
The true Successor from the Court removed : 
The Plot , by hireling Witnesses improved , 
These Ills they saw , and as their Duty bound , 
They showed the King the danger of the Wound : 
That no concessions from the Throne would please , 
But Lenitives fomented the Disease : 
That Absalon , ambitious of the Crown , 
Was made the Lure to draw the People down : 
That false Achitophel's pernicious Hate , 
Had turned the Plot to ruin Church and State : 
The Council violent , the Rabble worse : 
That Shimei taught jerusalem to curse . 
With all these loads of injuries oppressed , 
And long revolving in his careful Breast , 
th' event of things ; at last his patience tired , 
Thus from his Royal Throne by Heaven inspired , 
The Godlike David spoke ; with awful fear 
His Train their Maker in their Master hear 
Thus long have I , by native mercy swayed 
My wrongs dissembled my revenge delayed : 
So willing to forgive th' Offending Age ; 
So much the Father did the King assuage . 
But now foe far my Clemency they slight , 
th' offenders question my forgiving right . 
That one was made for many , they contend : 
But 't is to Rule , for that 's a Monarch's end . 
They call my tenderness of Blood , my fear : 
Though manly tempers can the longest bear . 
Yet , since they will divert my Native course , 
't is time to show I am not good by force , 
Those heaped Affronts that haughty subjects bring , 
Are burdens for a Camel , not a King : 
Kings are the public Pillars of the State , 
Born to sustain and prop the Nations weight 
If my Young Samson will pretend a Call 
To shake the Column , let him share the Fall 
But o that yet he would repent and live ! 
How easy 't is for Parents to forgive ! 
With how few Tears a Pardon might be wo● 
From Nature , pleading for a Darling Son ! 
Poor pitied Youth , by my Paternal care , 
Raised up to all the height his frame could bear : 
Had God ordained his fate for Empire born , 
He would have given his Soul another turn : 
Gulled with a Patriot's name , whose modern sense 
Is one that would by Law Supplant his Prince : 
The People's Brave , the Politicians Tool ; 
Never was Patriot yet , but was a Fool. 
Whence comes it that Religion and the Laws 
Should more be Absaloms than David's Cause ? 
His old Instructor , ever he lost his place , 
Was never thought endued with so much Grace : 
Good Heavens' , how Faction can a Patriot paint ! 
My Rebel ever proves my people's Saint : 
Would They impose an Heir upon the Throne ? 
Let Sanhedrims be taught to give their own . 
A king 's at least a part of Government ; 
And mine as requisite as their Consent : 
Without my leave a future King to choose , 
Infers a Right the present to Depose : 
True , they Petition me to approve their Choice ! 
But Esau's hand suit ill with Iacob's voice . 
My pious Subjects for my safety pray , 
Which to secure they take my Power away . 
From Plots and Treasons Heaven preserve my years , 
But save me most from my Petitioners . 
Unsatiate as the barren Womb or ●r●ve . 
God cannot grant so much as they can Crave . 
What then is left but with a jealous Eye 
To guard the small remains of Royalty ? 
The Law shall still direct my peaceful Sway , 
And the same Law teach Rebels to obey : 
Votes shall no more established Power control , 
Such Votes as make a part exceed the whole : 
no groundless Clamours shall my Friends remove , 
Nor Crowds have power to punish ever they prove : 
For Gods , and Godlike Kings their Care express , 
Still to defend their servants in distress . 
O that my Power to saving were confined ; 
Why am I forced , like Heaven , against my mind , 
To make Examples of another kind ? 
Must I at length the Sword of Justice draw ? 
O cursed Effects of necessary Law ! 
How ill my Fear they by my Mercy scan , 
Beware the Fury of a patient Man 
Law they require , let Law then show her face ; 
They could not be content to look on Grace , 
Her hinder parts , but with a during Eye 
To tempt the terror of her Front , and die . 
By their own Arts 't is righteously decreed , 
Those dire Artificers of Death shall bleed . 
Against themselves their Witnesses will swear 
Till Viperlike their Mother Plot they tear : 
And suck for Nutriment that bloody gore 
Which was their Principle of Life before . 
Their Belial with their Belzebub will fight ; 
Thus on my Foes , my Foes shall do me right : 
Nor doubt th' event : for factious crowds engage 
In their first Onset , all their Brutal Rage ; 
then , let 'em take an unresisted course , 
Retire and Traverse , and delude their force : 
But when they stand all breathless , urge the fight , 
And rise upon 'em with redoubled might : 
For lawful Power is still Superior found , 
When long driven back , at length it stands the ground . 
He s●●d . th' Almighty , nodding , gave consent ; 
And Peals of Thunder shaken the Firmament : 
Henceforth a Ser●eses of new time began , 
The mighty Years in long ▪ Procession ran : 
Once more the G●dli● David was Restored ▪ 
And 〈…〉 knew th●ir Lawful Lord  
FINIS 

