Tyrannic Love , OR THE Royal Martyr . A TRAGEDY . As it is Acted by his Majesty's Servants , at the THEATRE ROYAL . 

BY JOHN DRYDEN , Servant to his MAJESTY . 

Non jam prima peto — neque vincere certo ; 
Extremum rediisse pudet . — Virg.  




LONDON , Printed for H. Herringman , at the Sign of the Blue Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange , 1670.  

To the most Illustrious and Highborn Prince , James Duke of Monmouth and Bucclugh , one of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy-council , and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter , etc.  

SIR , 

THE favourable Reception which your Excellent Lady afforded to one of my former Plays , has encouraged me to double my presumption , in addressing this to your Grace's Patronage . So dangerous a thing it is to admit a Poet into your Family , that you can never afterwards be free from the chiming of ill Verses , perpetually sounding in your ears , and more troublesome than the neighbourhood of Steeples . I have been favourable to myself in this expression ; a zealous Fanatic would have gone farther ; and have called me the Serpent , who first presented the fruit of my Poetry to the Wife , and so gained the opportunity to seduce the Husband . Yet I am ready to avow a Crime so advantageous to me ; but the World , which will condemn my boldness , I am sure will justify and applaud my choice . All men will join with me in the adoration which I pay you , they would will only I had brought you a more noble Sacrifice . Instead of an Heroic Play , you might justly expect an Heroic Poem , filled with the past Glories of your Ancestors , & the future certainties of your own . Heaven has already taken care to form you for an Hero . You have all the advantages of Mind and Body , and an Illustrious Birth , conspiring to render you an extraordinary Person . The Achilles and the Kinaldo are present in you , even above their Originals ; you only want a Homer or a Tasso to make you equal to them . Youth , Beauty , and Courage ( all which you possess in the height of their perfection ) are the most desirable gifts of Heaven : and Heaven is never prodigal of such Treasures , but to some uncommon purpose . So goodly a Fabric was never framed by an Almighty Architect for a vulgar Guest . He showed the value which he set upon your Mind , when he took care to have it so nobly and so beautifully lodged . To a graceful fashion and deportment of Body , you have joined a winning Conversation , and an easy Greatness , derived to you from the best , and best beloved of Princes . And with a great power of obliging , the world has observed in you , a desire to oblige ; even beyond your power . This and all that I can say on so excellent and large a Subject , is only History , in which Fiction has no part ; I can employ nothing of Poetry in it , any more than I do in that humble protestation which I make , to continue ever 

Your Grace's most obedient and most devoted Servant , John Dryden . 

PREFACE . 

I Was moved to write this Play by many reasons : amongst others , the commands of some persons of Honour , for whom I have a most particular respect , were daily sounding in my ears , that it would be of good Example to undertake a Poem of this Nature . Neither was my own inclination wanting to second their desires . I considered that pleasure was not the only end of Poesy ; and that even the instructions of Morality were not so wholly the business of a Poet , as that the Precepts and Examples of Piety were to be omitted . For to leave that employment altogether to the Clergy , were to forget that Religion was first taught in Verse ( which the laziness or dulness of succeeding Priesthood , turned afterwards into Prose : ) and it were also to grant , which I never shall , that representations of this kind may not as well be conducing to Holiness , as to good Manners . Yet far be it from me , to compare the use of Dramatic Poesy with that , of Divinity : I only maintain against the Enemies of the Stage , that patterns of piety , decently represented , and equally removed from the extremes of superstition and Profaneness , may be of excellent use to second the Precepts of our Religion . By the Harmony of words we elevate the mind to a sense of Devotion , as our solemn Music , which is inarticulate Poesy , does in Churches ; and by the lively images of piety , adorned by action , through the senses allure the Soul : which while it is charmed in a silent joy of what it sees and hears , is struck at the same time with a secret veneration of things Celestial , and is wound up insensibly into the practice of that which it admires . Now , if , instead of this , we sometimes see on our Theaters , the Examples of Vice rewarded , or at least unpunished ; yet it ought not to be an Argument against the Art , any more than the Extravagances and Impieties of the Pulpit in the late times of Rebellion , can be against the Office and Dignity of the Clergy . 

But many times it happens , that Poets are wrongfully accused ; as it is my own Case in this very Play ; where I am charged by some ignorant or malicious persons , with no lesle Crimes than Profaneness and Irreligion . 

The part of Maximin , against which these holy Critics so much declaim , was designed by me to set off the Character of S. Catharine . And those who have read the Roman History , may easily remember , that Maximin was not only a bloody Tyrant , vastus corpore , animo ferus , as Herodian describes him ; but also a Persecutor of the Church , against which he raised the sixth Persecution . So that whatsoever he speaks or acts in this Tragedy , is no more than a Record of his life and manners ; a picture as near as I could take it , from the Original . If with much pains and some success I have drawn a deformed piece , there is as much of Art , and as near an imitation of Nature , in a Lazare as in a Venus . Maximin was an Heathen , and what he speaks against Religion , is in contempt of that which he professed . He defies the Gods of Rome , which is no more than S. Catharine might with decency have done . If it be urged , that a person of such principles who scoffs at any Religion , ought not to be presented on the Stage ; why then are the lives and sayings of so many wicked and profane persons , recorded in the Holy Scriptures ? I know it will be answered , That a due use may be made of them ; that they are remembered with a Brand of Infamy fixed upon them ; and set as Sea-marks for those who behold them to avoid . And what other use have I made of Maximin ? have I proposed him as a pattern to be imitated , whom even for his impiety to his false Gods I have so severely punished ? Nay , as if I had foreseen this Objection I purposely removed the Scene of the Play which ought to have been at Alexandria in Egypt , ( where S. Catharine suffered ) and laid it under the Walls of Aquileia in Italy , where Maximin was slain , that the punishment of his Crime might immediately succeed its execution . 

This , Reader , is what I owed to my just defence , and the due reverence of that Religion which I profess , to which all men , who desire to be esteemed good or honest are obliged : I have neither leisure nor occasion to write more largely on this subject , because I am already justified by the sentence of the best and most discerning Prince in the World , by the suffrage of all unbiased Judges ; and above all , by the witness of my own Conscience , which abhors the thought of such a Crime ; to which I ask leave to add my outward Conversation , which shall never be justly taxed with the Note of Atheism or Profaneness . 

In what else concerns the Play , I shall be brief : for the faults of the writing and contrivance , I leave them to the mercy of the Reader . For I am as little apt to defend my own Errors , as to find those of other Poets . Only I observe , that the great Censors of Wit and Poetry , either produce nothing of their own , or what is more ridiculous than any thing they reprehend . Much of ill Nature , and a very little Judgement , go far in the finding the mistakes of Writers . 

I pretend not that any thing of mine can be Correct : This Poem , especially , which was contrived and written in seven weeks , though afterwards hindered by many accidents from a speedy representation , which would have been its best excuse . 

Yet the Scenes are every where unbroken , and the unities of place and time more exactly kept , than perhaps is requisite in a Tragedy ; or at least then I have since preserved them in the Conquest of Granada . 

I have not every where observed the equality of numbers , in my Verse ; partly by reason of my haste ; but more especially because I would not have my sense a slave to Syllables . 

't is easy to discover , that I have been very bold in my alteration of the Story , which of itself was too barren for a Play : and , that I have taken from the Church two Martyrs , in the persons of Porphyrius and the Empress , who suffered for the Christian Faith , under the Tyranny of Maximin . 

I have seen a French Play , called the Martyrdom of S. Catharine ; but those who have read it , will soon clear me from stealing out of so dull an Author . I have only borrowed a mistake from him , of one Maximin for another : for finding him in the French Poet , called the Son of a Thracian Herdsman , and an Alane Woman , I too easily believed him to have been the same Maximin mentioned in Herodian . Till afterwards consulting Eusebius and Metaphrastes , I found the Frenchman had betrayed me into an Error ( when it was too late to alter it ) by mistaking that first Maximin for a second , the Contemporary of Constantine the Great , and one of the Usurpers of the Eastern Empire . 

But neither was the other name of my Play more fortunate : for as some who had heard of a Tragedy of S. Catharine , imagined I had taken my plot from thence ; so others , who had heard of another Play called L'amour Tyrannique , with the same ignorance , accused me to have borrowed my design from it , because I have accidentally given my Play the same Title , not having to this day seen it : and knowing only by report , that such a Comedy is extant in French , under the name of Monsieur Scudery . 

As for what I have said of Astral or Aerial Spirits it is no invention of mine , but taken from those who have written on that Subject . Whether there are such Being's or not , it concerns not me ; 't is sufficient for my purpose , that many have believed the affirmative : and that these Heroic Representations , which are of the same Nature with the Epic , are not limited , but with the extremest bounds of what is credible . 

Prologue . 

Self-love ( which never rightly understood ) 
Makes Poets still conclude their Plays are good : 
And malice in all Critics reigns so high , 
That for small Errors , they whole Plays decry ; 
So that to see this fondness , and that spite , 
you 'd think that none but Madmen judge or write . 
Therefore our Poet , as he thinks not fit 
TO impose upon you , what he writes for Wit , 
So hope's that leaving you your censures free , 
You equal Judges of the whole will be : 
They judge but half who only faults will see . 
Poets like Lovers should be bold and dare , 
They spoil their business with an over-care . 
And he who servilely creeps after sense , 
Is safe , but never will reach an Excellence . 
Hence 't is our Poet in his conjuring , 
Allowed his Fancy the full scope and swing . 
But when a Tyrant for his Theme he had , 
He loosed the Reinss , and bid his Muse run mad : 
And though he stumbles in a full career ; 
Yet rashness is a better fault than fear . 
He saw his way ; but in so swift a pace , 
To choose the ground , might be to lose the race . 
They then who of each trip th' advantage take , 
find but those Faults which they want Wit to make . 
persons Represented . 

Maximin , Tyrant of Rome . By Mayor Mohun . 
Porphyrius , Captain of the Praetorian Bands . Mr. Hart.  
Charinus , the-emperour's Son.  Mr. Harris . 
Placidius , a great Officer . Mr. Kynaston . 
Valerius , Tribunes of the Army . Mr. Lydall . 
Albinus , Tribunes of the Army . Mr. Littlewood . 
Nigrinus , a Tribune and Conjurer . Mr. Beeston . 
Amariel , Guardian-angel to S. Catharine . Mr. Bell.  
Berenice , Wife to Maximin . By Mistress Martial . 
Valeria , Daughter to Maximin . Mistress Ellen Guyn . 
S. Catharine , Princess of Alexandria . Mistress Hughes . 
Felicia , her Mother . Mistress Knepp . 
Erotion , Attendants . Mistress Vphill . 
Cydnon , Attendants . Mistress Eastland . 
SCENE The Camp of Maximin , under the Walls of Aquileia . 

Tyrannic Love ; OR , THE Royal Martyr . 

ACT I  

SCENE I  

A Camp or Pavilion Royal.  Maximin , Charinus , Placidius , Albinus , Valerius , Apollonius , Guards . Max.   THUS far my Arms have with success been crowned ; 
And found no stop , or vanquished what they found . 
The Germane Lakes my Legions have o'erpast , 
With all the bars which Art or Nature cast : 
My Foes , in watery Fastnesses enclosed , 
I sought , alone , to their whole War exposed . 
Did first the depth of trembling Marshes sound , 
And fixed my Eagles in unfaithful ground : 
By force submitted to the Roman sway 
Fierce Nations , and unknowing to obey : 
And now , for my reward , ungrateful Rome 
For which I fought abroad , rebels at home . 


Alb.   Yet 't is their fear which does this War maintain : 
They cannot brook a Martial Monarch's Reign : 
Your Valour would their sloth too much accuse ; 
And therefore , like themselves , they Princes choose . 


Placid .  Two , tame , gowned Princes , who at ease , debate 
In lazy Chairs , the business of the State : 
Who reign but while the people they can please , 
And only know the little Arts of Peace . 


Char.   In fields they dare not fight where Honour calls ; 
But breathe a faint defiance from their Walls . 
The very noise of War their Souls does wound ; 
They quake , but hearing their own Trumpets sound . 


Val.   An easy Summons but for form they wait , 
And to your Fame will open wide the gate . 


Placid .  I wish our Fame that swift success may find ; 
But Conquests , Sir , are easily designed : 
However soft within themselves they are , 
To you they will be valiant by despair : 
For having once been guilty , well they know 
To a revengeful Prince they still are so . 


Alb.   't is true , that , since the Senate's succours came , 
They grow more bold . 


Max.   — That Senate's but a name : 
Or they are Pageant Princes which they make : 
That power they give away , they would partake . 
Two equal powers , two different ways will draw , 
While each may check , and give the other Law. 
True , they secure propriety and peace ; 
But are not fit an Empire to increase . 
When they should aid their Prince , the Slaves dispute ; 
And fear success should make him absolute . 
They let Foes conquer , to secure the State , 
And lend a Sword , whose edge themselves rebate . 


Char.   When to increase the Gods you late are gone , 
I 'll swiftly choose to die , or reign alone : 
But these half-kings our courage cannot fright ; 
The thrifty State will bargain ever they fight : 
Give just so much for every Victory ; 
And rather lose a fight , than over-buy . 


Max.   Since all delays are dangerous in War , 
Your men , Albinus , for assault prepare : 
C●●spinus and Menephilus , I hear 
Two Consulars , these Aquileians cheer ; 
By whom they may , if we protract the time , 
Be taught the courage to defend their crime . 


Placid .  Put off th' ' assault but only for this day ; 
no loss can come by such a small delay . 


Char.   We are not sure to morrow will be ours : 
Wars have , like Love , their favourable hours : 
Let us use all ; for if we loose one day ; 
That white one , in the crowd , may slip away . 


Max.   Fates dark recesses we can never find ; 
But Fortune at some hours to all is kind ; 
The lucky have whole days , which still they choose ; 
th' unlucky have but hours , and those they loose . 


Placid .  I have consulted one , who reads Heavens' doom , 
And sees , as present , things which are to come . 
't is that Nigrinus , made by your command 
A Tribune in the new Panonian Band. 
him have I seen , ( on Ister's Banks he stood , 
Where last we wintered ) bind the headlong flood 
In sudden ice ; and where most swift it flows , 
In crystal nets , the wondering fishes close . 
then , with a moment's thaw , the streams enlarge , 
And from the Mesh the twinkling Guests discharge . 
In a deep vale , or near some ruined wall 
He would the Ghosts of slaughtered Soldiers call ; 
Who , slow , to wounded bodies did repair , 
And loath to enter , shivered in the air ; 
These his dread Wand did to short life compel , 
And forced the Fates of Battles to foretell . 


Max.   't is wondrous strange ! But , good placidius , say , 
What prophecies Nigrinus of this day ? 


Placid .  In a loan Tent , all hung with black , I saw 
Where in a Square he did a Circle draw : 
Four Angles , made by that circumference , 
bore holy words inscribed , of my stick sense . 
When first a hollow wind began to blow , 
The Sky grew black , and bellied down more low , 
Around the fields did nimble Lightning play , 
Which offered us by fits , and snatched the day . 
' Midst this , was heard the shrill and tender cry 
Of well-pleased Ghosts , which in the storm did fly ; 
Danced to and from , and skimed along the ground , 
Till to the Magic Circle they were bound . 
They coursing it , while we were fenced within , 
We saw this dreadful Scene of Fate begin . 


Char.   Speak without fear ; what did the Vision show ? 



Placid .  A Curtain drawn presented to our view , 
A Town besieged ; and on the neighbouring Plain 
Lay heaps of visionary Soldiers slain . 
A rising mist obscured the gloomy head 
Of one , who in Imperial Robes lay dead . 
Near this , in Fetters stood a Virgin , crowned ; 
Whom many Cupids striven in vain to wound : 
A voice to morrow , still to morrow rung : 
Another Io ; Io , Paean sung . 


Char.   Visions and Oracles still doubtful are , 
And never expounded till th' event of War. 
The God's foreknowledge on our Swords will wait : 
If we fight well , they must fore-show good Fate . 


To them a Centurion . Cent.   A rising dust which trouble's all the air , 
And this way travels , shows some Army near . 


Char.   I hear the sound of Trumpets from afar . 



[ Exit Albinus . Max.   It seems the voice of Triumph , not of War.  



To them Albinus again . Alb.   Health and success our Emperor attends : 
The Forces marching on the Plain , are friends . 
Porphyrius , whom you Aegypts' Praetor made , 
Is come from Alexandria to your aid . 


Max.   It well becomes the conduct and the care 
Of one so famed and fortunate in War. 
You must resign , Placidius , your Command , 
To him I promised the Praetorian Band. 
Your duty in your swift compliance show , 
I will provide some other charge for you . 


Placid .  May Caesar's pleasure ever be obeyed 
With that submission , which by me is paid . 
Now all the Curses envy ever knew , 
Or could invent , Porphyrius pursue . 


Aside . Alb.   Placidius does too tamely bear his loss ; 
[ To Charinus . This new pretender will all power engross : 
All things must now by his direction move ; 
And you , Sir , must resign your Father's love . 


Char.   Yes ; every name to his repute must bow ; 
There grow no Bays for any other brow . 
He blasts my early Honour in the bud , 
Like some tall Tree the Monster of the Wood , 
O're-shading all which under him would grow , 
He sheds his venom on the Plants below . 


Alb.   You must some noble action undertake ; 
Equal with his your own renown to make . 


Char.   I am not for a slothful envy born , 
I 'll do 't this day , in the dire Visions scorn . 
He comes : We two , like the twin Stars appear ; 
Never to shine together in one Sphere . 


Exit cum Alb.  Enter Porphyrius attended . Max.   Porphyrius , welcome , welcome as the light 
To cheerful Birds ; or as to Lover's night . 
Welcome as what thou bring'st me , Victory . 


Por.   That waits , Sir , on your Arms , and not on me . 
You left a Conquest more than half achieved ; 
And for whose easiness I almost grieved . 
Yours only the Egyptian Laurels are ; 
I bring you but the relics of your War. 
The Christian Princess to receive your doom , 
Is from her Conquered Alexandria come . 
Her Mother in another Vessel sent , 
A Storm surprised ; nor know I the event : 
Both from your bounty must receive their state ; 
Or must on your triumphant Chariot wait . 


Max.   From me they can expect no grace , whose minds 
An execrable superstition blinds . 


Apoll.   The Gods who raised you to the World's Command , 
Require these Victims from your grateful hand . 


Por.   To minds resolved , the threats of Death are vain ; 
They run to fires , and there enjoy their pain : 
Not Mucius made more haste his hand t' expose 
To greedy flames , than their whole bodies those . 


Max.   How , to their own destruction , they are blind ! 
Zeal is the pious madness of the mind . 


Por.   They all our famed Philosophers defy ; 
And would our Faith by force of reason try . 


Apoll.   I beg it , Sir , by all the powers Divine , 
That in their right , this Combat may be mine . 


Max.   It shall ; and fifty Doctors of our Laws , 
Be added to you , to maintain the cause . 


Enter Berenice the Empress , Valeria Daughter to the Emperor , Erotion . Placid .  The Empress and your Daughter , Sir , are here , 



Por.   What dangers in those charming Eyes appear ! 
Looking on the Empress . How my old wounds are opened at this view ! 
And in my murderers presence bleed anew ! 


Max.   I did expect your coming to partake 
To the Ladies . The general gladness which my Triumphs make . 
You did Porphyrius as a Courtier know , 
But as a Conqueror behold him now . 


Ber.   You know ( I read it in your blushing face ) 
To Por.  To merit , better than receive a grace : 
And I know better silently to own , 
Than with vain words to pay your service done . 


Por.   Princes , like Gods , reward ever we deserve ; 
Kneeling to kiss h●●● And pay us in permitting us to serve . 
O might I still grow here , and never move ! 


( lower . ) Ber.   How dangerous are these ecstasies of Love ! 
He shows his passion to a thousand Eyes ! 
He cannot stir nor can I bid him rise ! 
That word my heart refuses to my tongue ! 


Aside . Max.   Madam , you let the General kneel too long . 



Por.   Too long , as if Eternity were so ! 



Aside . Ber.   Rise , good Porphyrius , ( since it must be so . ) 



Aside . Por.   Like Hermits from a Vision I retire ; 
rising . With Eyes too weak to see what I admire . 


Aside . Val.   The Empress knows your worth ; but , Sir , there be , 
To Porphyrius , who kisses her hand . Those who can value it as high as she . 
And 't is but just , ( since in my Father's cause , 
You fought ) your Valour should have my applause . 


Placid .  OH Jealousy , how art thou Eagle-eyed ! 
She love's ; and would her Love in praises hide : 
How am I bound this Rival to pursue , 
Who ravishes my Love and Fortune too ! 


Aside . A Dead March within , and Trumpet's . Max.   Somewhat of mournful , sure , my Ears does wound ; 
Like the hoarse murmurs of a Trumpets sound , 
And Drums unbraced , with Soldier's broken cries . 
Enter Albinus . Albinus , Whence proceeds this dismal noise ? 


Alb.   Too soon you 'll know what I want words to tell . 



Max.   How fares my Son ? Is my Charinus well ? 
Not answer me ! O my prophetic fear ! 


Alb.   How can I speak ; or how , Sir , can you hear ? 
Imagine that which you would most deplore , 
And that which I would speak is it , or more . 


Max.   Thy mournful message in thy looks I read : 
Is he ( o that I live to ask it ) dead ? 


Alb.   Sir — 



Max.   Stay ; if thou speakest that word , thou speakest thy last : 
Some God now , if he dares , relate what 's past : 
Say but he 's dead , that God shall mortal be . 


Alb.   then , what I dare not speak , look back and see . 



Charinus born in dead by Soldiers . Max.   See nothing , Eyes , henceforth , but Death and woe , 
  done me the worst office you can do . 
Youv'e shown me Destinies preposterous crime ; 
An unripe fate ; disclosed ever Nature's time . 


Placid .  Assuage , great Prince , your passion , lest you show 
there 's somewhat in your Soul which Fate can bow . 


Por.   Fortune should by your greatness be controlled : 
Arm your great mind , and let her take no hold . 


Max.   To tame Philosophers teach constancy ; 
There is no farther use of it in me . 
Gods ( but why name I you ! 
All that was worth a prayer to you is gone : ) 
I ask not back my Virtue , but my Son.  


Alb.   His too great thirst of fame his ruin brought . 
Though , Sir , beyond humanity he fought . 


Placid .  This was my Vision of this fatal day ! 



Alb.   With a fierce hast he led our Troops the way : 
While fiery showers of Sulphur on him reigned ; 
Nor left he till the Battlements he gained : 
There with a Forest of their Darts he striven ; 
And stood like Capaneus defying Jove . 
With his broad Sword the boldest beating down , 
While Fate grew pale lest he should win the Town . 
And turned the Iron leaves of its dark Book , 
To make new dooms ; or mend what it mistake . 
Till sought by many Deaths , he sunk though late , 
And by his fall asserted doubtful Fate . 


Vale.   O my Dear Brother ! whom Heaven let us see , 
And would not longer suffer him to be ! 


Max.   And didst not thou a Death with Honour choose , 
To Alb.  But impudently liv'st to bring this news ? 
After his loss how didst thou dare to breath ? 
— But thy base Ghost shall follow him in death . 
A decimation I will strictly make 
Of all who my Charinus did forsake . 
And of each Legion each Centurion 
Shall die : — Placidius , see my pleasure done . 


Por.   Sir , you will lose by this severity 
Your Soldier's hearts . 


Max.   — Why , they take Pay to die . 



Por.   then spare Albinus only . 



Max.   — I consent 
To leave his life to be his punishment . 
Discharged from trust ; branded with infamy 
Let him live on , till he ask leave to die . 


Ber.   Let me petition for him . 



Max.   — I have said : 
And will not be entreated , but obeyed . 
But , Empress , whence does your compassion grow ? 


Ber.   You need not ask it , since my birth you know . 
The Race of Antonin's was named the Good : 
I draw my pity from my Royal Blood.  


Max.   Still must I be upbraided with your Line ? 
I know you speak it in contempt of mine . 
But your late Brother did not prise me lesle , 
Because I could not boast of Images . 
And the God's owned me more when they decreed 
A Thracian Shepherd should your Line succeed . 


Ber.   The Gods ! OH do not name the powers divine , 
They never mingled their Decrees with thine . 
My Brother gave me to thee for a Wife , 
And for my Dowry thou didst take his life . 


Max.   The Gods by many Victories have shown , 
That they my merits and his death did own . 


Ber.   Yes ; they have owned they ; witness this just day ; 
When they begin thy mischiefs to repay . 
See the reward of all thy wicked care , 
Before thee thy succession ended there . 
Yet but in part my Brother's Ghost is pleased : 
Restless till all the groaning world be eased . 
For me ; no other happiness I own 
Than to have born no Issue to thy Throne . 


Max.   Provoke my rage no farther , lest I be 
Revenged at once upon the Gods and thee . 


Por.   aside . ] What horrid tortures seize my labouring mind ! 
OH , only excellent of all thy kind ! 
To hear thee threatened while I idle stand : 
Heaven ! was I born to fear a Tyrant's hand ? 


Max. to Ber.   Hence from my sight , — thy blood , if thou dost stay , — 



Ber.   Tyrant ! too well to that thou knowest the way . 



( going . ) Por.   Let base Souls from falling Fortunes fly : 
I 'll pay my duty to her , though I die . 


Exit leading her , Max.   What made Porphyrius so officious be ? 
The action looked as done in scorn of me . 


Val.   It did , indeed , some little freedom show ; 
But somewhat to his Services you owe.  


Max.   Yet , if I thought it his presumption were — 



Placid .  Perhaps he did not your displeasure hear . 



Max.   My anger was too loud , not to be heard . 



Placid .  I 'm loath to think he did it not regard . 



Max.   How , not regard ! 



Val.   Placidius , you foment 
On too light grounds my Father's discontent . 
But when an action does two faces wear , 
't is Justice to believe what is most fair . 
I think , that knowing what respect there rests 
For her late Brother in the Soldier's breasts , 
He went to serve the Emperor : and designed 
Only to calm the tempest in her mind , 
lest some Sedition in the Camp should rise . 


Max.   I ever thought him loyal as he 's wise . 
Since therefore , all the Gods their spite have shown 
To rob my Age of a successive Throne ; 
And you who now remain 
The only Issue of my former bed 
In Empire cannot by your Sex succeed : 
To bind Porphyrius firmly to the State , 
I will this day my Caesar him create : 
And , Daughter , I will give him you for Wife . 


Val.   OH day , the best and happiest of my life ! 



Placid .  OH day , the most accursed I ever knew ! 



Aside . Max.   See to my Son performed each Funeral due : 
then to the toils of War we will return ; 
And make our Enemies our losses mourn . 


Exeunt . ACT II  

SCENE I  

The Royal Camp.  Berenice , Porphyrius . Ber.   Porphyrius , you too far did tempt your Fate , 
In owning her the Emperor does hate . 
't is true , your duty to me it became ; 
But , praising that , I must your conduct blame . 


Por.   Not to have owned my zeal at such a time , 
Were to sin higher than your Tyrant's crime . 


Ber.   'T was too much my disgrace t' accompany ; 
A silent wish had been enough for me . 


Por.   Wishes are aids , faint Servants may supply , 
Who ask Heaven for you what themselves deny . 
could I do lesle than my respect to pay , 
Where I before had given my heart away ? 


Ber.   You fail in that respect you seem to bear , 
When you speak words unfit for me to hear . 


Por.   Yet you did once accept those vows I paid . 



Ber.   Those vows were then to Berenice made ; 
But cannot now be heard without a sin , 
When offered to the Wife of Maximin . 


Por.   Has , then , the change of Fortune changed your will ? 
Ah! why are you not Berenice still ? 
To Maximin you once declared your hate ; 
Your Marriage was a Sacrifice to th' State : 
Your Brother made it to secure his Throne , 
Which this man made a step to mount it on . 


Ber.   Whatever Maximin has been , or is , 
I am to bear , since Heaven has made me his . 
For wives , who must themselves of power divest , 
When they love blindly , for their peace love best . 


Por.   If mutual love be vowed when faith you plight , 
then he , who forfeits first , has lost his right . 


Ber.   Husbands a forfeiture of love may make ; 
But what avails the forfeit none can take ? 
As in a general wreck 
The Pirate sinks with his ill-gotten gains , 
And nothing to another's use remains : 
So , by his loss , no gain to you can fall : 
The Sea , and vast destruction swallows all . 


Por.   Yet he , who from the shore , the wreck descries , 
May lawfully enrich him with the prize . 


Ber.   Who sees the wreck can yet no title pled , 
Till he be sure the Owner first is dead . 


Por.   If that be all the claim I want to love , 
This Pirate of your heart I 'll soon remove ; 
And , at one stroke , the world and you set free . 


Ber.   Leave to the care of Heaven that world and me . 



Por.   Heaven , as its instrument my courage sends . 



Ber.   Heaven ne'er sent those who fight for private ends . 
We both are bound by trust , and must be true ; 
I to his Bed , and to his Empire you . 
For he who to the bad betrays his trust , 
Though he does good , becomes himself unjust . 


Por.   When Brutus did from Caesar Rome redeem , 
The Act was good . 


Ber.   — But was not good in him . 
You see the Gods adjudged it Parricide , 
By dooming the event on Caesar's side . 
't is virtue not to be obliged at all ; 
Or not conspire our Benefactors fall . 


Por.   You doom me then to suffer all this ill , 
And yet I doom myself to love you still . 


Ber.   Dare not Porphyrius suffer then with me , 
Since what for him I for myself decree ? 


Por.   How can I bear those griefs you disapprove ? 



Ber.   To ease'em , I 'll permit you still to love . 



Por.   That will but haste my death , if you think fit 
Not to reward , but barely to permit . 
Love without hope does like a torture wound , 
Which makes me reach in pain , to touch the ground . 


Ber.   If hope , then , to your life so needful be , 
Hope still . 


Por.   — Blessed News ! 



Ber.   — But hope , in Heaven , not me . 



Por.   Love is too noble such deceits to use . 
Referring me to Heaven , your gift I loose . 
So Princes cheaply may our wants supply , 
When they give that their Treasurers deny . 


Ber.   Love blinds my Virtue : if I longer stay , 
It will grow dark , and I shall lose my way . 


Por.   One kiss from this fair hand can be no sin ; 
I ask not that you gave to Maximin . 
In full reward of all the pains i  passed , 
Give me but one . 


Ber.   — then let it be your last . 



Por.   't is gone ! 
Like Soldiers prodigal of their Arrears , 
One minute spends the Pay of many years . 
— Let but one more be added to the sum , 
And pay at once for all my pains to come . 


Ber.   Unthrifts will starve if we beforehand give : 
[ Pulling back her hand . ] I 'll see you shall have just enough to live . 


Enter Erotion . Ero.   Madam , the Emperor is drawing near ; 
And comes , they say , to seek Porphyrius here . 


Ber.   Alas ! 



Por.   — I will not ask what he intends ; 
My life , or death , alone , on you depends . 


Ber.   I must withdraw ; but must not let him know 
Aside . How hard the precepts of my Virtue grow ! 
But what ever Fortune is for me designed , 
Sweet Heaven , be still to brave Porphyrius kind ! 


Exit cum Erotio . Por.   she 's gone unkindly , and refused to cast 
One glance to feed me for so long a fast . 


Enter Maximin , Placidius , Guards . Max.   Porphyrius , since the Gods have ravished one , 
I come in you to seek another Son. 
Succeed him then in my Imperial state ; 
Succeed in all , but his untimely fate . 
If I adopt you with no better grace , 
Pardon a father's tears , upon my face , 
And give 'em to Charinus memory : 
May they not prove as ominous to thee . 


Por.   With what misfortunes Heaven torment's me still ! 
Why must I be obliged to one so ill ? 


[ Aside . Max.   Those offers which I made you , Sir , were such , 
no private man should need to balance much . 


Por.   Who durst his thoughts to such ambition lift ? 
[ Kneeling . The greatness of it made me doubt the gift . 
The distance was so vast , that to my view 
It made the object seem at first untrue ; 
And now 't is near , the sudden excellence 
Strikes through , and flashes on my tender sense . 


Max.   Yet Heaven and Earth , which so remote appear , 
[ raising him . ] Are by the Air , which flows betwixt 'em , near . 
And betwixt us two my Daughter be the chain , 
One end with me , and one with you remain . 


Por.   You press me down with such a glorious Fate , 
[ Kneeling again . ] I cannot rise against the mighty weight . 
Permit I may retire some little space , 
And gather strength to bear so great a grace . 


[ Exit bowing . Placid .  How Love and Fortune lavishly contend , 
Which should Porphyrius wishes av-s_d befriend ! 
The mid-streams his ; I , creeping by the side , 
am shouldered off by his impetuous Tide . 


Enter Valerius hastily . Val.   I hope my business may my haste excuse ; 
For , Sir , I bring you most surprising news . 
The Christian Princess in her Tent confers 
With fifty of your learned Philosophers ; 
Whom with such Eloquence she does persuade , 
That they are Captives to her reasons made . 
I left 'em yielding up their vanquished cause , 
And all the Soldiers shouting her applause ; 
Even Apollonius does but faintly speak , 
Whose voice the murmurs of th' assistants break . 


Max.   Conduct this Captive Christian to my Tent ; 
She shall be brought to speedy punishment . 
I must in time some remedy provide , 
[ Exit Valerius . lest this contagious Error spread too wide . 


Placid .  TO infected zeal you must no mercy show : 
For , from Religion , all Rebellions grow . 


Max.   The silly crowd , by factious Teachers , brought 
To think that Faith untrue their youth was taught , 
Run on in new Opinions blindly bold ; 
Neglect , contemn , and then assault the old . 
th' infectious madness seizes every part , 
And from the head distils upon the heart . 
And first they think their Prince's faith not true , 
And then proceed to offer him a new ; 
Which if refused , all duty from 'em cast , 
To their new Faith they make new Kings at last . 


Placid .  Those ills by Malcontents are often wrought , 
That by their Prince their duty may be bought . 
They head those holy Factions which they hate , 
To sell their duty at a dearer rate . 
But , Sir , the Tribune is already here 
With your fair Captive . 


Max.   — Bid 'em both appear . 
Enter S. Catharine , Valerius , Apollonius , Guards . See where she comes with that high Air and mien , 
Which marks , in bonds , the greatness of a Queen . 
What pity ' 't is ! — but I no charms must see 
In her who to our Gods is enemy . — 
Fair foe of Heaven , whence comes this haughty pride , 
[ To her . Or is it Frenzy does your mind misguide 
To scorn our Worship , and new Gods to find ? 


S. Cath.   Nor pride nor frenzy , but a settled mind ; 
Enlightened from above , my way does mark . 


Max.   Though Heaven be clear , the way to it is dark . 



S. Cath.   But where our Reason with our Faith does go , 
we 're both above enlightened , and below . 
But Reason with your fond Religion fights , 
For many Gods are many Infinites : 
This to the first Philosophers was known , 
Who , under various names , adored but one . 
Though your vain Poets after did mistake , 
Who every Attribute a God did make . 
And so obscene their Ceremonies be , 
As good men loath , and Cato blushed to see . 


Max.   War is my Province ; Priest , why stand you mute ? 
You gain by Heaven , and therefore should dispute . 


Apol.   In all Religions , as in ours , there are 
Some solid truths , and some things popular . 
The popular in pleasing Fables lie , 
The truths , in precepts of Morality . 
And these to human life are of that use , 
That no Religion can such Rules produce . 


S. Cath.   then let the whole Dispute concluded be 
Betwixt these Rules and Christianity . 


Apol.   And what more noble can your Doctrine preach , 
Than Virtues which Philosophy does teach ? 
To keep the passions in severest awe , 
To live to Reason , ( Nature's greatest Law ) 
To follow Virtue , as its own reward ; 
And good and ill , as things without , regard . 


S. Cath.   Yet few could follow those strict Rules they gave ; 
For human life will human frailties have ; 
And love of Virtue is but barren praise , 
Airy as Fame : nor strong enough to raise 
The actions of the Soul above the sense . 
Virtue grows cold without a recompense . 
We virtuous acts as duty do regard ; 
Yet are permitted to expect reward . 


Apol.   By how much more your Faith reward assures , 
So much more frank our Virtue is than yours . 


S. Cath.   Blind men ! you seek even those rewards you blame : 
But ours are solid ; yours an empty name . 
Either to open praise your Acts you guide , 
Or else reward yourselves with secret pride . 


Apol.   Yet still our Moral virtues you obey ; 
Ours are the Precepts though applied your way . 


S. Cath.   't is true , your virtues are the same we teach ; 
But in our practice they much higher reach . 
You but forbid to take another's due ; 
But we forbid e'vn to desire it too . 
Revenge of injuries you Virtue call ; 
But we forgiveness of our wrongs extol : 
Immodest deeds you hinder to be wrought , 
But we proscribe the least immodest thought . 
So much your Virtues are in ours refined , 
That yours but reach the actions , ours the mind . 


Max.   Answer in short to what you heard her speak . 



[ Too Apol.  Apol.   Where Truth prevails , all arguments are weak . 
To that convincing power I must give place : 
And with that Truth that Faith I will embrace . 


Max.   OH Traitor to our Gods ; but more to me ; 
dar'st thou of any Faith but of thy Princes be ? 
But sure thou ravest ; thy foolish Error find : 
Cast up the poison that infects thy mind ; 
And eat the Torments thou art sure to feel . 


Apol.   Nor fire , nor torture , nor revenging Steel 
Can on my Soul the least impression make : 
How gladly , Truth , I suffer for thy sake ! 
Once I was ignorant of what was so ; 
But never can abandon Truth I know : 
My Martyrdom I to thy Crown prefer ; 
Truth is a Cause for a Philosopher . 


S. Cath.   Loose not that Courage which Heaven does inspire ; 
[ To Apollonius . But fearless go to be baptised in fire . 
Think 't is a Triumph , not a danger near : 
Give him your blood ; but give him not a tear . 
Go , and prepare my Seat : and hover be 
Near that bright space which is reserved for me . 


Max.   Hence with the Traitor ; bear him to his Fate . 



Apol.   Tyrant , I fear thy pity , not thy hate : 
` A Life Eternal I by Death obtain . 


Max.   Go , carry him , where he that Life may gain . 



Ex. Apollonius , Valerius , and Guards . Placid .  From this Enchantress all these ills are come : 
You are not safe till you pronounce her doom . 
Each hour she life's a Legion sweeps away ; 
she 'll make your Army Martyrs in a day . 


Max.   't is just : this Christian Sorceress shall die : 
( Would I had never proved her Sorcery : ) 
Not that her charming Tongue this change has bred ; 
I fear 't is something that her Eyes have said . 
I love : and am ashamed it should be seen . 


[ Aside . Placid .  Sir , shall she die ? 



Max.   — Consider she 's a Queen . 



Placid .  Those claims in Cleopatra ended were . 



Max.   How many Cleopatra's live in her ! 



[ Aside . Placid .  When you condemned her , Sir , she was a Queen . 



Max.   no , Slave ; she only was a Captive then . 



S. Cath.   My joyful Sentence you defer to long . 



Max.   I never knew that Life was such a wrong . 
But if you needs will die : — it shall be so . 
— Yet think it does from your perverseness flow . 
Men say , indeed , that I in Blood delight ; 
But you shall find — Haste , take her from my sight . 
— For Maximin I have too much confessed : 
And for a Lover not enough expressed . 
Absent , I may her Martyrdom decree ; 
But one look more will make that Martyr me . 


[ Exit S. Catharine Guarded . ] Placid .  What is it , Sir , that shakes your mighty mind ? 



Max.   Somewhat I am ashamed that thou shouldst find . 



Placid .  If it be Love which does your Soul possess — 



Max.   Are you my Rival that so soon you guests ? 



Placid .  Far , mighty Prince , be such a crime from me . 
[ Kneeling . ] Which , with the pride , includes impiety . 
could you forgive it , yet the Gods above 
Would never pardon me a Christian Love.  


Max.   thou liest : — there 's not a God inhabits there , 
But for this Christian would all Heaven forswear . 
Even Jove would try more shapes her Love to win : 
And in new birds , and unknown beasts would sin ; 
At least , if Jove could love like Maximin . 


Placid .  A Captive , Sir , who would a Martyr die ? 



Max.   She court's not death , but shuns Captivity . 
Great gifts , and greater promises I 'll make ; 
And what Religion is 't , but they can shake ? 
She shall live high : — Devotion in distress 
Is born , but vanishes in happiness . 


Exit Maximin . Placid . solus .  His Son forgot , his Empress unappeased ; 
How soon the Tyrant with new Love is seized ! 
Love various minds does variously inspire : 
He stirs in gentle Nature's gentle fire ; 
Like that of Incense on the Altars laid : 
But raging flames tempestuous Souls invade . 
A fire which every windy passion blows ; 
With pride it mounts , and with revenge it glows . 
But I accursed , who servilely must move ; 
And soothe his passion for his Daughter's Love ! 
Small hope , 't is true , attends my mighty care . 
But of all passions Love does last despair . 


Exit . ACT III  

SCENE I  

The Royal Pavilion . Maximin , Placidius , Guards and Attendants . Max.   This Love that never could my youth engage , 
Peeps out his coward head to dare my age . 
Where hast thou been thus long , thou sleeping form , 
That wakest like drowsy Seamen in a storm ? 
A sullen hour thou choosest for thy birth : 
My Love shoots up in tempests , as the Earth 
Is stirred and loosened in a blust'ring wind , 
Whose blasts to waiting flowers her womb unbind . 


Placid .  Forgive me , if I say your passions are 
So rough , as if in Love you would make War. 
But Love is soft — 
And with soft beauty tenderly complies ; 
In lips it laughs , and languishes in eyes . 


Max.   There let it laugh ; or , like an Infant , weep : 
I cannot such a suppling passion keep . 
Mine , stiff with age , and stubborn as my arms , 
Walks upright ; stoops not to , but meets her charms . 


Placid .  Yet fierceness suits not with her gentle kind ; 
They brave assaults ; but may be undermined . 


Max.   Till I in those mean Arts am better read , 
Court thou , and fawn , and flatter in my stead . 
Enter S. Catharine . She comes ; and now , methinks , I could obey : 
Her form glides through me , and my heart gives way : 
This Ironheart , which no impression took 
From Wars , melts down , and runs , if she but look . 


Exit Maximin . Placid .  Madam , I from the Emperor am come 
T'applaude your Virtue , and reverse your doom . 
He thinks , whatever your Religion be , 
This Palm is owing to your constancy . 


S. Cath.   My constancy from him seeks no renown ; 
Heaven , that proposed the course , will give the Crown . 


Placid .  But Monarches are the God's Vicegerents here ; 
Heaven gives rewards ; but what it gives they bear : 
From Heaven to you th'aegyptian Crown is sent , 
Yet 't is a Prince who does the gift present . 


S. Cath.   The Deity I serve , had he thought fit , 
could have preserved my Crown unconquered yet : 
But when his secret Providence designed 
To levelly that , he levelled too my mind ; 
Which , by contracting its desires , is taught 
The humble quiet of possessing naught . 


Placid .  To Stoics leave a happiness so mean : 
Your Virtue does deserve a nobler Scene . 
You are not for obscurity designed : 
But , like the Sun , must cheer all human kind . 


S. Cath.   no happiness can be where is no rest : 
th' unknown , untalked of man is only blessed . 
He , as in some safe Cliff , his Cell does keep , 
From thence he views the labours of the Deep : 
The Gold-fraught Vessel which mad tempests beaten , 
He sees now vainly make to his retreat : 
And , when from far , the tenth wave does appear , 
Shrinks up in silent joy , that he 's not there . 


Placid .  You have a Pilot who your Ship secures ; 
The Monarch both of Earth and Seas is yours . 
He who so freely gives a Crown away , 
Yet asks no tribute but what you may pay . 
One smile on him a greater wealth bestows , 
Than Egypt yields , when Nilus overflows . 


S. Cath.   I cannot wholly innocent appear , 
Since I have lived such words as these to hear . 
OH Heaven , which dost of chastity take care ! — 


Placid .  Why do you lose an unregarded prayer ? 
If happiness , as you believe , be rest , 
That quiet sure is by the Gods possessed : — 
't is greatness to neglect , or not to know 
The little business of the world below . 


S. Cath.   This doctrine well besitted him who thought 
A casual world was from wild Atoms wrought : 
But such an order in each chance we see , 
( Chained to its cause , as that to its decree , ) 
That none can think a workmanship so rare , 
Was built or kept without a Workman's care . 


To them Maximin , Attendants , and Guards . Max.   Madam , you from Placidius may have heard 
Some news , which will your happiness regard . 
th' Egyptian Crown I to your hands remit ; 
And , with it , take his heart who offers it . 
She turns aside . Do you my person and my gift contemn ? 


S. Cath.   My hopes pursue a brighter Diadem . 



Max.   Can any brighter than the Roman be ? 
I find my proffered Love has cheapened me : 
Since you neglect to answer my desires , 
Know , Princess , you shall burn in other fires . 
— Why should you urge me to so black a deed ? 
Think all my anger did from Love proceed . 


S. Cath.   Nor threats nor promises my mind can move : 
Your furious anger , nor your impious Love.  


Max.   The Love of you can never impious be ; 
You are so pure — 
That in the Act 't would change th' impiety . 
Heaven would unmake it sin — 


S. Cath.   I take myself from thy detested sight : 
To my respect thou hast no longer right : 
Such power in bonds true piety can have , 
That I command , and thou art but a Slave . 


Exit . S. Cath.  Max.   To what a height of arrogance she swells ! 
Pride or ill nature still with Virtue dwells ; 
Her death shall set me free this very hour ; 
— But is her death within a Lover's power ? 
Wild with my rage , more wild with my desire , 
Like meeting tides — but mine are tides of fire . 
What petty promise was 't that caused this frown ? 


Placid .  You heard : no lesle than the Egyptian Crown . 



Max.   Throw Aegypt's by , and offer in the stead ; 
Offer — the Crown on Berenice's head . 
I am resolved to double till I win ; 
About it strait , and send Porphyrius in . 
Exit Placid . We look like Eagles towering in the Sky ; 
While her high flight still raises mine more high . 


To him Porphyrius . Por.   I come , Sir , to expect your great commands . 



Max.   My happiness lies only in thy hands . 
And , since I have adopted thee my Son , 
I 'll keep no secret from thy breast unknown : 
Led by the interest of my rising Fate , 
I did espouse this Empress whom I hate : 
And therefore with lesle shame I may declare , 
That I the Fetters of thy Captive wear . 


Por.   Sir , you amaze me with so strange a Love.  



Max.   Pity , my Son , those flames you disapprove . 
The cause of Love can never be assigned ; 
't is in no face , but in the Lover's mind . 


Por.   Yet there are Beauties which attract all hearts ; 
And all mankind lies open to their darts : 
Whose Sovereignty , without dispute , we grant ; 
Such Graces , sure , your Empress does not want . 


Max.   Beauty has bounds , — 
And can no more to every heart be so , 
Than any Coin through every Land can go . 
Some secret Grace , which is but so to me , 
Though not so great , may yet more powerful be : 
All guard themselves when stronger Foes invade ; 
Yet , by the weak , surprises may be made : 
But you , my Son , are not to judge , but aid . 


Por.   What is it , Sir , you can require of me ? 



Max.   I would from Berenice's bonds be free : 
This yoke of Marriage from us both remove , 
Where two are bound to draw , though neither love . 


Por.   Neither the Gods nor man will give consent 
To put in practice your unjust intent . 


Max.   Both must consent to that which I decree . 



Por.   The Soldiers love her Brother's memory ; 
And for her sake some Mutiny will stir . 


Max.   Our parting therefore — shall be sought by her . 
Go , bid her sue for a Divorce , or die ; 
I 'll cut the knot , if she will not untie : 
Haste to prepare her , and thyself return ; 
Thy Hymen Torch this day with mine shall burn . 


Exit . Por.   Rather my Funeral-torch ; — for though I know 
Valeria's fair , and that she love's me too , 
'Gainst her my Soul is armed on every part : 
Yet there are secret Rivets to my heart ; 
Where Berenice's Charms have found the way ; 
Subtle as Lightnings , but more fierce than they . 
How shall I this avoid , or gain that Love ! 
So near the Rock I , to the Port , must move . 


To him Valeria attended . Val.   Porphyrius , now my joy I may express , 
Nor longer hide the Love I must possess . 
Should I have stayed till Marriage made us one , 
You might have thought it was by duty done ; 
But of my heart I now a present make ; 
And give it you ever it be yours to take . 
Accept it as when early fruit we send : 
And let the rareness the small gift commend . 


Por.   Great Monarches , like your Father , often give 
What is above a Subject to receive : 
But faithful Officers should countermand , 
And stop the gift that passes through their hand : 
And to their Prince , that mass of wealth restore , 
Which lavished thus , would make whole Nations poor . 


Val.   But to this gift a double right you have : 
My Father gives but what before I gave . 


Por.   In vain you such unequal presents make , 
Which I still want capacity to take . 
Such fatal bounty once the Gauls did show ; 
They threw their Rings , but threw their Targets too . 
Bounty so placed , does more like ruin look ; 
You pour the Ocean on a narrow Brook.  


Val.   Yet , if your Love before prepares a Boat , 
The stream so poured , drowns not , but makes it float . 


Por.   But when the Vessel is on Quicksands cast , 
The flowing tide does more the sinking haste . 


Val.   And on what Quicksands can your heart be thrown ? 
Can you a Love besides Valeria's own ? 


Por.   If he who at your feet his heart would lay , 
Be met with first , and robbed upon the way , 
You may indeed the Robbers strength accuse , 
But pardon him who did the Present lose . 


Val.   Who is this Thief that does my right possess ? 
Name her , and then we of her strength may guests . — 
From whence does your unwonted silence come ? 


Por.   She bound and gauged me , and has left me dumb . 



Val.   But of my wrongs I will aloud complain : 
False man , thou wouldst excuse thyself in vain : 
For thee I did a Maidens blush forsake ; 
And owned a Love thou hast refused to take . 


Por.   Refused it ! — like a Miser midst his store , 
Who grasps and grasps , till he can hold no more , 
And when his strength is wanting to his mind , 
Looks back , and sighs on what he left behind . 


Val.   no , I resume that heart thou didst possess ; 
My Father shall my injuries redress : 
With me thou losest his Imperial Crown , 
And speedy death attends upon his frown . 


Por.   You may revenge your wrongs a nobler way ; 
Command my death , and I will soon obey . 


Val.   no , live ; for on thy life my cure depends : 
In Debtors deaths all obligation ends : 
'T will be some ease Ungrateful thee to call ; 
And , Bankrupt-like , say , trusting him lost all . 


Por.   Upbraided thus , what generous man would live ! 
But Fortune will revenge what you forgive . 
When I refuse , ( as in few hours I must ) 
This offered grace , your Father will be just . 


Val.   Be just ! say rather he will cruel prove , 
To kill that only person I can love . 
Yet so it is ! — 
Your interest in the Army is so high , 
That he must make you his , or you must die ! 
It is resolved ! who ever my Rival be , 
Aside after a pause . I 'll show that I deserve him more than she . 
And if at last he does ingrateful prove , 
My constancy itself rewards my Love.  


Exit . Por.   she 's gone , and gazing round about , I see 
Nothing but death , or glorious misery ; 
Here Empire stands , if I could Love displace ; 
There , hopeless Love , with more Imperial Grace : 
Thus , as a sinking Hero compassed round , 
Beckons his bravest Foe for his last wound , 
And him into his part of Fame does call , 
I 'll turn my face to Love , and there I 'll fall . 


To him Berenice , Erotion . Ber.   I come , Porphyrius , to congratulate 
This happy change of your exalted Fate : 
You to the Empire are , I hear , designed ; 
And fair Valeria must th' Alliance bind . 


Por.   Would Heaven had my succession so decreed , 
That I in all might Maximin succeed ! 
He offers me th' Imperial Crown , 't is true : 
I would succeed him , but it is in you . 


Ber.   In me ! I never did accept your Love ; 
But you , I see , would handsomely remove : 
And I can give you leave without a frown : 
I always thought you merited a Crown . 


Por.   I never sought that Crown but on your brow ; 
But you with such indifference would allow 
My change , that you have killed me with that breath : 
I feel your scorn cold as the hand of death . 


Ber.   you 'll come to life in your Valeria's arms : 
't is true , I cannot boast of equal Charms ; 
Or if I could , I never did admit 
Your Love to me , but only suffered it . 
I am a Wife , and can make no return ; 
And 't were but vain , in hopeless fires to burn . 


Por.   Unkind ! can you whom only I adore , 
Set open to your Slave the Prison-door ? 
You use my heart just as you would afford 
A fatal freedom to some harmless bird , 
Whom , breeding , you never taught to seek its food ; 
And now let fly to perish in the Wood  


Ber.   then , if you will love on , and disobey , 
And lose an Empire for my sake , you may . 
Will a kind look from me pay all this score , 
For you well know you must expect no more ? 


Por.   All I deserve it will , not all I wish : 
But I will brave the Tyrant's rage , for this . 
If I refuse , my death must needs ensue ; 
But you shall see that I dare die for you . 


Ber.   Would you for me , 
A Beauty , and an Empire too deny ? 
I love you now so well — that you shall die . 
Die mine ; 't is all I can with honour give : 
Nor should you die , if after , I would live . 
But when your Marriage and your Death I view , 
That makes you false , but this will keep you true , 


Por.   Unbind thy brows , and look abroad to see , 
OH mighty Love , thy mightiest Victory ! 


Ber.   And yet — is there no other way to try ? 
't is hard to say I love , and let you die . 


Por.   Yes , there remains some help which you may 〈◊〉 
If you , as I would die for Love , would live . 


Ber.   If death for Love be sweet , sure life is more : 
Teach me the means your safety to restore . 


Por.   Your Tyrant the Egyptian Princess love's ; 
And to that height his swelling passion moves , 
That , fearing in your death the Soldier's force , 
He from your bed does study a Divorce . 


Ber.   th' Egyptian Princess I disputing hard , 
And as a Miracle her mind regard . 
But yet I wish that this Divorce be true . 


Gives her hand . Por.   't is , Madam , but it must be sought by you . 
By this he will all Mutinies prevent ; 
And this , as well , secures your own content . 


Ber.   I hate this Tyrant , and his bed I loath ; 
But , once submitting , I am tied to both : 
Tied to that Honour , which all Women owe , 
Though not their Husband's person , yet their vow . 
Something so sacred in that bond there is , 
That none should think there could be aught amiss : 
And if there be , we should in silence hide 
Those faults , which blame our choice when they are spied . 


Por.   But , since to all the world his crimes are known , 
And , by himself the Civil war 's begun , 
Would you th' advantage of the fight delay , 
If , striking first , you were to win the day ? 


Ber.   I would , like Jews upon their Sabbath fall : 
And rather than strike first , not strike at all . 


Por.   Against yourself you sadly prophesy : 
You either this Divorce must seek , or die . 


Ber.   then death from all my griefs shall set me free . 



Por.   And would you rather choose your death , than me ? 



Ber.   My earthy part — 
Which is my Tyrants right , death will remove , 
I 'll come all Soul and Spirit to your Love. 
With silent steps I 'll follow you all day ; 
Or else before you , in the Sunbeams , play . 
I 'll lead you thence to melancholy Groves , 
And there repeat the Scenes of our past Loves . 
At night , I will within your Curtains peep ; 
With empty arms embrace you while you sleep . 
In gentle dreams I often will be by ; 
And sweep along , before your closing eye . 
All dangers from your bed I will remove ; 
But guard it most from any future Love. 
And when at last , in pity , you will die , 
I 'll watch your Birth of Immortality : 
then , Turtle-like , I 'll to my Mate repair ; 
And teach you your first flight in open Air.  


Exit Berenice cum Erotio . Por.   She has but done what Honour did require : 
Nor can I blame that Love , which I admire . 
But then her death ! 
I 'll stand betwixt , it first shall pierce my heart : 
We will be stuck together on his dart . 
But yet the danger not so high does grow : 
I 'll charge death first , perhaps repulse him too . 
But , if o'repow'red , I must be overcome ; 
Fore'dback , I 'll fight each inch into my Tomb.  


Exit . ACT IU.  

SCENE I  

Indian Cave . Placidius , Nigrinus . Nigrinus with two drawn Swords , held upward in his hands . Placid .  ALL other means have failed to move her heart ; 
Our last recourse is , therefore , to your Art  


Nig.   Of Wars , and Bloodshed , and of dire Events , 
Of Fates , and fight Kings , their Instruments , 
I could with greater certainty foretell ; 
Love only does in doubts and darkness dwell . 
For , like a wind , it in no quarter stays ; 
But points and veers each hour a thousand ways . 
On Women Love depends , and they on Will ; 
Chance turns their Orb while Destiny sits still . 


Placid .  Leave nothing unattempted in your power : 
Remember you oblige an Emperor . 


Nig.   An earthy Fiend by compact me obeys ; 
But him to light intents I must not raise . 
Some Astral forms I must invoke by prayer , 
Framed all of purest Atoms of the Air ; 
Not in their Natures simply good or ill ; 
But most subservient to bad Spirits william 
Nakar of these does lead the mighty Band , 
For eighty Legions move at his Command : 
Gentle to all , but , far above the rest , 
Mild Nakar love's his soft Damilcar best . 
In Airy Chariots they together ride ; 
And sip the dew as through the Clouds they glide : 
These are the Spirits which in Love have power . 


Placid .  Haste , and invoke 'em in a happy hour . 



Nig.   And so it proves : for , counting sev'n from Noon , 
't is Venus' hour , and in the waxing Moon . 
With Chalk I first describe a Circle here , 
Where these Aetherial Spirits must appear . 
Come in , come in ; for here they will be straight : 
Around , around , the place I fumigate : 
My fumigation is to Venus , just : 
The Souls of Roses , and red Corals dust : 
A lump of Sperma Ceti ; and to these 
The stalks and chips of Lignum Alöes . 
And , last , to make my fumigation good , 
't is mixed with Sparrows brains , and Pigeons blood . 
Nigrinus takes up the Swords . They come , they come , they come ! I hear 'em now . 


Placid .  A deathlike damp sits cold upon my brow : 
And misty vapours swim before my sight . 


Nig.   They come not in a shape to cause your fright . 



Nakar and Damilcar descend in Clouds , and sing . Nakar .  Hark , my Damilcar , we are called below ! 



Dam.   Let us go , let us go ! 
Go to relieve the care 
Of longing Lovers in despair ! 


Nakar .  Merry , merry , merry , we sail from the East 
Half tippled at a Rainbow Feast . 


Dam.   In the bright Moonshine while winds whistle loud , 
Tivy , tivy , tivy , we mount and we fly , 
All racking along in a downy white Cloud : 
And lest our leap from the Sky should prove too far , 
We slide on the back of a new-falling Star.  


Nakar .  And drop from above , 
In a Jelly of Love ! 


Dam.   But now the sun 's down , and the Element's red , 
The Spirits of Fire against us make head ! 


Nakar .  They muster , they muster , like Gnats in the Air : 
Alas ! I must leave thee , my Fair ; 
And to my light Horsemen repair . 


Dam.   OH stay , for you need not to fear 'em to night ; 
The wind is for us , and blows full in their sight : 
And o'er the wide Ocean we fight ! 
Like leaves in the Autumn our Foes will fall down ; 
And hiss in the Water — 


Both.   And hiss in the Water and drown ! 



Nakar .  But their men lie securely entrenched in a Cloud : 
And a Trumpeter-hornet to battle sounds loud . 


Dam.   Now Mortals that spy 
How we tilt in the Sky 
With wonder will gaze ; 
And fear such events as will never come to pass ! 


Nakar .  Stay you to perform what the man will have done . 



Dam.   then call me again when the Battle is wone . 



Both.   So ready and quick is a Spirit of Air 
To pity the Lover , and succour the sair , 
That , silent and swift , the little soft God 
Is here with a wish , and is gone with a nod . 


The Clouds part ; Nakar fly's up , and Damilcar down . Nig.   I charge thee , Spirit , stay ; and by the power 
[ To Damilcar . ] Of Nakar's Love , and of this holy Wand 
On the North quarter of my Circle stand : 
( Sev'n foot around for my defence I take ! ) 
To all my questions faithful answers make , 
So may'st thou live thy thousand years in peace ; 
And see thy Airy progeny increase : 
So may'st thou still continue young and fair , 
Fed by the blast of pure Aetherial Air. 
And , thy full term expired , without all pain 
Dissolve into thy Astral source again . 


Dam.   Name not my hated Rival Gemory , 
And I 'll speak true whatever thy questions be . 


Nig.   Thy Rivals hated name I will refrain : 
Speak , shall the Emperor his love obtain ? 


Dam.   Few hours shall pass before your Emperor shall be 
Possessed of that he love's , or from that love be free . 


Placid .  Shall I enjoy that Beauty I adore ? 



Dam.   She Suppliant-like , ever long , thy succour shall implore : 
And thou with her thou lov'st in happiness may'st live : 
If she not dies before , who all thy joys can give . 


Nig.   Say , what does the Egyptian Princess now ? 



Dam.   A gentle slumber sits upon her brow . 



Nig.   Go , stand before her in a golden dream : 
Set all the pleasures of the world to show , 
And in vain joys let her loose spirit flow . 


Dam.   Twice fifty Tents remove her from your sight , 
But I 'll cut through 'em all with rays of light : 
And covering other objects to your eyes , 
Show where entranced in silent sleep she lies . 


Damilcar stamps , and the Bed arises with S. Catharine in it . Dam.   singing . You pleasing dreams of Love and sweet delight , 
Appear before this slumbering Virgins sight : 
Soft visions set her free 
From mournful piety . 
Let her sad thoughts from Heaven retire ; 
And let the Melancholy Love 
Of those remoter joys above 
Give place to your more sprightly fire . 
Let purling streams be in her fancy seen ; 
And flowery Meads , and Vales of cheerful green : 
And in the midst of deathless Groves 
Soft sighing wishes lie , 
And smiling hopes fast by , 
And just beyond 'em ever laughing Loves . 


A Scene of a Paradise is discovered . Placid .  Some pleasing objects do her mind employ ; 
For on her face I read a wand'ring Joy.  


SONG . Dam.   Ah how sweet it is to love , 
Ah how gay is young desire ! 
And what pleasing pains we prove 
When we first approach Love's fire ! 
Pains of Love be sweeter far 
Than all other pleasures are . 
Sighs which are from Lovers blown , 
Do but gently heave the Heart : 
Even the tears they shed alone 
Cure , like trickling Balm their smart . 
Lover's when they loose their breath , 
Bleed away in easy death . 
Love and Time with reverence use , 
Treat 'em like a parting friend : 
Nor the golden gifts refuse 
Which in youth sincere they send : 
For each year their price is more , 
And they lesle simple than before . 
Love , like Springtides full and high , 
Swells in every youthful vein : 
But each Tide does lesle supply , 
Till they quite shrink in again : 
If a flow in Age appear , 
't is but rain , and runs not clear . 


At the end of the Song a Dance of Spirits . After which Amariel , the Guardian-angel of S. Catharine , descends to soft Music , with a flaming Sword. The Spirits crawl off the Stage amazedly , and Damilcar runs to a corner of it . Amar.   From the bright Empire of Eternal day , 
Where waiting minds for Heavens' Commission stay , 
Amariel fly's : ( a darted Mandate came 
From that great will which moves this mighty Frame , 
Bid me to thee , my Royal charge , repair , 
To guard thee from the Daemons of the Air ; 
My flaming Sword above 'em to display , 
( All keen and ground upon the edge of day ; ) 
The flat to sweep the Visions from thy mind , 
The edge to cut 'em through that stay behind . ) 
Vain Spirits , you that shunning Heavens' high noon , 
Swarm here beneath the concave of the Moon , 
What folly , or what rage your duty blinds , 
To violate the sleep of holy minds ? 
Hence , to the task assigned you here below : 
Upon the Ocean make loud Tempests blow : 
Into the wombs of hollow Clouds repair , 
And crush out Thunder from the bladdered Air. 
From pointed Sunbeams take the Mists they drew , 
And scatter 'em again in pearly dew : 
And of the bigger drops they drain below , 
Some mould in Hail , and others stamp in Snow . 


Dam.   Mercy , bright Spirit , I already feel 
The piercing edge of thy immortal steel : 
thou , Prince of day , from Elements Art free ; 
And I all body when compared to thee . 
thou treadest th' Abyss of light ! 
And where it streams with open eyes canst go : 
We wander in the Fields of Air below : 
Changelings and Fools of Heaven : and thence shut out , 
Wildly we roam in discontent about : 
Gross-heavy-fed , next man in ignorance and sin , 
And spotted all without ; and dusky all within . 
Without thy Sword I perish by thy sight , 
I reel , and stagger , and am drunk with light . 


Ama.   If ever again thou on this place art found , 
Full fifty years I 'll chain thee under ground ; 
The damps of Earth shall be thy daily food ; 
All swollen and bloated like a dungeon toad : 
And when thou shalt be freed , yet thou shalt lie 
Gasping upon the ground , too faint to fly ; 
And lag below thy fellows in the sky . 


Dam.   OH pardon , pardon this accursed deed , 
And I no more on Magic fumes will feed ; 
Which drew me hither by their powerful steams . 


Ama. to S. Cath.   Go expiate thy guilt in holy dreams . 
[ Ex. Dam.  But thou , sweet Saint , henceforth disturbed no more 
With dreams not thine , thy thoughts to Heaven restore . 


The Angel ascends , and the Scene shuts . Nig.   Some holy Being does invade this place , 
And from their duty does my Spirits chase . 
I dare no longer near it make abode : 
no Charms prevail against the Christians God.  


Exit . Placid .  How doubtfully these Spectres Fate foretell ! 
In double sense , and twilight truth they dwell : 
Like sawning Courtiers for success they wait , 
And then come smiling and declare for Fate . 
Enter Maximin and Porphyrius , attended by Valerius and Guards . But see , the Tyrant and my Rival come : 
I , like the Fiends , will flatter in his doom : 
None but a Fool distasteful truth will tell , 
So it be new and please , 't is full as well . 


Placid . whispers with the Emperor who seems pleased . Max.   You charm me with your news , which I 'll reward : 
By hopes we are for coming joys prepared : 
Possess her Love , or from that Love be free — 
Heaven speaks me fair : if she as kind can prove , 
I shall possess , but never quit my Love. 
Go , tell me when she wakes — 
Exit Placidius . Porphyrius seems to beg something of him . — Porphyrius , no ; 
She has refused , and I will keep my vow . 


Por.   For your own sake your cruel vow defer ; 
The time 's unsafe , your Enemies are near . 
And to displease your men when they should fight — 


Max.   My looks alone my Enemies will fright ; 
And o'er my men I 'll set my careful Spies , 
To watch Rebellion in their very eyes . 
no more , I cannot bear the least reply . 


Por.   Yet , Tyrant , thou shalt perish ever she die . 
Aside . Enter Valeria . Valeria here ! how Fortune treats me still 
With various harms , magnificently ill ! 


Max.   Valeria , I was sending to your Tent , 
To Valeria . But my Commands your presence does prevent . 
This is the hour , wherein the Priest shall join 
Your holy Loves , and make Porphyrius mine . 


Val.   aside . Now hold , my Heart , and Venus I implore , 
Be Judge if she he love's deserves him more . 


Por.   aside . Past hope ! and all in vain I would preserve 
My life , not for myself , but her I serve . 


Val.   I come , great Sir , your justice to demand . 



To the Emp.  Max.   You cannot doubt it from a Father's hand . 



Por.   Sir , I confess before her Suit be known ; 
And , by myself condemned , my crime I own . 
I have refused — 


Val.   — Peace , peace , while I confess 
I have refused thee for unworthiness . 


Por.   I am amazed . 



Max.   — What Riddles do you use ? 
Dare either of you my Commands refuse ? 


Val.   Yes , I dare own how ever 't was wisely done 
TO adopt so mean a person for your Son : 
So low you should not for your Daughter choose : 
And therefore , Sir , this Marriage I refuse . 


Max.   You liked the choice when first I thought it fit . 



Val.   I had not then enough considered it . 



Max.   And you have now considered it too much : 
Secrets of Empire are not safe to touch . 


Por.   Let not your mighty anger rise too high ; 
't is not Valeria merit's it , but I 
My own unworthiness so well I knew , 
That from her Love I consciosly withdrew . 


Val.   Thus rather than endure the little shame 
To be refused , you blast a Virgin's name . 
You to refuse , and I to be denied ! 
Learn more discretion , or be taught lesle pride . 


Por.   OH Heaven , in what a Labyrinth am I led ! 
I could get out , but she detains the thread ! 
Now I must wander on till I can see , 
Whether her pity or revenge it be ! 


Aside . Max.   With what child's anger do you think you play ? 
I 'll punish both , if either disobey . 


Val.   Since all the fault was mine , I am content 
Perphyrius should not share the punishment . 


Por.   Blind that I was till now , that could not see , 
'T was all th' effect of generosity . 
She love's me , even to suffer for my sake ; 
And on herself would my refusal take . 


Aside . Max.   Children to serve their Parent's interest , live . 
To Val.  Take heed what doom against yourself you give . 


Por.   Since she must suffer , if I do not speak , 
't is time the Laws of Decency to break . 
She told me , Sir , that she your choice approved : 
And ( though I blush to own it ) said she loved . 
Loved me desertless , who , with shame , confessed , 
Another flame had seized upon my breast . 
Which when , too late , the generous Princess knew , 
And feared your justice would my crime pursue , 
Upon herself she makes the Tempest fall , 
And my refusal her contempt would call . 


Val.   He raves , Sir , and to cover my disdain , 
Unhandsomly would his denial feign . 
And all means failing him , at last would try 
TO usurp the credit of a scorn , and die . 
But — let him live : — his punishment shall be 
The grief his pride will bring for losing me . 


Max.   You both obnoxious to my justice are ; 
And , Daughter , you have not deserved my care . 
't is my Command you strictly guarded be , 
Till your fantastic quarrel you agree . 


Por.   Sir — 



Max.   I 'll not hear you speak , her crime is plain , 
She owns her pride which you perhaps my feign . 
She shall be Prisoner till she bend her mind 
To that which is for both of you designed . 


Val.   you 'll find it hard my freeborn will to bond . 



Max.   I 'll find that power o'er wills which Heaven never found . 
Free will 's a cheat in any one but me : 
In all but Kings 't is willing slavery . 
An unseen Fate which forces the desire : 
The will of Puppets danced upon a wire . 
A Monarch is 
The Spirit of the World in every mind ; 
He may match Wolves to Lambs , and make it kind . 
Mine is the business of your little Fates : 
And though you war , like petty wrangling States , 
you 're in my hand ; and when I bid you cease , 
You shall be crushed together into peace . 


Val.   aside . Thus by the world my courage will be prized ; 
Seeming to scorn , who an , alas , despised : 
Dying for Love's , fulfilling Honour's Laws ; 
A secret Martyr while I own no cause . 


Exeunt Porphyrius and Valeria severally . To Maximin enter S. Catharine . S. Cath.   I come not now , as Captive to your power , 
To beg ; but as high Heavens' Ambassador , 
The Laws of my Religion to fulfil : 
Heaven sends me to return you good for ill . 
Your Empress to your Love I would restore ; 
And to your mind the peace it had before . 


Max.   While in another's name you Peace declare , 
Princess , you in your own proclaim a War. 
Your too great power does your design oppose ; 
You make those breaches which you strive to close . 


S. Cath.   That little beauty which too much you prize 
Seeks not to move your heart , or draw your eyes : 
Your Love to Berenice is due alone : 
Love , like that power which I adore , is one . 
When fixed to one , it safe at Anchor rides , 
And dares the fury of the winds and tides : 
But losing once that hold , to the wide Ocean born , 
It drives away at will , to every wave a scorn . 


Max.   If to new persons I my Love apply , 
The Stars and Nature are in fault , not I : 
My Loves are like my old Praetorian Bands , 
Whose Arbitrary power their Prince commands : 
I can no more make passion come or go , 
Than you can bid your Nilus' ebb or flow . 
` 't is lawless , and will love , and where it list : 
And that 's no sin which no man can resist : 
Those who impute it to me as a crime , 
Would make a God of me before my time . 


S. Cath.   A God , indeed , after the Roman style , 
An Eagle mounting from a kindled Pile : 
But you may make yourself a God below : 
For Kings who rule their own desires are so . 
You roam about , and never are at rest ; 
By new desires , that is , new torments , still possessed . 
Qualmish and loathing all you had before : 
Yet with a sickly appetite to more . 
As in a fev'rish dream you still drink on ; 
And wonder why your thirst is never gone . 
Love , like a ghostly Vision haunts your mind ; 
't is still before you what you left behind . 


Max.   How can I help those faults which Nature made ? 
My appetite is sickly and decayed , 
And you forbid me change ( the sick man's ease ) 
Who cannot cure , must humour his disease . 


S. Cath.   Your mind should first the remedy begin ; 
You seek without , the Cure that is within . 
The vain experiments you make each day , 
To find content , still finding it decay , 
Without attempting more , should let you see 
That you have sought it where it never could be . 
But when you place your joys on things above , 
You fix the wandering Planet of your Love : 
Thence you may see 
Poor human kind all dazed in open day , 
Err after bliss , and blindly miss their way : 
The greatest happiness a Prince can know , 
Is to love Heaven above , do good below . 


To them Berenice and Attendants . Ber.   That happiness may Berenice find , 
Leaving these empty joys of Earth behind : 
And this frail Being , where so short a while 
th' unfortunate lament , and prosperous smile . 
Yet a few days , and those which now appear 
In youth and beauty like the blooming year , 
In life's swift Scene shall change ; and cares shall come , 
And heavy age , and death's relentless doom . 


S. Cath.   Yet man , by pleasures seeks that Fate which he would eat ; 
And , sucked in by the stream , does to the Whirl-pool run . 


Max.   How , Madam , are you to new ways inclined ? 
To Ber.  I fear the Christian Sect perverts your mind . 


Ber.   Yes , Tyrant , know that I their Faith embrace , 
And own it in the midst of my disgrace . 
That Faith , which abject as it seems to thee , 
Is nobler than thy Purple Pageantry : 
A Faith , which still with Nature is at strife ; 
And looks beyond it to a future life . 
A Faith which vicious Souls abhor and fear , 
Because it shows Eternity to near . 
And therefore every one — 
With seeming scorn of it the rest deceives : 
All joining not to own what each believes . 


S. Cath.   OH happy Queen ! whom power leads not astray , 
Nor youths more powerful blandishments betray . 


Ber.   Your Arguments my reason first inclined , 
And then your bright example fixed my mind . 


Max.   With what a holy Empress am I blessed , 
What scorn of Earth dwells in her heavenly breast ! 
My crown 's too mean ; but he whom you adore , 
Has one more bright of Martyrdom in store . 
She dies , and I am from the envy freed : 
Aside . She has , I thank her , her own death decreed . 
no Soldier now will in her rescue stir ; 
Her death is but in complaisance to her . 
I 'll haste to gratify her holy will ; 
Heaven grant her zeal may but continue still . 


To Val.   Tribune , a Guard to seize the Empress straight , 
Secure her Person Prisoner to the State.  


Exit Maximin . Val.   going to her . Madam , believe 't is with regret I come 
To execute my angry Prince's doom . 


Enter Porphyrius . Por.   What is it I behold ! Tribune , from whence 
Proceeds this more than barbarous insolence ? 


Val.   Sir , I perform the Emperor's Commands . 



Por.   Villain , hold off thy sacrilegious hands , 
Or by the Gods — retire without reply : 
And , if he asks who bid thee , say 't was I  


Valerius retires to a distance . Ber.   Too generously your safety you expose 
To save one moment her whom you must lose . 


Por.   Betwixt you and death ten thousand lives there stand ; 
Have courage , Madam , the Praetorian Band 
Will all oppose your Tyrant's cruelty . 


S. Cath.   And I have Heaven implored she may not die . 
As some to witness truth Heavens' call obey ; 
So some on Earth must , to confirm it , stay . 


Por.   What Faith , what Witness is it that you name ? 



Ber.   Knowing what she believes , my faith 's the same . 



Por.   How am I crossed what way so ever I go ! 
To the unlucky every thing is so . 
Now , Fortune , thou hast shown thy utmost spite : 
The Soldiers will not for a Christian fight . 
And , Madam , all that I can promise now , 
Is but to die before death reaches you . 


Ber.   Now death draws near , a strange perplexity 
Creeps coldly on me , like a fear to die : 
Courage , uncertain dangers may abate ; 
But who can bear th' approach of certain Fate ? 


S. Cath.   The wisest and the best some fear may show ; 
And wish to stay , though they resolve to go . 


Ber.   As some faint Pilgrim standing on the shore , 
First views the Torrent he would venture o'er ; 
And than his Inn upon the farther ground , 
Loath to wade through , and loather to go round : 
then dipping in his staff does trial make , 
How deep it is ; and , sighing , pulls it back : 
Sometimes resolved to fetch his leap ; and then 
Runs to the Bank , but there stops short again ; 
So I at once — 
Both heavenly Faith , and human fear obey ; 
And feel before me in an unknown way . 
For this blessed Voyage I with joy prepare ; 
Yet am ashamed to be a stranger there . 


S. Cath.   You are not yet enough prepared to die : 
Earth hangs too heavy for your Soul to fly . 


Por.   One way ( and Heaven I hope inspires my mind ) 
I for your safety in this strait can find : 
But this fair Queen must farther my intent . 


S. Cath.   Name any way your reason can invent . 



Por. to Ber.   Though your Religion ( which I cannot blame , 
Because my secret Soul avows the same ) 
Has made your life a forfeit to the Laws , 
The Tyrant's newborn passion is the cause . 
Were this bright Princess once removed away , 
Wanting the food , the flame would soon decay . 
And I 'll prepare a faithful Guard this night 
T' attend her person , and secure her flight . 


Ber. to S. Cath.   By this way I shall both from death be freed , 
And you unforced to any wicked deed . 


S. Cath.   Madam , my thoughts are with themselves at strife ; 
And Heaven can witness how I prise your life : 
But 't is a doubtful conflict I must try 
Betwixt my pity and my piety . 
Staying , your precious life I must expose : 
Going , my Crown of Martyrdom I loose . 


Por.   Your equal choice when Heaven does thus divide , 
You should , like Heaven , still lean on mercy's side . 


S. Cath.   The will of Heaven , judged by a private breast , 
Is often what 's our private interest . 
And therefore those , who would that will obey , 
Without their interest must their duty weigh . 
As for myself , I do not life despise ; 
But as the greatest gift of Nature prize . 
My Sex is weak , my fears of death are strong ; 
And whatever is , it 's Being would prolong . 
Were there no sting in death , for me to die , 
Would not be conquest , but stupidity . 
But if vain Honour can confirm the Soul , 
And sense of shame the fear of death control , 
How much more than should Faith uphold the mind , 
Which , showing death , shows future life behind ? 


Ber.   Of death's contempt Heroic proofs you give ; 
But , Madam , let my weaker Virtue live . 
Your Faith may bid you , your own life resign ; 
But not when yours must be involved with mine . 
Since , then , you do not think me fit to die , 
Ah , how can you that life I beg , deny ! 


S. Cath.   Heaven does in this my greatest trial make , 
When I for it , the care of you forsake . 
But I am placed , as on a Theatre , 
Where all my Acts to all Mankind appear , 
To imitate my constancy or fear . 
then , Madam , judge what course I should pursue , 
When I must either Heaven forsake , or you . 


Por.   Were saving Berenice's life a sin , 
Heaven had shut up your flight from Maximin . 


S. Cath.   Thus , with short Plummets Heavens' deep will we sound , 
That vast Abyss where human Wit is drowned ! 
In our small Skiff we must not lance too far ; 
We here but Coasters , not Discov'rers are . 
Faith's necessary Rules are plain and few ; 
We , many , and those needless Rules pursue : 
Faith from our hearts into our heads we drive ; 
And make Religion all Contemplative . 
You , on Heavens' will may witty glosses feign ; 
But that which I must practise here , is plain : 
If the All-great decree her life to spare , 
He will , the means , without my crime prepare . 


Exit S. Cath.  Por.   Yet there is one way left ! it is decreed 
To save your life that Maximin shall bleed . 
' Midst all hisguards I will his death pursue , 
Or fall a Sacrifice to Love and you . 


Ber.   So great a fear of death I have not shown , 
That I would shed his blood to save my own . 
My fear is but from human frailty brought ; 
And never mingled with a wicked thought . 


Por.   't is not a Crime , since one of you must die ; 
Or is excused by the necessity . 


Ber.   I cannot to a Husband's death consent ; 
But , by revealing , will your crime prevent : 
The horror of this deed — 
Against the fear of death has armed my mind ; 
And now lesle guilt in him than you I find : 
If I a Tyrant did detest before , 
I hate a Rebel and a Traitor more : 
Ungrateful man — 
Remember whose Successor thou art made , 
And then thy Benefactors life invade . 
Guards to your charge I give your Prisoner back : 
And will from none but Heaven my safety take . 


Exit with Valerius and Guards . Por. solus .  't is true , what she has often urged before ; 
he 's both my Father and my Emperor ! 
OH Honour , how canst thou invent a way 
To save my Queen , and not my trust betray ! 
Unhappy I that ever he trusted me ! 
As well his Guardian-angel may his Murderer be . 
And yet — let Honour , Faith , and Virtue fly , 
But let not Love in Berenice die . 
She life's ! — 
that 's put beyond dispute , as firm as Fate : 
Honour and Faith let Argument debate . 


Enter Maximin and Valerius talking , and Guards . Max   't is said ; but I am loath to think it true , 
To Porphy . That my late Orders were contemned by you : 
That Berenice from her Guards you freed . 


Por.   I did it , and I glory in the deed . 



Max.   How , glory my Commands to disobey ! 



Por.   When those Commands would your Renown betray . 



Max.   Who should be Judge of that Renown you name 
But I ? 


Por.   — Yes I , and all who love your fame . 



Max.   Porphyrius , your replies are insolent . 



Por.   Sir , they are just , and for your service meant . 
If , for Religion you our lives will take ; 
You do not the offenders find , but make . 
All Faiths are to their own believers just ; 
For none believe , because they will , but must . 
Faith is a force from which there 's no defence ; 
Because the Reason it does first convince . 
And Reason Conscience into fetters brings ; 
And Conscience is without the power of Kings . 


Max.   then Conscience is a greater Prince than I : 
At whose each erring call a King may die . 
Who Conscience leaves to its own free command , 
Puts the worst Weapon in a Rebel's hand . 


Por.   it 's Empire , therefore Sir , should bounded be ; 
And but in acts of its Religion , free : 
Those who ask Civil power and Conscience too , 
Their Monarch to his own destruction woe . 
With needful Arms let him secure his peace ; 
then , that wild beast he safely may release . 


Mix.   I can forgive these liberties you take , 
While but my Counsellor yourself you make : 
But you first act your sense , and then advice : 
That is , at my expense you will be wise . 
My Wife , I for Religion do not kill ; 
But she shall die — because it is my william  


Por.   Sir , I acknowledge I too much have done ; 
And therefore merit not to be your Son : 
I tender back the Honours which you gave ; 
My liberty 's the only gift I crave . 


Max.   You take too much : — but , ever you lay it down , 
Consider what you part with in a Crown : 
Monarches of cares in Policy complain , 
Because they would be pitied while they reign ; 
For still the greater troubles they confess , 
They know their pleasures will be envied lesle . 


Por.   Those joys I neither envy nor admire ; 
But beg I from the troubles may retire . 


Max.   What Soul is this which Empire cannot stir ! 
Supine and tame as a Philosopher ! 
Know then , thou wert adopted to a Throne , 
Not for thy sake so much as for my own . 
My thoughts were once about thy death at strife ; 
And thy succession's thy reprieve for life . 


Por.   My life and death are still within your power : 
But your succession I renounce this hour . 
Upon a bloody Throne I will not sit ; 
Nor share the guilt of Crimes which you commit . 


Max.   If you are not my Caesar , you must die . 



Por.   I take it as the nobler Destiny . 



Max.   I pity thee , and would thy faults forgive : 
But thus presuming on , thou canst not live . 


Por.   Sir , with your Throne your pity I restore ; 
I am your Foe ; nor will I use it more . 
Now all my debts of gratitude are paid , 
I cannot trusted be , nor you betrayed . 


Is going . Max.   Stay , stay ! in threat'ning me to be my Foe , 
You give me warning to conclude you so . 
thou to succeed a Monarch in his Seat ! 
Enter Placidius . no , Fool , thou art too honest to be great ! 
Placidius , on your life this Prisoner keep : 
Our enmity shall end before I sleep . 


Placid .  I still am ready , Sir , when ever you please , 
To Porphy . To do you such small services as these . 


Max.   The sight with which my eyes shall first be fed , 
Must be my Empress and this Traitor's head . 


Por.   Where ever thou standest I 'll levelly at that place 
My gushing blood , and spout it at thy face . 
Thus , not by Marriage , we our blood will join : 
Nay more , my arms shall throw my head at thine . 


Exit guarded . Max.   There , go adoption : — I have now decreed 
That Maximin shall Maximin succeed : 
Old as I am , in pleasures I will try 
To waste an Empire yet before I die : 
Since life is fugitive , and will not stay , 
I 'll make it fly more pleasantly away . 


Exit . ACT v.  

SCENE I  

Valeria , Placidius . Val.   IF , as you say , you silently have been 
So long my Lover , let my power be seen : 
One hour's discourse before Porphyrius die , 
Is all I ask , and you too may be by . 


Placid .  I must not break 
The order , which the Emperor did sign . 


Val.   Has then his hand more power with you than mine ? 



Placid .  This hand if given , would far more powerful be 
Than all the Monarches of the World to me : 
But 't is a bait which would my heart betray ; 
And , when I 'm fast , will soon be snatched away . 


Val.   OH say not so ; for I shall ever be 
Obliged to him who once obliges me . 


Placid .  Madam , I 'll wink , and favour your deceit : 
But know , fair Coz'ner , that I know the cheat : 
Though to these eyes I nothing can refuse , 
I 'll not the merit of my ruin lose : 
It is enough I see the hook , and bite : 
But first I 'll pay my death with my delight . 


[ Kisses her hand , and Exit . ] Val.   What can I hope from this sad interview ! 
And yet my brave design I will pursue . 
By many signs I have my Rival found : 
But Fortune him , as deep as me does wound . 
For , if he love's the Empress , his sad Fate 
more moves my pity , than his scorn my hate . 


To her Placidius with Porphyrius . Placid .  I am , perhaps , the first 
Who forced by Fate , and in his own despite , 
Brought a loved Rival to his Mistress sight . 


Val.   But , in revenge , let this your comfort be , 
That you have brought a man who love's not me . 
However , lay your causeless envy by ; 
He is a Rival who must quickly die . 


Por.   And yet I could with lesle concernment bear 
That death of which you speak , than see you here . 
So much of guilt in my refusal lies , 
That Debtor-like , I dare not meet your eyes . 


Val.   I do not blame you , if you love elsewhere : 
And , would to Heaven , I could your sufferings bear ; 
Or once again could some new way invent 
To take upon myself your punishment : 
I sent for you , to let you know that still 
( Though now I want the power ) I have the william  


Placid .  Can all this Ocean of your kindness be 
Poured upon him , and not one drop on me ? 


Val.   't is poured ; but falls from this ungrateful man , 
Like drops of water from a rising Swan . 
Upon his breast no sign of wet remains ; 
He bears his Love more proudly than his Chains . 


Por.   This thankless man his death will soon remove , 
And quickly end so undeserved a Love.  


Val.   Unthankful as you are , I know not why , 
But still I love too well to see you die . 
Placidius , can you love , and see my grief , 
And for my sake not offer some relief ? 


Placid .  Not all the Gods his ruin shall prevent ; 
Your kindness does but urge his punishment . 
Besides — 
What is it I can for his safety do ? 
He has declared himself your Father's Foe . 


Val.   Give out he is escaped , and set him free : 
And , if you please , lay all the fault on me . 


Por.   OH do not on those terms my freedom name : 
Freed by your danger I should die with shame . 


Placid .  I must not farther by your prayers be wone . 
To her , All I could do I have already done . 


Val.   To bring Porphyrius only to my sight , 
Was not to show your pity , but your spite : 
Would you but half oblige her you adore ? 
You should not have done this , or should do more . 


Placid .  Alas , what hope can there be left for me , 
When I must sink into the Mine I see ? 
My heart will fall before you , if I stay ; 
Each word you speak saps part of it away . — 
— Yet all my Fortune on his death is set : 
And he may love her , though he love's not yet . 
He must — and yet she says he must not die : 
OH , if I could but wink , I could deny . 


To them Albinus . Alb.   The Emperor expects your Prisoner straight : 
And , with impatience , for his death does wait . 


Placid .  Nay , than it is too late my Love to weigh . 
Exit Alb.  Your pardon , Madam , if I must obey . 


Por.   I am prepared , he shall not long attend . 



Val.   then hear my prayers , and my submissions end . 
Placidius know , that hour in which he dies , 
My death ( so well I love ) shall wait on his . 


Placid .  OH , Madam , do not fright me with your death ! 



Val.   My life depends alone upon his breath . 
But , if I live in him , you do not know 
How far my gratitude to you may go . 
I do not promise — but it so may prove , 
That gratitude , in time , may turn to Love. 
Try me — 


Placid .  — Now I consider it , I will : 
Musing a little . 't is in your power to save him or to kill . 
I 'll run the hazard to preserve his life , 
If , after that , you vow to be my Wife . 


Val.   Nay , good Placidius , now you are too hard : 
Would you do nothing but for mere reward ? 
Like Usurers to men in want you prove , 
When you would take Extortion for my Love.  


Placid .  You have concluded then that he must die . 



[ Going with Porphy . ] Val.   OH stay , if no price else his life can buy , 
My Love a ransom for his life I give : 
[ Holding her Handkerchief before her face . ] Let my Porphyrius for another live . 


Por.   You too much value the small merchandise : 
My life's o're-rated , when your love 's the price . 


Enter Albinus . Alb.   I long have list'ned to your generous strife , 
As much concerned for brave Porphyrius life : 
For mine I to his favour owed this day ; 
Which with my future Service I will pay . 


Placid .  lest any your intended flight prevent , 
I 'll lead you first the backway to my Tent : 
Thence , in disguise , you may the City gain , 
While some excuse for your escape I feign . 


Val.   Farewell , I must not see you when you part : 
[ Turning her face away . ] For that last look would break my tender heart . 
Yet — let it break — I must have one look more : 
[ Looking on him . ] Nay , now I 'm lesle contented than before . 
For that last look draws on another too ; 
Which sure I need not to remember you . 
For ever — yet I must one glance repeat : 
But quick and short as starving people eat . 
So much humanity dwells in your breast , 
Sometimes to think on her who love's you best . 


[ Going , he takes her hand and kisses it ] Por.   My wand'ring steps where ever Fortune bear , 
Your memory I in my breast will wear . 
Which , as a precious Amulet , I still 
Will carry , my defence and guard from ill . 
Though to my former vows I must be true , 
I 'll ever keep one Love entire for you . 
That Love which Brothers with chaste Sisters make : 
And by this Holy kiss , which now I take 
From your fair hand — 
This common Sun which absent both shall see , 
Shall never behold a breach of Faith in me . 


Val.   Go , go , my death will your short vows restore : 
  said enough , and I can hear no more . 


Exit Valeria one way , and Porphy . and Alb. another . Placid .  Love and good Nature , how do you betray ! 
Misleading those who see and know their way ! 
ay , whom deep Arts of State could never beguile , 
Have sold myself to ruin for a smile . 
Nay , I am driven so low , that I must take 
That smile , as Alms , given for my Rival's sake . 
He , like a secret Worm , has eat his way ; 
And , lodged within , does on the kernel prey : 
I creep without ; and hopeless to remove 
Him thence , wait only for the husk of Love.  


Enter Maximin talking with Valerius . Max.   And why was I not told of this before ? 



Val.   Sir , she this evening landed on the shore . 
For with her Daughter being Prisoner made , 
She in another Vessel was conveyed . 


Max.   Bring hither the Egyptian Princess straight . 
To Placid . And you , Valerius , on her Mother wait . 


Exit Valerius . Placid .  The Mother of th' Egyptian Princess here ! 



Max.   Porphyrius death I will a while defer . 
And this new opportunity improve 
To make my last effort upon her Love. — 
Exit Placidius . Those who have youth may long endure to court ; 
But he must swiftly catch whose Race is short . 
I in my Autumn do my Siege begin ; 
And must make haste ever Winter comes , to win . 
This hour — no longer shall my pains endure : 
Her Love shall ease me , or her death shall cure . 


Enter at one door Felicia and Valerius , at the other S. Catharine and Placidius . S. Cath.   OH , my dear Mother ! 



Fel.   — With what joy I see 
My dearest Daughter from the Tempest free . 


S. Cath.   Dearer than all the joys vain Empire yields , 
Or then to youthful Monarches conquered fields . 
Before you came — my Soul 
All filled with Heaven did earthly joys disdain . 
But you pull back some part of me again . 


Placid .  You see , Sir , she can own a joy below . 



Max.   It much imports me that this truth I know . 



Fel.   How dreadful death does on the waves appear ! 
Where Seas we only see , and Tempest hear . 
Such frightful Images did then pursue 
My trembling Soul , that scarce I thought of you . 


Placid .  All Circumstances to your wish combine : 
Her fear of death advances your design . 


Fel.   But to that only power we serve I prayed , 
Till he , who bid it rise , the Tempest laid . 


Max.   You are a Christian then ! 
To Felicia . For death this very hour you must prepare : 
I have decreed no Christian's life to spare . 


Fel.   For death ! I hope you but my courage try : 
Whatever I believe , I dare not die . 
Heaven does not , sure , that Seal of Faith require ; 
Or , if it did , would firmer thoughts inspire . 
A Woman's witness can no credit give 
To Truth's Divine , and therefore I would live . 


Max.   I cannot give the life which you demand : 
But that and mine are in your Daughter's hand : 
Ask her , if she will yet her Love deny ; 
And bid a Monarch , and her Mother die . 


Fel.   Now , mighty Prince , you cancel all my fear : 
My life is safe , when it depends on her . 
How can you let me languish thus in pain ! 
To S. Cath.  Make haste to cure those doubts which yet remain . 
Speak quickly , speak and ease me of my fear . 


S. Cath.   Alas , I doubt it is not you I hear . 
Some wicked Fiend assumes your voice and face , 
To make frail Nature triumph over Grace . 
It cannot be — 
That she who taught my Childhood Piety , 
Should bid my riper age my Faith deny : 
That she who bid my hopes this Crown pursue , 
Should snatch it from me when 't is just in view . 


Fel.   Peace , peace , too much my age's shame you show : 
How easy 't is to teach ! how hard to do ! 
Mylab'ring thoughts are with themselves at strife : 
I dare not die , nor bid you save my life . 


Max.   You must do one , and that without delay ; 
Too long already for your death I stay : 
I cannot with your small concerns dispense ; 
For deaths of more importance call me hence . 
Prepare to execute your office straight . 


To his Guards . Fel.   OH stay , and let 'em but one minute wait . 
Such quick Commands for death you would not give , 
( Ah ) if you knew how sweet it were to live . 


Max.   then bid her love . 



Fel.   — Is duty grown so weak , 
To S. Cath.  That love 's a harder word than Death to speak ? 


S. Cath.   Oh! — 



Fel.   Mistake me not , I never can approve 
[ privately to S. Cath. ] A thing so wicked as the Tyrants Love. 
I ask you would but some false promise give , 
Only to gain me so much time to live . 


S. Cath.   That promise is a step to greater sin : 
The hold once lost , we seldom take again . 
Each bound to Heaven we fainter Essays make : 
Still losing somewhat till we quite go back . 


Max.   Away , I grant no longer a reprieve . 



Fel.   OH do but beg my life , and I may live . 
To S. Cath.  Have you not so much pity in your breast ? 
He stays to have you make it your request . 


S. Cath.   To beg your life — 
Is not to ask a grace of Maximin : 
It is a silent bargain for a sin . 
could we live always , life were worth our cost ; 
But now we keep with care what must be lost . 
Here we stand shiv'ring on the Bank , and cry , 
When we should plunge into Eternity . 
One moment ends our pain ; 
And yet the shock of death we dare not stand , 
By thought scarce measured , and too swift for sand : 
't is but because the Living death never knew , 
They fear to prove it as a thing that 's new . 
Let me th'experiment before you try , 
I 'll show you first how easy 't is to die . 


Max.   Draw then that Curtain , and let death appear , 
And let both see how easy 't will be there . 


The Scene opens , and shows the Wheel . Fel.   Alas , what torment's I already feel ! 



Max.   Go , bind her hand and foot beneath that Wheel : 
Four of you turn the dreadful Engine round ; 
Four others hold her fastened to the ground : 
That by degrees her tender breasts may feel , 
First the rough razing of the pointed steel : 
Her Paps than let the bearded Tenters stake , 
And on each hook a gory Gobbet take . 
Till th' upper flesh by piecemeal torn away , 
Her beating heart shall to the Sun display . 


Fel.   My dearest Daughter at your feet I fall ; 
Kneeling . Hear , O yet hear your wretched Mothers call . 
Think , at your Birth , ah think what pains I bore , 
And can your eyes behold me suffer more ? 
You were the Child which from your infancy 
I still loved best , and then you best loved me . 
About my neck your little arms you spread , 
Nor could you sleep without me in the bed . 
But sought my bosom when you went to rest , 
And all night long would lie across my breast . 
Nor without cause did you that fondness show : 
You may remember when our Nile did flow ; 
While on the Bank you innocently stood , 
And with a Wand made Circles in the flood , 
That rose , and just was hurrying you to death , 
When I , from far , all pale and out of breath 
Ran and rushed in — 
And from the waves my floating pledge did bear , 
So much my Love was stronger than my fear . 
But you — 


Max.   Woman , for these long tales your life 's too short ; 
Go , bind her quickly , and begin the sport . 


Fel.   no , in her arms my Sanctuary's placed : 
[ Running to her Daughter . ] Thus I will cling for ever to her waste . 


Max.   What must my will by women be controlled ? 
Haste , draw your Weapons , and cut off her hold . 


S. Cath.   Thus my last duty to you let me pay : 
[ Kissing her Mother . ] Yet , Tyrant , I to thee will never pray . 
Though hers to save I my own life would give , 
Yet by my sin , my Mother shall not live : 
To thy foul lust I never can confent ; 
Why dost thou then defer my punishment ? 
I scorn those Gods thou vainly dost adore : 
Contemn thy Empire , but thy Bed abhor . 
If thou wouldst yet a bloodier Tyrant be , 
I will instruct thy rage , begin with me . 


Max.   I thank thee that thou dost my anger move : 
It is a Tempest that will wreck my Love. 
I 'll pull thee hence , close hidden as thou art , 
[ Claps his hand to his breast . ] And stand with my drawn Sword before my heart . 
Yes , you shall be obeyed , though I am loath , 
Go , and while I can bid you , bind 'em both . 
Go , bind 'em ever my fit of Love return : 
Fire shall quench fire , and anger Love shall burn . 
Thus I prevent those follies I should do ; 
And 't is the nobler Fever of the two . 


Fel.   Torn piece by piece , alas what horrid pains ! 



S. Cath.   Heaven is all mercy , who that death ordains . 
And that which Heaven thinks best is surely so : 
But bare and naked , shame to undergo , 
't is somewhat more than death ! 
Exposed to lawless eyes I dare not be , 
My modesty is sacred , Heaven to thee . 
Let not my body be the Tyrant's spoil ; 
Nor hands nor eyes thy purity defile . 


Amariel descends swiftly with a flaming Sword , and strikes at the Wheel , which breaks in pieces , than he ascends again . Max.   Is this th' effect of all your boasted skill ? 
These brittle toys to execute my will ? 
A Puppet-show of death I only find , 
Where I a strong and sinewy pain designed . 
By what weak infant was this Engine wrought ? 


Val.   From Bilbilis the tempered steel was brought : 
Metal more tough the Anvil never did beaten , 
Nor , from the Forge , did hissing waters heat . 


Placid .  I saw a Youth descend all Heavenly fair , 
Who in his hand a flaming Sword did bear , 
And , Whirlwind-like , around him driven the Air. 
At his raised arm the rigid Iron shaken ; 
And , bending backward , fled before the stroke . 


Max.   What! Miracles , the tricks of Heaven to me ? 
I 'll try if she be wholly Iron free . 
If not by Sword , than she shall die by fire ; 
And one by one her Miracles I 'll tyre . 
If proof against all kind of death she be , 
My love 's immortal , and she 's fit for me . 


S. Cath.   no , Heaven has shown its power , and now thinks fit 
Thee to thy former fury to remit . 
Had Providence my longer life decreed , 
thou from thy passion hadst not yet been freed . 
But Heaven , which suffered that , my Faith to prove , 
Now to its self does vindicate my Love. 
A power controls thee which thou dost not see ; 
And that 's a Miracle it works in thee . 


Max.   The truth of this new Miracle we 'll try ; 
To prove it , you must take the pains to die . 
Bring me their heads — 


Fel.   That mercy , Tyrant , thou deniest to me , 
At thy last breath may Heaven refuse to thee . 
My fears are going , and I death can view : 
I see , I see him there thy steps pursue . 
And with a lifted arm and silent pace , 
Stalk after thee , just aiming in his chase . 


S. Cath.   no more , dear Mother , ill in death it shows 
Your peace of mind by rage to discompose : 
no streak of blood ( the relics of the Earth ) 
Shall slain my Soul in her immortal birth ; 
But she shall mount all pure , a white , and Virgin mind ; 
And full of all that peace , which there she goes to find . 


Exeunt S. Catharine and Felicia , with Valerius and Guards . The Scene shuts . Max.   she 's gone , and pulled my heartstrings as she went. 
Were penitence no shame , I could repent . 
Yet 't is of bad example she should live ; 
For I might get th' ill habit to forgive . 
thou soft Seducer of my heart , away — 
Who lingering wouldst about its confines stay 
To watch when some Rebellion would begin ; 
And ready at each sigh to enter in . 
In vain ; for thou 
Dost on the outside of the body play , 
And when drawn nearest , shalt be whirled away . 
What ails me , that I cannot lose thy thought ! 
Command the Empress hither to be brought ; 
To Placid . I in her death shall some diversion find , 
And rid my thoughts at once of womankind . 


Placid .  't is well he thinks not of Porphyrius yet . 



Aside . Exit . Max.   How hard it is this Beauty to forget ! 
My stormy rage has only shaken my will : 
She crept down lower , but she sticks there still . 
Fool that I am to struggle thus with Love ! 
Why should I that which pleases me remove ? 
True , she should die were she concerned alone ; 
But I love , not for her sake , but my own . 
Our Gods are Gods 'cause they have power and will ; 
Who can do all things , can do nothing ill . 
Ill is Rebellion against some higher power : 
The World may sin , but not its Emperor . 
My Empress then shall die , my Princess live ; 
If this be ill , I do myself forgive . 


To him Valerius . Val.   Your will 's obeyed ; for mighty Emperor , 
The Princess and her Mother are no more . 


Max.   She is not dead ! 



Val.   — Great Sir , your will was so . 



Max.   That was my will of half an hour ago . 
But now 't is altered ; I have changed her Fate , 
She shall not die . 


Val.   — Your pity comes too late . 
Betwixt her Guards she seemed by Bridemen led , 
Her cheeks with cheerful blushes were o'respred , 
When , smiling , to the Axe she bowed her head . 
Just at the stroke — 
Aetherial music did her death prepare ; 
Like joyful sounds of Spousals in the Air. 
A radiant light did her crowned Temples gild , 
And all the place with fragrant scents was filled . 
The Balmy mist came thick'ning to the ground , 
And sacred silence covered all around . 
But when ( its work performed ) the Cloud withdrew , 
And day restored us to each others view , 
I sought her head to bring it on my Spear ; 
In vain I sought it , for it was not there . 
no part remained ; but from afar our sight 
Discovered in the Air long tracks of light ; 
Of charming Notes we heard the last rebounds , 
And Music dying in remoter sounds . 


Max.   And dost thou think 
This lame account fit for a Lovesick King ? 
Go — from the other World a better bring . 
[ Kills him , then sets his foot on him , and speaks on . ] When in my breast two mighty passions striven , 
thou hadst erred better in obeying Love. 
't is true , that way thy death had followed too . 
But I had then been lesle displeased than now . 
Now I must live unquiet for thy sake ; 
And this poor recompense is all I take . 


Spurns the bod● Here the Scene opens and discovers Berenice on a Scaffold , the Guards by her , and amongst them Porphyrius and Albinus , like Moors , as all the Guards are . Placidius enters , and whispers the Emperor whilst Porphyrius speaks . Por.   From Berenice I cannot go away ; 
But , like a Ghost , must near my Treasure stay . 


Alb.   Night and this shape secure us from their eyes . 



Por.   Have courage then for our bold enterprise . 
Duty and Faith no tie on me can have , 
Since I renounced those Honours which he gave , 


Max.   The time is come we did so long attend , 
To Berenice . Which must these discords of our Marriage end . 
Yet Berenice remember you have been 
An Empress , and the Wife of Maximin . 


Ber.   I will remember I have been your Wife ; 
And therefore , dying , beg from Heaven your life : 
Be all the discords of our Bed forgot , 
Which , Virtue witness , I did never spot . 
What errors I have made , though while I live , 
You cannot pardon , to the dead forgive . 


Max.   How much she is to piety inclined ! 
Behead her while she 's in so good a mind . 


Por.   Stand firm , Albinus , now the time is come 
To free the Empress . 


Alb.   — And deliver Rome . 



Por.   Within I feel my hot blood swell my heart , 
And generous tremble in each outward part . 
't is done — Tyrant , this is thy latest hour . 


Porphyrius and Albinus draw , and are making at the Emperor . Ber.   Look to yourself , my Lord the Emperor : 
Treason , help , help , my Lord ! 


Maximin turns and defends himself , the Guards set on Porphyrius and Albinus . Max.   Disarm 'em , but their lives I charge you spare . 
After they are disarmed . Unmask 'em , and discover who they are . 
Good Gods , is it Porphyrius whom I see ! 


Placid .  I wonder how he gained his liberty . 



Max.   Traitor ! 



Por.   — Know , Tyrant , I can hear that name 
Rather than Son , and bear it with lesle shame . 
traitor 's a name which were my arm yet free , 
The Roman Senate would bestow on thee . 


To Ber.   Ah , Madam , you have ruined my design , 
And lost your life ; for I regard not mine . 
Too ill a Mistress , and too good a Wife . 


Ber.   It was my duty to preserve his life . 



Max.   Now I perceive 
To Porphyriu In what close walks your mind so long did move : 
You scorned my Throne , aspiring to her Love.  


Ber.   In death I 'll own a Love to him so pure ; 
As will the test of Heaven itself endure . 
A Love so chaste , as Conscience could not chide ; 
But cherished it , and kept it by its side . 
A Love which never knew a hot desire , 
But flamed as harmless as a lambent fire . 
A Love which , pure from Soul to Soul might pass , 
As light transmitted through a Crystal glass . 
Which gave Porphyrius all without a sin ; 
Yet kept entire the Right of Maximin . 


Max.   The best return that I to both can make , 
Shall be to suffer for each others sake . 


Por.   Barbarian , do not dare her blood to shed , 
Who from my vengeance saved thy cursed head . 
A flight no Honour ever reached before ; 
And which succeeding Ages will adore . 


Ber.   Porphyrius I must die ! 
That common debt to Nature paid must be ; 
But I have left a debt unpaid to thee . 
To Maximin — 
I have performed the duty of a Wife ; 
But , saving his , I cast away thy life . 
Ah , what ill Stars upon our Loves did shine , 
That I am more thy Murderer than he mine . 


Max.   Make haste . 



Por.   So hasty none in execution are , 
But they allow the dying time for prayer . 
Farewell , sweet Saint , my prayer shall be to you : 
My Love has been unhappy , but 't was true . 
Remember me ! Alas what have I said ? 
You must die too ! 
But yet remember me when you are dead . 


Ber.   If I die first I will — 
Stop short of Heaven , and wait you in a Cloud ; 
For fear we loose each other in the crowd . 


Por.   Love is the only Coin in Heaven will go : 
then take all with you , and leave none below . 


Ber.   't is want of knowledge , not of Love , I fear . 
lest we mistake when bodies are not there , 
OH as a mark that I could wear a Scroul , 
With this Inscription , Berenice's Soul.  


Por.   That needs not , sure , for none will be so bright , 
So pure , or with so small allays of light . 


Max.   From my full eyes fond tears begin to start ; 
Dispatch , they practise treason on my heart . 


Porphyrius kisses his hand , and blows it to Berenice saying , Por.   Adieu : this farewell sigh I as my last bequeath , 
Catch it , 't is Love expiring in a breath . 


Berenice kissing hers in the same manner . Ber.   This sigh of mine shall meet it half the way , 
As pledges given that each for other stay . 


Enter Valeria and Cydon her Woman . Val.   What dismal Scene of Death is here prepared ! 



Max.   Now strike . 



Val.   They shall not strike till I am heard . 



Max.   From whence does this new impudence proceed , 
That you dare alter that which I decreed ? 


Val.   Ah , Sir , to what strange courses do you fly , 
To make yourself abhorred for cruelty ! 
The Empire groans under your bloody Reign , 
And its vast body bleeds in every vein . 
Gasping and pale , and fearing more , it jyes ; 
And now you stab it in the very eyes : 
Your Caesar and the Partner of your Bed ; 
Ah who can wish to live when they are dead ? 
If ever gentle pity touched your breast — 
— I cannot speak , — my tears shall speak the rest . 


Weeping and sobbing . Por.   She adds new grief to what I felt before , 
And Fate has now no room to put in more . 


Max   Away , thou shame and slander of my blood . 
To Val.  Who taught thee to be pitisul or good ? 


Val.   What hope have I 
The name of Virtue should prevail with him , 
Who thinks even it , for which I pled , a crime ? 
Yet Nature , sure , some Argument may be ; 
If them you cannot pity , pity me . 


Max.   I will , and all the World shall judge it so : 
I will th' excess of pity to you show . 
You ask to save 
A dangerous Rebel , and disloyal Wife , 
And I in mercy — will not take your life . 


Val.   You more than kill me by this cruelty , 
And in their persons bid your Daughter die . 
I honour Berenice's Virtue much ; 
But for Porphyrius my Love is such , 
I cannot , will not live when he is gone . 


Max.   I 'll do that Cure for you which on myself is done . 
You must , like me , your Lover's life remove ; 
Cut off your hope , and you destroy your Love. 
If it were hard I would not bid you try 
The Medicine : but 't is but to let him die . 
Yet since you are so soft , ( which you call good ) 
And are not yet confirmed enough in blood 
To see his death ; 
Your frailty shall be favoured with this grace , 
That they shall suffer in another place . 
If after they are dead , their memory 
By any chance into your mind be brought , 
Laugh , and divert it with some other thought . 
Away with ' 'em . 


Exeunt Berenice , Porphyrius , Albinus carried off by Guards . Val.   Since prayers nor tears can bend his cruel mind , 
[ Looking after Porphy . ] Farewell , the best and bravest of Mankind ; 
How I have loved Heaven knows ; but there 's a Fate , 
Which hinders me from being fortunate . 
My Father's Crimes hang heavy on my head , 
And like a gloomy Cloud about me spread ; 
I would in vain be pious , that 's a grace 
Which Heaven permits not to a Tyrant's race . 


Max.   Hence to her Tent the foolish Girl convey . 



Val.   Let me be just before I go away : 
Placidius , I have vowed to be your Wife ; 
Take then my hand , 't is yours while I have life . 
One moment here , I must another's be : 
But this Porphyrius gives me back to thee . 


Stabs herself twice , and then Placidius wrists the Dagger from her . Placid .  Help , help the Princess , help ! 



Max.   What rage has urged this act which thou hast done ? 



Val.   thou , Tyrant , and thy Crimes have pulled it on . 
thou who canst death with such a pleasure see , 
Now take thy fill , and glut thy sight in me . 
But — I 'll th' occasion of my death forget ; 
Save him I love , and be my Father yet : 
I can no more — Porphyrius , my dear — 


Cyd.   Alas , she raves , and thinks Porphyrius here . 



Val.   Have I not yet deserved thee now I die ? 
Is Berenice still more fair than I ? 
Porphyrius , do not swim before my sight ; 
Stand still , and let me , let me aim aright . 
Stand still but while thy poor Valeria dies , 
And sighs her Soul into her Lover's eyes . 


Dies . Placid .  she 's gone from Earth , and with her went away 
All of the Tyrant that deserved to stay : 
i  lost in her all joys that life can give ; 
And only to revenge her death would live — 


Aside . Cyd.   The Gods have claimed her , and we must resign . 



Max.   What had the Gods to do with me or mine ? 
Did I molest your Heaven ? — 
Why should you then make Maximin your Foe , 
Who paid you Tribute , which he need not do ? 
Your Altars I with smoke of Gums did crown : 
For which you leaned your hungry nostrils down . 
All daily gaping for my Incense there , 
more than your Sun could draw you in a year . 
And you for this these Plagues on me have sent ; 
But by the Gods , ( by Maximin I meant ) 
Henceforth I and my World 
Hostility with you and yours declare , 
Look to it , Gods ; for you th' Aggressors are . 
Keep you your Rain and Sunshine in your Skies , 
And I 'll keep back my flame and Sacrifice . 
Your Trade of Heaven shall soon be at a stand , 
And all your Goods lie dead upon your hand . 


Placid .  Thus , Tyrant , since the Gods th' Aggressors are , 
[ Stabbing him . ] Thus by this stroke they have begun the War.  


Maximin struggles with him , and gets the Dagger from him . Max.   Thus I return the strokes which they have given ; 
[ Stabbing Placid . ] Thus , Traitor , thus , and thus I would to Heaven . 


Stabbing upward with his Dagger . Placidius falls , and the Emperor staggers after him , and sits down upon him , the Guards come in to help the Emperor . Max.   Stand off , and let me , ever my strength be gone , 
Take my last pleasure of revenge alone . 


Enter a Centurion . Cen.   Arm , arm , the Camp is in a mutiny : 
For Rome and Liberty the Soldier's cry . 
Porphyrius moved their pity as he went , 
To rescue Berenice from punishment , 
And now he heads their new-attempted crime . 


Max.   Now I am down , the Gods have watched their time . 
You think — 
To save your credit , feeble Deities ; 
But I will give myself the strength to rise . 
He strives to get up , and being up , staggers . It wonot be — 
My body has not strength my mind to bear . 
I must return again — and conquer here . 
Sits down upon the Body . My coward Body does my will control ; 
Farewell thou base Deserter of my Soul. 
I 'll shake this Carcase off , and be obeyed ; 
Reign an Imperial Ghost without its aid . 
Go , Soldiers , take my Ensigns with you , fight , 
And vanquish Rebels in your Sovereign's right : 
Before I die — 
Bring me Porphyrius and my Empress dead , 
I would brave Heaven , in my each hand a head . 


Placid .  Do not regard a dying Tyrant's breath . 
[ To the Soldiers . ] He can but look revenge on you in death . 


Max.   Vanquished , and dar'st thou yet a Rebel be ? 
Thus — I can more than look revenge on thee . 


[ Stabs him again . Placid .  O , I am gone ! 



Dies . Max.   — And after thee I go , 
Revenging still , and following even to th' other world my blow . 
Stabs him again . And shoving back this Earth on which I sit , 
I 'll mount — and scatter all the Gods I hit . 


Dies . Enter Porphyrius , Berenice , Albinus , Soldiers . Porphyrius tooks on the Bodies entering , and speaks . Por.   't is done before , ( this mighty work of Fate ! ) 
And I am glad our Swords are come too late . 
He was my Prince , and though a bloody one , 
I should have conquered and have mercy shown . 
Sheath all your Swords , and cease your enmity ; 
They are not Foes , but Romans whom you see . 


Ber.   He was my Tyrant , but my Husband too ; 
And therefore duty will some tears allow . 


Por.   Placidius here ! 
And fair Valeria new deprived of breath ? 
Who can unriddle this dumb-show of death ? 


Cyd.   When , Sir , her Father did your life deny , 
She killed herself , that she with you might die . 
Placidius made the Emp'rours' death his crime ; 
Who , dying , did revenge his death on him . 


Porphyrius knelt and takes Valeria's hand . Por.   For thy dear sake I vow each week I live 
One day to fasting and just grief I 'll give : 
And what hard Fate did to thy life deny , 
My gratitude shall pay thy memory . 


Cen.   Mean time to you belongs th' imperial power ; 
We with one voice salute your Emperor . 


Soldiers .  Long live Porphyrius Emperor of the Romans . 



Por.   Too much , my Country men , your Love you show 
That you have thought me worthy to be so . 
But , to requite that Love , I must take care 
Not to engage you in a Civil War. 
Two Emperors at Rome the Senate choose , 
And whom they choose no Roman should oppose . 
In Peace or War , let Monarches hope or fear ; 
All my ambition shall be bounded here . 


Kissing Berenice's hand . Ber.   I have too lately been a Prince's Wife , 
And fear th' unlucky Omen of the life . 
Like a rich Vessel beaten by storms to shore , 
'T were madness should I venture out once more . 
Of glorious troubles I will take no part , 
And in no Empire reign , but of your heart . 


Por.   Let to the winds your golden Eagles fly 

[ To the Soldier Your Trumpets sound a bloodless Victory : 
Our Arms no more let Aquileia fear , 
But to her Gates — 
Our peaceful Ensigns crowned with Olives bear ; 
While I mix Cypress with my Myrtle Wreath 
Joy for your life , and mourn Valeria's Death . 


Exeunt omnes . Epilogue 

Spoken by Mistress Ellen , when she was to be carried off dead by the Bearers . 

To the Bearer . Hold , are you mad ? you damned confounded Dog , 
I am to rise , and speak the Epilogue . 
To the Audience . I come , kind Gentlemen , strange news to tell ye , 
I am the Ghost of poor departed Nelly . 
Sweet Ladies , be not frighted , I 'll be civil , 
I 'm what I was , a little harmless Devil . 
For after death , we Sprights , have just such Natures , 
We had for all the World , when human Creatures ; 
And therefore I that was an Actress here , 
Play all my Tricks in Hell , a Goblin there . 
Gallants , look to 't , you say there are no Sprights : 
But I 'll come dance about your Beds at nights . 
And faith you 'll be in a sweet kind of taking , 
When I surprise you between sleep and waking . 
To tell you true , I walk because I die 
Out of my Calling in a Tragedy . 
OH Poet , damned dull Poet , who could prove 
So senseless ! to make Nelly die for Love , 
Nay , what 's yet worse , to kill me in the prime 
Of Easter-term , in Tart and Cheesecake time ! 
I 'll fit the Fop ; for I 'll not one word say 
TO excuse his godly out of fashion Play. 
A Play which if you dare but twice sit out , 
you 'll all be slandered , and be thought devout . 
But , farewel Gentlemen , make haste to me , 
I 'm sure ever long to have your company . 
As for my Epitaph when I am gone , 
I 'll trust no Poet , but will write my own . 
Here Nelly lies , who , though she lived a Slater'n 
Yet died a Princess , acting in S. Cathar'n . 
