THE HUSBAND His own CUCKOLD . 

A COMEDY . 

As it is Acted at the Theatre in Little Lincoln's — Inn — Fields , By His MAJESTY'S Servants . 

Written by Mr. John Dryden , Jun.  

Et Pater Aeneas , & Auunculus excitet Hector . 

Virg.  



LONDON , 

Printed for J. Tonson , at the Judge's-head in Fleetstreet , near the Inner Temple-gate , 1696.  

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE Sir ROBERT HOWARD , etc.  

SIR , 

Atrifle of this kind is so little worthy your attention , that I know not how to make a fair way for its appearance , and beg you to give it audience . The Muses are become so prostitute , that every Enthusiast begets a work on 'em ; Plays are grown mere Foundlings , and generated so fast , that we find one or more laid at the door of every Nobleman ; and these impudent Begetters are not satisfied that you give their unlawful Issue a maintenance and reering , but have the Conscience also to expect a Reward for easing themselves on you of their ungodly burden . Sir , I must confess I am little better than a lewd Sinner of this Order , but have so much Grace and Modef●…y at least to require no Recompense where I ought to be begging Pardon for committing a slip of this nature . I am confident I could not choose a more indulgent Foster-father ; and though my very Name bears an accusation against me , yet I have the honour also to be related to the Muses by the Mother's side ; for you yourself have been guilty of Poetry , and a Family Vice is therefore the more excusable in me , who an unluckily a Poet by descent . Poe●…e is a Noble Exercise , and like a reserved Game seems intended wholly for the recreation of Learned Gentlemen , or such at least as have had liberal Education , and these have still succeeded best in it : But we see the illiterate breaking in daily on the Quarry , and even those assuming , to themselves the name of Poets , who never had any other call to that Art beside the hope of a third day . If one half of us who set up for making Plays , understood what Horace says in these Lines , it may be we should not vainly presume to think ourselves what indeed we are not . 

Descriptas servare Vices , operumque Colores , Cur Ego , si nequeo , ignoroque Poeta salutor . 



Shakespeare among all the Writers of our Nation may stand by himself as a Phoenix , the first and last of his Order ; in whom bounteous Nature wonderfully supplied all the parts of a great Poet , and Excellent Orator ; and of whom alone one may venture boldly to say , that had he had more Learning , perhaps he might have been lesle a Poet. 't is certain the good nature of the Town suffers any thing for the sake of Novelty and Entertainment , however meager , and the encouraging some miserable Writers , is to be allowed more an act of Charity than Judgement ; for though Poverty be generally the end of a Poet , I think it is but a very lamentable beginning . There is a large difference between those , who following the itch of gaining empty applause , misspend their time in writing themselves into necessity , and such who spend their time in writing themselves out of it ; and where the Muse begins with the want of a Meals-meat . The former might be any thing else better than what they choose to be ; the latter , because they can be nothing else , would fain be Poets . 't is dangerous making a Pastime of any one thing so long , that at last we are glad to embrace it as a Profession ; like those , who after they have melted all their Substance in search of the Philosopher's-stone , are forced in the end to turn Chemists . But of this enough ; for I am already conscious to myself of deviating something from my Theme , and can only form this application out of what I have said , that you , Sir , have prudently known how to make the best use of your Excellent Talon in this kind , by applying it to your diversion , and the unbending your Mind . By these means , you have happily given our Country a great Poet in your writings ; and at the same time have not omitted the more necessary part of giving her a Great Statesman , and Hero ; to which Emi●…ncy your Birth , Courage , and Capacity have equally raised you . And should I enlarge on these Heads , I am confident the World would not tax me of the least flattery , and I should only be guilty of not giving you your due ; but you are reserved for a better Pen , and silence therefore is a good fault in me . I have only now to beg pardon for sending so mean a Trifle so long a Voyage ; 't is so full of faults I know not how to give it the name of a Play. The Italians when they know not what to make of a thing , call it Un Pasticcio Inglese , what kind Compliment they intent our Country in the Expression I know not , but I believe they mean no better than a Hotch-podge . 't is my first Poetical Cookery of this sort , and whatever it be , I humbly submit it to your Censure , but more to your Patronage ; and with it , 

Sir , Your most obliged humble Servant and Nephew , John Dryden . Rome , August the 20th , 1695.  New-style . 

THE PREFACE OF Mr. Dryden , to his Son's Play.  

I Have thought convenient to acquaint the Reader with somewhat concerning this Comedy , though perhaps not worth his knowledge . It was sent me from Italy some years since , by my second Son , to try its fortune on the Stage : And being the Essay of a young unexperienced Author ; to confess the truth , I thought it not worthy of that honour . 't is true , I was not willing to discourage him so far , as to tell him plainly my Opinion , but it seems he guessed somewhat of my Mind , by my long delays of his expectation : And therefore in my absence from the Town last Summer , took the boldness to dedicate his Play to that Person of Honour , whose Name you will find before his Epistle . It was received by that Noble Gentleman with so much Candour and Generosity , as neither my Son nor I could deserve from him . then the Play was no longer in my power , the Patron demanding it in his own right , it was delivered to him . And he was farther pleased , during my Sickness , to put it into that Method in which you find it ; the loose Scenes digested into order , and knit into a Tale. As it is , I think it may pass amongst the rest of our New Plays ; I know but two Authors , and they are both my Friends , who have done better since the Revolution . This I dare venture to maintain , that the Taste of the Age is wretchedly depraved , in all sorts of Poetry , nothing almost but what is abominably bad can p●…se . The young Hounds who ought to come behind , now lead the pack , but they miserably mistake the scent . Their Poets , worthy of such an Audience , know not how to distinguish their Characters ; the Manners are all alike inconsistent and interfering with each other . There is scarce a Man or Woman of God's making in all their Farces : yet they raise an unnatural sort of laughter , the common effect of Buffonery ; and the Rabble which takes this for Wit , will endure no better , because 't is above their Understanding . This account I take from the best Judges , for I thank God , I have had the grace hitherto to avoid the seeing or reading of their Gallimaufries . But 't is the latter end of a Century , and I hope the next will begin better . This Play I dare assure the Reader is none of those ; it may want Beauties , but the faults are neither gross , nor many . Perfection in any Art is not suddenly obtained ; the Author of this , to his misfortune , left his Country at a time when he was to have learned the Language . The Story he has treated , was an Accident which happened at Rome , though he has transferred the Scene to England . If it shall please God to restore him to me , I may perhaps inform him better of the Rules of Writing ; and if I am not partial , he has already shown , that a Genius is not wanting to him . All that I can reasonably fear , is that the perpetual good success of ill Plays may make him endeavour to please by writing worse , and by accommodating himself to the wretched capacity and liking of the present Audience , from which , Heaven defend any of my Progeny . A Poet indeed , must live by the many , but a good Poet will make it his business to please the few . I will not proceed farther on a Subject which arraigns so many of the Readers . For what remains , both my Son and I are extremely obliged to my dear Friend Mr. Congreve , whose Excellent Prologue was one of the greatest Ornaments of the Play. Neither is my Epilogue the worst which I have written ; though it seems at the first sight to expose our young Clergy with too much freedom . It was on that Consideration that I had once begun it otherwise , and delivered the Copy of it to be spoken , in case the first part of it had given offence . This I will give you partly in my own justification , and partly too , because I think it not unworthy of your sight . Only remembering you that the last line connects the sense to the ensuing part of it . Farewell , Reader , if you are a Father you will forgive me , if not , you will when you are a Father . 

Time was when none could Preach without Degrees , 
And seven year's toil at Universities : 
But when the Canting Saints came once in play , 
The Spirit did their business in a day : 
A Zealous Cobbler with the gift of Tongue , 
If he could Pray six hours , might Preach as long : 
Thus , in the Primitive Times of Poetry , 
The Stage to none but Men of sense was free . 
But thanks to your judicious taste , my Masters , 
It lies in common now to Poetasters . 
You set them up , and till you dare Condemn , 
The Satire lies on you , and not on them . 
When Mountebanks their Drugs at Market cry , 
Is it their fault to sell , or yours to buy ? 
't is true , they write with ease , and well they may , 
Fly-blows are gotten every Summer's day , 
The Poet does but buzz , and there 's a Play.  
wit 's not his business , etc.  

PROLOGUE , 

Written by Mr. 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Mr. Betterton . THIS Year has been Remarkable two ways , 
For Blooming Poets , and for Blasted Plays . 
  been by much appearing Plenty mocked , 
At once both tantalised , and over-stocked . 
Our Authors too , by their success of late , 
Begin to think third days are out of date : 
What can the Cause be , that our Plays won't keep , 
Unless they have a Rot some Years like Sheep ? 
For our parts , we confess we 're quite 〈◊〉 
To read such Weekly-bills of Poets damned . 
Each Parish knows 't is but a mournful Case 
When Christen fall , and Funerals increase . 
Thus 't is , and thus 't will be when we are dead , 
There will be Writers that will never be read . 
W●…y will you be such Wits , and write such things ? 
you 're willing to be Wasps , but want the stings . 
Let not your Spleen provoke you to that 〈◊〉 , 
' Od●…ife you don't know what you do , Sirs , when you write . 
you 'll find that Pegasus has tricks , when tried , 
Thou you make nothing on 't but up and ride ; 
Ladies and all , I faith , now get astride . 
〈◊〉 Characters , and Scenes , and Plots , 
Is grown as common now , as knitting Knots ; 
With the same ease , and negligence of thought , 
The Charming Play is written , and Fringe is wrought . 
Thou this is frightful , yet we 're more afraid , 
When Ladies leave , that Beaux will take the Trade : 
Thus far 't is well enough , if here 't would stop , 
But should they write , we must even shut up shop . 
How shall we make this Mode of Writing sink ? 
A 〈◊〉 said I ? 't is a Disease , I think , 
A 〈◊〉 Tetter that 's not Cured with Ink. 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 it spreads , till each th' infection takes , 
And seizes ten for one that it forsakes : 
Our Play to day is sprung from none of these , 
Nor should you Damn it , though it does not please , 
Since born without the bounds of your four Seas . 
〈◊〉 if you grant no savour as 't is new , 
Yet as a Stranger , there is something due : 
From Rome ( to try its fate ) this Play was sent , 
Start not at Rome , for there 's no Popery meant ; 
Where ever the Poet does his dwelling choose , 
Yet still he knows his Country claims his 〈◊〉 
〈◊〉 an 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 - Born he sends , 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , on you depends . 
Yet he 〈◊〉 hope some kindness may be shown , 
As due to greater Merit than his own , 
And begs the Sire may for the Son atone . 
there 's his last Refuge , if the PLAY don't take , 
Yet spare Young Dryden for his Father's sake . 
EPILOGUE . 

Spoken by Mrs' 〈◊〉 , Written by Mr. Dryden . LIKE some raw Sophister that mounts the Pulpit , 
So trembles a young Poet at a full Pi●… 
Unused to Crowds , the Parson quakes for fear , 
And wonders how the Devil he durst 〈◊〉 there ; 
Wanting three Talents needful for the Place , 
Some Beard , some Learning , and some little Grace : 
Nor is the Puny Poet void of Care ; 
For 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 our new 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 
Have not much Learning , nor much Wit to spare : 
And as for Grace , to tell the truth , there 's scarce one , 
But 〈◊〉 as little as 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Parson : 
Both say , they Preach and write for your Instruction : 
But 't is for a Third Day , and for Induction . 
The difference is , that though you like the Play , 
The Poet's gain is never beyond his Day . 
But with 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 't is another Case , 
〈◊〉 without 〈◊〉 , may rise to Grace ; 
The Poet 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 more , 
That if his Play be dull , 〈◊〉 Damned all over , 
Not only a damned Blockhead , but damned Poor . 
But Dullness well becomes the Sable 〈◊〉 ; 
I warrant that never spoiled a Priest's 〈◊〉 ; 
wit 's not his Business , and as Wit now go●…s , 
Sirs , 't is not so much yours as you suppose , 
For you like nothing now but nauseous Beaux . 
You laugh not , Gallants , as by proof appears , 
At what his Beauship says , but what he wears ; 
So 't is your Eyes are tickled , not your Ears : 
The Tailor and the F●…rier find the Stuff , 
The Wit lies in the Dress , and monstrous Muff. 
The Truth on 't is , the Payment of the Pit 
Is like for like , Clipped Money for Clipped Wit. 
You cannot from our absent Author hope 
He should equip the Stage with such a Fop : 
Fools Change in England , and new Fools arise , 
For though th' Immortal Species never dies , 
Yet every Year new Maggots make new Flies . 
But where he life's abroad , he searc●… can find 
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 Million 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 left behind . 
Dramatis Personae . 

Sir John Crossit . 
Old Landy . 
Sir Timothy Shallow . 
●…urch . 
Feewell , Kinsman to Old Landy . 
Bellville , in Love with Lucy . 
Doctor Lorman . 
Scrible , a Scrivener . 
Elliot , a Servant to Mr. Bellville's Uncle . 
Lady Crossit , Wife to Sir John.  
Mistress Lucy , Old Landy's Daughter . 
Mistress Lurch , Wife to Lurch . 
Phill , Woman to Mistress Lucy . 
Grace AND Betty . Two Waiting-women . 
THE HUSBAND His own CUCKOLD . 

ACT I  

SCENE I  

Enter Sir John Cro●…it , and Lurch . Sir John.   Neighbour Lurch , I am heartily glad to see you , but why that melancholy Face , that Countenance in Eclipse , how goes the World Man ? 



Lurch .  How goes the World , Sir John ? why how should it go with a married Man ? I have been Married a whole half year , in which time I have had more business on my hands than a Secretary of State , have raised more Outworks than any Governor of a Citadel to preserve my Wife's Chastity : In short , I am so broken and brought down with this blessed half year of Wedlock , that at the end of the next half , I am of Opinion I shall be Celebrated with the Anniversary of my Funeral ; the Doctors have almost given me over already . 



Sir John.   And the Midwives too , Neighbour ; you have entered indiscreetly upon this business of Matrimony , without making some necessary reflections . Why , in the name of goodness , what could provoke you with these some fifty years , as I modestly suppose on your back , at such an Age of ●…umbling to take a Girl of sifteen ? 



Lurch .  Why , Sir John ? to answer you with the same freedom what you interrogate , this was my Reason ; you are not ignorant , as being my Neighbour , that I have thriven in the World ; having so done , I began to bethink myself of making a retreat from business , in order to enjoy the declension of my days as comfortably as I could . 



Sir John.   In order to which , you took a Wife , a very pretty retreat from Business and the World , and an excellent Cordial for a Man in a declining Condition ; then to finish the happiness of your retreat , you are most abominably jealous , and take all the care imaginable to divulge it to the World , by depriving your Wife of those Christian Liberties which all Wise Men allow theirs ; as you order your affairs , Neighbour , you had as good make a public Proclamation in the Streets of London , I have a pretty young Wife , who will make me a Cuckold , you do the same thing in effect already . 



Lurch .  Sir John , I am obliged to you for the Summary you have been pleased to make of my present Condition ; but methinks in the first part of your Discourse , where you take notice of the little or no Comfort there is to be had in Marriage with so small concern , you seem to forget that you yourself are a married Man  



Sir John.   Forget , say you , that would be more than any married Man in Christendom could ever do yet ; but I remember it as seldom , and with as little regret as possibly I can : I have been married now these ten years , that is to say , I have served almost two Apprenticeships to Matrimony , 't were hard if I were not Master of my Vocation . 



Lurch .  So it should seem indeed , by your advising me to allow my Wife that Christian Liberty which you say all wise Men allow theirs ; 't is a Heathen Liberty , a Crime Capital , the broad Road to Cuckoldom . 



Sir John.   I tell you , Neighbour , you talk like a mere Novice in Matrimony , give me leave to tell you , 't is in vain to consine them ; for the more Women are constrained and deprived of Liberty , the more eager they are in the pursuit of it ; if you vex them , they 'll cross you , 't is an original perverseness they inherit by Nature ; why , I tell you once again they are the crooked rib of Adam , they love nothing like cross purposoes . 



Lurch .  't is well there are no Women here to hear you ; but still I say no liberty ; if I must be a Cuckold , I shall have this satisfaction at least , to be made one my own may . 



Sir John.   't is pity but your Wife should give it you ; i am afraid , Neighbour , I am afraid you have Capricorn gloriously ascending in your Nativity , you have a very foreboding look with you . 



Lurch . Sir John ,  you that are so good at deciphering other People's looks , had best look at home ; since I am provoked to speak my mind , I have observed that there is a certain swingeing two-handed well set black Doctor , who comes very often to feel your Lady's Pulse , I think they call him the Lady's Doctor in the Town , but he looks more like a Horn Doctor ; I am of opinion your Lady is not so often indisposed for nothing . 



Sir John.   You mean Doctor Lorman , that insignificant Fop Doctor , who has not the tenth part of the Learning of a Mountebank in Lincolns-inn-fields , a mere Crevat and Periwig one , who never knew beyond the composition of a Washball or a Pomatum , or how to prescribe a Clyster for my Lady's Lap-dog . He is not the first Coxcomb that has passed with Women for a Man of Parts ; but to confess freely to you , Neighbour , I never yet suspected my Wife's Virtue with the Doctor ; I know her to be humorous and fantastic , and therefore as she is often troubled with little indispositions , I am willing to let her have the Doctor she fancies . 



Lurch .  You take a very prudent course Sir John , according to your Maxim of Christian Liberty . 



Sir John.   This it is to be in company with a Man that 's Jealous ; Neighbour , thou art just like those who are seized with the Plague , they are not satisfied to have the Disease themselves , but make it their business to infect others : all Husbands ought to avoid thee as the Contagion , thou art full of the Purples of Jealousy . But no more of this , here comes my Wife . 

Enter Lady Cro●…it ; leaning on her Woman . 

Lady Crossit .  Oh! Grace , I am so very weak and faint all o' th' sudden , that except you hold me up , I shall scarely have strength to come to your Master . O , Sir John , where are you ? I have got such a dizziness in my , head , I can scarcely see from one end of the Room to the other . 



Sir John.   what 's the matter , my Dear , what new accident has befallen you ? 



L. Crossit .  O , Sir John , no new accident , 't is my old misfortune , the Vapours , a sudden faintness , a kind o●… a Falling-sickness , that reigning Disease among Ladies of Quality . Oh! dear Sir John , send quickly , before I have another Fit , for that fin●… Doctor , who is so Famous for Curing the Ladies of their Vapours ; O , o , I am ready to fall , I am so faint ; quickly , Sir John , quickly . 



Sir John.   Have a little patience , my Dear , till I go to the door and give orders — who 's without there ? d' ye hear , 

Goes to the door , Enter a Servant . Run immediately and fetch your Lady's Doctor hither , desire him to come with all possible speed . 



L. Cros.   OH fie , Sir John , how you give a Message to a Doctor of such a Repute ! I find I must word it myself , though I am so very faint . d' ye hear , Fellow , run quickly to the Gentleman your Master has mentioned , and present Sir John's humble service to him , and besure you remember to give mine in particular — This fellow 's such a Sot he 'll never remember half the Message — And , do you hear , let the worthy Doctor know I have had a most violent Fit of the Vapours . 

Exit Servant . OH ●…ie , Sir John , what Servants you keep , what a beastly leg the Fellow has made , and dirtyed all the boards of my Room . 



Sir John.   My Dear , you take no notice of my Neighbour Lur●… here . 



Lady Cros.   O Mr. Lur●…h , I protest I never saw you all this while , I am utterly ashamed of myself for being so unmannerly , pray Mr. Lurch how does the good young Woman do ? 



Lurch .  Whom does your Ladyship mean , if I may be so bold ? 



L. Cros.   I mean the good young Woman your Wife . 



Lurch .  I left her at home very well , at your Ladyship's service , under Lock and Key . 



Aside . L. Cros.   I need not ask you how you like a married Life , you are but in Hony-moon yet . 



Lurch   aside . If there be a hony-month in Marriage , I should be glad to find it ; but I 'll swear I have felt nothing but the Sting , without one drop of the Honey hitherto . 



Sir John.   My Neighbour is but a mere Bridegroom yet , my Dear ; by that time he has been as long Married as you and I have been , he 'll be able to give a good account of it . What say you , Neighhour , to ten years of Matrimony ? 



Lurch .  Why I say , Sir John , that in half that time Matrimony would give a better account of me . 



L. Cros.   I protest , Mr. Lurch , I forgot to ask you one Question , is your Wife never troubled with Vapours ? 



Lurch .  OH yes , of all sorts , Madam . I am sure she Hector's and Vapours me sufficiently . 



Aside . L. Cros.   't is a sign she is well born , for Vapours are more frequent among persons of Quality , than those of mean Condition ; I believe I ▪ have the ablest Physician in all Christendom for removing of them . 



Sir John.   Pray , Neighbour , let me recommend my Wife's Doctor to you , I 'll send him to visit your Spouse to morrow , or next day , or when you william  



Lurch .  no , Sir John , I am in no haste , I thank you , my Wife is in no such want of a Doctor yet , as yours . 



L. Cros.   You need not fear our sending the Doctor to you , Neighbour , he 's not so easily sent ; he 's not a Person who runs after Patients , on my word , the whole Town runs after him . But what 's the reason , Neighbour , you did not bring your Wife along with you ? I warrant you have left her at home all alone ; sie , you do very ill , Neighbour , 't is enough to make a young Woman grow melancholy , and despair ; you ought to take her abroad , and air her sometimes . 



Sir John.   Come , Neighbour , I know my Spouse will be glad of some Company , to pass away her indisposition ; come , I won't be denied , you must step home now immediately and bring your Wife to us , 't is a deed of Charity — But d' ye hear , Neighbour , do not forget in returning , to come along with her . 



Lurch .  You might have omitted your last Commands , for here 's a a swingeing black Doctor to be here , who looks like a Bird of Prey . 



Exit . Sir John   aside . So , I have taken a very good pretence to send him for his Wife ; the impertinencies of this Doctor , whom I expect every minute , will make the jealous Rogue ●…ass like a vexed Wasp . 



Lady Cros.   OH 〈◊〉 , Sir John , why would you send for Company ? I can't endure to receive Visits when I have got the Vapours : I am so indisposed at present , I am fit only to be seen by a Physician . 



Sir John.   I thought 't was your desire , my Dear , I did it to procure you some Company to pass away time , and divert Melancholy , but you always pervert my good Intentions . 



Lady Cros.   I 'd rather you 'd procure me a Physician : O , o , I 'm so faint again all o' th' sudden , your Arm quickly , Grace , your Arm.  

Enter Dr. Lorman . 

Grace .  Courage , Madam , here comes the Doctor . 

The Doctor sets his Wig in order , then advances . 

Dr. Lorm.   Sir John , after having professed the more than ordinary Concern I had , when just now I was Informed by one of your Attendants , of the most unwelcome News of your very Honoured Lady's Indisposition ; I ought to make a just Apology for my appearance in this negligent and too familiar Habit : But I have been so pursued and persecuted by several persons of Honour at home , for this whole Morning , that as I am a Professor of Physic , I have not had a Minute's leisure , to compose and put ▪ myself into a decent posture , in order to visit and attend those Patients , for whom I reserve so much esteem and respect , as I really do for yourself , and much honoured good Lady . 

While the Doctor and Sir John Talk and Bow together . 

Lady Cros.   aside to Grace What do you think Graee , is he not a Comely , Proper , Well-set , Black Man ? he 's absolutely the ablest Physician in all Europe . 



Dr. Lorm.   Worthy 〈◊〉 , you confound me with your Goodness . But that I may not neglect the great end for which I came hither , I must beg your permission to approach your Fair Lady , and take the Moment's of her Pulse . 



Sir John.   What a flourishing Coxcomb's this : A Patient might expire in the while he 's making a Compliment of Entrance , or setting his Wig in order . 



Lady Cros.   OH welcome , Doctor , I have been dying for you , absolutely dying for you , I have had such a terrible 〈◊〉 of the Vapours ; but the very sight of you has half Cured me already . 



Dr. Lorm.   Why , that is not altogether impossible , Madam , for I have had several Patients , who have protested to me , that they have discovered , I know not how to express myself , a Jenescay quoyness in my Physiognomy , that my very first appearance , I will not say has absolutely Cured them , but has given them a present ease from the Distemper under which they then laboured ▪ 



Lady Cros.   Good Doctor feel my Pulse quickly ; how does it beaten ? am I a Woman of this World or no ? 

Feels her Pulse . 

Sir John.   aside . 't is a brawny Aesculapius , he 's able to beget a whole College of Physicians . 



Dr. Lorm.   Madam , you have a very uneven disordered Pulse , it beats an alarm : But I shall order you a Tizan to rectify it immediately , as also 〈◊〉 remove those Obstructions from your Head and Stomach , which gene●…te and beget Vapours . 



Sir John.   aside . The Rogue has got the Trick of the French Doctors , ho prescribe a Tizan to every Disease . 

Enter Lurch and Mistress Lurch . Neighbour Lurch ; I see you are a Man of your Word , you are doubly welcome now . 



Lurch .  aside . Here is that Doctor whom Heaven confound . 



Sir John.   Doctor Lorman , this is a worthy Neighbour of mine , and this a Fair Lady called his Wife , whom I recommend to you as a Patient , that she may li●… herself under the Protection of so able a Physician . 



Lurch .  aside to Sir John Methinks you are very forward in recommending another Man's Wife , Sir John , but I shall desire hereafter , you would neither list my Wife for a Patient , nor me for a Cuckold . 



Dr. Lorm.   to Mistress Lurch Madam , I cannot but harbour an exceeding Esteem for your person , in which , at the first view , I discover such transcendent Merits , and as I have dedicated myself and my whole Art , to the Service of the Fair Sex , I should be infinitely transported , if ever I may be able to serve you in any particular of my Profession . 



Mistress Lurch .  Sir , I shall think myself highly honoured , in being assisted by One , whose Famous Cures have silled all Eyes with admiration , and all Tongues with sufficient Matter of Discourse . 



Lurch .  aside . So , she 's in with him already ; now am I all over in a sweat , I shall have him laying his brawny Fist on her Pulse immediately . 



Dr. Lorm.   As for my Cures , Madam , ( but first let me beg the Honour of your Fair Hand to consult your Pulse ) as for my Cures , I say , they speak themselves . 

Holds her by the Arm and Discourses , while Lurch endeavours to lose his Wife from him . And though indeed my Public Profession is of Physic , yet I dare aver , no Man in Christendom has a freer Hand in the Practical Part of Anatomy and Surgery . 



Lurch .  OH Lord , OH Lord ! but you had as good depose my Wife's Hand , Doctor , that it may not be a hindrance to your Discourse . 



Mistress Lurch .  no , the Doctor does me a particular Favour , and if it be no burden to him , I am very well satisfied he continue it . 



Dr. Lorm.   't is impossible , a Fair Lady's Hand should be a burden . 



Mistress Lurch .  I am much troubled with a Noise in my Head , Doctor . 



Lurch .  And so am I , while your tongue 's there . 



L. Cros.   aside . I can bear this no longer , that he should Court any other Woman in my presence ; I knew this devilish Company would hinder me from enjoying him all myself ; but I 'll be even with Sir John for this . 

The Doctor le 's go Mistress Lurches' arm , and her Husband slips his arm into its place , which the Dr. receives , not knowing it . 

Dr. Lorm.   But now I will acquaint the Company present of some precious Rarities of my own Manufacture . 



Imprimis .  I have a most approved water-wash for the Face , called my Lac Virgins , which works wonders on the Fair Sex , in clearing and beantifying their Skins ; and this Rich Cosmetick not to be sold a Farthing under five Guineas the Bottle , absolutely the greatest Secret in th●… European World.  



Lurch   aside . Absolutely the greatest Cheat in the whole Universe ; how the Rogue squeezes me . 



Dr. Lorm.   Secondly , I have most precious Pomatums of all sorts , of my own composition . 

Thirdly , I have rare oiled Night-gloves of right Roman Kid.  

Fourthly , Plumpers for the help of decayed Ladies who are Cheek-fallen ; Led Forehead-pieces , all manner of Night-vizards , or Face-moulds , with several other Gallantries of great consideration and importance ; but for fear of seeming vainglorious , I shall pass by in silence the rest of my Abilities , and beg your Pardon , Madam , for keeping your fair hand a Prisoner so long , which I thus Salute , to expiate my Crime with all due — 

sees Lurch . Sir , I am no Mountebank , I would have you to know I am no Mountebank ; Sir , let me tell you , I seldom or never knew any Person who made a jest of my Profession expire in his Bed — I am no Mountebank , Sir.  



Lurch .  I know not whether I am in jest with you or no , but I 'll swear you have been in earnest with me , this hand of mine which you have worried so , knows it very well . 



L. Cros.   Mr. Lurch , Let me tell you that you have neither a capacity to distinguish , or good breeding in treating with such levity a Person so esteemed for his many Virtues by all the World ▪ 



Dr. Lorm.   Madam , you mortify me with your exceeding goodness , let the Gentleman alone , he will meet with his reward one time or other , as I said before . 



Sir John.   Doctor , will you favour me to order the Tizan you mentioned for my Wife ? 



Dr. Lorm.   You may command my Art , Sir John.  



Sir John.   Who waits without , bring Pen , Ink , and Paper quickly . 

Dr. Lorm. writes . 

Dr. Lorm ▪  Let your Lady take this , and I 'll pawn my Art it does the business , it wants only to be superscribed ; for when my Apothecary serves 

Superscribes the Receipt . a Person of Quality , he always makes use of his best Drugs . 



Sir John.   Now you have obliged my Wife , Doctor , I have another Patient to recommend to you , which is my Wife's Lap-dog , who is so troubled with the worms , he 's a very pest in the house . 



Dr. Lorm.   Sir John , I receive particular consolation in the Proposal , and declare it to be one of the chief branches of my Profession , the knowing how to Cure those tender Creatures , who are so Ladylike in their Constitutions . 

begins to write . What Appeliation or Nom de Guerre does your Ladyship use for your Dog , that I may superscribe ? 



L. Cros.   Cupid . 



Dr. Lo●… .  His Age , Madam ? that I may regulate the Dose . 



L. Cros.   Two years old since Candlemas last passed . 

Dr. Lorm. Reads . For Mr. Cupid , Lap. Dog to the Honourable the Lady Dorothea Crossit , this will suffice . 



L. Cros.   Really I shall be overjoyed when my dog 's Cured . 



Sir John.   I must put an end to this impertinence , Doctor , I have some business to dispatch this Morning , and therefore must beg your leave to — 



Dr. Lorm.   Let me see what is it a Clock , this is my Governor ; 

Looks on his Watch.  How , is 't possible it can be so late , I am a ruined Man ! certainly my Watch runs upon wheels , I shall lose my Reputation absolutely , I should have made my whole tour of Patients by this time ; when a Man is once become necessary to the World , he is a Slave ever after . Ladies , I must suffer an unwilling divorce from your fair Companies . 



L. Cros.   Adieu , Doctor . 



Dr. Lorm.   Adieu , dear Madam . 



L. Cros.   Adieu , dear , dear Doctor . Your Fee , Sir John your Fee quickly , and remember my Dog's Fee.  

Aside to Sir John.  Sir John presses the Dr. to receive the Fee , who at first seems to be repugnant . 

L. Cros.   You must force him to take it , my Dear ; he 's so modest . 



Dr. Lorm.   OH Lord ! Sir John , what do you mean to do ? OH pray , Sir John , what do you mean ? Sir John ; your most humble Servant . 



Sir John.   You shall give me leave to wait on you down Stairs . 



●…rch .  Sir John , my Wife and I have been troublesome too long to you and your Lady , and therefore will take our leaves also . 



Mistress Lurch .  I hope , Madam , I shall find another occasion to show how much I am your ladyship 's most humble Servant . 



L. Cros.   Madam , you may command me ; you will pardon me that I leave Sir John to accompany you ; I am so faint with the Vapours , I dare not venture out of doors . 



Sir John.   Repose yourself , my Dear , in your Chamber , and leave me to ●…rve the Company . 

Ex. Sir John , the Doctor , Lurch , and his Wife . Lady Crossit and Grace remain . 

Grace .  Aye , you are much discomposed , Madam . 



L. Cros.   I am all confusion , prithee call 'em to Sing the Song I love . 



SONG . 

Help , help , ye Powers Divine , 
For sure from you this Lightning came , 
That from his Eyes shot through mine , 
Down to my Heart a subtle flame . 
2.  

I try to get 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 always in vain , 
For as fast as I fly , I fly with my pain . 
there 's nothing my Love and my Life can divide , 
For equally both to my Heartstrings are tied . 


L. Cros.   d' ye hear , shut the door close : Well , we Ladies of Quality are all Slaves to our Waiting-women . We are forced to trust them with our Secrets , and then they become our Mistresses : 

Aside . Have you shut the Door ? 



Grace .  I have locked it on the inside , Madam . 



L. Cros.   Do you remember , how many Rich Gowns and Petticoats , how many laced Pinner's , Hoods , Scarves , and Nightrails , I have given you , since the three Years you have served me , together with many other Vails , Perquisites , and Profits you have enjoyed in my Service ? 



Grace .  aside . What Tune will this Prelude end in , I wonder ! 



L. Cros.   I do not call to mind my Favours ; implying , that you are ungrateful ; but only to encourage you to persevere in the Love and Duty you owe me , and in that Faithfulness and Secrecy I have always found in you . Secrecy , Grace , is a most necessary Gift and Accomplishment , for one in your Station . 



Grace .  't is a Gift with which very few of our Sex are blessed . 



L. Cros.   Art thou sure thou canst be Secret Proof . 



Grace .  I think I am , Madam . 



L. Cros.   But 't is such a Secret , that if ever it should be discovered , especially by my Husband , I am a ruined Wife for ever . Hast thou the gift of Secrecy ? May I make thee my Confessor ? But first to stop thy Mouth , I give thee that fresh Manteau and Petticoat I wore yesterday . 



Grace .  Now , Madam , I am sure I have the Gift of Secrecy , you may Confess with safety . 



L. Cros.   Swear thou wilt be true to me . 



Grace .  What Oath shall I 〈◊〉 by 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ●…hat ? 



L. Cros.   Swear by any 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 



Grace .  ●…hen , may I never wear ●…ood , Scarf , Manteau , or Petticoat , more of your Ladyships , when ever I am guilty of betraying my Trust.  



L. Cros.   Well , I must tell thee then , I am in Love , Grace ! OH that Doctor , that Doctor , that Charming Doctor , I die for him ! 



Grace .  't is pity your Ladyship should die for want of a Physician . 



L. Cros.   OH , this Doctor will be the Death of me . 



Grace .  That may be too , for 't is one part of his Profession . 



L. Cros.   Didst thou never observe , how often I have chan●…d Colour at the sight of Dr. Lorman , my frequent Sighs , and languishing Looks , that have spoken too plainly my Passion ? 



Grace .  Yes , indeed , I always thought your Ladyship had a kind of a grudging to him . 



L. Cros.   Ah , would it were no worse ; I love him even to Madness . 



Grace .  Nay , now I find your Ladyship is 〈◊〉 a desperate Condition . 



L. Cros.   Well , since I have made thee my Confident , I must inform thee what Service thou must do me in this Business . Knowing my Husband was to go to Barnet this day , and not return till to Morrow Morning , I went privately yesterday to the Change , and bought a dozen of the finest Holland Shirts , lac●…d with the best Flanders Lace I could lay hands on : These I have put up in a Band-box , and intent you shall convey 'em to Dr. Lorman , in form of a Present . 



Grace .  A whole dozen of Shirts ! does your Ladyship intent he shall wear 'em all out in your Service ? 



L. Cros.   Leave your idle Questions : I intent to place a Letter in the Band-box , which will sufficiently unriddle the meaning of my Favours . 



Grace .  I think the Riddle of your Favours is not so very dark , that it should want an Explanation : Those Coats of Arms , as soon as seen , are blazoned ; and declare your Ladyship of the Family of Love , without a Herald to pronounce it . 



L. Cros.   However , don't you fail in your Duty , and when the Doctor Reads my Letter , be sure you say a world of tender Things to him , such as I would , were I present ; thou hast Wit at command . 



Grace .  I warrant you , Madam , he 's ours ; he must be a Doctor of Marble , to resist such a Letter as you have written . Besides , there 's a Present will bring him with a Vengeance . 

Love and a Bribe will make him soon surrender , 
Such powerful Forces make all Hearts grow tender . 
Exeunt . 

ACT II  

SCENE the Street . 

Enter Feewell , and Belleville , meeting each other . Feew.   Dear Harry , well met , may I presume to guests whither you are bound in such haste ? 



Bell.   no , my Friend , I 'll ease you of that trouble , and let you know I am bound with all my Sails full to the Port of Love ; Mistress Lucy , your fair Cousin , Rich old Landy's Daughter . 



Feew.   't is as I thought , you are a happy Man , you have the young Lady's heart , and ●…er Father's liking , you cannot fail of making a prosperous Voyage , and carrying the Golden-fleece off in Triumph . 



Bell.   True indeed , I steer as 〈◊〉 with fair weather , and a prosperous gale in sight of the Port ; but , my Friend , there are so many Sands , Rocks , and shallowss to be passed ever I can enter , that if a Man be not an expert Pilot indeed , he may perhaps founder in sight of it . I shall never think myself out of danger , till I have cast Anchor in the Harbour . 



Feew.   Never doubt , your Person , Virtues , and Repute you have in the World , with the deserts of a Thousand Pounds a year , are sufficient to secure you , without other helps . 



Bell.   Of which I must own your Friendship to be the chief ; but why does old Landy torture me thus with these delays and puts off ? it throws me into continual agonies , and 〈◊〉 . 



Feew.   OH my Friend , these Rich old miserable Fathers are always more considerate than other Men , they never clap up a Marriage in haste , but haggle to the last farthing , and love to have a lumping Pennyworth of a Husband . 



Bell.   I wish he were lesle Rich , than I would convince him I value not his paltry dust , and that I Court your fair Cousin for her own sake , not for the sake of what he has to give her — But 't is late , and I must follow where my heart is gone before me . 



Feew.   I am just now come from thence , and as soon as I have dispatched a word of business , at a house within half a stones cast , I shall be back again there as soon as you ; for I have to tell you , that I have already ●…ngaged old Landy and his Daughter to be merry at a Dinner I have 〈◊〉 for 'em , where you , dear Harry , must oblige me to make one . Besides , you may have known that Lurch the Landlord of the 〈◊〉 where they lodge , has newly married a young brisk Wife , with whom I have a small Intrigue in Embryo . My design is to get this young 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉 dinner along with us , in which I desire your 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 my return , for the beast is not a little jealous of her ; he has carried her abroad somewhere this Morning , and was not returned home when I left old Landy . 



Bell.   Ah , Ned , Ned , wilt thou never leave this single sinful way of living ? hadst thou not as good take up in time , and end honourably in Matrimony ? 



Feew.   I have no design to make an end so honourable as yet , this little World and I have something more to say to one another ever we part . Well , fare you well , I 'll be with you in a minute . 

Exeunt severally . Enter Lucy , and her Maid Phil.  

Lucy .  where 's my Father , Phil ? 



Phil.   I saw him about a quarter of an hour since , 
Walking about , with starts and pauses , 
And talked , or rather muttered to himself , 
Some grumbling words . 


Lucy .  Couldst thou not distinguish any ? 



Phil.   Very little , yet I listened , for I fancied 
'T was you that caused his staggering : 
But I could hear nothing , but sometimes 
Too little ; a very scanty pattern ; then paused , and then , 
But this Girl , than paused again , and then again 
Repeated the words Too little . 


Lucy .  What power has Money in the mind it governs ? 
'T will not allow Virtue to bear a price , 
Nor purchase any thing but its 〈◊〉 increase , 
And yet afraid to use it . 


Phil.   I hope , Madam , all will be well yet ; 
Sure Mr. Bellvill's merits will prevail . 


Lucy .  Did he see with my eyes they would , 
But Misers see no difference in Men , 
But what is made by Fortune . 
Enter Bellville . 

Bell.   Oh! my dear Mistress , in what fears I languish , 
Your Cruel Father keeps me on a rack 
By his delay ; every look I take 
From your fair sight , gives a fresh Torment ; 
To think what Curses rise against me , 
To keep me from enjoying such a blessing . 
Kisses her hand 

Lucy .  I have owned enough for you to guests 
I share in your afflicton ; press him now 
To give his final Resolution . 


Bell.   But if he should deny , let me have yours ; 
And keep his slighted Wealth for his own load 
That clogs his greedy Soul.  


Lucy .  OH Bellville , though I love you 
Enough to share the lowest Fortune with you , 
I dare not show it by a disobedience ; 
Though to a Cruel Father , one shake in any Virtue 
Will loosen all the firmness of the rest . 
Enter Landy . 

Bell.   See where he comes , disturbance 
Hangs on his looks . 


Landy .  O Mr. Bellville , what , in your old pursuit ? 



Bell.   I have no other Object in this World 
To wish or hope for , but the longed for Blessing 
Of your fair Daughter . 


Landy .  And you forsooth , are languishing , I hope , 
As well as your warm Lover ; all in haste , 
Reason and Consideration are grown Enemies . 


Lucy .  I hope , Sir , Mr. Bellvill's Merits 
Are a just Reason for my value of him . 


Landy .  Yes , yes , send Virtue to the Market , 
And see what 't will purchase : Mr. Bellville , 
I have perused the Authentic Copies 
Of your Estate and Fortune ; I think 
It barely may amount to a Thousand Pounds per Annum . 


Bell.   Were it a Thousand Million , 
All were too little 
To present your Daughter . 


Landy .  We are not talking of if it were , 
But what it is ; let me see , 
A bare Thousand , as we suppose at best , 
Is in troth too little , a very slender Patrimony . 


Lucy .  You talk , Sir , as if all Content and Happiness 
Were only placed in R●…heses . 


land   Hold your tongue , busie-box , when your Father 
Speaks , meddle not in the Matter , Huzzy ; 
't is I am to give the Money , you have nothing to give 
But your Consent , a thing not worth a Groat ; 
't is a fond property , that every Woman gives 
To the first Man she likes . 
You have been reading some vile Romance , 
Where the sine outside Fellow gets the Lady : 
I thought I had burned all your Amorous Fables . 
Enter Feewell . 

Feew.   What , in wrath , Mr. Landy , with your own Flesh 
And Blood ? Come , come , there 's a Haunch of Venison 
And a Bottle of Burgundy that stays for you , 
Will set all right again . 


Landy .  Angry , Cousin Feewell ! yes , very angry , 
't would move a Millstone to speak ! 
The Gipsy interrupts me just as I am talking 
For her own good . 


Feew.   You know , Mr. Landy , she 's an obedient Daughter . 
And you may kindly end these troubles ; 
Tell me , when is my Friend Bellville to be made happy 
With your fair Daughter ? 


land   't is that I was discoursing of , Cousin , 
But things of Importance require a mature 
And weighty Consideration ; but she 's in haste , 
In a most Amorous haste ; let me see , 
A Thousand pounds per Annum — 〈◊〉 — a thousand pounds . 


Feew.   So much my Friend has , I 'm sure , besides 
A considerable Personal Estate , which he 's so modest 
Never to mention ; this joined to what you are 
Able to give , may be a fair provision 
To make a very happy Couple . 


land   't is true , what I am able to give , I am able 
To give ; but by way of Bargain , and as I am 
A dealing Man , I am obliged to lay down no more 
In ready Monies , than what 's equivalent to 
Mr. Bellvill's Estate . 


Feew.   He has an Uncle , that has fifteen hundred 
A year , and no Child . 


land   And may give it I suppose to whom he pleases . 
Besides , Mr. Feewell , there 's an old English Proverb , 
He that waits for Dead men's shoes may go barefoot . 


Feew.   But sure , Sir , you ought to regard a little 
The many Virtues and Deserts 
Which tender my Friend capable 
To pretend to any Fortune . 


land   Alas , Cousin , Deserts and Virtues 
Are mere Drugs now a-days , mere Drugs , 
no Man is looked upon or esteemed , 
But he that has Money , and where there 's most Money , 
there 's most Worship ; and commonly 
Your Men of great Virtues , are great Beggars . 


Feew.   Our Forefathers , whom some will allow 
To be as Wise as we are , were of another Opinion . 


land   What Forefathers d'ye mean ? 
A Company of ragged 〈◊〉 Philosophers , 
Who lived in Tubs , and Cellars , and worth nothing 
But what they carried about ' 'em . 


Feew.   Yet that was a greater Treasure than 
Men ordinarily can now boast of . 


land   What Treasure d' ye mean ; their numbers 
Of Vermin , and other troublesome Companions 
That infested them ? 


Feew.   I mean their Knowledge and Content , 
Which Money cannot purchase . 


land   Nor could their great Wisdoms purchase a groat , 
Look you , Mr. Bellville , we have been 
Discoursing your Concerns ; you have a zealous Friend , 
And I join with him in a just and far esteem of you , 
But that must not hinder my care and desire 
To see that Gipsy well settled ; nothing of Consequence 
Aught to be done in haste , we ought to look 
Before we leap ; I like your Person , and 
My Daughter likes you , but soft and fair goes far ; 
Time and Straw ripen Medlars . 


Bell.   't is but just reason you should have 
The satisfaction due to a Parent 
In this , and all things that concern your Daughter : 
But since you say you have no great objections 
Against my Estate , my Person , or Conditions , 
I humbly ▪ beg your Promise as an earnest 
Of all my future Happiness . 


land   Well , I promise you , as I may say ; well , 
I do promise you . 
Enter Mistress Lurch . 

Bell.   May all the Happiness — 
Curse of her interruption . 


Mistress Lurch .  So , there 's Feewell , as I thought ; 
Aside . I must give him a hint that my Husband 
Is to go abroad this Afternoon 
To receive some Money ; sure he 'll have sense enough 
To take the hint , and give a civil Visit. 
Though the Brutus should leave me under 
Lock and Key , as sometimes he does : 
I have a Key as good as his , thanks 
To my Revengeful Ingenuity . 
Mr. Landy , your Servant ; your Servant 
Sweet Mistress Lucy . 


Feew.   You come , Madam , seasonably , if you please 
To grant me the favour of your most 
Agreeable Company , with the rest of your 
〈◊〉 here , to do Penance at a 
Poor Batchelor's Dinner . 


Mistress Lurch .  Were I absolute Mistress of myself , 
And my own time , I could quickly resolve you 
How much more I esteem a Batchelor's Treat , 
As you call it , than what I am like to have 
At home with a Husband , who this Afternoon 
Goes to the other end of the Town 
About some earnest business , and leaves poor me 
All alone at home ; I know not how to spend 
My time alone , not I , I swear — besides , 
He is so wickedly Jealous , that if I do 
But look on a Man , as I may now on you , 
Mr. Feewell , he immediately thinks I intent 
To make him a Cuckold . 
She looks amorously upon him . Enter Lurch . 

Feew.   What a Tottipottimoy Tyrant 't is , 
She has given me a hint , 
And I must improve it . 
Aside . 

Lurch .  So , there 's my Prisoner broke loose ; 
I no sooner turn my back , but she 
Breaks Goal immediately ; and talking 
With Feewell , whose frequent Visits to 
My House have given me suspicion . 
Heigh day , how she 〈◊〉 and jets her tail 
In and out — this can be no lesle than a Plot 
To Subvert the Government of her Anointed 
And Supreme Head — but I shall dissipate 
The Conspiracy in a moment . Hark ye , 
Hark ye , Mistress Wagtail , I have something 
To say to you , I have some earnest business 
With you , by the leave of this Gentleman 
With whom you are so close in Council . 
She starts ▪ 

Mistress Lurch .  Earnest business ! you have had no 
Earnest business with me the Lord knows when ; 
But you always interrupt me , if I am engaged 
In Discourse with any one . 


Lurch .  Very 〈◊〉 ! I shall make you know 
That you ought not to be engaged with any 
But your Husband , Madam ; therefore 
I Command you , in virtue of Holy Obedience , 
To come away ; come away , I say , and do not 
Provoke me to make use of my Sovereign Authority . 


〈◊〉 .  〈◊〉 , fie , Mr. Lurch , now you are 〈◊〉 severe 
Upon your 〈◊〉 , the Company have reason to take 
It ill ; this Warfare of your 〈◊〉 is 〈◊〉 , 
it 's enough to deter a young 〈◊〉 
That are going to join hands . 


Mistress Lurch .  I am weary 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , I 〈◊〉 
Forbear saying so ; he never 〈◊〉 me to see 
Any Company , or go abroad , but keeps me 
Under Lock and Key for whole days together , 
He had as good bury me alive . 


Bell.   Come , Mr. 〈◊〉 , to make amends for the scandal 
You have given , I propose that you permit 
Your Wife to dine with us , and 〈◊〉 you also 
Be overruled by the present Court , to do 
The same in order there , to make up this breach 
Of Wedlock , and give ample security for keeping 
The 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ▪ 〈◊〉 Feewell 〈◊〉 to 
Day , and will be pleased to have his Table 〈◊〉 with 
Good Company . 


Feew.   ' 〈◊〉 my intention to have 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 , had 
Not you prevented my Request . 


Lurch .  I have a strong 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 your 〈◊〉 
Are , but I shall put a spoken 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 
Aside . 

land   't is a laudable 〈◊〉 , and I 
am resolved to see it executed , and therefore 
I press you Mr. Lurch to muster with us , 
And the other moiety , your little 〈◊〉 , 
To be merry to day . 


Lurch .  Me you may 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 my 〈◊〉 no 
Doubt may be pressed , but now 〈◊〉 may 
Come in as a Volunteer . 


land   Come , it lies on my 〈◊〉 
To see this Domestic Fury 〈◊〉 ; 
Why Man , you are not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 
Should you be left in this Fit alone 〈◊〉 
Your Spouse , in hot blood you ▪ 
Might be apt to exercise 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 
Upon her . 


Mistress Lurch .  Let him 〈◊〉 his 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 are already 
Ceased between 〈◊〉 , I fear no 〈◊〉 of 
Manhood he can do . 


land   Come , no more of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 
Prepare for 〈◊〉 now but Mirth and Peace . 


Lurch .  Well , well , I submit , I must go lay up 
Some Papers , and will be there as soon as 
You — Nay , Mistress , you shall along with me , 
You shall march with your Chief Officer , 
we 'll be with you presently . 
Exit with his Wife . 

Bell.   How this Fellow with his Soliciting 
Jealousy prepares a Cuckoldom for himself . 
Enter Scrible , a 〈◊〉 . 

Scrible .  Save you , Mr. Landy . 



land   O Mr. Scrible , what News with you ▪ 
I hope my Mortgages stand good ? 


Scrib .  OH very safe , Sir ; but I have a business with you , 
That may deserve your privacy . 


Bell.   What a Devil brings this ill-looked 〈◊〉 ? 



land   Pray Gent. oblige me 
To entertain yourselves in the next 
Room , till I call you ; I know 't is no ▪ 
Unkindness to leave you together . 
〈◊〉 all but Landy and Scrible . Now , Mr. Scrible , the business . 


Scrib .  Why , Sir , I hope 't is that will be 
Acceptable to you ; but first give me leave 
To ask you , for I see Mr. Bellville 
Here , and there 's a Report he 's to have your 
Daughter Mistress Lucy , I hope you are not engaged ▪ 


land   Why , Mr. Scrible ? he 's a Gentleman 
Of a fair Character , and an indifferent 
Competent Estate . 


Scrib .  But I hope you are not engaged ? 



land   Why , why , good Mr. Scrible ? 



Scrib .  Why , Sir , I am come with a Proposition 
To you , for a Gentleman of two Thousand a year , 
His Name Sir Timothy Shallow , of a good Family 
In the North ; the Shallows of Shallow-hall have 
Been ancient there , his 〈◊〉 clear , and as 
Much as I tell you ; a plain honest 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 
And a Justice of Peace , and of the Quorum ▪ 


land   How , how , two Thousand a year ? 



Srib .  Yes , as good a two Thousand as is in England , and the 
Gentleman himself , upon my Account of your 
Daughter , and what you were very well able to give , 
Is so earnest in the matter , that he would needs 
Presently present himself to you . I have lodged him 
Hard by , at a Friend's House , till I made way 
For his Reception . 


land   Umh , this is very unlucky . 



Scrib .  You 〈◊〉 troubled , Sir.  



land   A little , Mr. Scrible . 



〈◊〉 .  Do you not like my Proposition ? 



land   Yes , Mr. 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 like 〈◊〉 Proposition 
Very well ; yes , very well , but I am — 


Scrib .  What , Sir — you are much concerned . 



land   A little , Mr. Scrible — 〈◊〉 — two Thousand a year . 



Scrib .  Yes , Sir , fairly and 〈◊〉 , without any the 
least encumbrance . 


land   I am unlucky . 



Scrib .  I hope you have not 〈◊〉 yourself ? 



land   Why , in troth I have 〈◊〉 a way , 
Or as one may say , in a 〈◊〉 
Given my Consent . 


Scrib .  But have you 〈◊〉 any Agreement ? 



land   Not at all , not in the 〈◊〉 ; nay , I was not at all willing ▪ 
But always put off coming 〈◊〉 the matter , 
For I 〈◊〉 Mr. 〈◊〉 Estate 
Of the smallest ; but at last being 
Very much importuned , I think I did say 
I consented , or promised , or something like it . 


Scrib .  And was this all ? 



land   Yes , the very all ▪ and no more ▪ 
And the word slipped 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 
But just as you came . 


Scrib .  Well , well , 〈◊〉 nothing in this 
Actionable , and therefore if you 〈◊〉 it ▪ 
I 'll fetch Sir Timothy presently , 
To present himself to you , and your Daughter , 
And if you agree , we 'll make short work 
Of it , to prevent tricks and devices . 


land   Pray do , Mr. 〈◊〉 ▪ and in the mean time 
I 'll discourse the matter 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 
A Man ought to do the 
Best he can for his Child , you know ; I 'll tell him 
So plainly , so pray 〈◊〉 the Knight . 
Two Thousand Pounds per 〈◊〉 , and a Lady 
At first dash ; not to be neglected . 
Without there — 
Exit Scrible . Goes to the door . Call in Mr. Bellville , and 
My Daughter , I shall make a 〈◊〉 
Pother amongst 'em ; but my daughter 's 
My Daughter , and if she be not wise enough , 
I ought to be so for her ▪ 


Enter Mr. Bellville , leading Mistress Lucy and Feewel ▪ Mr. Bellville ,  I have often told you , that Prudence 
And Consideration ought to be used in 
Matters of Importance , and the bestowing 
A Child is a great one . 


Bell.   I hope , Sir , you proceeded so when you 
Promised me the Happiness of your Daughter . 


land   Soft and fair , good Mr. 〈◊〉 , your 
Importunities , and my Cousin Feewells , were 
So troublesome , that I think I did in a 
Manner , and as a Man may say , somewhat 〈◊〉 
Utter something of Consent , Of to that purpose . 


Lucy .  So much , Sir , that sure I cannot justly be 
Any others , but Mr. Bellvill's . 


land   Again Prattle-box , at your old way , to 
Meddle when your Father pronountes Matters 
For your good . 


Feew.   But your Reputation , Sir , 



land   Aye , Sir , my Reputation shall be preserved . 
By keeping myself from being thought an Ass , 
By seeming not to know a Shilling from a Sixp●…nce . 
In short , I have received a Proposition , 
From a worthy Knight for my Daughter , 
With double Mr. Bellvill's Estate , 
I say double . 


Bell.   But , Sir.  



land   no butts , Sir , no butts , I am bound in 
Conscience , and must and will examine the Matter , 
Therefore no more words , they are but wind . 
The Knight will be here presently . 
Enter Sir Timothy Shallow and Scrible . See where he comes . 



Lucy .  Bless me , what a Figure ' 't is . 



Scrib .  Mr. Landy , this is the worthy Knight 
I made the Motion for , who cometh in Person 
To present himself to you and your 
Fair Daughter . 


land   He is very welcome , Mr. Scrible . 



Sir Timo.   Your Servant , Sir , and as Mr. Scrible 
Told you , I come to offer myself a 
Servant to your Daughter . I suppose , 
Sir , this may be she . 


land   Yes , Sir , such as she is . 



Sir 〈◊〉 .  By your leave , Fair L●…dy , 
He Salutes Mistress Lucy . By the Mass , I never blinked my Eyes on 
A titer Lass , in good Faith , Mr. La●…dy , 
You have a most bonny Daughter . 


land   Why indeed , Sir Timothy , I think she is not 
Much a-miss , come , Lucy , hold up your Head , 
Leave whimpering , Huzzy , 
Aside . she 's bashful , Sir.  


Sir Tim.   I'faith , a most dainty Creature : 
Look you , Mr. Landy , I 'll 〈◊〉 make many words , 
I am downright Country all over , 
I don't practise the fine Words , and 
May be most of them the fashionable Li●…ss 
Of the Town ; but in short , if you and 
The Lady likes me and my Estate , I am fully 
Satisfied ; I 'll prod●… you the Particu●… 
Of an Honest Estate of 2000 l. a Year , 
All lying about 〈◊〉 Hall , where the S●…llowss 
Have been known for many 〈◊〉 . 


land   A fair Estate , I confess , Sir Timothy , 
And when you please to bring the Particulars , 
We shall proceed , and I make no question , 
But fairly on all sides . 


Sir Tim.   Nay , I 'll not be long in doing that , 
For I hate delays ; besides , I hate staying 
In this Town , I should be ●…akt here in , 
A little time . 


Scrib .  If Sir Timothy pleases , we will depart now , 
And speedily return , with a full Account 
Of every thing , and short Heads for an Agreement . 


land   With all my Heart , Mr. Scrible . 



Sir Tim.   Nay , I warrant 〈◊〉 I 'll ●…sten Matters , 
For in troth , Fair Mistress , I like you exceedingly , 
And you shall live in the North , as well 
As the Proudest of 'em all , 
And have a Coach at your Command , 
And if you take to Love Hunting , 
I have as good a Pack of Dog's 〈◊〉 ever laid nose to ground . 


Scrible .  Come , Sir Timothy , time calleth upon us . 



Sir Tim.   I go , I go , Mr. Scrible ; for this time farewell , 
Good Mr. Landy , I shall be with you again 
Speedily ; farewell Fair Mistress , I assure you 
I like you very much , exceedingly yf●…ith . 


land   Come , Sir Timothy , I 'll wait upon you out : 
Lucy follow me , I have something to say 
To you . 
Exeunt Sir Tim. and Scrible , Landy and Lucy another ●…ay . 

Bell.   Was there ever such a turn 
Of Fortune , I fancied that Parchment 
Rascal came for no good ? 


Feew.   Was there ever such a Miser ? 
A Groat more purchases him from 
The freehold of common honesty . 


Bell.   't is insupportable to think of losing her . 



Feew.   Come , clear up , we will not lose her , 
we 'll pursue 'em close , this Northern Privateer 
Shall never Board our Rich Vessel . 


Bell.   I 'll sink him and myself first ; 
Before he has fair Lucy for his Wife , 
I must be first unmarried from my Life . 
Exeunt . Enter Lady Crossit , and Grace with a Band-box . 

L. Cros.   Are you sure you are perfect in your Message ? 



Grace .  I have it all without book to a tittle , 
And your Ladyship has no more to do now , but to give me your Letter , 
And fling an old shoe after me for good luck . 


L. Cros.   here 's the Letter ready written , Signed and Sealed , 
Take it you , and put it under the Shirts , 
That when the Doctor goes to look on the Present , 
He may take it out with his own hands . 


Grace .  I like the Contrivance very well , however let me alone to guide him to take up the Linen , and to put his hand upon it . 



L. Cros.   Use your own discretion , 
I rely wholly on your Conduct . 


Grace .  Sir John is already gone to Barnet , 
And there 's no danger of his return till 〈◊〉 morrow Morning , 
For he is to lie at one of his Tenants Houses in the Town , 
As 't is his usual Custom . 


L. Cros.   thou art in the right , 
Therefore carry my Letter , and the Present immediately 
To my dear Doctor , sure he will not slight the Summons 
A Person of my Quality sends him . 
Well , 〈◊〉 leave thee to bring about the ●…est ; 
And retire to feed my fancy befir●…-hand , 
With the thoughts of my Lover , till thy return ; 
Do but ●…cceed , and bring him to my Chamber to night , 
And I 'll Reward thee beyond thy expectation . 
Exit . 

Grace   alon●… Now if I can but play the Mistress of the Ceremonies , 
And Conduct this Ambassador 
To a private Audience to Night , my Fortunes are made . 
Well , I find the Vapours her Ladyship complain of , 
Were only a mist she cast before her Husband's eyes , 
And the large Rewards she has promised , 
Have caused the like effects on me ; 
W●…o am to hear all , see all , and know nothing ▪ 
As they who keep a Treating-house connive 
At all the Cheats and Vice by which they thrive ; 
When Mass and Miss in hugger-mugger come , 
th' officious Chamberlain straight shows a Room : 
And though he more than guesses their Design , 
He has no other but upon their Coin ▪ 
So I , as true a Chamberlain as he , 
am guiltless of the Fact , to get the Fee.  
Is going out , when Sir John Crossit Ente●… at the same time in his Riding Habit , and makes her start . 

Sir John.   Grace , is 't you , what makes you start so ? 



Grace .  To see your Worship returned so soon . 



Sir John.   I am returned , only to take a Copy of a Lease I forgot . 
where 's yo●…r Lady ? 
Grace 〈◊〉 to bide the Band-box . 

Grace .  Retired to her 〈◊〉 . 



Sir John.   What 〈◊〉 you got there , that you 〈◊〉 so , 
And endeavour to conceal from me ? 


Grace .  Some things that belong to my Lady . 



Sir John.   What things ? 



Grace .  Only some new Head-dresses my Lady does not like , 
And I am going to carry 'em back to the Change.  


Sir John.   Let me see 'em , 
If they like me better than they do your L●…dy ▪ 
It may be I may persuade her to wear ' 'em . 


Grace .  But I am sure you won't like 'em neither — 
Besides , there are some things here , that Men must not see . 


Sir John.   If it be any thing that belongs to my Wife , 
I am sure I may see it , and will see it . 
I begin to suspect something , 
Aside . Her starting , and endeavouring to hide the Band-box m●…kes me curious . 
Open the Band-box , and show me what you have got there . 


Grace .  't is nothing but foul Linen indeed , indeed , Sin 



Sir John.   First Head-dresses , and then foul Linen , 
This is mere prevaricating , it may be she has stolen something , 
And I have seized her in the act of Conveyance . 
Aside . Come , open your Band-box quickly , or I 'll force it open ; 
For I am in haste , and cannot lose time . 
Open , Open , I say . 


Grace .  Why should you desire to pry into Woman's Affairs ? 
I must not , and cannot open to you . 


Sir John.   I 'll see that immediately . 

Snatches the Band-box away from her , and opens it . 

Grace .  OH Mercy , Mercy , and I 'll discover all . 



Sir John.   First , let me see what discoveries I can make without you , 
d' ye call these Head-dresses ? 
Pulls ' out one of the Shirts . They are very large ones , 
And the Fashion is prodigiously increased . 


Grace .  aside . If he looks any further , he certainly discovers the Letter ; and I am ruined . 

Sir John pulls out another Shirt , and the Letter falls on the ground . 

Sir John.   Item another — But what does this Letter do here ? 

Reads the Superscription . To the Dear Idol of my Soul.  





This looks like my Wif●…'s' Fenwork ; 

But now for the Contents . 

Opens and Reads . I never thought before this fatal Hour , 
Thus to confess the Naked Archer's Power . 
Till now my stubborn Breast , like 〈◊〉 shreld , 
Slighted his weaker Darts , and 〈◊〉 not yield . 
That only Arrow 〈◊〉 me through and through , 
Which the well-ayming Bow-boy shot for you ; 
Who rushing on me then in Fury came , 
And took me Prisoner in your Mighty Name . 


And so forth in Doggrel quite ●…o the bottom : What can this Lovestuff mean ? But hold , here 's a Post-scribble , I think in Prose ; what says this ? 

Reads . Dir Doctor , my Husbane is gone to Barnit this Ivining , and does not come back tell cummorro mornin ; the Nits are long and called , and I am not accost●…ed to lie alone , bein firful●… ; I think no Parson so we●… quallifid to guard my Hon●…ss , as you are , and therefore 〈◊〉 bold to beg your sweat Company to Nit , excuse this 〈◊〉 Lins , from her , who is alw●…s your most umbel Sarvant : 

Dorothy Crossit . 





This is some of her own Ingenious Style and Spelling ; However , there 's Sense enough in it to make me a Cornuto . 

To Gr●…ce . Pray , Madam , what was your Ladyship to have for the Postage of this important Letter ; what reversion of the next Satin Gown or Silk Petticoat have you been promised for this great Piece of Bawdy Service ? 

Grace .  OH Mercy , Mercy ; Pardon me but this one time , and I 'll never do so again . 



Sir John.   aside . That ●…ealous Rogue , Lurch , who suspects all Wives as well as his own , was in the right I find . 

To her . Well I will be Merciful for once to you , but on these Conditions , that you ●…cerely unravel the very bottom of this Intrigue to me ; and Secondly , that you keep my Counsel , as you have kept my Wife's . 



Grace .  The bottom of the Intrigue is this ; my Lady , who is deeply Enamoured of this ugly Fellow of a Doctor , went yesterday privately to the Change , and bought those dozen of Shirts you have discovered in the Band-box ; and ordered me just now to deliver them with this Letter , as a Present to him in her Name ; the rest you may easily understand by the Letter you have Read. — I believe my good Angel was the cause of your unexpected return ; for just at that very Moment when you surprised me , I had a qualm of Consclence , and was ready to wave my Commission . Thought I , what , shall I be accessary to the wronging so sine a Gentleman , as your Worship is , for the sake of that ugly Blackamoor Doctor . Thought I , I 'll never do it : — Your worship 's a ●…ine Gentleman : I wonder ind●…d , how my Lady can have the Heart to fall in love with such an ugly Monster , when she has so fine a Gentleman as your Worship for her Husband . 

Sir John chucks her under the Chin.  

Sir John.   Well , well , I am glad to be thought so by thee , thou art a forward Girl , I have always had a particular Esteem for thee , and am resolved to continue it . 

aside . The Baggage is full of Wit , and taking ; I have had a liking to her long ago . 

to her But d' ye hear , if you intent I should Seal your Pardon , you must now do me a piece of Service . 



Grace .  Any thing , Sir , to serve you , and to show I intended you no wrong . 



Sir John.   then thus ; you must keep all secret from your Lady that has passed , or is to pass between us two : In the next place , you shall pretend to have delivered the Message and Present to the Doctor ; and acquaint your Lady he will wait on her at the time appointed ; and I instead of goi●…g to 〈◊〉 will take Possession of the Shirts , and play the Doctor in 〈◊〉 this very Night . 



Grace .  But how will your Worship do , not to be discovered who you are ? 



Sir John.   Why thus : I intent to come late , and you shall order it so , that my Wife shall expect me in Bed ; I shall have nothing upon me but a Nightgown , and when I am just ready to enter her Room , you shall immediately let the Light fall , or snuff it out , as by chance , so that I being undressed , and having nothing to do , but to step into the Bed to her , there will be no occasion of lighting the Candle again . 



Grace .  So far all goes well : But how will your Worship do not to be known by Talking , and in the Morning before your departure ? 



Sir John.   that 's easy still , for my Voice , when I talk in a whispering Tone , will not be distinguished . then I intent to put on one of the laced Shirts , which will favour my design still more : As for my parting undiscovered in the Morning , thou knowest 't is late before the day breaks this Winter Season , and I design to leave her before 't is light , pretending fear of being seen to Morrow by the Neighbourhood , in the absence of her Husband . 



Grace .  You have answered all my Objections , and I promise to serve your Worship faithfully . 



Sir John.   Do so , and I 'll not only forgive thee what 's past , but also Reward thee Nobly — Be sure you take care your Lady knows nothing of this my sudden return by means of any in the Family . 



Grace .  there 's no fear I believe of that , for she 's retired to her Chamber , has there shut herself up , to Meditate , as she told me , and will speak to no body all this Afternoon but me ; when I return as she imagines from the Doctor . 



Sir John.   Well , I 'll slip aside till about Eleven at Night , at which Hour expect my Return , and get all things ready . 

Exit . 

Grace .  Your Worship shall be served punctually , leave it to my Management . 

Exit . 

ACT III  

SCENE in Lurch ' s House . 

Enter Mistress Lurch , and her Maid . Mistress Lurch .  'T Was a Noble Entertainment Mr. Feewell made us , Retty ▪ yet I fed my eyes more than my stomach ; 
For every time I observed my Husband's head was turned from me , 
I immediately cast an amorous look on Mr. Feewell , 
Who seldom failed of catching it , and returning me another . 
What did not he ask me with his Eyes ? 
What did I not grant him with-mine ? 
Our Eyes spoke faster , and explained 
Such Thoughts no Tongues could utter : 
't is certainly a Language only of Angels , and of Lovers . 
Mr. Bellville was the best Friend I had at Table ; 
He still plied my Monster of 〈◊〉 with so many 
Healths , and full Glasses , that he forced him 
By mere strength of Wine , and Argument of Bumpers , 
To change his natural ill humour for a good one , 
And become a sociable Beast in Company 
Yet he did not forget himself so much , 
But that as soon as Dinner was ended , 
He ordered a Coach to be got ready , 
And hurried me home along with him ; 
And is gone to the other end of the Town to receive a sum of Money . 


Betty .  What would you say if Mr. Feewel should come to you now ? 



Mistress Lurch .  't is not impossible . 
For when I was going out of the Room where we were merry , 
I remember I heard the Company talk something of breaking up . 
Besides , I gave him a hint this very Morning , 
That my Husband was to go abroad . 


Betty .  This very morning I did as much , 
Fearing the Infallibility of Eye-language 
Might fail in such Particulars ; 
And told him , this hour your Husband was to go abroad . 
For which , like a well-bred Gentleman , 
He put a New Crown Piece into my hand ; 
't is not the first I have had of him . 


Mistress Lurch .  then I am certain he will come , 
If the Company does not detain him . 


Betty .  I hope you 'll be Civil to him , Madam , if he should come ? 



Mistress Lurch .  O , Betty , my heart 's so full , 
And I find myself in such a Confusion , 
That I know not what I shall say to him if he should come — 
Love has put me so on the rack of Expectation , 
That I shall never be able to speak to him ; 
And I 'm af●…aid he 'll mistake my silence for a rebuke , 
And be daunted in his Address . 


Betty .  Never fear , Madam , you 'll sinned the benefit of your Tongue . 
We Women never lose the use of it , 
But in the Bed of Sickness , or of Love. 
But should you be as mute as a Fish , 
d' ye think Mr. F●…wel does not understand the hanging of the Lip , 
And the Languishing cast of an Eye half asleep ? 
Besides , Men have more ways to the wood than one ; 
When they see that Love and whining Passion will not work us , 
And that we expect to be put to the Question , 
They behave themselves like an undaunted General , 
Who , resolved to storm a Fort , admits of no Parley , 
And Puts all to the Sword. 
〈◊〉 , hist , what footsteps do I hear ? 


Mistress Lurch .  't is Feewel , on my life ; I tremble all over . 



Betty .  Let him come , we are two to one . 
we 'll give him as good as he brings , never fear . 
Enter Feewell . 

Mistress Lurch .  OH Heavens ! who 's that , my Husband ? 



Betty .  no , 't is Mr. Feewel , Madam . 



Mistress Lurch .  Sure Mr. Feewell has mistaken my Chamber , 
For that of his Cousin Landy . 


Feew.   Joy of my eyes , 't is impossible I should mistake , 
When I have so sure a guide as Love to direct me . 


Mistress Lurch .  You naughty Man , 
How durst you venture to come into my Chamber , 
When you knew my Husband was abroad , and I all alone ? 


Feew.   That was the chie●…est motive of my coming , Child . 



Mistress Lurch .  If my Husband should find us two together , 
I am ruined for ever . 


Feew.   Therefore we must prevent his coming upon us , 
And dispatch my Love : 
't is no time now to discourse or think of an absent Husband , 
When a Lover's present ; 
Come , prithee , I am in more haste than thou imagin'st . 


Betty   aside . He has the true knack of undoing us , 
He has such a pretty kind of way with him , no Woman can deny him . 
My Mistress is reduced to her Eye . Language already — 
Well , I 'll take a turn in the Garden , 
And leave the Knight and the Enchanted Lady together . 
Steals out . 

Mistress Lurch .  What , is the filthy Girl gone , 
And left me all alone with a Man ? 
Why Betty , help , help , where are you ? I darned call aloud now , 
For fear any body should hear me . 
Aside . Why Betty , Betty . 
Softly . 

Feew.   Come , come , if Betty should hear , 
She has more wit than to answer ; 
She knows you are in safe hands , come prithee , come this way a little , 
And do not put me to lug so hard , thou dear Creature . 


Mistress Lurch .  Bless me , what do you mean to do , Mr. Feewell ? 



Feew.   Why , I do mean to bless thee , and myself too ; 
But in the first place , I intent to lock the door , 
And after that , to retire with thee into the next Chamber , 
And I 'll tell thee the rest when I am there . 


Mistress Lurch .  I hope you are a Man of Honour , Mr. Feewell , 
And intent me no harm , 
You see I trust you with my Reputation . 


Feew.   Aye , Child , I warrant thee , 
thou shalt find that I am a true Man of Honour ▪ 
As they are retiring , Lurch knocks , and cries without , open the door there . 

Mistress Lurch .  OH my Husband , my Husband , what shall we do ? 



Feew.   'Sdeath , I fancied the Devil would thrust in his horns , 
When you began to talk of him ; 
Is there no place to hide me in ? 


Mistress Lurch .  no place but an old Armoury , 
And there he 'll be sure to look in the first place . 
Knocks louder , and bids open the door . 

Mistress Lurch .  All I can do , is to disg●… you 
In some of the Maid's Clotheses , that lie in the next Room . 


Feew.   Come , dispatch the Masquerade then , if there be no other way . 
But 't will not do , unless we 〈◊〉 out fire , fire , and I sally in the smoke . 


Mistress Lurch .  So , so , now get to that Corner — 
Rush out upon him . 
Having dressed him in a 〈◊〉 and loose Sc●…rveses and Hoods , they cry out Fire , Fire , Fire . 

Mr. Lurch .  Open the door , I say , open the door , 
Or I 'll break it open . 
She opens the door , crying Fire still . 

Mr. Lurch .  Where , where ? OH my Papers , my Papers . 

As 〈◊〉 enters , Feewell rushes out against him , and throws him down . 

Mistress Lurch .  I hope 't is out again , 't was but just begun ; 
I was so suddenly frighted , that it made me cry out . 
Enter B●…tty . OH Betty ! I hope the fire 's out ? 



Betty .  Yes , Madam , you ne●…d not be afraid . 



Lurch .  A very sudden Fire , and as suddenly put out . 
There was a devilish strong dockt Jade gave me a broad side , 
And whirled me about like a Gigg ; 
You had got a very lusty Lady , a Fortune-teller , I suppose , 
Or a Cuckold-maker in Woman●… Clotheses , 
Which amounts to the same thing . 


Mistress Lurch .  If a Broom were dressed up in Woman's Clotheses , 
Your Jealousy would make a Man of it immediately . 
If you continue to mistrust my Virtue at this rate , 
I 'll give you cause to do so in reality . 


Lurch .  I think that 's pretty well performed already . 



Mistress Lurch .  None but such a jealous head as yours , 
Could harbour such a suspicion . How came you , pray , 
To return so soon from tother end of the Town ? 


Lurch .  Because I remembered I was invited to a 
Burial that way , as you know 〈◊〉 morrow , 
And so I turned back , resolving to do it all under one . 


Mistress Lurch .  no , 't was your jealousy brought you back , 
Only to plague me with your hotheaded Fit ▪ 
Be as innocent as I will , I must be Condemned ; 
you 're a great Encourager of Virtue indeed ; 
You ought in Conscience to ask my Pardon on your knees , 
And 't is well I have the Charity to forgive you . 


Lurch .  Forgive me , very good , forgive me ! 



Mistress Lurch .  Yes , forgive you , for thus publishing 
Your own Folly , and my Dishonour . 


Lurch .  Excellent ! come , we 'll go in and consider the Matter ; If any one wilfully destroys himself , they say he 's felo de se , she shan't have cause to call me Cuckold de se , I 'll not be Jilted out of my Care and Vigilance : 

Plots may be better laid , and then , if luck hold , 
I may ask Pardon for being made a Cuckold . 
Exit . 

SCENE II of the Third Act.  

Enter Landy . land   Sir Timot●…y has sent word he 's coming . 
't is well , very well , Mr. Bellville must give way ; 
A Knight , and 2000 per Ann. not to be resisted . 
Let Fools please themselves with empty Notions 
Of fine Parts , and outside Virtu●… . 
A dressed up fashionable Gentleman — 
All fading Fooleries , their value a Notion ; 
Give me the solid lasting Properties 
Of Land , and Money — OH here he comes . 
Enter Sir Timothy , and Scrible . 

Sir Timothy ,  you are a punctual Man , I like it well , 
I love punctual proceedings , Mr. Scrible . 


Sir Tim.   Nay , Sir , you shall always find me 
Tite and honest , plain-dealing , and steady ; 
Gud faith , I 'll no waverer . 


Scrib .  Sir Timothy hath hereby brought you 
A true and honest particular of his Estate . 
I have also prepared some short Particulars , 
With Blanks for either to Sign , if you so agree ; 
For Sir Timothy is much taken with you Daughter , and is in haste . 


Sir Tim.   Why , look you Mr. Landy , 
( Father I hope that shall be ) I am at a word , I hate delays , 
Besides , I would fain be rid of this smoky Town , so plaguy full of noise , 
That a Man had as good live in a Belfry when they ring a Peal , 
And things so strangely dressed , as if it were all a Poppet-show ; 
I 'll even thought I had met two or three Ghosts , 
They said they were the Sparks of the Town , 
And called them by a strange name , Boughs , or something like it ; 
'Slid they looked as if they had been haled out of Meal-tubs , 
Tom 〈◊〉 our Miller does not go more besinea●… . 


land   For my part , Sir Timothy , I'like an honest plain Country Gentlem●…n , there 's no tricks covered in fine words to abuse one another ; a Civil-war of Tongues in this Town rages perpetually . 



Sir Tim.   Nay , in good faith , I 'll carry your Daughter to Peace and Plenty , and show you how well I like her , I 'll make a Thousand a year Jointure . 



land   Enough , enough , good Sir Timothy , and I will give the Girl a Portion proportionably . 



Scrib .  It is then meet that you sign these short Articles accordingly . 



land   we 'll retire to my Closet , and there finish . 
Come , Sir Timothy , good Fortune attend us . 
Exeunt . Enter Bellville , and Feewell . 

Bell.   They say this damned Image of a Knight 
Is come , with that Rascal Scrible . 


Feew.   Curse on ' 'em , what 〈◊〉 they make ; ' 'slife they give us no time for invention , we might else try to bribe that Scribbling Cur , he would bark on any side for Money 



Bell.   I am so confounded , that my Thoughts justle and crowd one another into confusion . 

Look , Feewell ; 

Enter Mistress Lucy . See where that Sunshine comes , overcast with a soft shower — OH , my dear Lucy , while this gentle pity blesses my Soul with joy ; the cruel fears of losing you , blasts all the springing Comfort , and withers into sorrow . 



Lucy .  How cruel is a Father , to make the Life he g●…ve so miserable , as mine must be ! 

Enter Philadelphia hastily . 

Phil.   OH Mistress , we are all undone , I peeped into my Master's Closet , and there 's the Bumkin Knight and he , Signing and Sealing , and that Ink-bottle Rascal , busy in ●…iverting the Papers . 



Feew.   This is worst of all . 



Bell.   I am lost beyond Redemption , there 's no avoiding this ruin , unless fair Lucy will fly with me , and in my Fortune find shelter from this storm . 



Lucy .  Alas , I dare not ! I cannot fly from that which Heaven makes my Duty . 

Enter Servant . 

Seru.   Mr. Bellville , there 's a Gentleman without , come Post from the Country , who desire's to speak with you . 

Exit Servant . 

Bell.   Let him come in — 

What should this be ? 
Enter Elliot , Servant to Mr. Bellville ' s Uncle . How ! Elliot — what News with you ? 



Elli .  Very sad , Sir , at least to me , your Uncle my good Master is dead , and has left all his Estate to you , Real and P●…rsonal : 〈◊〉 ●… Letter from his Steward , Mr. Trusty , who keeps all things in qulet Possession for you , and desire's you to hasten down with all the speed you can . 



Bell.   't is so — My Uncle was lately in good Health . 

Bellville reads the Letter . 

Elli .  Yes , Sir , but died suddenly of an Appoplex , I lost a good Master . 



Bell.   And you have found another , if you please , Elliot . 



Elli .  I thank you , S●…r , what order do you please to take for going ? 



Bell.   d' ye know my Lodging , Elliot ? 



Elli .  Yes , Sir , I was directed from thence to find you here . 



Bell.   Go thither then , and refresh yourself , I believe you ●…ave Rid hard , I have some 〈◊〉 that I must look after ; but I 'll come thither with all the speed I can , and then order every thing . 



Elli .  I 'll wait there for you , Sir.  

Exit Elliot . 

Feew.   This is very ●…lucky , would this News had come a little sooner , this Argument would Convert the Old Gentleman to the Religion of our side . 



Bell.   But I fear 't is gone too far . 



〈◊〉 .  'T will turn him again , and fet him , like a wind mill , to ●…all with the wind that changes , and turn off the Knight , as he did the Squire . 



Lucy .  But if he has Signed Covenants , he 'll never venture the battle of a Suit of Law , he dreads a Writ , as he would a piece of Canon 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 him . 



Feew.   ' 'Slife , how dull we are ; yet if we could make him of our Party , there might be some contrivance to 〈◊〉 this Knight 〈◊〉 upon a wrong Adventure . 

Studies . 

Lucy .  't is possible this additional Consideration might incline his 〈◊〉 Prudence , but I fear 't is too late . 



Phill.   Mistress , I have a Fancy come into my Head , that may do . 



Bell.   P●…thee Phill , let 's hear it . 



Phill.   Nay , 't is a very pretty one , and tends to no lesle than to make myself a Lady . 



Feew.   On my Life , I have hit on the same fancy with Phill.  



Phill.   Mine is to pack the Cards upon him , and shuffle me to turn up instead of my Mistress . 



Feew.   Say no more , Phill , I have it all ; thou art the ●…ather , and I the Mother of this Plot ; let me alone to shape it , now thou hast got it . 



Bell.   But dear Cousin Feewell , what is 't . 



Feew.   Say no more , but let me alone with my Cousin Landy , you ●…ellville shall be Taught your Part in good time , and you Cousin Lucy have nothing to say , but to have and to hold , after the Parson . 



Phil.   You intent , I suppose , to draw my Old Master into the Plot. It cannot fail ; he will certainly take the Bait , and then Mistress , I must take place of you . 



Lucy .  With all my Heart , Phill ; thou dost deserve it for taking mine . 



Feew.   Come , no Words , nor Conjuring up Doubts , withdraw all , and leave me to Assault this Castle of Treasure , which is unfortified to hold out against such Batteries as I shall raise against him , observe well your Parts . One thing I had forgot ; you Bellville , you must seem a little cold , as if your new Fortune , and being so ill used by him had chilled your passion for his Daughter ; stay , give me the Letter , now be gone , while I wait for his bolting out . 



Bell.   Heaven prospero your attempt . 

Exit Bellville . 

Feew.   They are gone in time , see where the Squadron comes , led by Captain Scrible , having , I suppose , newly Signed the Treaty . 

Enter Scrible first , Landy , and Sir Timothy . 

Scrible .  Give you joy , Mr. Landy , and you , Sir Timothy ; I suppose you have no business more for me at present , I must hasten and provid●… other Matters necessary for the Wedding . 



land   Do , good Mr. Scrible . 

Exit Scrible . 

Sir Tim.   Nay , I must about Matters too , in good faith ; 〈◊〉 ●…mble the Parson , time , and place together , I long y faith to make Mistress Lucy the Lady Shallow , and I 'll return quickly . 



land   The sooner the welcomer , good Son , as I think I may now call you . 



Sir Tim.   And I hope I may call you Father , and get a little Son to make you a great Father . 



land   Lustily spoken y faith , Sir Timothy , and I 'll give it a Father's Blessing . 



Sir Tim.   And in good faith I 'll ●…asten to get it , so farewell till then ; I 'll quickly come to fetch my Lady , to increase the Family of the Shallow . 

Exit . 

land   So , all goes well . Pretty y faith ! they would have p●…swaded me to take Ninepences for a Noble ; very pretty y faith . OH 〈◊〉 Fe●…well , your Servant . 

Fe●…well steps out . 

Feew.   I waited to speak with you , Cousin . 



land   What , about the old Story ? Pray Cousin Feeweell give off the pursuit of that Matter , 't is a cold scent , and I am engaged , fully engaged . 



Feew.   I hope not , Sir , for 't is a new Matter I have to acquaint you with . 



land   New Matter , pish , what new Matter ! my daughter 's my Daughter , and my Care of her the same ▪ and a Thousand a year is but a Thousand a year , and two Thousand is two Thousand ; and I must desire Mr. Bellville to forbear further troubling himself , and me . 



Feew.   I wish , Sir , ne may not too readily comply ; he had your Promise , and I assure you , resents his injury . 



land   I think I did utter a hasty word , or so , but two Thousand a year is a very good Ex●…use : 



Feew.   But almost three Thousand is a better Argument . 

In short , Sir , I resolved , without Mr. Bellvill's leave , to acquaint you that his Uncle is dead , and has left him above Fifteen Hundred a year , besides a great Personal Estate . 



land   How , Cousin , sure this is a devise ? 



〈◊〉 .  Read this Letter , and if your Opinion holds , you will repent what you now joy in . 

Reads the Letter . 

land   By my life 't is so indeed ; nay , I have heard his Uncle had such a fair Estate . OH Mr. Feewell , what have I done ? 



Feew.   I hope nothing but what may be undone . 



land   OH yes , Cousin , that scribble scrable Rasc●…l has fettered me in Articles , to get his Fee.  



Feew.   Not so fast , I hope , but that you may get loose . 



land   OH impossibl●… , they 'll clap Writs upon me , and toss me into the Spiritual Court , where no flesh ever ' scaped destruction . 



Feew.   I am very much troubled , is there no Remedy ? 



land   OH I would there were , Cousin , you know I ever esteemed Mr. Bellvill's Person . 



Feew.   I must confess I wondered you were so suddenly fond of this Knight , of the ill-favoured Countenance ; besides , you knew your Daughter loved Bellville , some Consideration should have been had of her Content . 



land   Alas ! 't was for her sake ; care of her , care of her ; 't is very unfortunate , had this News come but a day sooner . 



Feew.   that 's not to be helped now , if I were you , I 'd stand the 〈◊〉 . 



land   no , Cousin , I 'd as willingly Death should Arrest me as a Sergeant , and had as good almost fall into the hands of the Hangman , as the Lawyers ; besides public shame , Cousin . 



Feew.   Would you be truly and heart●…ly pleased , if a way might be found to set you safely free , and Bellville 〈◊〉 have your Daughter ? 



〈◊〉 .  Cousi●… , Cousin , with all my Soul , I have found this Knight to be Sir Shallow , indeed a very Coxcomb . 



Feew.   And will you steadily act in the 〈◊〉 , if a handsome one be contrived ? 



land   Most cheerfully , Cousin , trust me , most willingl with my best skill and power . But d' ye hear , Cousin , will not this great addition of ●…ortune , joined to the unhappy usage of Mr. Bellville , make him fly off ? 



Feew.   ' Troth he is something grumb upon the Matter , but 't is possible his love for your Daughter may overcome . 



land   Persuade him , good Cousin , work him into easiness , and forgiven●… ; I always esteemed his Person , desire him to believe it from a penitent and hasty Father ; good Cousin can you tell where we may find him ? 



Feew.   Easily , Sir , for I left him taking his leave of his Mistress , I saw her begin to put finger in eye . 



land   then I fear he 'll fall off . Call 'em in , good Cousin , and assist me ●…n that you say is your own design ; call 'em in , good Cousin , and endeavour to soften him by the way ; tell the Girl I charge her to look kindly 〈◊〉 him . 



Feew.   Well , Sir , I 'll try my utmost — 

B●…t be sure , Sir , to be very kind to him . 

Exit Feewell . 

land   Doubt it not in the least . Now am I to go to Sentence and Repentance , and my Penance will be ( no doubt on 't ) an additional Portion ; how this Earthquake of Land has shaken me ? no matter , if the Plot be well laid , and succeeds , I shall be contented , and my poor Gi●…l will be pleased . And I consider , when riches give me leave , that the truth on 't is , this Knight is a very Coxcomb , and my Daughter had been as well disposed of in a deep Well , as to this Shallow ; what Troubles have I twisted myself into ! OH these Girls , these Girls , every one of them gives as much trouble as a Leash of Boys , they must be reared like Or●…ngetreeses in a cold Country , kept within doors , and carefully housed ; what a happiness it would be for Parents , were there an Insurance-office ●…or getting Boys instead of Girls , any Wise Man would give Ten in the Hundred to have his Wife Insured . Soft , they come — I see my Cousin Feewell is working the Matter . 

Enter Feewell , earnestly whispering with Bellville , Lucy and her Maid following . 

Bell.   Have you any Commands for me , Sir ? 



Lan.   I wish Mr. Bellville I had the power to Command you , but I am now the Petitioner for what you once desired . 



Belt.   I do not understand you , Sir.  



land   I think you once desired Lucy . 



Bell.   I did , Sir.  



land   And now , Sir , I desire you should have her . 



Bell.   Once indeed , Sir , you seemed to be of that mind , but presently I was forbid to hope that happiness . 



land   I was too hasty I confess , and if you still love my Daughter , she shall pled my excuse . Speak to him , huzzy . 



Lucy .  What should I say , Sir ? 



land   What should I say ! when I scrupled at your having Mr. Bellville ; than you could interrupt me with your chattering , and now forsooth , you can't speak ; look kindly on him , and win him into kindness and forgiveness . 



Lucy .  You hear , Mr. Bellville , what my Father says , if you lou●… me still . 



land   Well said , my best Girl , y faith , that was a devilish look ; can you resist it , Mr. Bellville ? 



Bell.   I must ever love Mistress Lucy , I dare not deny that powerful truth ; but to what purpose is all this discourse ? I hear you are engaged to Knighthood . 



Feew.   then let me speak , I have promised my Cousin Landy to find a way to free him from that engagement ; he joyfully con●…ents to act his part in the Plot , and if you love Mistress Lucy still ; she shall be yours . 



land   With an addition of Portion , Mr. Feewell , to express my esteem of you . 



Feew.   Come , 〈◊〉 , Mistress Lucy shall be yours ; but no more words , we 'll in , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 our Design , which I think cannot fail ; Phill is one of the Party , Sir.  



land   she 's honest , I dare swear . 



●…il .  At this time especially , when my own advantage Rewards me for it . 



Feew.   You must be sure , Madam Phil. that must be , under pretence of Modesty , to 〈◊〉 ordel and mu●…le yourself with Hoods , that the Knight may not discover . 



Phil.   Trust that to my management . 



Feew.   〈◊〉 Mistress Lucy , when the Knight comes next to make his last Claim , you must manage your Hoo●… so as to be a pattern for Phil. But now let 's withdraw , and perfect 〈◊〉 Design . 

Exit Bellville , leading Lucy . 

SCENE Changes to the Street . 

Enter Lurch alo●… . Lurch .  Well , I must rid myself of these Lodgers , for as long as they domineer , at this rate , I shall never be Master of my own House , or my Wife ; at the end of this 〈◊〉 I shall 〈◊〉 old Landy to remove himself , his Daughter , and the rest of his Luggage ; as long as they are here , this Feewell will have a 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 upon my House , under pretence 〈◊〉 coming to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Landy . B●…deses , wherever a Rich young Heiress life's , all the young 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 and starched 〈◊〉 of the Town , come buzzing about that House all day long , like so many Bees about a Hive , and the Servants need have no other business , than to open the door to Penny-post Men , and 〈◊〉 in the shape of Porters . 

Enter feewell , and his Servant . 

Feew.   Who dost thou 〈◊〉 gave this 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to thee ? 



Seru.   Sir , it was given me by a Woman in ●…aste , just at the turning of the last Street . 



Lurch .  aside●… 〈◊〉 you so ! This is Feewell , I know the voice . I 'll venture to draw nearer , and observe him a little ; 't is late in the Evening , and 〈◊〉 not easily discover me . 



Feew.   At the Corner of the 〈◊〉 Street ! 〈◊〉 thou so ? I have a strong guess , before I open it , from whence it comes . 



Lurch   aside . So have I , I 'll swear . 

Feewell opens the Letter . 

Few .  Yes , it is that Dear Creature , Lurch his Wife , as I imagined . 



Lurch .  aside . Yes , 't is that dear Devil , as I imagined too . 



Feewell   reads Sir , To Morrow at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon , my Husband goes Abroad , to Accompany the Corpse of a deceased Friend ; this is to let you know , I expect your Company in my 〈◊〉 at that 〈◊〉 , begging that you would not omit so blessed an Opportunity . 



Lurch .  aside . To make me a Cuckold . 



Feewell   reads on I shall impatiently wait you at the Place appointed , 〈◊〉 without Seconds ; if you are a Man of Honour do not fail me , who am yours , etc.  



Lurch .  no Seconds , said she ? though , by her leave , I intent to make a third , to hinder the effusion of Christian Blood.  



Feew.   Yes , fair Inviter , I will meet thee . 

OH thou dear expected Hour of Three in the Afternoon to Morrow , how long wil●… thou 〈◊〉 coming ? How shall I be able to pass my time away with Patience ? To Night I 'll go in search of Bellwille , or pick up some other intimate Acquaintance , with whom I may be free , and over a Glass of Lifegiving Liquor , I 'll heighten Humour , and Enjoy my Friend . 

To Morrow for my Mistr●…ss . 

Exit with Servant . 

Lurch .  Your Mistress , and my Wife — Hence forward I shall never wonder at these Billet-douxs , for being made up in the fashion of Horns — Blessed Opportunity , and Man of Honour — O sine Age ! 

OH dainty fine Age ! OH delicious Age ! 

What a Wife of defiance have I got ? 

OH Husbands , Husbands , you that are fast in the Lobs-pound of Matri●…mony , behold , and pity your Poor Fellow su●…rer : Was it not sufficient that we entered the Prison voluntarily but we must bind ourselves over to such good Behaviour , and give such swinging Security for our staying there ? We have all paid dearly for our Peeping and 〈◊〉 . 

So have I seen a Mouse with Hunger spent , 
To the strong Parmaz●…nss inviting scent 
Advance , and creep around the wiry Gin , 
That seems to fortify the Bait within ▪ 
At length ( for nothing hazard , nothing hold , 
Hunger and Women make a Coward bold ) 
The thoughtless Animal , resolved to dare , 
Ventures within the Matrimonial Snare : 
Down falls the Trap door of the teacherous House , 
And makes a Husband of that Captive Mouse . 
〈◊〉 . 

End of the Third Act.  

ACT IU.  

A Night Scene . 

Enter Sir John 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 his Night Gown , and a dark Lantern in his Hand . Sir John.   I am got loose from her Ladyship at last ! Never was Poor Man so put to it , to play the Lover with his own Wife ! One such another Night , would have forced me to have crossed the Cudgels , and confessed the Husband in my own defence . 

E●…ter Grace to 〈◊〉 . 

Grace .  softly . Sir John , Sir John , is it you ? 



Sir John.   Yes , 't is I , all that 's left of me . 



Grace .  I heard your Wors●…ip come out of my Lady's Chamber ; I hav'ned Slept a ●…ink all this Night , for fear my Lady should have discovered you , and I was terribly afraid she had , because I heard her make a Noise , and cry out , as I thought — just when yo●… Worship left her . 



Sir John.   thou are in the right , the Outcry was made by my Wife , but not because she discovered me . 



Grace .  Why was it then ? 



Sir John.   'T was because I 〈◊〉 her a 〈◊〉 ●…ort of a 〈◊〉 at my parting , instead of a more civil good Morrow , she might reasonably have expected from me . 



Grace .  I cannot comprehend your meaning , Sir.  



Sir John.   To be more 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , I have 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Marks of Remembrance behind me , on her Ladyship's Face , with these Ten Executioners , that the Doctor will not be able 〈◊〉 Cure them this Month , with all his Art ; in short , I Counterfeited the Madman all 〈◊〉 sudden , rose from her Bed in a Clap of 〈◊〉 , like 〈◊〉 from his Mistress , and have left such a storm of my Finger's ends on her Visage , that she writes no more Love-letters in haste , I 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . But d' ye hear ; Go you up to your Lady immediately , and strive to 〈◊〉 her as well as you can , and above all , be sure you tell her , you have 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the Doctor is given to be Lunatic 〈◊〉 certain 〈◊〉 . Go get you gone , you 'll find I have locked the door upon her . In the mean time , I 'll dress myself abroad in my Riding Habit , in order to return home again , as from the Country . Do as I bid you , and leave the rest to me . 



Grace .  Well , I will go to her , 〈◊〉 you have Commanded me , though I tremble at the approaching storm . 

Exit . 

Sir John.   ( alone ) 

This it is to have a Matrimonial Conduct . 
Happy were all the Husbands in the Nation , 
could they , like me , put down th' old Horning Fashion , 
And follow this new Dance , as I have led it , 
Of Cuckolding themselves to save their Credit . 
Exit . 

Enter Landy . Landy .  The plot 's admirably laid , it can't miss , I can't but be pleased to think my poor Girl shall be pleased too . To say the truth ▪ Mr. Bellvill's an honest Worthy Gentleman ; she had almost as good have been coupled to one of his Hounds , as to this Knight ; but he 'll not be unprovided of a Wife ; and o my Conscience Phil. will make one good enough for him . 

Enter Sir Timothy . 

land   OH Sir Tim●…y ; welcome , I see you hasten Matters . 



Sir Tim.   In geud faith I 'll have been used to pursue the Chase , when I like my Game . 



land   Nay , I must confess , I think Lucy is a fair Quarry . 



Sir Tim.   And 〈◊〉 run her down I 〈◊〉 you ; I pray call my Mistress , I 'll let her know I have provided all things , and the much Man of God waits ready for us . 



land   Without there , bid my Daughter Lucy come presently . 

Landy calls for Lucy . 

Sir Tim.   I 'll quickly gang into the Country with her ; I am here like one that has lost his way in the night . I hope , Father Landy , we shall see you at Shallow-hall , 〈◊〉 faith the Bells ●…all twang it away , to bid you welcome . 



land   Thank you Son , all in good time . 

Enter Lucy , with a Hood over 〈◊〉 face . Why , how now , what 〈◊〉 up ? here 's Sir Timo●… come to carry you to Church , are you ready ? 



Sir Tim.   Yes , Mistress , and y faith I 'll gang thither more 〈◊〉 , than ever I did to say my Prayers . 



land   Why , how now Girl , look up ; and speak to Sir 〈◊〉 , what , whimpering 〈◊〉 a 〈◊〉 ? what say you , Girl , not a word ? 



Lucy .  What you please , Sir.  



land   You must excuse her , she 's so bashful she can't look up . 



Sir Tim.   't is the fashion when Women are going to be Married , they all seem fearful . Why , there was Jane 〈◊〉 of our Town , I was ●…vited to the Wedding , she never held up 〈◊〉 head all the while , but whimpering , and 〈◊〉 she liked the Fellow well enough . 



land   Besides , Sir Timothy , you may excuse her , she 's a fond Girl , and must leave a fond Father ; come , hold 〈◊〉 thy head , my Child . 



Sir Tim.   no matter , Father , I 'll warrant you , I 'll blink upon her face hereafter , and gudfaith show it in the North , where there is never such another ; I 'll carry them the Northern Star.  



land   Notably said , in troth . 

Enter 〈◊〉 and Feewell . How now , Mr. Bellville , what brings you at this time of day ? 



Bell.   You may easily guests , Sir , I come to demand my Right . 



land   Your Right , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 your Right ? 



Bell.   Your 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 if you 〈◊〉 just 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 word . 



land   Mr. 〈◊〉 , my daughter 's disposed of , and I am bound in Covenants to this Worthy Knight . 



Sir Tim.   't is even so , 〈◊〉 , and I 'll 〈◊〉 keep her . 



Bell.   You shall neither do 't with ease or safety , I shall not quickly submit to such an injury . 



Sir Tim.   Nay , geud 〈◊〉 , if you are angry , you may turn the 〈◊〉 of your Girdle behind you . 



Bell.   Are you , Madam , consenting to my injury and ruin ? 



Lucy .  I must obey my Father , Sir.  



land   that 's my good Girl . In troth , Mr. Bellville , I esteem you , and wish you well , heartily well 〈◊〉 and if you wish my Daughter well , I hope you will not 〈◊〉 to hinder her good Fortune ; let that prevail with you to excuse me ; Care of a Child , Mr. Bellville is excusable in a Father ; I do not doubt , Sir , but 〈◊〉 Merits will make you happy in another . 



Feew.   Faith , Bellville , this is gone so far , that I could wish you might desist , if possible . 



land   I thank you , good 〈◊〉 , I pray you good Mr. Bellville , you see ? 't is impossible for me to go back now . 



Bell.   But I can Sue you upon your I 〈◊〉 . 



land   But I have Signed nothing . 



Feew.   Come , Bellville , a Lawsuit will but bring trouble to you 〈◊〉 , let me beg you to desist . 



Lucy .  Since I must obey my Father , you will but 〈◊〉 a storm upon us all . 



Bell.   Nay , Mistress since you are of the Party , I must submit . 



land   In 〈◊〉 , Mr. Bellville , this is very kind , and I wish you had another Lady at the same time , to make you happy , 〈◊〉 I may 〈◊〉 your Wedding-feast . 



Feew.   Why , on my 〈◊〉 that may be ▪ if Bellville will ; I know a Lady that has loved him long , and deserves 〈◊〉 , or any one . Now to make all things clear , and that the World may see that you are dis●… from your Promise , I would propose that Bellville should be Mistress Lucy's Father , and give her in the Church , and permit me to fetch the fair Lady that love's 〈◊〉 and I to be her Father , and give her Bellville at the same time . 



Sir Tim.   Geud faith , a rare Contrivance . 



Bell.   Since I have 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 Mistress Lucy , I can 〈◊〉 submit to all the rest . 



〈◊〉   I am for 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 you , Mr. Bellville . 



Sir Tim.   Y Gud Faith , Sir , I 'll ever be your Servant ; and if I should have the good For●… to see you at Shallow Hall , I 'll make you welcome , and show you good Sport. I have good 〈◊〉 , and a 〈◊〉 of good Hounds as 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 away ; and when we have done our Chase , than what 〈◊〉 think we 〈◊〉 ye 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 even 〈◊〉 it away to my Neighbour Allens , and there 〈◊〉 off a 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉 Ale , and all the while John Slouch , the 〈◊〉 Piper in the North of England , plays to us ; and afterwards every one trips off a Jig cleverly away . 



Feew.   Who are your best Jiggers , Sir Ti●… ? 



Sir Tim.   Geud Faith , I have a man without , e'en 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , that feet it as well as the best . 



Feew.   Pray , Sir Timothy , oblige us all with the fight of it . 



Sir Tim.   Mar●…y , with all my Heart : Call in my man Jonny . 

Enter Johny Thump . 

Come Johny :  Geud Faith you must trip a 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 my 〈◊〉 ▪ 



Johny .  〈◊〉 can they play John 〈◊〉 his 〈◊〉 ? 



Feew.   Yes , I warrant you : Strike 〈◊〉 there . 

They play Stoakes ' s Jig . He 〈◊〉 . 

land   I protest , Son , you are a 〈◊〉 Gentleman , you have half celebrated your own Wedding . 



Feew.   Come , let 's dispatch then , for I am to 〈◊〉 a Bride too . 



land   Come , Child , make yourself ready ; you 'll acquaint them , Sir Timothy , where they must come . 



Feew.   Ay marry , and fetch the 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 meet 〈◊〉 at the Church-door . 



land   Go , Lucy , and make yourself ready . So , 〈◊〉 , prosperity attend you ; and in 〈◊〉 , you Mr. Bellvile , in your new Lady . 

Exit Lucy . — — Excellent , it goes smoothly on all . I 'll send and invite my Friends , especially Sir ▪ John Crossit and his Lady , and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 his Wife . — 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 ; Lucy : will have 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . They that have most Wealth , have most Worship : I remember a most pertinent parcel of Verses on the Subject of riches . 

All 〈◊〉 ●…sidess is poverty : with Gold , 
Wit , Virtue , Courage , Honour , bought and sold. 
E'en Jove once doubting his Almighty pow●… . 
〈◊〉 his Mistress in a Golden shower . 
Ex●… . 

SCENE the Third , which opens , and 〈◊〉 Lady Crossit in an Undress . 

Lady Crossit and her Women come forward on the Stage . Lady Crossit .  OH Grace , I am undone for ever , This Devilish inhuman Doctor has ruined my Face to that degree , 't will never be my own again ! What could move this Cruel Monster to use me thus ? 



Grace .  Madam , I 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 told for 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 I 〈◊〉 gave credit to it till now ; that 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 some very extravagant . 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 



L. Cross.   It must be so , Grace ; for no man living , in his right Senses , would have 〈◊〉 a Woman at such a 〈◊〉 : A Woman that loved him too passionately — OH my Face ! 



Grace .  Ah! poor Lady , my very Heart bleeds for you : Did you perceive no 〈◊〉 . Madam , lin 〈◊〉 , Senses , no alteration of his Carriage before the Morning ? 



L. Cros.   None , that I remember ; no discomposure of his Carriage , but what was very agreeable . I had no cause to complain of him the first part of the Night . 



Grace .  These men who study hard , are often given to odd Fancies , and 〈◊〉 Madness ; but to show it in such an unnatural way , is something more than one would have suspected . 

Enter a Servant . 

Serv :  Madam , Sir John is 〈◊〉 from 〈◊〉 ▪ 



L. Cros.   OH Grace , what shall I do now ▪ What Excuse shall I make for my Face ? say quickly , or I am ruined for ever ; Sir John will ask me twenty questions why I am so bepatched . 



Grace .  Tell him any thing , Madam ; that you have had a Fit of the Vapours , the Swimming in the Head , and have got a Fall , and so hurt your 〈◊〉 , or any thing 〈◊〉 that comes 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Head first ; if a Woman sets herself to 〈◊〉 , she ? 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 an 〈◊〉 worth a 〈◊〉 . 



L. Cros.   I am so distracted , I can 〈◊〉 think or say any thing . 



Grace .  Lay yourself down quickly then , and receive Sir John in your Bed , as becomes your 〈◊〉 . 



L. Cros.   Had I received no other , besides Sir John , I had never been so 〈◊〉 . I 〈◊〉 my 〈◊〉 . 



Grace .  Hark , I hear him 〈◊〉 ; 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to accost him , and put the best Face on the Business I 〈◊〉 . 

Enter Si●… John as : from the Country . 

Sir John.   What ails your Lady , Grace ? the Servants tell me she is very ill . 



Grace .  OH Sir ! there 's my poor Lady ; she has had a most violent Fit of th●… Vapours , and spoiled all her Beauty with an unlucky fall . 



Sir John.   Ah my poor Dear ; how is it ? are you not 〈◊〉 — with fulling ? 



L. Cros.   Ah Sir John , my Face , my 〈◊〉 , my Face , has received all the 〈◊〉 ; my 〈◊〉 is 〈◊〉 very Soul of my Body ; I am hurt in the very Soul , 〈◊〉 John.  



Sir John   Aside I find Women have 〈◊〉 then . 

to her 〈◊〉 shall we 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 you , my 〈◊〉 ? 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 find your 〈◊〉 ? 



L. Cros.   Troubled with a 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , Sir John.  



Sir John.   But has not the Doctor been with you yet . 



〈◊〉 . 〈◊〉 .  OH no , Sir John ▪ 



Sir John.   Why , what a neglect's that ? 〈◊〉 , look 〈◊〉 your L●…dy , that see she wants nothing , while I myself go for the 〈◊〉 . 



L. Cros.   no Doctor , I beseech you , my Dear ; don 't put yourself to these perpetual Expenses . 



Sir John.   I take it unkindly of you , my Dear , that you should think I grudge to give a Guinea or two to do you good ; my whole Estate is too little for such a Wife . 



L. Cros.   you 'll ruin yourself with Doctors Fees. OH Sir John , Si●… John ! 



Sir John.   Aye , aye , my Dear ; I 'll look all over the Town , but 〈◊〉 find him out , and send him to you immediately ; 〈◊〉 have patience a little , and 〈◊〉 send him to you . 



Exit . L. Cros.   What Grace , must I see this Devil of a Doctor again , after all my 〈◊〉 ? I shall tear his Eyes out of his Head , if ever I light on him , and revenge the Wrong he has done to my Face on hi●… 



Grace .  And so I would , Madam , and repay it with Usury . 



L. Cross.   And so I will , Grace ; therefore I charge you get a 〈◊〉 of my Footmen ready with stout Oaken Plants : But he 'll never be so bold to approach me , sure , not even to come near the House . 



Grace .  It may be he has forgot what he has done in his mad fit , and may come ; 〈◊〉 if he does , let me alone to prepare a substantial Bastinading for him . 



L. Cros.   OH , I am so afraid of Visitants ! Give Orders to all the House , that I 'll see no body ; I 'll see no body this half Year : OH this Face that has Captivated so many , is ruined itself . 

Exeunt . Enter Mistress Lurch and her 〈◊〉 

Mistress Lurch .  So , Betty , now we have caused the great Ches●… to be brought from the other Room into this , and got the 〈◊〉 of Ropes ready , let Mr. Feewell come when he will , I am prepared to receive him without fear of being discovered by my Husband : This Plot is so well laid , it cannot but take — When Husbands grow Jealous , they only put us to the trouble of being so much the more Ingenious , and working the Web of our Designs finer . How long is it , Betty , since my Husband has been gone to the Burial ? 



Betty .  About half an Hour , Madam . 



Mistress Lurch .  Is 't possible , 't is no more : OH what a sweet half Hour of Love's lost by Feewells not making more haste to take his share of it ! 



Betty .  't is scarcely yet the Hour you appointed him . 



Mistress Lurch .  When will that dear Hour come ? 



Betty .  Immediately , Madam , have but patience . 



Mistress Lurch .  OH , 't will never come till he comes ! 



Betty .  then 't is already come , for here he is . 



Enter Feewell . 〈◊〉 .  am I not 〈◊〉 daring Lover , in venturing to mount that breach a second time , where I lately ' scaped a scouring so narrowly ? 



Mistress Lurch .  And to appear a Confessed Man , whereas before you were glad to 〈◊〉 off in the opprobrious Shape of a Woman . 



〈◊〉 .  Love , Child , can do all things ; Almighty Love , that Trans●… the Gods into Birds and Beasts , and all other sort of Living Creatures . 



Mistress Lurch .  Transformed your Worship into a Chambermaid . 

If I 〈◊〉 not , there is another God called Fear , altogether as Powerful , which worked this last wonder , and diminished you from the stronger Sex , to the weaker . 



〈◊〉 .  Fear that thy Husband should have discovered thee , no other : But whatsoever Fear diminished in me then , Love has restored me now , I can tell thee ; and 〈◊〉 thou hast any doubts left concerning my Sex , I am come on purpose to clear ' 'em . 



Mistress Lurch .  You had as good let the Trial alone , I shall make a Woman of you the second time ; for my Mind misgives me terribly , and I know not why , that my Husband will return upon us unexpectedly as he did before , and if he should , you 'll be changing Sexes again : But for your Comfort , I have taken Compassion on you this time , and found out a securer Retreat than you made use of before ; I have prepared a Ladder of Ropes , not a Rope and a Ladder for you ; by which , if my Husband should surprise us , you may easily escape out of my Bedchamber Window into the Garden , and then let yourself out , through a back door , into the Street : As for that Chest you see there , 't is a Trap for my Husband , if he should 〈◊〉 untimely to disturb us . 



Feew.   Prithee tell me no more , I know too much already , and would not think myself secure in my Enjoyment ; it 's difficulty and danger , make an 〈◊〉 pleasant . 

Lurch knocks at the door softly . 

Betty .  Madam , some body knocks at the door . 



Mistress Lurch .  Bless me ! Who can it be ? My Husband would have knocked louder , and with more Authority ; go to the door softly , and listen a little : How I tremble all over ? 

Betty goes to the door . Lurch from without in a Woman's Voice . 

Lurch .  Will my Lady buy any Ribbons or Gloves to day ? 



Betty .  Madam , we are undone ; on my Life it is my Master , who feigns a Woman's Voice ; it must be so , for I am sure I have turned away the Ribbon Woman once to day already : I am certain 't is a feigned Voice . 



〈◊〉 .  then I suppose , I must in good Manners betake myself to the Ladder of Ropes , and scamper . 



Mistress 〈◊〉 .  You must so , and that without delay , there 's no help for 't ; but if the Plot I have laid succeeds , I 'll not be long from you . 



Feew.   that 's all my Comfort ; what Noses these Husbands have got ! this is the second time this old Bowman has smelled me out . 



Mistress Lurch .  〈◊〉 . 



Feew.   What so coldly must we part ! By Heavens , I must have the pleasure of ravishing a Kiss or two , now thy 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 venged on him ! — OH , I could dwell here for ever ! 



Mistress Lurch .  Go , get you gone , till you can Kiss 〈◊〉 . Betty , 〈◊〉 him quickly to escape , and leave me to manage this Ribbon Woman . 

Feewell and Betty go into the 〈◊〉 Chamber . Lurch knocks again . 

Mistress Lurch .  who 's there ? 



Lurch .  〈◊〉 a Woman's Voice 't is your 〈◊〉 Glove-woman ▪ I have the finest scented Gloves , and new fashioned Ribbons , no Man in Europe has finer . 



Mistress Lurch .  So , 〈◊〉 has discovered himself , 't is he , now I must play him 〈◊〉 trick . 

She speaks , that her Husband may overhear her . Betty , why don't you make more haste ? the 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 ; lock the Chest upon him quickly , quickly . 

To her 〈◊〉 I have no need of 〈◊〉 Gloves or Ribbons , at present , 〈◊〉 , I am 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 here another day . 

At the door ▪ Re-enter Betty . 

Betty .  Madam , all 's safe , you may open the door to your Husband 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 please ; the bird 's flown . 



Mistress Lurch .  that 's well ; but we must endeavour to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 

Lurch 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 who 's 〈◊〉 knocks so loud and impertinently ? 



Lurch .  in his own Voice 't is I my Dear ; I want something in your Chamber , let me in quickly . 



Mistress Lurch .  Betty , open the door to your Master . 

〈◊〉 opens the door , and Lurch rushes 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 a 〈◊〉 , and 〈◊〉 it , she 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 

Lurch .  What does you Conscience misgive you 〈◊〉 that you dare not look a Blunderbus in the Face ? 

John , 〈◊〉 , Thiefs , Thiefs . 

Calls out . Enter John and Thomas . 

John.   Where , Sir , where ? 



Lurch .  hid in the House ; 〈◊〉 every Corner , and under the Bed , carefully I charge you . 

Exeunt . I heard her say , lock him in the Chest quickly ; he must be in that Chest there . 

The Chest shall be my Throne . 

Gets on the Chest  Where I sit and reign over this Slave and Cuckoldmaker ; the King on Horseback in the Stock-market , that tramples on Heretics and Pagans' , is but a Type of me , that triumph over the living 〈◊〉 — Now , Mistress , if you have not a mind to have some Pills discharged into your Stomach , to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Amorous 〈◊〉 , tell me immediately and directly , 〈◊〉 you have hid that Robber of my Honour . 



Mistress Lurch .  Whom d'ye 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 



Lurch .  You know , Minx , well enough 〈◊〉 I mean ; I mean Feewell , that Polluter of my 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉 of my 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 



Mistress Lurch .  How should I know ? 

〈◊〉 : 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 

Lurch .  I believe 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , and 〈◊〉 too ; but what does this Chest do here ? it uses to stand in another Room . 



Mistress Lurch .  OH my Dear , I have put some Table Linen in it , and other things , and had it brought into this Room , to be readier at hand . 



Lurch .  Where is the 〈◊〉 of it ? give me the Key . 



Mistress Lurch .  You have put 〈◊〉 in 〈◊〉 a 〈◊〉 , I know not where I laid it ; 't is well I am not with 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 a fright would 〈◊〉 have made me 〈◊〉 . 



Lurch .  〈◊〉 , what of a 〈◊〉 ? if 〈◊〉 you 〈◊〉 with Child , I 'm resolved to pled 〈◊〉 Guilty , in the face of the World , declare it a Bastard from , the beginning , and proceed to 〈◊〉 it 〈◊〉 't is Born. Come , come , without delay , deliver me the Key of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 



Mistress Lurch .  Nay , prithee , my Dear , 't will be so 〈◊〉 ; I have things there , I 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 . 



Lurch .  I 〈◊〉 indeed , there 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 that you will want very often . 

〈◊〉 two 〈◊〉 . 

〈◊〉 .  We have 〈◊〉 every 〈◊〉 , and can 〈◊〉 nothing like a Thief . 



Lurch .  〈◊〉 , be 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 keep the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ; then he 

Exit . must be here waiting 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the resurrection of the Flesh ; come , the Key I say , or do you see this ? 

Holds the Blunderbuss at her . 

Mistress 〈◊〉 .  Yes , 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , if you please ; you have murdered my Honour already , by your base Jealousy ; all the World thinks 〈◊〉 made you a Cuckold . 



Lurch .  then all the 〈◊〉 in the 〈◊〉 . 



Mistress Lurch .  't is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 makes you one ▪ you had best kill me , and be hanged for it . 



Betty .  Good Sir , don't hold the Gun so against my Mistress ; Lord ! if it should go off . 



Lurch .  〈◊〉 her give me the Key then . 

Enter Sir John Crossit . 

Sir John.   Why how now , Mr. Lurch , Armed , and in a furious Warlike posture ? 



Lurch .  Yes , Sir John , I am upon my guard , being near the Enemy . 



Sir John.   What Enemy , Mr. Lurch , I see none but your Wife ? 



Lurch .  Why that 's one , the other is enclosed here in this Fortification ; but I shall storm it . 



Sir John.   Fie , Mr. Lurch , your 〈◊〉 makes you fancy it . 



Lurch .  Sir John , I never saw a Marriage in all my life , but a Cuckold-maker belonged to it ; every Husband is as sure of his evil Genius , as having a shadow when the Sun shines on him . A Cuckold-maker is as inseparate from our Calling , as an Apothecary from a Doctor of Physic he Prescribes , but the Apothecary Administors' . 



Sir John.   Fie , Mr. Lurch , you grow Extravagant . 



Lurch .  Let her give me the Key then . 



Mistress Lurch .  There are Woman's things in it , not fit to be sce●… . 



Lurch .  I believe so , truly ; now Sir John , do you perceive , Sir John ▪ look you Mistress no more delays , if you 'll not open the door , I 'll fire upon the Castle . 

Offers his Blunderbuss at the Chést . 

Mistress Lurch .  Hold , hold , Sir ; here Betty , give him the Key . 



Betty .  There 't is , Sir , now for your Discovery . 



Mistress Lurch .  So , have you found this mighty Enemy ▪ 

Lurch opens the Chest hastily . 

Sir John.   Nay , Mr. Lurch , this is so unreasonable , are you not ashamed ? 



Mr. Lurch .  I had ears sure — this is odd , very odd . 



Sir John.   Fie , Mr. Lurch , come ask your Wife forgiveness , and use her more like a reasonable Man  



Lurch .  Why , I confess I did believe she had made me a Beast ; come , Sweet heart , we 'll forget , and forgive . 



Mistress Lurch .  And how long will you continue reasonable ? 



Lurch .  As long as you please to let me ; come , my Dear , no more skirmishing , Peace is concluded , and I 'll present thee with a handsome New Gown , and the Appurtenances , as a Testimony of my Reconciliation . 



Sir John.   Well said , Mr. Lurch , and now prepare for Mirth and Jollity ; we shall be presently Invited to Mistress L●…oy's' Wedding , and Mr. Lan●… has prepared a mighty Feast . 



Mistress Lurch .  send him a happy Voyage through the u●…certain ways of Matrimony . 

Constant severeness that warm Sex inflames , 
The wildest Haggards gentle Manning tames : 
Too much ill usage , and to want all trust 
Raises Revenge , to make their Crimes seem just . 


ACT v.  

SCENE I  

Lady Crossit ' s Antichamber . 

Enter Grace alone . Grace .  There lies my Lady in the next Room , Railing at , and Cursing the Doctor , and Swearing she 'll tear him to pieces if he durst come near her , and it cannot be long before he must come . 

Enter Doctor Lorman . OH Doctor ! you are Born under a Lucky Planet , you are the happiest Man ; my Lady thinks it an Age till she sees you ! But we must speak so●…ly , she 's run half Mad for you ; well , 't is most certain , you are a most taking Man with the Ladies ; and you know mine in particular , has always had an Esteem for your Person , she does nothing but sigh all day for you , I believe poor Lady she 'll run Mad ; but you must be secret , o●… you ruin all , you know there 's a Husband in the case . 



Dr. Lorm.   Poor Lady , she needs not fear , I took an Oath to be secret , when I was Sworn Doctor : Alas ! she is not the first Lady who has fallen in love with my Person , one half of my Women Patients are in her Condition . 



Grace .  I must inform you , that my Lady has had the Misfortune to hurt herself a little with a fall , as you 'll see by her Face , and has taken that occalion to ●…eign herself 〈◊〉 ●…or your ●…ake , has sent her own Husband to fe●…ch you , and lies on her Bed in the next Chamber , expecting your happy Arrival ; I blush to say more , but you may guests the rest . 



Dr. Lorm.   What her Ladyship has a violent sit of the Vapours , I warrant , is it not ? Well , let me alone with her Ladyship . 



Grace .  But hold , do you Entertain yourself in this Room ; while I acquaint her that you are come , as I am ordered : If the violence of her Passion should cause her to be extravagant in her Actions , you are not to be surprised , now I have told you how excessively she love's you . 



Dr. Lorm.   Never fear , I can be as Extravagant as she is ; I like an open barefaced Love that con●…es itself ; the more manifest the Disease is , the more easily the Remedy is applied . 



Grace .  Expect here a Moment then , and you shall be admitted immediately , I must use you now like a Lover , and not like a Doctor . 

Exit . 

Dr. Lorm.   Doctor or Lover , Lover or Doctor , Student in Physic , or Student in Love , are Synonimous . We Doctors of Physic , have a ●…arge Cure of Bodies , an unlimited ●…rerogative over Flesh and Blood.  

Enter Lady Crossit . But here 's my Patient ! Him ! Him ! Now to show my skill in managing an extravagant sit of Love : Now to show myself a Physician of Parts . Him ! Him ! 



L. Crossit .  Where is this Devil ? Where is this cruel , inhuman , barbarous Monster ? 



Dr. Lorm.   ( in a soft voice ) Here am I , no Devil , but a Man ; a kind , yielding , melting Lover . 

( aside ) she 's in a desperate taking : Him ! Him ! How she stairs on me , and devours me with her Eyes . 

The Doctor scts his Wig in order , and smiles on her . 

L. Crossit .  ( aside ) What does the Villain jeer and laugh at me a●…ter all ; OH Devil ! Devil ! Let me come ●…ear to th●…e , that I may revenge myself for all I have suffered . 



Dr. Lorm.   ( getting loose from her ) Hold , hold , a Truce . 

( ●…ide ) she 's in a furious fit of Love I see ; the Old ●…hilosopher was in the ●…ight — Prima Coitio est acerrima , The first Engagement is the sharpest . Truce , Truce , a little , and I 'm for you again . 

Lady Crossit follows him round the Stage , with her Arms stretched out as before , and the Doctor makes the more haste to unbutton himself . 

L. Crossit .  OH Impudent Devil ! Monstrous Hellhound ▪ a Rape ! Help ! Help ! 

Servants come in with Cudgels , and bastonade him round the Room . 

Dr. Lorm.   Treason ! Treason ! Murder ! Mercy ! Murder ! OH my Crevat and Periwig ! What shall I do ? My Profession's spoiled for ever ! 



L. Cros.   Monster ! Devil ! Pound him , break his Bones , beaten him to a Jelly ! 

Enter Sir John Crossit . 

Sir John.   What all the House in an uproar ! Hold there , and let me know what 's the Matter amongst you ; who 's that Fellow undressed there ? 



L. Crossit .  OH my Dear , a Monster , that would have offered Violence to my Virtue ; would have ravished me , but for the Servants who came in to my assistance . 



Sir John.   Speak , Monster of Monsters ; what art thou ? 

Shaking him by the Collar . 

Dr. Lorm.   OH , Sir John , your most humble Servant , 

I am a Doctor of Physic , my name 's Lorman , 

Sir John , your most humble Servant . 

Enter Grace . 

Grace .  Dr. Lorman , what , a Doctor of Physic Practising undressed ; is it you , good Doctor , who would have thought it ! I could have sworn Butter would not have melted in his Mouth , by his fine Talking ! — Well , I shall always suspect the worst of a fine Talking man , that can do nothing but Talk finely , for his sake . 



Dr. Lorm.   ( aside ) Now I begin to see day a little , the Lady is Literally run Mad for Love , and in this mad fit , she thinks I am some Monster or other , and has treated me accordingly : But I must frame some plausible Excuse , to save my Credit and Doctoral Authority , if the aching of my Bones , will permit me to Harangue . 

To Sir John.  Honoured , Sir , I imagine you are not a little surprised , as also , your much Honoured and Virtuous good Lady ; who by this time , I dare aver , is returned to her good Senses again , to behold a Person of my Coat at this present in disorder : But when you shall have understood the Reasons I had to put in practice this Mysterious Operation ; I promise myself , you will not only hold me guiltless of any ill designs , but also applaud my Conduct and Physical way of Proceeding in a Matter of so weighty Consequence . 



L. Crossit .  ( aside ) What , is the Villain going to discover all ? What can this mean ? 



Dr. Lorm.   Perceiving at my first Entrance . But first let me beg the favour of perusing my Habiliments again . 



Sir John.   By all means , pray let the Dr. peruse his Habiliments . 

Doctor 

( dresses himself , and speaks . ) Perceiving at my first Entrance , as I was saying , that your very honoured and virtuous good Lady's indisposition — Sir John , may I beg the favour you would be pleased to order one of your Attendants to restore my Periwig to its former decorum . 



Sir John.   By all means , Doctor ; who 's there ? give the doctor 's Wig to my Valet to revive it a little . 



Dr. Lorm.   Perceiving at my first entrance , as I was saying , that — 



Sir John.   I pray dispatch , for my wife 's indisposed , and wants repose . 



Dr. Lorm.   Now I am a Doctor of Physic again , and can harangue . 



L. Cros.   How the Villain holds me in suspense . 

Aside to Grace . OH , Grace , I am ruined for ever , if he produces the Letter I sent him . 



Grace .  ( softly ●…o L ▪ Crossit . ) Never fear , Madam , let him go on , I warrant we have Cudgeled him into discretion . 



Dr. Lorm.   Him , him , perceiving at my first entrance — 



Sir John.   he 's perceiving at his sirst entrance again ; what did you perceive at your first Entrance ? 



Dr. Lorm.   That your honoured and good Lady's indisposition had troubled and diverted the right course of her senses , which I soon discovered by a disorderly stare , or rolling of her eyes ; it immediately came into ●…y head , to restore your Lady's health , by playing a piece of ingenious Extravagance ; upon which , incontinently I fell to undressing and dismantling myself — 



Grace .  Yes , incontinently indeed , Doctor ! 



Dr. Lor.   And threatened to assault your Virtuous Lady by way of a Rape ; but as I hope to receive a Fee to day , without any sinister intention , Sir John , your good Lady's natural inclination to Virtue , restored her to her right senses again ; caused chiefly by the fright with which I struck her good Ladyship , for I had put on a look as fierce as that of a Centaur . 



Sir John.   That is to say , of a Horse Doctor , by way of Parenthesis only . 



Dr. Lorm.   Sir John , I am your most humble Servant ; but I am a Member of the Reverend College . 

Enter a Servant . 

Seru.   there 's a Footman without , who inquires for Dr. Lorma●… , say●… he comes from my Lady Lackit , who lies dangerously ill , and desi●…es the Doctor would come to her immediately . 



Dr. Lorm.   ( aside . ) she 's a very impertinent Lady , I am not in a Condition of serving her at present , but I 'll make use of this pretence to go home , and apply Sal●…eses and Ointments to my back and sides . 

( to Sir John. ) Sir John , I am heartily sorry I am interrupted by the Request of this Lady , for my Personal Appearance to relieve her , and that I have not leisure to dilate on this wonderful Cure I have wrought to day mo●…ning on your very Virtuous , and much honoured Lady . 



L. Crossit .  I can a●…ure you , Doctor , I woned rather have chosen to have remained indisposed , than to be Cured 〈◊〉 such an undecent and 〈◊〉 way , it has put me in such a fright . 



Grace .  To her softly Admirably well Counterfeited , Madam . 



D. Lorman .  There is a virtuous Wife for you ; Sir John , you are very happy in a virtuous Lady . 



L. Cros.   Aside . 〈◊〉 seem to be sorry for his being beaten to satisfy my Husband ( to D. Lorman ) I am in●…initely concerned , Doctor , that you have received so 〈◊〉 a Recompense for the great service you have done me to day . My Servants beaten you like a very Stockfish . 



D. Lorm.   Dear Madam , never trouble yourself for that , the Credit I shall gain in the World for this Operation , will make me sufficient amends . I aim at Fame — Madam , Hercules gained Heaven by his Club ; and I mount up to the top of Fame and Heaven of Reputation , by means of the Cudgel , like a second Hercules — But I must take my leave of you now , Sir John , to wait on this Patient , who expects me ; she is a Lady of Quality , and must be served punctually . 



Sir John.   You have more need to look after yourself , Doctor ; you must of necessity have received some damage in your outward Man  



D. Lorm.   Nothing at all , Sir John , a trifle , a Rib or two of lesser note broken , or so , nothing else , on my word , a mee●… Trifle , Sir John , and Madam , your most humble Servant . 

Sir John offers him a Fee.  

D. Lorm.   Sir John , I wonder you 'll put yourself to this trouble , suspend your Favours till I have done your Lady some further service . 



Sir John.   But for the beating , Doctor , you must accept it indeed . 



D. Lorm.   You are so obliging , Sir John ! well , I 'll protest I 'll have nothing from you , for my next Visit. Sir John , and sweet Madam , your most humble Servant . 

Exit Doctor . 

Sir John.   Aside . So he said the very last time he was here ; so far by the help of my own Wit , and Grace's assistance , I have carried it victoriously , not only satisfied myself on the Body of him that might have made me a Cuckold , but also revenged myself bodily on my Wife , that would have made me a Cuckold . 

Come Sweet heart , how does your Face ? 



La. Cros.   OH Sir John , so torn and scratched . 



Sir John.   Scratching is an Appendix to Caterwauling . 



L. Cros.   How , Sir ? 



Sir John.   Your Doctor , Madam , was justly beaten for his wonderful Cure , but he was to have cured you another way . 



L. Cros.   I know not what you mean.  



Sir John.   You may understand without my telling you . 



L. Cros.   What should I understand ? 



Sir John.   Your own Folly.  



L. Cros.   Ah me . — 



Sir John.   no more , you must understand me now . The Letter and Shirts 〈◊〉 : I have 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 , your 〈◊〉 would 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 you than Excuses , or seeming 〈◊〉 . 



L. Cros.   O Sir John , Can you forgive me ? 

〈◊〉 . 

Sir John.   I 'll try . 



L. Cros.   By all my hopes of good , I 'll never more injure you in a Thought . 



Sir John.   't is well , rise and compose yourself , for we are invited by Landy , to his Daughter's Wedding , they are ready to 〈◊〉 from Church . 



L. Cros.   I hope , Sir , you will not carry me in this Condition . 



Sir John.   Yes , but I will , or else worse Interpretation may be made of it ; no more words , I must be obeyed in this ; I have hid your shame and mine : Henceforth , be your own Doctor , and prescribe yourself a Constant use of Virtue . 

For that Receipt never failed of doing good , 
And Cures the loser Fevers of the blood . 
Exeunt . Enter Landy . 

land   By this time Lucy has her Wishes , and I have mine ; if the Plot should be discovered , I hope Bellville has too much mettle to lose his Mistress ; the Knight will look as blank as a Cutpurse , that finds no Money in the place he searched for — no matter , 't is not the first Game he has lost , and Phill will stand him another very good Chase . 

Enter Mr. Lurch and his Wife . 

OH Mr.   Lurch , you are welcome , heartily welcome , and your fair Partner too ; they are coming , Mr. Lurch , with your ●…etterss about ' 'em . 



Lurch .  I wish they may prove Easy to all , especially to fair Mistress Lucy . 



Mistress Lurch .  She deserves all Happiness . 



land   I thank you both . 

Enter Sir John Crossit and his Lady . 

Sir John ,  Welcome good Sir John , and your good Lady too , what is not your Lady well ? 



Sir John.   She has got an unhappy fall , Mr. Landy , and very much hurt her Face , but her respect to you and Mistress Lucy , forced her to come , notwithstanding her unfit Condition . 



land   In Troth , Madam , I am very much obliged to you , the new Married People , I believe , are near upon returning . 



Sir John.   Mr. Bellville will be a happy man  



land   None , Sir , my Daughter is to be a Lady . 



Sir John.   How , a Lady ? 



Mr. Lurch .  This is very strange . 



land   't is very true , Sir , a Northern Knight , one Sir Timothy Shallow , has outbid Mr. Bellville by a Thousand a Year . 



Sir John.   I wish Mr. Landy that you are not bribed to make your Daughter unhappy . 



land   I have known many , Sir John , very unhappy by being too Poor , but never any by being too Rich.  

Ha●…ke — 

I hear 'em coming . 

Soft Music . 

Enter●…well ●…well like Hymen , going before ; Sir Timothy and his Lady , and Bellville with his . Feew.   what 's here , a Mask ? 

I now represent Hymen , Signior Landy , 
My Deputy has done as well as can be ; 
Has made their Tongues tie knots to such a wonder , 
That their own Teeth , though Bones , can't knaw asunder : 
And now we are for jollity preparing , 
Which all ( till deep Night calls ) shall have a share in . 
then we must leave the Lovers to their own share , 
To end their Kind Disputes in Civil-warfare ; 
Where the least Mercy the most Love expresses , 
And he most gentle proves , that most oppresses . 
While the Fair Sufferer Languishing cries sie on 't , 
The God of Love's the only pleasing Tyrant ; 
Advance , Sir Tim , and with a dutiful guessing , 
find out your Daddy quickly , and ask Blessing . 


Sir Tim.   Your Blessing . 



land   What , Madam , not down upon your Marrowbones ; come , off with your trumpery — how — what have we here ? 

Pulls off 〈◊〉 Hood . 

Sir Tim.   what 's the meaning of this ? woe 's me , what have I got ? 



Phill.   An Obedient Wife , Sir.  



Sir Tim.   Nay , in geud faith , hold a blow , I 'll not be choosed so . 



land   where 's my Daughter , I am abused , where 's my Daughter ? 



Bell.   Here , Sir , with her Husband , and beg your Blessing . 



land   Hey day , what means all this ? 



Sir Tim.   Nay , by the Mass , Mistress Lucy is my Wife , and no other , and I 'll seize my own Chattel where I find her . 



Bell.   You must seize this first . 

Offers to draw . 

Sir Tim.   What a God's name , must one sight for his Wife ? Father Landy , I pray let us send for Mr. Scrible , and clap Actions on 'em for Cheats and Robbers . 



land   land Troth , Sir Timothy , Law-suits are dangerous Bogs to get into , we may sink faster than we can get out ; besides , I fear Matters are gone too far . 



Feew.   Be appeased , Sir Timothy , what 's done , can't be undone ; be contented , many have done worse , you have Married a handsome Woman , virtuous and good . 



Lucy .  Believe me , Sir , none exceeds her in goodness , and good humour ; I have esteemed and loved her , as I would a Sister . 



land   Why , in troth , Sir Timothy , since we are both deceived , the best way is to bear it patiently ; and , in troth , she has always behaved herself so well , she shall not come a Beggar to you . 



Lucy .  I hope , Mr. Bellville , for my sake , will add to my Father's 〈◊〉 . 



Bell.   That I will , most willingly , and as largely as my dearest Lucy pleases . 



Feew.   Look you there , Sir Knight , come , give her your hand ; nay , never hang back , there is no other Remedy ; come , come , she 'll bring you a brave young Shallow . 



Sir Tim.   If it must be so , y faith I 'll gang into the North as fast as four Legs will carry me . 



Phill.   This minute , if you please ; Sir , you shall ever find me an Obedient Wife , and with true Love and Care will ever strive to please you . 



Sir Tim.   Since I am Pounded , and no 〈◊〉 out , I 'll even make the best of a bad Market . 



land   I dare swear you will be pleased with her , when you know her better . Come , no more words , nothing now but Music , and every Man take his Lady . 



Feew.   I having none of my own , must presume to borrow another Man's . 



Lurch .  Like enough , in troth . 

Enter Servant to Landy . 

Seru.   Sir , here are Gipsies , that desire admittance . 



land   Let 'em come in , all 's free this day . 

Enter Gip●… . 

1.  Gipsy .  Bless you Masters , we 'll tell your Fortunes . 

To Bellville . OH Master ! you may be happy if you will , 
For 't is a good Jack , that makes a good Gill.  


2.  Gipsy .  Master , Master . 

You have a great Cross through the Line of Life , Perhaps y' are Jealous , y 'had as good trust your Wife . 

To Lurch . 

3 Gipsy .  You shall enjoy good health , and good cheer , And have a young Huntsman within the year . 

To Sir Tim.  

4 Gipsy .  OH brave Palms , you have Mistresses plenty , And you can be Constant at once to twenty . 

To Feewell . 

Old Landy .  Come , Mr. Lurch , you could Sing well in your young days , if Marriage has not cracked your Voice , let 's hear the Dialogue between you , and your Wife ; it may be a means to make a thorough Reconciliation . 



DIALOGUE . 

Herald   Why so Coy , and so Strange ? 
Does your Kindness decline ? 
Your Love find a Change , 
Or do you doubt mine ? 


She.   When inconstant Men grow , 
We c●…n quickly discern , 
And ou●… Sex you ●…ll know , 
Are apt Scholars to Learn . 
I watched how your Eyes on Phillis wero g●…ncing , 
Crowned with a Garland of Roses for Dancing : 
When t●…e Pedlar came , you gave her a Lace , 
And a fine gaudy string for her Needle-case . 


Herald   You remember , it may be , 
When you were May-lady , 
The nimble Thyrsis so Caper d and Chanted , 
You gave him a Ribbon so long that it ●…aunted 
And waved in the air ; when the brisk youth then tried 
For a Kiss , you simpered , and faintly denied : 
And blushing ; you only cried fie , forbear , 
you 're such another ; nay , pish , I swear 
There was never in the World such rudeness as this ; 
Yet gently contrived he should rau●…sh a Kiss . 


Herald   Now prithec let 's leave this impertinent str●…ggle , 



She.   For Men will be false , 



Herald   And Women will juggle . 



Both.   then let us be easy by freedom hereafter , 
For Jealousy never yet mended the Matter . 


Herald   what 's past , we 'll forget , 



She.   what 's to come , never inquire , 



Both.   But take surest Advice of present Desire . 



land   Now to such poor Cheer as I have provided for you ; 

Joys Crown you all , every one here 's my Guest , 〈◊〉 all are welcome to a Mis●…'s' Feast . 

Exeunt Omnes . 

FINIS . 

