THE MEDAL . A SATYR AGAINST SEDITION . 

By the Author of Absalon and Achitophel . 

Per Graiùm populos , mediaeque per Elidis Vrbem Ibat ovans ; Divumque sibi poscebat Honours . 

EDINBURGH , Reprinted Anno DOM. 1682 ; 

EPISTLE To the WHIGS . 

FOR to whom can I dedicate this Poem , with so much justice as to you ? 't is the representation of your own Hero : 't is the Picture drawn at length , which you admire and prise so much in little . None of your Ornaments are wanting ; neither the Landscap of the Tower , nor the Rising Sun ; nor the Anno Domini of your New Sovereign's Goronation . This must needs be a grateful undertaking to your whole Party : especially to those who have not been so happy as to purchase the Original . I hear the Graver has made a good Market of it : all his Kings are bought up already ; or the value of the remainder so enhanced , that many a poor Polander who would be glad to worship the Image , is not able to go to the cost of him : But must be content to see him here . I must confess I am no great Artist ; but Signpost painting will serve the turn to remember a Friend by ; especially when better is not to be had . Yet for your comfort the lineaments are true : and though he sat not five times to me , as he did to B. yet I have consulted History ; as Italian Painters do , when they would draw a Nero or a Caligula ; though they have not seen the Man ; they can help their Imagination by a Statue of him , and find out the Colouring from S●●●onius and Tacitus . Truth is , you might have spared one side of your Medal : the Head would be seen to more advantage , if it were placed on a Spike of the Tower ; a little nearer to the Sun. Which would then break out to better purpose . You tell us in your Preface to the No-protestant Plot , that you shall be forced hereafter to leave off your Modesty : I suppose you mean that little which is left you : for it was morn to rags when you put out this Medal . Never was there practised such a piece of notorious Impudence in the face of an Established Government . I believe , when he is dead , you will wear him in Thumb-rings , as the Turks did Scanderbag ; as if there were virtue in his Bones to preserve you against Monarchy . Yet all this while you pretend not only zeal for the Public good ; but a due veneration for the person of the King. But all men who can see an inch before them , may easily detect those gross fallacies . That it is necessary for men in your circumstances to pretend both , is granted you : for without them there could be no ground to raise a Faction . But I would ask you one civil question , what right has any man among you , or any Association of men , ( to come nearer to you ) who out of Parliament , cannot be considered in a public Capacity , to meet , as you daily do , in Factious Clubs , to vilify the Government in your Discourses , and to libel it in all your writings ? who made you Judges in Israel ? or how is it consistent with your Zeal of the public welfare , to promote Sedition ? Does your definition of loyal , which is to serve the King according to the Laws , allow you the licence of traducing the Executive Power , with which you own he is invested ? You complain that his Majesty has lost the love and confidence of his People : and by your very urging it , you endeavour what , in you lies , to make him lose them . All good Subjects abhor the thought of Arbitrary Power , whether it be in one or many : if you were the Patriots you would seem , you would not at this rate incense the Multitude to assume it : for no sober man can fear it , either from the King's Disposition , or his Practice : or even , where you would odiously lay it , from his Ministers . Give us leave to enjoy the Government and the benefit of Laws under which we were born , and which we desire to transmit to our Posterity . You are not the Trustees of the public Liberty : and if you have not right to petition in a Crowd , much lesle have you to intermeddle in the management of Affairs : or to arraign what you do not like : which in effect is every thing that is done by the King and Council . Can you imagine that any reasonable man will believe you respect the person of his Majesty , when 't is apparent that your Seditious Pamphlets are stuffed with particular Reflections on him ? If you have the confidence to deny this , 't is easy to be evinced from a thousand Passages , which I only forbear to quote , because I desire they should die and be forgotten . I bave perused many of your Papers : and to show you that I have , the third part of your No-ptotestant Plot is much of it stolen , from your dead Author's Pamphlet called , the Growth of Popery : as manifestly as Milton's defence of the English People , is from Buchanan , de jure regni apud Scotos : or your first Covenant , and new Association , from the holy League of the French Guisards . Any one who reads Davila , may trace your Practices all along . There were the same pretences for Reformation , and Loyalty , the same Aspersions of the King , and the same grounds of a Rebellion . I know not whether you will take the Historian's word , who says it was reported , that Poltrot a Huguenot , murdered Francis Duke of Guise by the instigations of Theodore Beza : or that it was a Huguenot Minister , otherwise called a Presbyterian ▪ ( for our Church abhors so devilish a Tenent ) who first written a Treatise of the lawfulness of deposing and murdering Kings , of a different Persuasion in Religion : But I am able to prove from the Doctrine of Calvin , and Principles of Buchanan , that they set the People above the Magistrate : which if I mistake not , is your own Fundamental : and which carries your Loyalty no further than your liking . When a Vote of the House of Commons goes on your side , you are as ready to observe it , as if it were passed into a Law : But when you are pinched with any former , and yet unrepealed Act of Parliament , you declare that in some cases , you will not be obliged by it . The Passage is in the same third part of the No-protestant Plot : & is too plain to be denied . The late Copy of your intended Association , you neither wholly justify nor condemn ; But , as the Papists , when they are unopposed , fly out into all the Pageantry's of Worship ; but in times of War , when they are hard pressed by Arguments , lie close intrinched behind the Council of Trent : So , now , when your Affairs are in a low condition , you dare not pretend that to be a legal Combination , but whensoever you are afloat , I doubt not but it will be maintained and justified to purpose . For indeed there is nothing to defend it but the Sword : 't is the proper time to say any thing , when men have all things in their power . 

In the mean time you would fain be nibbling at a parallel betwixt this Association , and that in the time of Queen Elizabeth . But there is this small difference betwixt them , that the ends of the one are directly opposite to the other : one with the Queen's approbation , and conjunction , as head of it : the other without either the consent , or knowledge of the King , against whose Authority it is manifestly designed . Therefore you do well to have recourse to your last Evasion , that it was contrived by your Enemies , and shuffled into the Papers that were seized : which yet you see the Nation is not so easy to believe as your own Jury ; But the matter is not difficult , to find twelve men in Newgate , who would acquit a Malefactor . 

I have one only favour to desire of you at parting , that when you think of answering this Poem , you would employ the same Pens against it , who have combated with so much success against Absalon and Achitophel : for than you may assure yourselves of a clear Victory , without the least reply . Rail at me abundantly ; and , not to break a Custom , do it without wit : By this method you will gain a considerable point , which is wholly to wave the answer of my Arguments . Never own the bottom of your Principles , for fear they should be Treason . Fall severely on the miscarriages of Government for if scandal be not allowed , you are no freeborn subjects . If God has not blessed you with the Talon of Rhyming , make use of my poor Stock and welcome : let your Verses run upon my feet : and for the utmost refuge of notorious Blockheads , reduced to the last extremity of sense , turn my own lines upon me , and in utter despair of your own Satire , make me Satyrize myself . Some of you have been driven to this Bay already ; But above all the rest commend me to the Nonconformist Parson , who written the Whip and Key . I am afraid it is not read so much as the Piece deserves because the Bookseller is every week crying help at the end of his Gazette , to get it off . You see I am charitable enough to do him a kindness , that it may be published as well as printed ; and that so much skill in Hebrew Derivations , ma not lie for wast-paper in the Shop . Yet I half suspect he went no farther for his learning , than the Index of Hebrew Names and Etymologies , which is printed at the end of some English Bibles . If Achitophel signify the Brother of a Fool , the Author of that Poem will pass with his Readers for the next of kin ; perhaps ' 't is the Relation that makes the kindness . Whatever the Verses are ; buy 'em up I beseech you out of pity ; for I hear the Conventicle is shut up , and the Brother of Achitophel out of service . 

Now Footmen , you know , have the generosity to make a Purse , for a member of their Society , who has had his Livery pulled over his Ears : and even Protestant Socks are bought up among you , out of veneration to the name . A Dissenter in Poetry from Sense and English , will make as good a Protestant Rhymer , as a Dissenter from the Church of England a Protestant Parson . Besides if you encourage ayoung Beginner , who knows but he may elevate his stilea little , above the vulgar Epithets of profane , and saucy Jack , and Atheistick Scribbler , with which he treats me , when the fit of Enthusiam is strong upon him : by which well-mannerd and charitable Expressions , I was certain of his Sect , before I knew his name . What would you have more of a man ? he has damned me in your Cause from Genesis to the Revelations : And has half the Texts of both the Testaments against me , if you will be so civil to yourselves as to take him for your interpreter ; and not to take them for Irish Witnesses . After all , perhaps you will tell me , that you retained him only for the opening of your Cause , and that your main Lawyer is yet behind . Now if it so hap he meet with no more reply than his Predecessors , you may either conclude , that I trust to the goodness of my Cause , or fear my Adversary or disdain him , or what you please , for the short on 't is , 't is indifferent to your humble servant , whatever your Party says or thinks of him . 

UPON THE AUTHOR of the following POEM 

ONCE more our awful Poet Arms , t' engage 
The threatening Hydra-faction of the Age : 
Once more prepares his dreadful Pen to wield , 
And every Muse attends him to the Field : 
By Art and Nature for this Task designed , 
Yet modestly the Fight He long declined ; 
Forbore the Torrent of his Verse to pour , 
Nor loosed his Satire till the needful Hour : 
His Sov'raigns' Right by Patience half betrayed , 
Vvaked his Avenging Genius to its Aid . 
Blessed Muse , whose Wit with such a Cause was Crowned , 
And blessed the Cause that such a Champion found . 
With chosen Verse upon the Foe he falls , 
And black Sedition in each Quarter galls ; 
Yet , like a Prince with Subjects forced t' engage , 
Secure of Conquest He rebates his Rage : 
His Fury not without Distinction sheds . 
Hurls mortal Bolts but on devoted Heads : 
To lesle infected Members gentle found , 
Or spares or else pours Balm into the Wound . 
Such generous Grace th' ingrateful Tribe abuse , 
And trespass on the Mercy of his Muse ; 
Their wretched doggerel Rhymers forth they bring 
To Snarl and Bark against the Poet's King : 
A Crew , that scandalise the Nation more 
Than all their Treason-canting Priests before ! 
On these He scarce vouchsafes a scornful smile , 
But on their Powerful Patrons turns his Style . 
A Style so keen ▪ as even from Faction draws 
The Vital Poison , stabs to th' Heart their Cause . 
Take then , great Bard , what Tribute we can raise : 
Accept our Thanks , for you transcend our Praise . 
To the Unknown Author of the following Poem , and that of Absalon and Achitophel . 

THUS pious ignorance , with dubious praise , 
Altars of old to God's unknown did raise ; 
They knew not the loved Deity , they knew 
Divine effects a cause Divine did show ; 
Nor can we doubt , when such these Numbers are , 
Such is their cause , though the worst Muse shall dare 
Their sacred worth in humble Verse declare . 
As gentle Thames charmed with thy tuneful Song 
Glides in a peaceful Majesty along , 
no rebel Stone , no lofty Bank does brave 
The easy passage of his silent wave , 
So sacred Poet , so thy Numbers flow , 
Sinewy , yet mild as happy Lovers woe ; 
Strong , yet harmonious too as Planets move , 
Yet soft as Down upon the Wings of Love. 
How sweet does Virtue in your dress appear , 
How much more charming , when much lesle severe 
Whilst you our senses harmlessly beguile , 
With all th' allurements of your happy Style , 
YE insinuate Loyalty with kind deceit , 
And into sense th' unthinking Many cheat : 
So the sweet Trhacian with his charming lyre 
Into rude Nature virtue did inspire , 
So he the savage herd to reason drew , 
Yet scarce so sweet , so charmingly as you , 
OH that you would with some such powerful Charm 
Enervate Albion to just valour warm ! 
Whether much suffering Charles shall Theme afford 
Or the great Deeds of Godlike James' Sword , 
Again fair Gallià might be ours , again 
Another Fleet might Pass the subject main . 
Another Edward●ead ●ead the Britain's o● , 
Or such an Ossory as you did moan ; 
While in such Numbers you , in such a strain 
Inflame their courage , and reward their pain . 
Let false Achitophel the rout engage , 
Talk easy Absalon to rebel rage ; 
Let frugal Shimei curse in holy Zeal , 
Or modest Corah more new Plots reveal , 
Whilst constant to himself , secure of fate , 
Good David still maintains the Royal State , 
Thomas each in vain such various ills employs , 
Firmly he stands ▪ and even those ills enjoys ; 
Firm as fair Albion midst the raging Main 
Surveys encircling danger with disdain . 
In vain the waves assault the unmoved shore , 
In vain the winds with mingled fury roar . 
Fair Albiòn's beaureous Cliffs shine whiter than before . 
Nor shalt thou move , though Hell thy fall conspire , 
Thomas the worse rage of zeal's Fanatic Fire , 
thou best , thou greatest of the British race , 
thou only fit to fill Great Charles' his place . 
Ah wratched Britain's : ah too stubborn Isle , 
Ah stiffnecked Israel on blessed Canaan's , soil 
Are those dear proofs of Heaven's Indulgence vain , 
Restoring David and his gentle reign . 
Is it in vain thou all the Goods dost know 
Auspicious Stars on Mortals shed below 
While all thy streams with Milk , thy Lands with Honey flow 
no more fond Isle , no more they self engage , 
In civil fury , and intestine rage ; 
no rebel zeal thy duteous Land molest , 
But a smooth Calm sooth every peaceful breast , 
While in such Charming notes Divinely sings , 
The best of Poets , of the best of Kings , 
The Medal . A SATYR AGAINST SEDITION 

OF all our Antic Sights , and Pageantry 
Which English Idiots run in crowds to see , 
The Polish Medal bears the prize alone : 
A Monster , more the Favourite of the Town 
Than either Fayrs or Theatres have shown 
Never did Art so well with Nature strive ; 
Nor ever Idol seemed so much alive : 
So like the Man ; so golden to the sight , 
So base within , so sergeant and light . 
One side is filled with Title and with Face , 
And , lest the King should want a regal Place , 
On the reverse , a Tower the Town surveys , 
Over which our mounting Sun his beams displays , 
The Word , pronounced aloud by Shrieval voice , 
Laetamur which , in Polish , is rejoice , 
The Day , Month , Year , to the great Act are joined 
And a new Canting Holiday designed . 
Five days he sat , for every cast and look , 
Four more than God to finish Adam took . 
But who can tell what Essence Angels are , 
Or how long Heaven was making Lucifer ? 
O , could the Style that copied every grace , 
And ploughed such furrows for an Eunuch face , 
Could it have formed his ever-changing will 
The various Piece had tired the Graver's Skill ! 
A Martial Hero first , with early care , 
Blown , like a Pigmy by the Winds , to war. 
A beardless Chief , a Rebel , e'er a Man , 
( So young his hatred to his Prince began ) 
Next this , ( How wildly will Ambition steer . ) 
A Vermin wriggling in the th' Usurper's Ear. 
Bart'ring his venal wit for sums of gold 
He cast himself into the Saintlike mould ; 
Groaned , sighed and prayed , while Godliness was gain 
The loudest Bagpipe of the squeaking Train 
But , as 't is hard to cheat a Juggler's eyes , 
His open lewdness he could never disguise . 
There split the Saint : for Hypocritique zeal 
Allows no Sins but those it can conceal . 
Whoring to scandal gives too large a scope : 
Saints must not trade , but they may interlope . 
th' ungodly Principle was all the same ; 
But a gross Cheat betrays his Partner's Game . 
Besides , their pace was formal , grave and slack ▪ 
His nimble Wit outran the heavy Pack . 
Yet still he found his Fortune at a stay 
Whole droves of Block heads choking up his way ; 
They took , but not rewarded , his advice , 
Villain and Wit exact a double price . 
Power was his aim : but , thrown from that pretence , 
The wretch turned loyal in his own defence , 
And Malice reconciled him to his Prince . 
Him , in the anguish of his Soul he served , 
Rewarded faster still than he deserved 
Behold him now exalted into trust , 
His Counsels oft convenient , seldom just . 
Even in the most sincere advice he gave 
He had a grudging still to be a Knave . 
The Frauds he learned in his Fanatique years 
Made him uneasy in his lawful gears . 
At best as little honest as he could . 
And , like white Witches , mischievously good ▪ 
To his first bias , longingly he leans , 
And rather would be great by wicked means . 
Thus , framed for ill , he loosed our Triple hold . 
( Advice unsafe , precipitous , and bold . ) 
From hence those tears ! that Ilium of our woe ! 
Who helps a powerful Friend , fore-arms a Foe 
What wonder if the waves prevail so far 
When He cut down the Banks that made the bar ? 
Seas follow but their Nature to invade . 
But He by Art our native Strength betrayed 
So Samson to his Foe his force confessed . 
And , to be shorn , lay slumb'ring on her breast 
But , when this fatal Counsel , found too late , 
Exposed its Author to the public hate . 
When his just Sovereign , by no impious way , 
Could be seduced to Arbitrary sway . 
Forsaken of that hope . he shifts the sail : 
Drives down the Current with a pop'lar gale . 
And shows the Fiend confessed without a veil . 
He preaches to the Crowd , that Power is lent , 
But not conveyed to Kingly Government . 
That Claims successive bear no binding force . 
That Coronation Oaths are things of course . 
Maintains the Multitude can never err . 
And sets the People in the Papal Chair . 
The reason 's obvious ; Interest never lies 
The most have still their Interest in their eyes , 
The power is always theirs , and power is ever wise , 
Almighty Crowd , thou shorten'st all dispute , 
Power is thy Essence , Wit thy Attribute . 
Nor Faith nor Reason make thee at a stay , 
thou leap'st o'er all eternal truths , in thy Pinbarique way . 
Athens , no doubt , did righteously decide , 
Whem Photion and when Socrates were tried : 
As righteously they did those dooms repent , 
Still they were wise , what ever way they went. 
Crowds err not , though to both extremes they run , 
To kill the Father , and recall the Son. 
Some think the Fools were most , as times went then 
But now the world 's o'er stocked with prudentmen . 
The common Cry is even Religion's Test , 
The Turk's is , at Constantinople , best , 
Idols in India , Popery at Rome , 
And our own Worship only true at home . 
And true , but for the time , 't is hard to know 
How long we please it shall continue so . 
This side to day , and that to morrow burns , 
So all are God-a'mighties in their turns . 
A Tempting Doctrine , plausible and new : 
What Fools our Fathers were , if this be true . 
Who , to destroy the seeds of Civil War , 
Inherent right in Monarches did declare : 
And , that a lawful Power might never cease . 
Secured Succession , to secure our Peace . 
Thus , Property and Sovereign Sway , at last 
In equal Balances were justly cast 
But this new Jehu spurs the hot mouthed horse , 
Instructs the Beast to know his native force , 
To take the Bit between his teeth and fly 
To the next headlong Steep of Anarchy . 
Too happy England , if our good we knew , 
Would we possess the freedom we pursue , 
The lavish Government can give no more : 
Yet we repined , and plenty makes us poor . 
God tried us once , our Rebel-fathers' fought , 
He glutted'em with all the power they sought , 
Till , mastered by their own usurping Brave , 
The freeborn Subject sunk into a slave . 
We loathe our Manna , and we long for Quails . 
Ah , what is man , when his own wish prevails . 
How rash , how swift to plunge himself in ill , 
Proud of his power , and boundless in his Will : 
That Kings can do no wrong we must believe , 
None can they do , and must they all receive . 
Help heaven . or sadly we shall see an hour , 
When neither wrong nor right are in their power 
Already they have lost their best defence , 
The benefit of Laws , which they dispense 
no justice to their righteous Cause allowed ; 
But baffled by an Arbitrarie Crowd . 
And Medals graved , their Conquest to record , 
The Stamp and Coin of their adopted Lord 
The Man who laughed but once , to see an Ass 
Mumbling to make the cross-grained Thistles pass , 
Might laugh again , to see a Jury chaw 
The prickles of unpalatable Law. 
The witnesses , that , Leech-like , lived on blood , 
Sucking for them were med'cinallie good , 
But , when they fastened on their festered Sore , 
then , Justice and Religion they forswore , 
Their Maiden Oaths debauched into a whore . 
Thus Men are raised by Factions , and decried , 
And Rogue and Saint distinguished by their Side . 
They rack even Scripture to confess their Cause , 
And pled a Call to preach , in spite of Laws . 
But that 's ●o news to the poor injured Page : 
It has been used as ill in every Age : 
And is constrained , with patience , all to take ; 
For what defence can Greek and Hebrew make ? 
Happy who can this talking Trumpet seize ; 
They make it speak whatever Sense they please ! 
'T was framed , at first , our Oracle to inquire : 
But , since our Sects in prophecy grow higher , 
The Text inspires not them ; but they the Text inspire . 
London , thou great Emporium of our Isle , 
OH , thou too bounteous , thou too fruitful Nile , 
How shall I praise or curse to thy desert ! 
Or separate thy sound , from thy corrupted part ! 
I called thee Nile ; the parallel will stand : 
Thy tides of wealth overflow the fattened Land ; 
Yet Monsters from thy large increase we find ; 
Engendered on the Slyme thou leav'st behind . 
Sedition has not wholly seized on thee ; 
Thy nobler Parts are from infection free . 
Of Israel's Tribes thou hast a numerous band ! 
But still the Canaanite is in the land 
Thy military Chiefs are brave and true : 
Nor are thy disinchanted Burghers few . 
The Head is loyal which thy Heart commands : 
But what 's a Head with two such gouty Hands ? 
The wise and wealth love the surest way : 
And are content to thrive and to obey . 
But Wisdom is to Sloth too great a Slave , 
None are so busy as the Fool and Knave . 
Those let me curse ▪ what vengeance will they urge , 
Whose Ordures neither Plague nor Fire can purge : 
Nor sharp Experience can to duty bring , 
Nor angry Heaven , nor a forgiving King ! 
In Gospel phrase their Chapmen they betray : 
Their Shops are Dens , the Buyer is their Prey . 
The Knack of Trades is living on the Spoil ; 
They boast , even when each other they beguile . 
Customs to steal is such a trivial thing , 
That 't is their Charter , to defraud their King. 
All hands unite of every jarring Sect ; 
They cheat the Country first , and then infect . 
They , for God's Cause their Monarch dare dethrone ; 
And they 'll be sure to make his Cause their own . 
Whether the plotting Jesuit laid the plan 
Of murth'ring Kings , or the French Puritan , 
Our Sacrilegious Sects their Guides outgo ; 
And Kings and Kingly Power would murder too . 
What means their Traitorous Combination lesle , 
Too plain to evade , too shameful to confess . 
But Treason is not owned when 't is descried ; 
Successful Crimes alone are justified . 
The Men , who no Conspiracy would find , 
Who doubts , but had it taken , they had joined . 
Joined , in a murual Covenant of defence ; 
At first without , at last against their Prince . 
If Sovereign Right by Sovereign Power they scan , 
The same bold Maxim holds in God and Man : 
God were not safe , his Thunder could they eat , 
He should be forced to crown another Son. 
Thus , when the Heir was from the Vineyard thrown , 
The rich Possession was the Murth'rers own . 
In vain to Sophistry they have recourse : 
By proving theirs no Plot , they prove 't is worse ; 
Unmasked Rebellion , and audacious Force . 
Which , though not Actual , yet all Eyes may see 
't is working , in the immediate Power to be ; 
For , from pretended Grievances they rise , 
First to dislik , and after to despise 
then , Cyclop-like in human Flesh to deal : 
Chop up a Minister , at every meal : 
Perhaps not wholly to melt down the King : 
But clip his regal Rights within the Ring . 
From thence , to assume the power of Peace and War : 
And ease him by degrees of public Care. 
Yet , to consult his Dignity and Fame , 
He should have leave to exercise the Name : 
And hold the Cards , while Commons played the game 
For what can Power give more than Food and Drink , 
To live at ease , and not to be bound to think ? 
These are the cooler methods of their Crime ; 
But their hot Zealots think 't is loss of time : 
On utmost bounds of Loyalty rhey stand : 
And grinn and whet like a Croatian band , 
That waits impatient for the last Command . 
Thus Outlaws open-villany maintain : 
They steal not , but in Squadrons scour the Plain , 
And , if their power the Passengers subdue , , 
The Most have right , the wrong is in the Few . 
Such impious Axioms foolishly they show , 
For , in some soyls Republics will not grow , 
Our Temperate Isle will no extremes sustain , 
Of pop'lar sway , or Arbitrary Reign , 
But slides between them both into the best , 
Secure in freedom , in a Monarch blessed . 
And though the Climate , vexed with various winds 
Works through our yielding Bodies , on our Minds , 
The wholesome Tempest purges what it breeds , 
To recommend the Calmness that succeeds . 
But thou the pander of the people's hearts , 
OH Crooked Soul , and serpentine in arts . 
Whose blandishments , a Loyal Land have whored , 
And broke the Bonds she plighted to her Lord ; 
What Curses on thy blasted Name will fall ! 
Which Age to Age their Legacy shall call ; 
For all must curse the Woes rhat must descend on all . 
Religion thou hast none : rhy Mercury 
Has passed through every Sect , or theirs through Thee . 
But what thou giv'st , that Venom still remains ; 
And the poxed Nation feels Thee in their Brains ▪ 
What else inspires the Tongues , and swells the Breasts 
Of all rhy Bellowing Renegado Priests , 
That preach up Thee for God : dispense thy Laws : 
And with thy S●●mm ferment their fainting Cause ? 
Fresh Fumes of madness raise ; and to isle and sweat 
To make the formidable Cripple great . 
Yet , should thy Crimes succeed . should lawless Power 
Compass those Ends thy greedy Hopes devour , 
Thy Canting Friends thy Mortal Foes would be ; 
Thy God and theirs will never song agree . 
For thine , ( if thou hast any , ) must be one 
That let's the World and Humane-kind alone : 
A jolly God , that passes hours too well 
To promise Heaven , or threatn us with Hell. 
That unconcerned can at Rebellion sit ; 
And wink at Crimes he did himself commit . 
A Tyrant theirs ; the Heaven their Priesthood paints 
A Conventicle of gloomy sullen Saints ; 
A Heaven , like Bedlam , slovenly and sad ; 
Foredoomed for Souls , with false Religion , mad . 
Without a Vision Poets can fore-show 
What all but Fools , by common Sense may know : 
If true Succession from our Ifle should fail . 
And Crowds profane , with impious Arms prevail , 
Not thou ▪ nor those thy Factious Arts engage 
Shall reap that Harvest of Rebellious Rage , 
With which thou flatterest thy decrept Age. 
The swelling Poison of the several Sects . 
Whlch wanting vent , the Nations Health infects 
Shall burst its Bag ; and fight out their way 
The various Venom's on ▪ each other prey ▪ 
The Presbyter , puffed up with spiritual Pride , 
Shall on the Necks of the lewd Nobles ride : 
His brethren damn , the Civil Power defy ; 
And parcel out Republic Prelacy . 
But short shall be his Reign : his rigid Yoke 
An Tyrant Power will puny Sects provoke ; 
And Frogs and Toads , and all the Tadpole Train . 
Will croak to Heaven for help , from this devouring Crane . 
The Cutthroat Sword and clamorous Gown shall jar , 
In shareing their ill-gotten Spoils of War : 
Chiefs shall be grudged the part which they pretend ; 
Lords envy Lords , and Priends with every Friend 
About their impious Merit shall contend . 
The surly Commons shall respect deny ; 
And justle Peerage out with Property . 
Their General either shall his Trust betray , 
And force the Crowd to Arbitrary sway ; 
Or they suspecting his ambitious Aym. 
In hate of Kings shall cast anew the Frame ; 
And thrust out Collatine that bore their Name . 
Thus inborn Broils the Factions would engage ; 
Or Wars of Exiled Heirs , or Foreign Rage , 
Till halting Vengeance overtook our Age : 
And our wild labours , wearied into Rest , 
Reclined us on a rightful Monarch's Breast . 
FINIS . 

